[RAW OCR — U.S. Army Office of the Inspector General and Auditor General, 'Use of Volunteers in
Chemical Agent Research,' DAIG-IN 21-75 (Col. James R. Taylor and Maj. William N. Johnson), March 1976]
[Source: archive.org identifier army-igchem, https://archive.org/details/army-igchem]

Page 1 of 264 


— . 


"P ur 
ul | ۱ N 21-75 | 
„5 sess 

| | Use of Volunteers in 

I | | | Chemical Agent Research 

Ji 

ll E by 
i ۱ | 

il 

Ill 

| 


— 
کہ سے — ͤ — 


Page 2 of 264 


i 001 ۷ 
UR: GR TRE تس‎ 0 s CO CERE 
: WASAINGTON, 9.C. .20310 


DAIG-IN 21-75 Use of Volunteers ٦ 


9 Chemical Agent Research 


i HO MAR 97 


CAUTION 


4 
3 THIS INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORT CONTAINS 55 Tes 
7 AND SELL SE ات پا با مج‎ i ACCOR Cs Wan E AQIS 
3ت‎ FAN Oris l-10 AID oil, AR 20-1. 802 0 DI 
Or ru Scl DILE AS ASS و تم یہت‎ SOLIS اہب و کچھ‎ D ii مات‎ DE 
D Wild THZ-TPIOIIVR c L AFFAIRS iF SO. 
= BISSEEINATIGAX CUS LSS ANY QOETICIODUAVIGO TEITOTASY 613 0 a 
: REL OAL) ² Ce ACOSUL STO Gn 25V جا و لود‎ 5 5 
E BI NADE من تہ‎ Of seat iC :یہ‎ 13310: OF THI E 
? TAIS Beret VILL- Ge motes CO pia اچ پا د جا ھ2 یا‎ Tae 3 
ET DE PAL. T OF THE ALN, SHL, CTO, OC 20310 WEEN وت‎ 
) 


ITs PUATOSS. (Para 1-72(!8), AR 20-1 


Page 3 of 264 


DEPARTMENT OF THE ARM’ 
OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL ANO AUD. N GENE 
WASHINGTON, O.C. 20310 


v 


DAIG—IN 


۶ SUBJECT: Research Report Concerning the Use of Volunteers in Chemical 
Agent Research 


This research report was prepared by Colonel James R. Taylor and Majer 

= William N. Jobmseu, Inspectors General, Office of The Inspector General, 
Beadquarters, Department of the Army, pursuant to the Vice Chief of 
Staff Lecter of Instruction, dated 21 July 1975. 


QN 


E ^ Colonel, IG 


n 
d Investigations Divisicn Investigatietis Division 


— APPROVED BT: 


"Tbe Inspector General 
- and Audicar General 


— L.. e UL . 


Page 4 of 264 


USE OF VOLUNTEERS 


— LN 


CHEMICAL AGENT RESEARCH 


Page 5 of 264 


( TABLE OF CUNTENTS 


m ] 
PAST. 
LI 


.II HISTORY OF CHEMICAL WARFARE . . . . . .. T 3 

cun III  PSYCHOCEEMICALS, LSD - ITS DISCOVERY, 
DEVELOPMENT AND USE V c WOMEN ee dba AE 

= IW” PERCEPTION OF TEE TEREAT دامع بے‎ | . da 
y DERIVATION AND INTERPRETATION OF AUTECRITY ........ے.‎ . ^ 28 

ET VI HUMAN VOLUNTEER SELECTION AND SCREENING PROCESS él 
] VIZ INFORMED COME Lr 77 
7 | VIII CHEMICAL WARFARE EXPERIMENTATION WITE HUMANS AT T 


EDGEWOOD ARSENAL ا مر ہے‎ e RAS RT UR 


مع ےا ا سا ا و کے ھا و ما ہپس و وی FELD IESTI‏ کت 


aoe As . Fort. Bragg e و‎ o4 AER ANE OR E . 110 
3. Fort DP WEE. یم سا و ہے ھت‎ eci ew „ 118 

— C. Fore Benning V 125 
D. Dugway Proving Ground . . . . . . . s 128 

E x INTELLIGENCE CORPS LSD TESTING < 135 
Ls À. Edgewood hagge 137 
Be: UIhisd Gace ھی‎ RS XOU A : 142 

= i C. Derby Hat . . . | Lad 
132 


X ^ CONTRACTS WITH CIVILIAN INSTITUTIONS . . . . 
XI LNCAPACITATING RESEARCH COS 


LIII SBIALIDGRAPHY 202 law بے‎ ٣٤+ Nos X. Y we تٌُی‎ ۲ 


W. 
bs 
A 


Page 6 of 264 


FOREWORD 


During the 1975 hearings conducted by che Senate Selec Committee tc study 
Govermnental Operatians with Respect ta intelligence Acrivicies, che U.S. 
Ar s role in research and experimentation with hallucinogenic drugs 
became a matter of interest aud concezn to the Commictee and the public. 
The coupling of Army efforcs in chemical agent research and acciors involv- 
ing the Intelligence commmicy resulted in a spate of publicity doch 


factual and speculative. 


During the same general timeframe, che ongoing jaint hearings of che Senate 
"Labor and Public Welfare Committee, Subcommittee on Health, and che Senate 
Judiciary, Subcommittee on Administrative Practice and Procedure, asked 
quescions of the Army about the Human Volurteer Program, che quality of 
"infarmed consent" as related to research volunteers, and the adequacy of 
medical follow-up on those who had volunteered co take part in research 


projects over the years. 


As a result of the several congressional hearings and subsequent publicitz, 
numerous requests for information vere received by the Department of Defense 
from cougressional committees, individual members of Congress, private 
citizens and che media. The nature of the inquiries reflected che dlfrerenc 


incerests íavolved and resulted in several different staff agencies chen 
Department of. the Army being tasked co provide the requested informacion. 


The Lack of factual information available to quickly respond to the inquir- 
ies illustraced an inadequacy of che Army’s inscicucionai memory on this 
subject area. This inadequacy vas aggravated by inconsistencies in the 
limited data which was xvaílahle. 


These shortcomings in responding fully, accurately, and rapidly, partic- 
ularly at a time when Govermmental agency actions and programs were 
already suspect, placed an addicional strain on che public's faith in 
Che credíbilicy of che U.S. Army. 


To assure thart requests for information concerning the Aray's role ia 
hallucinogenic drug research were ansvered factually, che Secretary of 
The Army directed Chat a research effort be made co determine what had 
been done in chemical agent research. Accordingly, The Inspector General 
abd Auditor General, Headquarters, Department of che Army, was directed 
to conduct che necessary research to decermine che Army's role in drug 
tescing. A verbatim text of the Lecter of Instruction which directed che 
research effort is reprinted below: 


sages 


اج 


2 


Page 7 of 264 


21 Jul 1975 


SUBJECT: Lecter of Instruccion 


The Izspecror General and 
Auditor General 
í Department of che Arny 
Washington, D.C. 20310 


l. Recent public and Congressional interest in the Army's use 

and casting of hallucinogenic drugs has generated uumerous 
1 requests from the news media for information concerning these 
activities. Records currently available to the Army Staff indi- 
cate chat these ces cs vere conducted during the period from che 
early 1950's chrough the lace 1960's ac various locations in 
the Unicad Scates and overseas.  Eovever, due to the lengthy 
cine span involved in che testing program, many of che super- 
visory personnel involved in che program and che records and 
Lx reports pertaining co che planning, conduct, and results of 

the tests have been retired. This situation places che Army 

in a posicion of uot being able to reply quickly and factually 
7 to requescs for informacion from varíous news and Congressional 


agencies. 


8 2. You are directed to conduct che necessary research co es ca- 
blish che historical faces and circumstances surrounding che 
U.S. Arxy's participation in che testing of hallucinogenic 
drugs. Specifically, your research will be ín sufficient 
~ detail to provide, ac a minimum, che following infcruation: 
a clear reconstruction or che programs and projects involved 
E wich particular emphasis on che rationale used as a basis for 
cheir iniciacion; appropriace mandates and authorizations upon 
which the testing programs and projects vere iniciated, exam- 

1 ination of extent of volunteers, the use of subjects wichour 
subjeccs' knowledge; and che costs of such projects and pro- 
gracs funded by the Department of che Army co include che total ` 
cost of operacion of the Special Operations Division, Fort 


- Detrick, MD. 


3. The Surgeon General and the Assistant Chief of Staff for 
Lntelligence will provide cechnical assistance as required and 
سے‎ : will provide access to and copies of any reports pertaining Co 
che testing of hallucinogenic drugs by che Army which are 
required to complete your research. The Commander, U.S. Arsy 


aA 2S e 


2 


Page 8 of 264 


Materiel Commend, will provide assistance required by your 
researca teams in gaining access to installacions, testing 
facilicies, and records storage facilities. The research 
Ceams are authorized access. to all records, files, facili- 
cles, and informacion which they consider necessary to 
accomplish this casking. 


- 4. Your report will be submitted: co che Chief of Staff as 
expeditiously as possible consistent with the requirement 
co insure that che information provided is complete, SERAN 
and accurate. 


S/ 
WALTER T. KERWIN, JR. 
General, United States Army 
Vice Chief of Stafz 


This mission was unlike che usual directive for inquiry or luvestigacicu 
normally assigned co The Inspector General for action. Instead of decer- 


mining che facts and circumstances of a specific wrong(s) or allegacion(s), 


the mission vas to conduct a form of historical research; research which 
would determine exactly hac che Army had done in chemical agenc testing 
during the period 1950-1975. A period wnich probably had as many changes, 
programs, and prob lers as any comparable pericd in history: post-World 
War LI; the Korean War; the Cold War; reorganizacion of Department of 
Defense; reorganizacions of Deparment of che Army; the var in Vietnam; 
and major advances in medicine, che sciences, nuclear weapons, missiles, 
and aircraft. The sheer volume and frequency of change alone provided 
some indicacion of the magnitude of the task to be performed. From che 
outset, the research effort proved to be difficult and cumbersome. 


The research was not co include ary activities or arrangements between 
Department af Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency concerning 
biological/chemícal agents and weapons systems for delivery, but was 

co be limited to the Army's participation in che testing of d-lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD) with emphasis on the racionale used as a basis 
for test initiacion; authorizations upon which the testing programs and 
projects were initiated; and the costs of such projeccs funded by Depart- 
ment of the Army. an exception vas made to the limitation on the research 
as it concerned DOD/CIA and biological agents, in chat the total cost of 
operating che Special Operations Division (SOD), Fort Detrick, MD, from 
1953 to 1971 vas co be determined. 


ہے 
** 
.— 
— 
1 


Page 9 of 264 


The research scope eventually vas enlarged co include drugs other than LSL. 
Initially, the cera hallucinogenic vas used as û means of describing che 
exteat of che research, however, as core accurate infcrmation waa received, 
che inaccuracy and inadequacy of the term became apparcnt. Ultimacely, che 
study vas co include LSD and also other drugs generally classified as chen- 
ical incapacitating agents, to include benzilates and glycolates. All drugs 
invescigated or tested during the period were not included in the research, 
however, those which figured prociceatly in the Haan Volunteer Program 


vere reviewed. 


The search for records was to prove particularly difficult. Current — 


records posed no particular prob leg, since records handling policies 

made chen reasonably available; however, che cajoricy of the records 
involved vere not current. Mest of the research effort, particularly 

on LSD, occurred during che 1950s and early 19605; these records had 

long since been recired and in some cases destroyed in accord with ara. 
des rruccion schedules. The frequent changes in the U.S. Army organiza- 
tional struccure resulced in manv changes in uait designations and lcca- 
cions, resulcing in records being retired, destroyed, or relocaced withou: 
adequate coucern for proper disposition of records wich historical signif- 
icance. 

Where records vere not available or vhere information gaps existed, plans 
vere developed to interview the personnel involved, both the scientíst and 


Since the research spanned a Z5-year period, man: 


che subject volunteer. 
recírec, 


of che personnel actively involved in the research programs were 


quice elderly, moved to new locations, or deceased. 


The hiscory of che Human Volunteer Program was examined in considerable 


detail. The use of humans in chemical agent research was examined frog 


the earliest days of the Chemical Jar are Service during World War I through 


the publicacion of the Secretary of Defense (Wilson) memorandum in 1953z 
and chen cracing che development of che formal volunteer program in use 
today. The selection of volunteers, to include che pre- and past test 
medical examinations, care during che experiments, and nost important, ۵ء‎ 
of informed consent was examined critically by revieving medical 


quality 
maintained ou volunteers and ín limited cases interviewing che 


records 
volunteers. 


Ihe thoroughness of che research effort is indicated by che following 
statistical data: 


a. Interviews of 65 witnesses were conducted in 32 cities, in 17 


states, and che District of Columbia and involved traveling in excess of 
160,000 passenger miles. 


Page 10 of 264 


Tens of chousands of pages of documencs uere reviewed ac various 


5: 
to include che Nacional Archives; the Naríonal Recards Center. 


locations 


Suicland, 
Library, Carlisle Barracks, PA; Edgewood Arsenal, Edgewood MD; Aberdeen 


Proving Grounds, Aberdeen, MD; Fort Detrick, MD; Fort McClellan, AL; and 
-the files of the various staff agencies, commands, or units which might 
have been involved, no marter how peripherally, with che chemical research 
program. Additionally, witnesses were requested to provide any documents 
“or evidence vhich right have come inato Cheir possession. 

Certain events which occurred during the course of the research effort 
added to the complexicy of the effort and served to stretch our che tine 
required to complete che project. First, there vere the allegacions aired 
publicly on IV and other media reflecting on che fimess of the Chief of 
the Medical Research Division, Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal. 
The person involved was ín charge of the drug testing program. an inves- 
Cilgation concerning this matter was conducted and reported separately. 
Then, during the course of records and file searches ic was learned chat 

a civilian patient in a New York psychiatric hospital had died in 1953 
after receiving an experimental drug which had been provided che hospital 
by che U.S. Army (Chemical Corps) as parr of a research project conducted 
by che hospital under an Ammy comtracc. An investigation of this incidenc 
was also conducted and reported separacely. finally, during che course of 
the research information was received indicating that the U.S. Arny Intel- 
ligence Canter/Schocl had conducted jointly, wich the Chemical Corps, a 
series of research projects involving LSD at Edgewood Arsenal, U.S. Aray, 
Europe, and the U.S. Army, Pacific. A report of those tests is included 


herein. 


It is in this vein that che research was conducted. Every effort vas made 
to obtain and review pertinent data. Where records did not exist, che 
testimony of witmesses was solicited co fill in che gaps. Where neither 
documentary or testimonial evidence was available, then license vas taken 
by drawing logical conclusions or assumptions based on evidence availabie. 
past performance, or other indicators. Where this occurred, efforts ca 


Clearly identify such license is made. 


MD; the Army Records Cencer, Sc. Louis, MO; the Army War College 


میں 


Page 11 of 264 


CHAPTER I 


HISTORY OF CHEMICAL WARFARE 


General 


_The purpose of this chapter is to provide a brief descriptioa of the 
evolution of chemical warfare development and its employment by various 
combatants throughout military history. 


Chemical warfare is generally thought of as che incencional ermploymenc 
of toxic liquids cr solids to produce casualties, plus the use of screen- 


ing smoke ar incendiaries .+ 


Eiscory reveals aumerous occasions where combatants employed chemical 


warfare to serve their tactical advantage. Some af these events are 


worthy of mencion in this report ín order to establish che roots from 
which che modern concepts have evolved. 


Pre-World War I 

Incendiary chemicals were recorded in warfare ag early as 1200 B.C. in a 
fora called "Greek Fire." This secret chemical formula caused a substance 
to spontaneously burst into flame on contact with wacer. Ocher combatants 
such ag the armies of India and che Roman Empire lacer refined che process 
to make it empicyable on Land as well as varer. 1 This novel weapon is ۱ 
credited wich saving che Byzantine Expire from enecy domination for nearly 


So affective vas "Greek Fire" thac it vas scill very 
J 


a thousand years. 
IC vas reported to have been 


much in use sone two thousand years later. 
successfully employed by King Constancine against the Saracens in 673 A.D.; 
and later by the Saraceas againsc the Christians in che Crusades. A form 
of "Greek Fire" vas used by Union General Gilmore in che American Civil 
war and caused Confederate General Beauregard to write chat Gilmore was 
firing "the most destructive missiles ever used in war." 


Other foras of chemical warfare were reported in ancient tines as early 

as 431 B.C., in bactles between the Athenians and Spartans. Im this. 
fas$rance the Spartans burned wood pitch and sulphur under che walls of 

Che cities of Places and Belium to choke che defenders. The Spartans 
also melted pitch, charcoal, and sulphur in huge keccles and blew che 
fumes over che defenders’ lines by means of bellows. Still other record- 
ings reflecc that in 360 B.C. the Trojan King Aneas used a composicion ci 
pitch, sulphur, cow, resinous wood, and ocher inflamable substances which 
were burled in pots fram the walls of besieged cities. The Chinese devel- 
oped stink pots, thousands of years ago, for boch offensive and defensive 


6 


-. 
. 
7 
~ 


"nni 


Page 12 of 264 


exployment. The ancient Japanese warriors used finely ground pepper cc 
produce lachrymatory (cear) effects. In che Russo-Japanese War, crude E 
grenades of rags scaked with arsenic compounds were bumed by the Japanese | 
on Che ends of bamboo poles to-generate choking fumes to waft on ener 

crenches. In 1855, during che Crimean War, che Bricish planned to use 

burning sulphur in the siege of Sebastapal. However, che plan was raport- 

edly discarded as inhumane. Still lacer in the American Civil War, during 

the siege of charles cou, SC, che Unicorn Army used burning wood hat hac 

been saturated with sulphur in an effort to force che defenders to evac- 


uate che city. 7 
Alchough there is very licc’e evidence to indicate chat chemical variare 
vas of major significance in most early military confrontations, the 
potential of its future role was of sufficient concern to make ic an 
issue ar The Hague Conference of 1899. In fact, a prohibition of gas 
warfare was agreed co bv a number of countries ac The dague, including 
ratificacion by Germany, however, neither che Uniced Staces aor Great 
Britain sígned this treaty, which banned use of gas filled projectiles.? 


World War Y 


In August 1914 che French used rifle-fired tear gas grenades to harass 
the German actackers. Germany claimed chis violated The Hague accord. 
The French councered chac since tear gas vas designed co control civil 


ics use could noc be considered an act of chemical warfare. 


commocionus, 
= 
The 


Shortly thereafter, the British and Germans also employed cear gas. 
Germans’ use of chlorine gas on 22 April 1915, agains: che French and 
British ac Ypres, was perhaps the first recorded sigificant gas attack. 
The gas had a definice demoralizing effect on the accacked forces 23 
Three months Later che British hurriedly formed "The Special Brigade, R.E." 
On 25 September 1915 che British showed the Allies che folly of being 


unprepared Co enter chemical varfare Sen the kilted members of the 


Special 3rigade attempted Co carry their chlorine filled cylinders intc 
the German trenches at Loos, France. None of che chemical carrying 

acc Ackers reached che German emplacemencs and very few of chem returned. 
Loos became a tragic defeat for doch the British l5ch Division and their 
initial chemical varfare effort. Fortunately, che Germans’ failure to 
exploit cheir success provided the remnants of the Special Brigade another 
chance. 5 Their second effort came on 13 October 1915 wich che accack on 
Hulloch Redoubt. Having learned valuable lessons in defeat, the British: 
use of gas mec with marked success on cnis occasion. The lid vas off and 


chemical warfare was quickly integrated inco batcle plans on borh sides. 


Later still in World War I che Germans introduced phosgene, a choking gas, 
and by che end of 1915 they had added a vomiting gas to force their foes 
co unmask so che phosgene could reach the lungs. By mid-1916 the French 


7 


— 
او‎ 
T. 
** 
w, 
E 


90,000 of h died.l 


Page 13 of 264 


roduced another fanily of toxic gases called "Blood 


che Germans incrocuced custard gas--e blistering 
In February 


Gases." In July i? 
agent char could produce casualties among masked troops. 


1918 the American croops were attacked by Germans using phosgene and 
chloropnicrin gas. The american forces retaliated for the first time 
in June of 1918 with phosgene. World War I saw doch sides employ approx- 
imately 17,000 chemical troops to cause more chan one million casualties, 


aad Austrians had inc 
i; 


Chemícal warfare vas horrifying to the civilized world, buc it also 
offered che possibility of the discovery of more humane veapons. This 
possibilicy was recognized, to a degree, through a comparison study of 
american casualties. Ome third of ou. casualties vere caused dy gas, oi 
whom approximately two percent died. In contrast, 25 percent of the non- 
gas casualcies died. In all, ower 3,000 substances vere investigated 
for toxic use in World War L, 32 were tested in combac, and 12 attained 


z 
noteworthy results. I 


Post-World War I 


Following World War I, a new atCcecpc vas made in 1921, at Washington, DC, 
to prohibit the use of war gases and similar materials. This subsequent 
proposal Sas aot ratified by France and, as a result, the proposal Cas 
voided. In 1925, ar the Geneva Conference, a treaty resolution called 
fc- prohibicion of war gases and bacteriological warzare. Great Bricain, 
the USSR, and other nations, in ratifying the treacy, made it clear chat 
they were bound only in relation to other countries complying with che 


treaty gers. The United States, Japan, Czechoslovakia, Argentina, and 


Brazil did not sign the treacy.l:2 


Eleven years later the world would learn that the treaty was not an 
effective deterrent. In 1936 the Italianas used mustard gas againsc the 
dare-fooced local forces of Abyssinia; both countries were signatories 
ef che 1925 Geneva Prococol against che use of gas. Between 1937 and 
1943 che Japanese repeatedly used gas attacks against the Chinese forces 
to overcome their superiority in numbers.1,4 
world War II 
gas employmenc did not play an important tactical role 
Incendiaries represented the principal chemical municion 
used in thac war. Although che major parties co the War cartied toxic 
gases in their tavencory, chreacs of recaliacion were crediced as che 
deterrent force. Ac che close of che war, che Allies were shocked co 
iscover that Che Germans possessed large stocks of new gases of the nerve 
poison category. These vere far more deadly chan the standard gases avail- 
able to che Allies. The Russians had captured a German Tabun plant and 


In general, toxic 
in World War il. 


8 


aA heh 


or non-lethal agents. 


Page 14 of 264 


moved it to Russia; subsequently, gabe (GA) became their standard nerve 
gas. The United States adopted sarin (GB), which also was discovered by 
Germany, as its standard nerve agenc.l Thereafter, stockpiles of nerve 

gases multiplied on both sides of the frou curtain. Both sides continued 
research to find new toxic chemical agents of greater lethality and employ- 


ability. H ۱ 
Korean War 


Ihe Korean conflict was conducted without use of toxic chemical agents by 
either side.l,4 The Russians accused the UN forces of employing deadly 
chemical and biological agents. However, na evi.ence was ever produced 
to support this claim. Conversely, the Uniced States strongly suspected 
the Chinese and-North Koreans of using psychochemical drugs as part of 
cheir "brainwashing techniques" on prisoners of war. This opinion was 
shared by many knowledgeable officials in the Defense Deparcment, several 
congressmen, and some members of che scientific community.l;9 Great con- 
cern vas voiced throughout che military and che general public; could ve 
train, equip, or otherwise prepare our troops to detect and resist the use 

of chemical agents designed to break their will and cause irrational behavior? 


Current 


Since che Korean War a great many armed confrontations have been recorded, 
and although research, development, and stockpiling of chemical weaponry 
made major strides throughouc the world, riot control agents, herbicides, 
and incendiaries were the extent of chemical munitions known to have been 
employed. An exception was recorded in the conflicc between Egyptian and 
Yemen forces in 1966-1967 when both sides reportedly used Russian and 
Bulgarian supplied phosgene gas and perhaps a nerve agent. 


Meanwhile, in che United States the national strategy chat followed the 
Korean War moved steadily coward massive nuclear retaliation. Alchough 

che policy did not eliminate chemical varfare'a importance, it did place 
primary focus On nuclear weaponry for both offensive and defensive pur- 
poses. Research and development in chemical warfare continued, but was 
marked by a disinterest in its value for future employment. As che 

impact of the policy of massive retaliation became better understood by 
researchers and planners alike, concern for an alteraative to this policy 
became apparent. Among the alternatives considered uas a greater role 

for chemical varfare.1,6 By the late 1950s the Chemical Corps was 
experimenting with a wide range of chemical agents, which included the 
World War II agencs of chlorine, phosgene, chlorophiczrin, and nitrogen 
mustards. Also included vere the German developed nerve or ancicholin- 
esterase agents of GB and GA (sarin and tabun), as well as new, more toxic 
anticholinesterases. Another category under scudy was che incapacitating 
Within chis class there was emphasis on both psycho- 
chemicals and physical incapacicants. It is chis environment and period in 
our history on which this report will focus. 


9 


aA 2 es 


Page 15 of 264 


T FOOTNOTES 


CAAPTER I 


Eouse Report No. 815, by The Committee on Science and Astronautics, 


qv. 
= House of Representatives, 86ch Congress, 1959. 
Ze Report enticled, ‘Warfare Gases, Eiscory, Description, Medical Aspects," 


— by H. L. Gilehrisc, undaced. 


3. — 


Intelligence Staff Study, "Soviet Research and Development Capad 1 2 es 
for New Toxic Agents," dated 1958. 


t. Report by Chemical Warfare and che Chemical Warfare Service published 


in October 1942. 
24 Cc. cee (American Chezical Society) Advisory to the U.S. Ary 
Caerical Corps, 19-20 May 1958. 
5. Ihe Weekly Publicacion of the Society of Chemical Indus czy, Report 
‘No, 46, Loudon, dated 12 November 1960. 
7. Research paper by Dr. L. Wilsou Greene, Arzy Cnemical Center, Maryland, 
citle, "Psychochemical Warfare, A New Concept of War," prepared in August 
= 1949. 
8. Minutes of Senate, Foreign Relations Committees hearing of April 1969, 
lst Session of the 91sc Congress. 


9. Chemical Warfare Laboratory Special Publication, Current Status of 
lacapacitating Agents Program, by Dr. Wicten, dated September 1962. 


l0. Booklec encitled, Weapons of Courterinsurgency Chemical/Biological, 


Anti-Personnel, Incendiary," published by NARMIC on 15 January 1970. 


ll. History of U.S. Arzy Chemical Corps, Volumes I and II. 


— 2 


10 


Page 16 of 264 


CHAPTER II 


PSY CHOCHEMI CALS 


General 


The purpose of chís chapcer is twofold: che first is to provide a sec of 


common definitions which wili be acceptable for use throughout chis report; 
and the second is to trace the discovery and use of LSD and other psycho- 


tropic drugs in boch ancíentr and modern times. 


The review of the literature and interviews with personnel involved with 
the drug research program disclosed a degree of confusion resulcing from 
a lack of consensus as to the meaning of specific vords and terms asso- 
dated with chemical agent research efforts. To preclude misinterpreta- 
tion or amabiguicy im subsequent discussions about psycnochemicals, Cer 
frequently used ia conjunction with the research effort are defined belo. 


Incanacicatiag - Non-Lethal Agents are defined as chose compounds which 


men delivered or employed in an effective dose can interfere wich an 
individual's performance of duty for a militarily significant period of 
time, buc which will allow him to recover complecely wichout medical aid.” 


Physical [ncapacitants are Chose compounds which are active in small 
doses and snich produce a significant or profound disturbance, anesthesia, 


paralysis, or immob{lizacion for a significant, but cemporary, period. 
Included among the effects are: impairment of vision (physiological); 
impairment of hearing; postural Lowering of blood pressure of such a degree 
thac standing is impossible; rigidicy; tremers; convulsions; induction of 
severe svuptomacic nausea and vomiting; and interference with abilicy ca 


regulate body cemperature.~? 


Psvcnolozical Incapacicants or Psvchochemicals are those compounds which 
produce a nental ircapacitation, in effect diminishing a person's will co 
resist. They effect che central nervous system and may cause one or more 
of the following: impairment of the thinking process; memory lapse; black- 
duc (2ercal); or loss of touch wich reality. I. 


Psychotropic is a term used almost interchangeably with psychochemical, 


buc without a good semantic juscification. Psychotropic drugs are defined 
icy for che psyche or, presumably, 


formally as those having a Cropism or affinity 

the central nervous system. For purposes of chis research effort, the 
following definition will be used: A psychotropic drug is one which pro~ 
duces any degree of mental incapacitation or disassociation, and which 
could alter che state of mínd or mood. Its main effect is on che central 
nervous system and includes compounds classified as follows: 


aA aes 


Ll 


— U— 200 7  - — 


کشر ص رہ —— 


Page 17 of 264 


Shoe! i 


t 7 
E a. sedacives (hypnotics) which slow mental activicy, such as 


alcohol and barbicurates; 
b. scimulants mich speed up activity, such as amphetamines and 
caffeine; 


7 c. tranquilizers (major) which calm psychotic behavior, such as 
chlorpromazine; 


— d. Cranquiliziers (minor) which calm anxiety, such as neprobamate; 


eter press‏ شس سور سسجت 


e.  anti-degressants which stimulate activity, such as phenalzine; 


f. psychocomineziícs (hallucinogenics) which cause deep changes in : 
mood and perceptions, such as LSD and mescaline. 


Psychotropic drugs can also be described as eicher deliriants or hallucinc- i 


genics: 


Jeliriant drugs are those which produce or tend to produce 
delirium as a primary effecc. Included wichin che cacegory are ancicholi- ۱ 
nergics such as scopolamine, benzilaces, and glycolaces.^ nese drugs i 
may produce vivid visual hallucinations buc che memory of them is depressed 
and che overwhelming drug effect is to slow mental and physical activity. 


a. 


"Tro 


b. Zallucinogenic or psychotomimetic drugs are those whose effects 
‘aimic insanity or psychosis, but which usually are easily differentiated 
from a crue psychosis. These drugs are also called psvchnedeliícs (mind 
m manifesting) and include such drugs as LSD end mescaline. These drugs tend 

co accivace rather chan depress mezcal activity. The visual hallucinations 
they produce sometimes involve bizarre distortions of physical objects 
= and are or cen vividly remembered. 


overt 


Chemical agents were not of interest to che military on che basis of cheir 
E ability co cause hallucinations or delirium as such, but rather for their 
abilicy co cause an enemy co be.wilitarily incapacitated, either by seda- 
cion, psychosis, or physical means, so that he would noc be able to make, 
a wormal or routine response to a specific military situation or demand. 


Me rarer 


Psvchocherical Compounds 


medical 
which is 
Aztec pro- 
the mescal 
interest, 


trene 


Several of chese compounds have been the subject of extensive 
research and have lengthy and detailed histories. Mescaline, 
obtained from che peyote cactus, can be traced to che ancient 
fessional diviners, who achieved inspiration by eacing either 
buttons or che psilocybin producing mishroom. As a matter of 
the dame mescaline vas adopted because of its use by the Mescalero Apaches 


1121: 


Que 


(c "geri m 
rm نید‎ TT? 


12 


-dom. 


Ia Venezuela, Brazil, and Columbia, 


Page 18 of 264 


Indian natives. of the Great Plains, where the peyote 
cactus was ceadily available, developed the peyoto rice called peyocism, 
which spread to che Comanches and Gas, who transformed che rite into 

a religion. Eventually, the plains tribes fused their peyocism religion 
wich Christianity and greacly subordinated the ritual use of thls hallu- 
cinogenic compound. 3 The "Psilocybe Mexicano” mushroom also was used by 
medicine men of Indian tribes in Mexico during che 19th century. 


in che Loch century. 


Halluctnogenic type drug use began with primicive societies as a means of 


curiag sickness, communion with supernatural powers, medica~ 
discomfort, and bore- 


a few are worthy of 


divinacion, 
tion, amd such mundane purposes as allaying hunger, 
- &Alchougb chere are many historical examples, 

mention to further establish that hallucinogenic drugs and their use are 


not new. / 


Siberian tribes, such as the Koryak, Chuckthee, and Kamchadal, have for 


centuries made use of the helluctnogenic properties of "Fly Agaric," which 
is derived from a rare mushroom found in che barren and formidable areas 
of the norzheastera regions of Asia. Their use was motivated by a desire 
to escape from the harsh environment, as well as to facilitate contact 


with che spiric world. 3 


certain Aborigines extracted "picuri" from the leaves of a 


ir Aus cral La, 
The extraction contained scopolamine, which they us ed 


potato-like shrub. . 
co suppress thirsc and hunger. 


primitive tribes have for ages escaped 
che realities of their plight by utilizing the hallucinogenic properties 
of che "yakee," "epena," "yopo," and "piopo" plants. 


Lvse-zic Acid Diechylamide (LSD) 


LSD is one of a group of drugs know as ergot alkaloids. Ergot is forned 
by che growth of che "ascomycecous fungus" on various grasses and sedges, 
such as rye, wheat, oats, barley, Ace, and algeriana diss (a reedy grass 
of che Mediterranean region used in basket and cord making). The chief 
botanical source of commercial ergot in the United Scares and in European 
countries is Che rye planc. Ergot has long been used in medicine because 
of its specific action in contracting uterine musculature, and vas used in 
midwifery in che 18th and 19ch centuries, mere it was ecployed as an 
abortifacienc. The drug scill has some use in obstetrics for che control 
of postpartum hemorrhage, bur ic has been largely replaced by individual 
purified alkaloids.” Certain alkaloids also have been widely used in che 
creacCment of migraine. The ergot alkaloids can be converted to lysergic 


acid by Sp کو‎ the alkaloid mixture to alkaline hydrolysis followed 
dy actdificarion.® 


13 


میں 


Page 19 of 264 


\ LSD vas first synthesized by Or. Alberz Hofmann, a Swiss chemise at 
Sandoz wa>oracories in Basle, Sciczzerland, in 1938. However, LC was 
noc until april 1942 chaz Dr. Hofmann discovered ics hallucinogenic 

x pocencial. Wale zcrxing wich derivatives of lysergic acid he acci- 

dencally exposed himself to a small quantity of lysergic acid diechy la- 

Ia less zhan an hour he was muddled, confused, and unable to 


— mide. 
— continue his work. He reportedly left the laboracory and returned co 
his hoce co rest. ze pulled che window snades co block che light because 


che ravs vere painful to his eves. There in che quiet dark of his home 
^ be reported having a beautiful experience; chus, his report of LSD's 

hallucinogenic properties." Another Swiss scientist, Dr. W. A. Stoll, 

is credited with being the first to syscemactically investigate the psy- 
= chological phenomena or LSD. Ee reported discucbances in perception 
E chac led co hallucinations, acceleration of chinking, and slight dimming 
of consciousness, buc Athout a lessening of judgment. He also found 
chat i: vas outstanding in producing a clear-cut blunting of che effect 
anc suspiciousness chat was often seen in schizophrenic patients. By 
1947 Dr. Scoll nad compleced cescs of che drug in both mentally norzal 
and abnormal suDiects with no unfavorable after effects. 


Meanwnile, in che Uniced States a seed had been planted chat would 
a maior zilicary interest in the potential use of 


eventuaily excize 3 
; 2sv cnochemical agents. In 1947 Dr. Alsopn H. Corvin, Professor of Caecistry 
at Jonas Zookins University, wrote che Chemical Corps Technical Command 


suggesting che potentialities of enzymes as toxicological warfare agents. 

Ee offered that with intensive research, it was probable that substances 

E capable of destroying necessary vicamins could be found. The loss of 
essencial vitamins, he opined, held che possibility of producing mass 
hallucination and uncoucrollable hysteria by incoxicacion. 


year anc a half later the Sctencific Director, Chemical Corps Technical 


Command, Arzy Chemical Center, MD, Dr. L. Wilson Greene, took up Dr. Corcin's 
ie theme in a report titled, “Psvchochenical Warfare, 4 New Concept of Far. 


Dr. Greene offered chat he was convinced that the trend of each major 


conilicc, being characterized by T nczeased deach, human misery, and 
: property destruction, could be reversed. He believed thar chrough 
mE psycnechenical warfare ic vould be possible to conquer an enemy with- 
out the wholesale killing of his people or che mass destruction of 
is property. Dr. Greene reported chat Dr. Corcin's idea cas a major 
scride forvard for mankind, hovever, he stated that enzymes would decoc- 
dose wich the intense heat creaced bv the explosive charge in minicions 
cr ov the heat from mesc known aerosol devices. Therefore, he proposed 
` a search be zade for a stable checical compound which vould cause mental 
abnorcalicies of military significance. His report provided a list of 
51 materials which were known to cause mental disorders. LSD vas not 
f included in his list, which probably indicated a general unawareness 
x: in 19-9 of the compound by che American scientific community: However, 
Dr. Greene's study noted chat Dr. John P. Clay, Consult ant to the Chief, 


ah eka 


14 


Page 20 of 264 


Checical Division, European Command ac Heidelberg, Germany, was acare of 
Dr. Scoll's investigacions ín Switzerland with LSD, and he (Dr. Clay) vas 


in a position co monitor future studies that could be bereficiíal to che 


psychochemical warfare theme. 


Dr. Stoll continued his intense investigation of LSD in Switzerland and 

dy 1949 he had lectured about the “New Hallucinatory Agent“ to such gatherings 
as che Swiss Society of Psychiatry and che Association of Physicians in 
Zurich.l4 Acclaim of discovery of a major break-chrough in clinical 
treatmenc of mental patients vas rapidly growing. The new drug vas reported 
as being very active in unusually low dosage with full recovery in 


The compound vas very expensive, however, and 


approxizacely 24 hours. 
The restricted avail- 


available only from Sandoz Limited of Switzerland. 
abilicy of LSD probably accouncs for its delayed introduction into the 
United Staces.^ Even so, in 1950 doctors at Sc. Louis Stace Hospital 
Washington University Medical School in St. Louis, MO, reported thac LSD-25 
vas a drug that induced a concrollable toxic state within che nervous 

system and that it re-activated anxiety and fear with apparently just 

enough euphoria to permic recall of provoking experiences. Further, it did 


frequently encountered sluggishness of speech associated with 


zot cause the Ír 
other drugs. They opined thac LSD offered a means for more readily gaining 


access do Che chronically withdrawn patients and could serve as a new toci 
for shortening psychotherapy. 


anc 


A 
experiments which led to the conclusion thar lysergic acid diethylamide 


appeared to be a suitable substance for therapeutic investigation in the 
creatment of psychoses. It should be noted that in this same time period 
another aspect of LSD effects was becoming apparent. Specifically, could 
this or other similar drugs be administered co U.S. officials in order co 
sain iaforaation of national security impact, and mat could be done to pro- 
tect our officials against such an event? This aspect will be explored in 
greater decail in Chapter J, concerning the perceived threat. 


^ year later (1951) Ypsilanti State Eospital officials reported their 


For che present it is sufficient to state char chere vas cause for grave 
concern and a general absence of acceptable answers. In the early 1950s 
mental institutions, zedical schools, and medical research insticucions 
around the world conducted thousands of experiments with LSD in animals 
and humans. Their findings were published in open literature and used 
regulariv in medical schools and medical associacion lectures. LSD was: 
determined to be 100 times more toxic or effective than mescaline in 
creating schizophrenia; a definire aid co psycnoanalvsis; and a major 
advancement in che psychocherapy of neuroses. Although LSD was noc 
acclaimed co be a "miracle drug," there were guarded undertones char 
t could well have that potential. This ts evidenced, to a degree, by 
the wide variety of successful uses of LSD reported. Spring Grove Hospi- 
tal in Baltimore, MD, recorded measurable success in using LSD to aid in 
the control and cure of alcoholism. Psychiacrists reported chat LSD 


15 


sA a4 aA 


Page 21 of 264 


could surface repressed material and LC greacer transference of vital 


S25 
iafoernatiou from sacient co psychiatrisc. Dey allowed Chat one LSD 
session could replace ronchs of wark using che chen current techniques . 

The 


The British found LSD had great value in dealing wich psychopaths. 
Canadian Psvchiatric Association Journal reported good results wich LSD 


in reversirg frigídity and sexual aberrations. American mental hospicals 
£ 8 7 p 


reported thar treacmens of schizochrenic children with LSD aec wich some 
7 ji 
Several vell kncen 


Success when ali ocher known aecnods had failed. 
psvchiacriscs reported that selective, controlled use of LSD enhanced 


creativity. Several medical hospitals conducted numercus trials wich LSD 


Ge Cerminal diseased pacients vich profouzd favorable changes i2 attitude, 
where pain killers had failed .® 


Amongsc che enthusiasm of a growing use for LSU in che civilian medical 
che military scientific community was continuing ics effcrcs co 


کی 


community, 
promote a "huzaze weapon system" as an airermacive to ss destruction 


conventional or atomic means.5:9:l10 These forces vere joined by the ever 
present need cf the intelligence community co determine an enemy's cap- 
apilictes for using psychochemical agents as a veapou against our nacional 
securicy. f 

what was an apparent effort to pull these forces together, the Depari- 
of Defense appcinzed an "Ad Hoc Study Group ou 2sychochemical Agents 


8 جم 
[che Wolff Caczittee]" in June of 1955. The accions and conclusions cf‏ 
this group vill te discussed lacer in this report. However, it is impor-‏ 


tant to aote that ac che time the study group get chere were at leasc one 


hundred zajor reports available regarding experiments with LSD and other 


comparable psychocherical substances. 


— 
ee 
as 


Page 22 of 264 


FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER LI. 


"Selective Malfunccioning of Human Machine, New 


ls Report encitled, 
" by LIC Douglas Lindsey, November 1959. 


Borizous ín Chemical Warfare, 


Technical Report EATR4210, "The Search for Toxic 


225 Edgewood Arsenal 
Benjamin Witten, November 1969. 


Chemical Agents, by Dr. 


3... Article in Scientific American titled, "The Hallucinogenic Drugs," 


pubiished April 1964. 


4. Report entitled, "“Psychochenical Warfare, A New Concept of War," bv 
p 3 P 1 


Dr. L. Wilson Greene, August 1949. 
S: American Journal of Psychiatry, Volume 108, July 1951-June 1952. 


6. Book titled, "The Drug Scene," by Dr. Donald B. Louria, 1968. 


7. Report entitled, "The Role of Incapacitating Agents in Warfare, 
Eiscorical Review," by W. Bobo and 3. Wicten, dated Augusz 1965. 


8. Report of the Ad Hoc Study Group on Psychochemical Agents (Wolff 
Report), punished November 1955. 


9. "The Czicícal Importance of CBR in National Defense," 
by MG Marshall Stubbs, January 1961. 


9 Article enticled, 


10. Readers Digest article, "Let's Face che Truch About Gas and Germ 
Weapons," published in August 1960. 


ll. Minutes of “First Psy chochertcal Conference," Amy Chemical Center, 
MD, published by Dr. Amedeo Marrazzi, 12 May 1954. 


l2. Lecter from Azzy Materiel Command, subject: Hallucinogenic Compounds, 


daced 22 July 1975. 


hk 


17 


Page 23 of 264 


CHAPTER IIL 


i TEE IBREAT 


General 


The purpose of this chapter is to provide a rationale for the initiation 
of research of incapacitating chemical agents. 


To underszand and evaluate the decisions which resulted in the U.S. Army's 


entry inco and the subsequent proliferation of chemical agent research 
during che 1750s and early 19608, ic is aecesaary to first examine che 
"threac" co che free world as it was perceived ac that time. The percep- 
cions misc be viewed in the context of the events of che time and che then 
atcicudes of the American people. Of particular importance in this regard 
was the intensified struggle betveen che free world and communist world 
and the generally accepted thesis chat supremacy must be maintained in 


all macters which involved che comunist bloc. 


At the close of World War IT, America was accepted ag the only viable 
major power in che vorld.l In two world wars che seemingly unlinitced 
capacity of America to produce weapons, food, and transport: nad in each 
Case prevailed over che Ingenious new weapons and tactics employed against 
us. This, and our status as che world power, undoubtedly served to assuage 
the American people as the demtlircarization of ovr indugtrial might pro- 
ceeded and the coumcery returned to a period of normalcy .2, 23 Ecwever, 
mational strategists tecognized chat regardless of che world's horror of 
war and che expressed desire for peace, war had become more total chan 
ever, since technological advances in warfare assured that in the fucure 
entire popularíons could be affected directly and quickly 3, 5 Ic was 

also recognized chat although che atomic bomb waa credited with destroy- 
ing Japan's will to fight, 75 percent of che total bombs dropped on Japan's 
war making capability were chemical incendiaries. Wich this in uiad, iz 
vas reasonable to predict chat in future strategic planning chemical and 
biological (CB) warfare measures would join with radiological warfare as 
matters of primary consideration. However, for a brief period che G war- 


fare program vas dormant in che 0.0 


The ciose of che 1940s revealed a new facet of che communist revolutionary 
movement, which added a new dimension to iínterzational conflict and a new 
term co our lexiícon—'Cold War." A United Scates National Policy of Con- 
taimmenct was forzulaced, and from chis new challenges were presented. 

Zven when major conventional forces were not engaged in open conflict, 

the cold var cactics of propaganda, subversiou, guerrilla varfare, and 
liberation movements or uprisings were being employed. Once ic became 
apparent Chat the atomic bomb was no longer en American monopoly, it vas 


18 


a4 abel 


Page 24 of 264 


i izuevitable chat new stracegic assessnencs would have co be cade. Rational 
men obvicusly wouid look for other vays co attain national objectives; 
methods which would not include che strong possibility of nacional suicide 


E or general var 4,3 


In early 1951 che U.S. inzelligence comminity learned chat Russia was 
experimenting with a psy choc ropic drug called ker j abung“; which, when 
acministered to an unsuspecting viczim, vas alleged co enable an individ- 
‘ual to exercise external subservient control of that person without his 

F victim's subsequent awareness that he had been exploited. Use of this 
material in interrogation was viewed ag a potential threat to our nacional 


security . Shortly after U.S. intelligence interest was aroused, cwo 


= _ Soviet aloc agents vert seized in West Germany. They were carrying 
syrettes of a subscance which supposedly would lessen an individual's 
ability co resist che orders of his captors. The captured substance ves 

: furzished zo chemical laborarories ín Europe and che U. S.; however, the 

E exact identity could noc be determined, although it vas found to be an 

alkaloid compound. This discovery, and ics potencial, became more alarm 
ing vnez in che fall of 1951 a prominence doctor from Harvard Medical School 

Y reported co che Army Surgeon General chat he had learned, during a visit co 
Europe, chat several countries were experimenting with LSD and studying its 
possible military use. 2 This dnformation, coupled with earlier intelligence 

E findizgs, heightened che suspicion that che military application of psycho- 
chemical drugs was the object of intensive chemical research by our paten- 


cial enemies. 
E USSR - Research and Development 


Chemical warfare was not new to the USSR. In 1888 Czarist Russia vas 

- Song che first of the mafor powers co recognize che military significance 
of chenical warfare, particularly muscard gas. In 1899, ar The Hague, 
Czar Nicholas made che unprecedented announcement of che possible employ- 

= ment of projectiles filled with "delerterious gases." The czar 3 srtatemerc 
created enough concern chat tne Assembly outlawed the use of chemical 

filled projecziles. 25 This vas the only chemical warfare prohibition co 


come out of The Hague in 1899. In 1914 the USSR established a chemical 


i ars are research and development capability, three full years ahead of che 
United States.” In 1915 Russia, as with che other Allies, was initially 
unprepared for the Germans' use of chemical weapons. However, Russia's 
earlier research vas evident when she retaliaced, within two zoachs, using 
mustard, chiorine, and phosgene gases; she was the first of che Allies co 


Zy che beginning of World War II Russia was believed co have larger 


do so. 
Some hint of cheir inter- 


z chemical agent stockpiles chan any ocher nation. 

est in research in chemical warfare agents was reflected in 1943 when 

M. I. Kabachnik was awarded che Stalin Prize, lsc Class, for “development 

E of a chemical substance of great significance." German intelligence docu- 
ments captured after World War II disclosed that the Germans credited: 


A گت‎ of 


19 


Page 25 of 264 


t Russia with being fully prepared for exiensive chemical warfare, and, in 
fact, had developed a class of coxic agents noc chen known to Germany. 
Some credence 1s provided to this belief by noting che uae Russia made of 
E r. Vau Bock after Wcrld Wer II. Dr. Von Bock was the production manager 
of the German Tabun gas plant chat vas transferred co Russia at che end of 
the war. Although Dr. Von Bock vaa captured and taken to Russia along 
= with the plant, he vas not employed in che reassemblage of che plant or 
^ subsequent chemical agent produccion. U.S. intelligence considered this. 
as evidence that Russia already possessed ample expertise of her own, 24 
By comparison, ín the early 1950s the United Scates was far behind che 
USSR in che research and development of chetical warfare agents.+/ In 
1952 the Central Incelligence Agency disclosed chac che Soviec Bloc had 
made large purchases of ergot (from which LSD is derived). Also, during 
chis same timeframe the Polish radio urged the people to collecc ergot 
because considerable quancities vere needed.. 
altsougo Acerican lateres: ín new chemical warfare agents, Co include 
psychochericals, vag incensified during che Korean War, priorities for 
: research and development efforts were necessarily placed on development, 
improvement, and produccion of weapons of known immediate value co the 
waz erfor- as opposed to extensive research of aew agents. Thus, chem 
ical research and develcpuent efforts were directed primarily toward 
iroritancs, smoke, incendiaries, and navain. 27d Nevertheless, the USSR 
: and her sazellítes continuously charged the United States with che nanu- 
facture and use of biological warfare agents. 23 These allegations were 
accompanied by massive propaganda efforts and contrived evidence. Another 
Startling event of the Korean War vas the belief tchac che communists had 
used drugs in cammeccion with che "brainwashing" of our POWs.27f In this 
= regard there was a general belief char the drugs ín question were of che 
pszchochezical category. These events, when coupled with our lack of 
research and development effort ín new chemical and biological warfare 
— agents, magnified our comparative backwardness in che field. This 4s 
mot to state chat che milicary was doing nothing in che area of chemical 
research and development; there wag research being done, buc quaztizacively 
che dollar amount involved vas quite small, approximately 1/1, 000 ch of the 


military budget. 27d 


- 


U.S. Policy 


In general, che policy makers and national strategists alike were influenced 
by che policy on gas warfare formulated by Presidenc F. D. Roosevelt, which 
Sr he expressed as . . I have been loach co believe that any nacion, evea 
our present enemies, could or would be willing co looae upon mankind such 
terrible and inhumane weapons. . . . use of such weapons has bean ouclaved 
s by the general opinion of civilized mankind: This councry has not used 


them and i hope that we will never be compelled zo use them. I state 


£A SAM 


20 


Page 26 of 264 


EC 


noc even a 


co che use of 
."23 con- 
needed resources 


categorically char we shall under ca circumstances resort 
such weapons unless they are first used by our enemies. . 
sequently, decision makers were not willing to expend che 
in Che develapment of a weapons capability that had such a remote chance of 
becoming parc of che nation's arsenal. This policy and belief was not 
withouc its opponents. Hany of che nation's advanced thiukers were openly 
concerned chat the. evolutionary and revolutionary forces ac work chroughouc 
the world had invalidated past judgmezts. They argued chat history had 
shown many times that a powerful nacion could not retrain its position by 
continuing co rely on oucmoded concepcs.? Moreover, they believed chat 


strong economy could win a war from a standing start, men new 


weapous were available but were aat in our inventory. In simpler tems, 


ic ig the weapons in being that count the most. 


During the 1950s the Roosevelt policy was attacked au its two principal 
premises. First, chemical warfare is "inhumane." It vas argued chat 
could offer a ray of hope for a more "humane" weapons 
system; that is to say, an enemy could be temporarily {acapacicatad 
without harming che surrounding populacion or induscrial capability .4,10 
Seccncly, it was argued chat if the commuciscs succeeded in attaining 

a superiority in aew chemical and biological weapons which we could not 
match or which we could not defend against, we would forfeit che opcion 


psychochemicals 


ef retaliarion.ll,;12,l5 


The merits of the arguments on either side are not inportant to this 
.ہج‎ however, the fact chat such controversy existed at che cime ig 


i=portant. 


Although research and development in chemical warfare to include che 

use of human volunteers wes authorized and conducted during the 1950s, 
the public apparently vas unaware of either the extent of the Army's 
research effort or of the capabilities of their potential enemies. 
Moreover, prior to the lace 1950s (1957-1959) there is evidence of only 
minimal efforts on the part of che military to provide the Congress sub- 
scancial informacion regarding chemical warfare research from both the 
offensive and defensive scandpotut. 27 The nass of daca reviewed ín che 


preparacion of this report indicated chat secrecy was maintained for three 
First, the lack of definite knowledge of exactly chat 


primary reasons: 
che 


cur enemies already Ser or had in their om arsenals; second, 
natural revulsion agaiasc che effects of both ald and new C3R agents 
mace them natural targecs for international propaganda campaigns; and 
third, was che concern char the American people vould express repugnance 
with the army's involvement in this type of warfare preparation, rather 
Chan accepting Che need for research, {f for no other reason chan to 
leama how co protect our population in the event of a chemical attack. 
This later perception vas highlighced in a apeech by a former deputy 
director of Defense Research and Engineering in 1959 when he said: 


hoses 


"AC 


Page 27 of 264 


che present time I cight say the Soviec Union seers to be ahead of us in 
the field of chemical and biclogical weapons for military use, as well as 
* in che field of civil defense against these weapons. The apparent American 
reluctance to think about and face up to the realities and pocencialicies 
of biological and chemical weapons might give an enemy an absolutely crucial 
Z cilitary advantage over us, unless we take steps immediately to rectify our 
-  zilitary and civil defense posture, vis-a-vis the biological and chemical 
weapons capabilities of our potential enemies. . . 12 


Serious open acknowledgement of America's chemical/biological civil defense 


"readiness appeared to come into focus in 1958. The suddennese wich which 


ampie file documents and public literature appeared leads to a conclusion 
= that the opponents of secrecy had been struggling for some time to pres ent 
their case to Congress and the general public. Their motivation seemed co 
) sten from concern for the public welfare and a desire to influence a more 
ue -flextble national policy. In early 1958 che Chief of the Army Chemical 
Corps offered that since 1948 T.S. national policy had been based on 
nuclear deterrence. He stated that che U.S. had been involved in 17 
i wars during that ten-year period and won none of them, nor had nuclear 
= weapons been used in any of chem." In the meantime, he reported, cour 
munism had increased its geographical and population control by 600 per- 
cent. Moreover, he opined that psychochemicals and their non-lechal 
~ effects were ideal for Russian use against che United States because 
they would allow for the capture of undamaged American industry and the 
manpower resources to operate it. His theme was adopted by mary 
scientists, legislators, and military planners. In lace 1958 the new 
Chief of the Army Chemical Corps promoted the "Blue Sky Program,” which 
was designed co seek nez and novel ideas from chemists througnout the 
TT mation. Eight months later the U.S. Army Chemical Corps Advisory Council 
(an assemblage of some of the nation's leading sctentists) reported chat 
the U.S. was seriously lagging behind the USSR in chemical warfare readi- 
ness. They reported:  thar the USSR was prepared for large-scale chemical 
0 ` and biological warfare, boch overtly and covertly; USSR chemical agent 
production schedule was three or four times that of thè U.S.; the USSR 
had started production of V-agents in 1956 while the U.S. would not start 
until 1960; che USSR started production of G-ageats in 1947 and the U.S. 
started in 1954; Russia had stockpiled 215,000 tons of chemical agents as 
Compared co 31,000 tons by the U. S.; and Russia's chemical service employed 
e 100,000 men while the U.S. bad 5,000. Furthermore, che Council found that 
the USSR had a decided advantage because the U.S. and its al Hes had litcle 


or no chemical/biological defense System. 17 


e Those findings were reinforced by che results of a Booz-Allen Applied 
Research, Inc., research project which had been contracted to determine 

the extent of USSR efforts in chemical and biological warfare and che 

= U.S. defenses against that type warfare. Boar-Allen reported that the 


* ید 5 


22 


Page 28 of 264 


USSR was concerned vith C3 warfare and it could be their future prime 
effort. Another finding was thar che U.S. was without effective C3 
countermeasures or alert syaten. Additionally, chey found char che 
research required to correct rhe deficiency vas not being conducted. 


C3R Research 


During chis period the need for more research vas often che subjecr of 
major news articles: The Army Information Digest published Attack by 
Invisible Invader; U.S. Newa and World Report published New Worry for 
World; The Reporter published The Campaign to Make Chemical Warfare 
“Respecctable;+6 che Baltimore Sunday American and News Post published 

a Series of four articles entitled Plan to Alert Nation on Invisible 
Death, US Wide Oven co a Surprise Gas—Germ Raid, Gas, Biological War- 
fare Threac co U.S. Nov, and U.S. Has Few Ways to Spot Cloud of Death;l18 
and the Readers Digest Association, Inc., published Let s Face che Truth 
about Gas and Germ Weapons.29 These are a small sampling of the material 
published on the subject. The theme generally was che same; the Russians 
vere ready and willing to conduct C3 warfare and che U.S. was not, thus, 
national security was in jeopardy. The Congress, boch the Ecuse and 
Senate, conducted hearings at che committee level on chis subjecc. The 
House of Representatives subcommittee on appropriations received testi- 
.zouy regarding chemical and biological reseerch aud related metcers in 
March 1958, April 1959, March 1960, March 1961, and March 1962. The 
House Counictee on Science and Astronautics received extensive testi- 
mony in January 1959 and submitted a comprehensive report co the Houae 
of Representatives titled: Research in CBR (Chemical, Biological and 
Radiological Warfare).23 The recommendations offered by this committees 
in their report appeared co represent the culmination of a decade of 
salesmanship efforts by the chiefs of the Chemical Corps and their 


supporters; therefore, they bear repeating in this report. The report 


concluded: 


As a result of its hearing end further study on che problems 
of research in CBR, this committee offers che following 


recommendations: 


- (1) There must be a strong and continuous intelligence effort 
concucted by che United States as a protective measure to keep 
abreast of foreign developments in the fields of CBR if this 
country is to have time to develop adequate passive defense 
and other countermeasures. 


(2) Surveillance of foreign activities might also give this 
` naciou ics only inkling of imminent use of CBR against the 
: Unfted States, and therefore is important for chis reason coo. 


23 


ask 28 A 


Page 29 of 264 


(3) There is an urgent need for greater public understanding 
of the dangers and uses of CAR if proper support is co be 
gives co our defenses and countermeasures. 


(4) In ary consideration of international disarmamenc, a 
special effort must be made cot co overlook the great poten- 
tial of CBR and che ease of evading detection cf CBR activi- 


ties. 


(5) There ts an urgent need for higher level of support on a 
conzinuing, long run basis in order to develop better detec- 
ciou and protection measures against possible employmenc of 


CBR against Chis country. 


(6) Civil defense plans of chis country should include a 

more positive effort ac providing shelters which are proof 
against CBR attack, at providing rore masks and protective 
clothing, and in public instruction in defensive measures. 


(7) More posicive and inaginative attention should be given 
to the problems of dececcting and guarding against use of ŒR 
by saboteurs aimed at disrupting key accivicies ín cime of 
emergency. 


(8) The committee views (32 as a weapon which is not com- 
pecicive with nuclear weapons, but complementary co then, 
designed to do a different job. 


(9) The committee camnoc bring itself co describe any weapon 
cf var as "humane," and makes no moral judgment on che possible 
use of CGR in warfare. e does recognize chat ignoring CER 
will net remove the problem of its existence or its possible 
enployment againac che United States. 


(10) Le ia granted that some forms of CIR offer che prospect 
and che hope of winning batcles without taking human life or 
destroying homes and factories. If force msc be used, chis 

is betcer thar many of che alternatives. Buc ic must also be 
recognized chat even if che US is attacked wich che new gentle 
weapons, rhe consequences of any defeat for our nation would de 
just as dangerous to our national goals and life. 


(LI) Iz ís also recognized chat in Che present world situacion 
wich other countries pursuing vigorous programs of CBR develop- 
zest, the best immediate guarantee che US can possess to insure 
chat CER is not used anywhere against che free world is to have 


t 


- 
m. 
m. 


Page 30 of 264 


` 


E a sczoag capability in chis field, coo. This will only came 
with a stronger program of research. 


— (12) At the present che, CBR research is supported at a level 
equivalenc co only one ore-thousandth of our total defense 
5 budgec. In light of ita potencialicies, chis committee recom- 
. mends chat serious consideration be given to the request of 
Defense officials that this support be at least trebled. Only 
an increase of such size {s likely co speed research to a level 
a af attainment compatible with the efforts of the communist 


nations. 


(13) If A ia co be considered a deterrent force in the US 
E arsenal of weapons, the program of research advocated here 

vill have co be accompanied by an adequace program of manu- 
facture and deployment of CBR munitions. 

14) CBR warfare is not particularly expensive as compared with 
many other modem forms of variare, particularly when considered 


3 as an incremental cost added to already necessary delivery tech- 


aiques exployed for nuclear weapons. This is a further reason 


why chis investment must be given careful consideration. 


UM (15) The research being done in C3R has already yielded a variecy 
: o peacetime benefits, including antidotes for poisons, new. 

i serums to prevent disease, greater understanding of how dis- 

m eases are spread, new insecticides, and fundamental knowledge 

of life processes. There is no real separation possible 

between potential military application of chemical and bio- 
logical knowledge and peaceful applications. These peaceful 
applications are required in any case and deserve added sup- 

port For che national welfare. 


(16) The United Scates is in a research and development race, 
particularly with the Soviet Union, whether ic be for peaceful 
- or military purposes. The study by this commitree of R 
~ reiarorces our general view of che urgency of che overall 
race and necessicy of full public understanding and support 
E of science and technology everywhere in our nation. 


The Senate Armed Services Committee, in its February 1962 hearing, con- 
sidered many of che same aspects as the House had two years earlier. 


Iz is inportant to note thac Defense officials and Congress were not 
alone in their concern for improved OR research and public awareness 
- of the chreat. In October 1959 che American Legion adopted a resolucion 


` 


25 


یں 


ae a د کے‎ a € ree 


- 


L 


Page 31 of 264 


M 


to achieve an impressive aíliícary capability in CBR warfare. 
October 1959, the American Cheri call Society Board Committee ou Civil 
Defense published a finding chat declared che US was fcllowing a CBR 
They vent on to claim char the American 


Also in 


policy of "Bead iz the Sand." 
people were uninformed as to Che dangers of chemical attack, char there 


was a lack of C3R deterrent weaponry. The American Chemical Society, with 
88,000 members, was often crediced by che news media with removal of che 
lid of secrecy that surrounded che need for adequate C3R civil defense 
measures. 17 Unquestionably, che American people were beginning to get 

the word chrough che media, congressional hearings, defense public rela- 
tious efforts and a wide variety of speeches to such assemblages as che 
fnerical Corps Protective Committee, che Robert A. Welch Foundation, 
American Chemical Society, Armed Forces Chemical Association, Coupressed 
Gas Associacion, Office of Defense Mobílizacion, American Medical Asso- 
ciation, and che American Ordnance Association. The messages they received 
were similar: che U.S. wag not ready to defend itself against a chemical 
warfare attack; the fear of an exchange could inhibit the Soviets from 
uging atomic weapons if other means could achieve their purpose; Soviet 
planners vere quoted as saying, "in the future, war will be discinguisned 
fzcm all past wars Q connection with mass employment of Air Force devices, 
rocker seapons and varius means of destruction, such as atomic, bydrogen, 
chemical and bacteriological weapons"; Soviet forces, with 175 ready divi- 
sions, had chemical troops at all echelons and were prepared to parsicipate 
in large-scale gas warfare; and Major General Drugov of the Soviec Ay vaa 
quoted a3 saying, "special interesc attaches icself to the so-called psychic 
po sous (mescaline, mechedrine, and lysergic acid derivatives) which are 
sow used for simularion of mental disease. 23 The speeches also contained 
such alarming statements ag: any major military power can manufacture 

nerve gas or a comparable material at che rate af hundreds of tona per 
day; che American civil population 1s without proceccíve masks or train- 
ing In their use; America cannoc afford co ignore che real posaibilicy 
that even core powerful chemical weapons then nerve gases remain to be 
discovered; and America may not know che ctype of chemical warfare agent 
aa enemy cay choose co emaloy on our Forces until we are on che baccle- 


field, thus our research must be complete.19,21,22 


New Po2licv 
— MÀ À—— —u—ä— 


A change in policy regarding chemical warfare appeared inevitable by the 

time President Kennedy cook office. The Kennedy adminiscration asked for 

a wider choice of responses shorcly after caking office and Defense research 
and development officials curaed cheir efforts toward a "Balanced Arsenal-- 
Balanced Power" efforc.22 With this new policy came che proliferacion of 
Chemical research and development co address both che offensive and defensive 


needs of our cational security. 


NUS 


26 


r 


EN 


Page 32 of 264 


FOOTNOTES 
CHAPTER III 
I. Notes of Joint Intelligence Council Meeting, 1952. 
TS Chemical Corps Procective Committee Report, March 1959. 
3% U.S. Army Chenical Corps Advisory Council Report, July 1959. ^ 


4. Speech co Robert A. Walch Foundacion by MG Stubbs, 20 January 1961. 


Ja Intelligence 3ranch Scudy on Policy and Trends in USSR with Respect 


co Offensive Cherical Warfare, l January 1955. 
6. Intelligence Branch Study of chegical Warfare, Office of Chief 
Chemical Officer, Deparment of che Army, November 1954. 


7. Ad Soc Advisory Cormictee of Chemical Corps Mission and Structure 
(filler Reporc), August 1955. 


8. Aray Informacion Digest, "Attack bv Invisible Invader, by MG Creasy, 
ر‎ 8 , 8 


February 1958. 


9. U.S. News and World Report article, "New Worry for World," May 1958. 


10. Text of speech, "CBR Warfare in Focus,” by MG Creasy. 


Ils Same as Footnote 22. 


125 Speech titled, "This is the Threat, bv Dr. William H. Summers on, 


8 April 1960. 


13. U.S. Senate, Congressional Record, remarks by Honorable Alexander 
Wiley of Wisconsin, 30 January 1958. 


is. | Remarks co Compressed Gas Association titled, "Should We Worry About 
CB Warfare," by MG Creasy, January 1958. 


o Armed Forces Chenical Association by MG Stubbs titled, 


pum Remarks ¢ 
"CBR A Power for Peace," April 1959. 
16. Article dy The Reporcer ticled, "The Campaign to Make Chemical Warfare 


Respectable," October 1959. 


27 


„eds 


Page 33 of 264 


17. Repert by Hertcan Chentcal Society, Board Comzittee on Civil Defensr, 
19 Occoter 1953. 


id. Series of articles 5v Baltimore Sunday American and News Post titled, 
"Plan to Alert Nacion on Invisible Death"; "U.S. Wide Open to a Surprise 


Gas~Germ Raid"; Las, Biological Warfare Threat ta U.S. Now"; and "U.S. Has 


` Few Ways to Spot Cloud of Death, January 1960. 


"e „ 19. Speech to Serican Medical Association titled, "Medical Importance 
of CBS Warfare," by LIG Heaton, The Surgeon General of the Army, 30 June 
1950. 


= 20. Readers Digest article, Let's Face che Truth About Gas and Germ 


Weapons," August 1950. 


— 21. Speech c "Balanced Arsenal-3alanced Power, 


o 
by MG Stubbs, Se 


224 Speech to Anerican Chemical Societv, "This is the New CRR Perspective, 


by MC Stubbs, 8 April 1960. 


23. House Report #815, The Commictee of Science and Astronautics, The House 
s of Representatives, The Congress of the U.S., B6ch Congress, Ist Session. 
24 Trerallinanra € 
» Tete کہا يہ ھا‎ SESE eee, Sowtes 
— July 1958. 
25.7 ffice of Scientific Intelligence, CIA report on "Soviet Efforts to 
Develop New Checical Warfare Toxic Agents, October 1960. 


26. Meeting Notes of the Anerican Chemical Society, "History of Chemical 


Corps," 19-20 May 1958. 
27. Congressicnal record of testimony: 


House of Representatives: 


Subcommictee on Appropriations, B6th Congress, March 1960. 


a. 
g b. Appropriacions Cozaitcee, &7th Congress, March.1962. 

pe c. Appropriations Ceonmictee, B5ch Congress, March 1958. 

d. Appropriations Cemmittee, B6ch Congress, April 1959. 

e. Appropriations Cozzittee, 87ch Congress, March 1961. 

f. Science and Astronautics Cemmictcee, 86th Congress, June 1959. 
E g. Foreign Affairs Committee Report, May 1970. 

Senace: 
— h. Araed Services Committee, 87th Congress, February 1962. 


i. Foreign Relations Comcittee, 91st Congress, April 1969. 


aA ۹ء‎ 


28 


Page 34 of 264 


CHAPTER LV 


TEE DERIVATION OF AUTHORITY 


General 


The purpose of this chapter is to present the auchority for che conduct 
of chemical warfare research wich human subjects; co describe the pro- 
cedures Chat governed che conduct of research with humans; and to discuss 
Che interpretations of authority for the conduct of incapacitating agent 


5 research which existed ac che cime. 


This chapcer will cover the origins of medical research restrictions for 
the Ay. [Irt also covers the extremely high level at which decisions vere 
made and che lengthy and chorough staffing that preceded the granting of 
authoricy co use buman volunteers in research. Finally, ic will include 
discussion of che several occasions when research was conducted without 
proper auchority or when authoricy was incorrectly granted. : 


Chemical Corps Medical Research and the Use of Human Subjects 


Just as in che hiscory of medicine, human experimentation appears co nave 
been an integral part of che hiscory of the U.S. Army chemical warfare 
research efforts. Ou 28 June 1918 the President of the Uzited States 
directed che organizarion of che Chemical Warfare Service (CWS), Nacional 
A, under the Secretary ef War. The CWS was created by merging the 
Chemical Service Section, National Army, che Chemical Element of che 
Ordnance Department, and che Sanitary Corps of the Medical Department. 
Four years later, in October 1922, the CWS created a Medical Research 
Division to conduct research directed at providing a defense against 
chemical agents .2 Parc of the defense was che provision of therapeutic 
and prophylactic measures. The scientists apparently shared a common 
belief chat no matter how exhaustively an agent was tested in animals, 


if ít was intended to protect or heal man, its efficacy had to be proved 


in oan. 


The scant evidence available for this period indicated chat for the next 
19 vears che subjects used in various tests of mustard, phoagene, and 
many other chemical agents vere voluzteer emplayees of Edgewood Arsenal. 
This expedient arrangement reportedly sufficed because the experimental 
scar vas too small co generate experiments requiring large numbers of 
human subjects. However, available documents reflected chat in early 
1941 che chreac of war caused greater urgency for che development of 
Consequently, che need for a larger source of volun- 


protective items. 
Ihe first recorded recruiting arrangement was a 


teers also developed. 


29 


— 

Se 
t 

-. 


Page 35 of 264 


request nada co all technical and officer personnel at Edgewood Arsenal 
co signify their willingness to participate in various tests; a method 
which was soon reported as unsatisfaccary.3 Generally, it was considered 
Chat repeated exposure to agents was hazardous because the cumulative 
effects of che compounds were noc known; sensitizing employees to com- 
pounds they had to work wich in the course of their normal duties basi- 
cally vas unproductive; many of the volunteers because of their cechnical 
qualifications had preconceived opinious as to the reactions they should 
have to certain agents and chus were noc completely objective or unbiased 
in their reporcíng; test results were subject to invalidation due to che 
lack of tescing on a valid random population basis; and a concern that 
che fear of censur.: by co-workers motivated many af che volunteers. 


Tnis period vas characterized by an absence of any evidence which would 
indicate who authorized the use of human volunteers, or if it was a point 
of coucerm. It vas apparent that {f a source of authority did exist, ic 
probably vas informal and reszed wich the local commander. The first 
indicacion of formal authority co recruit and use volunteer subjects in 
chemical warfare experiments wag in 1942. Specifically, in june 1942 
records reflected chac che Secretary of War was requested to rule on che 
permissibilicy of using enlisted men for detail testing of mustard type 
agents. ReportedIy, che Acting Secretary approved the test in principle 
and authorization vas granced by The Adjutant General of che Army in che 
aame of the Secretary.’ This authority was followed by large-scale human 
experimentation ac Edgewood Arsenal, as well as at field laboratories 
located at Camp Siebert, AL, Bushnell, FL, Dugway Proving Ground, UT, 
and San Jose Island. The tescing programs continued throughout che war 
years. Ic also was reported ar this authority was noc rescinded. Sub- 
sequently, during the early 1950s chis original authorization was again 
used for the conduct of tests at Dugway Proving Ground which involved 
exposing human volunteers to mustard ctype agents. It must be noted 

chat che evidence concerning tests involving mis card agents following 
World War II vas a single documentary reference, uncorroborared by any 


other evidence. 


In July 1943 che Chemical Warfare Service (CWS) was assigned responsi- 
bilicy for all medical research involved in che field of chemical war- 
fare. This adjunct to the CWS mission included toxicclogical research 
and che invescigacion and study of hazards to the health of Chemical 
Warfare Service personnel.’ With the end of World War II che immediate 
requirement far volunteers temporarily was diminished. There were indi- 
catious thac che laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal reverzed co the ald 
practice of using local aasigned personnel to meet their volunteer needs. 
This does noc imply chat the end of World War II curtailed che research 
activity of the Chemical Corps. On the «contrary, che frighcening revela- 
tion that Germany had stockpiled certain organic phosphate coupounds (nerve 


30 


aA nS 


Page 36 of 264 


1 az were far acre deadly chan che chemical agents in the Allied 


- 


gases) ii 
arsenal, ceveloped a new series of challenges for the Corps. Discovering 


methods zo counteract che lethal effects of these compounds became a 

E primary goal of aedical research. However, American researchers were 
unable to locate any usable research evidence that che Germans had con- 
ducted meaningful human experimentacions with che nerve agents. Thus 
ic was necessary co spend che next several years confirming German 
research data by animal experimentation and by compiling sufficient 
information cto determine che sate experimental dose for man. When 
the necessary animal experiments had been concluded and the Chemical 
Corps investigators vere confident of their abilicy co safely conduct 

QeXperZmenczs in man, the ques:ion again surfaced ag to where che volun- 
teers would come from. 


authority co Use Volunteers 


this period, the rules governing che use of humans had undergone 
or chazges. The first of these changes was the Nuremberg Military ` 
ibumals, following World War II, which produced a set of firm rules 

— for the conduct of medical research. They were known as che "Nurenberg 
1947," and ic established 10 specific rules fat ended co govern 
che use ci humans in che conduc? of medical experimentation. Since 
chis Code became the foundation for future guidance to researchers, its 


سس کہ 


essential 


i 
: 1. The voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely 


essezzial. This means that the person involved should have 
legal capacity co give consent; should be so aicuaced as to 
7 be able co exercise free power of choice, without che inter- 
= ven con of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, over- 
reaching or other ulczeziíor fora of constrainc or coercion; 
and should nave su£f£icienc knowledge and comprehension of the 
elements cf che subject matter involved so as to enable him to 
Lake an underscandiag and enlightened decision. This latter 
elemens requires that before che acceptance of an affirmative 
m decision by che subject there should be made known co him che 
aature, duracion and purpose ot che experiment; che method and 
aeans bv which ic is co be conducted; all incoaveniences and 
- zazazis reasonably to be expected; and che effects upon his 
= . neal sh or person «hich may possibly come from his parzicipa- 
ticn in the experiment. The duty and responsibilicy for i 
ascertaining the quaility of che cousent rests with each 
individual who iniciates, directs or engages in the experi- 
menc. It ig a personal duty and responsibility which ay 
not be delegated co another with impunity. 


elements are repeated in chis report: 


x 


nA p 


31 


Page 37 of 264 


a 2 The exverimenc should be such as to yield fruitful resultas 


i 2. } 
Jue ELIE . JS MC du c E a 
tar che good of society, unprocurable by other methods or means 
and aot random and unnecessary in nature. 


of study, 


1. The experiment should be so designed and based on the 
results of animal experimentation and a knowledge of the nat- 


history of che disease or other oroblezs under study chat 
che 


ural 
che anticipated results will justifv the performance of 


experiment. 


4. The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid all 
unnecessary 2hvsiícal and mental :uffering and injury. 


D 5. No experimenc should be -conducted where there ig an a priori 
reason CO believe chat death or disabling injury will occur; 
except, peraa2s, ín chose experimeucs chere che exverimencal 

€ physicians also serve as subjects. 


6. The degree of risk co be caken should never exceed chat 


WE deterzined bv che humanitarian importance of che problem to 


be solved bv the experiment. 


rover preparations should be made and adeauate facili- 
ties orovided co protect the experimental subiect agaiast even 


the remote possibilicies of injury, disability or death. 


tment should be conducted only bv scientifically 


> 8. The exper 
qualified persons. The highesc degree of skill and care snould 


be required chrough all stages of che experiment of chose who 
conduct or engage in che experimenc. 


9, During che course of rhe exveriment the human subject 
imeat co an end if he 


should be ac liíbercv to bring the experimen 
has reached the shvsical or ental scare dere continuation 
ct Che exverimenc seems co him to be impossible. 


— 10. During the course of the experiment che scientist in 
charge must be orepared co terminate the experínent at any ` 
LL he has probable cause to believe, ín the exercise 


staze 
— of the zood faith, superior skill, and careful judgment re- 
f che experiment is likely 


cuired of him chat a concinuacton of 


to result in iniury, disability, or deach co che subject. 


Tne second major change occurred in 1950, with the incroduction of legis- 
lacion governing the organization of the U.S. Army. The inicial statutory 
, authority for che Army to conduct research and development vas housed in 

= Che Organization of che Army Ace of 10 July 1950. Seccion 104 of the Act 


i 
1 

“Th 

h 

t 
h 

t 
1 |t 


a NS 


32 


x SSS Se تب لت‎ .—.—...ꝗ⁊ĩ—.—.— 


—— — — . 


` 


Page 38 of 264 


(74 Scatuce 322; 5 USC 235a) held chac: "The Secretary of the Army ia 
authorized to conduct, engage, and participate in research and develop- 
ment programa related co activities of the Aruy of the United States and 
co procure; or contract for the use of, such facilities, equipment, aser- 
vices, and supplies as may be required to effectuate such programs." 

Ic appears that this vas the first time che Congress placed into law 
coacrol over research and development acciviries and further vested che 
responsibility and authority for such programa wich che service secretary. 
It further appears from this Act chat the Congress recognized research and 
developuerzt funccions as an integral part of che Army's role. 


Ac this point im history chere are twa separate, yet related, actions 
impaccing oa research: the Nurezberg Code of 1947 and che Organization 

of che Army Acc of 1950. Although chere is little in che vay of docu- 
Mentary evidence to indicate general knowledge or recognition of che 
ac of these actious, it does appear chat auchoricy for future use 

of mens in research would require observance of the Nuremberg Code and 
also vould require author: zacion by the service secretary. However, ao 
doctmentary evidence vas discovered which índicaced that the secretary 
either delegated his auchoricy or established directives or guidelines co 


preclude research involving human subjecta without his authorization. In 


fact, there vas a notable lack of policy one way or the other between 1950 


ard 1952. 


The aatter of the use of human volunteers was under deliberare considera- 
ctou by che Armed Forces Medical Policy Council during che first two years 
of tae 1950s. In che fall of 1952, following extensive study, the Council 
reported co the Secretary of Defense chat researchers had reached the point 
beyond which essential data could aot be obtained unless human volunteers 


Thus, they recommended chat the Secretary of Defense es ca- 


were ucilized. 
blish a policy chat would authorize che use of humans in aedical reasearch .۵ 
de cited as che 


They further recommended that the Nuremberg Code of 1947 
principal guidance to the services. However, they urged chat three articles 
of the Code be modified. The first of ches e recommended modifications vas 
chac Article l require che volunteer's consent co be in writing and his 
sigracure vitmessed. Secondly, chey recommended that Article 5 be nodi- 
Sed co delete che final phrase except, perhaps, ín those experiments 
where the experimental physicians also serve ag subjects," thereby leav- 

ing che entire article co read: "No experiment should be conducted where 
there is an a priori reason co believe that deach or disabling injury vill 
occur." Finally, they suggested chat an addicional rule be added which 


would prohibit che use of prisoners of war as volunteer subjects. 


Based upon a recommendation of the Armed Forces Medical Policy Council 
Chat human subjects be employed as che only feasible means for realistic 


a3 


a . 


mpar 


D 
H 
i 


Page 39 of 264 


evaluations and/or developmenc of effective preventive measures of defense 
against atomic, biological, or chemical agents, che Secretary of Defense, 
by a memorandum ta the service secrecaries, established a policy governing 
the use of human volunteers. The memorandum, daced 26 February 1953, vas 
classified "TOP SECRET" and provided the following: each service secretary 
was authorized to use human volunteers im experimental research connected 
with che development of defenses of all types against atomic, biological 
and/or chemical warfare agents; provided specific guidance and safeguards 
concerning che use of human volumceers, which included che rules as sec 
forth iz che Nuremberg Code, as modified by che Armed Forces Medical - 
Policy Council; required chat in each inacance in which an experiment 

wag proposed pursuant to the memorandum chat che nature ard purpose of the 
proposed experiment (protocol) and che name of che person co be in charge 

of the experimezc shall be submicred for approval of che service secretary; 
required that che service secretary approve, in writing, che proposed experi- 
ment and the person co be in charge of che experiment; and required che 
service secretary co inform the Secretary of Defense of each approved 


research proposal.8 
* 


Although chere was ao evidence chat che Chemical Corps Research Labora- 
tories gere provided advance informacion concerning che forthcoming 
guidance cu che use of human volunteers in research, chere vas evidence 
cte underlying principles of the "Wilson Memorandum” were kmown and 
vere the subject of detailed discussions long before Department of che 
army published an implemencing directive. In this regard, the Medical 
and Relaced Problems Committee of the Chemical Corps Advisory Council 
mec at che Army Chemical Center (now Edgewood Arsenal), on 20-22 March 
1953, cto discuss che impact and implementation of the rules established 
ac the Nuremberg Trials and accepted in modified fora by the Secretary 
of Defense in February 1953. In attendance ac this meeting vere che 
prominent civilian doctors who constituted che committees, legal and 
medical advisors to che Chief, Chemical Corps, representatives from 

che medical and biological laboratories, and representatives of izter- 
mediate chemical research commands.4 The report of chis meecing was 
significant because ic indicated the existence and use of an alternate 

co norzal coumand channels for che dissemination of Arzzy policy within 

che Chemical Corps. Although the "Wilson Memorandum" vas dated 26 February 
71953, che Arzy's implementing ínscrzucrions co chat memorandum had not been 
pubiished or announced at che time of the conference. Nevertheless, the 
Council, in ancicipacion of an Army policy, advanced local interpretations 
that lacer vould be germane in che execution of Che policy. The depth of 
kmowledge held by the participants regarding problems associated with the 
use of humans in research is probably best explained by recognizing the 
key positions they occupied in the Chemical Corps organizacion and, in 
sone instances, overlapping membership in other advisory councils within 
Che armed forces. Some of cheir interprecative conclusions are worthy 

of mention ac this point, even though most will be discussed later in 


that 


SES 


34 


Page 40 of 264 


They concluded Shas it was iczporcanc co 


s Sd guosequent chapters. 
Fie In cheir 


renciate becceen hazardous and nouhazardcous experiments. 
a tnis differentiation was essential since they agreed that only 
els for hazardous experimenta need be submitted for approval. Iz 
ignct, they reported chat gas mask training during which men passed 
h chamber with a high concentration of 2287 gas would be con- 
A 


E 
aochaz a zdous and "in che line of duty."  Anocher consideracion 
Q 28 


ek Fort co seek blanket type approval for experiments already bein 
thus simplifying an anticipated problem of otra Ing approval 
The participants agreed that che nosc 


Ln 
n 
tn 
B 
5 . 


— 
for specific hazardous experiments. 
controversial legal aspect was to determine what constituted volunta-7 con- 


The conferees noted chac che important consideracions in this regard 


8٥٠ 
were: the age of Che volunteer; mental capacity; and che amounc of inforna- 
cion which mist be provided in advance of obtaining che signed voluzceer 


statement. Addiciomally, It waa opined char any form of coercion, mental, 
paysical, or sacerial, must be avoided. Further, they considered atiicary 
volunteers as presenting a particularly sensitive problem since goldiers 

vere imbued with a sense of obedience and readily could be placed in a 
position mere che experiment wag made co appear as a milicary duty and 


thus scce-hing the volunteer could not refuse. 


Tec Dachs later, in May 1953, che Army Staff presenced the Secretary of 
à proposed dizective do implemen 


she A-zy with a che "Wilson Menorancun.” 
Alchough che Secretary agreed in principle with che proposed instructions 
he rejected che inicial e because it was restricted 
ical, biological, and radio- 
classificacion 


to che field, 
to biological agent research rather than cheni 


logical agents and because he believed that the "TOP SECRET” 


should be downgraded in order co make the itascructiong more readily avail- 


able co subordinate elements that would be conducting the research. Evi- 


zst guidance to the Ar Staff was published 


dence indicaces.cthac the fiz 
on 30 June 1953.41 This memorandum, which was addressed through che 


Assistant Chief of Scaff, G-4, to che Army Chief Chemical Officer and 
The Surgeon Gereral, was cticled: "Use of Volunteers in Research," and 
vas to be referred to as "Chief of Scaff Memorandum 385 (CS:385). Ics 


fas co provide policy and procedures for the use of volunteers 


purpose 
iz atomic, biclogical, and chemical research. Tn addiction to transait- 
cing the ll rules contained in the "Wilson Memorandum" and legal con- 
siceracions for researchers, it also directed that co research of atomic, 
biclogic or chemical agents using volunteers would be conducted vichout 
che specific written approval of che Secretary of the army. Moreover, it 
iizecced chat proposals for such researcn would be forwarded to The Surgeon 
Gezeral of che Army for his review and mandatory comment prior CO presenta- 
zion ca che Secretary for approval. The memorandum, as published, did noc 
differentiate between hazardous and nouhazardous experiments as a considera- 
cion of whether to obtain Secretary of the Army approval, rather, it speci- 
fied chac all acomic, biological, and chemical agent experiments which used 
human subjects would be submitted. The document search failed co disclose 


EI 


35 


———M—MM—M——— مم‎ 
3 - —-—À——— —————— — — — r. — — 


Page 41 of 264 


any dccrgaacs which provided additional guidance qualifying or linicing 
che cme cf experizents requiring approval. Such guidance normally vould 
have been iracsaicced chrough the Office of che Chief Chemical Officer to 

* the Commander of the Chemical Corps Research and Engineering Command located 


at vhat is acc Edgewood Arsenal. Records do indicate that on 24 July 1953, 
after receiving guidance from che Chief Chemical Officer, che Commender of 

che Checical Research and Engineering Command nocified che Commander of che 
Cnerical Cerps Medical Laboratories that che policies and procedures sec 

forth in Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 were effective ixmediacely and would 
govera the use of volunteers in all present and future experimental research. I- 
‘The Cocmacder also directed that research plans and requests for approval 

to conduct experiments using human volunteers be submitted by 7 August 1953, 
and thac uncial such time as new approval was granted all experimentation 

using volunteers would be scopped. This action directed immediate com- 


pliance without exception co the new policy. 
= Initial Reauest to Use Volunteers 


Ou 7 August 1953 the Medical Laboratory Commander submitted a request for 
approval to conducc seven research projects. Although not specificaily 
i2 vas implied chat these experiments had been in progress ac che 


stated, 
The seven research projects 


tine the 24 July 1953 letter was received. 
for which approval was requested were: 


Recention of nerve gas vapor in human respiratory tract. 


a. 
~ LE Behavior Of nerve gas Tad on the human skin. 

c. Effects of nerve gas 95 the nervous and mental functions in man. 

d Effeccs of nerve gases and of therapeutic agents on visual 


e. Evaluation of candidate therapeucic agents in man. 


Sensory threshold effects of phosgene oxime in man. 


in 


EC Cocparative effects on skin of vesicanc liquids, vapors, and 


aerosois.iJ 


The Medical Laboratory Commander in his request for approval of the 

research plans included his interpretation chat che "use of volunteers 

in zesaarch" applied co the exposure of individuals to the hazards of 

toxic chemicals, vhecher they vere standard or candidate chemical warfare 

agents, Or standard or chemical therapeutic agents. The Laboratory Commander 

= expressed an assumption that the Chief of Staff directive requiring Secre- 
tary approval did noc include studies of the physiological aspects of 


Sene 


36 


— - some, m 8 s — —— 2 — — eaa د‎ 5 . — 4 i u 


Page 42 of 264 


eccive cacterial, including che proceccive mask, since such studies did 


dum c have to involve exposure to toxic chemicals. 

The Commander, Chenical Corps Research and Engineering Command, the Chief 
Chemical Officer, and The Surgeon General reviewed the proposed plan and 
recommended to che Secretary that ic be approved. The Surgeon General in 
his comments provided an opinion chat the provisions of the Chief oz Staff 
Memorandum 385 would apply in che event toxic chemicals were used in gas 
mask tests. A memorandum to Chief of Staff, dated 5 November 1953, signed 
by the Secretary of the Army, Robert T. Stevens, granted approval co con- 
‘duct the requested research progrars using human volunteers. A synopsis 
of the Chemical Corps plan, which listed the seven investigative studies, 
was attached as an inclosure to the approval memorandum and contained 

a statement to the effect that the basic directive did not include studies 
of the physiological aspects of protective materials, including che pro- 
che gas mask, unless such studies included exposure 
Alchough che copy ef the Chemical Corps plan referred 
of che Army's memorandum could not be located, other 


chat the approved plan concained basically the same 
Further sup- 


tective function of 
zo toxic chemicals. 
to in the Secretary 
documents indicated 
data submitted by the Medical Laboratory on 7 August 1953. 
port of chat conmrencion vas contained in a 24 December 1953 letter trom 
tne Oz2zice of che Chief Chemical Officer to the Commander, Chemical وت‎ 
Research and Engineering Command, in which approval of the request of 

7 August 1953 vas granted. This particular letter approved all seven 
investigative study requests without modification or qualification; it 
confirmed the assumption that studies involving physiological aspects of 
protect 
randum 385, unless exposure co toxic chemicals was involved; it directed 
chat Aray contractors must abide by che same basic principles and safe- 
guards governing military researchers; and it specified that the facc 
chac che Chemical Corps vas using human volunteers in research vas, of 
itself, unclassified. 5 This downgrading of classification apparently 
was accributable to the Secretary's earlier concern about che level of 
classificacion, which culminated in a Secretary of the General Staff 
Memorandum, dated 16 October 1953, downgrading Chief of Staff Memoran- 
dum 385 from "TOP SECRET" co "CONFIDENTIIAL."lÓ It appeared that the 
inicial high classification afforded che subject may have been partially 
responsible for the lack of complete documentation and for early mis- 
iaterpretations of the policy. 


Policy interpretations are mentioned ac this time because there was evi- 
dence Chat at least cue research project was not terminated pending 
submission and approval of the research plan in accordance with Chief 

of Staff Memorandum 385. Specifically, an operation code named "TOP 
BAT" was conducted at che Chemical Corps School, Fort McClellan, AL, 
between 15 and 19 September 1953. 17 . 


37. 


ive material were not within the intent of the Chief of Staff Memo- 


se 


Page 43 of 264 


This research project, which was cermed a "local field exercise," involved 


the use of Chemical Corps troops in testing methods of deconcaminaciag 


biological warfare agents, mustard gas, and nerve gas. A review of che 


scant literature available on che exercise indicated that it was conducted 
in contravention of che intent of the. Department of Defense and Deparment 
of the Army policies. While ic is possible that a separate request for 
approval zay have been submitted and subsequencly retired and/or des roy ed, 
it is more logical to assume char che project vas considered co fall within 
a "line of ducy" exercise for Chemical Corps troops and interpreted as noc 
subject zc che provisions of policies governing che "use of vplunteers in 
research." This conclusion is uot offered as an excuse for an exerciae in 
woich soldiers were exposed co toxic chemical agents wichour proper author- 
ization and without their consent, but rather to emphasize che extreme 
difficulcy of accempcing to implement a complex policy by means of a 


— 2 


relacively simple, buc highly classified directive. 


Another observation of import conceras the seven investigative studies 
vüich uere forwarded for approval and which appeared to be a request for 
approval of experiment with a “class” of drugs rather than a request for 
research involving a specific chemical agent. For example, the first of 
the seven investigative studies, “Retention of Nerve Gas Vapor in the 
Stan Respiratory Tract," failed to specify which of the several avail- 
able serve gas agencs would be used and under what circumstances. Since 
Che nerve gas agents varied significancly in coxtcity, it would appear 
extremely difficult for The Surgeon General to conduct a thorough eval- 
uation of the proposal without kmowing che specific chemical nerve agent 
ca be used in the experiment. Again, there may have been additional 
correspondence and conferences answering these various questions about 


Che agent co be used and che emergency Creatment measures do be available 
on site prior to The Surgeon General recommending approval, however, no 
records of such were found. Thus, the available records gave che impres- 
sion chat che submission of the initial request amounted co notching mre 
chan a perfunctory action for the purpose af abcaining blanket approval 


for ongoing research projects. 
Medical Volunteer Program 


By 1954 the Chemical Corps had established a framework within which co 
conduct hinan experimentacion, however, they lacked an adeguate pool of 
volunteers. There were indications some experimentation was being cor- 
ducted using enlisced personnel assigned to Edgewood and technicians 
assigned to the laboratories. However, this source was excremely lim- 
iced and could noc support che ctype research program envisioned. 


In 1955 it vas decided tchac the most practical source of volunteers would 
be enlisted men stationed ac Army installacions in the vicinity of Edge- 
wood Arsenal. The Medical Laboratories formed an orientacion ceam to 


zd 4 5s 


38 


Page 44 of 264 


visit Second àrzy XSaadquarters ac Fort George G. Meade and solicit che 
support cf che commander. The mission was successful. In April 1955 
EQ, Second Army, published a directive to its major installation com 
manders encouraging chem to publicize che program In an attempt to pro~ 
vide Edgewood Arsenal 20 volunteers each month for a period of 30 days 
temporary duty (IDT). 18 i 


The firs: contingent of l6 soldiers from Second Army Headquarters arrived 
ac che Any Chemics! Center (Edgewood Arsenal) ou 2 May 1955.19 For a 
ءا‎ 2 period ic appeared that che Medical Laboratories had established a 
complere, viable program, i.e., auchoricy co use humans in research; a 
proper medical staff to conduct the research; and a steady supply of volw- 
ces zs. However, Ach a few monchs more urgent priorities for Second 
Army's personnel resources inhibited che flow of volunteers.J In aa effort 
to overcome this shortfall, che Chief Chemical Officer requested che support 
of the Quartermaster General, the Chief, Corps of Engineers, che Chief of 
Ordnance, amc che Caief Signal Officer. This action resulted in volimceers 
coming from Fort Knox, KY, Fort Lee, VA, Fort Eustis, VA, Fort Belvoir, VA, 
Fort Monmouth, NJ, and Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, In addition co those 
already committed by Fort Meade. 


2sychocheczical Drugs 


On 7 Sepcezber 1955 che Commander of the Medical Laboratories formally 
requested permission to use volunteers in research involving nonlethal 
psychochenicals. 20 His requesc, titled, "Additional Use of Volunteers 

in Research," vas submitted co che Commanding General, Research and 
Zagineering Command, who concurred in the request, as written, and for- 
warded ic co che Chief Chemical Officer, Department of che Army.2l Prior 
to the request being prepared and forwarded, chere vas a considerable body 
of research data concerning che effects of psychochemicals on humans avail- 
able co the Chemical Corps Medical Laboratory, Co include data obtained as 
a result of actual experimentation conducted by civilian hospitals and 


universicies working under Army contracts. 


Some cf the events which preceded this requesc had a direcc bearing on 

it and on subsequent actions invelving psychochemicals. Several monchs 
prior to the Medical Laboratories’ request Co use volunteers in psycho- 
chemical research, che Chairman of che Technical Advisory Panel on | 
Biological and Chemical Warfare, Office of the Assistanc Secretary of 
Defense (R&D), appoinced an "Ad Hoc Scudy Group on Psychochemical Agents” 
to evaluate che military potential of this ctype of chemical warfare. 
Their report, known as the "Wolff Report," after the name of the com- 
miccee chairman, was published in November 1955 and presented specific 
recomendations for che conduct of future research involving psychochem- 
ical agents. 22 The comittee concluded that experiments with psychochem- 
ical agents, of which LSD appeared to be the most promising, should de 


ES. کہ‎ 4 


39 


Page 45 of 264 


carried out with volunteer units as soon as practicable. In this regard, 


the Study Group also prepared and recommended che izplementarion of a 
detailed olan for the conduct of small unit experiments. Reference co 

the "Wolff Report" was necessary at this point because a review of che 
actions surrounding the submission of che September 1955 request for 
"Additional Use of Volunteers" gave the impression that staffing of the 
request vas held in abeyance pending release of the report. It apparently 
was n beforehand chat the Study Group vould not only favor testing of 
psychochemicals on humans, but also would recommend chat tests be conducted 
to determine the drug's effect on small military unit operations. Records 
also indicated that several monchs prior to the Seprember 1955 request 
being approved, advance planning was widerway Co implement the testing 

of small units, as recommended by the "Wolff Report.” 


In January 1956 the Office of the Assistant Chief Chemical Officer for 
Planning and Doctrine reviewed the "Wolff Report” and commented on the 
recctmendacion which proposed that, prior to a military group being 
adminiscered LSD, they should be given a carefully prepared cratining 
lecture on the effects of LSD. The reviewer stated thac: "in view of 


the fact chat a great many of the effects observed in the group may be 


che result of suggestion (placebo effect) ic would appear desirable to 


have one control group which has neither been given a training lecture 
on LSD-25, sor azy informacion as to the symptoms of the drug being 
administered. Symptoms due to suggestion would thus be reduced co a 
time a more realistic combac situation would 
assumed that enecy personnel, under compat con- 
ditions, vould not have recently been briefed on che effects of LSD-25."23 
It is not known whether the reviewer in this instance would have caused 
the drug to be administered to all of che volunteers or to selected men- 
ders of each group. Implicit in the comment, however, is the theme that, 
from che Atari standpoint, a lack of knowledge on the parc of the 
volunteer vas necessary for a realistic experiment. Neither the correct- 
ness of che commenc aor the value of che added realism is at issue. What 
is involved is that in spite of clear guidelines concerning the necessity 
for "informed consent," there was a willingness to dilute and in some 
cases negate che intent of the policy. It vill be demonstrated again 
during che discussion of the specific experiments that this actitude of 
selective compliance was more of the norm than the exception. Other 
evidence indicated chat in 1956, prior to the approval to use human 
volunteers in testing of psychochemical drugs, research investigators 
at Edgewood Arsenal attempted to secure permission to employ a NIZE 
slice crev as the small unit to be used in the type experiments recom 
mended bv the "Walff Report."2^ 


minimim anc at the same 
de utilized since irc is 


Another example of selective compliance with exiscing policy occurred in 
February 1956. <A memorandum from che Deputy Chief Chemical Officer for 
Scientific Accivities to che Commander of the Research and Development 


E „K. 


40 


Page 46 of 264 


Commend recomended thac che Chemical Corps scientific studies of LSD, a 
U.S. pacezced compound, be continued; char for military security reasons 
che owner of che parent aot be advised of the present and possible future 
‘acteresc im the compound; and that a careful record of the quantities 
syuchesized be msintained. This reccmmendetion wag made after a legal 
opinicn vas received from che Chemical Corps Patent Agency which, in 
effect, stated chat use of che pacent compound in the manner intended 
would be an infringement of the patent owner's rights and acttonable by 
the patent owner; thac based on this "che Chemical Corps may use the 
vent zen set forth in Che reference patent and its only liability for 


4,90 doizg will be a requirement to pay a reasonable sum for so doing." 


lt further opined that "governmental use of che invention need not be 
disclosed to assignee where such action would compromise security." 25 
It is nct known if che pacent owner of LSD ever received notificacion 
cf the use of his patent or reimbursement for such use. The point of 
chis example is moc simply co show possible violation of patent rights, 
duc co again demonsctrace the existence of a frame of mind and purpose 
which fostered a villizgness co bend or break rules and policies so aa 
to insure mission accomplishment; a continuing reliance on the "end 
justifies the nens." 

In March 1956 che scarf ag action on the September 1955 request for 
"Additional Use of Volunteers," which had apparently stopped pending 
receipt and review of che Vol: Report,” resumed when che Chief Chen- 
Teal Officer forwarded the proposal to The Surgeon General, requescin 
his coments and concurzence. The forwarding indorsement pointed out 
that the Chemical Corps was conducting research investigations, using 
volunteers, in defense against chemical warfare, and chat a small por- 
tion of such research, conducted entirely by highly qualified contrac- 
Cors, involved experimerncacion with psychochemical drugs. This research 
vas reportedly authorized by che Secrecary of the axay in his 5 November 
1953 zemorarduz.?6 However, a review of che referenced memorandum does 
acc indicate any reference to psychochemicals. To che conczary, the 
approved plan contained 
oximes, and vesicancs. Further, the Secretary of che Army directed chat 
che saze principles and safeguards which applied to the Department of 

Che Arzy would apply equally co contracts awarded co outside contractors. 


The Chief Chemical Officer further stated that the increasing importance 


cf the Ante destruccion" concept and the need for a defense against 
agencs causing temporary incapacitaction had led to che need for a con- 
centzrated study of psychochemical agents. Studies which, for the firsc 
time, sould involve the use of psychochezicals on volunteers in the 
Chemical Corps laboratories. The proposed plan for testing paychochem- 
icals provided che protocol, the name of che medical doctor in charge, 
and a proposal for che conduct of operational exercises to determine che 
vulnerability of military personnel to paychochemicel agents in various 
military exercises. These exercises included: command post operations; 


41 


seven specific experiments involving nerve agents, 


— EA 


Page 47 of 264 


logiscical exercises; squad drills; bridging operations; and fire direccion 
Moreover, che request estimated that 200 volunteers 


center operacions. 
would be reguired in the first year of experiments. inis request was for 


a "class" of chericals (psychochenicals) and for types of experiments 
rather than specific drugs for a specific experimeuc. This procedure, 
although noc specifically prohibited by extscing policy, appeared to be 
a departure from the intent of the policy, and as such did not provide 
those in the approval chain with a clear or complete picture of what 
actually was being proposed as it related to the volunteer. There was 
no evidence found indicaring that objections or questions were raised 
concerning this lack of specificity. Although, on ll April 1956 The 
“Surgeon Genrcal, in his reply, did refer co earlier discussions and 
correspondence on che subject matter and that che proposal, as submicted, 
ES vas a satisfactory development of ideas discussed, provided for adequate  . 
safeguards, and recommended approval by the Secretary of the Army. A 
. ever, ao record of the earlier discussicns or correspondence was located, 
= nor vas there other evidence discovered which would indicate thar chose 
higher in the chain of approval, co include the Secrecary of che Ary, 
received informacion other chan chat concaíned in che proposal and The 
Surgeon General's review. Iz vas recognized that informal coordination 
or briefings could have provided more of che details as to the specific 
drug co be used. However, subsequent events do not reinforce this sup- 
. posicion. On 17 May 1956 the Director of Research and Developmenc, in 
E a dero randum to the Chief af Scaff, U.S. Army, approved che plan as sub- 
vitted, although chere vas a specific requirement thac che Secretary of 
the A-Zy must approve, in writing, each proposed use of human volunteers. 28 
— There vas evidence chat this deviation from policy was questioned imme- 
diately by responsible Chemical Corps personnel. However, a memorandum 
for record indicated chat as a result of a discussion between a Cherical 
B Corps legal advisor and an officer in the Director of Research and Devel- 
opment office, it vas decermined that the approval action vas proper. 
There vas no evidence found which would indicate chat the Secretary of 
ENS d che ArZy approved che proposal, eicher in writing or orally; or. that he 
delegaced approval authority to the Director, Research and Development; 
Or Bac he even had knowledge af che approval made in his stead. Several 
wicnesses stated that since the Director af Research and Development vas 
— a member of che Secretary's staff, as che fore runner of the current Assis- 
fant Secretary of the army for Research and Development, he would have 
been in the proper execucion of his responsibilities when he approve 


che request in che game of che Secretary. ; 


Nevertheless, on 24 Mav 1956 the Medical Laboratory at Edgewood Arsenal 
vas nocified char che psychochemical testing plan had been approved. 
Since approval cane through normal command channels, chere would have 
been zo reason for the Medical Laboratory Commander to question the 
authority Co proceed with che planned experiments. This request and 
"e subsequent approval appeared to have established two precedents: 


4 


42 


Page 48 of 264 


(1) requescs for the use of volunteers in drug testing could be approved 
ca a class basis vcichout specific mention of che wide variety of drugs 
involved, or their individual potencial effects; and (2) regardless of 
earlier guidance, all protocols did not require the written approval of 
the Secrecary of the Army. Undoubtedly, these cwo precedents laid che 
groundwork for fucure dilution of what had originally appeared co be 


clear and unequivocal centralized control of the authority to use volun- 


teers. 
Aide Recruitment 


Available records indicate thac by early 1957 inadequate numbers of volun- 
teers were being made available to the Chemical Corps for conduct of human 
experiments. Thus, in April 1957 The Adjutant General of the Army directed 
che Aray area commanders ín the Uniced Stares to establish a program to 

od can volunteers for use at the Chemical Warfare Laboratories at Edgewood 
Azsenal.Jl This document cited the need for 50 volunteers per month and 
established a schedule for the six Army areas to furnish volunteers for 
jO—day DY periods. The directive gave Chief of Staff Memorandum 385, 
dated 30 June 1953, as authority co conduct this program. Le emphasized 
that voluntary consent of che human subject vas absolutely essential; and 
scated that in all experiments involving volunteer subjects, the individual 
thoroughly informed of all procedures and what to expect during 


would be th 
each test. Tthermote, the volunteer would be free to determine whether 


or not he desired to participate. 

On il July 1957 the Chief Chemical Officer wrote a letzer addressed to all 
Chemical Officers in the Zone of Interior (ZI), in which he encouraged chen 
to energetically support the volunteer program, emphasizing the importance 
of the volurceer’s contribution to the national defense effort. 


Air Force-Nav- Particivation 


During the sane cimeframe, the United Scaces Air Force and the Department 
of the Navy were invited to participate in the volunteer program by sending 
10 men each mouth.  Éecords reflected chat the Air Force contributed volun- 
teers scCarcing in November 1957; the Navy apparently elected noc to join 
the program at chis cine. Available records reflected chat becveen May 
1955 and Decenber 1957 approximately 540 volunteers were employed in the 
program ac Edgewood Arsenal; 14 of chese were reported co have been from 
the Ar Force. Sowever, indications were chat this figure did not include 
the assigned technical assistants and researchers who "informally" volun- 
teered. However, records indicated an addicional projecc involving Air 
Force and Aray participation in August 1961 when che Chemical Research 

and Development Command submitted a protocol for “experimental exposures 

of men to propellant vapors." This experiment vas reported as an Air Force 
research project conducced with the use of Air Force volunteers. Al chough 


43 


A a4 nA 


Page 49 of 264 


prococol vas submitted through U.S. Ar 

che purpose of receiving Secretary of che 

no records discovered which indicated that 

It is possible chat approval was granted 

and records noc retained in biscorical Files. However, the portant 
poiat is not che absence of records, buc that responsible invescigators 
and commanders recognized that this type of research test vas not included 
within the broad authority previously received. 


"V-Agezt Studies 

Further interpretation of which experiments actually required personal 
approval by the Secretary of the Army was found in the documentation con- 
ceraíag approval co conduct volunteer tests with V-agents (lethal nerve 
agents). In May 1958 che Commander, Chemical Warfare Laboratories, sub- 
mitted a request, subject: Use of Volunteers in Research on V-Agencs," 
through Chemical Corps Command channels, requesting authority to test 
V-agencs in man. Specified in the proposal was the statement that cre 

of the proposals, submitred and subsequently approved by the Secretary 

of che Army in November 1953, included the use of G-agents (nerve agents), 
which are highly toxic organo-phosphorus compounds. The request continued 
chat even core effective organo-phosphorus compounds, kmown as V-agencts, 
dad been synthesized. 33 The Chief Chemical Officer, in forwarding che 
request co The Surgeon General for his comments and/or concurrence, stated 
chac research ‘avestigations being conducted under the 5 November 1953 
approval involved G-agencs and implied chat the request to use V-agents 
vas simply a logical excensicn of the initial plan. In June 1958 the 
Cet, Research and Development Division, Office of The Surgeon General, 
responded to the May 1958 request by poincing out that a critical review 
could cot be made on the basis of informacion provided in the proposal, 
however, it did scate that Che proposal, as written, satisfied the minimum 
requirements under Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. The Surgecn General 
commented that since human studies on V-agencs were a logical extension 

of Che nerve gas studies previously approved by the Secretary of the Army, 
thac che same responsible medical doctor was in charge, and che investiga- 
.tion would adhere co the provisions of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385, then 
ít vas believed that no new authorization was required. 34 The requested 
commencs vere recurmed to the Chief Chemical Officer, and ultimately che 
research project involving the use of V-agents in humen volunteers began. 


there was evidence that che 
Chemical Corps channeis for 
Arzy's approval, chere vere 
such approval was granted. 


In reviewing The Surgeon General's comments in this instance, it was noted 
that chere vas reference to more stringent safeguards used in the volun- 
ceer program with BW agencs. These included: submission of a protocol 
for each new series or phase of study; a critical review by The Surgeon 
General co insure compliance with Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 before 
proceeding; and continual review of experimental results. This indi- 
cation of che use of a double standard in implementing policy on use 

of volunteers was not further explained. 


44 


Page 50 of 264 


The Surgecn General's coczenacs point out this difference very succinctly 

and ulcizacely agreed wich che original coucencion that it was a logical 
extension of G-agenc research, requiring no further authorization. Docu- 
mentation was not found uch would explain how efter a proposal to employ 

a zore highly carte agent on humans vas received, and che reviewing official 
in The Surgeon General's office concluded initially that a review cr con- 
structive coments could not be made on che basis of the information pro- 
vided, and scill be adequace to sacisfy the minimum requirements of the 
Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 policy. In spice of these wenswered critical 
questions, the reviewer, in effect, agreed with the proposal and added 
weight to the ínterpretzaticn of policy maʻa by the Chemical Corps. 


Policy Interpretarions 


Hear e, in the fall of 1957 the U.S. Army Chemical Research and Devel- 
opment Command had directed the term K-agent be used instead of psycho- 
che-ical agent. Although chese terms continued to be used incerchangeably, 
ic vas aoted chat ac this point in time che Medical Laboratory ac Edgewood 
s Sas. had approval to use volunteers in experiments involving three 
classes of compounds: G-agents; V-agents; and K-agents. However, che 
Secretary of the Arg actually had signed only che auchorization for seven 
investigative studies using nerve agents (G-agencs). Ac s point it 
appeared that the deviance from che established policy could be artribuced 
ta a failure of staff officers at Department of the Army level co comply 


wich the letcer and the intent of policy established dy the Secretary of 
Defense and expended on by che Secretary of the Army. 


In early November 1958 che Medical Laboratory at Edgewood submitted, through 
Chemical Corps channels, a request to use female volunteers in conjunction 
with the psychochemical research program. The request was then forwarded 
co The Surgeon General for comment, who recommended that the request be 
disapproved on the basis that the early stage of research in che area of 
psvchochemical research and che serious legal and public relations impli- 
Cations involved in the use of female volunteers made ic inadvisable to 
use females at this time. Apparently, che Chief Chemical Officer agreed 
since that vas the basis cited in his disapproval of the request. Sub- 
sequeatly, che Deputy Commander of the Chemical Warfare Laboratory, in an 
internal memorandum to che laboratory director stated that females could 
moc be used on che basis that their use was strictly prohibited by the 
provisions of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385.36 ac this time ve find one 
request, use of female volunteers, bur two different reasous why chey 
could not be used; one of which involved an interpretation of Chief of 


Scaff Memorandum 385. 


Thus, it appears that each request which involved application of the 
provisions af Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 resulted in an interpretation 
of the policy. More startling vas the lack of consistency in the inter- 
pretations, ranging from the most strict to che widest possible larirude. 


45 


یڈہ 2 


j 
1 
1 


Page 51 of 264 


Azotaer example cf the highly flexible incerprecacions of policy occurred 
in Novenber 1984, shen the Checical Warfare Laboratory Commander submicted 
a request tc have an addictonal physician authorized to accept direct 


ility for the conduct of experimencacions on human volunteers 


اکھج بھی ار رہ 
curing the absence of the primary doctor. This doctor was to be ín addi-‏ 


cion zo che responsible physician required to be appointed by che Secre- 


tary of che Arzy ín accordance with DOD policy. The Surgeca General 


recomended chat another doctor be authorized to accept direct responsi- 
bilicy ia the absence of che responsible physician and included an addi- 
tional control to be used if che request vas approved. However, che 
ref, Research and Developmenc, disapproved che req est and stated at: 
"as interpreted in all actions co date, che provisions of Chief of Scaff 
Memorandum 385 do noc permit the dilucion of personal responsibility in 
che prasecution of che human volunceer program.” Included with this dis- 
approval was a copy of an opinion by The Judge Advocate General (TJAG) in 
which it vas opined thac there vas no legal requirement that anyone be 
responsibilicy when the designated doctor was 
absent.3/ To che contrary, the policy clearly contemplaced one person 
should be so designated and vould recaín responsibility ac all times. 
Egvever, it also contemplated chat other cualified persons would be 
placed ia charge of specific experiments, subject co direction and 
control of the designated doctor. Again, ve have an example of incon- 


sistent interpretation. 


desigzaced to asstme direct 


Finally, ín June 1969 a proposal titled, "Physiological Stress Aspects 
of Chemical Agents,” vas subeitrad by the Director of the Biomedical 
Laboracory at Edgewood Arsenal.°° The proposal clearly indicated the 
iacent co use safe ammourts of chemical agents in human volunteers in 
connection with selecced physiological stress experiments. However, 

= did aoc specify which chemical agents were to be used. The Office 

af The Surgeon General reviewed the protocol in the lighc that chemical 
agents would be used, although the protocol stated that a separate request 
for approval of actual chemical agents would be submi cred. The Office 
of the ref of Research and Development approved che request and ruled 
that síace chenical agents vere not included in the protocol, Secretary 
of the Arar approval was not required under AR 70-25. 8 

On 12 Septecber 1969 che Office of The Surgeon General returned the 


approvec request co Edgewood Arsenal. Although it is known chat 
experiments under this protocol vere conducted at Edgewood, no evi- 

dence vas found of the Secrecary of the Army’s approval of the specific 
Chemical agencs used. The submission of this particular protocol wich- 

out mencion of the chemical agents to be employed seemed co have negated 
che purpose of retaining authority at any level above che laboratory. 

The Army regulacion in force at chat time (AR 70-25) required the de- 
tailed plan" co be submitted co The Surgeon General. The plan could hardly 


be considered a "detailed plan of experiment" without inclusion of che 


46 


یڈ 


Page 52 of 264 


chegz cal agents incended co be used ou the volunteers. Ir is conceivable 


chat with approval of che protocol, lesa che chemical agenta, the investi- 
gators could expioy chemical agents previously approved in connection wich 


che new plan. r 


Even though there were significant advances and changes in the research 
and the volunteer programs between 1953 and 1958, there was ao indication 
of corresponding changes or updating of the policy directives. 


By December 1958 chere appeared to be concern about which chemical compounds 
were approved for use in volunteer subjects. Evidence of this concera was 
Séund in correspondezce between the Direccor of the Medical Research Labora- 
tories (Edgewood Arsenal) co che Commander, Chemical Warfare Laboratories 
(Edgewood Arsenal), and the Commanding General, Chemical Research and Devel- 
opment Command (Washington, DC), during the month of December 1958.38 The 
gist of chese documents was chat the Medical Laboratories had iziciated 

or intended co initiate research programs using volunteers to test chen- 
ical agenc £A 1779 (CS), a riot cencrol.agent that causes extreme irrita- 
cion co cucous membraces, and agent EA 1476 (cetrahydrocannabinols, a 
This was in addicion co approvals already 


marinuana lixe campound). 
The documents indi- 


received for experimencs wich , V-, and X-agents. 
caced thac the Chemical Research and Development Command agreed chac 
researca approval had been granted for G-agents (GA and GB), V-agenc 

(VX), and K-agent (LSD-25); however, che Medical Laboratory was directed 

to suspend 24 1476 volunteer studies until Secretary of the Army approval 
was granted. 39 Available records indicated zhat the protocol fer EA 1476 
had noc been submitted as of che end of December 1958, although chere was 
an inference that some volunteer studies had been conducted. Additionally, 
the Medical Laboratory was permitted co continue volunteer studies with 

ZA 1779 (CS), provided che prococol was submitted to their next higher 
command (Chemical Warfare Laboratory) by 30 December 1958.49 The records 
indicated thac che protocol for ZA 1779 vas submiítzaed to the Commander, 
U.S. Amy Chemical Research and Development Command, on 30 December 1958.1 
This series of documents indicated chat the various Chemical Commands were 
in substantial agreement in regard to which protocols by class and agent 
were authorized for use ín volunteer studies. The documents also indi- 
cated other areas of concern, co include: che desire to be in full com- 
pliance wich Chief of Scaff Memorandum 385 (CS:385) as evidenced by the 
suspension of che EA 1476 (marihuana) experiments; and che desire co 

avoid delays in the program while pending submisaion of the necessary 
protocol as evidenced by che granting of interim permission co continue 

EA 1779 (CS) studies while awaiting formal approval. 


In February 1959 che Commander, Chemical Warfare Laboratories, reportedly 


learned that a woman had been exposed to EA 1779 (CS) in a planned experi- 
Ment ac che Medical Research Laboratory at Edgewood 6 as a result of 


یہ 


47 


Page 53 of 264 


chis incidenc, the Chezical Warfare Laboratories Comander sent his labora- 
ror? commanders a memorandum in which he stated chat che use of females in 
human voiuateer research programs was noc authorized. Additionally, he 
emphasized chat there were three definite control measures governing any 
particular experiment: che basic policy document on the use of human 
volunteers (Chief of Scarf Memorandum 385); the specific protocol that 


was developed for use of a particular agent; and the detailed plan for 
which required approval by the 


of the Army as responsible for the 
volunteers. 


the actual exposure of human volunteers 
individual designated by che Departmenc 
use of chemical warfare agents on human 


Following the 30 December 1958 submission of the protocol for EA 1779, nc 
evidence was discovered which indicated actual Secrecary of the Army 
approval for use of this agent. However, in July 1959 EA 1779 did appear 
on a list of agents approved to be used on humans which vas published bv 
che Chemical Warfare Laboratories. Also in July 1959, a directive from 
the Commander, Chemical Warfare Laboratories, Edgewood Arsenal, escahlished 
that no individual could use on himself any agenc for which an approved 
prococol vas noc available; another indication of cightening cf controls. 
= July 1959 che protocol for research involving chemical agent EA 1476 
(2azihuaza) and related compounds and for phencyclidene (serayl) benzilates 
and related cocpounds vas submitted through Chemical Command channels. One 
the accompanying documents included a declaration that prior to learning 
che interpretation chat each class of chemical agents necessitated sep- 
arate approval from che Secretary of the Army for volunteer testing, chem- 
ical agenc EA 1476 had been tested in about 36 volunteers.^^ There vas no 
indication of who decided that each class of chemical agent had co be 
approved separately, or who decided on "class" approval as opposed co 
individual agent approval, wnich appeared to be the intent of the original 
directive from che Secretary of Defense ("Wilson Memorandum"). Although 
the inicial request of 17 July 1959 was for two different classes of com- 
pounds (cecrahvdrocannabinols and benzilaces), che only protocol found 
for Che period of time was che former. Moreover, che request From che 
Chief Chenical Officer co The Surgeon General for comments and/or con- 
currence addressed only EA 1476 and related compounds. On 21 July 1959 
concurred in by The Surgeon General. Ic دا‎ assumed that 
then processed through normal command channels, alchough 
was found which indicaced such staffing prior to the 
Army action in October 1959. On 8 October 1959 Secre- 
Wilber M. Brucker forwarded a memorandum co the Chief 
of Stari, U.S. Army, which stated: approval is granted for the conduct 
of research investigations using volunteers for studies in defense against 
nonlethal incapacitating chemical warfare agents. These experiments vill 
conf£orz co che proposed plans submitted by che Chief Chemical Officer and 
reviewed by Ihe Surgeon General, U.S. Army (Inclosure 1)." The memorandum 
further provided: "additional authority is granted co pursue similar 


0 


o 
rh rh 


che prococol vas 
che protocol was 
no doctmenctacion 
Secretary cf che 
tary oz che Arzy 


E . 


48 


Page 54 of 264 


volunteer studies with ocher nonlethal incapacicacing chemical warfare 
agezcs provided The Surgeon General, U.S. Army, concurs with che protocol 
acd procecures propos ed by the Chief Chemical Officer, U.S. Arzy."45. 
Clearly, Secretary Brucker delegated approval authority to two special 
scaff members of the Departmenc of the Army (Chief Chemical Officer and 
The Surgeon General) as regarded future “nonlethal incapacitating chemical 
vartare agents.” Ir was not evident how often and to what degree chat 
delegation vas usec. The nonavailability of documents in this regard may 
be atcribuced co che dilution of a formal approval procedure. Secretary 
Srucker's action did noc require a signature approval "by either the 
Chemical Officer or The Surgecn General," nor wag there any evidence chat 


he required a copy of an approved plan to be provided either to his office, 


ce of Che Arzy Chief of Scaff, Director of Research and Development, 


the Offi 
It vas 


or the Secretary of Defense as required by the "Wilson Memorandum.” 
possible that future approvals were informally coordinated with The Surgeon 
General and verbally approved by the Office of the Chief Chemical Officer. 
This possibility vas supported, as mentioned earlier in chis report, fm chat 
during the Lace 1950s and eariy 19608 interest and research in nonlethai 
incatacitating chemical warfare agents was very interse. 


Secretary Brucker's approval vas cramsmitted from Che Chief, Research and 


co che Chief Chemical Officer and The Surgeon General on 


Developnent, 
the Office 


L3 October 1959 wichouc further guidance. On 16 October 1959 
of the Chief Chemical Officer relayed che approval to the Commending Gener- 
£l, Cuecical Corps Research and Development (RAD) Command, again withouc 
acdizg amplificacion or clarification. The Chemical R&D Command forwarded 
it to che Chemical Warfare Laboratories an 23 October 1959 with a caution 
that experiments must conform co che proposal already approved for EA 2148 
anc EA 1476 (marihuana compounds) and related compounds and benzilates and 
related compounds. On 17 November 1959 che approval reached the Director, 
Medical Research Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal, and directed chat volunteer 
studies would be limited to EA 2148. and homologs, EA 1476 and homologs, 
LS2-25, CS, and benz Laces. 46 Ic vas of interest chat the 17 Novenber 

1959 document did aoc include che cerm "related compounds"; chis could 
have been an oversight or an effort co limic the latitude permitted che 
laboratory investigators. Taken literally, the omission of "related 
compounds” azer benzilaces would preclude experimentation, without 
additional approval, of candidate agents other chan benzilates in che 
giycolate class. The original approval of benzilates and "related com- 
pounds" apparentiy would have permitced experiments with any glycolate., 
agent.  Houever, che evidence does nor clearly indicate that this was an 
incentional restriction, or that it was perceived as a restriction by the 


Tesearcn investigators. 
chem- 


the 
co 


It vas also not surprising that there vas a lack of evidence of new 
ical agent protocols being submicced during this period. As far as 
medical research invescigators were concerned, approval waa ac hand 


zA 244 


49 


Page 55 of 264 


use v2lunceerzs in research involving the following:  G-agents (nerve); 
UV-agezcs (nerve); K-agencs (psycnochericals); CS (irritants); tecrahydro- 


caunabizols (carihuana); and benzilates (which could be interpreted co 


include ocher glycolaces). 


3enzilate Research 


As vas discussed earlier, the search for incapacicatisg agents intensified 
when the Kennedy administration took office. Specifically, Department of 
Defense "?roject 112" placed a high priority on development of a chemical 
‘imcapacitating agent. Records indicated char by 1962 che primary agent to 
dec chis requirement was a benzilace called agenc "BZ" or "EA 2277." 

Plans for this agent apparently called for development of munitions, 
stockpiles, and storage facilities, as well as essentíal research. By 

Atrii 1962 the program had progressed to che poinc thac cn 23 April 1963 

che sts cant Secrecary of che Army (Research and Development) appointed 

a project officer to provide overall supervision of che project. On 20 June 


1962 zhe Secretary of he Army signed a memorandum to the Secrecary or Defense 


ag him chac the Aray had already inictaced accion co have Me doccrine 


10 
for ezplormenc, storage, and handling of agenc "3Z" completed prior to 
delivery of che munitions .6 It apparencly was assumed that formal Secre- 


ary ci the y approval for the agent research was included in Secretary 
eer tests of 


s 's 8 October 1959 approval for use of volunteers in [ 
"Pheacyclidene ('Serauyl'), benzilates and related compounds . "^2 


Tn March of 1972 che Director of the Biomedical Laboratory at Edgewood 
submitted a proposed protocol for che "glycolace agents.” The 
scaced chat Secretary of che Army approval had been obtained in 


years, but that the Office of The Surgeon General and Office of 
No evi- 


Arsenal 
requesc 
earlier 
zhe Clef, Research and Development, had suggested resubmission. 
gence vas found which confirmed that either of che proposals were approved 
by dne Secretary of the Aruy. However, it is possible chac reference co 
earlier approval by che Secretary of the Arzy related co Secretary Brucker's 
approval of "benzilates and related compounds" in October 1959. 


Regulatory Controls 


Oa 26 March 1962 che first Army regulacion governing the "Use of Volunceers 
as Subjeccs of Research" was published (AR 70-25).48 The purpose of the 
regulation vas co "prescribe policies and procedures governing che use of 
volunteers as subjects in Department of che Army research, including 
research in nuclear, biological, and chemical warfare, wherein human 

beings are deliberacelv exposed co unusual or pocenciallv hazardous con- 
Cicious. These regulacions are applicable worldwide, wherever volunteers 
are used as subjects in Department of the Arny research.” This regulation 
did noc indicate supersedure of any previous direccive(s), however, it 


50 


2 Á ES * 4 


Page 56 of 264 


peared co be incended for chat purpose. It provided fcr certain excep- 

c for chose performing normal hazardous duties, such as 
aining, fire and ges drilis, and the Like, „ co 

e discussed during the escly Chemical Corps Advisory 027 meetings. 

c lisced basic principles co be observed by investigators, which were 

ideccical co those reccomended to che Secretary of Defense by che 

Armed Forces Medical Policy Board in early 1953. The regulacion provided 

"a physician approved by The Surgeon General will be respcasible far 


as cO policy 
ac and jucp 


tnat: 
che zedical care of volunteers. The physician may or cay not be the pro- 
ject reader, ouc will have authority to terminate the experiment at any 


cine csat he believes death, injury, or bodily hara is likely to result." 
„This provision appeared to be a change in the interpretation of guidance 
provided by che "Wilson Memorandum," which apparently intended that the 
Service secretary would approve, in writing, the physician in charge, aa 
vell as che protocol for the experimenc. 


Spec gen: of Resvonsiblie Physician 


iei discussion of che history of che appointment of "respocsi5le 
28 2 " for the medical volunteer program is in order at this pant. 


£Zvidezcs indicated chac in April 1956 che Secrecary of che Army approved 
] Zens of Dr. Van M. Sim as physician responsible for volunteers 

“cal warfare research.^? The records further indicated that in 
vender 1958 an effort vas made co expand che "one onysictan in charge 
ment (as mentioned earlier in this chapter), when che Chief Chen- 

al 8 ور‎ requested che Secretary of the Ammy co appoint Dr. Kimura 

goed to che Medical Research Laboratory, as the altermace physician 

to act as such when Dr. Van M. Sim was temporarily absent fron 


3 
A charge, 
However, che request vas acc approveds0 and the require- 


the Laboratory. 
menz for a responsible physician remained unchanged. 


ict remained wich che Secre- 


Auchoricy co appoint che physician in charge had 
cacy of the Army. This wes indicated on 18 June 1959 when the Under 
Secretary of che Army, accing for che Secretary, appointed Colonel Lindsey, 
newiy assigned Director of che Medical Laboratory, co replace Dr. Van M. 
Sim as the responsible physician. This level of auchoricy apparencl 
concizued until 17 July 1962 (after publicacion of AR 70-25) when a 
“request so have Colonel Lindsey's replacement as director (Colonel Bauer) 
appoizzed as respousibie physician vas forwarded to che Office of che 
Chief Chemical Officer, who forwarded the request chrough The Surgeon 
General co che Chief, Research and Development. On 6 August 1962 The 
Surgeen General recommended approval and on 17 August 1962 che Chief, 
Research and Development, approved che designatiou of Colonel Bauer. 32 
Although che regulation (AR 70-25) provided for The Surgeon General co 
approve Che responsible physician, in Chis instance che appoinment was 


.- 
ہت 
4 
.- 

a 


Page 57 of 264 


made 5v the Chief, Research and Development. Cn 20 March 1963 che 

Commander, Chentcal Research and Development Laboratory, submitted a 

request to have Dr. Van M. Sim appointed responsible physician co replace 
Colonel Bauer. The request vas forwarded through the U.S. Army Mmitions 
Command and U.S. y Materiel Command to The Surgeon General, who, on 

l6 April 1963, recommended co the Chief, Research and Development, char. 
Dr. Siz be appointed on an inrerim basis until a Medical Corpa officer vas 
assigned as Director of the Laboracory. On 18 April 1963 che Chtef, Research 
and Development, approved The Surgeon General's recommendation and further 
Tequesced chat che Commander, U.S. Army Materiel Command, upon che assign- 
Bent of a Medical Corps officer as Director of Medical Research, take 
necessary action to designate him as the responsible physician.2J Several 
months lacer, on 26 Sepcember 1963, Colonel Blair vas appointed to replace 
Dr. Sin, a position he held for eleven years. Although it could noc be 
determined at what level of authority this appointment wag made, corres— 
pondeace directed co the Commander, U.S. Munitions Command, wag obtained 

and iz is assumed char the Commander, U.S. Army Materiel Corcacd, approved 
the designacion. By 1974 che practice of service secretary approval of 

the "Medical Officer Responsible for Volunteers” had come full cycle. 

On 9 September 1974 Colonel McClure, Director, Biomedical Laboratory, was 
ppoinced by the Secretary of the Ay, even though the governing regula- 
cion (AR 70-25, dated 31 July 1974) required, as did the earlier version, 
that The Surgeon General approve the appointment of the physician responsible 
Sor the medical care of volunteers. ۱ 


Although the Level of approval authority for appointment of the physician 
responsible For volunteers in research apparently was changed, the author- 
ity to approve a specific protocol was retained by the Secretary. Para- 

AR 70-25, daced 26 March 1962, Approval co Conduct Experiments, 
provided that: "Te is che responsibility of the head of each major command 
and other agency to submic to The Surgeon General a written proposal for 
studies mch come within the purview of this directive. The proposal will 
include for each study che aame of the person to be in charge, name of che 
proposed actending physician, and che detailed plan of Che experiment. 

The Surgeon General vill review the proposal and forward it with his com- 
ments and recccmendacitons on uedical aspects to the Chief of Research and 
Developmenc for approval. When a proposal pertains to research with nuclear, 
biological or chemical agents, che Chief of Research aad Development will 
submit the proposal, together with The Surgeon General's review, to che 
Secretary of che Army for approval. No research with nuclear, biological 
or chemical agents using volunteers will be undertaken without che consent 
of the Secretary of the Aray." AR 70-25 was revised in July 1974. The 
revision transferred che final approval authority from the Chief of Research 
and Development co The Surgeon General for all research using volunteers, 
except research involving nuclear and chemical warfare agents.  Approyal 
for nuclear and chemical warfare agents wag retained by the Secretary of 


g-aph 6, 


the Aray. 


5 AA 


Page 58 of 264 


Medical Corps; Chemical Corpa Agreements 


The procedures for gaining approval of the use of human volunteers in 
chemical warfare agent experiments apparently was well defined, co 
include mandatory review and comment by The Surgeon General. In effect, 
once The Surgeon General had reviewed a prococol, his role in chat phase 
ot chemical agent research was finished, unless specific requests for 
assistance or acvice vere received. Thus, the medical expertise avail- 
able from che Office of Tne Surgeon General apperently was absent during 
the actual conduct of experiments. A means to alleviate this problem may 
have been available through the initiation of a series of Joint Medical- 


Chezical Agreements. 


August 1958 and was titled: "The 


The first cn agreement vas dated 
Conduct Research and Develcpmenr." 


Joint Medical-Chemical Agreement to 
This agreemenuc, which was signed by The Surgeon General and che Chief 
Chemical Officer, provided that The Surgeon General vould assign a ned- 
ical doctor as Director of the Medical Research Laboratory (Biomedical 
Laboratory) mo would have his performance rated by che Commanding Officer 
of che Checical Warfare Labcrarori£es ac Edgewood Arsenal. The Director's 
pe-zoraance would be indorsed by che Commanding General, Army Medicali 
Research and Development Command. Thus, che Director would work primarily 
for the Chemical Corps and have the initial parc of his performance report 
completed by his Chemical Corps superior; and secondarily he would serve 
as che chemical warfare advisor to che Commanding General, Army Medical 
Research and Development Command (which vas directly under The Surgeon 
General), who would be che indarsing officer for the duty performance 

The agreement appeared co be en adequate method for ‘insuring 


report.) 
chart The Surgeon General's office was kept informed of the Medical Research 
edie 


Laboratory's efforts. The agreement was renewed in March 1959 wizh che 
appointment of a new Chief Chemical Officer)’ and again in January 1963, 
when the Chemical Corps’ zespcasibilicies were transferred to the Arzy 
Mazeriel Comnaad.58 another reference to chis agreement was found in an 
August 1972 version, which was amended in November 1972, co allow for: 
annual program plarring and evaluation to be made jointly becween The 
Surgeon General and che Commanding General, U.S. Arzy Materiel Command; 
performance evaluation of the Biomedical Laboratory director to be made 
t7 Edgewood Arsenal Technical Director and indorsed by the Commander, 
Madical Research and Development Command; and for che submission of 
research protocols ta U.S. Ar Materiel Command for new classes of 
chemical agents not previously approved. These protocols vere to be 
reviewed oy The ac par General and forwarded ta the Secretary of the 


Azzy for approval. 3 


Other Regulatory Controls 


In 1964 cwo separate Department of Defense Instructions were published 
aich seemed co separate chemical and biclogical research from investi- 
gacional drugs research. The first, Department of Defense [Instruction 


53 


Page 59 of 264 


Musser $150.5, dared 7 February 1964, subjecc: Regponsibilictes for 


Research, Jevelopmenc, Test and Evaluacion on Chemical and Biological 
Weapons and Defense,Ó2 directed chac each service would be responsible 
E for preparation and conduct of its own programs and chat che Army would 
be responsible for joinc requirements. The second publication wae Depart- 
Instruction Number 5030.29, daced 12 May 1964, subject: 


mecc of Defense 
Ic staced that: "DOD assumes full 


= invescigacional Use of Drugs by DOD. 
responsibility fcr che protection of humans involved in research mder 
its sponsorship, whether this involves invescigational drugs or other 
hazards." To monicor this respoosibilicy, DOD directed that each máli- 

szary devartment establish, within che office of its respective surgeon 
general, a formal board of professional personnel co consider each 

from wichin that milícary department or from its con- 


P4 


research proposal 
iraciors, or e-antees, which may involve the use of human subjects in 
clizical investigacioa of new drugs. (To implemenc this, the Army esta- 
lished che ہے‎ Investigational Drug Review Board.) Furthermore, the 
desc vich an invesciga-— 
cictai drug vas performed under che sponsorship of a cilicary department, 
cest and other pertinent details would de submicted co 

in tura, would indicate its 


TOD izstzucczion provided chat beřore a clinical 


the plana of che 
u the appropriata review board. The board, 
and forward che plan Ach ics approval to che service surgeon 
general ior confirmacion. DOD further directed chat each service would 
1 prepare a plan to inglemenc che requirements discussed above within 60 
cays. Attached to che DOD tastruccion was a nemerandtm of understanding 
between che Deparcmenc of Healch, Education and Welfare and DOD concezz- 
= ing: "Invescigacional Use of Drugs by the DoD. 62 
à boch of the DOD instructions were signed by the Director of 
Research and Engineering, they did nac make reference to each 
or mention a possible relationship. Nevertheless, che Army 
ently perceived the requirements as separate and distinct. As 
an example, ic appeared chat berween 1964 and 1974 a basic drug such as 
7 LSD could de processed through two different channels, depending on ics 
If che investigator was within Che Medical Research and 
Develocnment family, che protocol would go before che Army investigational 
am Brug Review 3card (AIDRB) and receive final approval from The Surgeon 
General, if warranted (AR 40-7). On che other hand, the protocol from 
iavesctigators employed at che Biomedical Laboratory at Edgewood Arsenal 
vould de routed through che army Materiel Command channels co The Surgeon 
i General for concurrence on che medical aspects of che protocol (AR 70-25) 
anc final approval was co come from che Secretary of the Aray after receiv- 
ias The Surgeon General's commences. AR 70-25 did not, and still does noc, 
the crug (LSD in this case) to be reviewed by che Drug Review Board 
as parc of The Surgeon General's procedure. To compound che problem, chose 
drugs which vere already being invescigaced ou human subjects as investi- 
: gational drugs were not required by regulation to be submitteddfor review 


proposed use. 


a nS 


54 


Page 60 of 264 


der che N vas established. Thus, cwo differenc 38 gens exisced co 
eek approval far che game drug. Neither system, chemical or medical, 
apparently provided for retroactive application to ongoing agent or drug 
research previously approved. . 


o p 


Finally, in November 1964 the Departmenc of the Army published AR 40-7 

13 November 1964), subject: Clinical Use of Invescigational drugs. 64 
-This regulacicn superseded AR 40-2, dated 14 November 1960, and directed 
that new drugs required for investigational use would not be used withour 
prior approval of The Surgeon General. AR 40-7 also provided for extensive 
review of the proposed protocol by che AIDRS. This regulation subsequently 
was revised and rep: bliahed on 21 July 0 September 1969, and 4 April . 


1975, withouc maior modification or change. 


Cn 10 September 1975 LTG Richard R. Taylor, The Surgeon General of the 
Army, testified before Congress hac: "in October 1974, The Surgeon 
General established the Human Use Review Office under che direccion of 
Che Assiscanc Surgeon General for Research and Development. The Suman 
Use Review Office vas charged with adziniscering and coordinacing aczivi- 
ties of the amy Investigational Drug Review Board, the U.S. Army Medical 
Research and Development Command Contract Review Board and The Surgeon 
General's wan Use Committee and Clinical Investigacion Committee, to 
insure uniform application of etbícal standards for human research studies 
conducted Arghun or sponsored by che Army Medical Department and other 
AIZZy Agencies. The duman Use Review Commictee is the central A pro- 
for all extramural and intramiral human subject research 


دت 


" cessing p 
uch require approval under provisions of Army Regulations." While dis- 
cussing Defense Against Chemical Weapons, Lieutenant General Taylor 
repotced: "Furthermore, the review mechanisms applied to Edgewood have 

a been tightened over the last two years so that protocols are reviewed by 
che y Investigacional Drug Review Board and Human Subjects Researc! 
Review Board and relevant Deparczegt of Defense and Food and Drug Adminis- 


— traction regular :ons are followed." 


Suspension of Hen Volunteer Program 


On 28 July 1975 Acting Secretary of che Arny Norman R. Augustine suspended 
testing of chemical compounds on human volunteers at Edgewood Arsenal. 


— 
<.. 
Los 


Page 61 of 264 


FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER IV 


l. General Order No. 62, dated 28 lune 1918, by The War Deparment. 
2. Chemical Warfare Service, Edgewood Arsenal, General Order No. 15, 
dated 12 October 1922. ; 
is Czezical Research and Development Laboratory Special Publication 2-51, 


Evaluacion of Medical Resea.ch Volunteer Program, published in 1962. 


4, Chemical Corps Advisory Council, Medical and Related Problems Com- 


mictee Meecing Minuces of 20-21 March 1953. 


„ Caief Chemical Warfare Service Officer, Order No. 48, daced 


Text of Testimony of Lieutenant General Taylor, The Surgeon General, 
Deparrnent of che Army, to U.S. Senate, 94th Congress, Isc Session. 


7. — Section 104 of che Acc of 10 July 1950 (74 Statute 322; 5 USC, 235a). 
8. Arwed Forces Medical Policy Council Papers, Fall 1952. 


9s Secretary of Defense Memorandum for Secretary of the Arzy, Navy, 
and Air Farce, subject: Use of Human Volunteers in Experimental Research, 
dated 26 February 1953. "Wilson Memorandum.” 


l0. Secretary of che Army Memorandum for Chief. of Staff, Army, subject: 
se of Human Volunteers in Experimental Research, dated 20 May 1953. 


ll. Chief of Scaff Menorandum through Assistant Chief of Staff, G—4, 
for Chief Chemical Officer and The Surgeon General, subject: Use of Volun- 
teers in Research, dated 30 June 1953 (CS:385). 


12 Commanding General, Chemical Research and Engineering Command, Letter, 


subject: Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 24 July 1953. 


13. lst Indorsement co 12, above, dated 7 August 1953. 


lí. Secretary of the Army Memorandum for Chief of Staff, Army, subjecc: 
Use of Volunteers in Research, daced 5 November 1953. j 


l5. Chief Chemical Officer Letter, subiect: Use of Volunteers in Research, 
co Commanding General, Caemical Corps Research and Engineering Command, 


daced 24 December 1953. 


zA K. 4 


56 


Page 62 of 264 


e 
16. Secretary of the General Stati Memorandum, subjert: 
dated 16 October 1953. 


Usc of Volun- 


teers ia Research, 


17. Summary of Major Events and Problems for FY 54. 

. 18. Headquarters, 2d Army, Lecter, subject: Recruitment of Human Volun- 
teers, to Ciass I and II Installation Commanders, dated 11 April 1955. 
19. Medical zesearch Laboratories Disposition Form prepared by che 


Clinical Research Division, dated 8 March 1956. 


20. Medical Résearch Laboratories Lerter, subject: Additional Use of 
Volunteers in Research, to Commanding General, Chemical Research and 


Engineering Cozaand, daced 7 September 1955. 


2. Caezical Corps Research and Developmenc Command Lecter to Chief 
&Lical Oificezr, Department of the Army, subject: Additional Use of 
Volunceers in C. Research, dated 22 March 1956. 


Rerort cf The Ad Hoc Scud Group on Psychochemical Agents, published 


22. 
19 Ncvec5er 1955. 
23. Medical Research Laborateries Disposition Form, subject: PBC 206/1 


(Reference Walff Renorr), dared TA Jannary 1956. "2a ] 


24, Caezical Corps Research and Development Command Letter to Dr. Wolff, 
dated January 1957. 


224 Deputy Chief Chemical Officer for Scientific Activities Nemo rand um, 
subject: LSD Patenc Rights, to Commander, Chemical Research and Develop- 
gent Ccczanc, daced 3 February 1956. 


سس ب 


26. Chiet Chemical Officer Letter to The Surgeon General, subject: Addi- 
tienal Use cf Volunteers in CW Research, dated April 1956. 


7. Tue Surgeon General Lecter to Chief Chemical Officer, subject as 26, 
Seva, cated ll A221 1956. 


w 4 


28. Director of Research and Development Memorandum for Chief of Staff 
ai the Atay, subject as 25, above, dated 17 May 1956. 


28. 


25 Cnerical Research and Development Command Letter co Chemical Warfare 
Labcratories, subject as 26, above, dated 24 May 1956, wich Memorandum for 


Re cz TG bw Dr. Sporn. 


30. Informal couversations with Colonel Vogal (Retired), Dr. Sporn, Dr. K. Cag 
Enerson, Colonel Steed (Retired). 2 


EE 


57 


Page 63 of 264 


3l. The Adjucanc General of che Army Lecter, subject: Use of Volunteers 
ia Research, co Cozzazcing Generals of Zone of Interior (ZI) A Tes, dated 


18 April 1957. 


32. Chlef Chemical Officer Lecter co All Chemical Officers, 0+4 
Medical Research Volunteer Program, dated ll July 1957. 


33. Chemical Research and Development Command Letter, subject: Additional 


Use of Volunteers in Research, 


34. The Surgeon General Letter, subject: Addirtonal Use of Volunteers 


35. Chief Chemical Officer Lecter, subject: Use of Female Volunteers, to 


The Surgeon General, dated 14 November 1958 (forwarding request from 
Chemical 36D Command, dated 4 November 1958). 


36. Chemical Warfare Laboratories Incermal Lecter, subject: Use of Volun- 


teers for Agent EA 1779 Tests, dated 10 February 1959. 


Medical Research Laboratories Letter, subject: Appointment of Addi- 
nal Responsible Physician, to Chief Chemical Officer, dated 4 November 


Corps R&D Command Letter to Commander, Chemical Warfare 


38. Chemical 
Use of Volunteers, dared 8 December 1958. 


Laborataries, subject: 


39. Cheazical Corps R&D Command Letter to Commander, Chemical Warfare 
Laboratories, subject: Use cf Volunteers, dated 15 December 1958. 


to Director of Medical Research, 


40. Chemical Warfare Laboratories Letter 
dated 23 December 1958. 


subject: Use of CW Agents on Volunteers, 


to Army Chemical R&D Command, 


4l. Chemical Warfare Laboratories Lecter 
1779 (CS), daced 30 December 


subject: Use of Yolunceers in Testing ZA 
1958. 

42. Chemical Warfare Laboracories Lecter, 27 July 1959, regarding 
approved agents to be used on humans. 


43. Summary Sheet, Chief Chemical Officer to Chemical Corps R&D Command, 
proposed volunteer studies of EA 1576 and related compounds, dated 30 July 
1959. 


44. Chemical Corps R&D Command Lecter to Chief Chemical officer, subject: 
Proposed Volunteer Studies of EA 1476, dated 17 July 1959. 


58 


co Chief Chemical Officer, dated 20 May 1958. 


i2 Chemical Warfare Research, to Chief Chemical Officer, dared 12 June 1958. 


یں 


Page 64 of 264 


Secretary of che Army Memcrandum for Chief of Scaff, subjecc: Use 


45. 
Volunteers in Research, daced 8 October 1959. 


of 
46. Chemical Corps R&D Command Lecter to Commander, Chemical Warfare 
Laboratories, dated 23 October 1959; Lecter from Chemical Warfare Labora- 
cortes to Director, Medical Research Laboratory, dated 17 November 1959, 


` subject: Use of Volunteers in Research. 
Chentcal Corps R&D Laboratories Lecter to Commanding General, Chemi- 


= 47. 
Experimental Exposures of Men ta Propellant Vapors, 


cal Command, subject: 
dated 2 August 1961. 


48. Army Regulaciou 70-25, dated 26 March 1962, R&D Use of Volunteers as 


Subjects of Research. 


Chief of Research and Development Memorandum co Chief Chemical Officer, 
7 


= 49. 
subject: Appoinmnent cf Physician in Charge of Volunreers, daced 20 April 
1956. ۱ 
50. The judge Advocate General Memorandum regarding physical presence of 


physician tn charge, dated 17 November 1958. 


Sl. Chief Chemical Officer request of -17 April 1959, Medical Officer 
Responsible for Volunceers. 18 June 1959 approval dy Under Secrecary, Army. 


Chemical R&D Lecter to Commanding General, Chemical R&D Command, sub- 


5 323 
ject: Medical Officer Responsible for Volunteers, dated 17 July 1962. 
ت2‎ 53. Chemical R&D Letter to Commanding General, R&D Command, subject as 
52, above, daced 20 March 1963. 
= 54.  Arzy Maceriel Command Letter of Appointment, Medical Officer Responsible 


Š ۱ for Volunteers, dated 26 September 1963. 


55. ry Regulation 70-25, Research and Development Use of Volunteers as 


; Subjects of Research, daced 31 July 1974. 
36. Joint Medical—Chemical agreement co conduct Research and Development, 
ي‎ signed by Major Generals Hays and Creasy in August 1958. 


conduct Research and Development, 


37. Joint Medical-Chemical agreement to 
in March 1959. 


signed by Majcr Generals Hays and Stubbs 


Joint Aray Medical Service-Army Materiel Coraand agreement on NespOons 


'S8. 
7 bilities for che Conduct of B&D Defense Against CG Agencs, signed by 
zi General Besson and Lieutenant General Heacon on 23 January 1963. 


aes 


59 


Page 65 of 264 


59.  Memoranduz of Agreemenc, Arczy Maceriel Cammand-The Surgeon General, 
cf August 1972. 


60. Summary Sheec, subject: Project Manager for Agent EA 2277, dated 
18 april 1962. 


61. Secretary of the Army Memorandum to Secretary of Defense, subject: 
Use of Chemical Agent BZ, dated 20 June 1962. 


62. Jepartnent of Defense Instruccion Number 5160.5, subject: Responsi- 
bilities for Research and Development, Test and Evaluation on Cheri^cal 


aod Biological Weapons and Defense, dated 7 February 1964. 


63. Departmenc cf Defense Instruction Number 5030.29, subject: Investi- 
gational Use of Drugs by DOD, dated 12 May 1964. 


645. Ay Regulation 40-7, Clinical Use of Invesciígacional Drugs, dated 
13 November 1964. 


65. ry Regulation 40-7, Clinical Use of Invescigacional Drugs, dated 
21 July 1967; superseded on 30 Sepcember 1969 and 4 April 1975. 


$6. Edgewood Arsenal Letter to The Surgeon General, subject: Physiological 
Stress Aspeczs of Chemical agents, dated 19 June 1969. 

67. 26 August 1969 The Surgeon General Indorsemenc to Chief, Research and 
Developmenc, Deparcment of the dAray. 


68. 3 September 1969 Chief, Research and Developmenc, Indorsement co 
ihe Surgeon General. 


59. 12 September 1969 The Surgeon General Indorsement to Edgewood Arsenal. 


70. Biomedical Laboratory Letter to The Surgeon General, subject: Plan 
or Glycolate Agents, dated 6 March 1972. 


71 News Release from Office, Chief of Informacion, Department of the 


مل 


Azzy, dated 28 July 1975. 


72. Prepared statement by Lieutenant General Taylor, The Surgeon General, 
Department of che Aray, before che Subcommittee on Administrative Practice 
and Procedure of che Judiciary Committee, 10 September 1975. 


73. Secretary of the Aray Memorandum for Commander, U.S. Army Materiel 
Command, subject: Medical Officer Responsible for Volunteers, dated 
9 September 1974. 


60 


X 


Page 66 of 264 


CHAPTER V 


SUMAN VOLUNTEER SELECTION AND SCREENING 


General 


Tne purpose of this chapter is to address the implementation of the 
Suman Volunteer Program, co include recruiting and che thoroughness 


of the medical screening of volunteers. 


às tentioned previously, volunteers have served the medical element of 
the U.S. y Chemical Research and Development Laboratories since the 
establishment of the Medical Division in 1922.1 Records indicated chat 
prior to World War II che volunteers vere exployees of Edgewood Arsenal 
who usually vere part of the various research test projects. Dur 
world War II there vas large-scale use of volunteers ac various test 
sices throughout che United Scaces. Following World War II human 


wee 
جم ہہ‎ 


volunteer resources vere apparently met as they were prior to the war, 
i.e., ty local assigned personnel. This vas the case until May 1955 
when the first contingent of che formal volunteer program arrived ac 
Zágevcoc.? Very lictle is known about Che recruiting uechods, medical 
screening procedures, and utilization of che volunteers prior to 1955; 
acr vas it determined i£ this void was che result of routine destruction 
Of records or if there were simply fewer and less complece records main- 
tained. Ic is probable chat che Nuremberg Trials had a significant 
impact on the thoroughness with which research records were maintained. 
As discussed in Chapter IV, the Armed Forces Medical Policy Council 
established che rules of the Nuremberg Code as an esgencial part of 
future medical research involving che use of human subjects when in 

1952 they recommended that the Secretary of Defense permit the use of 


humans in medical research. 


Secretary cf Defense Wilson's memorandum co che service secretaries in 
February i953 established the procedures to obtain authority to conduct 
research with chemical agencs involving human volunteers. However, 
program iniciative still rested wich che laboratory. t was che 
responsibility of the research investigacor to justify che need co use 
humans i2 experizentations. There was evidence that this responsibility 
was not new co the Chemical Corps medical investigators, nor was it taken 
iightiv. Ia fact, months before the Secretary of che Army had approved 
implementing instructions, the Chemical Corps Advisory Council vas 
consicering the inpact of che new requirements Che Nuremberg Code 

placed on them. On 20 and 21 March 1953 the Chemical Corps Advisory 
Council tet ac Edgewood Arsenal to consider these medical and relaced 
ptoblems.3 The Council members noted chat human experimentation within 


61 


ates 


Page 67 of 264 


che practice of medicine had been conducted far a long period of cime, 
although usually on severely ill patients who vent co a doctor for help. 
Tne Council stressed chat che problems confronting che Chemical Corps 
were entirely different in chat experiments would be performed an 

normal, healthy individuals and subjecting chem co a certain degree of 
danger. Thus, they allowed chat careful consideracion had to be given 
and safeguards established in cerms of che moral, echical, and technical 
aspects of the problem of using humans. They reported chat basic deci- 
sions could have co be made regarding the type of experimental work 
which vas feasible and correct; che rules of conduct which would be 
Followed to create the maximum safeguards; and che procedures which 
would be established to determine whether che information to be obtained 
would juscifv che risk involved. Following these considerations they 
reported that the practical problem of how to obtain a steady flow of 


human volunteers would have to be addressed. 


The Council (which consisted of boch mílizary and nonmilitary members) 
discussed atmerous problem areas, many of which are prevalent today. 
The Caai-zan of the Council (a civilian medical doctor) opined chat 
"certain problems must be considered more adequately if normal sub- 
jects are to be used in experiments, the purpose of which is noc co 
benefi: the subject or people with disease, duc to aid in military 
matters. Tne experimenter in each instance mst be a physician, and, 
in view of che moral and ethical practices embodied in the Hippocratic 
Qazh, it sill be extremely difficult for che physician co judge, in an 
unbiased manner, the type of experiment to be performed and what the 
possible hazards are co che patient. From that point of view, con- 
sideration misc be given co methods of choosing experimental subjects, 
what regulations govern the divulging of information to volunteer sub- 
jects as to the hazard invoived, and whether or noc chat should, in 
any vay, be che responsibility of the physician directly involved in 
che expericent." They also discussed the need co define nonhazardous 
experiments and chose which nay be hazardous to a degree and which would 
be considered líne-of-duty (such as troop gas chamber exercises). The 
Council also recognized Che need for a clear and overall set of funda- 
chat a proposed plan for experinentation could 
of those criteria, thereby avoiding individual 
decisious hich vould eventually result in a wide range of standards. 
direct evidence to indicate the impact that chis 


&lthough chere was no 
Councii had on formulating future policy, it is apparent from the sub- 


ject caccer discussed chat they had considerable expertise in che field 
of chemical and medical research, especially as ic would involve human 
volunteers. The implementing authority, Chief of Staff Memorandum 385, 
for use of volunteers in research vas published by che Army Chief of 
Staff on 30 June 1953.4 This document set forth eleven basic principles 


for the use of human volunteers in research: 


mental principles, so 
be evaluaced in terms 


62 


Page 68 of 264 


a. The voluntary consent of che heren subject is absolutely essen- 
cial and must be obtained in writing with a proper witness. 


b. The experiment misc be such aa to yield results essential co 
che Army or for che good af society, unpracurable by other methods. 


c. The experiment misc be based on animal experimentation and knowl- 
edge of che problem so chat the anticipaced results will justify performance 


of the experiment. 


d. The nuzberz of medical volunteers used shall be che minimum 
Tequi-ed Co obCain che essential data. 


e. The experiment will be conducted so as to avoid all unnecessary 
physical and mental suffering and injury. 


E. No experimezt will be conducted if there is any reason to believe 


that death ar disabling injury may occur. 


g. Proper precautions will be nade and adequate facilities provided 
to protect che medical volunteer against all foreseeable posaibilities of 
injury, disability, or death. 


h. Ihe experimenc will be conducted only by scientifically qualified 
persons and che medical care of che volunteers supervised by a qualified 
physician. 


I. The physician in charge must be prepared to terminate the experi- 
ment ac any stage if he has any cause to believe continuation may result 
in injury, disabilicy, ar death. ` 


. The medical volunteer cust be informed chat at any time during 
che course of che experiment he has che right to revoke his consent and 
withdraw from che experiment, without prejudice. 


T. Use of prisoners of war in human experimentation ts prohibited 
under any circumstances. 


^e greatest emphasis in terms of detailed guidance wag placed on che 
irsz of these principles, I. e., volunteer consent, which will be dis- 


cussed in depch in Chapter VI. 


A request ca conduct experiments with nerve gases on volunteers was sub- 
micced in August 1953. Permission was granted in November 1953, however, 
it did not provide for a source of volunteer subjects. On 12 March 1954 


The Surgeon General prepared a sec of principles, policies, and rules for 


63 


OIE o 


regarding volunteer consent. 
‘Memorandum 385 guidance vere expanded as follows: 


Ts 


: tion." 


Page 69 of 264 


for the use of human volunteers in medical research. Wich four excepcions, 


chese priacigles generally were che same as Chose published in Chief of 
The firsc rule was in che form of expanded guidance 
Next, rules 7 and 8 of the Chief of Scaff 
"Adequate preparations 


should be made and adequate facilities provided to protect the experimental 


Scal? Mesoracdun 385. 


^ — 


subject against even remote possíbiliríes of injury, disability or death. 


includes hospítalization and medical treatment as may be required. 

Tbe experiment should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons 
(izcluding an adequately trained physician) who shall be required to exer- 
cise the highest degree of skill and care throughout the experiment.  . 
Competent consu! tants should be available on short notice in this connec- 
Finally, there was included an addítional rule: "Agents used in 
research must have the following limiting characteristics: controllable 
lechality; no serious chronocity anticipated; effective therapy available; 
and adequate background or animal experimentations." These were uot 
intended to replace the rules set forth in the basic pole (Chief of 

Stari Memorandum 385), but rather to clarify their intent. 


vier to this, in April 1953, the Chemical Corps Advisory Council recco- 
cended a system be developed to provide a pool of volunteers for chemical 
warfare research ac che Aray Chemical Center (Edgewood Arsenal) Ó This 
problem vas again discussed by the Medical Committee of che Chemical Corps 
Advisory Caunczl on 30 September 1954, The report of that meecing indi- 
cated a request for a continuing supply of volunteer subjects had been 
sub sed to che Office of the Secretary of the Army and the official in 
charge of manpower in the Office cf the Secretary of the Aray had expressed 
approval of che request. Thus, favorable accion was reportedly anticipated 
im time co have volunteers available by January 1955. Iz was further recor- 
ded cat if such military volunteers were not supplied, che Medical Labora- 
Ceries would have to continue obtaining a sporadic source of volunteers, 
boch military and civilian, from the personnel of the Army Chemical Center. 
This comment vas attributed co the Chief of the Clinical Research Division, 
Medical Laboratories, and is interpreted Co mean that between che time 
formal approval for the use of volunteers was granced in November 1953 
anc the time of the Committee meecing (September 1954), volunteers were 
recruited from personnel assigned to Edgewood Arsenal. There were no 
volunteer medical records found which would corroborate chis assumption. 
Eovever, witnesses contacted during the inquiry stated such records normally 


were not kept for volunteers from che laboratory. 


The Commictee report also contained a statement Chac: "The Laboratories 
drew up a forzal program and submitted it co che Secretary of the Aray 

for approval (referring to the 7 August 1953 request for approval co test 
nerve agents in humans); approval for the plan bad been received (referring 
to the 5 November 1953 approval by Secretary Stevens)." This program 


64 


E اید‎ 


Page 70 of 264 


reportedly visualized four types of studies for human volunteers. "The 
first category consists of planned, hazardous experiments chere there is 
a clearcut risk, buc wich intelligent, adequate supervision, safeguards, 
and adequate therapy available, ic is felt chac no irrevocable damage 
Experiments will noc be actempted where such damage can 
These fcra the type of experiments for which the ary 
approval has been received and the ouly kind where such 
approval is required. Mother cacegory includes risk of accidental 
exposure to hazardous degree. The fullest possible studies should be 
made of any such uoplanned exposures. The third category consists of 
experiments that are only potentially but not definitely hazardous. 
The experizents would be hazardous if the individual, despite previous 
exarinacion and check-up, should prove unusually sensitive, or if there 
occurs an accidental error or break in technique. The fourth category 
of procedures vill be chose designaced non-hazardous, experiments 


involving no hazard greater than chac of crossing a highway." 


vili be done. 


be foreseen. 
Secretary's 


Teparacion sor Volunteer Recruitment 


'd 


On 13 October 1954 the Commander of che Chemical Corps Medical Research 

Laboratories submitted a request co the Commanding General, Chemical 

. Corps Regearch and tagineering Command to establish a procedure for the 
ary volunteers for use in medical research asso- 


reczcircczenrt of cilic 
ciated with chemical warfare. This request recommended establishment 


oz an Ar ide volunteer recruitment program that vould provide the 
Medical Research Laboratory a continuous flow of 20 volunteers per 
The request was forwarded to che Chief Chemical Officer, Depart- 


monch. 
Based on a recommendation fron 


ment of che arny, on 13 October 1954. 
the Office of The Surgeon General, the Medical Research Laboratory's 
proposal was disapproved in favor of a less expensive plan. The 
aicarcace plau suggesced that specific installations, such as Fort 
Meade, be coucacced and che groundwork laid, through The Surgeon 
General's represencacive ac each station, to obcain approval of the 
local commander to recruit volunteers fram his installation. Oni 

25 Januarv 1955 the Arzy Chemical Cencer (Edgewood Arsenal) published 
che first known Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) dealing wich mili- 
tary volunceers for chemical warfare. The stated purpose of this 
memorandum vas to outline the procedures for processing of milicary 
voluzteers for medical research conducted at the Army Chemical Center 
by the Czenical Corps Medical Laboratories. The directive provided for 
che recruitment of volunteers from Second Army Headquarters at Fort ` 
Meade, MD, for temporary ducy (TDT) at Edgewood Arsenal. The volun- 
teers were zo be provided administrative support, rations, quarters, 
and supplies upon arrival. Following these arrangements, volunteers 
vere scheduled for physical examination and orientation relative co 

che test program. The directive also allowed the Medical Laboratory 


65 


- 
wá 
LJ 
~: 


En 


—...——.—————.— ...تس سس ص1س مس . 
r — . ͤ—— —.— —‏ 


"m 


Page 71 of 264 


che volunteer for observacion and treatment beyond the 
No mention vas made af the details of 


ada 


staff to recaic 
normal actachment, if necessary. 
the physical/mental exzaminacíons co be given prior co the volunteer s 


acceptance inco the program or of a follow-up examination at the comple- 
tion of his temporary duty. © 


Records fouzd ac Edgewood Arsenal indicated that during the period $-23 
January 1955 the Chemical Corps Medical Research Laboratories and the 
Aero Medical Laboratory, Wright-Parterson Air Force Base, conducted a 
joinc research project at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base to investigate 


"Carbon Mouczide Gassing of bean Volunteers. II No authority for the 


conduct cf this experiment was fou-d during the imauiry. If approval 


was not sought because the tesr was considered "only pocentially, but 
not definitely hazardous,” and thus according to the earlier interpre- 
tation noc requiring Secretary of the Army approval, it would have indi- 
cated, as a zinimum, a propensity towards a liberal interpretation of 
policy. lsc, ir is pessible that approval was obtained chrough U.S. 


Air Force channels, alchough no records of this were retained or found 


iz che Laboracory files. However, records were found which indicated 


t3ac che àrzy Medical Laboratories supplied 10 volunteer subjects for 
the project; individual medical records for these volunteers were noc 


Located. 


In late February 1955 the Medical Research Laboratories began their 
preparation for recruiting volunteers from Fort Meade by furnishing an 
informacion lecter to the installation indicating the type of test planned 
for use of volunceers.12 The volunteers were advised char three types of 


investigations would be conducted: 


a. Tae minimum systemic and local effects of certain toxic agents, 
watch vould involve inhalation of small amounts of nerve gas. The docu- 
ment alloved chat voluateers would be tharoughly informed about all 
procedures and whac was to be expected during each test; every precaution 
would be taken to protect the volunteer against danger or serious disccn- 
fort; and physicians and other scientists who had previously been volunteer 


subjects would be in attendance ac all times. 


The evaluacion of chemical warfare equipment, such as the test- 


E. 
Testing 


ing cf chemical items designed to protect the individual soldier. 
of chis equipment required wearing trials before the itens were standardized. 


[rvescigations involving the problems of adapting defensive itens‏ وت 
do natural human capacities, such as a manual dexterity test using pro-‏ 
tective gloves. Moreover, each volunteer vas to be free to determine‏ 
whecher or not be desired to participate after he received a full explana-‏ 
tion of the test procedure and be was ta be free to terminate his 30-day‏ 


Cexparary duty tour at any time. 


-. 

— 
5 
2. 
0 


Page 72 of 264 


Ineludad with 2 info.sation Letter referenced above -s a doc st 
cicled: "Medical Research Volunteer Program," which vas intended co be 
for all voluateers, and an acknowledgerenc that it had 


mandatory reading 
been read and understood was included in che "Suman Volunteer Agreecenc” 


fora. at the same cine, che Medical Laboratory established an "Indoccri- 
nacicn and Screening Team of two Chemical Corps officers and one medical 
officer co be responsible for selecting che qualified individuals frou 
among Che volunteers. The appointment of this team and other arrangements 
vere cade as a result of a commitmecc by 2nd Army Headquarters to provide 
20 volunceers per 30-day period ta the excenc possible. 13 The letter also 
armounced that the críencation and identification of individuals under 
consideration for selection would be accomplished only by personnel 
assigned to the Chemical Corps Research and Engineering Command. Further, 
2nd Arzy would tzanscít and provide for exploicacion of the preliminary 
recruiting material provided by the Chemical Corrs. Additionally, 22d 
Ay would assemble prospective volunteers, as requested, for detailed 
orientation and final screening. However, 2nd Army would not engage 
direccly in any aspect of the orientation and screening process. Avail- 
able records indicated chat during March and April 1955 Chemical Corps 
Medical Research Laboratories personnel developed a program in conjunction 
with Seadquarters, 2ad Army, representatives and che chiefs of che various 
techeical services (Quartermaster General, Chief of Engineers, erc.) to 
recruit, screen, and select volunteers from che 2nd Army area. On 21 April 
Zeadquarters, 2nd U.S. Army, published a directive to the installation 
commanders in ics Arzy area establishing procedures for selecting volun- 
s. „ The directive provided thac when finally selected, the volunteer 
d be placed on IDY co Edgewood Arsenal for 30 days. The requirement 

or volunteers was established as 20 per month. The directive provided 
chat den sufficient nominations were received, an orientation team fron 
che Chemical Corps Research and Development Command would conduct a brief- 
ing for che volunteers. Those who still remained after the briefing would 
be requested to sign a volunteer participation agreement. 


„ r. rr وی‎ mee epee 


No direct evidence of the type medical and psychological examination ‘given 
Co these early participants was available, however, some newspaper arcicles 
puoOlishes during the recruiting effort were located; chey indicated chat 
preliminary examinations vere planned for volunteers. In March 1955 che 
Balcimere Evening Sun and the Nevs-Post published articles about the up- 
coming experimencts.- In these articles it was reported that che volun- 
teers would de carefully screened for physical and psychological suitability 
pricy co testing. In April 1955 a similar article appeared in the Army 
Des which reported chat "All volunteers would be screened carefully 

oy chree different groups Co decermine their physical and psychological ` 
suitability." The three groups, although uot further identified, probably 
were: (I) che military urit, where potential volunteers were screened to 
insure chey mec the initial seleccion prerequisites: Intelligence (Apti- 
tude Area I Score cf 80 or above), completion of basic military training, 


67 


Page 73 of 264 


a (a general health racing established from medical examina- 


E physical prežil 
tior and recorded iz the individual medical records), age group of 17 to 
15, remaining service of at least six months, and have an organization and 
(2) the orien- 


Aruy official record which contained no adverse informacion; 


zacion ces menciíoned earlier chat met with the volunteers after initial 
l Research Labora- 


screening and prior selection for travel co the Medica 
tories; and (3) the doctors who examined the volunteers at che Laboratories 


prior co participation in experinents. 


First Formal Volunteers from Second Armv 
The first contingent of 16 soldiers from Second Arzy Headquarters was 
reported co have arrived ac the Army Chemical Center un er this program 
May 1955.1 A computer printout, based cn data available from indi- 
vidual volunteer medical records, indicaced ایس‎ the first experimental 
use of these volunteers occurred on 20 May 1955. À sampling of the 
available volunteers records revealed chat che medical examination of 
chese eariy volunteers included: a standard report of medical examina- 
tien; report of medical history; chest X-ray; urinalysis test; and an 
= ZAG recording. Many of che records, hovever, were incompleta in that 

chey did soc reflect the type of chemical agent adminiscared to the vclun- 

deer, che mechod of administration of the drug, or che dosage given. Ic 
chac the original plan for medical evaluation of the 
final or exit type physical examination for. 
che volunteers. However, arrangements to correct this bee cu were made 
prior to the departure of che group chat arrived in May 1955. 8 The exic 
examination provided during the 1955 cime period appeared to consist af 
a chesz X-ray and an exit interview. There vas an indication that che 
purpose of che interview may have been for an evaluation of the volunteer's 
attitude in order co reinforce future recruiting efforts, rather chan eval- 


uation of his cotal medical well-being. 


EC cn 2 


also vas apparezc 
T volunteers did aot include a 


Volunteers from this source concinued to arrive at Edgewood, during the 

5 3ہ‎ lader uf 1253, from fore Knox, KY, Fort Meade, MD, and Fort Monmouth, 
V. 19 Approximately 140 volunteers vere received during 1955. The avail- 
able records of these volunceers, which were, in most cases, incomplete, 

x indicated chat they received a medical exazinacion, signed a volunteer 
statement (although not available in all cases), and were used in experi- 
mencations involving nerve and nus card gases and perhaps other agents. 
&cuever, ay June 1956 che number of volunteer subjects from Second Army 
and the various technical service inscallations dwindled to five or six 

' The Medical Research Laboratory stated that despice their 


per nmonck. 
sorts in recruitment of volunteers, troop commanders did noc 


a. vigerous ez 
place sufficient priority on the program. They argued chat Department of 


the Army should compel troop commanders co release volunteers despite 
With the inclusion of psychochemical 


shortages in ocher critical areas. 
the medical screening was expanded to 


= compound experinencarion in 1956, 
68 


— 

*. 
M 
—. 


Page 74 of 264 


include a social hs cor incervieu and che Minnesota Mulciphasic Per- 
sonalicy Invezcory (MMPI) co exclude chose volunteers who ght react 
adversely under situacions of psychological stress. Alchough avaílaole 
records were noc sufficiently complete co determine exactly when these 
tests were included, ic appears they were being employed in early 1957 
and perhaps lace 1956, when the first volunteer records clearly indicaced 


che use of LSD on volunteers. 


Coucinental Army-Wide Recruitment 


I2 April 1957 che recruiting base was expanded to include all army inscalla- 


cious chin che Uniced Scaces.29 The Deparment of the Amy di ected Army 


commanders co assist in the recruitment of volunteers and co release a zini- 


mum of 30 per wonch oz a rotating basis the six Army commanders vere 

each given two months per year in which they would furnish volunteers). 
The cers "Recruiment" was defined in other publications- as: "restricted 
to cublicizing Che program, accepting applications, and selecting a quota 
from among those who applied.” No coercion or enticement of volunteers 

vas permitced. The April i957 directive held thac: "The volimcary con- 

cf che humar subject is absolutely essential. This means chat the 
have legal capacity to give consent; should be so 
sicuated as cO be able to exercise free power of choice without the iater- 
venciou of any element of farce, fraud, deceit, duress, over-reaching, or 
other ulterior fora of constraint or coercion.” t further provided that: 
"Is all experizeucs involving volunteer test subjects, che individuals are 
thoroughly informed about all procedures, and what can be expected during 
each test." The Army commanders were asked to emphasize the program within 
their commands and to stress such matters as: the need for volunteers; 
thotcugh physical examinations; awareness of the applicacion process; 
necessity of a volunteer agreement statement; quality of accommodations 

ac the Edgevood Arsenal test site; a liberal pass policy for volunceers; 
availabilicy of letters of commendarion for volunteer service; and the 


—— 


availabilicy of temporary duty (TDY) pay ($1.50 per day) to volunteers. 


seazc 


person involved should 


The renewed emphasis placed ou the recruiting of volunteers from all ہج ھ‎ 
areas within the United States was apparently productive as the total 
volunteers received in 1957 was reported as 298 as compared co 100 for 
1956.21 Tocal volunteers for 1958 vas reported as 383.1 During chis 
period (1955-1958) only two volunteers were reported as "physically 
ungualified."1,-1 ٤ع‎ muse be noted that official and unofficial docu- 
ments discovered during che inquiry differ (in some instances considerably) 
ia reporting the number of volunteers, and all figures are reported as che 
best evidence available rather than as absolute figures. 


In lace 1957 the Air Force agreed to furnish volunteers to che Chemical 
Corps. Records indicated chat this practice continued until July 1961 
and included approximately 350 airmen.- 


69 


PD nO ہی‎ rr ir- TDA 


۶,0. 


اضر 


تچ سمخ موا ا ا 


اجکی دی یں 


` phasic 


Page 75 of 264 


te Che normal clinical experiments conducted ac 
vere conducted with volunteers fror 
These ces gs vill be discussed in sep- 


During 1938, in >٥ 
Zdgecood Arsenal, "field cescs" 
Fort 3ragg and Fort Holabird .22 
arace chapters of chis report. 


Recapitulacion of Volunteer Utilizarion - 1962 


By the end of June 1962 reports indicated 2,588 volunteers had been used 
at Edgewood since 1955; approximately 350 of these were Air Force person- 


^ During che same period, 49 volunteers vere reported as physically 
35 were reportedly 


had refused to 
Figures avaiiable 


nel. 
unqualified; 51 had requesced release from che program; 


returaed to their units for disciplinary reasons; and 6 
participace in the program after arrival ac Edgewood. 
for che "use of volunteers" showed chat 112 were used in lethal agent tests 
272 in incapacitating agent tests; 132 in miscellaneous physiological tests 
and 492 in macerial tests. 


Medic Evaluacion of Volunteer Subtects 


ed chat by 1962 volunteers spent their first three days ac 


they ever had. The examination, which vas conducted by a physician, in- 
cluded chest X-ray, elecctrocardiogram, tests of liver and kidney function, 
as vell as hemacological cescs (blood studies). The MMPI (Minnesota Multi- 
Personalicy Inventory) was reportedly given to all volunteers and 
scored by a psychologist or psychiacrist co determine behavior patterns 

oz the volunceers. Successful completion of these tests qualified the 
subject for use in experiments with ancticholinesterase compounds (nerve 
agents), riot control agents, some therapeutic drugs, and ces cs of pro- 
tective zacerial (whlch often did not involve drugs). IË che volunteer 
passed caese tests, he was given an eleccroencephalograph test, a per- 
sonal interview with a psychiatrist, and a blood chemistry analysis. 

To be eligible for psychotropic drug experiments the volunteer had co 
successfully complete all screening tests. 


Posc-1962 Recruicing Procedures 


In March 1962 che basic guidance for "Use of Volunteers as Subjects of 
Research" vas published in AR 70-25. In July 1962 The Adjucanc General, 
Headquarters, Deoartmenc cf the Army, published a letter to che Commanding 
General, U.S. Concinental Army Cocmand (CONARC), subject: Use of Volun- 
teers in Research, authorizing procurement of volunceers by recruiting 
from che Zone of Interior (ZI) Army areas for temporary duty periods of 

60 davs.~ The screening process vas changed somewhat at chis time.  Arzy 
area commanders vould select the major installation in their area where 
volunceers would be recruiced. The post commander would survey his troops 


70 


— 
v. 
Ts 

-. 


Page 76 of 264 


for pocezcíal volunceers, following which a Chemical Corps recruiting 


team would arrive at the post and present a briefing to an assembly of 

as vany as 500 enlisted personnel. A follow-up Chemical Corps team would 
arrive later to review che medical histories of che potential volunteers 
and select 60 from chose considered most eligible. The 60 men were placed 
ca TDY orders to Edgewood Arsenal, wnere each volunteer again was given a 
standard physical examination without regard to the date of his last exam- 
ination. Obvious medical rejects were dropped from the agent program ire 
diately after a disqualifying finding was determined. In addition co the 
general physical exsmination, volunteers received a complete bemogrzum, 
upinalysia, serology, chest X-ray, , EEG, liver and renal function 
bacterzies, psychological tests, and a psychiatric interview. The final 
seleccion of volunteers for the agent program was made by a board of 
medical officers who were permitted to reject volunteers who otherwise 
mec all qualifications if, in their judgment, the subject should not be 
used. One report held chat as of 15 December 1963, 2,863 volunteers had 
been available and were used in 2,279 exposures of 90 chemical agents. 24 
These figures, alchough from official reports, cannot be considered abso- 
luce since they are in conflict with other official publications, and in 
some cases vary as much as 27% (Footnote 24 indicaced chat chere were 218 
volunceers available in 1957, while the publication in zootnoce 1 snowed 
298 volunteers for che same period). 


indicated chat this volunteer selection system was still in use 
July 1966 when the Commander of Edgewood Arsenal reported that, ag of 
July 1966, a cotal of 4,360 volunteer test subjects had been utilized 
che medical research program at Edgewood Arsenal with no deaths, no 
injuries, and no observable residual effects.25 On 17 January 1967 The 
Adjutant General, Deparment of the Army, again directed che Commanding 
General of the Concínencal àruy Command to provide volunteers to Edgewood 


Research Laboratories. 25 This letter provided for che volunteers (average 
reened by their station 


of 40 per mouth for 60 days TDY) to be medically scree 
surgeon if a team from Edgewood could not be made available for that pur- 


pose, 


Zvaluation of Volunteers for Use in Psychochemicals 


Available historical records located during the research effort indicated 
chac a comprehensive sec of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) was ` 
available wichin che Clinical Research Department of the Medical Research 
Laboratories. One of these SOPs, published in 1968, dealt with "volunteer 
screening and selection” and provided detailed guidance for the psycho- 
logical/psychiatric selection of volunteers. 2 Ic provided guidance for 
screening Che medical history of the volunteer, evaluation of his general 
aptitude (GT Score), the MPI test, family history, and other data. The 
final result of the screening process was to place each volunteer in a 


71 


Otherwise, the directive was similar to those puslished previously. 


a 


vet 


. 


Page 77 of 264 


acegocy c efula 3. A ratíag of "A" neant the X .unteer cleared 

or psychochezical testing; "B" aesrt he could receive a low—aose of pey- 
choche-icsls only; "C" meant no psychochenicals could be used on che valua- 
caer; and D' meant tbe volunteer could be used for equíprenc tasca only. 


c 
f 


Re—Zvaluztion of Volunceer Requirement — 1973 


In general, che process of Army area commanders providing up to 500 per- 

scunel for oriencatíons/briefings conducted oy a team from Edgewood l 
Arsenal continued through 1973, when Army organizational changes caused 

a re—evaluacion of the mechod of recruitment.  Eowever, the screening and 
selection process for deterzining which volunteers qualified for use in 


which experiments remained about the same. 


à -review of the volunteer medical record files revealed that no records 


were retained for the period prior to May 1955, E, in fact, records were 


prepared ac all then; and thac. from 1955 through 1958 most of the records 
were inadequace and íncomplece. Gradual improvement was noted in both 
record compleceness and the medical screening process starting in 1959. 
ay cme notable exceptions to chis general improvement trend; one 


There were s 
such exception was evident in the comparison of official reports for the 
were used ac 


year 1960, which indicated chat in excess of 500 volunteer 
the Medical Research Laboratories. However, only approximately 40 vulun- 
teer records actually indicated char a chemical agent vas adminiscernd. 
Other exceptions to good record keeping and medical screening processing 


were apparent in che lack of records concerning the military intelligence 


drug testing program conducted at Edgewood during 1958-1960, and to a 
"£ield tests" conducted at Forts Bragg, Benning, and 


lesser rect, che 
discussed individually in lacer chapters. 


McClellan. These will be 


Army, to include formation or the Training and 


The reorganizacion of. the 
and che Military Personnel Center Command 


Decctrine Command (TOC) 
(MILPERCEN) ia 1973, required the Medical Research Laboratories co renew 
their efforts to obtain volunceers.78 ac the requesc o£ the Office of 
the Chief of Research and Development, Department of che Any, 30 che 
icaedical Laboratory (formerly Medical Research Laboratories) submitted 
a justification to continue the selection process in a manner similar to 
methods used prior to the reorganization, i.e., have the area or post 
c anders assezble troops for orientation and briefing (installations 
to be selected by che newly formed TRADOC); and continue to have che 
initial screening process to preselecc approximately 80 (formerly 60) 
volunteers for temporary duty at Edgewood Arsenal, where the second 
screening process would concinue to take place. Additionally, the 
period of TDY was requested to be raised from 60 to 90 days to allow 


for better utilization of the volunteers.?2? 


T 

ue, 
ME 

2. 
a 


MOSS 


Page 78 of 264 


As of 30 June 1973 records reflected chat 6,408 different volunteers had 


been used in medical research by the Biomedical. 8 for a total of 
6,709 volunteer tours (chis includes repeat cours). 3 


It guess chat the و ویو‎ in Army organization did have an effect on 
the Biomedical Laboratory's recruiting efforts, although uot immediately. 
By January 1974 there were no volunteers available and it appeared it 

. would cake six mouths to reinitiate tbe Laboratory's systematic seleccion 
process.J2 Volunteer records indicated that the program was again in 
operation by May 1974; 2 1t concinued until 28 July 1975 when the Accing 
Secretary of the Army directed a temporary suspension of all testing of 
chemical compounds at Edgewood Ársezzl using bean volunteers. 


73 


— 
Ts 
T. 
ae 
r.. 
ay 


ZU E 
q 
FOOTNOTES 
- _ CHAPTER V 
I l. GDL Special Publication 2-51. Evolution of the U.S. Army Cherícal 


Research enc Developaenc Laboratories Medical Research Volunteer Program, 


published ia November 1962. 


2. Briefing text, Human Investigacion Facility, Directorate of Medical 
Research, . S. Army Chemical Research and Development Laboratories, 
Edgecozd Arsenal, D, 1963. 


3. AC-723 Chemical Corps Advisory Council, Medical and Related Problems 
Coumitcee Maecing, 20-21 March 1953. 


of Staff Memorandum for Chief Chemical Officer and The Surgeon 


4 Chief 
General (CS:385), subject: Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 30 June 
1953. 


Folicies and Rules of the Office of The Surgeon General, 


6. AC 727 Chemical Corps Advisory Council Meeting, 23-25 Acril 1953. 


AC(:3)S-303 Medical Committee, Chemical Corps Advisory Council, 
October 1954, published in Sepcember 1955. 


Ni 


30 Septecser and 1 


2 8. Lecter, subject: Recruitment of Volunteers for Research Experi- 
mentation, from the Chezical Research and Eagineering Command co che 
Chief Chenical Officer, Depar rent of che Army, dated 13 Occober 1954. 


9. Same as Footnote 19. 


10. Meno randun Number 11, Military Volunteers, dated 25 January 1955. 
11. . Lecter, subject: Appreciation for Cooperation in CO Scudies, from 
Ghenica! Corps Medical Laboratories co Commanding General, VOC, Wrignt- 
Patterson Ar Force Base, dated 1 February 1955. : 
12. Letter, subject: Recruitment of Milicary Volunteers, dated 26 February 


- 1955. 


—. 
x. 


74 


Page 80 of 264 


Recruitment of Military Volunteers, from Second 


l3. Lecter, subject: 
Arzy co Commanding General, Chemical Corps Research and وو‎ 


Cocmand, Army Chemical Center, MD, dated 4 February 1955. 


14. Letter, subject: Enlisted Volunteers for Chemical Corps Medical 
Laboratories, from HQ, Second Army, to Commander, Class I and II f 
Iostallations, dated 21 April 1955. 

15. News Article, The Evening Sun, Baltimore, March 28, 1955, “Chemical 
Device Tests Stated." 2 l 


16. News Article, Army Times, April 2, 1955, "Army to Test New Poisons, 
Equipment on 20 Volunteers." i 


Computer printout of 9 Jannary 1976 from Biomedical Laboratory, 


Ll 
dose, and date of administracion. 


Edgewood Arsenal, of years, agent, 


subject: Human Volunteers, 


18. Disposition Form, dated 19 May 1955, 
co Asst/TCW 


from Chief, P&E Office, Medical Research Laboratories, 
Medical Research Laboratories. 


19. Merorandum for Commanding General, CMC C RDCOM, subject: Recruit- 


dent of Volunteers for CW Research, dated 6 September 1956. 


20.  Leczer Directive, subjecc: Use of Volunteers in Research, fron 
Departmenc of the army, Adjutant General, to Commanding Generals, ZI 
Armies, daced 18 April 1957. 


21. CWL Special Publication 2-13, U.S. ay Chentcal Warfare Laboratories 
Report on The Medical Research Volunteer Program, printed June 1958. 


22.  Meecing of the Medical Committee, U.S. Arny Chemical Corps Advisory 
Council, 3 November 1958. 


23. Briefing noces of 1962, citled, “Volunteer Program at CRDL." 
` Briefing by Major General Stubbs to Deputy Secretary of Defense. 


25. Briefing text 1963, Human Investigacion Facility, Directorate of 
Medical Research, U.S. Arzy Chemical Research and Development Labora- 
tories, Edgevood Arsenal, MD. Title, "Volunteer Program." 


2A Letter regarding "Use of Volunteers as Subjects of Research," dated 


29 July 1966, from Commander, Edgewood Arsenal, co Commanding General, 


U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command. 


75 


ated 


Page 81 of 264 


26. Leccer, subject: Use of Volunceers as Subjeccs of Research, dated 
17 January 1967, from The Adjucant General, Department of the Amy, co 
Commanding General, U.S. Continencal Army Command. 


27. Clinical Research Department SOP No. 5, dated 12 August 1968, 
"Volunteer Screening and Selection.” 


28. Chief of Staff Regulation No. 601-1 (CSR601-1), Department af che 
Army, Office of the Chief of Staff, dated 27 March 1973. 


29. Letter, subject:  Requirezenc for Volunteer Program, Biomedical 
lLaboratorr, Edgewood Arsenal, dated 20 September 1973. 


30. Letter, subject: TIDY Personnel of Use as Volunteers to Research, 
dated 9 October 1973, from Chief of Research and Development, Department 


of che Army, to Commander, U.S. Army Materiel Command and The Surgeon 


General. 


31. Booklet titled, "“Recrutrement and Selection of Medical Research 
Voiunceers," prepared in 1973. 


32. Latter, subjecc: Recruiment of Medical Research Volunteers, fron 
Biomedical iabcratory Director, to AMC, dated 8 January 1974. 

33. News release, trom Office of Chief of Informacion, Deparment of 
army, dated 28 July 1975. 


76 


ah 8s 


Page 82 of 264 


General 


The purpose of chís chapter is to describe briefly the evolution of coa- 
sent requirements, particularly standards regarding the ioc 
adequacy, and sufficiency of consent proceduras. 


The absolute essentialiry of voluntary consent has been the stated policy 
of the Department of Defense and the Department of che Army since the 
inception of authority to conduct experimental research witch human sub- 
jects. Secretary cf Defense Wilson's memorandum allowed that participa- 
cion of any man vas subject ta the condition of volumtary consent. This 
meant that "the person involved should have legal capacity to give consent; 
should be so situated as to be able to exarcise free power of choice, witb- 
out the intervention af any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, over- 
reaching, or other ulterior form of constraint or coercion; and should have 
sufficient knowledge and comprehension of che elements of the subject matter 
involved as to enable him to make an understanding and enlightened decision. 
This lacter elemenc required that before the acceptance of an affirmative 


decision by the experimental subject, chere should be made known to hir che ` 


nature, duracion, and purpose of the experiment; the method and means by 
which it is to be conducted; all inconveniences and hazards reasonably to 


be expected; and che effects upon his health or person which may possibly 


come from bigs participation in che experiment."* The memorandum further 
allowed that: "The duty and responsihilities for ascertaining the quality 
of the consent rests upon each individual who initiates, directs or engages 
in the experiment. It is a personal duty and responsibility which may cot 
de delegated co another with impunity." This guidance came after a thorough 
evaluation of the results of the Nuremberg Trials and lengthy deliberations 
by the Amei Forces Medical Policy Council and was signed personally by 
the Secretary of Defense. Unfortunately, the guidance, sound as it seemed, 
was available to very few, due to che "TOP SZC2EI" classification placed 
on it. In fact, it was not declassified waril August 1975, during the 
conduct of The Inspector General inquiry. However, on 30 June 1953 che 
Cozet of Staff of che Army published a memorandum through the Assistant ` 
Chief of Staff, G4, for the Chief Chemical Officer and The Surgeon General 
cf the Army which implemented the Secretary of Defense's guidance.? This 
irective was initially claasifisd "TOP SECRET," however, was regraded 
"CONFIDENTIAL" and chen to "UNCLASSIFIED" in July 1954 at the urging of 


tbe Secretary of the Army. 


77 


اتی 


= م >> سرد M‏ موہ taco‏ 74 — سے دہ 


ہت — 


Page 83 of 264 


Throughout the initial years of the Army volunteer program, the Chief of 
Staff's memorandum, known as CS: 385, was cited at all echelons as che 

"basic policy." Thus, chere is little doubt chat commanders and invesci- 
gacors involved in che use of volunteers in research had access to the 
Secretary of Defense instructions regarding the essenciality of informed 
cousent for all volunteer subjects. Nevertheless, there was evidence i 
developed during this inquiry to indicate chat in many cases consent was 
relegated to a simple, all-purpose statement to be signed by the volunteer. 
In March 1954 the Office of The Surgeon General of the Aray set forth rules 
co govern the use of human volunteers ín medical research. The first of 
these rules stressed the essentíality of voluntary consent in terms similar 
“to chose cited in the "Wilson Memorandum" and Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. 
The third rule again emphasized char Before the acceptance of consent of 
the volunteer, he must be given adequate explanarion. He should be informed 
of the nature, duracion and purpose of the experiment; the mechod and means 
by which it is to be conducted; all inconveniences and hazards reasonably 
to be expected; and the effects upon his health or person which vay possibly 


come from his participation in the experiment." 


A review of che minutes of che Chemical Corps Advisory Council meeting in 
March 1953 reflects that both military and civilian advisors were concemed 
with honering che full intent of informed voluntary cons ent. The Council 
discussed such germane problems as: the type of people char could be 
trusted to conduct experiments with humans; che ability of the investi- 
gator to present che hazards of the experiment to che volunteer in an 
unbiased manner; and che need to have the experiment clearly explained 
to the subjects beforehand, as vell as a prognostication of the outcome 
of the experiment, Co include informing the subjecz i2 che outcome was 
mot know. They further discussed the need for a comprehensive signed 
Statement in which the volunteer vould indicate his awareness of the 


experiment and its associated hazards. 
Volunteer Participation Agreement 


The first record of volunteer agreement was found in an undated, draft 
form, probably prepared within the Medical Research Laboratories in late 
1954.5 The format of the initial proposed volunteer agreement is presented 
below in its original form as a point of departure for che díacussion of 
future generations of volunteer agreements: 


NAME i 
AGE , RACE , GRAD ; Serial No. 
Organization 


Name of Nearest Relative 
Address of Nearest Relative 
Telephone Number of Nearest Relative 


gens 


.78 


Page 84 of 264 


I; , certify chat the nature of 


che experiment I have volunteered to participate in has been. 


explained fullv from the standvoint of possible hazards to 
health. I certify chat I have been familiarized with the 


—— ——————X—Á——  ———— 
cature of che experiment and che agents to be used, comen- 
race with security requirements. It is my understanding 


that the experiment is so designed and based on the results 
of animal experimentation, of che ratural history of che dis- 
ease, or other problems under study thac the anticipated results 
will justify the performance of the experiment. I understand 
further chat the experiment will be so conducted as to avoid 

, all umecessary physical and mental suffering and injury, and 
that I will be at liberty to request that che experiment be 
terminated- if ín my opinion I have reached the physical or 
mental state where continuatica of the experiment becomes 


impossible. 


I recognize that in the pursuit of certain expetiments transi- 
tory mental disturbance or unconsciousness may occur and men 
such reactions seem especially likely co occur I will be so 
advised. I recognize, also, chat under these circumstances, 

I must rely upon the skill and wisdom of the physician super- 
vising the experiment ta institute whatever medical or surgical 
measures are indicated to protect me against the possibility of 
serious or permanent injury and/or disabilicy, or death. 

.I certify that there has been no coercion, element of fraud or. 
deceit, undue moral suasion or other adverse pressure brought 
to bear in my volunteering for this study.. I have done so of 
uy own free will, completely aware of all hazards, rewards and 


recognition involved. 


DATE: NEN WITNESS: ` 
SIGNED: p WITNESS: 


Although noc documented, fit appeared that in February 1955 chis draft fora 
was forvarded by the Commander of the Medical Research Laboratories co che 
Commanding General, Chemical Corps Research and Engineering Command, for 
approval. in March 1955 the agreement form was returned to che Medical 
Research Laboratories in a revised form.’ Since only the revised agree- 
ment was attached to the returned indorsemenc, it cannot be determined 
with cerctaincy chat the draft form cited above was the one proposed. It 
is possible chat the original draft vas modified by the Laboratory Cox- 
mander prior to dispatch. Nevertheless, the revised edicion which was 
approved at tbe intermediate headquarters, wich the concurrence of the 
local legal advisor, represented a substantial change in the content af 


DENS 


79 


Page 85 of 264 


d 3 a 
of the original proposed agreement. The first two senceuces of che draft 


agreement (underlined in the draft quoted above) were changed to resd: 

TUS e , certify chat I received, read and understand a document 
entitled, Medical Research Volunteer Program, dated 15 March 1955, copy 
of which ís annexed hereto, and thac the general nature of the experiments 
I have volunteered to participate in have been explained from the stand- 
point of possible hazards co my health." It was noted that the revision 
eliminated the word "fully" from the first sencence and eliminated the 
second sentence entirely, i.e., "I certify chat I have been familiarized 
with the nacure of the experiment and che agents to be used, commensurate 
with security requiremencs.” Additioually, che v-rds "mental disturbance 
cr unconsciousness" found in the draft were replaced by che word "discom- 
ficure." There was co evidence found which would indicate the proposed 
format for volunteer agreements was ever staffed at Headquarters, Depart- 
meut of the Army, level, for efther staff information or approval. How- 
ever, دہ‎ evidence was found which would indicate that such approval or 
coordination vas required. It was clear, however, that the Department of 
Defense, Department of the Army, and The Surgeon General intended that 
che volunteer be given sufficient knowledge upon wüich to base an under- 
standing and enlightened decision. Judged solely by the content of che 
agreement the volumctesr was required to sign, the intent of the informed 
cousent policy did not appear to have been fulfilled, since the revised 
form did noc require disclosure of the chemical agent to be used or che 
full effects of the drug, nor did the publicacion appended to the volun- 
teer agreement form contain that informacion. Tt is possible, however, 
that che detailed kacwledge needed by the potenctal subject to cake a 
fully informed consent was intended to be presented to him by means other 
chan the “volunteer's participation agreement.” Assuming that vas che 
case, it may have been intended thar the publicacion "Medical Research 
Volunteer Program" cited in the agreement, accompanied by a verbal explana- 
tion ac che time of che experiment would provide che volunteer subject che 


reguired knowledge. 
The "Medical Research Volunteer Program” publicacion? contained a general 


discussion of the purpose of the program, use of medical research volun- 
Ceers, Che current program, special problems of discipline and clinical 


facilities, volunteer tecruiment, history of the program, and che cost 


Under che topic of current program ít contained a brief, 
auchority; Air Force and Navy 
inducements 


of the progran. 
general discussion of such matters as: 
participation; administration; prerequisites for selection; 
for volunteers; operacion of che medical research volunteer program 
(including quarters, rations, volunteer agreement, physical and psy- 
chiatric examinations, and test requirements); and scheduling of volun- 
teers' participation. Reading and understanding this document would 
appear Co provide the pocencial volunteer knowledge of che overall pro- 
gram and che enviroment in which he would serve his temporary duty, buc 
vould got provide detailed knowledge regarding che specific experiment or 


agent ta which be would be exposed. 


80 


مرا یں رس M M MÀ e‏ —— یلو سم — — 


ERA 


Page 86 of 264 


The second adjunct which was mentioned in the basic agreement, i.e., "an 


explanation from che standpoint of possible hazards to my health," pre- 
sumably would have been given by the medical investigator just prior to 
the conduct of the actual experiment. However, a random review of the 


available volunteer records failed co disclose evidence of such an explana- 


tion prior co approximately 1964. Later, some records reflected an indica- 


tion that some additional information may have been presented to the 


volunteer prior co a particular experiment. In these cases, the statement 


was stamped on the back of che basic agreement and read: "The nature of 
the proposed experimental procedure has been personally explained to the 
undersigned and he agrees co participate as a volunteer." The stat eneat 
vas signed by the volunteer and a medical officer. This rcatement vas 


^ainilar to cue cited in an Edgewood Arsenal Information Paper of August 


1975 and was -reportedly used during the 1967-1974 time period.’ Tae 


wording of the gtatement was opea to the conjecture of whether the explana- 
tion included macters regarding the specific agent and its effects or 
merely che experimental procedure. At any rate, documentary evidence 

of even this uíniíral compliance effort was not fouad for the early years 
(1955-1962) of the program. To the contrary, evidence that full explana- 
tions vere not given was found in che form of a news arcicle2® and personal 
lezzers fron former Cr ees seeking additional iaformation regarding 
their par-zicipacion.^ ^-^ Alchough the basic volunteer pertictpacion 
agreenent vas republished on several occasions between 1955 and 1975, 

only one other change was evident, that being the eliminacton af che 

date of publication of "Medical Research Volunteer Program." Available 
evidence of this change indicated ic was made in 1960, but could have 
been earlier. A new form initiated in 1975 vas the first major revision 
since 1955.9 Ic appeared to beczer meet the intent of informed voluntary 


consent. The revised form reads as follows: 


ls „ having attained uy eighceenth 
(18th) birthday, and otherwise having full capacity co consent, 
do hereby volunteer ta participate in an investigational study 


ancitled: 


My 


under the direction c 


- The implications of my voluntary participation; the nacure, 
duration and purpose; che mechods and means by which ic is 
to be conducted; and the inconveniences and hazards which 
cay reasonably be expected have been explained co me by 

„ and are sec forth on the reverse side 

of chis Agreemenc, which I have inictaled. I have been given 
an opportunity to ask questions concerning this investigational 
study, and any such questions have been answered to my full and 


complete satisfaction. 


81 


. 


Page 87 of 264 


* I understand chat I may at any time during the course of thia 
study: revoke my consent, and withdraw from the study without 
S prejudice, however, I may be required to undergo certain 
i . further examinations, if in the opinion of the attending 
physician, such examinations are necessary for my health 


or well being. 


Signature Date 


L vas present during the explanation referred to above, as well 
as the Volunceer's opportunicy for questions, and hereby wit- 
== ness his signature. 


ape Wimess' Signature Date 
Informed Consent 
ERU The 'Wilsou Memorandum," the Chief of Staff Memorandum 385,2 and The Surgeon 


General principles” all provided that the human subject "should have suffi 


cient knowledge and comprehension of che elements of the subject mattar 
= involved as to enable him to make an understanding and enlightened decision." 


All available evidence indicated that with one exception, which will be 
discussed under the chapter ou intelligence testing, only volwareer sub- 
V jects were used for the chemical drug or agent experiments by Army inves- 
tigators. Moreover, the great majority of the volunteers signed formal 
volunteer agreements, prior to participation in experiments. These facts 
— were made abundantly clear through formal testimony of former Medical 
Research Laboratory Commanders and investigators 1,1213, 4,15 review 
of official reports (cited elsewhere in this report); review of available 
za ` volunteer records; interview of former volunteers; and inforaal discussions 
with Medical Laboracory employees. Thus, the question vas not whether che 
subjeccs volunteered, buc whether they were provided sufficient inforza- 
tion co permic an enlightened decision. Several factors were apparencly 
TE weighed by the medical imvestigacors in an evaluation of the depch of 
knowledge made available to the volunteer. These factors vere: security 
requirements surrounding the experimental agent or testing procedure; 
= invalidacion of the objectivity of the cest results through suggestion 
of what vas expected of the volunteer under the influence of the drug/ 
agent (placebo effect); depth of available knowledge and personal con- 
z victious of che investigator regarding effects of che experimental com- 
pound; and a judgment of what izformatiou would be of value to che vol un- 
teer subject in making his decisiou. This ig not to say that these factors, 
when reviewed in respect to present knowledge, were valid considerations, 


82 


—. 
vw. 
M 
7. 
3 * 


=. ... — 
s7, t + . ۰ P E 


wee 


Page 88 of 264 


but, rather, ít is co point out that there vas apparent concern at che 
time the experiments vere conducted. The first of chese factors vas a 
concern which vas reflected in the initial draft participation agreement? 
and which stated: "I certify that I have been familiarized with che 
mature of the experiment and the agents to be used, commensurate with 
security requiremenrs." Although this phrase was not found in the 
approved edition of the volunteer agreemenc, neither was a reference 

to disclosure of the agent. Thus, che approved agreement removed the 
mandatory requirement for the investigator co disclose the actual agent 
or to determine the security classification of the drug / agent and match 
it against the security clearance of the volunteer. Ir is difficult to 
imagine an investigator withholding tbe idearificacion of the experimental 
agent from che volunteer because ic was highly classified, and there was 
no evidence found of this happening. on the other hand, if a medical 
investigator simply apprised the volunteer subject that he was about co 
receive an experimental agent called EA 1476 or EA 1729 or LSD or any 
ocher Laboratory related nomenclature, chis would appear to be nothing 
more chan paying "lip service" to the requirement. Therefore, disclosure 
of the agent name or withholding ic might not have been mataríal to the 
volunteer's decision process at the time of the experiment. However, it 
sould seem appropriate char the volunteer should have been provided, sone- 
time during the volunteer period, che medical name of che drug in the 
evenc of future adverse reactions. 


Concern for the objectivity of the experiment was reflected in the Aray 
Regulacion (AR 70-25), 31 July 1974, governing the use of volunteers as 
subjects of research 16 Much provided that: "He will be told as much 
of the nature, duration, and purpose of che experiment, the method and 
beans by wich. it is to be conducted, and che inconveniences and hazards 
to be expected, ag will not invalidate che results." If that statement 
extracted from che concexc of the regulation appears bland and incon- 
sistent with che rent of informed consent, such does not appear ca 
cave been che intent. Rather, che purpose was to illuminate chat che 
objectivity of test results was a concern of the medical investigator. 
The 1962 edition of the regulation contained a similar caution. No 
evidence was found which would indicate that any investigator allowed 
the volunteer to accept greater risks to his health or well-being simply 


for che sake of more objective test results. 


Finally, there is the question of how much of his own knowledge and 
possible contrary opinions did the investigator have to relate to the 
volunteer. Evidence reviewed during the research effort indicated chat 
the medical research personnel employed at the Chemical Corps Medical 
Research Laboratories vere among che most knowledgeable in their field 
and chac they vere kept abreast of related research findings by civilian 
investigators. Nevertheless, there were no records located which would 


اڈ 


83 


‘Arsenal by the Commanding General of the Medical Research 


Page 89 of 264 


corroborate or establish thart the investigators presented all che medical 
evidence available co che volunteer. Nor could it be determined chat what 
was reported as evidence by one investigator was accepted as such by anocher. 
The. problem of voluntary consent was noc peculiar to the Army; it was 
common to all medical investigators. In June 1966 Dr. Henry K. Beecher, 

of Harvard Medical School, a long-time consultant to the Army Surgeons 


19 addressed the problem of consent in a special article for che 


General, - 
New England Medical Journal, 18 in which he wrote: "All so-called codes 


are based on che assumption that meaningful or informed consenc is readily 
available for che asking, . . . this is very often not the case. Consent 

ih any fully informed sense may not be obtainable. Nevertheless, ic remains 
a goal coward which one must strive For sociological, ethical and clear-cut 
legal reasons. There ig no chaice in the matter. If suitably approached, 
patients will accede, on the basis of trust, to any request their physician 
may cake. At che same time, every experienced investigator ces chat l 
patiencs will often submit co inconvenience and some discomfort, if they 

do not last very long, but the usual paciest will never agree to jeopardize 
seriously his health or his life for the sake of science." His article 
continued: "In any precise sense, statements regarding consent are nean- 
ingiess unless one knows how fully the patient was informed of all risks, 

and if chese are not known, that fact should also be made clear. A far 

more dependaole safeguard than censenc is the presence of a truly responsible 
Qn 28 June 1966 Dr. Beecher's article was relayed to Edgewood 
and Development 
require- 


investigator." 


Command , 20 Be urged the Commander at Edgewood to be alert to the 
ment for informed voluntary consent on the part of each volunteer subject. 
One month later the Edgewood Arsenal Commander responded. 21 He reported 
that a copy of the Beecher article had been furnished to all professional 
personnel ac the Medical Research Laboratories, Moreover, he stated that 
“ail volunteer test subjects, after a thorough indoctrination and briefing 
on che program in which they are participating, sign a volunteer partici- 
pation agreenent in triplicate. Such procedure has been reviewed and 

the legal standpoint by representatives of the JAG." His 
that the agreemenc signed by che subject was used for the 
protection of the doctors and the Army in general and noc specifically 

as a means of communicating che hazards of an experiment co che potential 
volunteer, uch was apparently the function of the briefing chat report- 
edly preceded the signing of the agreement. However, documents regarding 
recruiting procedures and some volunteer records indicated that in most 
cases the agreement was signed prior co arrival at Edgewood Arsenal, or 
on the first day after arrival. Im either case, it was usually signed 
before the sudjecc was selected for a specific agent test. Therefore, 

ir was not likely that meaningful information regarding all hazards to 

fis healch were provided the volunteer prior to his signing the partici- 
Thus, it was apparent that full compliance with che 


approved from 
reply implied 


patioa agreement. 


84 


7۸ es 


research program was fz 


Page 90 of 264 


` 


"informed cousent" requirement relied upon oral communication between the 
resgcasitle physician and his patient, and upon the Army's ability to 

insure the presence of the required number of truly respousible investi- 
gators. Evidence chat more than 7,000 volunteers were tasted at Edgewood 
Arsenal without a single fatality or serious injury must be accepted as 
supporting evidence of the abilicy of the U.S. Any and the medical research 


staff to fulfill their responsibilities. 


Command Influence and Inducement 


Ihe problem of enticing soldiers to volunteer for the Chemical Corps medical 
irst discussed at the Chemical Corps Advisory Council 
Meeting in March 1953. Ac that time, a legal advisor to the Chemical Corps 
opined hat any offers of rewards or special privileges or other ezcicements, 
co include "hazardous duty pay" might be construed as coercion and chereby 
negate the intent of che volunteers free choice. In this regard, Chief af 
Scaff Memorandum 385 (basic authority for use of volunteers ia research) 
provided that the volunteer "should be so situated as co be able tc exer- 
cise free power of choice, withour the intervencion of any element of force, 
fraud, deceit, duress, over-reaching, or other ulterior form of constraint 
or coercion. . . ."? The current regulation (AR 70-25, 31 July 1974) 
governing use of volunteers as subjects of research provided that che volun- 
teer "musg give consent freely wichout being subjected co amy force or 


duress, ^9 


Evidence assembled during the research effort reflected char several 
imducements vere offered to persuade the soldier to volunteer. Those 
inducements vere listed in an official oublicacion and presented co 
fascallacion commanders throughout the Army for publication as recruit- 

ing materiai. They included: 30 days of temporary duty (IDT) ac $1.50 

per diem or $45 per month (more chan half of a private's monthly pay in 

zany cases): precise of a three-day pass each weekend; berzer living and 
recreational accommodations than normally available ac zazy troop ínscalla- 
tions, such as air-conditioned rooms and hospital type beds; relief from 

all facigue cype details; an opportunity Co receive a medical examination 
not norzailv available during other military duty assignments; a guarantee 
of a letzer of commendation that would be placed in che volunteer s official 
.personnel iiie; and a sense of patriotic contribution to the nation’s 
nacional security. These rewards may appear minimal men viewed in 

terms of today's Army and economy, however, ia the 1950s and early 1960s 
Chey represented substantial rewards. No evidence vas found to indicate 
that any of che privileges were unauchorized or illegal, however, che 
ecphasis placed on them during recruiting efforts appeared co be an 
attempc co influence the prospective subject's decision by offering 


promises of special privileges or rewards. 


85 


a4 D 


Page 91 of 264 


` 


‘Another matter discussed during the Chemical Corps Advisory Council meet- 
ing of March 19534 was the need to remove any appearance of military duty 
from the recruiting process. In other words, the soldier was not to be 
given any reason to believe that he was expected to volunteer or that 
volunteering his services was considered a part of his military duty. 
Although it was not established that commanders or recruiters misused 
their authority, rank, or pos: tion to influence soldiers co volunteer, | 
there vere indications chat application of the power of command, expert 
knowledge, and position were employed in a manner to suggest possible 

The initial Army directive chat authorized recruitment of 
volunteers in 195722 did more than merely extend the geographical area 
from which volunteers could be sought; it also assigned che Army area 
commanders a quota of volunteers to be furnished on a monthly basis. 

The reasons for the directive were twofold: first, inadequate numbers 

of volunteers were forthcoming from the Second Army area, which vas che 
previous area of reczuitnent, and second, it vas to impress wit and 
installation commanders of the need to provide volunteers. Clearly, 

che direccive advocated strict observance of che highest ethical and 
moral practices in all recruiting efforts. Still, it is noc re as ori 
able co assume that the Army area commander would consider himself 
obligated to emphasize the program to the extent necessary to fulfill 

his quota. Evidence of che method of recruitment indicated thac instal- 
lacioun commanders vould direct che assemblage of a Maſnum of 300 enlisted 
den without regard to che volunteer prerequisites for the purpose of a 
specialized briefing given during normal duty hours by a Medical Research 
Laboratory recruiter. The assignment of quotas co military commanders, 
the involuntary assemblage of Large oumbers of soldiers, and the skillful 
presentation of selected material regarding the volunteer program by a 
-i1litary officer (in some cases a physician) could have given che pot en- 
tial volunteer che impression that his participation was directly related 
to pertorsance of his military duties. 


coercion. 


In retrospect, full compliance could have been obtained by assigning 
commanders ceilings rather than quota; and orientation briefing attendance 
should have been striccly voluntary and conducted during nonduty hours. 
Moreover, local commanders should have been provided nore detailed infor- 
macton about the program co permit an adequate review of the presentation 
to insure that his troops were aware of all the facts available. The 
lacter responsibility apparencly was neither recognized nor fulfilled 

in the early years of the recruiting efforts and perhaps noc in later 
years as well. An example of this failure was reflected in a February 
1955 letter from the Chief of Staff, Second U.S. Aray, which announced 
that Second Army would only be responsible for che assembly of prospective 
volunteers and chat all orientation, identificacion, and selection of 


volunteers would be handled entirely by Chemical Corps personnel .23 Other 
forms of subtle pressures, applied to persuade military personnel to volun- 


teer will be discussed in later sections concerning field ces ts. 


86 


BTS 


a ۹ . A 


Page 92 of 264 


M 


In summary, the evidence clearly reflected that every possible medical 
consideracion was observed by che professional investigators at the Medical 
Research Laboratories; volunteers were not fully informed, as required, 
prior ta their participation; and the methods of procuring their services, 
in many cases, appeared not to have been in accord with che intent of 
Department of the Army policies governing use of volunteers in research. 


87 


AS 


Page 93 of 264 


ra م‎ ; FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER VI 


— E; Memorandum for the Secretary of Amy, Navy; and Air Force, from 
= Secretary of Defense, subject: Use of Human Volunteers in Experi- 


dental. Research, dated 26 February 1953. 


B 2: Memorandum through Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4, for Chief Chemical 
Officer and The Surgeon General, from Chtef of. Staff of the Army, 
subject: Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 30 June 1953. 


~ 3. Document, subjecc: Use of Human Volunteers in Medical Research, 
Principles, Polices and Rules of the Office of The Surgeon General, 


E ` dated 12 March 1954. 


4. Chemical Corps Advisory Council Meeting of March 1953, Medical 
and Related Problems Committee minutes. 


3. Drafz Volunceer's Participation Agreement, prepared by Chemical 


Corps Medical Laboratories, Army Coemical Center, MD, undated. 


6. Letter, subject: Human Volunteer Agreement Form, from Commander, 
Medical Research Laboratories, to Commanding General, Chemical Corps 
Research and Engineering Command, dated 24 February 1955. 


Te lst [nodorsement to Letter in reference 6, dated 17 March 1955, 
7یئ‎ from Commanding General, QLC R&E Command, to Commander, Medical 
nx , Research Laboratories. 


8. Chemical Warfare Laboratory Special Publicacion 2-13, The Medical 
پل‎ Research Volunteer Program, dated June 1958. 


o Information Paper, subject: Policy Review for Use of Human 
— Volunteers, from Edgewood Arsenal, dated 29 August 1975. 


10.  Volunteer's Participation Agreement, U.S. Army Chemical Research 
and Developuent Laboratories, U.S. Aray Chemical Center, MD, A CLC 
m Form 6-9, Revised 22 June 1960. 


ll. Testimony of Dr. (COL, Rec) Norman W. Elton. 


12. Testimony of Dr. (COL) James S. Ketchum. 


ages 


&8 


Page 94 of 264 


— 


13. Tescimony of Dr. (COL, Ret) Joseph R. Blair. 


14. Testimony of Dr. (COL, Ret) Nicholas G. Bocctiglteri. 


1. E of MAJ (Ret) Robert Clovis. 


16. Army Regulation 70-25, dated 31 jury 1974, Use of Volunteers as 


-Subject of Research. 


17. Chemical Corps Medical Laboratories Special Report MS Nr 71, 
First Psychochemical Conference, dated 12 May 1954. 2 


18. Article, New England Medical Journal, by Henry K. Beecher, M.D., 


"The Problem of Cousent," dated June 16, 1966. 


19. Surgeon General Directive, Establishment of Ad Hoc Advisory 
Committee on Use of Volunteers as Subjects of Research, dated 


9 December 1963. 


20. Commanding General, Medical Research and Development Command Letter, 
subject: Informed Consent, to Commander, Edgewood Arsenal, dated 

28 Juma 1966. 

21. Commander, Edgewood Arsenal, Letter, subject: Informed Consent, 
to Commanding General, Medical R&D Command, dated 29 July 1966. 


22. Department of the Army Letter to 6 Generals of ZI Artes, 
subject: Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 18 April 1957. 
23. Headcuarters, Second U.S. Army, Letter to Commanding General, 
Cnemical Corps Research and Engineering Command, subject: Recruitment 
of Military Valunteers, dated 4 February 1954. 
24. Chemical Research and Development Laboratories Special Publicacion 
2-44, subject: Medical Research Volunteers, dated August 1961. 

Re- 


25. Army Materiel Command Letter to TRADOC and FORSCOM, subject: 
cruitment of Medical Research Volunteers, dated 25 June 1973. 


26. Aray Times Article of 14 February 1959, titled, "2 Men Cited as 
Human Guinea Pigs," from Camp Irwin, CA. "Neither of che men was told 
what he vas doing. Regularly they swallowed pills, took shots and 
underwent periods in che gas chamber, but سو چون‎ of tae men knew whac he 
was taking or what the experiments might prove. 


89 


"E 


CAMP 


Page 95 of 264 


27. Personal Lecter from Army Private to the Commander of the Medical- 
Research Laboratory, dated 5 December 1970, requesting details of the 
type of psychochemical drug, dose and possible effects on his future 


^ 


offspring. 


28. Personal inquiry from Army Specialist om ll August 1967 requesting 
knowledge of drug he had received seven months earlier and its possible 


effect on his mental health. 


s, 

--— 
* 

. 
2 


Page 96 of 264 


CHAPTER VII 
INITIAL CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENT EXPERIMENTATION 


AT EDGEWOOD ARSENAL 


General 


ES The purpose of this chapter is fa briefly describe the research conducted 
ac the Medical Research Laboratory as a preliminary to and concurrent with 

7 human studies. Additionally, it will highlight the methodology of the 
to include supervision, controls, scaffing, medical facilities, 


= research, 
and tbe quantity of volimteers used at Edgewood Arsenal in chemical warfare 


tescing. 


Edgewood Arsenal 


E Zdigewood Arsenal, located approximately 20 miles aorctheast of 3altizore, MD, 
was originally purchased in 1917 and named Gunpowder Reservation. Tt was 
renamed Edgewood Arsenal in 1918 when ít became the home of the newly formed 
7 Chemical Warfare Service. The importance of the Reservation was increased 
in 1920 men che Chemical Warfare School moved from Lakehurst, NJ, to be 
co-located with the Chemical Warfare Service at Edgewood. Edgewood con- 
tinued co develop as the hud of chemical warfare activities; in 1942 irc 
7 was renamed the Chemical Warfare Center with the following sub-commands: 
Chemical Warfare Technical Command; the Chemical and Medical Laboratories; 
a Proving Ground; Chemical Warfare School; Chemical Officer Candidate 
I School; Chemical Warfare Board; and che Eastern Chemical Depoc. By 1946 
the population of che command was approximately 17,000 military and civil- 
ian employees; ac which time it was renamed the Army Chemical Center. 
Organizational titles changed frequently between World War II and che 
che Korean War, but the post remained che focal point of A= 
By 1951 there were three major subordinate 
commands located at the center: the Research and Eagineering Command 
— (Sorrerly che Technical Command); che Materiel Comand (Hr CON); and 
che Training Command. The Research and Engineering Command consisted 
of the Chemical Research Laboratory, Medical Laboratory, and the Engineer- 
5 ing agency. A year later the Medical Laboratory was renamed the Chemical 
Corps Medical Laboratories; the Training Command (including the Chemical 
School) relocated to Fort McClellan, AL. Prior to the summer of 1962 che 
5 ۱ various organizations and activities located at che Aruy Chemical Center 
m were under che control of the Chief Chemical Officer, Department of the 
army. Following a major Army reorganizacion in 1962 che past became che 
responsibility of the newly formed Army Materiel Command. Also in 1962, 
the cicle of the installation was changed back to Edgewood Arsenal. 4 = 


stare of 
chemical warfare activities. 


AL 


Ts 
. 
T 
it 


Page 97 of 264 


year later the Arsenal absorbed the Munitions Command (initially a con- 
trol headquarters under the Army Materiel Command); the Arsenal headquarters 
also assumed operational responsibility for Fort Detrick, MD, Pine Bluff, 
AR, and Rocky Mountain Arsenal, CO, which were designated as sub-posts of 
Edgewood. In 1966, however, the Biological Research Laboratory at Fort 
Detrick was separated from the Edgewood command. Finally, in 1971 Edgewood 
Arsenal was merged with another nearby Army Materiel Commend installation, 
Aberdeen Proving Ground. Essentially, Edgewood Arsenal bas been the center 
of chemical warfare research and development for the past 57 years. There 
fore, it is not strange to find that che great bulk of the use of volrnteers 
in medical (chemical) research was conducted at that installation. More- 
over, the majority of the Army's experts in the chemical research field 


were stationed. at Edgewood. 


In addition to being the research hub involving human subjects, Edgewood 
served equally important functions ín the development of chemical com- 
pounds and the conduct of preliminary tests to insure that huzan testing 


was safe and productive. 


The preliminary laboratory research was absolutely necessary in order to 
insure compiiance with the basic policy governing the use of humans in 
research, Chief of Staff Memorandum 385, which provided: "The experi- 
ment should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, 
unprocurable by other methods or means of study, and not random and umneces= 
sary ín mature. The number of volunteers used shall be kept at a minimum. 
The experiment should be so designed and based on the results of animal 
experiments and a knowledge of the natural history of the disease or other 
problem wunder study that the anticipated results will justify the perform: 
ance of the experiment. The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid 
all unnecessary physical and mental suffering and injury. No experiment 
should be conducted where there is a prior reason to believe that death 
or disabling injury will occur. The degree of risk to be taken should 
never exceed that determined by the humanitarian importance of the problem 
to be solved by the experiment. Proper preparations should be made and 
adequata facilities provided to protect tha experimental subject against 
even remote possibilities of injury, disability or death. The erpe rant 
should be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons. The highest 
degree of skill and care should be required through all stages of the 
experiment of those who conduct or engage in the experíment."2 


In order to be in full compliance with the Department of the Aray regula- 


tions and policies, scientists were involved in a graat deal of painstaking 
research long before volunteers were used. The preliminary work often took 


years. 


92 


— . — MÀ — . 


میں 


Page 98 of 264 


س 
SEIT‏ 


The first and perhaps foremost prerequisite for che conduct of a quality 
program would appear to be the availability of scientifically qualified 
persons. In that regard, historical reports reflected that in 1954 the 
Medical Research Laboratory was staffed with an abundance of highly quali- 
fied personnel. There were 32 college educated officers, 12 of which vere 
medical doctors from some of the country's best medical schools, 3 of the 
officers held Ph.D.s, and l was both a Ph.D. and an MD. Of the 130 enlisted 
scientific and professional personnel (ZSP?) assigned, 128 held college 
degrees, 55 beld Master of Science degrees, and İl were Ph.D.s. The 117 
civilian employees ranged ín grade from GS-7 to GS-17 and included numerous 
Ph.D.s and MDs from such leading universities as: Harvard Medical College, 


"University of Munich, University of Pennsylvania, Joma Eopkins University, 


Princeton University, Cambridge, Duke, University of Berlin, Columbia, 
Cornell, and Stanford.l Im addition to its own select staff, the Medical 
Laboratories bad continuous input from the private sector of medical research 


in the form of contractual arrangements, chemical and medical advisory coun- 


cils, industrial liaison, and published literature. 


The medical and laboratory facilities and equipment were reported as among 
the best available. The current modern facilities were opened in 1968. 
Thus, wich a competent staff and complete facilities, che Medical search 
Laboratory at Edgewood vas in an excellent position to conduct the prelim- 
inary zesearch necessary to insure that only the most promising chemical 


compouncs vere used on human subjects. 


Preliminary Procedures 


There were several ways that chemical compounds came to the attention of 
the Medical Research Laboratories. Some of those were: discovery by - 
Medical Laboratory employees through hasic research or during experiments 
with other chemicals; review of professional literature; accidental or 
incenticnal discovery by industry; and recommendations from other medical 
research institutions (both in the U.S. and other countries). 


However, che most prevalent source of chemical compounds appeared to be 
from che Chemical Corps Industrial Liaison Program. An example of this 
method vas the discovery of benzilaces (3Z), the most useful of che known 
incapacitating agents developed by the Chemical Corps. It was reported 
hac as of October 1960 che most potent benzilate candidate agent under 
consideration by the Chemical Corps vas agent EA 2277. Reportedly, ic 

vas obtaiaed in 1958 chrough the Chemical Corps Industrial Liaison Program 
from Eofimann-—LaRoche, Inc., of Nutley, NJ, where animal and limited 

human exposures had been conducted prior to nominacing the agent to the 


Chemical Corps. 


aA aN * 


93 


Page 99 of 264 


: The Chezical Corps screened this compound, along with thousands of others 


received from their various sources, to determine ics potential military 


Once che compounds with potential milicary value were selected 


usefulness. 
These 


from che mass of candidate agents, more detailed studies vould begin. 
studies vere known as "inicial coxicity screening." Becween 1950-1975 
approximately 34,500 compounds were studied. Following the initial screen- 
ing, each compound was reviewed in light of its potential zilitary value. 
Records reflecced thac 2,077 agents. survived the inicial review. Those 


agents selected for further chemical analysis were divided into three 


general categories: proposed irritants; ‘ncapacitants; and lethal agents. 


e proposed incapacitating agents vere next studied in animal ‘ahevior 


tests, using several different species (still in the chemical laboratories). 
Next, the candidate agents were presented to the Medical Research Laboracories 
for addicional research. Initial medical research included an evaluation of 
the data available from the Chemical Laboratory, evidence from industry, 
private inscitucions, and cechrícal liceracure.  Addicionally, the labora- 
tory scarf? conducted pathology and pharmacology studies. Following these 
evaluations, a second major review was conducted co further reduce che 

number of candidate compounds. Records reflected char 2,026 of the available 
2,077 agents were rejected ar this stage of the research cycle. The remain- 
ing 51 candidate agents were submitted for pre-clinical cescing at -he 
Medical esearch Laboratories. 


The next laboratory studies involved research n numerous animal species, 
prophylaxis studies, and cherapy studies. Only 32 candidate agents report- 
edl’ survived the pre-clinical research phase of the cycle. Those agents 
vere selected for clinical testing wich volunteers. 


It is important to aote that candidate agents entered into the research 
life cycle throughout che 25-year period. Moreover, they did not proceed 


at a uniicrm speed, rather, cheir rate of progress vas dependeat upon the 
priority given the: agent and the state-of-the-art in relacion co che agent. 


Cuce the agent passed che pre-clinical or animal testing phase if was con- 
sidered safe for human experiments. This belief vas presented to Congress 
ia 1959 hy the then Chief, Clirical Research Division, Chemical Warfare 
Laboratory, Army Chemical Center, MD, when he testified regarding che 
volunteer program at Edgewood. Be stated that the volunteer program had 
been conducted for four years and it "Encompasses medical protection: and 
medical creacment against lechal compounds as vell as che study of com- 
pounds mich ve feel are perfectly safe co put in the human. To say safe 
it Deans extensive vork over a period of years in which ve are totally 
satisfied that there are no acute effects from this compound that persist 
and there are uo chronic effects that may come later. "5 


94 


<.. 
fS 
bt 


I 


Page 100 of 264 


1 
Available records and testimony indicaced that once an agent vas determined 
to be acceptable for human experimentation, a formal protocol had to be 
submitted (assuming it was a new agent) to obtain approval for use in humans. 
This request (the detailed procedure vas discussed in an earlier chapter) 
was submitted through Chemical Command channels, through The Surgeon General, 
for the Secretary of the Army's approval. Once the authority to use volun- 
teers to test a specific class of drugs was granted, a detailed research 
pian was prepared bv the medical investigator. 


The plan normally included a listing of che investígators, to include che 
medical doctors, clinical research assistants, Medical Service Corps per- 
sonnel, nurses, and aidmen required; full juscification for the experiment; 
the objective of the experiment; che estimated time and cost of the experi- | 
went; a detailed description of the approach to be used co arrive at the 
objective of che experiment; technical considerations such as special equip- 
ment or procedures required during the conduct of the experiment; 4 descrip- 
tion of each drug plamed for use during the experiment; a detailed liscing 
of all references relating to the experiment and similar earlier experinents; 
che number of volunteers required for conduct of the experiment, along with 
the prerequisites those volunteers mist meer in order co qualify as suitable 
subjects; che name of the responsible physician and where he could be contacted 
en a 24-hour basis; and a complete list of safety requirements and considera- 
tions peculiar to the experiment. 


Prior to execution, the plan had: zo be approved by a Medical Board, which 
normally consisted of: the responsible physician; che Chief of the Clinical 
Branch; the Chief of the Medical Research Division; the Deputy 


Research 
Director of the Biomedical Laboratory; and the Direccor of the Bicmedical 
Laboratory. Although the citles and membership of the Medical Board and 


che formal nature of the approval varied somewhat over the 25-year period, 
the practice appeared to be generally che same. 


Follewing the research life cycle, formal protocol approval for use of the 
drug, local Medical Board approval of the experimental plan, and oftea che 
self-exposure of che investigator, the experiment vas ready for use on 
volunteers recruited and screened under the volunteer program. Tr should 
be noted chat although some witnesses indicated mar the medical investi- 
gator always tested a new compound or agent on himself before using it on 


a volunteer, such was not the case. There was no evidence of a general 


practice or unwritten requirement to do thís or even that a majority of 
medical investigators supported such a practice. 


The specific number of volunteers authorized in the research plan vas 
selected from the pool that was available ar the Medical Research Labora- 
tory. Methods of briefing, selection, supervision, and control varied 
according co che type of experiment, desires of the medical investigator, 


میڈ 


95 


Page 101 of 264 


and local policy. However, evidence of a 1964 LSD experiment at Edgewood 
appeared co represent the normal method of conducting volunteer experiments 
with chat ctype of drug. 8 In that experiment, the investigator's reports 
indicaced thac 16 subjects were selected from a group of 45 volunteers on 
the basis of a psychiatric interview. Also, all 16 had previously received 
a complete physical examination, laboratory studies which included EEG, 
MMPI, and an interview by the screening paychologist. The 16 subjects 
were explained the program in general terms, told of specific drug tests, 
and other cast activities thar would take place. All the men readily 
agreed to participate. The group was then assigned to che same set of 
squad rooms and a senior master sergeant with neuro-psychiatzic training 

^ and experience was assigned to a room in the same area. Further, each 
individual was assigned a specific partner, from among bis roommates, with 
whom he would always be scheduled on any test he would undergo. Other 
controls that were reported were: each individual would complete a per- 


sonal check lisc twice daily (the report would list his mood, health, 
administrative complaints, and comfort); the master sergeant supervisor 
would tabulate the lists daily and initiate any required corrective accion. 
Each individual mec bi-weekly with a psychiatrist co learn more of the 
process and to vent his personal opinions. Finally, the report held chat 
all psychochenical studies required nurses to be ín attendance on a 24 hours 


a day basis and the mainctemance of detailed behavior check lists fcr each 


volunceer subject. 


Other experiments tay have been documented in greater or lesser detail 
than described above, however, this experiment was cited to show the 
average method of operation for a psychochemical experiment. 


Field Test 


fiis 


Determining the effect of a psychochemical agent on the morale and e 
ciency of a military mic was the objective of testing that class of drugs 
ron the inception of che volunteer program. Evidence of che purpose of 
Psychochecical research was found in che report of the "First ?sychochez- 
cal Conference," which was held in May 1954.9 At chat conference many 
of che leading psychochecical medical researchers presented che resulcs 
of experiments they had conducted on their own and under Army contract. 
Ac the conclusion of che meeting ane of their recommendations was "Field 
"trials are nov indicated. These should include the effectiveness of 
performance of soldiers subjected co psychochemicals in the execution 


of war games all the vay from desk levels to field levels." 


à similar recommendation was offered by che "Ad Hoc Study Group ou Psycho- 
chemical Agents" in their 19 November 1955 reporz to che Office of the 
Assistant Secretary of Defense, حم‎ J The group's report, kmown as che 
"Wolff Report,” carried a recommendation that "The experiment, as outlined 


96 


ہیں 


V 


“on Psychochemical Agents. 


Page 102 of 264 


in decail in chis report, be carried out with volunteer units as soon as 
practicable," and chat "The potential and promise in che use of psycho- 
chemical agents in warfare be re-evaluated upon completion of small -U t 


experiments." 


preliminary studies conducted sith animals and with individual 
volunteer subjects were preparatory to evaluation of military mits, "field 
desc, or "applied research." Field tests Chat were conducted away from 

the immediate area of Edgewood Arsenal will be discussed ín the next chapter. 
The first, reported applied research with any semblance of a military unit 
was reported at a February 1957 Medical Research Contractor's Conference 
A military member of the Medical Research Labora- 
tory staff reported thac four volunteers vere organized into an infancry 
team in order to test their ability to decontaminate themselves of a simu- 
lated chemical agent while under the influence of LSD. The test, which 

took place in 1956, was conducted on the Edgewood Arsenal Reservacion. 

The four men were given an oral dose of LSD prior co the start of the 

test. While they were digging a foxhole an airplane passed overhead and 
sprayed a water solution which simulated a chemical agent attack. The 
task was to remove the solucion from the exposed skin by using the approved 
decontamination procedures.+ The principal finding reported was char the 
men performed all tasks as well after ingestion of LSD as chey had without 
the effects of the drug. However, it was judged chal their notivacion had 
been affected and that more difficult mental tasks would better measure 

the incapacitating abilicy of LSD. Thus, more tests were planned for 1957. 


Thus, the 


e 


In 1957 several additional iteld type tests were conducted in and around 
Edgewood Arsenal. The first of these tests involved che use of a NIXE 
missile uniz's radar van at Aberdeen Proving Ground (an Army post located 
five miles from Edgewood Arsenal). Available records indicated chat 16 


volunteers received LSD prior to attempting to perform che cracking and 
radar equipnent.l3,14. 


recording operations associated with the employment of 

Additional field type tests were conducted at Edgewood in December 1957. 
Those studies included: 20. enlisted men performing military drill (march- 
ing) under che influence of LSD to evaluate their ability and willingness 
to the discipline of close order drill; 12 volunteers were eval- 


to adhere 
uated to determine their abiliry to don chemical protective masks and per- 


form skin deconcaminacion exercises similar to those held a year earlier; 
8 men performed disassembly and assembly of the military rifle after having 
ingested LSD; another group of 28 volunteers were evaluated for their 
ability to concentrate on volleyball competition after LSD ingestion.12 


Physiological and Material Studies 


In the early years of the volunteer program, the majority of volunteers 
were used in physiological studies and military clothing and equipment 


<.. 
a 
-. 
— 
* 


97 


Page 103 of 264 


For the mosc part, these tests did noc involve the use of drugs; 2 
An z 


cests. 
or in some cases very minute quanrícies of a chemical compound. 


Information Paper prepared for volunteers ín 1957 by the Office of che 
Chief, Chemical Officer, Departmenc of the Army, described the following 
ctype ceses: 18 (1) "Evaluacion of Chemical Warfare Equipment. Various 
designs of gas masks and protective hoods are worn for short periods to 
test the relative merits of each model. If the item leaks, the wearer 
experiences a slight eye irritation which ig not even sufficient to pro- 
duce tears. If chis occurs, the volunteer leaves the test chamber ime- 
diately. The eye effects disappear within several minutes from the time 
of leaving che chamber. (2) Adaptation of Defensive Items to Natural 
Busan Capacities. Certain items of protective clothing are worm under 
controlled conditions ta determine their value to che soldier under vary- 
ing conditions. which might be encountered in the field. There will be 


lictle or no discomfort or fatigue." 

Several examples of the non-drug related studies were cited in a special 
publication entitled, "Medical Reasearch Volunteers - Peacetine Heroes. "l5 
For example, volunteers tested the serviceability of experimental chemical 
field alarms. To do this, volunteers were placed ín a safe container such 
as a van ín order to test an alarz (developed to alert troops of the presence 
of a chemical agent); the van was then moved to a contaminated area and the 
volunteer would attempt co determine the chemical concentration af the out- 
side enviroment.  Ochers tested such equipment as protective air locks for 
operational combat vehicles.. The volunteer would dress in fully protective 
cloching and enter into che air lock (sealed chamber) from a simulated con- 
taminated area, discard his outer garments as if they were contaminated, 
and then enter into che work area of the van. Thus, providing data on 
speed of operaciou and adaptability of the equipment to field usage. 
Volunteers also tested mechods of feeding troops in a chemically contam- 
inated atmosphere. Under simulated conditions, they tested equipment chat 


could enable a military tactical unit co feed its soldiers while in a gassed 


area. 5ع1محصت‎ of physiological studies were: co have volunteers walk a 


treadmill in a variety of temperatures to determine che extent to which 
sweat would reduce the protective qualicies of impregnated clothes; and 
volunteers would scale barriers while wearing a protective chemical cask 
ta allow sciencists do evaluate any restriction the mask caused to che 
volunteer's rate and volume of breaching. Hundreds of such tests were 
routinely conducted and constituted a major use of the volunteers. 
Statistical records indicated that between 1955 and 1963 LIX of che 
available volunteer time vas used in lethal agent experiments; 272 of 

che tice vas used in testing various incapacitating agents, 13% in physio- 
logical studies; and 492 in material studies. 


Ancther record reflected chat medical volunteers were used a total of 
240,442 hours during che period 1958-1962.19 These hours were broken dow 


accotding to experimental categories: 


REX 


* 


98 i 


n‏ سس 


Page 104 of 264 


{ - 

E l.  Incapacítacing compounds 29.97 

— 2. Lechal compounds (anticholinesterases, cylinide) 14.5% 

3. Not control compounds 14.22 

E 4. Protective equipment and cloching (masks and 2322 

3 climatic effects) 
= 5. Effects of drugs and environmental stress on. 6.4% 
3 . human physiological mechanisms l 

— 6. Development evaluation and test procedures 12.52 
(compounds in body fluids, stress conditions) 

— 7. Human factors tests (ability of volunteers to 2.1% 

follow iascruccions) 
7.22 


= 8. Other (visual studies, sleep deprivation, | 
incapacitating compounds’ effects on rifle tean) 


2 Quantity of Participacion in Medical Research Volunteer Program 


l Several factors hindered determination of the exact aumber of volunteers 

i Chat participated in the chemical warfare medical research program. Infor- 
92 mation vas made available, through testimony of some witnesses as well as 
informal discussions with past and present Medical Laboratory exployees, 
that some medical investigators exposed chemselves (as vell as other 
informal volunteers from the medical staff) to various chemical agents, 

For the most part, records of those exposures are not available. 24,22 
This figure was estimated by che staff at che Biomedical Laboratory co be 
115 different informal volunteers. No evidence vas found to substantiate 


~ or refute that figure. 


Another factor chat may have affected accurate recording of the number of 
7 volunteers involved in drug experiments vas che Medical Research Labora- 
tory's policy concerning access to volunteer medical records. In February 
1969 it was reported that approxirately 300 volunteer medical records were 
missing Son their dora place of storage. 24 It was apparent chat for 
the first 14 years of volunteer work, che Medical Research Laboratory had 
liberal policies concerning access to and use of che experimental data on 
medical volunteers, co include their case records. Although chose proce- 
T dures vere apparently strengthened after February 1969, chere exists the 
possíbilicy that some af che volunteer records were not recovered or chat 
important data vas removed from the records over a period of years. inally, 


E ash n 


99 


Page 105 of 264 


3 


a 


E detezuzining vith certainty che quantity of volunteer participation over 
20-year pericd vas hampered by conflicting reports. Hcwever, an approxíra- 

tion of the oumber of volunteers used by che Biomedical Laboratory (formally 
Medical Research Laboratories) vas decermined from reports and technical 


data made available during the research effort. 


The first of those reports was prepared in 1958, three and one half years‏ دہ 
after the records indicated the volunteer program began at Zdgewood Arsenal. 20‏ | ' 
The publication contained data that 758 volunteers had served between May‏ ' 
a 1955 and lune 1958. Four years later another special publicationl? reflected‏ 
that as of June 1962, a total of 2,588 volunteers had served at Edgewood.‏ 
Other.data EE che number at volunteer subjects used in experiments‏ 
was found in an Informacion Paper published in 1964. 18 fe vas reported‏ 
Bn that ac the end of 1963, 2,863 volunteers had been received ac Edgewood's‏ 
Medical Laboratory. The figures in chat report were ín conflict wich boch‏ 
of the earlier reports; the variance between the figures on a yearly basis‏ 


= was ag much as 272 in oue year group. i 
An undated recruicing and selection booklet that apparently had been pub- 

— lished in 197417 contained a chart citled, "Participation in Medical 

Research Volunteer Program." Although ihe exact figures were not pre~ 

a bar graph display indicated thac approximately 6,605 volunteers 

participared at Edgewood as of 30 June 1973. Again, Chere vere differences 

> . in the figures found in chis report and earlier reports. Finally, a acte- 
book reportedly kept 5 over che years contained a fifth ser of volun- 


seated, 


- teer participation figures. These figures tocaled 6,983 volunteers wit 
bez cers, or 6,675 different volunteer subjects from 


2 308 of them being repeaters, 
May 1955 through July 1975. These figures also differed from the other 
tn order to provide the best possible documented estimate of 


reports. 
yearly figures contained 


8 voluztesr participants at Edgewood Arsenal, the 
in the five different sources vere افو تو‎ for the years they overlapped 


each other and the average figure was used. 
The figures discussed so far incl nde volunteer participants at Edgewood, 
not the volunteers in "field tests" at other military posts. Moreover, 
= these figures represent the number of volunteers avaitable for all types 
E ents and aot., jusz those involved in drug or agent type experi- 


ps cf per 
ments. The number of vclunteers that actually received a drug or experi- 


Zeztal chemical compound was even more difficult to determine exactly. 

i Relatively lictle evidence regarding which volunteers received mich drug 
was found. Volunteer case records maintained at the Biomedical Laboratory 
at Edgewood were, ín many cases, incomplete, and, as mentioned, some records 

m Ar have been lost. However, they represenred che best available evidence 
of which valunteers received drugs and which did not. 


— 
EM 
T. 
E 
«y 


Page 106 of 264 


' Accordingly, selected data from those records was prepared in the fora of, 
a computer princouc ín January 1976. That printout was used as che 
principal document in determining the nuzber of volunteers used in drug 
tests. The approximate number of volunteer participants used at Edgevood's 
Medical Laboratory and the number of volunteers used in drug or chemical 
agent experiments as reflected in the available individual volunteer cese 
m record are indicated in Chart 1 at the end of this chapter. The chart 
also shows the percentage of the available volunteers that were used in 


drug / agent experiments during each of the 20 years of the program. 


Irre arities 


During the review of the records and reports conceraing che conduct af che 
volunteer program at Edgewood Arsenal, several irregularities were dis- 
closed. Although the errors did not appear to distract from the cverall 
worth of the program, they are brought out in this report so that future 
errors of this or of a similar nature can be avoided. 

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, scme medical investigators conducted 
E self-exposures and allowed other technical personnel to "inforzally" 
volunteer for drug / agent experiments. This practice, ao macter how vell 
coatrolied, and admirable, should be disallowed unless it is properly 
approved anc the subjects receive the full benefit of the standard medical 
examination and a complete record of their exposure is maintained in the 
Same manner as other subjects. Otherwise, proper inspection of the pro- 
gram as well as medical follow-up, when required, is impossible. 


Paragraph 4 of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. (CS:385) of 30 June 1953 
E: stated: ^". . . ag a general rule volunceer subjects should be males 
a under 35 years of age, with no physical or mental diseases."? This 
guidance vas repeated in various other official publications, includin 
CwL-SP 2-13, mich reportedly vas, required reading for all voluzteers. 
No evidence vas found to indicate that restrictions against che use of 
females or males of 35 or more years of age were revised prior to 1974, 
On the contrary, permission to use female volunteers in chemical warfare 
research vas requested in November 1958 and disapproved based on the 
recomendacion of The Army Surgeon General m December 1958.28 Evidence 
was available co establish thac the policy was violated both by the use 
5 of females and of males 35 years of age or older. In facc, in February 
> 1959 the Deputy Commander of the Chemical Warfare Laboratories reported 
nis discovery of a violation of the prohibition against che use of females 
as subjects in a chemical warfare experiment. ?3 Additionally, the com- 
puter printout of volunteers used in drug/agent studies at Edgewood26 
zeľlected that two female subjects were used ín a test of a chemical 
nerve agent in 1957. Furthermore, informal discussions with Biomedical 
Laboratory personnel índicated that several other females were used in 


non—-drug related experiments conducted at Edgewood, 


A اہی‎ 


101 


Page 107 of 264 


i A review of an Edgewood Arsenal volunteer participation notebook “> and 
volunteer work sheets for 1960 and 1961^' revealed male subjects age 35 
cr older were used on at least 31 occasions between 1960 and 1965 in 


zi violation of Army policy. 


Finally, cescimouy of witnesses, informal discussions, and a review of 
> some volunteers! official medical records disclosed that no mention of 
Che volumceers' participation or the drug / agent received was reported 
in individual official medical records. Since the majority of compounds 
cested in bumans vere experimental, it seemed logical that noc all che 
hazards or long range effects that could be caused by the compounds were 
known to che medical investigator ac the time of the experiment. Thus, 
data as to the chemistry of che agent, amount used, and a point of con- 


7 tact where specific details were available would appear to be the minimum 
informacion required to be entered in the individual's official medical 
records. 


The Surgeon General of the y is aware of this problem, and on 8 Septecb5er 
1975 testified before Congress that "In addition, actżou hes been taken to 

J insure that eny participation in volunteer studies under the sponsorship 
of fort Derrick or Zdgewood Arsenal will be carefully documented in indi- 


vidual medical records. 29 


s Aes 


102 


Page 108 of 264 


. VOLUNTEERS USED IN CHEMICAL AGENT EXPERIMENTS AT g 
Se EDGEWOOD ARSENAL 3 
E- : . Z USAGE = 
VOLUNTEER NO. OF VOLUNTEERS IN AGENT 3 
TEAR AVAILABLE* USED IN AGENT TESTS** TZSTS 3 

1955 142 91 64 
1956 103 57 5 [ 

5 144 208 1957 سے 

1958 382 217 55 d 

1959 414 179 43 
p 1960 534 38 7 I 
1961 472 156 33 i 
1962 396 130 33 1 
oe 1963 348 169 43 s 
1964 474 290 61 3 
1965 480 347 72 F 

1966 400 243 61 
35 1967 470 245 52 : 

1968 407 208 51 
1969 406 184 45 i 

52 161 312 1970 سے 


5 106 | 54 m A 
6,99 2*4» Total 3,425 20 Yr 7 


*Average of five different reports. 
**Fxz-act from case record at Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal. 
***Does not include an estimated 115 volunteers from the Medical Laboratory 


over the 20-year period. 


| 


Page 109 of 264 


۲001:0125 


CRAPTER. VLI 


3 History of Edgewood Arsenal, published in 1965. 
2. ie“ of Staff, g, Memorandum for Chief Chemical Officer and The 
Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 39 June 


Surgecn General, subject: 
1953 ) 77 


Fn 


Tie Benzilaves Status o ivities, dated 


capacitating Agent Program at Edgewood Arsenal 


4, Raport on Cost of In 

1950-1975 (TAB 2), dated J September 1975. 

32 US. Ecuss of Repr uzacives Commiccee on Science and Astronautics 
Yearings of 22 June 1959. 


ezcrc - Research Plan, 12,248, dated 30 June 1272, 


entral Accion of EA 3834 and Other Psycnotrozic 
Tascimeny of COL (Ret) Joseph K. Blair, , Urrector of che Bicmeaical 


Leseratory, 1963-1974 


8. U. S. Armay Chemical R&D Laboratory TP 3224, “The Assessment of ZA 1729 
and EA 1528 by the Inhalation Source," dated Juiy 1964. 

9 COL Special Put teres (MLS2 Nr. 71), First Psychochem ca! Conference 
ot 12 Mev i934, published Ser cerner 1955, 


ene AG Hoc Study Group on Psrcchocheniczl Agents, for Che 


Re2crcz of 
R&D (Wolff Report), dated 


19 
Office of the Assistanc Secretary of Defense, 
13 Nove-czer 1953. 


&T. Memetandi= from the Caief, Clinical Research Branch, to the Fort 
3anning advance Course, reference LSD test, undated. 

12. Sin Fact Saeec 1ث‎ : 
134 Leccer. Caier of Research and Development to Dr. Harold C. Wolff, 


Dew York Hospital, subject: Human Volunteer Tests with K Agents, dated 


January 1957. 


0 


104 


Page 110 of 264 


XLI 


l4. CRDL TP 3074, "Clinical Investigation of EA 1729," dated June 1961. 


15. CRDL SP 2-44, "Medical Research Volunteer Peacetime Heroes," dated 


August 1961. 


16. Chief Chemical Officer, Department of che Army, Letter of 11 July 
1957, subject: Medical Research Volunteer Program, Inclosure 3, Medical 
Research Volumteer Program Handout. 


17. Booklet entitled, "Recruitment and Selection of Medical Volunteers." 


18. Volunteer Program Information Paper, "Human Investigation Facility," 
dated 14 February 1964. 


19.  CRDL S? 2-51, "Evolucion of the U.S. Army Chemical Research and Devel- 
opment Laboratories Medical Research Volunteer Program," published November 


1962. 
20. U.S. y Chemical Warfare Laboratories report on the Medical Research 
Volunteer Program, CWL-SP-2-13, dated June 1958. 


zl Testimony of Colonel Ketchum. 


: 
A. 


2 Tescimeny of Dr. Sim in 1959 and 1975 to Congress. 


w- s. 


23 Disposicion Form, subject: Use of Volunteers for EA 1779 Tests, dated 


mae 


10 February 1959. 


24. Memoranda for Record and SOP (Clinical Research Departmenc), subject: 
Record and Document Control, dated 13 February 1969. 


25. Edgewood Arsenal Volunteer Farticipation notebook, undated. 


26. Computer printout of Volunteers’ Participation in Drug Related Studies 
at Edgewood Arsenal, May 1955 to July 1975. 


27. Voluateer Work Sheets for July 1960 and January—May 1961 found in 
folder 1303 at Biomedical Laboratory. 


28. Letter, subject: Use of Human Volunteers in CW Research, fron Edge- 
wood Arsenal te Commander, U.S. Army Chemical Corps R&D Command, dated 

4 November 1958. First Indorsement from The Surgeon General, dated 

8 December 1958. Third Indorsement, same subject, dated 31 December 1958. 


Page 111 of 264 


29. Prepared statement by LTG Richard R. Taylor, MD, Tbe Surgeon General, 
Department of the Arzy, before the Subcommittee on Investigations of the 
Armed Services Committee, House of Representatives, Pirst Session, 94th 
Congress, 8 September 1975. 


106 


| 


)) 000 


— 


p= 


CHAPTER VIII 


FIELD TESTING OF LSD 


General 


The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the "field testing” phase of 
the approved basic research plan to test the effects of psychochemical 
agents on small milítary units and military operations. It will include 
a discussion af tests conducted at Fort Bragg, NC, Fort McClellen, AL, 
Fort Benning, A, and Dugway Proving Ground, UT. 


Ine individual test phase of the research plan was conducted primarily at 
the Army Chemical Center (Edgewood Arsenal) and was directed at the effects 
of psychocherical agents on the nervous and mental functions of individuals, 
and also to evaluate prophylactic and therapeutic agents to combat the 
effects. Since one of the stated purposes of the research was to estimate 
the actual vulnerabilicy of military personnel to psychochemical agents 
through the use of operational exercises, it was necessary that the experi- 
mentation be directed to actual military units and military tasks. 

As discussed earlier, the "Wolff Report" served as an additional per- 
Suasive juscification for the eventual approval of the proposed research 
plan to use huzan volunteers in testing the psychochemical agents. In 
addition, the report provided emphasis on the need to test smell military 
units. The following paragraphs from the "Wolff Report" are quoted co 
illustrate the degree of importance placed on the use of military units 

by the Study Group and subsequently reflected in the field testing phase: 1 


There is much experimental data on che effect of LSD 25 on 
individual humans under laboratory and civilian circumstances, 
buc, in the opinion of the Study Group, there is not yet suffi- 
cient information about the effects of very large doses of LSD 
25 on humans or about its effect on groups of people, and es- 
pecially upon organized and disciplined groups of people. Based 
upon our present knowledge of the effects of the drug, we can 
make the following statements: 


(1) If LSD 25 is used against heterogeneous, undisciplined 

and urinformed groups of people and if ic is administered by 
surprise, it is possible that the agent will be effective in 
producing panic and disorganization. 


(2) When LSD 25 is used against homogeneous, vell-disciplined, 


properly led and previously informed groups of people who are 
forewarned of irs administration and likely effects, the 


. 107 


Page 113 of 264 


effectiveness of the agent in producing panic and disorganiza~ 
tion is not known. . . . The promise offered in this field can 
be determined only by assaying the effect of psychochemical 
agents ca military units. If LSD 25, used as outlined in the 

"experiment, should tail to produce disorganizing and disrupting 
effect on the military wit, it would be evident that there is 

no military promise in this field. However, 1f the use of these 
agents should, under the specified conditions, produce sarious 
disruption in the ability of the unít to carry out its missions, 
then it could be reasonably stated that these agents offer great 
promise for use in military operations. 


To determine the answers to the problem posed, the Study Group prepared 
and recommended a detailed plan for demonstration of the military effec- 
tiveness of LSD-25 when used on small bodies of troops. The detailed 


plan specified that a military group of the general size of an Army 
squad or the aircraft flight crew of a large bomber be used, and further 


recommendec that the group have the following characteristics: 


It should have existed as a unit for some time prio: to the 
experinenc. 


Its mecbers should be thoroughly familiar with each orher and 
with their leader. 


Ihe group should be recognized as having high morale and strong 
cohesiveness. 


The caliber of the group and its membership, however, should 
not be so outstending as to make it markedly different fron 
any other good t of similar type in its branch of the 
service. . .. 


the Study Group stressed that pre-test studies be made on 
the members, to include medical, psychiatric, and psychological examina- 
cions. The report continued that: "No man will be excluded from che 
previously chosen group because of medical or psychiatric findings unless 
in the opinion of the medical evaluators the administration of LSD to such 
a man would be seriously dangerous to his physical or mental health. The 
total data shall Ro used to aid in understanding the results of the experi- 


"od 


Additionally, 


rent. 
Authority 


A proposed plan, 
originally by the Chief, Clinical Research Division, 


"Additional Use of Volunteers in CW Research," was prepared 
Edgewood Arsenal, in 


108 


Page 114 of 264 


September 1955, and subsequently submitted through channels by his succes- 
sor. The proposal was held for a period and then recomposed by the Deputy 
Chief, Research Division, Chemical Research and Development Command,. prior 

to forwarding to Chief Chemical Officer for final staffing. 2 The plan was 
reviewed by The Surgeon General, and on 26 April 1956 the Chief Chemical 
Officer forwarded the plan, in accordance with Chief of Staff Memoranduz 385, 
to the Secretary of the Army for approval. However, by a memorandum to the 
Cnief of Staff, U.S. Army, dared 17 May 1956, the Director of Research and 

` Development approved the plan. There was no evidence that the Secretary 


of the Army reviewed or approved che plan. 
The research plan included, among other goals, the following: 


(1) Studies of the effect of psychochemical agents on the 
nervous and mental functions of man. 


(>) By the use of operational exercises, estimates of the 
actual vulnerabilicy of milicary personnel to psychochemical 
agents will be made. The kind of tests contemplated include: 
command post exercises, logistics exercises, performance of 
small squads as teams in complex group activities such as 
ridging a suzil stream, the operation of a fire direction 
center, a performance in a link trainer, operation of a filter 
center, etc. The culminating exercise will be an infantry 
squad performing typical field operations over varied terrain. 3 


Before proceeding with the progress of the field testing phase, an inter- 
esting point came to light while reviewing the proposed research plans; 

a point which appears to further illuscrate the impact of the "Wolff 
Report" on chemical agent research. The copy of the proposed plan which 
was approved by che Director of Research and Development and inclosed 
with his memorandim to the Chief of StaffJ differed from the proposed 
plan originally submitted by the CHemical Research and Development Com- 
mand. Specifically, the following sentence was added to the subparagraph 
(b) of the study requirements: "The culminating exercise will be an 
infantry squad performing typical field operations over varied terrain.’ 
A Search of che file failed to disclose who added the extra task, although 
it apparently occurred after the proposal left the Chemical R&D Command. 


f 


In reviewing the "Wolff Report," particularly the detailed plan for dezon- 
stration of che military effectiveness of LSD~25 when used on small bodies 
of troops, their proposed infantry task vas quite similar.l It is logical 
to assume chat since the original prcposal waa prepared well before the 


109 


fn 


- 


Page 115 of 264 


"Wolff Report" vas published, that the extra cask probably was added in 
e of the Chief Chemical Officer, where the "Wolff Report" vas 
then available. Since it vas not a significant change to the plan, 
apparently no special note was made. However, the fact chat it was 
added provides some indication of the attention given co the "Wolff 


Report." 


Field Testing - Fort Bragg, NC 


The first of the field tests was conducted at Fort Bragg, NC, and involved . 
Airborne Corps Artillery. i 


the Offic 


several wits of the XVIII 


It could not be determined with certainty who initiated the request for 

the test nor why the XVIII Airborne Corps vas the selected major unit. 
Bever, several documents were located which provided some insight into 
the sequence of events that led to the selection of the XVIII Airborne 
Corps. A copy of a message, dated 28 June 1958, from the CG, CONARC, co 
the CG, US 4ch Assy (with information copies to CG, USA Air Defense Center, 
Port Bliss, Office of the Chief Chemical Officer (OCC LO), Wash., DC, and 
CO, USA CWL, ACC, MD), made reference to a letter, CMLPD-CE, OCCMLO, 7 
February 1958, subject: Request for Authority to Conduct Test, with 2 
inclosures. Ihe cited reference indicated that the Chief Chemical Officer 
had requested use of personnel from a NIKE Missile Batcalion as partici- 
pants in a test of EA 1729 (LSD). A 3d Indorsemenc to this letter, head- 
Quarters menen, requested the Commanding General, U.S. Army Air Defense 
Cen cer, to consider the capability to participate in the test with che 
cited AAA Battalion or other SAM (surface-to-air missile) mit. A second 
reference cited in the message was a letter, AKBAAC-PAPA, D, U.S. Army 
A Defense Center, 5 June 1958, subject: Request for Conduct of Teszt 

by Chemical Corps (U), and lst Indorsement, 13 June 1958, with 2 Inclosures. 
4Alchough che contents of this letter could not be determined, it appeared 
from subsecuent events that che proposed AAA Battalion could not be used. 
The body of the message contained a request for information concerning 

che availability of any four traimed NIKE launching or fire control sec- 
tions. The message also exhibited a sense of urgency in that it mentioned 
a starting target date of 1 August 1958. No further information concert- 
ing this correspondence or the request for a NIKE missile unit participation 


was found. 


- 


in revievizg a draft copy of a letter, Headquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps 
Artillery, wadaced, subject: B. F. Laboratories - Fort Bragg rescs, 3 chere 
vas reference to a IN, Headquarters, Third U.S. Army, AVCML 7-1, to 
Commanding General (CG), XVIII Airborne Corps, dated 17 July 1958, and 

a letter, Seadquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps and Fort Bragg, subject as 
above, dated 13 August 1958. It appeared that the original February 1958 


110 


Page 116 of 264 


from the Office of the Chief Chemical Officer to the CG, CONARC, 
vas for personnel from a specific AAA Battalion (Missile NIKE) to take 
parc in che test program. (This type unit may have been requested bz che 
Cnerical Warfare Laboratory personnel since they had conducted individual 
tests in 1957 on personnel assigned to a NIKE site (radar van operacion 
When as late as 27 June 1958 no response had been received, it 


request 


test).)29 


^ was assumed chat at this time the Chief Chemical Officer again contacted 


the CG, CONARC, who chen contacted the Commanding General, Third U.S. Army, 
mo, in turn, sent a message, dated 17 July 1958, to the Commending General, 
XVIII Airborne Corps, which presumably either requested or directed the 

Airborne Corps to assist in the test program. 


In a report of a meeting of the Medical Committee, U.S. Aray Chemical Corps 
Advisory Council, 34 November 1958, Fort Detrick and Army Chemical Center, 
MD, it vas reported that: "A third test on which the Chief, Clinical Inves- 


tigation Division, reported involved the use cf a film during which zn eval- 


uation of the agent was given, not by the Chemical Corps but by a representativ 


of the service testing the agent. Only during the medical phase of the 
operation did che Chemical Corps participate in this test. The test was 
conducted at Fort Bragg at the instance of CONARC. The subjects were from 
the 18ch Airborne Corps Artillery."°% Again, in a Chemical Research and 
Development Laboratories Technical Report, CRDLR 3074, Clinical Investi- 
gation of =A 1729 (U), dated June 1961, it was reported that: "After 
enough experiments in individual and small groups of volunteers had been 
carried out to ascertain that large group studies were feasible, arrange- 
ments were rade by CG, CONARC, to conduct a test at Fort Bragg, NC, in 
September 1958. Chemical Corps personnel supplied the necessary medical 
support for all test operations, but operational evaluation of the tests 
was made by members of the XVIII Airborne corps. "7 

few documents relating to this phase of the test program, ic 


that the Chemical Warfare Laboratories had conducted suffictent 
The 


From the 
appeared 
individual rests and were preparing for the testing of small units. 
Cnemical Warfare Laboratory, through its command channels, apparently 
initiated the basic request for unit testing, and when the Air Defense 
Command was unable, for one reason or another, to take part in the field 
test, the request then moved to CONARC and eventually to che XVIII Airborne 
Corps, a unique organization. No evidence vas found to indicate that any 
of the headquarters concerned disagreed with the proposed conduct of the 


field testing of EA 1729. 


Prior to commencement of the Fort Bragg field test, the Chemical Warfare 
Laboratories, Army Chemical Center, sent two of their personnel to Fort 

Bragg, and based on their observations and discussions with personnel of 
the XVIII Airborne Corps Artillery, recommendations were made for che 


Page 117 of 264 


Chemical Warfare Laboratory (CWL)-Fort Bragg tests to the XVIII Airborne 
Corps Chenical Officer. Their recommendations, which were contained in 

` a disposition form, subject:  CWL-Fort Bragg Test, dated 31 July 1958, 
listed the specific units to be tested and also provided a proposed calen- 


dar of events." 


lil 


f 


The results of the tests involving personnel of the XVIII Airborne Corps 
Artillery vere well documented: an after action report, in draft forz, 
prepared by Headquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps Artillery;? a story plan 

for the Fort Bragg Fin; a disposition form, dated 23 September 1958, 

from the Chief, Chemical Research Division, to the Deputy Director and 7 
Director, Medical Research, subject: Brief Summary of Work oa Fort Bragg 
Tests, covering the period from 2 Seprember-13 September 1958; O and a 
Chemical Reasearch and Development Laboratories Technical Report (LR) 
3074, subject: Clinical Investigations of EA 1729 (U), dered June 1961. 
Tne reports generally were consistent in their overall evaluations of che 
effect of LSD-25 on small military units. 


0 


0 


Tor the purpose of the record, a coupendium of the cited cest results 
references is presented below. 


III ALrborue Coros artillery 
&. Teams selected from the tests were: 


a 0) Meteorological Sections from 2d Obsn Batzalion, 26th Artillery 
and 2d Missile Battalion (EJ), 42d Artillery. 


(25) Survey teams from 2d Oban Battalion, 26th Artillery and 
2d Missile Battalion (HJ), 42d Artillery. 


(3) Two 40mm AW Gun Crews from 3d AW Bartalion, 62d Arzcille-y. 


(4) © Fire Direccion Team from lsz How Bn, 83d Artillery and 
3d How In, 16th Arcillery. : 


t. All tests were photographed using both silent and sound movie: 
caheras to record actual reactions during the tests. 


es àll personnel who took part in che test vere volunteers and vere 
screened thoroughly, both physically and mentally. Of che 70 men who 
volunteered to compose the teams, ll were rejected for either psychiatric 
a or medical reasons. The crews selected represented above average, skílled 
aray units with exceptional morale. All personnel were completely informed 
as to probable effects of the agent and probable duration of the effects. 


X12 


t 


ALS . — ee. ——— 2 —.— 
. —— en TT 
—.— 


Page 118 of 264 


The XVIII Airborne Corps Artillery After Action Report added the follow- 
ing statement: "This screening and orientation contributed materially to 
the ability of the teams to produce any results at all."5 

d. Test protocol. The total dose of 150 micrograms of EA 1729 
adrinistered to the volunteers was selected on the basis of previous 
clinical experience as a dose which vould (1) produce measurable effects 
that would endure for the period of the test; (2) permit the degree of 
physical activity necessary; and (3) not be so severe as to result in a 
Serminaction of the test before missions vere accomplished. 7 A breakout 
of the agent exposure of the 59 men tested was as follows: 


47 volunteers received a single dose = 47 doses 


8 volunteers received two doses — 16 doses 
4 volunteers received three doses — 12 doses 
59 volunteers received a total of 75 doses 


Complete recovery vas experienced by all personnel within 36 hours after 
receiving che agent. 


e. Test results.” 


(1) Meteorological Section. The mission of this section was 
to furnish necessary weather data that would affect artillery projectiles 
or rockets in flight and would furnish wind aloft data for prediction of 
fallout after an atomic burst. The sections were assigned the mission of 
making weather balloon releases ac intervals of dose + 10 min; dose + 1 
hour; and dose + 2 hours. A completed message was prepared after the 
first weather balloon, but the section could not produce anyching for. 
the next two balloons. 


(2) Ste Section. The mission of this section was to furnish 
survey control data by artillery units to locate firing positions and tar- 
gets. Two survey sections were given data for a survey control point and 
the mission cf extending this control to another area; a mission which 
normally would be accomplished in 2 1/2 hours. The drugged team required 
5 hours to perform the task and the accuracy was within allowable tolerances 
Only because che team recorder vas not drugged and vas able to recheck all 
angles and taped distances. When the test was repeated with all team mex 
bers drugged, the team required almost 4 hours to complete the mission and 
the accuracy was not within tolerable limits. 


(3) Fire Direction Team. The mission of this section was to 
control battery or battalion firing by converting information furnished 
by an observer into commands for guns to fire; to convert without adjust- 
ment data furnished by survey and meteorological sections into commands 


Page 119 of 264 


co deliver fire on targets when no observer is available. an hour after 
receiving EA 1729, the drugged team vas tuch slower in processing fire 
commands, and although they were able to perform the necessary computa- 
tions for delivering area-type fire on target with acceptable resuits, 
they could noc fire precision type missions with any degree of accuracy 


because of the inability to concentrate. 


(4) 40mm Anci-sircraft Automatic Weapons Gun Section. The 
mission of this section vas to provide air defense for forward combat 
arms and to attack and destroy hostile targets on land or water, as 
required. Two 40m AA sections were emplaced on a ridge affording field 
of fare in all directions; movie cameras were mounted parallel with gun 
tubes and an L-19 aircraft was used as the target. Before administra- 
ction of the drug, the target tracking vas smooth and continuous, however, 
after taking the drug, the tracking efforts were jerky and uncoordinated. 
A study of the film indicated that although there were some simulated 
kirs, they were obtained more by accident then by design. 

The overall conclusions of the test were: (1) the agent is an effective 
weapon for use against mits for the purpose of rendering these units 
ineffective for periods of from 6 to 24 hours; aud (2) that units sub- 
jected to this agent would be incapable of fulfilling their mission. 
Although no actual firing was conducted using subjects who had been 
given the drug, due to che safety requíremeit involvec, results of the 
teams thac were used indicated that che contusion existing would be che 


same in the gm sections. 


Medical Results 


The Chemical Warfare Laboratories (CWL) project officer, in his brief 
summary report, pointed out that: 


In general medical problems have been minimal on chis test. 
In the first week of tests one person of the Metecrological - 
section became apprehensive co the point where he was given 
100 willigrazs of thorazíne orally. An interesting observa- 
tion . . . the first Survey Team who had received the drug 
the first week, all of them completed the survey with little 
üifficulty . . . after removal of one man who passed out in 
the first thirty minutes of the first test complaining’ of 
numbness and tingling of his hands and inability to move his 
hands and legs. He required no medication and. . . However, 
in the second week three of the group who had previously 
received che drug developed what might be classified as 
hysterical reactions. Im one, there was marked anxiety 


Page 120 of 264 


reaccion. . . . Ee «as reassured and required no medicacion. 
Another man also had difficulty in the vehicle returning frou 
the test and became quite apprehensive. The third aan had some 
difficulcy breathing. and on reassurance by the medical person- 
nel quieted down. In two of these instances they were people 
‘who had carried out their tasks very vell che previous week and 
ift was not suspected char such a reaction would occur. Im che 
survey team, on the l3th of September, one man developed a para- 

. noid reaction. Be became quite withdrawn, would noc communicate 
with ocher members of his team and refused to eat or drink, say- 
ing the food was probably contaminated with the material. Ower 
the period of 12 hours he gradually improved and the following 

D morming «as improve. to the extent that he was comwunicating 

quite freely wich medical personnel. 


Ic might be stated that chere have been no instances in which 
there was not a noticeable change of behavior in any of che 
persounel mo received the drug. . . . In general, performance 
was aot improved as a result of having experienced the drug 
reaction previously. 10 


Compliance With Chief oi Staff Memorandum 385 


The information available indicated that the requirements of the volunteer 
progran, L.e., volimtary and informed consent, were met, however, copies 
of che individual volumteer statements and/or tesc records were not avail- 


able. 


"Wilson Memorandum" and Chief of Scaff Memorandum 385 


Other provisions of the “Wil 
vere not as scrupulously followed. 4 former commander of che Chemicai Corps 


Researca and Development Commend was interviewed concerning his knowledge 
of che volunteer program and the use af LSD in the research program. 22 
velaced that he had volunteered. to take part im the chemical agenc research 
programa; he had taken the regular physical and psychiatric examinations to 
make sure he was okay; he Wer he vas going to get che drug LSD ac sone 
point, buz did noc know exactly when. "I agreed that I vould cake che 

drug, buc when it vas administered would be up to the medical investigator." 
In response co a question as to whether he had ever been administered a 
ballucinogenic drug without first being made aware of the fact, he respond- 
ed: "Yes." ze related chat it took place at Fort Bragg when he vas there 
observing a test being conducted with members of the XVIII airborne Corps 

"I vas there to observe what was going on and also to brief 

the CG, XVIII Airborme Corps. I went co the site with CWL project officer 
and a major; ic was early and ít was cold. I was asked if I vanted sone 

bot coffee, which I did. I was given the coffee and apparently it had 


Artillery: 


ae kek 


115 


Page 121 of 264 


i LSD in ic; they cold me later, it had a dose of 200 micrograms af LSD." 
He continued by relating chat he had to brief che Corps Cammander, who 
was a very rough customer. When asked if he would have voluntarily taken 


LSD at chat time, he respouded in the negative. 


In this instance, the individual volunteered for the program; received a 

very thorough briefing on LSD; Ber the drug that he vas going to be given, 

but did aoc know when it would be given. Several mouths later, ile at 

Fort Bragg to observe che field cesting of LSD and co brief the Commanding 

QE General, XVIII Airborne Corps, he vas given a dose of LSD, without his 

knovledge or specific cousent. In fact, he stated that he would aot have 

“voluntarily taken che drug ac that time. If chis wag not an actual viola- 

E tion of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 as it related to voluntary ard informed 
consent, then, as a minimum, ic constituted an overly broad interpretation 


of voluntary consent. 


ET The CWL project officer, in a disposition form to the Director of Medical 
Research, subject: Fort Bragg Tescs,l2 relaced other aspects thar raise 
serious questions as co how closely the intent of Chief of Staff Menoran- 
dum 385 vas followed. Ome of the basic principles cited in Chief of Staff 
Memorandum 385 which must be observed in order to satisfy moral, echical, 
and legal concepts was: "During che course of the experiment the scientist 
i in charge must be prepared to terminate the experiment at any stage, if he 
has probable cause to believe in the exercise of the good faith, superior 
skill and careful judgment required of aim chat a continuation of the 
experiment is likely to result in injury, disability, or death co che 
7 experimental subject. I In chat disposition form the project officer 
wrote: "There have been statements that we can terminate a test after 
it has started, í—bolying that ve have antidotal compounds for 1729. 
= We do uot have such a compound. At besz all we can do is antenuace che 
acute reaczion, nor prevent nor terminace It. 2 Prom chis ic appeared 
Chat one of the basic conditions designed to safeguard che well-being of 
tne soldier volunteer vas uot followed. While it may be argued chac LSD 


Las determined noc ca be a lethal agent, the fact that it was unpredictable 
and in an experimencal catagory would appear to require strict adherence 


to all of che conditions set forth in Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. 


U.S. Arzy Special Warfare School, Fort Bragg Tests 


while the XVIII Airborne Corps Artillery units vere undergoing field tests 
cf LSD-25, che Coubat Development Tesz and Evaluarcion Officer, Special 
Warfare School, Fort Bragg, was directed to observe the ongoing tests to 

~ determine whether chat office would be interested in pursuing the use of 
LSD from che standpoint of its application to unccuventiíoual warfare cactics. 
Inicially, cwo officers from the Special Warfare School and one from che 


I 
ایل‎ 


l i 116 


being maintained surreptitiously. 


Page 122 of 264 


7th Special Forces Group began to develop a series of evaluations with 
respect co unconventional warfare operations involving the use of LSD-25. 
The chree officers volunteered to take the drug to gain firsthand knowledge 


Each was given a medical and psychiatric examination and 


of its effects. 
A series 


chen a complete briefing on the drug and its probable effects. 
of test situations were developed for Special Forces application. 15 


The following syuopsis and conclusions of the tests were obtained from a 
Report of Tests of Chemical Agent K-EA-1729 (U) prepared by the Special 
Warfare School. 16 During the period 29, 30 September and 1 October 1958 
two tests, a Guard Post Exercise and a Cover Story Interrogation Exercise, 
were conducted using chemical agenc EA 1729 on approximately 20 members of 
the 7th Special Forces (SF) Group. 


) 


Test Results 


a. Guard Post Exercise. Eighe members of the 7th Special Forces 
Group vere assigned guard posts and given a dose of LSD. They were 
instructed to deny entry to an area by anyone not having a special pass. 
Penetration of the guard post was accomplished easily. 


b. Cover Story Interrogation. Twelve members of the 7th Special 
Forces Group were given the agent and chen subjected to intensive interro- 
gation by trained military intelligence personnel to determine if the 
individuals could recain their cover story, to include identification, 
"nile under the influence of the drug. It was concluded chat an interro- 
gator of limited experience could compel a subject to compromise hizself 
and to sign documents which could place him in jeopardy; and that with a 
bigher dose of che agent, a state of fear and arxiety could be induced’ 
were the subject could be compelled to trade his cooperation for a 
guarantee of return to normalcy. 


in the Report of Tests of Chemical Agent K-EA-1729 it was mentioned that 
en additional cest ves proposed; a test which would involve a completely 
realistic guard sitvation, at night, with surveillance of the subject 

It was also proposed that the person- 
ael used would be those who had been previously evaluaced (physically 
and mentally) and chac the agent (LSD) would be administered clandes- 
cinely. It vas chen recommended chat "These tests be conducted, if 
reasonably convenient, but chat further undue efforts noc be expended 
for this particular project. It is felt chat the results of such a 
test, added to what is now known of the effects of the drug, would not 
macerially change the conclusions which have already been reached with 
regard to che potencial use of che agent ín Special Forces operations, 16 
Had this proposal been accomplished, it would have resulted in at least 


E بجی‎ 


117 


Ex 


Page 123 of 264 


Staff Memorandum 385; the first being the 

af che drug-—-violating che {nformed voluntary 
negacing che ability co withdraw at any címe; 
necessity.of the experiment. The firsc viola- 


The other violation mentioned concerns che 
“The experimenc 


two violacious of Chief of 
clandestine administracion 
consent provision and thus 
and secondly the value and 
tien was discussed earlier. 
follevizg principle of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385: 
should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, 
unprocurable by other methods or means of study and noc random and urneces- 
sary in nacure. 13 Although no record vas found which vould indicate chat 
the proposal vas carried out, Che fact that it was made by a responsible 
individual casts a cloud over the degree of integrity practi ed in comply- 
ing with the principles of Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. Research records 
for the Special Forces personnel who participated in the field testing of 


Information as to protocol procedures 


LSD were not available for review. 
whe staced: "Each 


during Che tests was obtained from the project officer, 


was taformed of the fact chat this was a test of a drug; I don't 


of chem 
I do 


kmow if they were cold the name or the fact it vas hallucinogenic. 
know that each signed a consent statement and each was given the same 
examinations before undergoing che ces cs. . We cancluded the tests 

and teactions were inconclusive, . . . there was so mich vartance in the 
reactiona Chat ve could not use ic Ach any degree of dependability, and 

at chat point the project vas árzopped and because of the nature of seme 

of the reactions of the individuals co the drug, particularly under ister- 
rogacion by professional military inceiligence personnel, I recommended, 
and zy boss agreed, co destroy all of che individual records of the 
evaluations because things occurred during the taterrogacion situation, 
while chey vere under the drug, chat could have been taken out of context 
later and used against them in an adverse manner, and so to protect the 
individuals who were involuntarily reacting to these situations, I des- 


zroyed the individual records involved. "45 


ield Testing - Fort McClellan, AL 


۲٢ 


The second series of the field testing of EA 1729 was ccouduczed ac the 
U.S. Arz; Chemical Corps School, Fort McClellan, AL. 


Purpose 


The purpose of chis series of tests probably was desc expressed in a 
Statement contained in the U.S. y Chemical Research and Developmentc 
Laboratories’ Technical Report (CRDLR) 3074, dated June 1961, subject: 


Clinical Invescigacion of EA 1729: 7 


118 


dt 


— 
2 
"k 
7 


Page 124 of 264 


1 Deroustraction of Effects of EA 1729 to U.S. Army Chemical 


Coros School Personnel. The Chief Chemical Officer desires all 


officers assigned to the Chemical Corps to be choroughly familiar 
with che current standard agents chat the Corps has developed 

and those experimental or research compounds Chat show che most 
promise of ulrimace development into effective agent or weapons 
systems. For this reason, several demonstrations of the effecta 
of EA 1729 were conducted at the U.S. Army Chemical Corps School, 
Fort McClellan, Alabama, in which students and members of the 
staff and faculty participated. t was felt thar actually 
experiencing che effects of EA 1729 would enable members of 

che Advanced Class co discuss more intelligently che potential 


7 c recognize its symptoms, and char additional 


of che compound, 
clinical. data could be gathered upon which to base a determina- 


tion of the value of EA 1729. 


The above statement, as written, appears to indicate a subtle pressure, 
intended or not, placed on all Chemical Corps officers at che U.S. Aray 
Chemical Corps School to volunteer for the program, if for ao other reason 
chan to be better qualified in their profession. The use of the tem 
“demonstration” in conjunction witch the statement appeared to run counter 
Co the basic principles governing che use of volunteers in research, 


notably: 


b. ihe experiment should be such as to yield frutcful results 
for che good of society, umprocurable by other cechods or means 


of study. and aot random and unnecessary in nature. 


C. The amber of volunteers used shall be kept at a minimum 
consistent wich item b above. 


The statement attributed to the Chlef Chemfcal Officer also appeared cc 
establish or reicerace the following priority of results expected from 


the demouscracions: 


a. lst Priority. Enable mexbers of che Advanced Class to discuss 
more intelligently the potential of the compound. 


- b. ld Priority. Recognize its symptoms. 


c. 3d Priority. Additional clinical data could be gathered upon 


which to base a determination of the value of the compound. 


nes 


Page 125 of 264 


a Authorization : 


There were oo records located which specifically addressed a proposal, | | 
recommendation, or authorization to expand the field testing of LSD to | 
include demonstrations or practical exercises for the Chemical Corps i 
Advanced Officers Classes. Thus, ít could not be determined whether | 
m the proposal to administer LSD co students and faculty at the Chemical | 
Corps School originated at the School, the Army Chemical Center, or the | 
“Office of the Chief Chemical Officer. Although problems of personnel | 
ES . Changes, reorganizations, records retirement and destruction were prev- | 
۱ alent throughout the research effort, the abseSce of files and records 
was most pronounced on events concerning the role of the Army Chemical 


Corps School in LSD testing. 


In addition to the above problems, in 1974 the Army Chemical School ac 
Fort McClellan, AL, was closed and chen relocated co Aberdeen Proving 
Ground, MD, where it was changed from a separate Branch School to a 
deparmmenc within the U.S. Army Ordnance School. Concomitant witha che 
‘Chemical School's reloczticu and redesignation, there was a significant 
— l decrease in personnel and facilities. This series of changes probably 
resulted i2 many documents being retired or destroyed prematurely, mis- 
filed, or misdirected during the transfer of assets to the new location. 
Bowever, other documents available provided some insight into the ques- 
= tion of authorization. At a meeting of the Medical Cocmittee of che 
U.S. Arey Chemical Corps Advisory Council on 15-16 June 1959, at Fort 
Deerick and che Aray Chemical Center, MD, a film was shown of the Fort 
= Bragg tests with EA 1729. The Chief, Clinical Investigation Division, 
Medical Research. Laboratories, indicated to the council that this cast 
Lese much to be desired as it was not sufficiently objective.“ Prior 
= to this, there was a meeting of che Protective Committee, U.S. Ar 
Chemical Corps Advisory Council, on 16-18 March 1959, at Fort McClellan, 
AL, at wnich ce the Fort Bragg film was shown. Personnel from the 
— School were in attendance. 


-Lacking adequate data to determine the actual sequence of events leading 

up to the tests ac the Chemical Corps School, we can only assume what 

= procably occurred. Based on the small size of the Chemical Corps and 
the close incerrelationships among key personnel at the Aray Chemical 
Center, Chemical School, and Office of the Chief Chemical Officer, it 

E appeared chat the '"demoustrazion" of che effects of LSD on students and 
faculty probably was considered a routine action and not necessarily the 
result of a specific proposal, request, or recommendation. Suffice it to 

- say, uo record of any objections to this phase of field testing was found. 


I 


- — SERRA 
م مم ب د سما ل ا م‎ mme qp = 
— ee ——— — — j——̃— — — 


Page 126 of 264 


Chemical Coros School Tests 


The first indication of testing wich psychochemical drugs at che Chemical 
Corps School, Fort McClellan, aL, was noted in a Chief Chemical Officer 
letter to che CG, USCONARC, dated 25 August 1959. The letter made refer- 
ence to a test in mich LSD-25 was administered co 30 students of the 
Chemical Corps Advanced Class during May 1959. It also referred to a 
report of chat test, dated 21 July 1959.38 No documents relacing to thís 
test or to the report of 21 July 1959 were found. In fact, this was the 
only reference co the conduct of such a test. However, additional corrob- 
oration that a test was conducted in May 1959 was evidenced by the presence 
ef individual medical records retained by the Biomedical Laboratory, Edge- 
wood Arsenal. These records indicated that LSD-25 was administered to 
personnel at the Chemical School in May 1959.48 


Ihe next instance of LSD testing at che Chemical Corps School was deter- 
mined from several rosters which indicated that a series of tests involving 
LSD were conducted at Fort McClellan on 28, 29, and 30 October 1959, 22 
Although records concerning volunteer statements, briefings, or medical 
and psychiatric examinations could not be found, informacion obtained 

from incerviews and other documents indicated that: students, both 
officer and enlisted, and faculty members volunteered for the progran; 

they were briefed choroughly on the specific compounds or agents to be 
used; and chey received medical and psychiatric exz—ínations.  inforza- 
tion available indicated char the subjects of these tests were properly 
informed as required by DA policy. However, there vas evidence chat the 
subjects may not have freely volunteered for the tests in all cases. 
Testimocy and documents apparently prepared after the 1959 tests indi- 
cated chat indirecc coercion tay have been used. 21, 23, 24, 32 fr appeared 
chac scudents and faculty may have been influenced to volunteer as a result 
ef subtle pressures being applíed, such as: studying the effects of LSD 
dy taking it was part of the course work; taking part and knowing, first- 
band, the effects of LSD would echznce che professional ability of che 
officer; and conversely, failure to volunteer probably would result in 

a lover evaluation or opinion by peers amd superiors. Additionally, a 
psychiatrist assigned to Fort McClellan from 1959 to 1961 stated char 
some personnel who declined to volunteer were sent to him to determine 
the reason for theis not volunceering. de inferred that this was a form’ 


of pressure used to induce volunteer participation. 24 


Bowever, a different viewpoint of the volumtariness of the Chemical Corps 
School participants was obtained during an interview of a retired senior 
Chemical Corps officer who had volunteered to take part in che research 


— 


program involving psychochemical testing during the spring of 1959. Ee 
discussed bis knowledge and recollection of the tests and opined chat 
since these were Chemical Corps officers, they would have volunteered 


Page 127 of 264 


` 


for the progran because it was a big opportunity to take part in such a 
progran; ic would make them feel more professionally prepared; and since 
chey would have viewed films made earlier, buc not made available for 
public viewing, they vould have had the best knowledge of the agent's 
effeccs and thus be more inclined to volunteer. 21 


The rosters obtained for the three tests conducted during October 1959 
indicated char 79 personnel vere tested.22 The individual dosage and che 
number of times the drug was administered was uot determined. The only 
official publication located concerning the tests at fort McClellan was 
found in LR 3074, Clinical Investigation of EA 1729, which provided 
“che following informacion: Tn these demonstrations, doses from 100 to 
150 cterograms per man were administered orally co the parcicipancs, and 
then che individuals engaged in such activities as map exercises, target 
analysis, arithmetic problems, bridge and black jack games. Some staff 
and faculty personnel attempted to give placlormm presentations and to 
conduct seminar—cype discussions." A chart accompanying Chis reporc 
reflected that 68 subjects had participated in the map exercise./ Another 
document cticled, "Fleld Training Tests," which apparently was used as a 
source document for a chart or vu-greph transparency, indicated that there 
were to series of tests at Fort McClellan, the first during October 1959, 
which involved 79 personnel, and che second in November 1960, mich involved 


80 personnel. 3L 


Taforsacioc vas obtained from several sources which indicated LSD demon- 
strarions or practical exercises vere given to several Advanced Officer 
Classes and Nonucommisstoned Officer (NCO) Classes berween 1959 and 1962. 
However, except for che tests already listed and some correspondence 
talaring to a LSD practical exercise for aa NCO Class cu 28 October 
2960, 27 no other records were found which would verify the number and 
Type of cests conducted at Forz McClellan. Individual medical records 
maincained at Edgewood Arsenal indicated thac 195 individuals partici- 
pated in tescs at Fort McClellan, ac least 113 of hen received a chen- 


Tne records of the remaining 82 subjects did not indicate 
48 f 


ical ageri. 
whether che tests involved a chemical agent. 


Ccmoliance Wich Chief. of Staff Menorandum 385 


Ãlthough records vere not available to substantiate ccapliíance or non- 
conpliance with Chief of Staff Meaorandua 385, there were several inci- 
cations chat the voluntary nature of the studeacs' parcícipacion vas in 
question. Additionally, one of che individuals interviewed recalled chat 
a friend of his ac the School had volunteered for che tesc program, buc 
apparently had received a dose of LSD without advance varning and ac an 
vnanticipared cime.32 Although this individual was listed on the roster 
as having received LSD ou 29 October 1959, it could not be determined if 


he had received additional doses. 


— 

ic 
8 

—. 


—— — ————— ͤ “]—t — 


Page 128 of 264 


* 


Ite use of che cers "demonstration" in conjunction with accinistering LSD 
to scudents and faculty ac Fort McClellan raised a question of whether the 
tests violated the principles or intent of Chief of Staff Memorandm 385. 
The issue of deconstrations vs. experiments was the subject of considerable 
discussion between the responsible physician, Chemical R&D Laboratories; 


the Commander, Chemical R&D Command; the Director of Military Operations, 


Office of the Chief Chemical Officer; and the Commandanc of che Chemical 
Corps School. The records of che discussions and correspondence provided 
a good insight into che different attitudes, concerns, and policy inter- 
pretatíons existing at the time and are addressed in the following paragzapos 


A letter, dated 31 August 1960, subject: LSD Demonstration, irom the 
Commander, Chemical Corps R&D Laboratories, to the Commanding General, 
Chemic2l Corps RAD Command, requested relief from the task of admins cer 
ing LSD co persounel attending the Chemical Corps School. Several reasons 
for noc continuing che detail were provided, none of which concerned che 
quescion of compliance with established policy. The Commanding General, 
Chemical Corps R&D Command, responded to che requesc with a series of 
decisions which reportedly were based on previous discussion of che sub- 
ject. The Laboratory was required to conduct “only one gore such demon- 
stracton for the current Advanced Class." Addicionally, che Laboratory 
was to Crain a medical officer, assigned to the Chemical Corps Training 
Command, zo conduct such demonstrations at the School and elsewhere. 

The policy that che responsible physician was "personally responsible 

for the use of experimenral chemical agents on humans" vas restated. 

Also, ali demonstrations conducted by the Chemical Caras Training Con- 
mand using LSD required approval by the responsible physiciaz.? 


in effecz, this exchange eased the burden on the Laboratory for admin- 
iscezizng LSD co Chemical Ccras School students, directed that another 
doctor be trained, and pinpointed the responsible pnysician's responsi- 
bility and authority. However, ít did not address whether "denonstra- 
tious wich LSD" vere in accord with policy goverzizg the use cf human 


volumteers in research. 


On 8 November 1960 the Commander, Medical Research Laboratories (the 


designated responsible physician) wrote to his next superior, the 
Commander, Gremtcal Corps R&D Laboractories.26 In this Tatta he 


challenged che decisions as well as the reported basis for chose 
decisions. Specifically, he stated that he had agreed only to con- 
duct tests relevant to scientific research and aot demonstrations with 
LSD or the other macters decided. Accordingly, he withdrew whatever 
concurrence he may have given during che earlier discussion and instead 
provided a policy scatemenc to guide the use of LSD-25 in human sub- 
jects, quoted below in part. 


ARAS 


123 


Page 129 of 264 


| 
| 
TA : | 
Jo moral or ethical basis exists for the exposure of human | 
subjects to pharmacologically active agents for purposes of. 
= “demonstrations.” The choice of the term “demonstration” in 

5 basic reference is oue of the most telling arguments contained 
‘therein. Whereas no legal basis has ever been established for l | 
experimentation on humans, nevertheless the officer and civíl- f 
ian physicians of the Chemical Corps feel morally, echically, i | 

and professionally justified (both as physicians, and as pro- 

fessional civil and military servants of the naciou) ín using i 
7 human subjects for research in, or wder the control of, che | 
Chemical Research and Development Laboratories. Any use of | 
LSD 25 in vüích we participate will be am experiment, uct a | 
= ` demonstration. | 
| 
! 
| 
| 
| 


Several other restrictive and/or explanatory clauses also were included in 
— the policy statement. 


A lsz Indorsement, dated 10 November 1960, to the above-referenced letter 

e" established char the Commander of che Chemical Corps R&D Laboracoriss noc 
ouly supported che responsible physician's viewpoint regarding human experi 
mentation, but also recognized his authority as the Secretary of che Arzy's 
des: gaced representative to establish such policy. Asa سو‎ of che 

un action, the Camanding General, Chemical Corps R&D Command, on 21 November 
1960, rescinded his earlier decision and indorsed the êye Î 2 pays tc 5 


policy statement. 26 


x The uert exchange in this controversy involved a letter from rhe Chemical 
Carps School, subject: Support for LSD-2S Exercises, dated 13 October 
1960, co che Commander, Chemical Corps R&D Laboratortas, in which ic vas 
= Tecognized mat the Medical Research Laboratory would support only one 
more LSD-25 practical exercise at the Chemical Corps School, and aliso 
advised char wich the Laboratories' assistance on this exercise, the 
= School would be able co conduct future exercises, calling on the Labora- 
cory only for che chemical agent. The lecter continued by requescing 
assistance for a 28 October 1960 Advanced NCO Class exercise, &lchouga 
E enphasizing that che School understood chat che Laboratory would have 
preferred co participate in the exercise for the Officer Career Class. 
Zy lsc Indorsement che Commander of che Laboratory advised that they 
-would be unable to participate in the exercise for the NCO Class on 
= 28 October 1960, but that selected NCO students and staff could be 
included in the plarmed December exercise for che Advanced Officer 
Class. By 2d Indorsement, dated 4 November 1960, the Comandant, 
7 Chemical Corps School, expressed appreciation to the Chemical Corps 
R&D Laboratories for che assistance provided on 28 October 1960 for 
the LSD exercise. It also mentioned that two doctors from Fort McClellan 


24268 


ES 124 


Page 130 of 264 


participated and thac iu the future they would not require any assistance 
from the Laboratories except for requesting che chemical agent. By 3d 
Indorsement, dated 10 November 1960, the Laboratory Commander advised 

the Commanding General, Chemical Corps R&D Command, of the recommendation 
of the responsible physician that experimentation on humans with LSD-25 
follow certain defined protocols, and again restated chat only the 
respoasible physician could approve tests with LSD. By Ach Indorserent 
che Commanding General, Chemical Corps R&D Command, advised che Office 

of the Chief Chemical Officer that Che interpretation of che responsible 
physician's authority and responsibility was: correct and chat only he 
could approve experiments involving human subjects. Nowhere in this 
correspondence do we find reference to Deparment of the Amy policy as 
expressed in Chief of Staff Menorandum 385, or discussion about whecher 


the "demonstrations or practical exercises with LSD" were violations of 


that policy.  Rovever, 
poysician attempted to 
scientific research. 


The evidence did not clearly establish the necessity ior tests conducted 


at Forz McClellan. On the contrary, the indications ware that the ces cs 
were conducted for other than necessary scientific research, which was a 
violacion of Chief of Stazf Memorandum 385. 

In summary, available evidence indicated that LSD field testing ac Fort 
McClellan may have started as early as May 1959 and included several 
officer and NCO classes. The records indicated that che last tesc at 
Fort McClellan probably was conducted ín December 1960, although there 
may have deen Other tests. Sane credence was lent to this belief of 
subsesuenc tests oy the Cestimony of a witness, who stated that he and 
another doctor cook LSD at the Chemical Corps School in January 1961. 

Se also stated that he was an observer at other LSD tests during 1961.24 


Field Testing - Fort Benning, GA 


The third series of field testing of EA 1729 was conducted at the U.S. 
Ar y Infantry School, Fort Benning, GA, on 8 January 1960. 


Purpose 


The purposes of this test were to familiarize volunteer Infantry officers 

with che symptoms, reactions, and recovery response when an individual 

was actually subjected to a measured dose of LSD-25; to determine whether 

the incapacitacion produced by LSD-25 was of military value; and to decar- 
Cine the situations in which it would be useful and usable.37 l 


123 


the available evidence indicated that the responsible 
terminate demonstrations with LSD as unnecessary for 


Page 131 of 264 


Authorization 


On 25 August 1959 the Office of Chief Chemical Officer requested the 
.CG, USCONARC, to authorize Chemical Corps personnel to administer LSD-25 
to approximately 30 volunteer students of the Advanced Class at the U.S. 
Army Infantry School and of the regular class at the Command and General 
Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS.J8 On 4 September 1959 EQ USCONARC 
mnatified the Commandanc, U.S. Army Infantry School (USAIS), Fort Benning, 
chat they agreed with the concepts of further evaluation of che agent, 
subject to the availability of facilities and sufficient vclunteers, and 
authorized che Commandant to communicate directly with the Chief Chemical 
Officer on the e'aluatíon.^l On 23 Sepcember 1959 the Director, Command 
and Staff Department, USATS, in a disposicion form to che Director of 
Instruction, advised chat HQ CONARC had directed the Infancry School co 
cooperate with the Chief Chemical Officer in the evaluation of LSD-25. 39 


was available showing 


Tats is the first instance in which a clear record 
field evaluation of 


the request procedures followed in preparing for a 
LSD-25. 


Conduct of Test 


Based on che approval to administer LSD-25 to Advanced Ofiicer Class stu- 
dent volunteers at che USATS, preperation for che test program was made 
and consisted of an orientation phase and three action phases.J7 


Orientation Phase. On 13-14 Navezber 1959 che Assistant Clef, Clinical 
Research Division, gave a general ھ7‎ gn psychochecicals co the two 
Advenced Classes of the [Infantry School Of che approximately 340 
members of Infancry Officers Advanced عوست‎ I and II, 135 students 
volunteered tc take part in the لی‎ This number was reduced even- 


tually do 41 volunteers. 


Ca 8 December 1959 a member of che Psychology and Euman 


action Phase L. 
the Minnesota 


actors Engineering Brazcha supervised the adetinistracion of 
وا‎ Personality Inventory (ET) and completed plans for clinical 
evaluations at che Martin Aray Hospital. The test aacerial wag to be 
returaed to the Clinical Research Division prior to 1 January 1960 for 


scoring and evaluation.36,40,41 


action Phase II. Oa 15 December 1959 che volunteers vere examined ac 

the Martin Amy Hospital. The physical examination for the human voim- 

teer program ſacluded che completion of Standard Fora 88, Report of 

Medical Examination, on each volunteer, except for the dental, chest 

X-ray, vision, and audio portions of the examination. It was stressed 3 


aee 


126 


Page 132 of 264 


that the Standard Form 89, Report of Medical History, would be completed 
in full wich special emphasis given to the following points which required 
definice positive or negative stacements: history of allergy of any type, 
asthma, etc.; drug sensitization or reactions; immunization reactions; 
hepatic disease— cirrhosis, hepatitis, etc.; epilepsy or seizures; and 
ulcers, duodenal or pepcíc.36,41 To avoid the compartmentalized draft 
board“ type examinations, each volunteer was examined by a single physician 


ia an individual quiet room. 


final phase, the 41 officers selected for the test were checked 
sy personnel from the Medical Research Directorate, Edgewood Arsenal, and 

as .a result, 17 officers from each of the cwo Advanced Classes vera selec- 
ted to receive Che drug; the remaining 7 officer volunteers were to serve 

as controls, receiving only water. The selection decisions vere based on 
(a review of the physical examinacions, review of the MMPI tests, and 
finally, on the previous experience of the Chemical Corps personnel 


regarding cests of chis nature. 36 


Priar to the 


Staff Department, USAIS, prepared a detailed plan for the 
actual test, to ínclude logistic and facilities support, security per- 
sonnel, medical support, and instructional classes to be given to che 


volunteers after they received LSD. 40 


The Command and 


Accion Phase TII. The actual test vas conducted on 8 January 1960. After 
a short briefing, che volunceers received LSD-25 in water, except for the 

7 c ro volunteers who received plain water. The dosage ranged from 

100 ro 200 aicrograms total dose, given orally and according ca che volun- 
teer's body weigne.36 Throughout the test, strict controls vere maintained. 
The subjects were requested to record thelr obsezvations and feelings con- 
tiaucusly throughout che test. These written comments provided a unique 
insighc into che effects of LSD on individuals.35 

During the following 24 hours, two of che volunteers exhibited nausea and 


dizziness. Af 0630 hours, 9 January 1960, all voluncasrs vere checked ov 


medical officers and released; no untoward reactions were notes. 


The only cecorded complaint of an adverse reaction because of the test 
was an allegation char one of the volunteers developed epilepsy approxi- 
mately two years after ingesting LSD.42 


Compliance vith Chief of Staff Memorandum 385 
Alchough che records concerning the accions preceding and during che field 


test vere accurate and in considerable derail, che individual records, to 
include volunteer scacemenats, physical/mental examinations, and other daca 


127 


Page 133 of 264 


relevant co the actual test, were not available. As such, comments as to 


compliance or noncompliance with policy regarding use of humans in research 
are only as accurate as those records which were availzble. Ic appeared | 
that the officer students were informed fully about the test, che drug and 
the probable effeccs, and their volunteer actions were in accordance with 


Chief of Staff Memorandum 385. 


The cited purpose of the test appeared do indicate that the research was 
necessary and chat minimum numbers of volunteers vere used.. However, in 
view of che tests or demonstratioas conducted earlier at the Chemical Corps 


School, che actual need of the Fort Benning field cest vas questionable. 


U.S. Ar- Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth (USACGSC). KS. 


Earlier in this section it was mentioned that che requesz from the Office 
of Chief Chenical Officer co che CG, USCONARC, also included 30 officer 
volunteers from the USACGSC to be tested with LSD-25. On 19 February 1960 
the Comandant, U.S. Azcy Command and General Staff College, wrote che 
Chief Chemical Officer in reference co participation in the LSD cesc.38 
The letter stated that in view of the discussions and the comments of che 

ceo USACGSC observers to the Fort Benning tests, it was agreed that partici- 
pation of the College in che further evaluation of LSD-25 would be suspended. 
This action was taken because substitute agents would de developed and vould 
require evaluation and testing at some future dace. 43 No other information 
was C5ocained mich indicated chat any tests involving han volunteers vere 
cauduczed at the U.S. W y Command and General Staff College. 


During che research effort a document vas discovered which indicated thac 
Leid ses g was conducted at Dugway Proving Ground, UT, on 25 Sepcemder 
anc involved four officer persounel assigned ta Dugway. There 
were informal references made concerning this cesc, in which four !nscruc- 
ac Dugway Proving Ground were administered LSD-25 and their subse- 
guent efforts to teach a class while under che influence of che drug vere 


fo 


Observed and evaluated. 


-There uere uo ocher records found concerning this cest, the volunteer 
aspeccs of the test, or che cest results. However, since this test cook 
place during the same general cimeframe as che Fort 3ragz, Fort McClellan, 

and Fort Benning casts, it vas assumed thac Che same general procedures 
were followed as concerns purpose of the test, mechod of obtaining valun- 


teers, and medical, psychiatric, and psychological examinations. 


128 7 
e 


jaf ia 


1078000097 یی روه وو میں که teet‏ ہہ 


— . MÀ we a ees sos an, 


— — 2 
— — —.— 


Page 134 of 264 


Field Tasc - Dugway Proving Ground, UT 


4 multi-phase field test involving the dissemination of agent BZ, a benzilate, 
was conducted at Dugway Proving Ground, Dugway, UI, duriag the period 12-26. | 
November 1964, by persounel from Edgewood Arsenal. The name "Project Dork" 


was agsigned co this field test. 


rurvose 


The purposes of "Project Dork” were to test the effective dosage of BZ when 
disseminated in the open and to collect information on the treatment of BZ 


induced delerium. 


There had been extensive clinical testing with BZ on voluntser subjects ac 
Edgewood Arsenal, however, no observations had been made on the effective- 
ness of the agent when disseminated under field conditions. Previously, 
field cescs involving dissemination of an agent had been disapproved an 
medical grounds because of lack of control over dosage and difficulry of 
Sn ging exposed individuals. However, recent gains apparently had over- 
come these obstacles and it was now considered feasible to conduct such 
field tests on humans, 46 


Autnorizatiou 

The basic authorization to conduct experiments with benzilaces was contained 
in a memorandum from Secretary of the Army Brucker co che Chief of Staff, 
subject: Use of Volunteers in Research, dated 8 October 1959.47 

On 29 October 1964, during a conference at Edgewood Arsenal, a Department 
of the Arzxy (DA) requirement co conduct a high priority program to deter- 
ziae che feasibility of dissemination of 32 agents in effective concentra- 
tions co distances of 1,000 yards against a poiat target vas nade cu, 
as was the desire for volunteer field exposures to be completed on an 


urgent basis.^6 


Field Test 
Selection of Volunteers.  Approximacely 10 volunteers were selected fran 
300 available volunteers in the Sixth U.S. Army area. They were selected 
on the basis of a personal history questionnaire and evaluation of Minne- 
sota.Multiphasic Personality Inventory tests. Complete medical evaluation, 
to include C3C, ECG, EEG, chest X-ray, liver and kidmey function tests, and 
psychological interviews vere conducted ac Edgewood Arsenal. Volunteer 
received numerous incentives, including weekly chree-day passes, IDT pay- 


menc, etc.46 Of the 10 volunteers initially selected, 8 were exposed co 


che agent. 


aA A 


129 


‘slightly more than 3 days apart. A 


Page 135 of 264 


The tesc itself involved che exposure of the 8 subjeccs ín groups of 4, 
A variecy of military tasks were per- 


formed and evaluated. Throughout the test stringent medical and other 
safety controls vere in effect. All subjects, following physoscigzine 
medication, showed a complete return to a normal neurologic status . 45,46 


A review of the two documents available on "Project Dork” indfcacad chat 
tests produced positive results. l 


Compliance with Chief of Scaff Memorandum 385 


-` et - 0 H 
No individual volunteer records were available for these tests.  Zvidence 
Chief 


available in the referenced reports indicated full com.liance with 
of Staff Memorandum 385. 


Summarv -.Field Test Phase 


field tests involving the use of LSD, amd in one instance the use of agent 


BZ, on human volunteers were conducted ac various military installations 
in the United States. A recapitulacion of the estimated umber of volunr- 
teers used ín each cast is listed belew: 


No. of No. af 

Volunteers Volunteer Medical 

Locacíon of Test (Esz.) Records Availablex 
Fort Bragg, NC 73 1044 
Fort McClellan, AL 191 f 195° 
Fort Bennizg, GA alc 426 
Dugway Proving Ground, UT 4 ad 
Dugway Proving Ground, UT 10 (Agent BZ) m 
319 345 


*Indicaced aedical records for individual volunceers maintained ac Edgewood 


Arsenal, or in soze cases merely record of volunteer parziciparion. 
Edgewood Arsenal medical records are available for 104 individuals. 


a. 
80 of dhe records indicate drugs were used, 24 do aot indícate che 
dose or drugs. 

5. Of che 195 records, 113 indicate the use of drugs, 82 do noc. 


C. 4l volunteers (34 were drugged, 7 vere noc). 


d. Only available records are list of names--no aedical records. 


130 


Lo 
xy 
T 
af 
ہے‎ 
* 


Page 136 of 264 


CHAPTER VIII 


FOOTNOTES 


1. Report of the Ad Hoc Study Group on Psychochemical Agencs, Office 
of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Research and Development, 


19 Navember 1955. 


Additional Use of Volunteers in Cw 


23 Disposicion Fora, subjecc: 
co Chief Checical 


Research, from CMLC Research and Development Command, 


‘Officer, dazed 22 March 1956. 


3. Memorandum for Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, subject: 
Corps Plan for che Use of Volunteers in CW Research, dated 17 May 1956. 


4. Copy of teletype from Commanding General, CONARC, co Commanding 
General, U.S. Fourth Amy, AC. 300853, dated 28 June 1958. 


Drafc report (copy), Headquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps Artillery,‏ تو 
Ft. Bragg, subject: BW Laboratories - Fc. Bragg Tescs, undated.‏ 


g of che Medical Cowmictse, U.S. Army Chemical Corps 


6. Nee 
ick and Azzy Chemical 


Advisory Council, 3-4 November 1958, Fort Derr 
Canter, M). 


7. U.S. arcy Chemical Research and Develoczent Laboratories Technical 


Report, LN 3074, June 1961, Clinical Investigacion of tà 1729; dy 
Van M. Sim, June 1961. 

8. Disposition Form, subject: CWL - Fort Bragg Tests, dated 31 July 
1958, fron CWL, ACC, to Corps Checical Officer 


— 


8, Scory Plan - Fore Bragg Film, with inclosure, undated. 


10. Disposition Fora, CMLRD-CW-M(C), from Chief, Clinical Research 
Division co Deputy Director of Medical Research and Director of Medical 
Research, subject: Brief Summary of Work on Ft. Bragg Tests Covering 
period from 2 Sept ~ 13 Sept 1958, dated 23 Septenber i958. 


ll.  Tescimony of W (Rec) Lloyd E. Fellenz, caken at St. Petersburg, FL, 


on 28 Augus: 1975. 
i2. Disposition Form, CMLRD-CH-HM(C), subject: Fort Bragg Tests, fron 
Chief, Clinical Research Division co Director of Medical Research, dated 


17 September 1958. 


131 


Proposed Chemical 


xe 


Page 137 of 264 


13. Chief of Staff Memorandum through Assistant Chief of Staff, G4, for 
Chief, Chemical Officer and The Surgeon General, CS: 385 (30 June 1953), 
subject: Use of Volunteers in Research. . 

14. Fort Bragg Roster, undated. 

15. Tescimony of COL Lawrence W. Jackley, 24 July 1975. 


16. Memorandum for Record: SWCAC-CD 400/UW/9/1/13, U.S. Aray Special 
Warfare School, Ft. Bragg, NC, dated 6 October 1958, subject: Report cf 


Tes cs of Chemical Agent K-ZA 1729(U). 


a 


17. Undated three page insert for Dr. Silver's speech, with a cwo page 


inclosure, tle: Summary of Review of Special Forces Tapes, made 29 


Sept - 1 Occ 58. 


18. Lecter, reference:  CMLRD—CW-M(C), to CPT E. R. Clovis, Clinical 
Research Division, U.S. Army CWL, Army Chemical Center, MD, from 
Headquarters, U.S. Aray Special Warfare School, Ft. Bragg, NC, daced 
10 November 1958, with fuclosure: Special Test Situacions. 

19. Letter, (CMLRD-CS-M(C), to CPT L. W. Jackley, U.S. Army Special 
Warfare Center, Combat Development Office, Ft. Bragg, NC, from 

CPT E. R. Clovis, Clinical Research Division, dated 30 Occober 1958. 


20. Letter (SWCAC 380.01) from Headquarters, U.S. Army Special 
Warfare School, Ft, Bragg, NC, to Dr. Van M. Sim, dated 23 October 1958. 


X 


21. Scatenent cf MG (Ret) J. J. Egyes, dated 14 August 1975. 
22. Roster, LSD Participants, dated 28 Occober 1959, 29 October 1959 
and 30 October 1959. 


23, Lecter to Secretary of Defense, dated 24 July 1975. 
24, Statement of George F. Solomon, MD, daced 6 August 1975. 


25. Letter, CML3D-CR-DSA, Headquarters, U.S. Army Chemical Research and 
Development Laboratories, Army Chemical Center, MD, daced 31 Augus c 1960, 
subjecc: LSD Demonstrations, and lst Indorsemenc, dated 11 October 19680. 


26. Leccer, COLRD-CR-M, Headquarters, Amy Chemical Center, MD, dated 

8 November 1960, subject: Use of Incapacitacing Agents on Human Sub jects 
(T). with actached Isc Indorsement, dated 10 November 1960, and 2d 
Indorsement, dated 21 November 1960 


132 


ser 


Page 138 of 264 


7 Lecter, Headquarters, U.S. Ar y Chemical Corps School, Fort 


275 
M-Clellan, AL, dated 13 October 1960, subject: Support of LSD 25 


Exercise, wich four Indorsements. 


28.  Leccer, CRD/D, Chief of Research and Development, to Dr. Harold 
G. Wolff, dated 9 January 1957, subject: Human Volunteer Tests with K 
Agents (C), wich attached Memorandum for Record. 


29. Meeting of the Medical Committee of the U.S. Azmy Chemical Corps 
Advisory Council, 15-16 June 1959, ar Fort Decrick and Army Chemical 


Cencer, MD, issued, November 1959. 


30. Meecing of the Procective Comittee, U.S. Army Chemical Corps 
Advisory Council, 16-17-18 March 1959, Fort McClellan, AL, issued, 


July 1958. 


Jl. Paper titled, Field Trairciag Tests, undated and unsigned. 


32. Statement of LTC (Rer) Paul J. Walsh, dated 26 Augusz 1975. 


33. Disposition Forz, dated 11 February 1966, subject: Transciczal of 


eport on LSD, from Medical Research Laboratory to the Director, Research 
Laboratory, with inciosures. 


34. Roster of Volunteers (ZA 1729), Fort Benning, dated 3 January 1960. 


5 Section VI, Writcen Coments of Volunteers Following Completion of 


36. Disposition Forz, dated 19 January 1960, sub j ect: Trip Reperr to 


Fort Benning, GA, from Chief, Experimental Medicine Branch to Director of 


Medical Research. 


37 Evaluacion Report, Psychochemical Agent (LSD 25). 


^. 


38. Lecter, Op-, subject: Determination of Possible Military Uses 
of LSD 25 dy administration to Students of the Advanced Class at che 
U.S. Azzy Infencry School and Cocaand and Staff College (Short Title: 
Evaluation of LSD 25), from Office of che Chief, Chemical Officer to the 
Commanding General, US CONARC, dated 25 August 1959. 

39. Disposition Form, daced 23 September 1959, GNKZAD-A, subject: 
Evaluation of LSD 25 (C) from Director of Instruction, U.S. Arzy Infantry 
School, co Director, Command and Staff Department, U.S. Arzy Infanery 


Scnool. 


133. 


SX 


Page 139 of 264 


i0. Plan of Test, Evaluation of LSD 25, undated, Command and Staff 
Department, U.S. Army Infanery School, Fort Benning, Ga. 


ul. Lecter, ATTNG-SCH, Headquarters, US CONARC, subjecc: Deterzization 
of Possible Military Uses of LSD 25 by Adminitscracton to Students of che 
Acvanced Class ac the U.S. Army Infantry School and Commend Staff 


College (Short Title: Evaluation of LSD 25), undated. 
42. Case File, Jordan, William R., LIC (Rec), Fort Benning, GA. 


43. Letcer, ALLDOC 252/6, U.S. Army Comsand and General Staff College, 
Fort Leavenworth, KS, to Chief Chenical £ 


Officer, Department of the 
Arzy, dated 19 February 1960, subject: Evaluacion of LSU 25 (C). 


44. Roster, Dugway Tests, 25 September 1959. 
45. Edgewood Arsenal Technical Report, ATR 4140, The Human Assegsnent 
or 3Z Disseminaced Under Field Condicions, dated November 1967. 


46. Report of Dork Progran, A Feasibilicy Study and Human Assessment 


of BZ Disseminaced Under Field Conditions, daced December 1964. 


47. Secretary of the Army Memorandum for Chief af Staff, subject: Use 
ef Volunteers in Research, dated 8 October 1959. 


48. Paper titled, Areas Where Tasting Occurred, 
Arsenal Medical Records Custodian, 27 January 1976. 


134 


provided by the Edgewood 


aX Jj A 


ae 


+6 4 (ETE 


Page 140 of 264 


Pe Eg 


€ 


CHAPTER IX 


INTELLIGZNCE CORPS EXPERIMENTATION 


WITE HALLUCINOGENIC DRUGS (U) 


General 


(U) S Tre purpose of this chapter is to explain hallucinogenic type drug 


zl 


experiments conducted by elements of the U.S. Army intelligence communitye 
in conjunction with elements of the U.S. Army Chemical Corps. This phase 
of the volunteer program is presented in a separate chapter because of its 
unusual relationship with the Edgewood phase of psychocherical drug experi- 
ments, field tests, and operational use of drugs for interrogation purposes. 


(U) As mentioned earlier in discussions concerning the "threat," the intel- 
ligence community was well Ware of psychochemical drug interest ín the early 


-1950s by potential enemies of che United States. Moreover, the Intelligence 


Corps was continuously striving to improve their mm interrogation methods 
as well as attempting to better understand the methods and means used by 
other nations. Also, as discussed earlier in this report, the Chemical 
Warfare Laboratories at Edgewood received authority to use human volunteers 
in psychochemical drug experiments in May 1956 and the Medical Research 
Laboratories at Edgewood initiated LSD (EA 1729) drug studies in lace 1956. 


Intelligence Corps Testing at Edgewood 


(U) Available records indicated that officials from the Intelligence Center 
at Fort Holabird and the Chemical Warfare Laboratories began coordination of 
a joint psychocheuical drug project in November 1957. Some planning and 
informal coordination of a possible joint project apparently was conducted 
in lace 1957 and early 1958.+ in May of. 1958 a testing program was dis- 
cussed ín earnest between the project officers from the Intelligence Board, 
located at Fort Holabird, MD, end the Medical Research Laboratories at 
Edgewood Arsenal. As a result of that meeting, che President of the Intel- 
ligence Board sent an informal plan to the HeLa) Research Direccorate of 
the Chemical Warfare Laboratories on 3 June 1958. 


(u) Ar The proposed plan, however, was evidently well knou and reviewed by the 


Laboratory staff at Edgewood months before it was officially sent to ther. 
This conclusion was drawn based on documents, dated in March 1958, which 
indicated a thorough review of the plan had been conducted at Edgewood. 

The plan, entitled, "Material Testing Program EA 1729," included detailed 
discussion of the “method of approach to Prospective Volunteers," which 
provided that prospects would be initially selected based on their official 
personnel records and security clearance Informacion. Next, the prospect 


20 
ہے — 111 


n? 


APPA? sem na 


~ vd e: 


Wwe 


Page 141 of 264 


© HHNE 


was to be approached on z personal basis and told that the official 
classified project would make mencal and physical demands upon hir. If 
the prospect was interested, he would be required co sign a securicy 
statement (declaring that he would protect the classification of the 
project). The plan allowed for a very general explanation of the pro- 
ject but noted "care will be exercised not co mention to the prospect 
the exact properties of the material which lend themselves to intelli- 
gence application.” Ir called for the prospect to sign a volunteer 
statement very similar in content to the statements used in the Edgewood 
volunteer program. Under a discussion of “Preliminary Tests for Volun- 
teer Prior to Program Testing,” the plan provided thac a complete mental 


.and physical examination as vell as other testing would be completed 


The first visic of the 
“physical examination, 


" 


prior to the use of any volunteer ín the program. 
volunteer group to Edgewood was planned to include 
group and individual unwitting reaction test and group orientation. 


(= Specifically, the plan established that: "The first visit of the volun- 


teer group to ACC [Amy Chenical Center, Edgewood] will be planned for 
9 purposes: physical examinatíon, unwitting reaction test, and group 
íentatíon of test program. 
The schedule will call for physical examinations during morning and after- 
noon of the day of arrival with those physically unfit being excused from 
further participation. In the early evening of the firs: day after arrival 
at ACC, the group will meet in a room provided by ACC staff. In the course 
of this gathering, alcoholic beverages will be served to the group. Prior 
arrangement will have paired each member of the volunteer group wich a 
trained interrogator not known to the subject. The interrogator will have 
had an opportunity to study the dossier of the subject to be observed and 
will have been provided sufficient additional information by which to 
accomplish the purpose of the exercise and to simulate a social situation 
comparable to a diplomatic cocktail party where an attempt will be made 
to derive classified informacion from unwittingly material-influenced 
subjects. All beverages, alconolic or otherwise, served to volunteers 
will have included sufficient EA 1729' for ac least effective dosage of 
all concerned. During the course of the gathering, individual observers 
will actmpr to associace with their designated subjects and, using guide- 
lines provided by ACC personnel, derive che desired information as deter- 
mined from previously furnished background information on the specific 
volunteer. Observations of the individual under group conditions will be 
followed by personal individual interview. Where necessary, the observer 
may administer an addicional dosage during this contact with his subject. 
Arrangements will have provided facilities for each pair to withdraw for 
such personal interview purposes. Volunteers will be given to understand 


that such interview ís a normal preliminary to the overall testing progran- 


The purpose of the individual interview will be for comparison purposes 
with z second personal interview to be conducted by the same observer on 
che following day when che volunteer is no longer demonstrably under the 


136 


sist 


A period of a three-day stay will be required. 


ates 


Page 142 of 264 
; Q LIE 1 
Um 


influence of the material. The voluntser will be given to understand thar. 
this second interview is ean extension of that of the previous day. On the 
afternoon of the second day, the group will agaín meet for the purpose of 
general orientation. They will be told of the experiment of the previous 
day. General orfentation will he by ACC representatives and will cover 
the following: nature and history of the material, previous experimenta- 
tion conducted, role of instant volunteers in contemplated testing pro- 
gram, ecc. The volunteers will be cold that they have been selected on 
the basis of their milicary intelligence background as persons acutely 
securiry conscious and experienced ín withholding information or extract- 
ing it from uowitting subjects; this for the purpose of testing the 
material for intelligence application under the most rigid conditions." 


^ 


(u) order planned tests provided for subsequent visits to Edgewood by the 


volunteer group and included: "Personality Profile Determination Through 
Interview and Effectiveness of Structured Interview Conducted by Untrained 
Personnel, which was to determine the ability of lay personnel, given 
proper instruction and training and a prepared structure of an intervie, 
to obtain from a subject the basic information required fer personality 
interpretation; "Comparative Before/After Reactions to Polygraph Exacina- 
tion," which vas to determine if a subject ís capable of carrying through 
a deliberate falsehood while under the influence of EA 1729 (LSD); "Memory 
Impairment Tests," which vere to evaluate the effect of the material (LSD) 
on retention ability of subjects; "Specialized Motor Reaction Memory Tesz- 
ing," which was to evaluate the impairment of simple motor reactions of 
volunteers after ingestion of LSD; “Effect of Environment and Physical 
Condition," which was to evaluate the effect of LSD on a volunteer under 
various envirommencs and physical conditions to include total isolation 
and hostile interrogation situations; and "Influence of Material Under 
Artificially Created Stress Situations,” which was to determine the 
abiliry of the volunteer to wichhold informacion under unusual stress 

as well as the influence of LSD. 


(U) No evidence was found to establish that this plan vas approved at any 
level above the President of che Intelligence Board or the Director of 

the Medical Research Laboratories at Edgewood. At least one document 
which contained the proposed plan was sent from che Intelligence Center 

to the Commanding Ceneral, Edgewood; that document was signed by the 
Adjutant Ceneral for the Center Commander, indicating that the Intelli- 
gence Center Comcander may have approved the program from che Intelligence 
Corps side. However, the former Comander of the Intelligence Center 
testified that he did not have knocledge of the plan beforehand med chat 


it vas entirely possible that letters left his command sígaed in his be- 


half without his knowledge. He further stated chat although the Intelli- 
gence Board vas located within his comand, it reported directly co che 
Office of the Assistant Chief of Scaff for Intelligence, Department of 
the Army, for operational matters of that nature. : 


137 


-SORHDENHAL— 


ED 


Page 143 of 264 


"JUI ilL واۓ از‎ ial 


(U) The Intelligence Board Project Officer confirmed in his testimony that 
the authority line for the Intelligence Board was direct to the Assis- 
tanr Chief of Staff for Intelligence (ACSI). He further testified thac 

it was his impression that no definite decision could have been made at 
Holabird to participate in the test at Edgevood without approval of the 
ACSI.J That belief, however, was not confirmed by former wembers of the 
ACSI staff. Additionally, no evidence was located to establish that the 
Medical Research Laboratories sought approval through Chemical Carps 
channels or that The Surgeon General's Office was given the opportunity 

to review the plan. On the contrary, indicacions were that Medical 
Research Laboratories considered the conduct of the experiment with 
Intellígence Corps valunteers to be within the scope of approval granted 

to them in May 1956 to use human volunteers in psychochezícal drug studies. 
Farthermore, che Chemical Corps appareurly funded these experiments, to 
include per diem and travel allowances for the volunteers. 


ODN 


U yar Records of the Medical Research Laboratory at Edgewood and the Intelli- 
gence Ccater at Fort Holabird reflected that the experiments were con- 
ducted (generally as planned) between August 1958 and May 1960. The 
experiments were divided into two phases: the first phase (series of 
experiments) was conducted from August to November 1958;4 and the second 
phase fram September 1959 to May 1960.12 Each phase began wich the 

planneo “\wneitting Reaction Tests" or "Contrived Social Sítuarion,"8.9 


and included three additional major experiments. The following is a 


breakdown of the tests by phase, dates of conduct, and reported partici- 


pants: 
NO. OF 
EXPERIMENT DATE(S VOLUNTEERS 

PHASE I2 (14 August-21 November 1958) 
Unovitting Reaction/Contrived 14 Aug 58 13 

Social SituationB.? 22 . : 
e 14-21 Aug 58 l4 

Tests 1,8 : . 
Isolation/Sensory Deprivation 2-21 Nov 58 10 

res ts 8, 10 
Rete Recall Tes ts 8 2-21 Nov 58 10 
PHASE *,- 10 September 1959-6 May 1960) 
Contrived Social Situation? 10 Sep 59 12 


138 : 


“CORBET E 


K 8 


Page 144 of 264 


Wd PRL bI Sii ke i ANS 


Isolation Testal^ 3 Hov-17 Dec 59 12 
A Retention and Recall Tests,“ 3 Rov-17 Dec 59 12 
* Polygraph Tests 5,15 ` 29.Apr-6 May 60 12 


(U) The exact nber of volunteers used ín these tests could not be deter- 

mined. However, evaluation of testimony, travel orders, and reports 

dndicated that 30 to 35 different volunteers were used, some of whoo 

.may not have received a drug but performed a technical service euch as 

Operation of a polygraph machine. Moreover, ít was not possible to 

determine the nuzber of times the volunteers (individually or collec- 

tively) received LSD. Some volunteers may bave received 20 or more doses 
of LSD over the pe: lod of nearly two years covering both phases of the 

tests.^ 


(U) The evidence clearly established that the volunteers did not render their 
"informed consent" prior to the first occasion they received LSD. More- 
over, there was a deliberate effort to deny che any information chat 
would perzít them to make a knowledgeable evaluation of the hazards 
involved ín their participation. The failure to informs the volunteer 
of even the fact that they would receive a drug must be shared by both 
the Intelligence Board, as initiator of the tests, and the Medical 
Research Laboratories, as Che medical investigators. However, ít must 
be noted that following the initial surreptitious administration of the 
drug, the voiunteers were provided a full explanation of the drug proper- 
ties and a briefing om the remainder af the project. There vas no indi- 
cation that any subject withdrew his consent or declined to return for 
subsequent ingestions of LSD. 


۱ (U) One witness testified that he was sked to volunteer in such a manner the 
he believed his refusal to participate would have placed hin in disfavor 
with his immedtate superior. l7 Bowever, pther Intelligence Corps volim- 
teers testified that no pressure was exerted to cause then Co volunteer, 
nor were they placed in a position that made participation zppear to be 
their military duty. +6,18,19 The project officer testified thar several 
prospects he approached declined to participate and their disinterest was 
not mentioned to anyone. That ís not to say that pressures were not 
brought to bear on certain subjects, rather, chat the majority of the 
evidence indicated the subjects were highly dedicated Intelligence Corps 
: officers and enlisted men who entered the program and remained in ict 

S ۱ because they believed they were making an írportant contribution to the 

32 . Corps and perhaps to narional defense. 


. 


Field Testing 


. (U) Following the first phase of Intelligence Corps testa (November 1958), 
the Chief of the Clinical Research Division at Edgewood, ín a letter to the 


139 


| UROL : 


AS 


A ecu nes 
4 


Page 145 of 264 


Commanding General, Army Intelligence Center, advised that all work on 
the initial plan had been completed and the results were rewarding. The 
£ letter also stated: "It Ls recommended that actual application of the 
` material [referring to LSD] be utilized in real situations on sn experi- 
mental basis, if possible. We shall be happy to assist your personnel 
with both medical and material problens."20: 


(0 Ou 21 January 1959 the U.S. Army Intelligence Center reported back to 
Edgewood: “This headquarters bas forwarded your letter to the Assistant 
Chief of Staff for Intelligence (ACSI), Department of the Ay, concurring 
in your recommendation that actual application of the material be utilized 
^ in real situations on an expe imental basis."21 Indications were chat the 
Intelligence Board project officer, in consort with Medical Research Labora- 
: tories representatives, prepared a plan to field test LSD as an aid to inter- 
5 rogation. In early March 1959 the Director of Medical Research at Edgewood 
alerted bis next superior (Commander, Chemical Warfare Labs) that the plan 
would be submitted to him in a few days by the Intelligence center. 22 Other 
evidence indicated that, as intended, the Intelligence Center forwarded a 
testing plan, calling for use of LSD overseas on foreign nationals, to the 
Chemical Warfare Laboratories in March 1959. That route was apparently 
selected as the mosz rapid avenue to The Surgeon General. 


(o و‎ Reportedly, on 9 April 1959 the Chief, Research and Development, Office 

of The Surgeon General, was briefed by Chemical Warfare Laboratory and 
Intelligence Center representatives on "Material Testing Program, EA 1729" | 
and the proposed plan for field experimentation. Ee was reported to have 
reserved judgment ac that time, buc later {informally notified Edgewood 
that The Surgeon General would consider the plan if it vas presented by 

! the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence (ACSI). Accordingly, the, 

i Intelligence Center sent the plan to ACSI to be coordinated with The 
Surgeon General, who "concurred in the finding of the Checicai Coros and 
offered no medical objections to the field experimentation plan." 
Apparently, as a result of that staff action, the Office of ACSI directed 
the Comander, U.S. Army Intelligence Center (USAINTC), to prepare a 
detailed staff study regarding the planned overseas test and to prepare 
a briefing for the ACSI on the matter. On 15 October 1959 USAINIC fur- 
nished the requested staff study to ACSI.23 


- (0) No further action was apparently taken on the approved overseas plan 
until completion of the second phase of the joint test that vas con- 
z ducted at Edgewood Arsenal during the period September 1959-May 1960. 


E : (u — On B August 1960 a liaison team, the “Office of Assistant Chief of Staff- 
Intelligence Liaison Team, was zent to Europe (USAREUR) to brief the 

b European intelligence community on the Joint Intelligence Corps/Cheuical 

Warfare Laboratories project for testing of LSD and to acquaint the G2, 

USARZUER, with the proposed plan for field experimentation wich LSD. The 


4 ages 


[2E Fr - 


Page 146 of 264 
E fert IHL Em 


* liaison team consisted of three members, the action officer „voe the 
Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of 
the Army (OACSI), the project officer from the U.S. Army Intelligence 
Board at Fort Holabird (USAINTS), and the project officer from che 

- U.S. Chentcal Research and Development Laboratories (USACRDL) at Edge- 

' wood. <A report rendered by the liaison team upon their return to the 
United States included their itimerary, which indicated they personally 
briefed the G-2, USAREUR, as well as the commanding officers of the 
Military Intelligeace Groups in Germany and France and a representative 

E of the J-2 (Joint Intelligence) Office, European Command (EUCOM), in 
Paris, France. 24 


U 7 In general, it was agreed that the intelligence community in Europe 

= would prepare a plan for implementation of the proposed "field test" and 
send ít to Department of the Army. Further, it was to be che responsibility 
of che European command to select the subjects, who would be nonvolunrteer, 
foreign nationals. The Department of the Army was to be responsible for 
providing a Special Purpose Team for the execution of the plan once it 
was finalized. It vas also agreed that the Special Purpose Tem (SPT) 
would include a qualified medical doctor and che necessary material (LSD) 
to conduct the experiments .24 


(U) Available evidence reflected that upon their return from USAREUR, the 
liaison team briefed the Director of Security, Mapping and Combat Inatel- 
ligeuce at OACSI, DA, om the results of their trip. Plans vere made to 
brief che Assistanc Chief of Staff, Intelligence (ACSI), foilowing receipt 
of the G-2, USAREUR, plan which was expected on or about LS Sepcec5er 1960.25 
They also reporcedly briefed che Assistant Chief Chemical Officer for 
Planning and Doctrine, who recommended that the Chief Chemical Officer 

and The Surgeon General be invited to the briefing for che ACSI. 


(U) Records indicated that on 25 November 1960 the Deputy ACSI and the G-2, 
USAREUR, informally agreed on the working relacíonship for the planned 
European field rests. 25 , 


(0) — on 7 December 1960 che project officer from USATNIC briefed the ACSI on 
the plan to conduct field tests of LSD in Europe. Also present at the 
briefing were representatives from the Office of the Chief Chenical 
Officer, DA, and The Surgeon General'’a Office. 26d. 27 


fujer A report of the briefing indicated that the ACSI was ín agreesent that 
a techaique, such as chat provided by mployment of EA 1729, vas required 
to enhance thelr conventional interrogation standards. e showed concern, 
however, im the macrer of coordination with other agencies and asked if 
this project vas coordinated with the CIA and FBI. The ACSI vas tnforned 
that coordinacion had not been effected, buc was planned after che field 
experimentation ín Europe was concluded and the results confirmed che 


"on ہو‎ 


141 
ee P 
CAH 2 


. —ͤ——Uꝛ—— — —— عم‎ 


i E 
ےم‎ mee o0. یپ کیہ چ‎ 


PESE 


E 
— —— € —— e 
۰ 


Page 147 of 264 


findings of the intelligence application. The ACSI reportedly remarked 

Chat: "his concern was that if this project is going to be worth any- 

thing it (EA 1729] should be used on higher types of non-U.S. subjects, 
T and, as he put it, ~ staffers. This could be accomplished if the CIA 
was brought in." ACSI also remarked that: "maybe the FBI should be 
informed and to possibly join us to furcher develop the experimentation." 
The report noted that ACSI did not direct coordination with the CIA and 
FEL, but only mentioned it for consideration by the planners. The 
same document stated that coordination with the CIA would not be made 
until there was more factual findings from field experimentation. 


“ (U) No evidence was found to indicate that the plan was approved by the 
Chief of Staff of che Army or any office bigher tha. ACSI. Moreover, chere 
were no indicactons that the projecc was coordínaced with the CIA, FBI, 
cr any other office cucside the Department of the Army. 


(U) Ia January 1961 the Chemical Corps made an officer available to be a 
member of the Specíal Purpose Team ,86 who joined the USAINTS project officer. 
The third member of che team was a medical officer from Fort Toccen, NY, 
apparencly provided by The Surgeon General (assignment of medical officer 

by The Surgeon General was not confirmed by documentary evidence). 


Operation Third Chance 


‘ (U) on 28 April 1961 the Department of the Army EA 1729 Special Purpose 
Team (SPT) departed for USAREUR to conduct a 90-day field experimentation 
program. The team consisted of: a medical officer (Arzy, LTC), Chemical 
Corps EA 1729 project officer (Army, MAJ), and the USAINTC project officer 
(Ar zy, MAI) representing OACSI. The code name “Operation Third Chance" 
was assigned to the field experimentation program. The objectives of 
the program vere stated in the after accion report as: "The overall 

purpose of the field experimentacton phase of the EA 1729 testing pro- 

: gram vas to confirm ar refute laboratory finding (1958-1960) in an effort 
to ascertain wnecher or not the EA 1729 technique could be exployed as an 
aid to interrogation and whether or not the technique does erhance the 
exploitabilicy of actual subjects af intelligence Interest. 25 


(U) Evidence indicated that the operation scarred with a preliminary co- 

^ ordination conference at USAREUR ta assure complere mutual understanding of 
policy and cperatioual factors established for the program by OACSI. 
Following Chat conference, the team went to ane of the Military Incelli- 
gence Groups to start the project. l 


ver All subjects ta be used in the test reportedly were nominated by che 
sponsoring intelligence units on the basis of their being critical cases 
which were considered to be unresolvable through conventional {ncerrogative | 
or investigative techniques. The plan vas to bring the subject to a 


142 


* 
T BAJ S 4 


27 — 
l ھ‎ 
C 
corey 


og oan رموہ‎ Pac بے‎ 


t 
4 
4 
4 
1 
t 


However, he was administered LSD instead of a truth serm. 


Page 148 of 264 


prearranged operational síte under a pretext designed to prevent his 
Wareness of the actual purpose of his involvement in the test. A gitua- 
tion was devised whereby the subject was given a plausible reason for a 
physical examination by the SPT doctor. The subject was introduced to 
the other two members of the team ín. a social environment, during which 
the surreptíticus administration of LSD was effected through a variety of 
beverages. Once the LSD had taken effect, the group moved to an interro- 
gation room where the subject was exploited. Available reports indicaced 
that the team's medical officer and psychologist were present throughout 


the interrogation in an advisory capacity. 9 


— The team conducted experiments’ 5 usc 562 (5). (2). 

6 USC 552 (b). (1) The report indicated that a total of ll experiments 
were conducted involving 10 individuals (experimentation of one individ- 
ual vas repeated). All subjects, except one, were foreign national, Aruy 
intelligence sources and agents; the exception was a U.S. soldier who 
bad been involved in a theft of classified documents. All subjects were 


nonvolunteers, although one man had agreed to take a "truth senm" tesz. 
29 


(U) The U.S. Army soldier used in conjunction with "Operation Third Chance" 


reportedly had removed approximately 166 classified (SZCRET) documents 
from the Staff Message Center, HQ USAREUR (REAR), COMZ, Orleans, France, 
on là March 1961. Between 15 March and 16 April 1961, during a standard 
military intelligence investigation, he formally confessed to taking the 
documents and allegedly disposing of them by rendering half of then 
illegible and throwing the remainder in a river. He was interrogated 
several times and was administered polygraph tests and a psychiatric 
evaluation. Subsequently, he changed his confession, contending that 

be threw all of the documents in the river. The military intelligence 
investigacion continued to determine if espionage was involved. Records 
indicated that on 2 May 1961 the soldier was placed in "voluntary procec- 
tive custody" in an off-post house and remained in such custody until 

13 June 1961, when he was released to his unit. During that period he 
was evaluated by a civilian psychiatric consultant to The Surgeon General 
of the Army, who recommended the enlisted man be allowed to voluntarily 
be interviewed under sodium pentothal (narco analysis), which was con- 
ducted on 26 May 1961 by an Arzy medical doctor and an Arzy psychiarrist 
ín a hospital envíronment. During the same month he vas interviewed while 
under voluntary hypnosis. The facerviews were followed by several psy- 
chiatric evaluations, one of which (June 1961) resulted in a recocaenda- 
tion that a "tension method aggravated by tension producing drugs" test 


might be useful.30 


(U) Thus, sometime between 8 and 12 June 1961 the DA Special Purpose Tem 


surreptitiously administered EA 1729 (LSD) to him and conducted an interroga- 


tion while he was under the effects of the drug. This event was reported 


143 


Mich > 


page 149 of 264 


x. iim Poit 


as part of "Operation Third Chance."  USAREUR vas later granted clearance » 
by the Department of Justice (which considered the case in light of the 
Atomic Energy Act) to initiate military justice proceedings against the 

- soldier. Subsequently, a pre-trial investigation was conducted. The Z 
Commanding General, COMZ, after consultation with his Staff Judge Advocate 
and Intelligence Officer, elected noc to court-martial the soldier, but 
instead directed iniciation of procedures for administrative separation i 
under the provisions of AR 635-209 (unsuicability). The decision was : 
reportedly made ín light of such factors as: prolonged interrogations = 
which preceded the soldier's first confession; a requirement of secrecy : 
that surrounded the activities of the DA Special Purpose Team; the possible E 

"^ unfavorable publicity arising from the soldier's recollection of the “bizarre ° 

methods" employed by the DA Special Purpose Team; and the unanimous opinion 
of the psychiatrists who evaluated the soldier that he had severe psychiatric 

The soldier subsequently waived his rights to counsel and to 

appear before a board and was separated from the service with a General Dis- 


charge on 23 October 1961.30,31,32 


(u) The Special Purpose Team returned to the United States in late July 1961. 
They concluded that a pressing need existed for advanced and unconventional 
techniques which would improve the capability of field intelligence units 
in the conduct of extensive and intensive special interrogations, and that 
the FA 1729 technique demonstrated promise of fulfilling that need to a 
siguíficant degree. Among their recommendations were: "A comprehensive 
field tescing program be established in conjunction with appropriate asso- 
cíated U. 5. incelligence and security agencies for the scientific deriva- 
tion cf ccpíric data upon which to standardize che EA 1729 technique; 

and that future field experimentation utilize real subjects of actual 

cases for both research purposes and operational advantage. 29 


(U) There was no evidence found to indicate char any part of this so-called 
experiment was presented to or approved by the Araş Chief of Staff or 

the Secretary of the Army, The evidence was clear that from the outset 

to the conclusion the project violated Department of Defense and Depart- 
ment of the Aray policies and procedures for conduct of chezical/uedícal 
research. Moreover, by both intent and practice, the team used nonvolun- 
teers and in all but one case non-U.S. citizens. Additionally, the use 

of the U.S. soldier was not experimental in nature but operational. 

Finally, the fault for the flagrant disregard for Department of the Amy 

and directives was primarily that of the Assistant Chief of Staff, 
Inor o +s, however, it must be shared by the Offices of The Surgeon 2 
General ana che Chief Chemical Officer. 0 


Overeticr Derby Hat 


(C- Available evidence indicated that in December 1961, following the return 
of the Special Purpose Team from Europe, the decision vas made at OACSI i 


144 = 


Orb 0 i 


| 
-re $ ie F 
; 


— 


Page 150 of 264 
x NM UV Dihal c لہ‎ 


to explore the posaibilicy of conducting similar experiments in the 
p U.S. Arzy, Pacific (USsARPAC). 23 On 27 February 1962 the Intelligence 
} Corps project officer briefed the Assistant Chief of Scaff, C2, USARPAC 
Y i en the "EA 1729 Program" at his Headquarters in Hawaii, The stated purpose 
: of the project was: “The primary purpose of the field testing program vill 
be experimental research under actual operating conditions, verification of 
previous laboratory and field test findings regarding the EA 1729 technique, 
and development of further data regarding operational exployment of the 
material. Any operational gains accruing to individual cases selected for 
experimentation will be considered a collateral advantage. 34 


ration for the new phase of testing, which was called "Operation Derby Hat," 
i ACSI requested the Chief Chemical Officer to provide an officer as a member 
: of a Special Purpose Team (SPI) for the USARPAC phase. 35 The Chemical Corps 
assigned the same officer who had represented them on "Operation Third 


Chance." 3 


(Vr The initial tests were to start on or about 20 April 1962. In prepa- 


oer” In April 1962 the Intelligence Corps project officer was placed on orde 
for South Viernan, thus, “Operation Derby Hat" was postponed pending selec- 
tion of a replacement.J7 Two months later a replacement was selected and 
plans were made for a second liaison visit to USARPAC; the visit was 
scheduled for 18 June 1962.38 The liaison trip to USARPAC, which included 
stops in Eavall, Korea, and Japan, took place during the period 21 June- 
7 July 1962. Arrangements vere made with the intelligence staff members 

5 USC e ری‎ (2) to provide oríentals of various nationalities 
for use ín LSD experiments. Special efforts were made to insure that 
U.S. citizens were not used as subjects of the experiments. 


wa "Operation Derby Hat" began on 8 August 1962 with the three-member 
Special Purpose Team stopping in Hawaii to coordinate with the USARPAC G-2 
. before traveling (59 (17 where they administered LSD to 5 USC 552 (5) (1) 
! subjects. “78 The team Ktayed in Toy (1) until approximately 29 Septenbe: 
1962, vhen they moved To) (I). While in (d) (Il) they adrzinistered 
E ZA 1729 (LSD) rod USC 552 (b] (1) subjects. Each of those experiments vas 
2 conducted in a manner similar to chat employed in "Operation Third Chance." 


At the end of October the team traveled to Japan, while the intelligence 
project officer took a side trip to Korea. While in Korea he was advised 
n that a U.S. Aruy officer, who had worked on "Derby Har" (by (1) had been 
| hospitalized for possible surreptitious administration of a drug. The 
entire Special Purpose Team returned to 5 E (b) (1) study the hospi- 
ł talized officer. 40 In an effort to determine {4f the drug he had received 
1 was LSD, the team administered LSD to the officer, who reportedly volun- 
teered to undergo the procedure in order that his reactions could be 
compared. l : Although no documentary evidence was found regarding identi- 
ficacion of the alleged first drug the officer ingested, a witness testified 


Page 151 of 264 


FPIMORITLS 
int I2 و سا‎ dci 


that it was concluded that pe officer was not umvittingly given LSD but 

bad simply drank too wich.“ ‘Additionally, no record was found of the 
officer rendering an informed voluntary consent agreement.  EBevercheless, 

the act of administering LSD to a U.S. citizen was at variazace to instruc- 
tions given the Special Purpose Team Chief in August 1962 by ACSI, who 
directed: "You are bereby instructed that under no circumstances will 

you use or allow to be used material FA 1729 on U.S. citizens.” 
CU) Im late November 1962 the SPT was reportedly in Tokyo when they received 
word from ACSI to remain in Japan for new orders. One member of the team 
had already departed for the United States; the other co remained in Japan 
pending further orders.43 Meanwhile, the Office of the Assistant Chief of 
Staff, Incelligence, Department of the Army, made arrangements to extend 

the team's stay in USARPAC for the purpose of sending thea to Saigon, South 
Vietnam. In a letter to the Commanding Officer, U.S. Army R&D Laboratory, 
Edgewood Arsenal, ACSI wrote: "In compliance with recent instructions from 
the Secrecary of Defense, it was necessary to extend the travel activities 

of the team for an additional 60-day period. This, of course, requires 

the services of the two officers [from Edgewood] ."44 The menoranduxz 
affixed to the letter stated, im part: "Instructions received from SD 
required team travel to Saigon, Vietnam for additional 60-day period ."44 


(d) Aw two members cf the team who were delayed ín Japan vere directed to 
proceed ta Saigon with an arrival date of 7 December 1962.53 The third 
member, who had returned to the ited States, testified that he was 
summoned to the Pentagon for an interview with the Assistant Chief of 
Staff, Intelligence. He was told to prepare to join the other members 
of the team in Vietnam and that he would be given a letter to deliver to 
the COMUSMACY personally. Ee further testified that he was advised that 
the need-to-know of the project was restricted to the Secretary of Defense, 
Chief of Scaff, Arzy, ACSI, and Chief, MACV; not the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff or the Secretary of the Aruy. 3 the letter, which was 
Teportedly opened in the presence of the three team members and the former 
project officer for “Operation Third Chance" (who was stationed in Viecaaz), 
allegedly announced the Secretary of Defense's decision to use LSD on Viet 
Cong POWs and directed the Chief, MACV, to insist that the Vietnamese pro- 
‘wide suitable subjects for the team.43 The letter in question was noc 
found during the research effort. : 


(028. Sworn testimony from two of the three Special Purpose Tean members and 
the former project officer of "Operation Third Chance" indicated thar the 
Special Purpose Team did uot administer, assist in the administration, 
or observe the administration of LSD to anyone in South Vietnam. The 
opinion of witnesses ag to why the project was aborted varied. In fact, 
no two offered the same reason, which may indicate that there were many 
reasons or merely chat their memory was dim on that particular point. At 
any rate, some of the reasons offered were: the difficulty ín finding 


aa ns 


146 


| 9 +2 


Page 152 of 264 


xibjeccs that met the prerequisite constraints for their use; inability 

of the Chief, MACY, to insist on Vietnamese cooperation; and the non- 

availabilicy of a aite that provided the seclusion required for secrecy 
3 and physical security. Whatever the reasons, no evidence was found that 


LSD was used on any subjects in South Vietnam. 


(U) Records indicated that in February 1963 the Chief of Staff, Aray, re- 
quested and received the report on "Operation Third Chance," conducted in 
Europe in 1961, and a Fact Sheet on "Related Activities of December 1962- 
January 1963.46 Although the Fact Sheet was not found, ít vas believed to 
have been in regard to the Special Purpose Ter s activities in Vietnam. 


(use ac the conclusion of a 10 April 1963 briefing on "Operation Derby Bac "47 
the Deputy ACSI, DA, direcced that no further field testíng with EA 1729 
be undertaken. The disconcinuance was based on a lack of data, inconclu- 
siveness of the testing, and the legal, politícal, and moral problems in- 


berent ín the use of EA 1729.48 
Summary 


summary, the Intelligence Corps’ use of LSD on himans involved 30 to‏ د1 صب (ں) 
U.S. Army officer and enlisted volunteers receiving repeated doses over‏ 35 
a period of nearly two years. The subjects apparently received thorough‏ 
physical e:aminacions and excellent medical care; the experiments were‏ 
conducted under competent medical supervision. The first experiment,‏ 
which ínvolved the surreptitious administration of LSD at a simulated‏ 
social reception, was in violation of published Department of Defense‏ 
and Deparzment of the Arzy policies. There were no records found for‏ 
the majority of the Intelligence Corps volunteers; che few which were‏ 
found were incomplete and totally inadeguate to determine even the most‏ 
basic information about the test.‏ 


( مر‎ "Operation Third Chauce" involved the use of LSD on nine foreign 
nationals and one U.S. military subject, none of whom were volunteers in 


any &ense of the word. 


: (U $ "Operation Derby Kar" involved the use of seven nonvolunteer foreign 
natícnals and one U.S. military person, who reportedly vas a volunteer. 
Boch operations, "Third Chance" and "Derby Eat," vere in violation of 
Department of Defense and Department of the ہحۂ‎ palícy and regulation 
and disregarded moral and ethical standards of conduct governing the 
use of humans in research. i 


(U) There vas no evidence of actual use of LSD on any subjects in South Viet- 
naz. Moreover, there was no indication that LSD vas used for any purpose 
by U.S. Aray intelligence agencies after the cessation order of 10 April 
1963 by the Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department 


of the Arxy. 


NER 


147 


Page 153 of 264 


RW - E 
1111 "e 


FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER IX 


1{U) Gf u.s. Army Chemical Warfare Laboratories (ACC), MD, Letter to 
Commanding General, U.S. Army Incelligence Center, Fort Holabird, MD, 

subject: Proposed Plan for Field Experimentation with EA 1729, dated 

19 March 1959. 


2.(U) yf U.S. Army Intelligence Board Letter to Chief, Medical Research 
Directorate, Chemical Warfare Laboratories, subject: Transcitcal of 
“Planning Worksheet, dated 3 June 1958. 


3.(U) gf Testimony of LTC (Ret) William J. Jacobson, 29 August 1975. 


T d Disposition Form by a Medical Research Laboratory staff weber, 
subject: Comments on "X" Material Testing Program Proposal from USAINTC, 


dated 27 March 1958. 


5 Uer" U.S. Army Intelligence Center, Fort Holabird, Letter to Coccanding 
General, U.S. Army Chemical Center, Edgewood, MD, subject: Material 
Testing- Program EA 1729, dated 28 April 1958. 


6. (U) Testimony of MG (Ret) Richard G. Prather of 29 October 1975. 


7. (U) Director of Medical Research Laboratories Letter to Commanding 
General, ACC, and Chemícal Corps Materiel Command, subject: Request for 
Fund Cítation, dated 21 October 1959. 


B. (U) U.S. Army Chemical Research and Development Laboratories Technical 
Report CRDL 3074 titled, “Clinical Investigacion of EA 1729," published 
June 1961. ` 


9. jw U.S. Army Intelligence Board Report, "Unecítríng Reaction Tests,” 
dated 14 August 1958. 


10 {Ua U.S. Army Intelligence Board Report, "Isolation Tests," dated 9 
Decemper 1958. 


10. U.S. Arry Intelligence Board Report, Polygraph Test," dated 21 
Auguat 1958. 


12fU) President, U.S. Army Intelligence Board, Letter to Chief, Checical 
Research Directorate, Edgewood, subject: Transmittal of Planning Work- 
sheet,” dated 24 March 1959. 


148 


T |‏ ح۲0 


2,4 E 


— — — — — e e o e 


Page 154 of 264 


E CONEBENTIAL 4 


13. U.S. Arzy Intelligence Center Letter to Edgewood Medical | 
Directorate, subject: Report of Experiment, dated 12 Novenber 1959. | 


14 ( U.S. Army Intelligence Board Letter and Memorsanduz for Record | 
to Army Chemical Center, subject: Report of Experiment, EA 1729, dated i 
27 April 1960. f 


Army Intelligence Board Memorandum, subject: Material‏ ہیس ان 
Testing Program FA 1729, Phase II Polygraph Test, dated 4 Augusc 1960.‏ 


16. (U) Testimony of LTC (Ret) Allan D. Bell, Jr., 8 August 1975. 


17. (0) Testimony of MAJ (Ret) Charles L. Shirley, Jr., 5 August 1975. 


18. (U) Testimony of Anthony A. Manheim (former enlisted man), 9 September 
1975. 


19. (U) Testimony of LIC (Ret) Robert R. Rich, 15 August 1975. 


20.[0 m Medical Research Laboratories Letter to Commanding General, U.S. 
Army Intelligence Center, subject: Material Testing Program EA 1729, 

approximate date 14 January 1959 (later reference identified letter as 14 
January 1959, Memorandum for Record on file copy is dated 5 January 1959). 


21.. (U) U.S. Amy Intelligence Center Letter to Commanding General, U.S. 
Army Chemical Research and Development Command, Edgewood, subject: terial 
Testing Program, ZA 1729, dated 21 January 1959. 


22 (er Disposition Form from Director of Medical Research to Coczander, 
U.S. Aray Chemical Warfare Laboratories, subject: CIC Test Plan, dated 


6 March 1959. 


23(UYe ^ USAINTC Letter to ACSI, DA, subject: Staff Study: Material Test- 
ing Program, EA 1729, dated 15 October 1959. (Includes reference to 
ACSI-SC Letter, 27 July 1959, requesting staff study — reference noc 


found.) 


24 (U Report af Trip of OACSI Liaison Group re Material Testing Progran . 
EA 1729, dated 26 August 1960. 


25 |جھیال‎ Heme سد‎ from USAINTB project officer to Board President, subject 
Maceríal Testing Program, EA 1729 re Report of Líaíson Trip to USAREUR, 


dated 30 August 1960. 


26 (U or" 0.8. AÁrzy Chemical Corps R&D Command Letter to Comander, U.S. Army 
Chemical R&D Laboratories, subject: Material Testing Program, EA 1729, 


dated 25 January 1961. 


149 z. 


(RADE 


Page 155 of 264 


Uer" a. Inclosure l. Disposition Form from DSMCI to ACSI, subject: 
Material Testing Program EA 1729, undated. 


(u bd. Inclosure 2. Material Testing Project EA 1729, Phase I 
Background and Summary to Date, undated. ; 


J) z^ c.  Inclosure 3. Material Testing Project EA 1723, Phase II 
Field Experimentation Program, undated. 


(= d. Inclosure 4. Fact Sheet by QACSI/ODSMCI/Security Division, 
subject: Material Testing Program EA 1729, dated 9 December 1960. 


Dum e. Inclosure 5. Memorandum for Record, ACSI-SC, dated 21 
December 1960. 


27 (2 Disposition Form, OACSI, subject: Notificacion of Briefing for 
7 December. 1960. 


28 (Jor Bead quarters, Department of the Army, Office ACSI, Letter to Commander 
U.S. Azzy Checical Corps RSD Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal, subject: Report 

of Trip end Activities of the Department of the Army EA 1729, 8 Purpose 
Tear. dared 21 September 1961. 


29 Dur Taoject Officer Report to ACSI, subject: Report of Trip and 
- Activities of the Department of the Army EA 1729 Special ee Team re: 
Operation “third Chance," dated 6 Septezber 1961. 


30. (U) Report of 18 gation - Loss of Classified Documents fron Head- 
quarters, U.S. Amy, Europe (Rear), to Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Arzy, Europe, 


dated 12 April 1961. 


31. (U) DA, TJaG, Washington, DC, file 61/121 (SC 5754), March 1962. 
32. (U) The Adjutant Ceneral file ~ Personnel Records. 


33. (U) Letter, ACSI-SC, subject: Material Testing Project EA 1729, dated 
29 December 1961. (Document not found; reference only.) 


34 (Ut ora for Record, subject: Policy and Operational Factors 
Involved in the Conduct of Field Experimentation of EA 1729, dated 


17Ma... os 


35 (XY esi Letter, subject: Materfal Tescing Program EA 1729, to Chief 
Coenica. (liicer, dated 28 March 1962. 


150 


GORRDENHA = 


= 
سا‎ 
3 
= 
E 
E 
2 
E 
2 
3 
2 
E 
2 


نی ا رج Cree Dee‏ 


rR TITER 1. 


th apt 


ODMH 


یت یی ہب 


4 
1 
t 
7 


Page 156 of 264 


E U.S. Army Chemical Corps Research and Development Command Letter, 
subject: Material Testing Program EA 1729, dated 6 April 1962. 


37. (U) ACSI Letter to USAINTC, subject: Material Testing EA 1729, dated 
9 April 1962, with attached Memorandum for Record. 


38 Uf ACSI Letter to CG, USAINTC, subject: Material Testing Progran 
EA 1729, dated 7 June 1962. 


39 Wor “aport on "Derby Hat" Liaison Trip to USARPAC Area, dated 13 July 
1962. 


so (Ugo ACSI-SPT "Derby Eat" Letter Reports: 


a. No. l, dated 17 August 1962. 

b. No. 2, daced 29 August 1962. 

c. No. 3, dated 7 September 1962. 

d. No. 4, dated 16 September 1962. 
e. No. 5, dated 22 September 1962. 
f. No. 6, dated 8 October 1962. 


g. No. 7, dated 12 October 1962. 
h. Wo. 8, dated 28 October 1962. 
i. Unmumbered, dated 15 November ری‎ 


ee Testimony, LTC (Ret) Gordon W. Ross, 20 November 1975. 


42 (U ACSI Memorandum for Chief, DA Special Purpose Team 1729, ھی و‎ 
Material Tescing EA 1729, dated 2 August 1962. 


4 Testimony of MAJ (Ret) Earnest R. Clovis of 18 November 1975. 


44. (U) ACSI Letter to Commander, U.S. Army Chemical R&D Laboratory, 
Edgewood, subject: Material Testing ZA 1729, dated 4 December 1962, 
with Memorandum for Record, dated 3 December 1962. 


45. (U) Message of 5 December 1962 from Camp Drake, Japan, to COMUSACV, 
Saigon, subject: Special Purpose Team. 


46 (Ulo orandum for Chief of Staff from Deputy ACofS for Intelligence, 
subject: European Report, DA EA 1729 Special Purpose Team, dated 
4 February 1963. 


47(U ACSI, DA, Disposition Form, subject: Notification of Briefing, 
dated 31 March 1963. 


48 ACSI, DA, Memorandum for Record, subject: Material Testing 
Program EA 1729, dated 12 August 1963. 


ak E pA 


151 


- .. س1۸ 00ید 


— 
——— — — — — جو‎ s e. > vasas ~.. 


Page 157 of 264 


CHAPTER X 


CONTRACTS WITE CIVILIAN INSTITUTIONS 


General 


The purpose cf chis chapcer is to provide an overview of the contracts 
awarded co civilian inscicutioms by che U.S. Army Chemical Corps during 
the period i950 cto 1971 and to briefly discuss the rationale, scope 

and cost of these contraccs. The discussions in chis chapter uere 
lirited co ccatracts for which actual contracts or contract progress 


reports were available. 


Contracts with civilian medical, penal and educational institutions 
vere an important and integral part of the Army's Chemical Corps medical 
research program. The concracts vere executed for a wide variety of 
purposes, ranging from analysis of chemical compounds to the use of 
volunteers and pacients in psychotropic drug experimentation. 

P 
Due to the passage of time and che routine records destruction require- 
ments, macy of the contracts executed in conjunction wich che Chemical 
Corps medical research program were not located, nor was a determination 
made as co Che actual number of contracts awarded, their cost, or how 
cany volunteers or patients were used by contractors. Although thousands 
of pages of documents from contracts, contract reports, and conference 


it was recognized chat additional Mf Ora tion may 


notes vere reviewed, 
ch effort. 


exist at sources and locacions noc explored during the resea 
However, che informacion presented was considered to de based on the 


mos c accurate data available. 


Available records indicated thac the Chemical Corps Medical Research 
Laboratories entered into numerous contracts wich chenical companies, 
medical schools and hospitals prior to 1950. However, the earliesc evi- 
dence of a contract or report of a contract relevanc to this research 
effort vas daced 18. Hay 1950. That conczact was wich the University of 
Maryland fer "Psychological Studies of che Effects of Chemical Warfare 


Agents." The available reports regarding the contract indicate chat 
human subjeccs were not involved. In all, 54 contracts or report cf 


contracts were discovered and reviewed during the research effort. The 


chart at che end of chis chapter provides a breakout of 48 of the 54 
contracts, Co include: contractor, dates of contract, escimated cost, 
coucract number, purpose of contract and che number ot volunteers used, 
as indicaced in che available reports. Six contracts for which reports 
were located vere noc included on the chart because they did not involve 
human subjects, drugs, chemical agents or matters related to the re- 
search effort. It should be noted, chat the contract data, to include 


mA . nd 


152 ; 2 


Page 158 of 264 


contract dates, cost, and number of human subjects, presented in this 
chapter may ciffer from similar ctype data presented elsewhere in this 
This is not co say that one is rore accurate or complete 
than others, rather the difference Ites in the sources from which the 
information vas obtained. An example of such a difference can be 
found in a comparison of the cost figures presented in Chapter XI 
regarding the contractual costs. The figures for chis chapter were 
derived from concracts and progress reports which were in many cases 
incomplete; while in Chapter XI the figures were based primarily on 
accounting records and available procurement reports. Since neither 
7 source can subscantiate che figures with absolute certainty, it 
«Seemed more appropriate to present the figures as they were deter 
mined from the various records ratier than use a single data source. 
E Additionally, the total number of volunteers actually used by the 
contractors may be greater than the number reflected on the chart, 
however, a higher figure could not be supported by the available records. 


report. 


Early Contracts 


I Very lictle evidence was found regarding contracts or the authority 
for the Chemical Corps Medical Laboratories to enter into contracts 
prior co 1953.  Eowever, ít appeared chat authority to enter into 
contracts was inherent in the missions and responsibilities assigned 

oe to the Chemical Corps. That is to say they were assigned the mission 
for developmenc of "nerve agents" and were permitted to contract for 

: matters related co that mission which could be better accomplished 

= by other agenci Evidence of this was found in a report of the Medical 

Committee of the Chemical Corps Advisory Council's 1954 meeting. 

At that meeting it was pointed out chat che Medical Laboratories were 

having considerable diffitulty procuring support for the Entomology 

Branch co study insecticides and insect renellants. In order to com- 

pensate for their lack of expertise in the entomology field, the Labora- 

tories reported that chey had contracted with two colleges that were 

d prominent in the field (Johns Hopkins and Tufts). Ic was also reported 
at the same meeting char much of the clinical research of che Medical 

7 Laboratories was under contract to other colleges, universitites, and 

E hospitals. The lisc included: Illinois College of Medicine, University 

of Coloradq, University of Utah, Galesburg State Hospital, Montifiore 

-Bospital, University of Louisiana, University of Pennsylvania, Massachu- 

sects General Hospital, University of Wisconsin, University of Indiana, 

and Howard University. No other details of chose contracts were reported; 
however, they were presenced in a light that indicated each contract 
provided for a service chat che contractors vere becter qualified ro 
perform than che Medical Laboratories at Edgewood. Ic was apparently 

" in that light chat che New York State Psychiatric Institute was granted 

the first known contract co conduct research in the psychochemical drug 


= 


153 


aen nA 


Page 159 of 264 


field. In fact, at Che First Paychochenical Conference” (12 May 1954) 
che principal Research Psychiatrist ac New York Psychiatric Institute 
was introduced as "a pioneer in tha field of correlating experimental 
pharmacology and clinical psychiatry." That iascitucion had recently 
completed three Chemical Corpe contracts to determine psychological 
effects of psychological chemical agents on human subjects. Those 
contracts are reflecced on che chart at che end of this chapter and 
were also discussed in a separate report regarding the death of a 
pacienc during one of the experiments conducted at the New York State 
Psychiacric Inscticuce. Experiments conducted wider those contraccs 
fuvolved cescing of human subjects with derivatives of LSD and mescaline. 


Posc-1953 Contractual Efforts 


As discussed earlier in this report, centralized approval authoricy for 
use cf humans ín research vas initiated in February 1953 with che "Wilson 
Memorandum." Et vas apparently the intent, if noc the wording, of 


that and later Departmenc of che Army directives hac the principles 
goverzing che use of humans be applied co Che Army contractual efforts 
as vell as ics own experimental research. 


That intent was also apparently understood, as evidenced dy the first. 
cu request’ for permission co use volunteers in research. The final 
paragraph cf Chat request from the Medical Research Laboratories 

(24 july 1953) stated: "Authoricy is also requested to use volunteer 
subjects for accomplishing those studies which for various reasons cannot 
be carried our in these Laborator zes. Moreover, the Secretary of the 
àrzy noted ín his approval of the request chac: "Special care and 
atcencion will be given to those portions of the approved investigations 
which are to be accomplished by contract, to insure that the same basic 
principles and safeguards applicable co Department of the Army laboratories 
are observed by the contractor.” 


Of che 54 contracts, for which varying reports were available, there were 
only 14 actual contracts found. The 14 contracts were initiated af cer 
publication of the Amy's basic policy for "Use of Volunteers in Research 
in 1953 (CS:385) and in each case the contract included provisions co 
require tne contractor to observe che Aray policies regarding che use 
Typical of those provisions was che one included 
"The contractor will 


"n 


of volunteer subjects. 
in a 1961 contract with Hahnemann Medical College: 
be required to adhere fully to the provisions set forch ia Appendix A 
entitled Policy to be Followed by the Contractor Where the Use of Tuman 
Subjects is Involved, attached hereto, in the use of any human subject in 
the work under this contract. The contractor further agrees to obtain 
prior approval of the Commanding Officer, U.S. Army Chemical R&D Labora- 
tories before commencing any research hereunder on buman subjects." ; 


154 


PESE $ 


Page 160 of 264 


Nerve gez: Studies 


The cajoricy of che contracts reviewed during che inquiry involved 
atudies other than psychochemical drugs In humans. Ten contracts, 
reflected on the chart, were awarded co four universities for studies 
of nerve agents and creatment of accidental exposures co nerve agents. 
Three of che ten contracts were awarded co the University of Colorado 
School of Medicine for investigation and treatment of nerve agent 
casualties and evaluation of therapy and antidotes for those casualties. 
A review of 21 reports submitted by the contractor reflected that 356 
accidental nerve agent exposures, which occurred at Rocky Mountain 
Arsenal, were invescigared, treated or evaluated under the terms of 


"those contracts. There vas no evidence that the contra tor used drugs 


or voluzteers in connection with his work. Two of the contracts vere 
awarded co the University of Utah to study effects of nerve agents on 
personnel at Dugway Proving Ground, Utah. The two reports available 
regarding chose contracts indicated that the contractor performed 
experimental research in animals, investigated accidental exposures at 
Dugway Proving Ground, and provided emergency hospital treatmenc for 
Dugway nerve agent casualties prior to the establishment of a military 
hospital ac Dugway. No volunteer work was conducted uuder che terns 

of chose contracts and drugs used vere those recogzized in the treat- 
meni of nerve gas exposure. Four similar contracts vere awarded co 
Joans Hopkins University. A review of eight reports regarding those 
contracts revealed chac chere were three objectives of che contracts. 
The first was to conduct studies af che electzoencephalogran (EC) as 
an aid in the evaluation of drugs; no humans vere involved ín those 
studies. The second was a study of "parathion spray,” a poisonous com 
pound commercially used as an agricultural insecticide. Reports indicated 
Chat ten volunteer subjects were employed im those experiments. Each 
volunteer was reportedly handled in full accord with U.S. Arzy policy 
(CS:385). The third objective of the contracts vas the invescigacion af 
nerve and mustard gas accidental exposures at Edgewood Arsenal; no 
volunteers or drugs were involved in char portion of che contractual 
effort. The last of che cen contracts, ín the category of nerve agent 
studies, vas awarded to the University of Maryland to investigate 

minor nerve gas poisoning at che Diamond Alkali Company (location was 
mot scared) im che early 1950s. Available reports of chat contract re- 
flecced che ínvescigacion of 38 accidental exposures to chlorine gas 


during che course of the contract. 


Tnucapacicating Agents Contracts 


Twelve contractors were awarded a tocal of 25 contracts for studies or 
experiments involving incapacitating agents. The agenc/drugs used were 
physical incapacttamts such ss morphine, demerol, seconal, scopolamine, 


135 


ہت 
کت 
Lr‏ 
.- 
:2 


garding those contr 


Page 161 of 264 


chiorprocazine, and secebarhical. Mezcal facapacitancs studies included: 
LSD, zescaline, acropine, psilocybin, BZ (benzilace) and glycolate 


compeuads. The nucber of 5 agent contracts lisced here (25) 


was ac variance with the amber of contracts reported by the m General 


Counsel in his tescimony of 8 1 19757 and with an earlie r report 
made co the Assistant Secretary of the Arcy .8 The difference was a 
result of cotaining more decatled contract data and az expansion of che 
number of chemical agents included in che research effort. As mencioned 
in the foreword, the initial research project was not {interpreted to 
Ínclude zany of the physical incapacicants or the glycolates, but vas 


restricted to "hallucinogenic compounds” such as LSD and mescaline. 


Three of che contracts were wich the New York Stace Psychiatric Institute 


for studies of LSD and mescaline and vere discussed earlier as vell as 
in a separate report. In late 1953, the investigators of that Institute 
formed a private corporation called "The Research Foundation for Mental 
Hygiene, Inc.” and were awarded two additional contracts to conduct 
studies Ach LSD and mescaline type drugs on psychiatric patients. 


regarding the performance of those contracts were not found. Thus, 


Details 
it can aoc be scaled with certitude that che patients used were volunteers 
or that the policies established by the — to gover the use af humans 


in research were adhered to in all cases. 


Tuc of che contracts uere awarded to the University of Washington for 

chis study af Neurological accion of CW agents. Review of 21 reports re- 

acts indicated the invescigactors established a volumceer 

pool af 35 medical students of which at least 19 were used in psycho- 

chemical drug experiments. The reports stated chat all Arny policies 

were observed by the investigators, to include complete mental and 

physical examiractions. The studies conducted under che Universicy o£ 

„ couczacts included che use of boch male and fecale humans in 
tesCing LSM (lysergic acid 000 ide), an LSD-like compound, LSD, and 


Shi. 


Two of the contzaccs were awarded to the University of Maryland to perform 
clinical and Laboratory studies af effects of a seríes of atropine 
substitutes, other candidate therapeutic agents and checical warfare agents. 
Five available contract reports and ccacracczors conference notes? reflected 
chat experiments vere conducted using military volunteers from Edgewood 
Arsenal as vell as patients from the University of Maryland Psychiatric 
Institute and area hospitals and perhaps other volunteers. The studies 
included testing of 20 male college gradua ges ability to operate an Air 
Force dual-pursuit apparatus while under the influence of LSD;.16 subjects 


‘were tested with LSD on the "Wechsler Memory Scale"; and 24 subjects 
vere given LSD co test their sense of cime. 


Others reportedly were given 
tests to determine the ability of dibenzyline (a blocking agent) to 


156 ۱ 


^ 


Page 162 of 264 


aztenuzce the effects of LSD. Availabie evidence indicated thart all 
e of volunteer subjects were observed. 


Cae of the contracts vas awarded in 1961 co North American Aviacion's 


Medical Deparcmenc co test "Aircraft Performance Decremenc Resulting 
from Ingestion of 32. Two reports regarding that contract stated 
chat 19 company ecployees volunteered as subjects in che experimenc. 
The reports also stated Chat each volunteer wes given a complete 
medical examination and was required to siga an individual volunteer 


agreement before taking parc in the casts. 


One contract vas awarded co the Indiana University in 1951 for the pur- 
pose of studying "Ihe Physiological Ef£ects of Arropine and Potential 
Atropine Substitutes." The seven reports regarding that contract did 

noc reveal ang information regarding screening or selection of 

volunteers. The absence of such detalls was not unusual as the contract 
predates publicacion of DOD and Army policies governing use of volunteers 
in medical research. The studies apparently dealt primarily with cherical 
search. Bovever, there was evidence of seven volunteers used in 


atropine studies. 


Six separate contracts vere awarded to the University of Pennsylvania. 
Tne i2izial conczac: (1951) vas for "Study of Chemical Warfare Casualties 
in Man."  Reporzs cf chat contract indicated that volunteers were noc 
used and the principal effort was chemical research with one exception. 
Oa one occasion, six firemen were accidercly exposed to an جس حلاص‎ 
substance, and chat exposure was reportedly investigated under the 
cer of at contract. The second contract vas a study of "Influence 
of Morphine and Demerol on the Respiratory Response of Man". Review of 
eight prog-ess reports available regarding that contract revealed 

chat approximately 40 volunteers vere used in coniunction with morphine 
and demerol drug tests. The reports did noc reveal the source of chose 
volunteers or any evidence regarding the screening, seleccion, or 


execution of volunteer agreements. 


The third and fourth contracts involved the "Evaluation in Animals and 


Man. Drug and Drug Mixtures Intended for use in Preventing or Treating 


C4 Casualties." The four reports available regarding these contracts 


indicated that 10 volunteers received scopolamine, atropine, and 
morphine. Again, zo evidence vas found co reflect Che source of volunteers 
or other macters concerning seleccion and medical preparations that 


preceded che use of volunteers. 
à and sixth contracts vere awarded in che mid and lace 1960s to 


of "Threshold Doses in Humans and Evaluation of Drugs 
55 progress reports revealed that approximately 320 


The fife 
conduct experiments 
in Man." Review of 


157 


3 LT TILL LM ea — a a a mn. 
evsene AAL enne 


Page 163 of 264 


12z2ates ac Holmesturg Prison were ceated wich l6 different chemical 
agents including dicen, atropine, scopolemine and various experimencal 


giycolace agents. 


: Since glycolates have noc been previously described in chis report, a 

brief description is provided at this point. "The glycolaces cause 

۱ incapacicatíon by interfering with us cnc funccicns (1. e., activa- 

n dor of smocth muscle and secretory glands) and che central nervous 

l 3 syscem funccions of acetylcoline; they depress or inhibit nervous 
activity. In addition to delirium, there is physical incoordination, 
blurred vision, ínribition of sweating and salivatior, rapid heart rate, 
elevated blood pressure, increased body temperature, and, ar high doses, 

E " vomiting, proscraziíon, and stupor or coma. The onset time may be minutes 

or hours, depending on the structure of the compound, and the duracion, 

hours or days. The effects may be reversed almost completely by treat- 

menc with poysostigmine or other centrally active cholinesterase 


inhibitors such as VX."- 


E The largess dollar value contract (DA 18-035—AMC-126(A)) of the six 
awarded co the Universicy of Pennsylvania was different than any of the 

ES previcus concracts with che other universities. In fact, che records 
and reports indicated that there were three major differences, First, 

z ic was the first known contract that the Medical Research Laboratories 
entered isto involving prison rates. Secondly, ít vas the first in- 
dication found that che contract investigators may not have been sully 
prepared co canduct experiments wich humans at the oucset of the program. 

= Finally, the records of the execution of chat contract indicated that 

one of che purposes of che contract was to allow military medical 
7 investigators to conduct experZzents using prison imatas as their sub- 
jeces. Indications of che uunpreparedaess of the conczactors medical 

B investigators vas reflected in a 5 November 1964 report of a visit by 

Che Chemical Corps Medical Contract Project Officer, Edgewood Arsenal, to 

che contractors’ facilities. That report held chat: "Throughout the 

= entire thrae-day period, cesting was hampered by equipment, such as 
needles, syringes, and alcohol sponges, noc being readily available. 
the second day of cesting no medical personnel, other than ourselves, 
were present, noc did any appear, or make contact sich us prior to our 
leaving Friday afternoon." The report also stated: "It is our opinion 
that in order for this program to be successful, chere needs to be 
guidance and supervision of rhe cesting by the contractors. This is 

~ especially i-oorcant in this early stage of the program for training of 

‘the nursing personnel and establishing standard operating procedures. 20 

= Another report of a visit by che Edgewood Arsenal Project Officer to 

Holmesburg Prison in March 1966, held chat che competence of the 

contractor staff and facilities were adequate, thus, indicating that 

improvements had been made in the one and a half years between the reported 


On 


لی .4 


cat‏ کم 


158 


p 


Page 164 of 264 


However, chat report cited proaf of the third point mentioned 
above, L.e., medical investigators from Edgewood were conducting experi- 
ments on prison imaces. This report stated that the purpose of the 
visir wag twofold: first; the introduction of new military medical 
investigators; and secondly, "to conduct a supervised experiment in- 


volving high dases of an incapacitating agent to decermine the 
capability of che contractor co assume responsibilicy for experiments 


of chis type. II 


visits. 


to provide subjects 
presented to the 
officer ín October 


The concerm chat the contract vas used as a means 
for use by Edgewood Arsenal medical personnel was 
Edgewood Arsenal legal adviser by the contracting 
41966. The legal couzsel ruled that che contract cannot be treated as 
one merely to provide subjects for the use of Edgewood medical personnel 14 
Later in October 1966, che contracting officer met with the Chief of 
Medical Research Laboratory and the contract project officer and reached 
an underscanding char the contractor had been and would, in che future, 
be alloved and required to assume full responsibility for the work 
conducted under the teras of the contract. Although this agreemenc 
appeared co indicate that Army medical imvescigators had noc taken parc 
ia either actual experiments or in direct supervision of experiments 
oa izzates, available evidence indicated that as lace as 1964, experi- 
. Dents ou prison írzcates ac Eolmesburg Prison were personally conducted 


or supervised by military medical investigators. 


The same civilian medical investigators who conducted research ac 
Eolzesburg Prison under University of Pennsylvania contracts formed the 
Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc. That organization received two contracts 
(one ia 1968 and the other in 1970) frcm the Chemical Corps to continue 
work at dolmesourg Prison with imate volunteers. The purpose of these 
contracts was to determine che threshold response dose of adult human 
subjects to various chemical agents furnished by the Medical Research 
Laboratories ac Edgewood. The chemical agents investigated were: choking 
agents, nerve agents, blood agents, blister agents, vomiting agents, 
incapacitating agents, and coxing + The 21 progress reports regarding 
these contracts indicated chat ac least 94 inmates were used in experi- 
mencs. in addicion to che reports, ome actual contract was found. Review 
of that couczact indicated the coucractor was required to comply wich 
Deparment of the Army policies established by AR 70-25 (Use of Volunteers 
in Research). There was no evidence that the investigators ac Holmesburg 
failed to comply with any of the policies set forth in the Army regulation. 
Zhe completion of the Ivy Research contracts was delayed in February 1971 
when the fomaces filed a civil suit coucerning the conditions ac the 
prison. Alchough the records indicated that che medical research vas not 
an element of the complaint, the work was stopped until the suit vas 
settled. Nine months later preparations were made to continue the 


"ERA 


159 


Page 165 of 264 


volurzeer experiízents. However, in March 1972, a fire within the prison 
damaged facilities and equipment located ou che prison grounds which 
, belonged co che prison, Ivy Research Laboracories anc the Army. Because 
fire and of criticism of Ivy Research by the Prisoa Board, che 


of Che fir 
ate coucract vas terzinaced in February 1973. No work on volunteers had 


been done since February 1971. 


Oue of che contracts cas awarded to American Ins c. cure for Research, 

- Silver Spring, MD in 1964. The objective of the contract was to develop 
a comprehensive ces c battery Co measure the effects of incapacitating 
agents on the abilities basic co performance of militarily relevant 
casks. Review of seven reports available regarding che contract indi- 
cated that che American Institute investigators conducted paychoactive 
chemical compound experiments on military volunteers. IC vas not clear 
from the reports if zhe volunteers came from Edgewood Arsenal or else- 
where or if the experiments were conducted at Edgewood Arsenal. Mcreover, 
the only agent mencioned in the reports vas EA 3580, a glycolate. Other 
Studies conducted under Che terms of the contract appeared to focus on 

academic type testing to determine the validity of che screening and 

S selection process used Co decerrinze which military volunteers vere 

eligible to receive psychochezical drugs. 

I2 1955 an A e grant (DAL8-108-CML-5596) was provided co Tulane University, 

Depar gent of Psychiaczy and Neurology, for research in abnormal brain 

‘functioning as related to mental illness. The few Army records avail- 

able regarding Che experiments conducted under the terzs of the Aray 

„ Zant revealed chat mental patients, normal volimteers and ueurological 

B patients were used by the Tulane medical investigators. The actual 

terms of the granc were noc found and therefore no decerzinatcion vas 

En made concerning the grantees compliance with Departmenc of che Aroy 
policies nor could any judgment be made as to the quality of consent 
rendered by che patients. One particular experiment involved giving LSD 
and mescaline to mental patients: who previously had wire electrodes 
implanted in their brains. Reports indicated chat the research group 
believed that a basic biochemical abnormalicy was responsible for the 
bizarre behavior demonstrated by many psychotic patients; and chat che 
vire electrodes served a twofold purpose: co record electrical abnor- 

a maliries in patients’ brains, and to stimulate patients brains ín hope 

of curing or ameliorating Che patients’ problem. The reports suggested 
= mat che implancacion of electrodes was financed under a grant from che 
= Commonwealth Foundacion and noc the Army grant. Finally, ic was uoc 
‘clear wnat che Chemical Corps interests in che experiments were at the 
— time, although, it vas surmised chat their inceresc did not go beyond 
gathering evidence of the effects of LSD and mescaline in humans. Some 
credence was lence to chat belief by che reports provided the Chemical 

Corps, which did not discuss che implantation pROCeeurras purpose or 

effect; rather they scressed the effects of the drugs. 


160 


رھ 


Page 166 of 264 


Three contracts were aarded Baylor University for experiments with 
physical incapacitacing agents ín human subjects. The five reports 
concerning Che contracts established chat che volunteers were screened, 
selected and sedícally examined in accordance with Amy policy 
directives. The experinents involved the use of adult volunteers of 


beth sexes with therapeutic drugs such es demerol, morphine end sco- 


polaniae. 


One of che contracts involving physical incapacitating agents was 
gwarded co che Institute for Behavioral Research co study Drug effeccs 
and complex behavioral repercories under condicions of full enviromental 
conczol." Experimencs under that contract primarily involved monkeys 

and baboons. However, chere was evidence of some volunteer 

experiments with sedatives or tranquilizers such as seconal, dimethyl 


crypcamine and chlorpromazine. 


The remainder of the contraccs were noc involved in psychochemical drug 
studies. Moz Sinai Hospital was awarded four contracts to conduct 
studies of patients with hypothalamic diseases; neicher drugs nor 
volunteers were involved. Louisiana State University was awarded two 
cactracts to conduct studies of poisoning and effects of organic 
pnospoace insecticides in tan and animals. Those studies involved the 
invescizgacioa of accidental exposures and did not include the use of 
drugs or volunteers. The Maryland Medicsl-Legal Foundation vas awarded 
a contract co study cases af botulism intoxication throughout the 
country. They collected daca and apparently paid victims (called 
volunceerg i2 their reports) far blood samples. Hahnemann Medical 
College and Zospical waa awarded four different contracts for evalu- 
ation of blocking agents (chemical compound used to arrenuace che 
effects of drugs or chemical agents). They used volunteer subjects 
extensively; progress reports reflected hat they used no coercion or 
enticemenc to gain volunteers and followed stringenc medical safeguards 
in every human test. New York University was awarded two contracts 
which involved collection of data on patients with endocrinalogic 
disorders (disorder of the glands). No drugs or volunteers were 


involved ín chose studies. 


The data upon which this chapter was based was found in various Arzy 
files; uo effort vas made to search the contractors files or to request 
che contractors assistance in contribucing data that may have been 
available ín their files. Moreover, research for this chapter did noc 
include contracts with chemical companies or laboratories for the 


development, synthesis or procurement of chemical compounds or 
equipment. 


Finally, with the excepctoa of the Bolmesburg Prison inmates and an 
occasional mention im contract reports, che names of volunteer subjects 8555 


161 


Page 167 of 264 


cr pacients vere not disclosed ín che records and reports researched 
c ag lagu 
Zecazitulatioz of Contract Data 

E IES ee Geach. Vara 

I= s Y, $4 concracts or progress reports of contracts, were reviewed 
as a basis fcr this portion of the report. Those contracts are 


2d categorized bela. 


"Nr. of Contractors Nr. of Contracts 
— of ORnCractors — 9k V.Cuütracocs 


Category 


Unrelated co iacapacitating 


Ds : Agent Research 6 6 
x Nerve Agenc Studies (N)2 4 10 
5 aE Agent Contracts (I)? 12 25 

5 Miscellaneous Research Scudies Q5? 09 13 

27 : 34 


ha مم‎ 
1 
om 
— 1م‎ 
n 


cluded on 
cegory of 


Contract Chart 
research, listed at Colum 8 of Contract hart 


162 


— —À———— M MÀ Una 
— 


COHTRACT CHART 


DATES : ` MR. Or CATEGOI 
CONTRACTOR OTART END COST CONTRACT un, PURPOSE OF CONTRACT VOLUNTEERS CONTRAC. 
ہے کچ کے می موی ےہ‎ MUST 8 TUUM LS eri : : LAM انت‎ RAL 
l. Amarican Inst. for Reasearch 07/01/64 10/23/67 $192,096 DA18-035-AHnC-282(4) Develop tasta to mOasuCe affects 102 1 
ot incapacitating agenta 
2. Baylor Unlverelty 10/01/61 09/30/62 6,551 /DA-Q.-18-C-36 Etudy affeata of Analgenle 31 1 
. : drugs on Veapivatory center 
end circulation in himana 
3. " ya 1964 1967 44,000 DA18-108-AHC-149 (A) Unk, I 
4. * m 06/02/65 06/30/68 44,000 DA18-035-4HC-337 (A) 18 1 
5. Hahnemann Hadice) Collega 06/26/61 07/31/66 277,863 DA18-108-0O1.-6623(4) Bvaluation of Therapeut fc Hone H 
f Compounds in anímale and humans 
6. " i: 03/24/62 04/24/68 50,060 DAA413-67-C-0489 65 H 
7. " " " 06/11/68 12/11/68 25,000 DAAA-1567-6C-0489- | 26 H 
0641-0295 
" n " u 01/06/69 03/06/70 49,775 DA4A15-69 -C-0295 16 H 
9. Inst. for Behavioral 10/01/62 12/31/65 156,681 D418-108-AHC-26(4A) Drug Effects and Comp lox پچ‎ 10 1 
Research ‘ behavioral repertories 
10. Indians Untversity 06/51 09/51 Unk, DA18-108-040.-2397 The Phystological effacte of 7 1 
At ropſne & Atropine Bubatirutasa 
11. Ivy Research Lebs., Inc. 06/28/68 12/01/69 78,135 DAAA-15~68-C-0627 ‘To determine threshold dose 94 I 
effects In nan 
12 „ s i 03/70 09/71 48,700 —  nAA4-15-68-C-0324 Dok. 1 
e ———— —— کے سک مہ ہو رہ ہک ہے‎ em — — . — Ä ů ů METER EE dm ie ibas 


nene 


v9z Jo 89, ebed 


— C MEM 00۲ 22 MMC — —— : ا‎ € — 
LI è 
DATE ; , Na, or CATEGORY 
COHTRACTOR TART BUD COBT CONTRACT NR, PURPOSE OP COUTRACT VOLUNT rE RG COUTR 
TUUM oT CONTRACT MK, TM — SR س‎ 
13. Johns Mopkine Valv, 02/25/40 07/15/63 $ 91,115 5410-108-405-O8980.- Determine eflects of drugs Hone H 
704(۸) end CM agents on the BEG 
14. " " si D418-100-CH1.- 6609 (A) Uni. H 
15. " " 11/19/51 01/33/55. 152,323 DA18-108-CHL-3014 Treatment of Injury by GB 10 W 
and mustard effects | 
16. " n " 02/01/55 02/15/60 18,000 0۸16-108-405-0. 8tudiee on LEG Method to ald Hons H 
-104 in evaluation of drugs 
17. Louisiana State Univ, 2 03/21/54 07/31/58 51,452 DA18-108-405-00.-57 Clinical Pathological and Unk. H 
f s Pathophyslologicsl atudies in 
. l anticholineetersse 00 
18. n m " 07/01/55 07/31/58 DA18-108 -CHL-547) Hona H 
19. Heryland Hedicel-Legel 10/11/63 09/07/66 143,330 DA18-0)5-AhC -102(4) Search far new Incepacitating None H | 
ound ei {on Agents j : | 
20. Hount Binal Moepltal 01/01/64 09/30/66 7.064 DA18-035 -AHC-281(4A) WVypothelanic Control of Hone H 
: Adconocortical Function 
21, ‘i " " 06/01/63 04/21/64 14,378 DA18-108-AHC-147 (A) None M i 
223. 80 M E 12/12/62 12/11/69 34,022... DAAA15-68-C-0244 Mons H | 
| 23. " " » 11/17/66 11/16/67 20,900 DAAA15-67C-0189 21 n 
24, Worth Aeerican Avistion 09/23/61 06/15/62 31,840 ۵۸18-108-040-4 Pilot Performanca taste with BZ 18 1 
15. New York State Paychietric 10/09/51 02/28/53 19.,807 DA18-108-(11,-291) Determine paychological „feet. Unk, I 
Institute 


of psychological chemical agente 
ou human subjects 


——— ß — M — —— ت0٤‎ 


p9z JO 691 eBeg 


(0 yyy A M ue a a Se M 
D è 

å DATES ; $ NR. Or CATECORY 
CONTRACTOR START END sr COHTRACY HR. PURPOSE OF CONTRACT © VOURNTeZ RS CONT Ke T 
26. H.Y. State Peychiatric last. 10/03/51 02/24/53 9 12,444 0A18-108-01.-29 14 Determina peychological ef(ecta 8 t 


of peychological chealcal agente 
on human subjecte 


27. ا‎ i 9 D 03/19/3) 03/10/54 11,831 DA18-108-CHL-4915 6 1 
18. New York Univarsity 07/01/63 06/30/64 10,550 DA18-108-ANC-182(x) Endocrinologic effects ot Hone M 
à sltered conscicusneas 
20 s 08/01/64 07/31/66 30,480 DA18—025-AHC- J04 (A) l Unk. D 
30. Research Foundation for ' 12/33 09/39/31 142,739 DÁ18-108-O0.-5198 Peychletrle and rharepeuf le 12 I 
Mentel Hygiene, Inc, 7 »tudies of compounds : 
51. BResserch Foundation for 09/57 09/39 15,000 0A418-108-405-OfL-49. Hantal behavior of human vith 65 1 
Hental yz fene, Inc, certeln tente 
32, Tulane Uolveretty 1933 Unk. 53,795 DAL S-108-C201.- 5596 Study behavior during sdaints- 6 1 
à tration, 13D-25, & moscaline 
3). Univ, of Colorado 06/31 09/54 64,295 DA18-108-CHL-2412 Investigation sad testing of None H 
: Barve egent casualties} 
evaluation of therapy and 
antidotes 
M. " " " 09/21/54 — 09/30/58 74,736 nii18-108-OQ0.-5586 Hone H 
33. * " z 09/01/38 03/31/61 36,341 0418-108-405-010.-264 Hone N 
36. Univ, ot Maryland 03/18/30 06/30/34 114,603 DÀ18-108-O1.-632 Veychologtcel.Studiee of affacte Hone N 
; 1 of CH agents; candidate thera- 
peut fe agente and CW agenta aífecte 
on humans 7 
— — —ñññ ——œU— — —— . — 


ah e 


bed‏ ,02 مرو 


— ———— M وہ‎ 


CONTRACTOR 

37. Univ, of Harylsad 
38. n "n "n 

39. Univ. of Pennsylveole 
40. " " r 

41 " نر‎ n 

42. ۰. " n 

4). " n " 

4a, u LL] n 

AS. University of uten 
46. "n n n 
47. Univ, of Washington 
AB, n n u 


24 بن‎ ex 


DATES 
START 


06/06/54 
03/14/37 
04/15/51 


07/01/55 
12/15/61 


06/01/63 
03/01/64 
11/66 


04/02/54 
03/05/51 


04/10/57 


nto 
06/30/51 
08/31/60 
02/01/55 


04/60 
12/14/62 


09/30/66 
03/31/67 
11/68 


08/31/57 
07/31/59 


11/30/62 


cost 
963,178 
89,89) 
98,894 


73,029 


14,990 


59,135 
326 ,840 
37,800 


37,673 


25,000 


221,519 


GONTRACT HR. 


PURPOSK OF CONTRACT 


DA18-108-Q1.-5519 


D418-108-àG1L-63)7 


DA18-108-QUL-2212 


. 418-108-010.-5751 


166 


DA-Q(L-18-108-G- 46 


(A)‏ ۱8-108-۸160-1423 ۸م 
DA1LB-O35-ANC-126(A)‏ 
DAAA-15-67-C-0154‏ 


DA18-108-Q1iL-5421 
DA18-108-405-C1L-60 
DA18-108-405-CHL - 


6364 


DA) 8-106-405-Qi.-79 


Study of OM casualties in man 


Reaescch of chemicsle snd CM 
casualties in man 


Experiments) basia foc treating 
CM casualties 


Evaluation of drugs in man 
Threshold doses in humane 
Evaluation of druge In man. 


Study effecta of CM agents as 
personnel hazard 


Tharapeutic effecta of chemical 
compounds 


Neurological Action of CW 
Agents f 


Estimated Total 


Wa. or 


CATPGORY 


VOLUNTEERS CONTRA 


Unk, I 
117 1 
Hone 1 
40 1 
Hone 1 
10 I 
310 I 
Unk. I 
AQ N 
1 N 
[4 
19 I 
Dok, 1 
1074 


v9c 10 LZ) eBeg 


Page 172 of 264 


" FOOTNOTES 
CHAPTER X 
DE 1 coatrace, DA 18-108-C4L-632, Universicy of Maryland, 18 May 1950. 
2. Report of Medical Committee, Chemical Corps Advisory M held 
E on 30 Sepzecber and 1 October 1954. 
7 3. Chezical Cerps Medical Laboratories, Special Recte (MSLR No. n) 


- c First Psychochezical Conference, held on 12 May 1954. 


4, Chenical Corps Medical Laboratories, Letter, subject: Use of 
Volunteers in Research, dated 24 July 1953. 


uS 5. Secretary of che army Memorandum, subject: Use of Volunteers in 
Research, dated 5 November 1953. i , 


— 6. Bahnecann Medical College and Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, Contract, 
DA 18-108-C2-7723(A), dated 26 June 1961. 


General Counsel, before 


7. Szacezent by Charles D. Ablard, àrzy 
ed Services, dated 8 Sep terer 1975. 


Investigations Subcommittees, House Arm 


8. Mecoranduc Zor ASA (R&D), subject: Senate Select Committee 
s Discussicn - Informacion Memorandum, from TIG. 


ae 9. CRDL TM 22-13 Report of February 1957. 

10. Edgevood Arsenal Report of 10 Neverber 1964, subject: Report on 
Trip to Holvesberg Cicy Prison on 5 November 1964 to begin Practice 

— Drug Testing on Prisoner Volunteers. 
ll. Medical Research Laboratory Menmoranduz, subject: Report of Visit 
to Hoinescurgz Prison, Holzesburg, PA, daced 24 March 1966. Report of 
Ireatzent, dated 28 March 1966 attached. 
sup Medical Research Laboratory Report, subjecc: Visit to Contractor, 


= Concracz, Da 18-035-AMC-126(A), Universizy of Pennsylvania, dated 10 
May 1966, 20 May 1966, 24 Mav 1966, ll October 1966, and 26 October 1966. 


= 13. Edgesood arsenal Technical Report, EATR 4210, The Search for Toxic 
Chemical Agents, Novecber 1969, page 139. 


= 14, Edgewood Arsenal Counsel Disposition Form, subject: Contract, DA 
18-035-AMC-126(A), dated 11 October 1966, attached Memorandum for Record, 
daced 26 October 1966. ` 


167 


4 کت 4ہ 


Page 173 of 264 


Medical Research of Checical Cozpounds Fact Sheet (2, Arxy-LSD 
Checical Classes, daced 21 July 1975. 


Contract, DAAA 15-70-C-0324, to Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc., 


15. 
Listing of Toxic Chemical 


for Threshold Doeses in Swans annex 1: 
Agents. 

17. Edgewood Arsenal Lecter co Director of Procurement, subject: 

Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc. Contract, DAAA 15-70—C-0324, dated 

9 February 1973. 

18. Department af the Axay, Office of The Surgeon General Memorandum, 
subject: Review of Reporcs on Deparment of the Army Grant, DA 18- 


108. 5596, to the Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Tulane 
University, 1955-59 - Informacion Memorandum, dated 22 August 1975. 


19. Edgewood Arsenal Special Publicacion EASP 1800-2, Chemical 
Agencs in DOD Contrzaczs, dated February 1972. 


168 


4 


Page 174 of 264 


20 
INCAPACITATING AGENTS 


COST REVIEW 


General 


The initial letter of instruction of 21 July 1975 directed chat The 
Inspector General determine the cost of the U.S. Artry’s participation 
in projects and programs concerning the testing of hallucinogenic 
drugs. IC aso required that a determinarcion be made of the total cost 
of operacion of che Special Operations Division at Fort Decrick, MD. 
The total cost of che Special Operations Division was prepared and 
subaicted separately. 


Initial Financial Study 


In July 1975, che Commander of Edgewood Arsenal, at che request of 

che Office of The Inspector General, directed a study be conducted ta 
determine che expenditures relating to incapacitating agent studies 
during che period 1950-1975. Investigators from The Inspector General's 
office and Edgewood Arsenal comptroller personnel agreed to limit che 
parameters of che study to expenditures related to the Human Volunteer 
Program. Thus, the study objectives were che recapitulation of the 
monies expended in basic research and exploratory development of 
incapacitating ageacs with particular emphasis on che research leading 
to and followed ín the clinical investigation. of fncapacitants in maa. 


On 8 Sepcember 1975, the Commander, Edgewood Arsenal, submitted che 
resulcs of his study to the Office of The Inspector General. Be reported 
chat: "The figures presented represent the closest approximarion 
available of the total ef fort expended, for the official record prior 

to FY 1968 vere destroyed as required by AR 340—18— 3. The results 


of chat study are at Sections 1 through 4. 


The data contained in the study was validated by Edgewood Arsenal 
comptroller personnel. This data was assimilated by personnel ín the 
Chemical and Biomedical Laboratories. It is the opinion of the 
Inspectors General, who reviewed the study and the data upon which 

the report vas based, end interviewed technical personnel that contributed 
to the scudy, that chis data was provided by technical personnel most 
kiovledgeable of and experienced in the program. 3 Finally, an Inspector 
General and a member of the Army Audit Agency performed an audit of the 
costs dara submitted for the incapacitating agent program at Edgewood 
arsenal. Ihe study reflected chat during the 25-year period the search 


169 


— 0 caer ee —— E ' '—ü—äf.b..—öſ S S — 3 
——— — — — چ‎ — A 


ei 


creme ٦ 


rr tem EDT Y 


! 


Page 175 of 264 


fcr and scucy of iacapacitating agents, both "in-house" (ac Edgewood) 
and through contractual work, cost. 77.4 million dollars. (Refer ta 


Sections 1-4.) 
Follow-up Financial Study 
2 EUAN — راہ‎ 


During the course of the research effort, the Inspectors General became 
are of iínforzacion which indicated tchat che parameters established for 
the firsc financial study may have been too restrictive. The concern 
vas that other factors associated with, but not part of, the development 
of incapacitacing agents may have been far more costly than the actual 
incapacitating agent program. Accordingly, the Commander, Edgewood 
Arsenal was requested to conduct an expanded and less restrictive 
financial study. In order to expedite the second study, the time period - 
vas uartowed co che years which other evidence indicated incapacitating 
agent development vas che most prolific, 1961-1970. Additionally, che 
parameters for che second study were greatly expanded by comparison with 
che previous study. The later study included two additional classes of 
drugs (benzilaces and glycolaces); it also included engineering labora- 
tory work in che dissemination process, alarm systems, detection methods, 
development and manufaccuring mechods technology; and the construccion 
of facilicizes ac Edgewood Arsenal. Additionally, ic included con- 
struction and field cescing at Dugway Proving Ground, and development, 
production and storage facilistes coscs at Pine Bluff Arsenal. On 15 
January 1976, che Comocroller, Edgewood Arsenal, provided che results 

af the second study. Again, the report, which is at Section 5, nated 
the difficulty in locacing accurate records in many cases. Nevertheless, 
the besc evidence available provided that che costs associated with the 
research, development, procuremenc, manufacturing, and storage of 
chemical incapacicating agents during the 1961-1970 period was increased 
by approximately 26 million dollars whea viewed from che broadest pos- 
sible parameters. Considering the increase for the 10 years of the 
second study, the 25-year cost was increased from 77.4 million to 103.9 


million dollars. 


Hovever, to escablish a Final estimate of the total cost of che incapact- 
tating agent program for the entire 25-year period, an adjustment to the 
15 years noc covered in the second study seemed necessary. To avoid a 
lengchy study, che additional cost adjustment to year graups 1950-1960 
and 1971-1975 was estimated. The mechod for determining the adjusted 
cost fer the years not included in che second study was as follows: The 
l0 gears covered in the second study (Section 5) established chat cost 
iacreases ranged from 842 in 1963 co 17.6% in 1969; the average increase 
for the 10 year period was 38.7%. Applying the 10 year average increase | 
to the 15 years covered only in the inicial scudy, provided an additional 
6.534 million dollars estimated to have been spent on the incapacitating 


agent program. 


ERA 


170 


tos 


Page 176 of 264 


- 


in summary, an initial study conducted in July-Sepcember 1975 vas con- 
fined to Che determination of costs related to basic research and 

erzloracory developmenc of incapacitacing agents and produced an 
escimaced cost of 77.4 million dollars for a 25 year period. A second 
study vas conducted in December 1975 and January 1976 to determine che 


cost of factors such as production, storage and facility construction 


that vere excluded from the inítial study. The second study considered 


only 10 of che 25 years covered in the first report. As a result of 
Che second study, che total cost of the program was increased by 26.5 
million dollars to make che estimated cotal 103.9 million dollars. The 
annual cost of the years not considered in the second study were 

upward by extrapolacing the average annual increase (38.7%) 


ad jus ced 
reported for the years considered in the second study. The estimated 
cost for che period 1950-1960 and 1971-1975 (Section 1) of 16.906 


million dollars was increased by the average adjustment of 38.7% co 
provide an additional cost of 6.534 million dollars. 


-$ 77,404,449 


STUDY NR. l (Seccions 14) 
STUDY YR. 2 (Section 5) 26,517,000 
Extrapelated costs for 15 years noc 
considered in Scudy Na. 2 6,534,000 
TOTAL estimated cost of Incapacitating - 
Program, 1950-1975 S110 ,455,449 


4 


mu 


iy 


Page 177 of 264 


FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER Xl 


ief of Scaff, Department of Army, Letter to The Iaspactor 


l. Office, 
Lecter of Inscruction, dared 


g General and Audicor General, subject: 
E 21 July 1975. 
Comander, Edgewood Arsenal, Lecter to U.S. Army Inspector General 


- 2: 

= Agency, subject: Financial Daca on Incapacitating Agents, dated 8 September 
«41975. 
- 34 Menorandum of 8 September 1975, by COL Lewis Wright, DAIG-IN, regard- 
ing cost of incapacitating agent program ac Edgewood Arsenal, 1950-1975. 

1 4, Memorandum for Record, subjecc: Validacion of Edgewood Arsenal Cos c 
5 Data, dated 8 September 1975. 

*: 2. Mecorancuu for Record, 7 November 1975, regarding estimated cost 


of incapacitacing program during che 1961-1967 cime period. 


fice of The Inspector General Lecter co Comander, Edgewood Arsenal, 


- 6. of 
c ou Regarding Medical Volunteer Program, 


subject: Request for L[nformact 
daced 9 December 1975. 


Tne Inspector General and Auditor General Memorandum for, Special 


7. 
Cost 


Assistant to che General Counsel, Department of Defense, subject: 
of Operatior of Special Operations Division, Fart Detrick, MD = informacion 
= Memoranda, dated 12 Sepcember 1975, with inclosures. 


1 


<.. 
HE 
M 
x 


P 


Page 178 of 264 


SECTION I 


SUMMARY OF COSTS © 


SES 


173 


mE it To . rr ri pesa ͤ——... — — 
a ae e 
: a 'ڑی٭یوسیس7“ںژح ۃہ کب‎ . ů —ͤ —ꝗ.—ͤ—„ fHPlH یمم‎ 


Vi 


© | E 6 "ps 


l i 


PEE 


| LI 
pg 7 | ET 
nA OP INCAPACITATION PROORAM | | 
1 1410 1771 | l | 
: i! i 
. i 1 „ 
ET 810891] kaj gsoronr i ۷ LABORATORY 
YEAR GRAND TOTAL TOTAL PROG IN-HOUSE i CONTRACTS j ` TOTAL PROQ ` YW-Housg : ۰3۸۶ 
1430 i 10,000 ' [ 
T ۱ 10,000 ' j 10000 10:000 
13 159.0114 ۱ 44,004 8 i ۱ - 
1935 95$ 0006 40,009 $0,000 ne “even: 147000 0 
1954 11,01 162,01] 161,000 101,077 15.000 15, 00% 
1955 175.00; 1454003 11,100 71,103 10,000 10,000 
1954 311; 130 150,130 11,500 1.310 1411006 161,000 . 
EI 11,180 191.350 81,000 92.310 : 190,000 150,000 
1958 110,015 460,011 195,100 164,915 410,000 )91.000 18,000 
LT 156,161 . 301,100 1141100 10,000 14.6“ (1,600. ! ENT 
tih ۵۵٣ 9.39194 „ 0,۵ "o 443, ses 1,110,040 1,040, 400 TNT 
1941 ۱,۵١ 7,07} 000 2,048,100 411.500 900013 "413, 105 uti 
1962 9.309.736 (1,699,911 1, 00 Us 1.60911 1.517600 ` ° 
1363 1.191415 2,016, 05 1 3,273,500 1.76305 3,151,010 1.590,00 1.561,10 
1743 197151130 Cr | cnn | 7 1521170 popsa 1 j 
7 0 à D D ۰ $51, 94- : : 
1956 7,366,985 , 3,062,021 1.697,70 ا‎ und Eie ٦ 
1967 1.078,06! 1,428,032 ت0‎ 100 | 109,151 1,650,019 $47,100 111.115 
TI 3.497 681 0 i 0۵ء‎ |o 135,154 1.419.994 141,100 £01,194 
5 í 447, 401.00 14.717 „000 : 
1970 3,5$11100 1,334,100 | 1. 10 1, 10 s 1331000 1:50:90) 1 117.800 سرت‎ 
1771 1.913,00 1.30 1, 500 1.0 7300 ۹ "618000 47.0% L. 
1921 1,214,$00 2,031,100 3,011,500 445/000 411,000 ~ 
DE 1,911,100 1,111,206 1,512,200 | 455,000 455.000 
Hu 1,919,100 1; 314,100 173101800 | 105,000 371% 
1773 ), 340,000 1,045,000 01,045,000 |. ' 331,000 355,000 : | 
— ہے — ̃ — —ͤ— — .سس‎ — À—— t LE) — ا‎ erri rr ER ete 4 
81 04 ; t J ۰ : 
نت 89۰و ر509 نت‎ p otro $30,482,975 15.733.000 7 14,739,075 ; 
— و سی ےت م‎ Koo — erra —— س‎ 
1 H 
TOTAL -INCAP PROG 7 j i 
APTE, Tat gyal ps s 
ZAP CONTR : 
*Incl $180,000 for Diesenlneti P 313(٤ ہت‎ 
for ہہ یلم‎ foy ri's 170 N * . P dd netes pa TK n i 176,300. Foi M, sone [AST اد‎ ou و‎ * — PS ۱ 
کت‎ "pus — ——ͤ— F— 


v9c Jo 64 | ٥6٥0ح‎ 


ہی 9À!‏ — سم . — — — س ی ̃— 


Page 180 of 264 


SUBJECT: Dissexization and Process Technology in Reletion tc Incepacition 


ATTENOILS - Or. Wert, Or. Serger, Me. Treglia, Or. J. Stevens, Mr. 7. G 
A. Caveso, CET Close and M. Kiefer 


l. The referenced meeting was held to determine i2 the input developed for 


Dissemination enc Process Technology bad been confized to the g= 
TEETER 29 res r is mem. For clarification; 6 


following criteria were reviewed by esch perticinems, ard discussed vie 
NEC with or. Metlemera. i 


a. For Disse— دہع‎ estimate cnly the ort of funds expended t2 
deveioe dissemination techniques Zcr dispersing incap agents irta test 
chembers for use in aril and man exposures. Do not include work to 


cen methods applicsble to wespons systems. 


imvestigats Ass ==“ On me 


b. For Srecess Tachnulcer, estirale only the accuct of Aimds ex 
yrecuce sizes cuentities of candidzte agerss ror use in animal t 
AA exposures. مت‎ not include prozess davelopzenit work fovencad 7 
establishing production methods. 


d. as vas ¿peec that the best estizate for Disseclzati 
Techblog, Arn che definition stated, cver a 25 yeer period vas 


“au von 


100,000 zo $150,COO. 


175 


— ÓÓÁGÀ 


DEREN 


Page 181 of 264 


8IGMED LAS 
INCAPACITATING AGENTS PROGRAM RECONSTRUCTION; 
1950 - 75 
John R. dood, Building £3100 


Method of Üetermining Construction Costs Applicagle to the [ncapacitating 
Agents Program 


By comparing the area of the building devoted to the volunteer progra 


‘and the incapacitating agents program with the total area af the building 
[t was - 


it was determined that only 20% of the total area was applicadie. 
estimated that since the.building was dedicated, 1968, only about 50% of 


"the total volunteers had been utilized on the incapacitating agents 
Thus, only 10% of the building cou!4 be construed as being with- 


Program. 
in the program. Assuming that the building has a useful life of 30 years 
and an initial cost of $3,275,400, the cost per year for the building 

is $109,000; that portion for the incapacitating agents program is 
$10,900 per year. For the 7 years in which the building has been used 


the total cast is $76,300. 


Formula: 
Incapacitating Area [Incaoacitatina Volunteers „ Total Cost , Yrs af Us. 
votai Area jotal Volunteers . * Useful Lite 

2 176 


Page 182 of 264 


INCAPACITATING AGENTS PROGRAM RECONSTRUCTION 


Applicacion of Overhead for Fiscal Years 1950 through 1956. 


Prior to 1957 the cost of overhead vas separately funded by an account 
kmown as P5700 (Program Management Support) which supported all overhead 
on R&D programs. In 1957 Edgewood Arsenal was chartered under the Army 
Industrial Fund, from which time overhead vas applied directly co in-house 
programs. Comptroller recotds prior to 1968 were disposed of in accord with 
regulations, Data available for fiscal years 1968 through 1975 show the 
rate of overhead ín relation to total direct cost to be relatively cocscant, 
with an average annual overhead rata of 47.8 percent applicable to che Chemica 
and Biological Laboratories. To show in-house costs on a comparable foocing 
for the period 1950 through 1975, overhead at the rate of 48 percent has 
accordingly been added to incüousa costs for the period 1950-1956. The total 


overhead adged, anounced to $307,824. 


a 42.4 


177 


Page 183 of 264 


SECTION II 


ANNUAL COSTS - 1950-1975 


T 


i 
1 LI 
à 
* 
۱ . TOTAL انا رود‎ 
: 1950 THRU 1975 
4 
۱ 
4 
: 2-2-7-8 
3 
i 
i 
A cT ITT eammemmmmmmemmmmm mn p ener iar pone 
ST qmi 11 l 
+6 .ےڑب ڑڑ.م,‎ , 0 


v9c 10 v8, Sed 


081 


OA PROJECT NO 


لے — —— — 


4-08-01-001 


Line 
Maw Compounds 


NCAP 


SOURCE 


MUCOM 


O 


INCAP PROGRAM 


{In Thousends) 


FY 1930 
RELEASEO 
۲ CQxTRACY 11-6] EAL plonep 
* „ 
10 
10 - 10 10 


343 4. 04 - 


voz jo 981 Sed 


i 
1 
i 
4 

1 


۱۷۲۸۶ PROGRAM 


(In Thousands) 


FY 1961 d 
RELEASED ) l ] 
DA PROJECT KO, nuc SOUACE PROGRAK CONTRACT IN-HOUSE CML Iongo x 
LI 
4-08-03-001 Mew Compounds HUC QM 30 
"weap 10 10 10 
LI . 
1212 
aiu 
| 


tut 


v9c Jo 981 Sed 


DA PROJECT MO, 


46411-001 


4199 26-001 


TOTAL 


EE 


Sos dc Research 
{a Lira Sctences 
P 


SOURCE 


MUCON 


HUCOM 


(In Thousands) 


v9z Jo 19, eBeg 


CBT 


0 0 


INCAP PROGRAM 
(in Thousendi) 
FY 1552 
RELEASED . ; . 
QA PROJECT NO. Lut SOURCE PROGRAH CONTRACT 11-۴ CHL lente uU : 
4-08-01-001 New Compounds HUCOM 1 
IACAP . U “9 TT N. š 
4641!-001 ] Psychologie KUC OK n i 
) Factory - AM, ` 
M, CU 
IXCAP 17 - 17 ~ n 
40802-010 Neurological hUCON 101 
Action, CV s 
INCAP 53 - 63 — 53 —— 
40802-01) Pathological KUC on 83 ; 
Action, CW m 
۴۶ 10 po 10 -H 10 
TOTAL چم ا‎ Ind l 
ee % T ہوم‎ O T 


"ETE 


yoz 10 881 86e 


9781 


1 ê * 
O 0 Q ‘ 
LNCAP TROGRAM 
(1n Thousands) " 
FY 1954 ' 
: RELEASED ' 
OA PAQJCCI XO. TUILE SOURCE PROGRAK _ CONTRACT 18:006 CML ont 7ھ‎ 
x 8 a 
4-08-03-001 Kaw Compounds HUCOK 240 7 
:.3 . T 0 DW th 
000 0 0٥+ Neurological 
Action, CM nuc ON 18) 
۳۲ 187 10 a! 7 02 
45912-007 Chinical [nvesti- . : : 
gatlan CM nu con 333 , ` 
INCAP am 5.1 r - ۱ 
40801-013 Pathological : MUS 
Action (V nu con 123 ] d 
INCAP 14 - 14 14 
TOTAL Program 945 ar — any prs NS: 
INCAP TA 101.1 : E GU TE 


"m 


y 


جو ےت ا یا و کس رن ساب سے 


yoz Jo 681 Ed 


Hoc d ۱ ۱ | | | | : | | | | | E | ! 

| 

i 
1 L 7 à l " 
$ a ds rug y a سے سی وس سج‎ m ے‎ 
Ji : ۱ . 

| 
۱ INCAP PAOGAAM 
; [1a Thousands) 

FY 1956 

il 

1 . í 
HH : RELEASED l . ; 
š | DA PROJECT KO, LILE SOURCE PROGRAM CONTRACT IN-HOUSE CAL Monto 

0 t * 5 
4 08 01-001 Mew Cospoundi HUCOM 760. Pre M" : 

; Ill. TI? Y] lá b` to 10 : 

5 نو در مہ j 4٦80٦-01-1‏ 

Act leon of tu ; 

۳ Agenti MUCOM - 45 
"Hb jo INCAP 145 jt.: ` 11.8 71.5 
a TOTAL Program 130$. oq . 
; L4 ےہ‎ ۸) 165 72,2 1 10 72.8 : 
. u 


v9c Jo 06 eBeg 


vec] wert. wam 2 


o 


O 


INCAP PROGRAM 


 — M À‏ لے 


(In Thoussndi) 


FY 1956 
> RELEASED Bx 
DA PROJECT NO. nnt SOURCE ۲۸٥۸ب‎ CONTRAI [H- HOUSE 
408 01-016 Chemical Agents Res HUCOM 804 
; TIJT, 161 - 161 
` 40802-018 Medical Aspects ` : . 
; of (V : nuc on i $4 
| ICAP 132 59.5 19.6 
1 10801-0156 Toxicological 
Aspects of Cw MUCOM 514 7 xod 7 
pun ء۲‎ 15.8 18:8 0 : f ET 
a 
40802-0149 Physiological : i ` 
Bats ef Cu f Nu con 336 
: 3 - 3 
TOTAL Prograa 2259 3 ERAN 
: : ۸۸۲ 311.8 4$.) EBD 


v9c jo 16) 2ed 


LET 


4 S 


QA PROJECT XD, 
40803-0168 


40802-018 
40802-016 


40802-013 


TOTAL 


: l | 
| i | t \ | ۱ ۱ I [ “1 \! 
à 
N N 
۱۸۲۸۶ 64 
{in Thousands) s 
FY 1967 
AELCASED s : , 

ung SQUACE BROGRAH CONTRACT 1A - HOUSE chy BIORED TT 
Cut Agent Res MUCON 1181 : 3 

Act 290 - 290 110 
Medica) Aspects HUC OM 325 
ót cu 

INCAP 3 [T] - 81 - 83 
Toxicological nu c on 530 
Aspects of Ch 

INCAP 10 - 10 - 10 
Physiological MUCOM 806 
Basis of CU : f Mcr "a 

INCAP 100 y): j - 3 
Program 2812 E 
NCAP 14% of “yao 130 9d ^ 


yoz JO z6, Sed 


881 


EN‏ کہ 


DA PROJECT NO. 
40801-071-01 


40802-023-0? 


. 408-03-016 


TOTAL 


Pharmacology 
IKCAP 


Toxic CW Agents 
f | ACA? 


Program 
00۲ 


SOURCE 


nuc on 


nucon 


nuc on 


| l 
| | i | j 
۱۸٢۲۸۶ PROGRAM ; 
(In Thousends) 
FY 1968 
RELEASED Den 
۲۶ CONTRACT IN-HOUSE CHL QJ ONED 
160 
334 1i5 Vas 169 
307 f 
128 19.3 106.1 108.1 
1371 
410 18 392 351 2 
2139 i 
470 182.1 651.1 392 19$.) 


v9c Jo c6, Sed 


68T 


— .سیب یو سی ی کہ‎ E rtt .تج ےج‎ Wr t V 


INCAP PAOGRAH ' 


{in Thousanda) 


FY 1359 
RELEASEO 
DA PAOJECT KO, 11٤ SOURCE PROGRAM CONTRACT IN-HOUSE CHL BMONED ^ 77 
40502 -022 Medical Aspects HUCOM 642 i ۱ ٦ 
el Cu ۰ 
IKCAP 3 153 40 119 - 213 
40802-023 CY Bfologicel HUCOM 1165.8 : 
Sciences Rasearch . 
[RCAF 42.2 42.2 42.8 
40601-016 Toxic cu Agents MUCOM 1600 ; : i 
A ۶ 575 63.4 411.6 471.6 C ee 
TOTAL — Progrea 3108.8 | 


INCAP 826.2 93.4 732.8 471.6 261.2 


v9c مز‎ ٢0 


061 


FC ۱ | { { I | | | Í { ا‎ b E 
t i i : ! i ! 1 ۱ I | ^d i 
: à 
. . 5 7 Ur 
** : 0 . O. A 0 . 4 
* ] i D à 
INCAP PROGRAM l : 3 
(In Thousands) É b^ 
2 i 
FY 1960 1 
| d i a 
RELEASED ۱ E ۰ E Q 
: DA PROJECT PO., nnt SOURCE PROGRAM CONTRACT JK IAI pa WD ^ uocem ^ O 
4C06-0t- 072 Medica) Aspects ` HOH MS ; : i > مرن‎ "ES BEN 
g of C3 E . : m ME ^ . O 
Inc» 1071 238 3 80) .1 سی‎ O1 
404-02-02) CV Biologica] St MUCON inn e ' | ^ dl E 
Rey i jd 
i i N 
ہدک‎ 821 ۱ 9.8 > Mil 3٤ DE O) 
&C08-0)-014 Toxicological Aspects nc 2710 ٠ b. fes n A 
ef C$ : 1 
ہہ‎ 1110 6 1040! 47 f 104044 ci 
5 1 D - 4 . s . g ; i „ * و‎ ۱ — » 1 
TOTAL Progr ea Wn el : ~ 5 ای‎ 7 
pau ٤ OOUE, 1190.81 1040. Ba , 3 


. 
. 
* 
4 
à 
* 
t 
E a 
ton». 
اسهم‎ 


cr ite 7 
sH nebi t Tas mae 


DS 


| : 
iC PROGRAM 
1 D (1n Thoussndi) 
i FY 1961 
Í 
: RELEASED. — : : -" 
. DA PROJECT m. Int SOURT PROGRAM CONTRACT A-1005 cau plonco 
i 4Co8- 02-022 Medical Aspects of CW HUCOH 1636 ۲ l 
l ic l 1459 0+ 0 nod nau 
. 
cus -02-02) CW Biological Sciences : NK 2694 
Researc à ` 
L 1147 246 901 ۶٦ 
cos -02-016 ہہ ہی‎ Aspects NG 65 E 
of Cu ` 
— C $5 : 66 
a ; 
r A£06-0)-006 Chemical Agent Research _ MON 1498 
: IU 900 j 426.6 473.2 473.2 
TOTALS rss 6793 ; . 
el, 31 مور‎ 1521.3 .: 104.) 


N لہ‎ 


yoz Jo 96| e6ed 


الال 


TM 0 000 ONO. ۰.0-۷ 


| d J : | | Í l l ۱ | | l. 
1 1 | à 


TT 


i 
|i 


0۷ 
0 
U 


0 ۰ ۰ l . O.. T r 


Ic PROCKAH 1 55 
(In Thousands} 
FY Yet. 


' E RELEASED " " 
DA PROJECT M). Ink SOURCE ` PROGRA 


4C0- 03-014 Toxic CW Agents ux 4160 


INCAP 


4199-26-00) ` Basic Research ta co : 47 ا‎ Á DE E و‎ . i UNDE . i 7 
Life Science : . ; E i ) 

INCAP ۱ و‎ ; : 
4C06-02-024 Medical 4 Mologlcal NM 
Aspects of Qui Agts ۱ 
: Ma. 
. p : . "on è » . : e 
TOTAL Progres v S adi £o ٦ وہ‎ ۰ٌ A 


px 


441 J. zu 7 et 
E 1917.6 1927.8 her oF 


و ورک ای دص چ Ok de a eter‏ ا penis‏ 2 
7 


n 


———.———.— سے 


ve JO 6| eBeg 


£61 


—— ———— ⏑ ö õ — BOA مہ‎ ma ا‎ a 


| 
t 1 i 
LI 
BA PROJECT HO. unt 
4006-01-4 Medical and Blologicil 
Aspects of Chealcal Agts 
INCAP 
4193-26-00] Basic Research in 
Life Sclences 
LNCAP 
4c0803-016 Toxic CW Agents 
INCAP 
TOTAL 


Aci 


er 


O 


IHCAP PROGRAM 


{in Thousands) 
FY 196) 
RELEASED 
PROGRAM | 
8196 


19935 
168) 
EON 
648) 
3$00 


16358 - 
2798. 


i | i 
i S ۱ ; 
۱-05] a ۷۰٣ id 
3271.6 3272.6 
1790.7 1790.1 
5063.2 1790.7 3272.5 


v9c Jo 861 Se 


— — ee ee 
— — 


i 1 i i i ! | l l i ۱ | 
٦ 5 EN 
کے‎ M — Mata a Ape 
1 
۱۲۴۸۶ PROGRAM 
(In Thoutendi) 
FY 1964 
M z RELEASED 7 
pA PROJCI WO, nmt SOURCE PROGRAM علق‎ K-HOUSE w BLOED 
140145018714 Life Science BR fn ہی مر‎ 15286 
Support of Materiel * E 
; میں‎ 219 10 203 » 103 
168221014060 Chemical Agents ACOH 6426 
LNCAP 4400 un „7 1073 1073 (e 
165223014079 Hon-Oef Mcd Aspects of HUCOH £304 
{Testi 06 & 08) Cheolcol Agents 
~~ y 
2 VEAP 6138 2324. . 2814 2814 —ä— 
1£6224014037 Med Def Aspects of MUCOM 1595 
Chemical Agents 
)rK P 766.1 187.1 609.0 e 609.0 
140145014914 In-House Lab Indep ۵ HUCOH 830 
| nCAP 63 ($) 63 
TOTAL Program 17161 
1 105486.1 5818.1 1708 1071 3695. 
ae 
——— —— 
mA یل‎ 


— سپ سے سی —— — 


v9c JO 66, 8620 


pA PROJECT NO. 
1€5223014060 


001 7۶ 


105223014079 


1c6 22401409) 


S61 


110130014314 


TOTALS 


mr NS et جم‎ 


UNE 
Chemical Agents 
incr 


Life Sclence, Basic 
Res in Spt of Malls 


In 


Hon- Def Medical Aspects 
of Chemical Agts 


INCAP 


Hedical Defense Aipecti 
of Chemical Agts 


١×ط‎ 
In-House Lab Indep Rsch 
] CAP 


MUCOH 


ین 


wh" 


O | O 


INCAP PROGRAM 
(1n Thoussodi) 
FY 1966 


RELEASED 
PROGRAM CONTRACT IA- POUSE Qv ۲٢٢٣ 
$910 


3800 2796.) 1003.7 1001.7 
37.1 266.6 120.5 o .. 0.4. 
4252 na 3106 $ 3104 


1815 - 161.2 1683.6 1653.8 


40 40 40 


E . 
10254.) 411.1 5323 1003.7 4919.3 


—— 0 12 — — 
سھمےےے سس — 


p9z Jo OO 0(0 


ا — € — 


0 0 . 0 


INCAP PROGRAM 


— 


(la. Thousends) 


TY 1966 
RELEASED. ` 
DÀ PROJECT "O nnt SOURCE PROGRAH CONTRACT 00s MH y jon 
16522014060 Chesical Agents i HUCOH 6251 : 
مں‎ ۱ 4100 384 7164 1.6 
10145019714 Life Scienca BA In Spt of 0ك‎ 815 
"itl : : 
I ; 154 ba 98.6 95.6 
2 
165223014079 Non Def Med Aspects of MUCOR 3103 
i (Tasks 06 1 08) Cal Agts : , 
ہل‎ 235 282,9 2012. 1031.1 
سی‎ * - 
o 106224014097 Med Def Aspects of COH 1169 z 
e {Tasks 08 4 10) Cal Agis z 
E l 612° ». 479 in 
0100 4۸ In-House Lab Indep Rich co $00 . 
| NCAP B6 0 B4 m 
n 
TOTALS ] .  Progra . 12439 : 
INCAP 7367 3902.7 HA.) ارہ‎ 2892.7 


aA aes 


p9z Jo Oe eBeg 


LET 


— — QM 


aestum‏ سے سے سے سے سے می سے د ےل 
—ů —-ů— —L—2T 4iA 4‏ ہس ہے سے م 


IL 


IA PROGRAM l ۰ 


(In Thousands) 


FY 1967 
: RELEASED ۱ 
DA PROJECT NO. TITLE SOURCE PROGRAM _ CONTRACT H-10US e أ9‎ — 
)) ۵۸ Life Sclances 8& In nc 959 
Support of ۲۱ : 
INCAP ۱ 191 69.8 121.2 121.2 
6 6۰۵٥ Chemical Agents HUCOH 41414 
1car Tesa 762.1 روف“‎ 7 ZEN 
165223014079 Hon-Defense Kad Aspects HOH 3367 - IX e pou 
(Tasks 06 1 08) of Chemical Agents 
IKCAP 1669 160 1479 109 
1262101۸097 Hed Defense Aspects Mon Mer l ; کے ہی‎ 
(Tasks 08 1 10) ol Chemical Agents . : . 
]hCAP : 5 s 506 606 
11013001۸91۸... 1310 * Lab ۹۵ MUCOH 500 
R 
Ic 70 70 : 70 
TOTAL Program 180402 f * ME 
I "0057 1012.1 3062.9 5 


palit” 15.2 


SE 


voc Jo zoz Ed 


۱ | | ۱ l 
| i ۱ i I ! l | ۱ l [ | i 1 
‘ b : : 
| apos Ed nnne وی ہے‎ —— — ————Á—À——— ا‎ pe Š H 
| O Q Q 
H 
H I PROGRAM ۱ 
(tn Thoutsndi) 
HY 1968 
RELEASEO - 
DA PROJECT Ho. nnt gung PROGRAM CONTRACT 11-0021 gea HED 
150145018714 Life Sciences OR [n HUCOH 660 l 
Support of terte . 
au yo 1.4 168.1 164.1 
18512014060 Chemnicas] Agenti Nc 1510 i 
Ea ۱ 1350 دس‎ ana a.t 
í 155223014075 hen - Of Hed Aspects nc. 3002 
i af Cal Agents z 
L2 1490 133.4 1366.8 356.6 
rz 18522401409] Med Defense Aspects of uc 885 e 
ea Cal Agents . . 
I NCAP 381.7 341.7 347. 
170130014914 In-louse Lab Independent MUCOH 526 
3 1c 
1 100 100 100 
۱ 
TOTAL Program 5625 — , EM PM 
۲ NOT 744 2751.) Nr. 2 2002.5 


5 ag 


p9z Jo coz eBeg 


M‏ سی سے۔ 


8231 


M , l | ۱ I ۱ 
[ i i 1 | | 
1 
INCAP PROGRAM 
(In Thousands) 
COP 1969 
RELEASED 
OA PROJECT NO, {TLE SOURCE PROGRAM 
)8061102511A Life Sciences AR İn HOH 663 
Support of Materiel 
IHCAP 300 
6 0 Chemical Agents MUCOM 3293 
INCAP 10⁰00 
1 155626024073 Hon-Def Hed Aspects of HON 301 
Cal Agents i 
Ir 1664 
18652106403) Hed Defense Aspects of MUCOM 
10 cn Agents 
INCAP 
1106 ۸ In-House Lab Initisted RAD HTI. 
INCAP 
TOTAL Program 
J CAP 
ES. 
ket 


| | | { L. ۱ 
۱ | t ۱ [ 
b 
: O 
CONTRACT 11-56 mw we 
300 300 
137.7 762.3 "hr 
44.7 1619.3 1619.3 


v9c مز‎ voc eDed 


ooz 


— ee — 


O | o. 0 


۱۳۷۴۸۶ PROGRAM 


(In Thoursnds) 
FY 1970 i 


DA PROJECT . In 6 PROGAMI CONTRAC II- HOUSE ex toco M 
1۲1111181491۱۸۰۰ Dn-Houss Lab Ind Research ac 541.3 ۱ ۱ : i 
5 ۵۵ if l w 40 : 40 
ies: Life Sclence BR la Spt of HICH نے ور‎ . 
Cal Kat) ۱ d 
7 مس‎ - l l 43 MH. an . 
196626204012-0) Chemistry of Incip Agts HUCOM 762 . "o Ax 
ICAP ; 182 i 182 na 
106526204011-02 Mio Hed Evel of Incip c 997 l X P 
INCAP ۱ 997 48 "T 2 Hg 
167627 16AD19-01 Performance of chen Exposed — MUCOM om x ری‎ ee i 
er * fe LS 
[Im (onn) mn’ 11.7 


Ks NC E 


— c ðàͤv: 


v9c Jo go SBE 


| | | | - ۱ I | | { | | 
j ۱ f i | i i d 4 ۱ | ۱ l I I t l ' i 
i 
L] 
1970 ۱ À i 5 
O 0 0 i ud 
i ET! 
RELEASED A ; . 
pA PROJECT 10. UME SOURCE PROGRAM Con TRACT 11-1 ex Heso 4 
è à : vet 
1V762)184D19-04 — Mew Methodi for Blo Assy NC 147.4 hi 
i : INCAP . ` 6.8 34.8 4.6 
14752)104025-0).— Prophylaxis & Therapy of MON 127.7 j 
Inc ap Agta š 
IRCA 572.7 ۱ 821.1 122. 5 
1407427184010 Search for Mew Chemical HC OH 1061.3 l . 
40 
mw 405 us E : 
140622184010-0) — Toxicology of Mew Cal Agta HUCO 360.4 EM i ' 
INCAP ; T 2$ 0 0 : T 
* 7 | ۱ ۱ E 
TOTALS Progres 1639.0 : 207 2 Kam GM 
} 3561.2 1» d 3418.1 110. f i سید‎ 
N E: B 8 
o Å . E 
8 uu 
l * S ua 
* i JA 
ae io 2 "tj 
C VIRES hye = EY 70 j "U a k CEN ZI ! : d 
* : ۰ ; ' . i 
i "٤ 4 


voz Jo g 0 


coz 


۱ | l | | 
] ۱ ۱ i 
4 
pA PAOJCCT WQ. 
Ink 
)7T141102871A Life Scleace BA in Spt 


aAa Jes 


1۷16111646019 ۰01۰. 


18۷16111۸۵19 ۰04 


1۵60611161061 -72 


)80621164021 -03 


)9662110AD25-0) 


1/$62607 012-01 


of Cal Hath 
I NCAP 


Pert Eval of Chem Exposed 
Pers ; 


1nCAP 


Mew Methods for Blo 
Assay 


۱۸٢ہ‎ 


Physiological Eval of Cul 
-Mis 


IncAP 
Clinical Eval of Cal Agts 
INCAP 


Prophylaxis 6 Therapy of 
Incap Agts 


ICAP 
Chemtstry of Incap Agts 
1×۸8 > 


l [ | | | l ! | 
| ۱ | | ۱ ] 
i 
3 کس نے‎ ۲ 
4 
IMCAP PROGAAM 
(In Thousands) 

"n ۱ . 
ounce PROGA CONTRACT ۱۸-۱8۸0 oc 110 ES 
NC 640 Ed * 

556 mo wo 
MUCON 320 

320 320 320 
MUCOK 250 n 

62.5 62.5 : 62.5 
یسر‎ os." ne ` 

— 
110 . V0 " 570 
; 1. 

nc e 

60 600 : w 
nr 550 ۱ 

eto on 850 550 
ACOM 350 : : 

s‏ ہو 


360 ` 30 


v9c JO JO BEN 


EDZ, 


LEZA] 


pA PROJECT NO, 


11417184010 


TOTALS 


nni. 


I bea cH {‏ ا 
"MX‏ 
ACLEASED -—‏ 
nut 508] PROGRAM COW] RACY‏ 
Search for Palentisl Cw) Agta FUCOH 1,000‏ 
328 11 
Program 4,700‏ 
eb 1.865. 1‏ 
Uu *‏ 


Celle. Aye Fx ga 77 


i | | | l 
O 

IIe ga 419 s 
324 x 
1.881. 0 7.08. 1 : 
4 
f 
۱ ۱ 9 
d 
| : EE 


v9c Jo 80c eBed 


{ [ | | J ۱ l | { | | | | [ | 
\ ۱ | ۱ ^ | ۱ | ۱ ۱ ۱ | i i i 
a 
LI 
— y: 27 007 
۱ 0 O O ‘| 
۱۱۴۸۲۱ PROGRAM 
(In Thousands) ; 
Fy 1972 4 
ACLEASED : 
۸۲۸۵۵٤ HO. Ant SOURCE PROGRAM — CONTRACT II eu 1108 8 i 
٢۸ In-louse Independ Rich c $25 ] : , i 
INCAP 30 50 50 : 
11111101۸7۱۸0۰۳ Life Science BR in t NK ۵00 ۱ ` E Á 
of Ca] ۲۱ ; 
. ICAP 165 19 i 155 zw 
1M1671164019-01 — Perf [val of Chem Exposed ۶۷ 30 . : 
Pers * : , n R 3 
3144 370 370 . : k 
IWI67)}64019-04 Mew Hethdos for Blo Assay MUCOM 270 ` 
INN a. 67.8 67.1 ; 
1W76271BA02}-01 —— Toxicology of Cal Agts nN "Bg . ۱ Um i 
1۴0۶ l 30; 30 30 ; 20 
WIFTIIBADZ)-02 — Physiology Eval of Cal HUCO 560 
Agts 2 i " d . 
INCAP . 460 460 ° p ES 40 2 | 
. t 
1627154021-03 1ار‎ Eval of ch. HOH 510 ro NN f ۱ 4 
gts thom eke e . 1 N 15m : 
را‎ -450 460 . 450 E | 
1V6626204012-0] che- of Incap Ayts MUCOM 400 ۲ * ٠ k 5 UÀ 
IMAP 400 400 400 MEE 
. . . . H ` 1 
176271 BADIO Search for Potential ا ہے 900 . 92س‎ 5 
Agents : . $ MNT A ; nd 
IN AP 106 tel 786 D 7 
e. das de Vet Rech qae 535 ä ا‎ : i 
A 771 g ^A up 4$ 7] — 1 
? 
Riv NES ce: 


a4 ak A 


poz Jo 60 SEN 


E LE —— ꝛ—u 2 —ͤ—ẽ . — E TT 
f 


8 | ۱ 

; N N ١ ۱ l i ۱ | rie و‎ | 

| ۱ | ۱ jo. d | ۱ ۱ 
, 0 
ےہ‎ II TT 0 
RELEASED " : 
DA c HO. TITLE OURCE PROGRAM - CONTACT (1:180) G nom 
1W762718AD25-03 Prophylaxis 6 Therapy MC OM 44$ l 
of Incep ۸۸۰1 
el 465 465 466 
TOTALS Program 5471 ` 
f 1 Im é.s i 2711.1 686 103).1 
tiie faye - FY ہے‎ 74 
دا‎ TU 
e 
[v 
E ` 1 
~~, 
' 5 
t k 
ae 
So Se a ee ee Qf UR 
۶711:٤ iibcr. ive ru 


— ایی ںاشاا‎ I n 


——Á — ——M—¼ Q — 


v9c Jo Ole eBed 


O O 
i {RCAF FRDGRAH 
| (in Thousands) i 
| nan 
l RELEASED ۱ : 
pA PROJECT WO, nut SOURCE A CONTRACT 11:16 
1 ۶+4 In-House Leb Ind Research  MUCOH 630 " 
INCAP 106 106 
11161102571A-02.— Support of Chem Hut] {A c 100 
N ۱ 168 L 
140521164019-01.— Pert Evel of Chem [xp nc 195 
Pers i 
| ۱ l 1 in in 
1 o -YMOSt114AD13-04 — Mew Kejhod for Bia Assay MUCON 1» 7۲ E ` 
= INCAP n.J ! Has ; npoc ‘ : 1 
W1627184D71-02 ء2‎ Evel of Cal 8۴04 2 $00 ۱ i ; " : 
ICAP : s "E X QUEM | 5 
ہر و رد ری ہیں سس‎ of Chem nco 4am وپ‎ | 
ہین‎ . > . ‘ : 
1W1627\0AD75-03 — Prophylexis 4 Therapy for MUCON 300 : l Ax 
Incap Agte e : i : 
INCAP ۱ wa 300 l wo - 
guo * ; . ! , RUE er 
Da : : S 


p9z 10 He Sed 


LOT 


ا 


O O 
pA FEKE W. nnt TT 10 CONTRACT 
(d bi- o Cheutitry of Incap Apts FUCOH 
KAP no 


W76271BAD10 Search for Potential Cal ACOH 600 
Agents 


, [CAP 
TOTALS Progrea 6 
wb . una 


t 


: Can na Pr hx . FY M71 


ah 4 8 


1x- HOUSE 


270 


Mi 


18b 


A 


p10 


1617.7 


SA 


n 2 „‏ . — 
— لاا لل — 


d 
E 
7 
1 


p9z 10 ee Sed 


Y PA PROJECT NO, 


11 8+4 


11001111. 


180141 


1۷71217184011 -77 


goz 


18752118A011-03 
159 [41601 


14762110A4025-0] 


147627184010 


zx 


LL 


(n-House Lab * 
n ft 
Iscr ۰ 


Suppo]t of Cal"! 
۸۸۸ا‎ Co! 


Perf Eval of Ca] 
Exposed Pers 
HCAP 


Physiological Eval 
0 al Agents 
NCAP d 


Clinical Eva) 
of Cal Agents 
° IXCAP 


eier of 1 
INCAP Agents 
UKCAP 


4 لیم سو 

herap for 1 
rae laau | 

INCAP 


Search for 

fotential 

Cul Apts 
Icq 


4 
! ا‎ UNCAP PAOBRAN, ہے ہے ہا‎ d 
(O64. D 
(In Thousands) N^ i A ed : Do 
55 pase qui bg 
i 1 . و‎ i 
| i TS ud. UE 
AELTAYED RU : 
iOUACE — | - PROGRAM CONTRACT ; 1 


وی 


مب 
n=‏ . سے وا 


ene ee 


ہے دو — dee‏ 


ہے سے 


— 2227 nmr کے‎ 
— 


| 


‘ 


ا سے 


. 


P 
ls 


* oT 


— 
* 
لے‎ 
-. utm 
< 


2 871 


v9c Jo ge eBeg 


ms 


607 


pA PROJECT . 
WI 621V6AD19-04 


TOTAL 


Ink 


Mex Methods for 
Mo Asia 
1 


ites ge 


O | 0 


ا۷١۸۶‎ PROGAAN 
(in Thoussnds) 


CCC 


RELEASED ` a D 3 : 
sounc PROGRAM CONTRACT IN-HOUSE a neg >on E 


A 


ARHCOM 308 li j AE. l 5 


` 
P 


بے 
a‏ 
ہہ 
S =‏ 
2 ` 
~ * 
— 
* 
٠‏ 
et‏ ك 
لد 
~ 
ہے 
۰ 
. 
رہ m ee‏ 
ہے حرۓغ ٭. 
DEL --‏ ہہ 


yos 1314.1 


(UU OU 


"T E EAA AALE LIEU KALSARIT LLARA ARAARA LINIARA LIA. 


— — ä WÆ!Raͤr ——ͤ—u—— —-᷑—¼ دح‎ 


p9z مز‎ he ebed 


i 1 
: ۱ i \ | | ۱ i | | { ۱ ۱ ٢ | 
' | ۱ ۱ ۱ i | l { ۱ ۱ j ۱ i i ۱ 
۱ 2 
N 
. i 
4 
- = X 
D . E Q O ۱ O ۴ EN 
B VAT 
INCAP PROGRAM . 
e (1n Thousands) 
nas 5 
. ` RELEASED Y 
pA PROJECT 110, UNE SOURCE PROGRAR COMTRACT IA. pose, mw ox) pois 
j 11611014914 In-House Lab ind Res — ARMCOH HT] 
i ہیا‎ to 60 ec : 
1 11111102171۸ -02 Support of Cal Met EA ARKO — 330 ; 
f ( LNCAP 110 l no | 110 
i! 7627 184D19-01 Performance [val of  ARHCOM . 10 : 
i Chem Exp Pera 
i 
i 8 مس‎ . 00 8 NT 100 
j o S Te- Physiological Eva} of ÁRHCON 430 i es 
i è Cal Agts 0 ~ 
39 : ۱ 
if ICAP c : . 30 300 : Joo 
1617 1AD21-0) Clintcol tal of 91110 ES 
1 Cal Agents i ۱ . 
jj : "T 
B . dg | n s v € HÁT e vi 
i 196626204D12-01 Chenlstry of Incip ARMCOM 110 
il Mu ; 
SB , 2 
E INCAP 110 a no no 
MW1627)0AD2 $-03 Prophylexts & Therapy A 100 "i . 
d „ for incap Agts : ` ] £r 
وی‎ NN es us 100 zo 100 . 


v9c jo ge Sed 


| i ۱ ۱ | ! 1 | i i { | i » 4 ! 
۱ è 
MU ⁵˙ A . A سو وع‎ - - 
7 O 9 0 ul 
RELEASE ; : TN 
DA PROJECT WO. HILE SOURCE PROGRAH CONTRACT IN-HOUSE اٹ‎ BIOMED e 
۲۷۰٥ [vel of Mew Chen ARHCOM $00 i 
for Potent Mission 
pl : 
INCAP 111 ut 121 
4 " TET ۶ 
TOTAL Å Progrem HL b à . 
۱ incl 1380 $ 1340 n 1041 7 45 
E 
. 1 
ri . 5 
i 
E 
4 nr 
3 
ET 
nN eM 
rar Ad 
H . ` E 
` ` 
3 ` 2d 
1 
: , 1 
. 1 qe 
i * 
ii ' 
1 5 
i 


A 


v9c 1o Ne abed 


Page 217 of 264 


SECTION III 


CONTRACT COSTS - 1950-1975 


V 


212 


EI 


e‏ — سے 


3. A a 


SaπHœEj OF CONTRACTUAL ACIIOMEI 


1950 THRO 1975 


v9c Jo ge 620, 


Te 


ͤ— — eee 


0 O | 0 


n 1552 l cur-Or.nouns ۶97۳۸2: (mos-ATr) : 
۲۲۲۲٢٣ E 
TAM caira m AL. mor gomma ۹ CONTR TITLE Of BON l 
. Mo5-0)-016 (00) 1564.  TODAL ger fi, ‘ | Ball Der Co Investigate & Develop Poteotisl CV Aganta b Byothusié of 
71 £65,833 Bpeolal Compounds i 


RD 


v9c Jo Ge eBed 


e ß . C S Vaf n KT Boat ree * ` js 
— — —ÀÀ وھ‎ 


r 1952 
aner / FERCENT . . 
Br ھا‎ . CONTA vo APTL _ AMOUNT FARA Cron, GOA _TITIX OW Qoorg 
4613-001 (mo) 2913 i19, 508 ¥ Y Peychiatrio cout Dtulies, txperieental Investigationa and Teata to Darul 
Paychologioel Kffsala of Certain Puychochenios] Agte oa Ruaan 
. Buhjeota | ` 
291 12 پاہا یا‎ WY ۶۲۰ات۶۲‎ Experimental Invest b Teeta (o Determine Clinioa] Erfecta of | 
Pwycheohantcal Agenta on Puychisirio behavior of Busan Subjects 
1913 11,832 WY Peychietrio Studies on Cliniosl & Psjohological Effects of Puychochemd cal igts 
: on mn Subjects 


STZ — 


p9z o ozz eBeg 


— E 


——— 


woe cones . ————L—— 


ا 
es ...:: — .‏ 
= 


ITZ 


‘ ó 
3 — ———— EN 
O 0 — 
N i ںو‎ o- S CONTRACTS (mom-AIT) : 
roter / rrchir 
TASK CONTR RQ Aryl AANT CONTA CTOR CONTA TITLE OR BOOMS 
hoBa2-010 (hio) $3190 TOTAL PROJ 4 30,000 Rach Found for Henlal ne Conduct Peychiatrio, Psychological & Toerspoutio Biudias 
: of Compounds 
تم رووا‎ (mo) 5519 TOTAL PROJ $51,077 Univ of Maryland Perform Clinical apnd latorstory Btudire on Effecta - 
: Atropine Bubstitules 
wf 


aA ze 


v9c JO fee eBeg 


— . — 


E — ees سس‎ 


LO SSI 


—— —— — a ری سے‎ STN Temp 7 75 و‎ Pe e A ——— بد اسم‎ Rr —f— t p eat 


0 0 | ^O 


۲٢ 1955 OUT- -USE CH Te (NON-AJT . 
vno 1ct/ PERCENT l i 
TASK ocara NO .MTLOO Ar CONTIN COR COTA TITLE ON r 
kofo2-018-o1 (uo) $198 0, ooo Rech Found for Hental Hyg Conduct Peychistric, Paychalogicsl k Therepeulic Gtudies 
of Compounds 
$396 . 15,205 Tulane University Conduat Clinica) Studies During Administration of Mescaline, 
Cnloropromesíne b Buch Other Disgnosetic & Therepeuttec 
Druga Lud Keurological A Psychiatric Change Produced) 
366) 9,000 University of Hichigau Conduct Research on Pherwacology of Certein Compounts 
Affeoting the Centre) Mervous Byeteas of Animals à Man 
TOTAL Fi) ۴6.25 
i 
| 
n 1 
hr 
ي‎ 
i 
4 
ری ھجت‎ NN ee ER ff ہے سے ما ہر‎ ⁰⁰⁰ꝗqydp dd yd n 8 CETT 
یئ‎ 


v9z jo zzz SBE 


* 


BIZ. 


—— 


— — بت 


pem 


— — 


سس سر چا 


2 — — 


سس ہام سو ےی ہے ہے 
= 


—— 
سس سم — 


001 


سک 
—.— 


O 


1 195 OT -OF -E COTM CTS (NENA ET) 
Faorect/ racut . i . 
ET CONTR NO APT Aout CONTRACTOR , SNR riri M SEU . 
\odoe -a)6-ch (B10) 5519 4 12,101 U of Heryland Perfora 6011۸101 and Laboratory 5tuítlas co Effect - Atropine 
. " . ; Bubstitutes 
40802 -018-G) 5663 41,400 Univ of Hicbigan Conduot Research on Pharmoology of Certain Caxpounda Affecting 
Uis Central Mervous Bystema of Animals b Han 
TOTAL IROJ | 53, su : * 
A oboe -o16 -oq $596 TOTAL MOJ | 15,029 Tulane Univerelty Conduct Clinical Studies Daring Adelnistrstlon of Hescaline, 
E Qilaropramasine & Buch Other Diegnostio kh Therepeutio Drugs 
{Study Neurological & Feychlatric Changs Produced) 
* 5 
t 
H 
3 
— 2 یی‎ — Ó— که کہ‎ Aia ید ا الیم‎ oe e ——U—ä— — u زا‎ irk ipeo ا‎ r r ۔حٗمالے۔- مو و کس‎ a مسر‎ LET می‎ hb ٠ ٠۰ e ١ جس وہ ہك‎ a. dae dy. - * N À à 2 — — — 


p9z jo gc SBE 


i 
i 
i 
H 
i 
: 


— i 


= 


STZ 


YY 1951 
FROJECT/ rent 
TASK _ CONTA NO 4k HORT 
&0602-019-o9 (mo) 5158 4 18,139 
5596 12,611 
‘6364 , Mo,000 


مسر ںہسحد سے T ILI‏ ویر عر ——— — —jr‏ . ——— 


TOTAL PROJ V 51,358 


O 


OuUF-OF-:I1DU3E cocta (pOr-a Ty) 
QQITRACTOR 


Rach Found for Wat 102 


Tulane Unive reily 


Univ of Wasbington 


CONTR TIHA On BCOPY 


Oonduct Paychietrio, Psycbologicel & Therapeutic 91oijav 
of Compounds 


Conduct Clinicel Diudies During Administration of 
HMascaliae Coloropromesine & Such Othar Diaet è 
Tharspeutic Drugs وک گنن‎ neurological & Psychiatric 
Change Produced ۰ 


Meurological Action of CV Agente 


v9c JO pzz 9Bed 


0 O | 0 


yv 1928 OUT OF HOUSE CONTIACTS {HON -A TT) 
rr / Pricer 
TASK COKTR HQ ArPL A HOUT COTTA cron CONTR TITLE On OCOPE 
48082-02201 (bio) $596 $10,151 Tulane Univsreity Conduct Clinical Btudies During Aduinisiration of 


Miecaline, Chloropromasina & Buch Other Dlegnoetic & 
Toerepeutio Drugs (Study Nouralogical & Psychiatric 
Chango Produced 


9 25,000 Rech Found for Hantal wp Research Studles tn Hoasurowent of Peychiatric, Pwycho- 
logical and Bpealel Therapeutic Effects of Certain 
Compounds . — 
6331 25.897 Wair of Maryland Psychiatric b Paychologícel Btudles to Determipe Effects 
: ‘ ia Normal Yolunteers 1 Hontal Patiente (2 or Mare 
Atropine Oubstitutes) 
6364 20,000 Univ of Veshington Neuralogical Action of CV Agents 
N R 
D TOTAL PROJ (9: 
Y Mc 
bB082 -02 3-02 5663. TOTAL PROJ $ 19,897 Univ of Michigsa Conduct Research of Pharmacology of Certain cm. 
Affecting the Central Wervous Byalcms of Animali à 
: Han 
1 
— 2 —V—— 22 WA یور‎ 237 — A جرد‎ ALEL ور‎ De ie B Mee ADA چ تھ م من‎ ep ہے‎ 
. ; . à . 0 sper te 1 121 
N eppure شش‎ nr OID ctn e As i i ` 


v9c Jo Scc ebed 


n | O | 0 


۳٣ 1956 : OUE-OF- HOUSE CONTIACTS (NOW-A]Y) 

ryorrer / ۶۲۳۴۲ : i : : 

TABK CONTR HO APPL ANOLE CONTRA CTOA CONTA TITIA Of BOOFE dt 
1005-03-016 (Qa) 108 TOTAL PROJ $18,000 Uoiv of ٢۶ Investigation of Kysno&ipe Hie 

8 
aranna tet tir سے‎ t aa m a i ےم‎ s ری‎ 1,3,7, 1:2 2)0 
y ; 
s nes i puso . sli Sieg UN E 
— — — — 


poz jo ge obed 


0 0 | ۰ | 


Fr 1959 QUI-OF-IDUSE CONTACTO (WON-AJ7) 
rrarror / rrraner ۱ t 
TABK Conr no APPL AMOUNT 009111۸۸28 ۴۸.701 OR BCOPE 
1008-03-016 (Oa) (296) 6572 ° #0,6 PE Corp Byotheete of Compounds für Use to Od. Roch 
: Y 50$ 33, 3¢4 
188 18,000 U of ۶۲٣۰ loveatigation of Rysnodine 


TOTAL Mwy "E 
2307000 23, 


Caz 


——ͤ— — m mee — 


EE 


v9z Jo JC eDeg 


0 O ^O 


rı 1939 Oup-Of-iou6E CONTACTS {HON AIF) 
rrosecr/ ۲٢ á ET i 
TASK CONTR NO E APPL ANAME 06-00 COTA TITIS OA SCOPE 
koBo2-022-0) (Do) 6364 TOTAL pros 4 40,000 Univ of Washington Heurological Action of CW Agente 
rà 
M 
Uu 
$ 7 
10 s 


— . —— . سے یا ۔‎ C anis UB ER cei EDT TIN DEP E E dy ا م ہم‎ ENT Dira ہد کے وہ‎ — DA موی‎ AR ELLAND تھ ےھچ مو می زم‎ 


v9c Jo 0(0 


— 
— — 
ä سس‎ 


LL 


د2 


rt 1960 


paossct/ 
TASK 


hood-0}-016 (OL) 


(525) 61 
6632 


6535 
Bor 


8». 


657% 
(296) 6372 


188 


Unly of Del 
Monsanto Oal 


Unly ef Coon 
Monsanto Cul 


Bienford Rech Inet 
Woodard Res C 
Nu Coyr 


Daly of Calif 


1٥ Organio Compounds pot Comper, Avell,‏ ط1ا :کرٹ 


stay of Intermediatea of Balected Agents 


Biological lotet to the Byotbesia of FA 2729 


Btdy of Intermediates of Selected Agents 


Byn of Uitrogen oootalaing Wetarocyolfe Ci Possessing 


Nys lol ol dotivity 


Bareening of Beleoted Compounds 


Dynthesls of Caxpound cer Use In Cal Noob 


D 


Tovest of Ry»nodine (20 Dwa) 


Re 


6/58 8/61 


yoz مر‎ bed 


-—— - 


rr yo OUT-OF-ipU3É CONTRACTS (MOM-AIT) ' 
prourct/ PERCENT 
pax CONTR nO APPL HOUT CONTRACTOR 
ko402.022 (mo) 6364 4 121,530 Univ of Meebington 
6613 30,009 Univ of Calif 
6609 18,000 Johne Hopkins 
y 25$ V, 500 : 
6568 319, 700 Bass}ton Late 
à y şop 10], 130 
31 
voboe-oQ3 (B10) 6629 4 48,670 Vanderbilt Univ 
6616 18,99 Univ of Hisa 
T53 V, Boo Univ of Calif 
6591 39,000 Ina U Found Rech 
(135) T003 eo, o Regents of Calif 
26. 35,501 Uaiv of Colo l 
6593 20, B34 B B alen 
“TOTAL PROJ 179, 503 
12 
Paras 


O 


CONTH TITLE On BOPE 
Beurologicel Action of cu Aganta 
Collection & Bludy of Plante Containing Disebling Bubatances 


Effects of Druge and OW Agente on tha EM 


Biological Evaluation of Leihel b JncepecitiaUting Agents 


Btudy h Eveluation of e Compound s 


Poors star on Centre) Byne pL! ¢ aya ۸۲٢١١٢٢۴ Not or Funct lon 
call. of Blologically-Active Substances from the Ha tural Ban ce 
r Dtudies of the Effects of Incapacitating Agente 
pure Investigations of Centrally Active Compounds 
Investigation and Treatment of C4 Casveltiss 


Isolation & Association Btudies V/Toxic Extructives of Cervus 
Ryania 


v9c Jo oec 5e 


VY 196) 

او کی 

۸۴ CONTR NO 
kco8-0j-016 (aa.) 162 


o 
Y 


gcc 
b. 


5 


ات 


(188) 6967 
6518 


TH 
525 


(296) 6572 


028 
imm: o- GRANT 


YYRCENI 


APPL Anand 


r M3 


1 3/3 


r 1/3 


r hoj 


r 1/2 


1,600 
8,000 (Cis) 
20,009 
21,000 
22,500 (Ox) 
+9 (Dm) 
22,000 (Oua) 
51,600 (Cua) 
39,300 (Ow) 


55,000 
1,300 


41,600 
15,060 


10,000 
7h ,900 
2h 970 


40,700 


33. 700 
10, 200 


79.6 
b 
36,423 
13 


O 


OUT-OF -HANE CONTRACTS (HCN AIF) 


SAM ات‎ 
Univ of Cana 
Ualv af Pol 
Wily of Cann 
Un|v of Tore 
Southern Reoh Inet 
Rutgers Uv 
Ooargetam Univ 
Olin-Hatht eson 
Regis C Co 


Armour Rech Fount 
Hon santo Qal Co 


Univ of Cal 


Woodard Rea Carp 


imiy of Conn 


Univ ef Del 


n Carp 


U of New Hampshire 


. 


CANH TITE OR el 

Inv of Wilbaa}a Bosnifora Alkalold 

Bynihatic Hothola for Meterocylio Ring Systems 
Biological Synthests of XA 1729 5-60. fa 

Inv of Indole Alkaloláe XO 3-0-3 ! 
Screening Anti-Cancer Opds for Iocapecity 

Byn of Opia for Usa aa Incapacity Agti 

Byn & Eval of Drugs ae aps Sy Ayts . 

Byu of Clycalio Aoid Estere 

dyn of Non—Camoaraisl Avsll Cpds 


Biocheuice] st of XA 2277 (JER Cum) 
Ut of Intermediates of Baleotod ($97.6 Gm) 


Lrreat of Ryenoiine (286 Om) 


Bcreunlng of Salsated Co«pounis 


hi al gc Routes to the Bynthcals of FA 1729 


1/60 - 6/61 
*/60 - 1/62 
11/58 - 10/61 
10/60 - 9/61 
9/60 8761 
9/60 - 9/&i 
10/60 - 10/61 
6/61 - 6/62 
1/61 - 6/62 
3/60 - 3/62 
6/58 - ۸۵۱ھ‎ 


Bynthcalso Ocgenig Compounds Mot Comer, Aveil. 


Byutheale of Compounds for Use In ات‎ Rech 


Onl Bynthosts of Analogs of Actinomycin : 


p9z JO Lez eBeg 


ا تِےےے جح 


ry 1561 
0 
YROJECI/ 
TANK COTA jlo 
1co8-03-m& (an) 0-1 
rale Gi Agents 
0-5 
0-28 
LEGEM; 0 - Gants 
* 
(ARR AR ععی‎ —————5rð.—— 12 . 5 


اید 


O O 


QUT-OF-MOUSE COfTRACTU (MYA) 


Pd AJ ONT COTM CTOR EAA una On scars ] 
4 12,500 Univ of Cona Ghoreaterisation of Withania Bami fara Alkaloid 9/60 - 5/61 
11,009 miv of Oregon lav Alkaloids of Calabash Orare 9/60 - 9/6 
* 20,000 Univ of Vow hehre Chea Byn of Analogs of Ana 6/61 - 6/65 


THO TOTAL +1 ہے‎ : 3 
Ac bes, ALY, 


———— . یندم ا دمه — oa ne — MÀ.‏ مل bhat eann‏ دسر سے :مل TS‏ ع382 .4 


مر 
SM‏ 


p9z JO zez he 


N 
[RI 


0 


n 1961 our-Of-NOUJ€E COUTIACTO IAI! 
4 
110 n C/ Pencent 2 
TA 4. Com, A0 AIVL AMOUNT CONTI CINI CONH TITLE OR SOME 
BRL — a LLL — a MAI ہا .سج سناس نت ملاس‎ i 
Voc -02-0?2,'02 Y 1011 4 30,000 U of ٥11 “Calloction b Jtudy af Viens Containing Oicobling Subacance | 
(bio) ‘ 
£452 30,000 Contrib of Panne loup Neurological Evel of Wav Agante q 
65 50,000 8t fonds Univeralty Neucotropie Effecto Jn Relation to Mamita) Structure 
1 
£609 20,000 Johne Hopkiua E(fecta of Drugs and CH Agents on thu FI! . 
. 1 25j 5. O i 
. A * d 1 
6368 200,45) Rarolton tabs Nicloyical $vniuotion of Lethal & Incupacitaling Agents } 
. Y sot 100, LOO i 
6591 16, 360 Ina ane U Pound lech Yeychological Dtudico of tho ffecto af Incopaciteting Agemie i 
& 62 15,000 U of 'aryloná Incopncitating Ac (tone of CW Chamicals b, 
60 51,640 Mo ^a Avia Corp Alrerev Far fore becrerent Henulting iroa Ingestion of Locapastctiag | 
Agents i f 
0 10,000 Maimonidas Hospital 9/61 - ٥٦/۸۵ Effects or Dnis on central Neural & Meurceninculur : 
Systems 3 
G16 30,005 Ualy ot III 7 10/60 ~ 30/61 Psychotouimatic & Poycholronic Age - Berouz 
| Enzyme دسا را‎ 
Í Giz 2h OC Univ of Wisconsin 10/60 - 9/61 Prareacologic ماد( ام(‎ that Uterupt ts Central feriur’ 
: Byàtex Friwstan 
ji z 
1 as 13,000 U of erylanc HMachualsn of Actlun of Ryanodioe or Nommalian Skelet: bunicl: 
n £g 51,301 Vanderbilt Univ Study f. یر‎ of Hou کٹ رر‎ 
i ` : 
1 (is 10,835 5 B Tonics Tavlation s ^t£a0clAtioc Studdsa V/Taxic Cxvaciádve. af -e 
as : Rr. 1A ; 
P TOTAL, PRES 
. ئ۸۸‎ 
a 
LE lood-O1-01 (WO 653. 65,062 1 ET nech Inat (our H fecta of Kew Chealcal oc Fiiyalological Üüyatzw at ib; lony 
i A 7 
4 7 12 . 
^. E . 
4e ا‎ 2 
' j 4 . 
—— Vr de ہے‎ we es ee ee en مرک‎ AEN * 


... amm mnt 


poz jo eec obed 


O ۱ O O . . L 


۲ 1962 OUr-Of-MO.GBE ذ ۷۲۲۱ء‎ (NOM-AIP) ۰ 
raarct/ vacet ; 
K CONTR HO LI ArONT _-— CONTRACTOR ء٥9‎ TITLE OR ۶ 
lco0-03-015 (Oa) 6572 4 861,556 M Corp - Dynthesls of Coxpounds for Une in Onl Rsoh 
Š r 1/2 42,270 : 
523 39,000 Unlv of Del Synthests Organio Campounds Not Coor. Avail. 
r hof 15,600 a 
à 65 39,073 Woodard fach Bcrecning of Bealactod Coaxpounda 
Puy 26,350 
6632 y . 97,610 Monsanto (m) Atay of Intormediatoa of elected Agents 
3د۲۶‎ 32,536 | 
| 6613 400,000 ںہ‎ Evaluation & üynthesls of Ool Caspounda 
EF 7c , 200 Stanford Res Inst Burvey of Recent Foreign ScloatiCio Dav 
t3 : r 1/2 ,600 . ۰ 
۰ ‘O E 
na 61,000 laxasido lab DBynthesle of Substituted Qlycolic ۶٤ 
TOTAL MOJ 2 
FA ), 582, 356 
1 4199-26-01 (OL) 035 15,000 Univ of Conn Isolation L Cheracterization of Mithonia Sorifcre 
: 6673 50, COO E 1 Mn Evel 4 Bynthosis of Cal Coupounda 
اس‎ 35,000 Atanfard Bos lost Bynthrzsis of nitrogen Containing ne Hf: IIc N Compound: 
| oai 9,065 Univ af Del Byntheals 4 Chen of Meterocyllo Compounds 


"gona mos 4359, ڑکا‎ ` 


| Inn: 0 - cu 
; 1 
i 


PL 16 D 
N 


سے 2 — سی وس UMEN MES‏ لت سے — — — مور رج ردپ مید ییو وھ یھی —— —u— — 2 2— os y‏ ———— —— 
x i‏ 


poz Jo vec ebed 


— — — ——— — — — 


0 O : 


T! 1962 OIT~OF -NODE CONTRACTO (NOH-AT . 
moncr/ YPACENT 
TASK cam W ATUL HOLL Cara 1 Camm IHA ی8‎ 08۸ 
lk coe -oah (810) 43 $48,406 U of C»lif Colloction b LO o£ Plante Containing Disat}ing Substance 
6652 52,220 Contrib of Penna 109 Howoloyscal Essl of Now Agante 
6601 16,000 Bt Louis Univ Nousotropic Effects in Aalatiun te OG Btructere 
6)1 90,600 “YLT Rach Inet (aur) Xffccteo of New OL on Pyatologtics) Sys of the Pot 
[73.7 371,9 Univ of Hilos fuor» Otudlas oa Conical Bymaptic Sys Affecting totar f'onct 
6609 i 20,009 Jan Hopkins Effecis of Druga & OL Agts on the EMN 
r 251 5,000 
6560 245,207 us ze lton labs Dialogical Eval of Lethal & Incapacity Ages 
y 9oj 220,758 . ۱ 
z 
t3 6591 3,600 Indjanna U Fond Rach P»ychologtcel Hludiece uf Lhe af(ket) CI Latin: ut 
e ۰ 
1669 10,207 Jefferson Mod Col Naurupbarmacoiogicol Profilo sf PIMA alld Activity 
THY 39,000 U of Teng Local Tr D. 2f Yeaicont ۹٤ 
195 10, 73 Rogents of U of Ct Conduct Promancalogicel Invest of Centretiy lese Uta of 
CHL Corps Interest 
6562 39,000 U of Harylaná muspacl tating *ctlons of dds 
05^ 6,552 ^ Baylar University Ost 62 ¬ 30 Bep 62-Quon Cora la: n of LzXrCl $ Peripheral 
; Actiona of Gama Anasthelic cps 
"30 10,09 Haimonides Hosptial Ba 61 - 31 Aug 62- IMaruncolegsen La- cas 


TUAL و‎ 38ER, 795 
FACIORRD 641,270 


n 


and Bpipal Byuaptiog Junctions 


^n the =) 


—— —ÿ—— 2 — — ES " 5 
T * Acker me — . ̃7—˙— , Vs cus E. 84907 ua 7 
IE ےب‎ — RIP etin —— fe — — — — — 


JO SEZ ohe.‏ ج۲9 


"Tab O O Oo 


rt 1962 Qur-or-ua ar CAUTRA CTS [non-A Ur) 
! ; 
LI 
; | mosscr/ PLACENT * 
i H TASK CQITA NO 39 A eur ء۶‎ cron COCH ۳۹ 
i ix99-26-oai (ma) š a3» $ 38,750 — Univ of M1 acenston Oct 61 ~ Bep 62 - Dehaviore) Effects of Pharma, Hat) that Di, 
: ; rupi the Contre) Horvous Aystom - Primates 
aT 13,009 Univ of Maryland Moy 61 - Oct 62 - Hechanica of Action of Rysnodina on Mennal 
: fan Bkelotal Muscle 
ar 4g, 085 Uniy of D4 f Oat 6} - Oct 62 - Action of Various Psychotonimatic Agents 
on Brain Ens By st cms 
o2 22,900 Rutgera Univ Nov 61 - Oct ~ Oyntheals of Gu. . Unt Rgajalog- 
] ical Erfoote : 
,ل : 6الم‎ re Unir of Penna Deo 61 - dee 62 - Exparbeantal Basis for Treating Chemical 
¥ lof 1,490 Casualties "us 
052 . 3,920 Univ of Panna Jua 62 - Hay 63 - Study on the cellular actions of Neuro- 
bumaral Trynzzit ters 
cmi مو‎ UN. 
۲۸۲۲00 131,145 


18 EC لم‎ D | 


v9c Jo o eBeg 


۱ 1 kh) " SAT- or - pour SMN (NOn-A IP) 
i 7 : i 
VAUR COTE » Am, | A pur rnu cron CANA TITER (B sorg ہے‎ 
Lco^-03-016 (an) (525) 651 [| 31,900 Univ of Del Oynthostae Dr ganto Compounds not Norder. Ava41, 
T vol 12,760 
(591) 6574 911 Woodard Res Corp Scrraning of Balocted سی‎ 
Y 1/3 32,590 
(295) 652 نہ‎ PE Carp oc Byuthesia of Compounds for Vas in Od. Rach 
Y i2 ub, k70 l ; 
6523 : 45, 000 کا نے‎ Cui Co üyntheele of H- cela Compounds 
6573 : $32,000 — E I bupont Evaluation b Byathoata af (nl Compounds, 
n T1 ,000 Btanfurd Rea Industrial La Iten with Forotgn-Concarna 
دہ‎ y 1/2 »300 i j . 
103 با‎ 30,000 AD Little lacepooitating Agent Rach 
y UN 
100 600,000 NE Corp 


Incopocitatina Agent Dach 


TOTAL PRO) $1,010,625 


FACTOKED 1, 709, 320 


۱01:7 PERCENT 


1x52-25-CA (OL) cay 11,000 U of Dal : Beterocyclic Mitrogan Cospound 4 
028 12,000 u af Hew Maapahlre Qal arntne le et Analcga af ein in 
6613 150,000 |. 1 1 DupoaL Bvaliation & ۷ of Cui Lazpoinds 
. . : " 
12 50,000 U of Corm Invect Of Alkaloid Products in @sprophytia Culture 
10 35,000 — Btanfora Inst 


Moterocyclic Nitrogen Compote 
TOTAL Mos — $258,000 


v9c Jo Zez eBeg 


TY 1963 


TROJTCT/ 


TASK 


Aco8-o2-oel (810) £552 


nay 
7217 


183 


6564 


10 


255 


Lo 
7 


¢ 


OUT-OY-MONE CONTRACTS (NON-A pT) 


40, 000 
47,626 
18,906 


N. ^0 
r şot 33,690 


18,152 
8,000 
29,565 
33.263 
ho, 725 
31,785 


481,557 
Y 90% 433,430 


715,008 


Hur 


Coal£it of Penna Hoop 


Bl, Tota Univ 

I I T Rach Inst (Amour) 
Inat for Deheviorel Nach 
Univ of Misa 


Nasalton labs 


U of Cinn 

Inal onna U Found nech 
U of Tenn 

Staat Raoh Inst 
Univ of NI 

U of Maryland 


laba‏ 2160ء ۶ ما1 


Marelton labs 


CaM Irpa CR 8608 
Meurological Evol of h Agta 
Mourolropia Effects In Ralation to d. $*ructars 


Btoesd Studies of IZ 


Drug ECC & Complex Bchovior&l Raparioires Unter Ccoditiona 
of full Environ Contral 
Tarn Gluay of Central Synaptic Bya Kffecling Hotar luncti« 


Biological Nal of Lethal & Incapecitating Agis 


7 


Bludy of Mypotbalalo Meurosecretary Mochan sma 
Resio Puychological Studlas of the Effecta et tnê aê sad 
xd Sanaa of Vealcont Burns 

Bludy of Cumperntive Nauropharmacalogy of hacias BRolaxant 
Biochemical basia of Psychidelic Drug Actions 
Incopecttating Agta of CH اہ‎ eis 


Biological Eval of Lethol & Incapecitoting ۶٤ 


Prog h Eval of Naturally Occurring Bilologicalig Active Mat 


—— —— مسمسو‎ ⅛ͤʃ7—ÜU—U Ft مہو مر سمسمسمح‎ E هب یھ‎ s RESCUE شس‎ n: 


p "ET 


v9c Jo gez 5e 


.æ — ہے‎ 


"£z 


— —— — ہس 


—— —ä—— — — 


O 0 


N 196) QUI-OP-HO.DE CCtmACT3. Hm 
Harrer / FIACENT E 5 
21 COTA Wo APPL BONE ۲9۲7۸8 
مم صمہ با‎ - (aid) 148 133,71 Harvard Col 
Jo 250,768 A n Little 
as 300,448  Btanford Rech 
187 11,000 n Y Baohool of hod 
253 W 2 Harvard Unty 
TOTAL PROI 1,6 
FACIORED — 1,722,551 
hx 95-26-00) (Rio) wg 22, 75 Daylar ۰۳۲۷ 
055 10,000: Jaun Bopkina Univ 
a 13,000 U af Maryland 


TOTAL mas 5,198 


21 


—————————— —— — hä — a 


ah des 


Molecular Struotime 4 Diffusional Processes Across 


o | 


0 


L4 
CONTA TITIA CR N 
Intact 


Xpidorals 


^ Incapachtsting Aat Booh 


Ad. Incepeciteting Agta 


Dndocrinological Bffeats of Altered Consciousness 


Collection h Ident of Flant Mat'i 


Bludy of Effoots on Cortain Analgesio Duas on A, pirat 
Center h Circulation of Huwans 


‘sep 62 - Bap 63 -'Effecta of Amphatamine-lika Cupda 


Aotian of Ryania Extracts of Hammealien 8Skolotal Muscle 


v9c 10 eec إ0‎ 


Memini B 


LT —. 


— 


IL 


guini 


3 
$ 


PROJECT / نل تنا‎ 
; TASK CONTR بر‎ AFTI AFUE 
j 1060 (c. ive 103 } 825,000 
| ni 221,925 
108 ; 856,671 
| (8 123,017 
۲1/3 11, 284 
130 104 , 5 
l in 50^ 358,211 
17 79, 109 
B3 
cn : M5 174,300 
as 177,000 
2971 356,100 
20 50,000 
6611 400,000 
6 39,245 
1 173 13,081 
TOTAL Ino 13.557.875 
PACTOUD 3,321, 
] 11% -n (OL) ۱ aa TULAL In 10,000 
I 
i 


O 


QuT-OF -NOIE ۸ 0 (non -ATY) 


COTRA CTCR 
AD Little 


Woolwerd Bach 
nu corp 


NO Carp 


Rach Triangle Inst 


Monsanto 


Marolton laba 


Atanfard Rech Inet 
Rach Triangle Inat 
Coss Prisar 
& 1 Dupont 


Woodard Res Corp 


Unity of De) 


22 


CONTR TITA CM BCOTR 


Incepacitsting Agont Rach (1963 - 1966) 


Bcroaning of Belacte4 Compounds (1963-1966) 


Besroh for Reu Incepacitating Agta (1963 - 1967) 


Synthesis of Cuspomds (196. - 1969) 


Byathesls of Ooxpounda (1954 1959) 


8yntbeals of Coxpounda (196) - 1969) 


Dev & Practical Application of New Primary Screaning Her 


d. Incapacitating Agenta 
Bearch for New CHE Agents 


OM. Incapaol tating Agents : 


. kral 4 Byntbesia of OL Caspamds 


Bcreening of Balected Compounts 


Aynthosts b chen of Polcrocyclia Comomts 


——— — — i چھچھ‎ a Raa مکوؤ ر — ——— —— مین لد می م س‎ e ede Pee tre — A ناص‎ a مد‎ m رمےمسجیلىصبیہیے‎ YI E 


E 
ahah 


v9c JO Ohe BE 


71 1964 


L- OT- OAS ٤ L 


O 


1 PROJECT / FERCKNT 
| TAGK CONTR NO APPL AMOUNT CONTRACTOR CONTR TITIES OA SCOPE 
i 1019 (B10) ` 0252 } 31,60) Btenford Ras Inat Conporetive Neurophemacal ogy of رر رٹ‎ Relaxant 
$22.11 9 d i 1 
| 2 0115 35,000 flarverd Col Holscular Structure b Diffuatona) Processes Across Intact U 
XpíAs mia Q) 
0103 200,000 A D Little Incsyacitating Agent Resserch 15 
| 0108 220,000 FHC Corp Incapecitaling Agent Research W 
| 0120 269,200 Narollon Saba Biological Exel of Letha) & Incapacitating د۸۸۸‎ A 
r Doj 215,360 : i A — 
N 5 
t 0126 101,923 Univ of Pena TMrresiiold Doses in haane [e] 
e s —h 
i 0115 13,19) Rech Triangle Inet Extraction of Biosasy of Hatursl Producto N 
i 0183 56,275 Univ of III Blochenical Bests of Psychidclic Drug Actions rA 
11 7 
| 0215 191,900 Btanforå Rech Inet اء لہ تا‎ Incapecitating Agents 7 
i cal 50,000 Chae Priser h Co CQhemtcal Iocepecitatina Agenta 
| 025) 18,192 Yx1epoás of Peychia- Collection & Ideatificetion of Plant Haterial 
tric Moapital 
ce 6o 66,00 Inst Tor Bchay Rach Drug Effect & Complex Behaviors) Rcpertolz2c Under Conditia. 
of Full Savironaenta! Control 
| oTi 55,650 Inst of Hd Bcfancc Bubtle Toxic Effects Produced by Drugs 
l 0202 55,000 A» Inst for Mach Kffacta of Drugs on in lerformnnce 
| 050 66,856 bt Joule Univ Nourotrop!c Effect in Reletion to Chenical Diructura 
i ۳ 
i 6652 50, 000 Contributors to Pena Naurological Evel of Mow Agcate 
| 6613 611,166 5 1 Dupont Evol A Bynthecels of Quealcal Cospouns 
| E | 
z : — وھ اھ ا مم خمد او‎ AS IEO و ی کی و‎ ER y ,موف‎ ine خف‎ 


nues 


LEZ 


rı 196 ; QuT-Of-MQu03 CQemacrs (H-A) 
movrcTt/ 0101017 
TASK CONTR NO ATR, ALKARIT camu crai 
۸019 (M0) 78 152, 63 ltc fabs 
522. H. 079 . r 90j 156,030 
0391 44,000 P. ylor u, Col of Hed 
TOTAL PRO 2,395, 
FA CTOR ED 2,321,328 
n (mo) 0255 4 70,605 Maseltoo Leds 
5825.11.07 D : l 
0253 -30,660 Tros Fallows of Harvard 
TAY 7,500 U of Tennessee 
(6631) 166 16, % LI f Mach met 


TOTAL maj ۲ 351,103 


— ——— — 


CONTA TITLE OR 20014 
Biological Evol of Lathal & Incapecitating Aganta 


Btudy of Effecta of Certain Analde- le Druge on tha Rasplira- 
tary Canter b Ciraulation in Humane 


Procurement h Evalustion of Naturally Ocourring Blologically 
Active Material 


Collection end Identification of Plant 11 


Local Trestment of Yesloaat Mona 


Biomed Btudiios of E 


v9c 10 Zvc eBeg 


— ————— جح 


TY 1965 
PROJECT/ سیر‎ 

TASK _ CONTR mo Arn. AMO 
aco (cra) odı2 ۲ 40,400 

5522.11. : 
010) $30,009 
Qu 205,000 
0100 530,000 
0120 . 11,105 
11/3 49,000 
0130 122,72 
0137 106, m 
‘ y 1/2 93,400 
QU 166,400 
025 175,256 
œg 100,000 
03% ,ر با‎ 000 
0315 2000 3.05 
oyl 55, U 
O 2p 251,400 
۱ یں‎ ma) 42,907 NT 
۲ء۸‎ 2,796,211 

7 * 
et 


O 


AT-. -E COMRACTO (Ha-a UT) 


Univ of Conn 
A D Little 
Woodard Rach 
PEC Corp 


mc Curp 


Rach Triangle Inat 


Honaspto Cal 


Marelton Labs 
Btanford Bach Inst 
Roh Triangle 

1 I Dpat 

Mazel ton labs 

las elt on Jabs 


Quas ۶۲۱۰۱٢۶ 


CAMA TITLE OA BCO[E 

Imvsatg of Alkalola 0. Altus 
Incepacitating Agent Bach (1963 - 1966) 

Screening of B«looted Compounds (1963 - 1966) 
Qoarch for Mow Incapacitatina Agents (1963 - 1957) 


Byntheals of Compounds (195) - 1969) 


Byntbesls of Cosgounda (1964 - 1969) 


Byntnasis of Cauxpounis (190% - 1969) 


Dev & Practical ‘yess of Hew Prisery +۴ Ya Hod 
CHL Inospeoitating Agents 

Search far Kew Od. Agents 

Evi) 1 Synthesis of Od. Canpeamis (1965 - 1968) 

Irritant Boreening of Campounta (1965 - 1969) 


New Hathod Dew for Drritant Bareening (1955 - 1966) 
ac Incapacttating Agents . 


v9z jo ge 0 


6EZ 


y bot 10,709 


16,009 
43,633 
11,000 

9.6.0 


TOTAL m 41, 1, I 
FACTOUED 1,17, - 


009 
A D Little 
Nu Corp 
X I Magat 
Chas Miser 


Hesel ten laba 


Univ of Panne 
Pann Hospttel 

Univ of Maryland 
Johns Ropkins 
Btanfard Rech Inat 
Bosch Triangle 


Am Inat for Rech 


IIR TIM. Oh 6COIX 
Incepecitating Agent Rs ch 


Incapacittating Agent Rach 


Evaluation A Byntheala of CHL Agenta 


OL Incspecitating Agents 


Biological Evaluation of Lethal A Inoepacitating Agent: 


Threshold Poea in ٭حصۃ::ۃ8‎ 


Neurological Evaluation of Agent 


Drug Effaota b Bebaylor Rcperlorives and Environ Control 


Effect of brug ar Gd. Aganta 


Comparative WNcuroybarsacology of Husole Rolasant 


Extraction of RI U of Nelurel Produota 


Coxperstive Neurophoarmacology of & Muscle ReJarant 


c‏ کی — CN‏ —.- رہ —— وو مرج دمحم — h‏ — — سے 


- — 


p9z Jo he 5e 


5 | TEE | 


OUI-Cf-MOUDE ۲۲۱۱۸٥۲۶۸۰۲۵ (NOn -A IT) 


TCA s 
corm کر‎ III AMOUNT gom cron CONTA TITIRA QIK 
0368 $102,600 Univ of Wisconsin Bohavioral Effects of Pharmocologio Materiala 
0253 25,480 Harvard Univ Callectioa 1 Ident of Plant Hat'l 
0007 B,502 Tala Inniv Relationship of Pxychotosiaetic . in Brain Meurohumars 
mkg ۱ 12,000 Naylor U Col of Rod Effects of Certain Analgesic Drugs oo'Resplratory Center 
0135 106,000 Univ of Wisconsin Method of Heo niring Od. Inincod Diomed Changes in Hameellsn 
Bpecles : 
rom, mas HN, بی‎ 
2 ! باعم‎ TOAL MOJ $ 12,073 Univ of Del Haterocyolio Milrogen Compounds i 
y e آوچ‎ 
| 
| 
"m 
i uit 
i lii 
t 
?1 " 
` pensa 
رہ‎ 
A 
— cem Kant سو او‎ t m t be o B e ta tn tne Ne LP t — ———Eæ—j4— ےب مم‎ i-r وہ‎ dod e n ممم ورو‎ c t سے‎ ͤ 


Em Tm E A 29 „ 
eee eee با ا ی ا‎ 275 k 


v9c Jo g eBeg 


2 — —À — مم‎ — — —À — — - 


O O O 
rt 1965 OUT OF -HOUSK CONTRACTS _) 791-۸ TY) ] 
PROJECT) PERCENT ۱ : : ff 
TASK O coin no APPL Apu CONTRACTOR CONTA TITIA OR gz 
f 


A09] (m0) 1113 2,321 Univ of Tena Local Treatment of Vesicant Burna 
3525. 11.097 . 
1c622 014031 0126 6,917 Univ of Tena Tureshold Doses in humans — 
0175 64,000 Nach Triengle Inat “Extraction of Biceasesy of Natura) Products 


0191 : : 30,000 lv of Calif Methods for Identification of Bits end Mode of Action 
] of Centrally Aotg Tocaopociteting Coxpounda 


f ME: TOTAL MOJ PETE i : 
ty 


26 


è . |‏ 
ابو جچجچھے ےہ یمم .1 و ہی مھ و PEDE RE‏ 


v9c Jo g eDeg 


0 0 8 | 


N 1966 OUT-OF- MOUE CONMACTE (on- Ar) 
Or / PERCENI : ۱ 
TASK CONTA مر‎ APPL, Af CONTIUCTOR CONTR TITLE OR BCOrs 
10650 (Qa) coke 4 48,508 Univ of Coon es laveat of Alkaloid Producta in Baprophytic culture 
N 0103 ^ 905,000 A Dilittle Incap Agent Rech (1963 - 1966) 
011) 33], n5 Woodard Rach Ocreaning of Balactad Corpounda (1963 - 1966) 
0108 T27,000 ng Corp Baasch for Mev lnosp Agents (196) - 1941) 
B 0128 bi. ooo nc Corp ; Byntheeis of Carpounds (1964 - 1969) * 
i 7175 13.0 . 
8 orks ` 365 000 Heel ton labs Dav I Practicsi Application of New Primary Screening Hettoda 
| " 1 (195A - 1966) ; 
i P $ 7 
i ~ 0291 163,006 Rich Trlangla Inet Beerch for few CHL Agents (1964 - 1967) TOT $1,100, Joo 
| 0336 1,338,933 X I Dupont Evaluation À Synthese of مت‎ Compounds (1965 - 1968) 
Hi ; 
1 TUTAL PHOS 1,161 ۱ 
i FACTORED > J., 26,361 
spia (mo) 6652 $3,002 Penn Hoapital Meurclogical Byalustion of new agante 
5011.11.01 


9,633 Ht Binal bsp liypothelanjc Control of Advspocortical Function 


iste a See ee (eate aaa Diretta نات‎ 


Jo Jpz obe‏ عو 


| 
| 
| 


tvc 


—M M M À——À ee 


N 1966 


roter / 
TASK 


4079-08 (810) 
3922.11.09 


M (mo) 
25.11.09] 


CONTR nO 


0120 


0125 
o 


9722 


aree 


rocoit 
APPL 


r 00 


TOTAL ÍROJ 


FACTORED 


TOTAL HO 


O 


OUT -OF -MOUSE CONTRACTS (تر نہ 1کرز.‎ 
۲یہ‎ CONTRACTOR CONTA TITIR & BCOYS 
$^ مم‎ Hazelton laba Wlologicel Kvalustion of Lethal & Lacap Agents 
100 
65,000 Univ af Penn Rasescch Work on Threshold Poses in Hue na 
53,409 Am Inet for Rach EfCact of Drugs on Ihsan Por formance 
130,000 laseltoa labe Blologicel Evaluation of Cnealcal Compounds (1966 - 1970) 
T 
zc} 889 
$ 33,000 feel te laba Blalogical Evaluation of Chemical Compounda (1966 - 1970) 


v9c Jo gh Se 


YUL 


1 ہے‎ ۱ N eee 


I | { | | I | i 
1 ۱ | i ۱ - Lo. , ۱ . . 


۱ 


2411: 


mii 
ihid 


O O 0 


— موس‎ S 


————————— 


— 


yx iil orr- HALE camera LI. 2 Dy] 
rns / rmerirr i 0 
TALK cora 10 APL Ame gangen COAN T[71£ Cà BCA — 
A (C.) 0108 4130,091 مہ‎ Cory lacepealiating Agent Bach (1963 - 1964) 
5522. U. C i 
0128 149,000 HO Corp Byntheals of Compounds ne - 1969) 
Y 1/3 49,600 
015 13,10 len Labs Dev A Practical Application of Mew Prinary Bcreealng 
Methods (1964 - 
03% 246,535 1 I Dupont Evaluation b 15 of ad. Caxpounds (1965 - 1553) 
p T." 291,000 NE Corp Incapeciteting Agent Raach (1951 - 1968) 
IWAL MAJ FET, T39 . 
fACTOUED 162,329. l i i 
upa (bis) 0296 f 29,850  Uulv of Wisa Hethods for Measuring Cnoalcally Induced Behavioral Mangai 
all. . l ` | Ia Various lll species 
LI 
وم دہ‎ 20,900 kt Binal Hosp Mypothalalo Cousrel of Advenogoertical Fonction 
00)1 i 19,009  Cocnall Univ. Effect of Tosio Agents on Rr ہچ‎ Ma La bal Lum 
TOL fuo) 4 59,833 
: ee. iili. 
407% (810) o 140,000 Masa)tag Labs Biological Kvalustion of Queatoal Compounds dili 
19ذ‎ : 
0126 30,000 dulv of Poona Tnreshold P. bn amas (195) - 1967) 
TOML 10 15, 
n 
— E&Eꝑö—¾ m i وم‎ e ae ہے‎ b ir مھ‎ irt ll ےه ےجو‎ heer و وی میں س ری و‎ g att tI ر موت‎ Ne P 


v9c مز‎ GH eBeg 


سے سے .. 


Y 


m 1968 

more / 

TASK U HO 

406a (ac) 0120 
$522.11.060 

0336 

0023 

A060 (QL) 0315 
5522,11.060 

. BTA (B10) : 015i 
5031.1), Jai 

407 (B10) 062] 
5522.11.0]9 

07 


ICAT 
AI 


r 1/3 


r 17 


TOTAL IROJ 
FACIOUD 


r 104 


TOTAL MOJ 
YACTOMED 


O 


OUT-OP MOUSE CONTRACTO {RONA rr) 


A 
3 
8 
. 
8 


65,000. n9 Carp 


1,50] E I Dapont 
496 % OT Arthur D Little 


125,000 Ua el ton Lab 


17,000  Unlv of Penna 


33,118 Ivy Esch Lad 


100,000 Heaslton Jab 


CATR TINE OR 28a 


Byol 


اید 


Lac 


1 


heals of Coxpounda (1964 - 1969) 


vation À Synthesia of QGL Cospouods 


pacitating Agent Assearch (1567 - 1972) 


Primary Toxicity Screening Tost h Hotbodology (1957 - 197) 


Er 


Thurs 


Bial 


rixcnta) Enals far; (a) Treatmant of CHL Casualties 
) Hola of Transport of gases thru ling Arenen 


D 


abold Doses in Humana 


Ogical Evaluation of Od. Compounda (1966 - 1970) 


i ri —ñ——— ́ — — 


v9z jo occ ebed 


977 


1 à 1 | | 
t l | | ۱ | | | | | l | = 
i i 
rı 1969 OUT-OF-IIAD E. CONTACTS IAA 
yROJECT/ 18087 : 
TASK cama no Arn AnOunt CONTRACTOR CONTA T OR BC 
4060-08 (aa) 0023 $162,509 A D Little Incapecttating Agont Raon (1951 - 1972) 
5522.11.050 
* 0120 95,200 NE Carp Byothosss of Compounds 
1 275 31, 700 
0316 01,0 — Marolton Leha PyLoary Toxicity Screening Tosta ond Matholalogy (1967-191 
1 1/2 13, 500 
TOTAL PROJ I HJ 
FACTORED: 231,709 
4079-08 (810) : 
5522. 11.079 0527 TOTAL PACU $ 54,711. Ivy Boch Toba 


JTnreabold Pasas in ran: 


p9z jo ] 0 


i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
ü 


— 0 
oes: 


Lt 


OT-OF-HANE 0×۸5 (KRA YE }‏ ہ۲۲ 
paorect/ Tu-: Dr 0‏ 

TASK S COHTR MO — _ BONE gammcmm . CAA FITA On COTE 
anm- (noj 4000324 (H-4 Rpt shows 
$19,672 


Aaaord of 1093's 
TOL PROTECT $48, 000) 


Ivy Rach Leb Threshold Poses in Nen (1970 -1971) 
" 5522.11.191 l 


An10-0j o Tal. In r (85,000 Hazelton labs 


Biological Evaluetion of Od. Compounds (1966 . 1970) 
5523.31, 709 


` 
— ——— ———— u — ——. —.— —— سے — — ہا ساسا اس — — . — ت‎ = 
à 
D 
* 
— — —— —— — — . —-— i A — — p — = 


yoz Jo zac Se 


Page 253 of 264 


— سے‎ 
— z umm 


SECTION IV 


FLOW CHART FOR PROPOSED CHEMICAL AGENTS 


580 


248 


b 


bm عم مم‎ (11111 moma Sema 


Peer - y 9 


E 


mat CAL. zu 


"n 


AN 


ALET» 


Able 


O 


FLOW CHART FOR PROPOSED CHEMICAL ACEXTE 


ims. wot yoj) 
» 


— ا بح ES‏ —1 


MENT 'OF*OZWOI مد‎ 1 


Tun 


ii 


v9c Jo vac ؤ0‎ 


Page 255 of 264 


O Lerne Incevacitating Asent Search 


ALI modal compounii thet merit conatdesetion far development in . 
The military aperta pera follow a ہس ےج‎ procedime [rar inception 
t3 recopeeodation as candidate agent. 1 


In the swarch porsa, chemical compounds may be acquired fraa contract iE 
40 ×س‎ originate *hrough in-house laboratory inreetigations, or be 
salictted Crom iodust=y, both domexzic and foreign, as commercial sacle. | h 
Dase cowxxuxis theg erter the initial toxic acceenirg crogrem. ‘he | 3 
La evaluated for btalagical affectiveness in zice (as the tant . : 
2 SU. subject) by tha intravenous route to datarcipne whether it bas lethal or 
: incapacttarioq properties. ‘The LD«j (Lethal Dose r the antl 
zion tastad) are reported [on these rcudies. House Lonalatioa 1 
Foodies demtcrxine whether the tast compound Ls a respiratory {ITA Tart 
vith potential riot carral applications. 


LI. Point Comeittees which {nclode among others, cheextsta, 
poermocalogista ard nen, fallow the progresa of “he tawting 
- ani at prescribed points >eccemercet courses of action oc rejection fron 
Arte conaidgraztigg af the test .ات بے‎ 


secomiary testing N tocludes = betbaviocral studies,‏ مد سا 
par3ccal safety, ng therapy, decortamizcation roc, irv‏ 
established far tha worming periocmel,. Pale acd muml—9caloqr of the c‏ 
sumercaa spwetes of tet animals are stuciíed ard cisically reviewed‏ 3 
anaal tartı ani «rentu&lly tha clicical‏ لح ادال مح Q before advancing to‏ 
rien Lo moan rolzzteeris.‏ 


مم اس میس یھ 


: Since مه‎ inevcztion of the comica! agent program 35,500 campour 

E werw richjected tO tasting in Coe initial souse tCOXÍCÍty owen. Of these, 
2, 7 pasad Lto the Í-—xpacitEkcing LET program and بات‎ secondary 
ہمہ‎ ecac testa. Tr (JL) n. were selected vy سیت3‎ 

TE^ ‘ El- D fer fortter testa, cod Review PAS LL chen reviewed the datz and 

recosemexted, only می رد‎ (32) compocexts for moecticteal ant magma 

۔ اوسسعمد کے 


Tuna, less oan 25۔0‎ of the compoxuuis scowened initially i3 the 
جس یکو ہہ سے‎ on وڈ‎ GOAT NA ee SUE T 
ممحلم‎ asas as [DOADRaitanta. 


Page 256 of 264 


. — 


ILDCXT3 GT SCLENTITIC EVALUATION LIADDC 
TO A KILITAKI CHEMICAL ACERT 


AGENT اعت‎ à 
MOOULSTITON l 
; ۱ 


251 


emer cen — — — I S a ہہ سب‎ 


TTDI TT — ° 


— —— — — 
— te — —À 


te t م ی ہا ت‎ pene 


Page 257 of 264 


SECTION V 


INCAPACITATING AGENTS STUDY - 1961-1970 


—.— 
a 


252 


. A 


Page 258 of 264 


D ARSENAL 
^ INCAPACITATING AGENTS STUDY 1961 - 1970 


= * 1. Reference دا‎ wade w letter, DAIG-IM, Ofc of the Inspector General 
end Aeditor General, 9 Dec 75, subject: Request for [nsormacion Regarding. 
Medicxl Yolunoeer Progra. ; 


ib E 1. Rrfercncod Letorr requevtad an additional study be made tc develop 
the Aloa cxt: in tw srelopeenct md xunufaccoing areas for 


incrpecirating agents. 


= 1. The previous study سی‎ Arsenal ماد(‎ +1: on Erle; 
Relating to [nexpecitating Agent Striias 1950 - [975'", covered می‎ 
بت تو‎ cod cost of bazic research uri oploratory E of inexpaciteting | 
agent; which ultinrely wer? used in experirenss with hem Yolunmers. 
This narrowing definition of the scope of the previous study logically 
preciuaed che inclusion of costs assoctated with dissemina md process 
technology beyond chat ic in che Human Volunteer Program. The 
— Limiting defini ions utilized in firaly (establishing the parameters 

of the previous sudy ae included under. cover of the previous study. 


This study addresses those costs specifically excluded Son the previ‏ .4 ا 
suy by definition, md it focuses on fiscal yeers 1961 - 1970 (TAB 3).‏ 
categories include dissexizatica, process, alara, detection, developeent, P‏ — 
ard Ar sods tmcCznlogy. In addiction cg Dese St.‏ 
construction at £dgewcod Arsenal is shon as mother cost factor along with‏ 
information provided by Pine Blut Arsenal and Duzewy Proving Ground 2s the‏ 
last Cure major ircas of interest of the Depercomt of the Aray [nspecoor‏ 
General (DAIG}. Darı provided by Pine Bluff Arsenal is shom ín TAB 3 brome‏ 


S Edgewood Arsenal ےہ‎ the DAIG 3 Office. i z n 

i Test axl Evaluation Cond, Aberdeen 
. The .ہبہ‎ of Suing listed for Dugway Proving ` 
at C adyics of the Compcroller Office at Dugwar 
ta aiste af documentary proof concerming 
che Arm. [t ts baliewed co have bean KOTE funding. 


ui Dr figures for coul peoga Talxtod to Tx 
E from PY 1961 - Fr 1970 are as foilon: cm وو‎ 
. FISCAL YEARS IXIARS (In Thousands) 
1961 $ 1,916 
= 1962 9,415 | 
. 1965 16.213 
‘Ss 1964 i 16,502 
1965 می در‎ 
; ۱ 1966 7 9,149 
= 1967 4,394 ! 
= : 1964 4,257 
1969 4,055 


۱ im 4,570 


ES 


d 253 


Page 259 of 264 


Ihesa figures represent the additive total of dollar figures developed 
by عبت‎ study aod dollar wl by fiscal year extracted free che ius 
report to correspond o the fiscal years covered by this suxir. 

dolur ascunti extracted سج‎ Che previous study (ref para 5) are as fellows: 


FISCAL YEAR . DOLLARS fIn Thousands) 
1941 1 3.371 
1962 5,310 
1943 1.799 
1964 10,536 
1965 10,294 
1966 7,367 
1957 4,075 
1965 3,498 
1963 3.447 


1970 3,551 


Qures shown on tbe schedule in TAB B are Che difference beDen 
these ہت‎ sets of figures od represent data solely related wo duis suny. 
S. M with te prerios sady, docoeentadion = supurt each uxi every 


Agere wes cot evailabla, for may Ales ind related OCT have bem 
tured uncer Ge provisions of AR 3540-18-13. available persconel 


| 
1 


— —ͤ—ę—ͤ— — 


——̃̃ñ— 


SSI 


FIC ARSIINAL. 


1970 


۸ TATING AQUIS SUAM [Y 190) - 
(Mhousends of Dollars) 
yen „ A N qui- 
pum MA FISCAL YPAR ۱ ; 11 
IRT TRT TRI 1951 TY Toss 1957 T9561 TY 1970 - 
GND TOTAL | 26,517 AMS 2. 2,00 لوو‎ — 1190 1.2 ag — 759 een 4 
1. DISSEMINATION TEQPOUOGY | we — 596 $0 — 4149 NL . ۶ ͤ B4 MO mo A U 
(tn ieee (4,397) ($00) (469) (400) (900). (400) (100 (24) (30) (300) (M4) 8 
Proj Mo, Tite ® 
013-01 Dissemination Research 1.2 $00 469 300 : N 
A98)1-001 Disseminaslon Invost Liq/Sollds 1,960 ۱ 500 900 460 100 Oo 
-04 Thermal Disseninatlon 1,118 240 300 300 171 S 
-0$ Hech Dissemination $0 . 50 
(cœniracis: 00) (1,199) (5) (0) 01) (545) (440) (54) (141) (0) . (0) (0) 9 
Ho, Tithe j N 
O) 
019-01 Dlsseninatlcn Research 19 5 14 IN 
ADA)-0) Dlasemination Liquid/Sol ids 1,150 : 545 440 54 141 HESA 
1. PROCESS TEO?DLOGY ۰ RUTB 2,601 350 1 M ul n 44 9 > 
(In Houses) (1,031) (350) (170) (348) (324) (103) (48) (90) (38) 
Proj Mo, Tithe 
1C$123014083-02. Act EA J443 693 : 250 195 uas 
۱ -0S Aci BA 1729 175 . 100 75 100 
-08 Incap Agent 31 34 : 
-0A lncap 4 RC AAT 241 $ 103 aa 90 
]8561602AD1 2-03 Process Tech of Incap Agts $b i . 4 i 54 
(Cont racta:) None 


میں 


! 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 


e‏ ہمہ سے سے حم ہم 


——— 


967 


zat i 


BIAMO Al. 


INCAPACITATING ۸۷35305 STAN FY 1964 - 1970 


۱ (Thousands of Dollars) 
TOTAL 


Du Sed wd | | 
4 
na 
Atas 
J. MARS | CETECTIOH TEC FILO gore 
(In House;) 
Proj Mo. — Title 
۸1٥۵٥۰۵4۹ Detection snd Warming 
(Cont rscta:) 
4, DEVELO {H.H.T, RITU 
. mms )1( 
(Jn House:) 
T (Contracts:) 
b. ۲ 
(In House:)} 
Proj No. Tithe 
Ani? Incap Onl Weapons Concepts 
01 Incap Agent ms Investigations 
01 ac ab Agent Hortar/Arilllery 
03 Incap Agent Narhcod/Alr hanl tons 
A196 Onl Heapons Sys Technology 
01 Incap ) RCA Mpas Sys Concepts 
1016 81 Weapons Systems 
03 Hnitions Concepts’ ý 
019-10 Malt tons سس‎ ity Stxy 
031-08. سمل‎ Alrcraft ON Hi nitlons 
031-16 hew Concepts for (¥ ۶۱۸۱٢۱٠٠۸۹+ 
032-23 incap Ageni/Hunltlons Sys 


MPR AF B? Hnitions 


in .50 . 100. 
(05) (50) (50) (100) 
275 50 30 100 
Hone 
A. 7۔1۸ — 1.263 — 190 . لاف‎ 
` 100 10 10 10 
(100) (10) (10) (10) 
Hone 
4,515 70 1259 1,81 
(1,465) (200) (1,259) (1,768) 
62 
117 
1% 
3,230 
716 635 
545 300 145 ۱ 
391 150 91 150 
995 250 1$ 500 
678 674 . 
463 483 


$0 


(50) 
50 


lani 
10 


(10) 


1,091 


(1,091) 


1,000 


»n- 


1 
(15) 
15 
1.110 1-244 
10 10 
(10) (10) 
1,10 1,14 
(1,230) — (300) 
1,130 300 


(10) 


(100) 


200 


FISCAL YAR —— i e 
Wi IDET INI INT INS INES 1*7  1WY TR 19 . 


200 


(100) 


100 


(411) 


AE 
61 1 
117 T 
13 


edu D 


v9c JO e BE 


LST 


— ی م س ص ےس می م‎ e — (ſV—ñ— t ی‎ —À fet 


— ( م م ر ا ی‎ peaa 


AA n ARSENAL 
IBCAPACITATIMG AGUNTS SRAN FY 1941 - 1970 


{hous ands of Dollars} 


TITS 
fur بی‎ 


: : FISCAL TRR 
SI INT 15 YA IN IE YOY 1961 IW) . 7 
(Centracca f} (1,002) — (10) (44) (938) 
Ho, Title 
13-034 Special Col n Sys RDTS 4 m i . : 
019-10 — Hnition Feasibility Study RPTE 10 10 
419% 0 Incap Agt Hortar/Arti]lery RDTB 93 E BH S 
$. ESD ARSENAL CONSTRUCTION 1M 238 
b. Building Hodification HA n 111 
b. Building Modification uc 125 126 
4. PUE BLUFF ARSENAL 801. 1.22. 42 14 IL 12 3 ^ n 1 a 
a. Fac Consis & Restoration NCA 1,391 1,391 
b. Production Gquip PIOC 356 346 
c. Operational Cost Hig VROC-AIP 6,442 1 LM 2,008 40 b 
d. Storage Gu 40 4 4 4 4 3 L| 
e. Dall (Ciean ip) PROC 4 ; P 
f, Stockpiling PROC i 1 3 
3. UD PROVING GRO 1,480 $76 693 44 14 149 
a. Flcld Testing noni 1,108 ani 641 44 
: AF 1 153 51 14 149 
NOTES 


J Sec attached Contract 11۸۸۶۰ 
) 


An estimaic of 100% vas uscd from VY 63-70 to obtain data on interlace of incapacitating gente with mashes and clothing 
pnd the decontaajaation of such agents. 


O) Type of Army fun unknown. Host IIe ۰ 


v9c Jo e Be 


asp Spee SSTT کک‎ 


o — ne =e 


BHO NIA. 
INCAPACITATING AANS SNAN 1901 - 1970 


(Thousands of Dollers) 
CONTRACTS 


CORMRACT THCAP í : 
CONTRACTOR i "m COMET MATES Nl roman nua. 
| 1. Aircraft Arent Inc Qu) 6643 6/27/6}-7/21/01 5 (5) Dev of Talocartridgo Dissemination Techniques 
1. Adrcreft Amareni Inc AC 80 (A) 1/4/63-2/18/64 28 (14) Tov of Talecartridge Dissemination Techniquea 
3. Alrerefs Armament lac عم‎ 1. — 1/1/63- 65 91 i (40 Technique as above for bonblots eae 
4. Athansic Research Corp NEC 315(4] . 12/350/64- 31/19/65 91 (45) Study of Pol pure thane Binder Pyrotechnic Formulation 
5 $. Dow Chealcat Co . 118(۸) 2/413/64-5/31/0) 354 (200) fyvo Pals 4 1061 Dissemination of An cal Agents 
4. Aerojet nora! Corp AMC 117(4) 2/24/64-11/26/61 592 (300) Dev of Prototype Osi Rolls Systems 
7. Atlantic Research Corp C- A490 $/1/6)1-3/1/64 80 (40) ud 2 Two Cone r tent System for Disseaination of Cad j 
: en وی‎ : 
à. Sunlon Research Institute KAL 112(4) 3/24/64-2/29/68 2,200 (44a) Disscn Invest of Liquid * Solid Onl Agents 
9. Northn e Carolina Corp l AME 958(A) 6/30/66-5/31/01 59 (39) Study of Pyrotechnic Pool MIA e 
10. D Chanica| Co C-0498 9/۹۵٥۵ 203. (101) Hew Concepts in Thermal Disscmination 
11. III Research institute ۸۸۲۰۰739 )۸( 4/19/66-4/ 30/61 | 49 (24) bor of Two Cospartsent Disscalnation Techniques 
12. Aorojet Ccroral Corp is . C-0198 3/11/66 -9/30/68 938 (934) f'obr) cation of Alr Drop BZ Clusters ۱ 
11. Cornell ^cronautlcal Lobs Q4. 60620 (A) 6/22/6)-6/6/68 2,75) (ea) Ol Agcut Anlt ion Sya for ٣٣۰۱۱٣۰ Pep Í حسرہ‎ ٤ 


TOTAL 6,5801. - (1,1461) 


eem atem tiep nen te‏ رت پور وت لیم 


v9c 0 e eBeg 


Page 264 of 264 


SORES FROM WHICH DD 


ol RED Program Scene FY 61-70.‏ سی 

Appendix A c of FY 61 Operating Prom, 1 Dec 60. 
Sed REA cf MA Development Area FY 61, 3 Jan 6l. 

Sth MA of Munitions Development Area FY 61, تد‎ Hex 6l. 
7. of kainos Developmert Area FY 61, 2$ Jun 6l. 
I Amex C of FY 62 Operating Program, 1 Mov Sl. 
dod RBA of Monitions Development Area FY 62, 25 Sep 62. 

1. C [tem Ded, 26 Feb 62 o mended by PEMA Br. 

9. lst R&A cf NaN Development Arse FY 63, 9 Jul 2ه‎ 


* 


ا یی بے دو = یی 


10. 2nd 2A cf Muiiticas Development Area FY 63, 27 Mer 63. 

EE u. W XIPR 08-615-52-9 RI Moai tion. 
l2. Edgewood Arsenal Five Year Saxe Program (Applicmala Year) . 3 
B. CIL 34 27 Oc: 65. | 1 
14. TEL R&A Scr Grocod ٢تا‎ ٥حصہ رت ملسا‎ , 6 Apr 66. 
LS. W. R&A Ath Qer FY 67, Z1 Am 67. 
= dF. 15. XCEL RAA Lst md “od Qtza FY ét. 

17. YOEL A. for PY 64. 
lt. WEL RA Sor PY m. 
: | 19. Procuremect سو وی‎ Files. 

FEC 

2. Comperotiers Céfica, Pine Huff srsenel. 


zn. Compcrallers Cffica, Dupay Proving Ground. 


^A 


E 


Lu 259 


