mushrooms continued to be obscured from the world until the late 1930's when they were once again brought to the attention of the scientific community. Fig. 1. Dr. Blas Pablo Reko Drawn by E.W. Smith In the second decade of this century, Austrian Blas Pablo Reko (1919), a physician with an interest in ethnobotany, learned that some groups of Indians living in the Mexican state of Oaxaca were still using psychoptic mushrooms in secret ceremonies perhaps involving ancient rites. These rites were performed apparently for the purpose of divinatory healing. Reko published his findings in a journal entitled El M&eacute;xico Antiguo . Reko subsequently discussed this discovery with his colleagues, who paid little attention to his mushroomic theories and showed no interest in pursuing this information on the supposititious use of inebriating mushrooms by the Indians of Mesoam&eacute;rica. Reko wrote that teonan&aacute;catl was "Div. g&eacute;neros de hongos, especialmente un hongo negro que crece sobre esti&eacute;rcol y produce efectos narc&oacute;ticos." ["Various genera of mushrooms, especially a black mushroom that grows on dung and produces psychotropic effects"]. Reko (1923) later wrote to Dr. J. N. Rose of the United States National Herbarium that "I see in your description of Lophorphora (peyote) that Dr. Safford believes this plant to be the ` teonan&aacute;catl ' of Sahag&uacute;n which is surely wrong. It is actually as Sahag&uacute;n states, a fungus which grows on dung heaps and which is still used under the same old name by the Indians of the Sierra Juarez in Oaxaca in their religious feasts." Safford's last defender, Huntington Cairns (1929), became the last person to expound the Safford theory. B. P. Reko's cousin, Victor A. Reko (1928), published the first objection to Safford's claims. It appeared in a book written years later in 1936. Below is an excerpt describing the effects of the mushrooms taken from that book entitled Magische Gifte: Rausche und Bet&auml;ubungsmittel der Neuen Welt (" Magical Poisons: inebrients and Narcotics of the New World "): "The nanacates are poisonous mushrooms which have nothing to do with peyote. It is known from olden times that their use induces intoxication, states of ecstacy and mental aberrations, but, notwithstanding the dangers attendant upon their use, people everywhere they grow take advantage of their intox
