[RAW OCR — CIA Inspector General "Report of Inspection of MKULTRA," 26 July 1963]
[Source: CIA CREST document C06767515, mirrored at https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-06767515]
[This raw file combines two OCR passes run by the researcher: (1) Internet Archive's tesseract-derived
06767515_djvu.txt, and (2) `pdftotext -layout` on the original 06767515.pdf. Both are reproduced below
in full, unedited, exactly as machine-fetched. The cleaned, hand-corrected transcript used in the draft
JSON record was built by cross-reading these two OCR passes against each other; see draft.textQuality.notes
in the JSON record for method.]

=================== PASS 1: archive.org tesseract djvu.txt ===================

. pproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515. 


a. (b)(3 


> ON 


Vana rt 26 July 1963 
as pens pert % Ne Aas 


Be on digg : 


‘MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence - 


“SUBJECT ~~ _—_-: Report of Inspection of MKULTRA 


"1. In connection with our survey of Technical Services 
_ Division, DD/P, it was deemed advisable to prepare the report — 
- of the MKULTRA program in one copy only, in view of its 
unusual sensitivity. 


2. This report is forwarded herewith. 


—_ 3. The MKULTRA activity is concerned with the research 
' and development of chemical, biological, and radiological — 
: 7: materials capable of employment in clandestine operations to 
. °°. €ontrol human behavior. The end products of such research 
"are subject to very strict controls including a requirement 
. for the personal approval of the Deputy Director/Plans for any 
operational use made of these end products. 


_ 4 The cryptonym MKULTRA encompasses the R&D 

phase and a second cryptonym MKDELTA denotes the DD/P . 

system for control of the operational employment of such materials. 
~The provisions of the MKULTRA authority also cover’ ' 
hee ee ee ; The administration and control of | 
this latter activity were found to be generally satisfactory and 
are discussed in greater detail in the main body of the report i 
on TSD. . % an pi eee sh . 


ahs 5.. MKULTRA was authorized by the then Director of 

Central Intelligence, Mr, Allen W. Dulles, in 1953. The TSD | 
was assigned responsibility thereby to employ a portion of its 
R&D budget, ‘eventually set at 20%, For research in behavioral 
‘materials oe under purely internal and com- 

. partmented cofitrols, (further @etails are provided in paragraph 3 
of the attached report), Normal procedures for project approval, 
‘funding, and accounting were waived. However, special arrange- 
ments for audit of expenditures have been evolved in subsequent 

"years. 2 — 


rs fo hey G6, 
—SECRET. 5 481852091 : 


Wests Peer ta Bea. we a pie eee ce eras _+ Copy 1 of 1 


wigs: 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


) 


———— 
ae Repos for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


tY rd 


+ 6 The scope of MKULTRA is comprehensive and 
_ ranges from the search for and procurement of botanical and 
chemical substances, through programs for their analysis 
_ 4in scientific laboratories, .to progressive testing for effect 
-.-On animals and human beings. The testing on individuals 
begins under laboratory conditions employing every safeguard 
and progresses gradually to more and more realistic opera- 
tional simulations. The program requires and obtains the 
services of a number of highly specialized authorities in many 
. fields of the natural sciences. 


2 The concepts involved i in ani pulsating human 
behavior are found by many people both within and outside the 
Agency to be distasteful and unethical. There is considerable 

_ °° evidence that opposition intelligence services are active and 

. highly proficient in this field. The experience of TSD to date 
indicates that both the research and the employment of the 

‘ materials are expensive and often unpredictable in results. 

‘Nevertheless, there have been major accomplishments both 

in research and Seen ep one, eraploymnent: 


. 8. The Sopeiieipal conclusions of the inspection are that 
the structure and operational controls over this activity néed 
strengthening; improvements are needed in the administration 
of the research projects; and some of the testing of substances 
‘under simulated operational conditions was suceed to involve ; 

excessive risk to the Agency. 


9 Attached for the signaciee of the Depity Director of 
_ Central Intelligence is a memorandum transmitting the report 
’ to the Deputy Director/Plans requesting a summary of.action . 
. taken or comments on the recommendations contained therein. 


Sadoye Dinky ber sea 


a" . ar ee Mae J.{(§. Harman 

He ess Inspector General 
). 

ae 


"Attachments - as stated nae es" _ Viv, 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515. 


7 CTT 
ir Pea ond Raw ft 


| 
TS - is S 204 
“4 2 See 


REPORT OF INSPECTION OF MKULTRA/TSD 


I, Introduction 
1. Technical Services Division (TSD), (then Technical Support 
Staff), 


received authorization from the then Director of Central 


Intelligence, Mr. Allen W. Dulles, on 3 April1953 to develop and 


_ maintain continuing operational capabilities in the fields of a 


Jee 


ey chemical and biological materials capable of producing human 


— Segre Gee ee - ee ae ig, 


behavioral and physiological changes, ee Tab >A). The cryptohym 

. MKULTRA was assigned to encompass TSD's research, development 
: os equipment activities in these two fields. The cryptonym MKDELTA " 
had already been sanignea by DD/P Notice No. 220-1 on 20 October 
1952 (since revised - see Tab B) as the indicator covering DD/P palicy 
a procedure for the use of biochemicals in clandestine operations : 
2. The MKULTRA charter pedvidas. only a brief presentation 
of the rationale of the authorized activities. The sensitive aspects 
of the program as it has evolved over the ensuing ten years dre the 
following: | 


a. Research in the manipulation of human behavior is 


considered by many authorities in medicine and related fields 


Declassification Review E.0. 12065 
Conducted on 17 June 1981 
Derivative Classification by 531925 
\ ‘Review 17 June 2001 
Derived from C9c.?; C9e 


Downgraded 61140 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


an 
iN es 


sr arab 


) 
C to be professionally unethical, therefore the reputations 
of professional participants in the MKULTRA program are 


on occasion in jeopardy. 


——— b. Some MKULTRA activities raise questions of 
legality implicit in the original charter. 
c. A final phase of the testing of MKULTRA products 


places the rights and interests of U. S. citizens in pAeopan dy 


d. ‘Public disclosure of some aspects of MKULTRA 
activity could induce serious savesee reaction in U. S. 
public opinion, as well as stimulate offensive and astexe ive : 
action in this field a the ‘part of foreign intelligence services, 
3. An recognition of the Senaitivity. of MERE TSD was . 
authorized exclusive control of the sataintatrations records,. and | 
_ financial accountings of the Program: a siithieenre of certification 


were all that were Hequiced of TSD to obtain advances of funds from 


Finance Division. The DCI's memorandum also exempted MKULTRA 
from audit, but this provision was modified to permit limited audit 
before the end of the first year. Funding of MKULTRA was eventually 


stabilized at 20 percent ‘of TSD's annual research and development budget. 


- It has fallen in the neighborhood of ber year over the ten-year . 


history of the program, of which about 30 percent has been allocated to 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO6767515 
1%. rf : 


Sor 


support of the cf, Tab C for MKULTRA ~~ , 
funding record FY 60-63. | 
4, The inspection of TSD activities in the field of 


while chartered under MKULTRA is discussed for peaeons 


behavior. a) Many extaidel projects in n support of the zB 


noted below in the section of the Inspector General's Survey dealing 


Wwweeee ce ee 


with the of TSD, cf. dis- 
cussions beginning with paragraphs | 
The security considerations applying to were found to 


be ie amare d different from those Eovexning manipulation of human / 


. ‘ 
” 2 i 


e = verge i 


vare boing funded and managed securely outside the 


“MKULTRA mmechantetin b) Chief, Sagpoxt: “TSD, believes that it may 


also be poatibue: in the citive to fund MKULTRA peeseete by 


Ces 


--gecure methods more compatible with DD/S responsibilities. c) The 


t 


“very nature of the requires that a high 


rescentade of its staff contribute and be witting of each operation. Ls 

security practices are tight and the Inspector General's baaees eaeatue - 

mends further refinements in security procedures. ee a 
5, The inspection of MKULTRA projects in Blochewicet controls” 


of human behavior raised questions in the following area of policy and 


management which are dealt with in the balance of this report: 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


-™ 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


a. Scope of.the MKULTRA charter: 

(1) Over the ten-year life of the program many 
additional avenues to the control of human behavior 
have been designated by the TSD management as 


appropriate to investigation under the MKULTRA charter, 


-including radiation, electro~-shock, various fields of 


payehology, sa pcnlates: sociology, Par anthropology, 
geasnolngy: harrassment substances, and parammititexy 
devices and materials. | | 

(2) Various eee do not appear to have Goss | 
sufficiently emo fe warrant waiver of normal aeeues | 
peecddeces tor auciornetion and central: —_— | 

| (3) Other secure channels for establishment and 
funding of Meche yesterile activities have been evolved 
over the oust ten years by Deputy Director/Support (DD/S) 
and in some cases could reasonably be secieeea by TSD 


in lieu of MKULTRA procedures. 


In view of these developments there is substantial agreement 


among all parties concerned that redefinition of the scope of 


MKULTRA is now appropriate . 


b, MKULTRA management policies: 
(1) The original charter documents specified that 


TSD maintain exacting control of MKULTRA activities. 


me ete, 


Vea 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


pproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


= 


In so doing, jhewaver: ‘'TSD has pursued a philosophy 

of so eectee documentation in keeping with the high 
sensitivity of some of the projects. Some files were 
found to present a eeneaani complete record, including 
most sensitive matters, while others with pacuiien® 
objectives contained little or no data at all. The lack 

of consistent records precluded use of edene inspection 


nec rene ete eee ES 


procedures. and raised a yariety of questions concerning 
management and fiscal controls. "8 ee 
: (2) Lack of records sees iit to inspection of 

MKULTRA moved to the forefront among jesues as the 
pesuant Subeay proceeded. Under normal ne 
the inspectors would have examined an inventory of dis- 
crediting, disabling, and lethal substances perfected or 
procured from whatever sources. The vederds on 
wapreudatalive teens would have been reviewed according 


to such standard criteria as: 


(a) How were the substance and its 
‘properties identified? . 


(b) What researcher was selected to 
perform the research, and why? 


(c) When was the work begun, where, : 
involving what costs, at what rate 
of progress, based on what tests? 


‘e# 5 eo 


ic ee ie ST 
ae SE: tite 
wre EU 


_ 


on rete ere ree meron ee tenn canes btearntememenpreymeer enn ene, ieee ase 


4 
nr rare pmo wi mt rein me te ppg sig saints 
~_ ~ - 


_ 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


i highly motivated, professionally competent individuals. 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


* (d) What are the present capabilities 
and limitations of the substance 
for clandesinte operations ? 


(e) What further research is being 
conducted on this and related sub- 
stances and how does this reflect 
existing TSD capabilities, opera- 
tional requirements and budget factors? 

(3) MKULTRA records afforded no such approach 
to inspection. There are just two individuals in TSD who 


have full substantive knowledge of the program and most 


of that knowledge is unrecorded. Both are highly skilled, 


Part of their competence lies in their command of intel- 
ligence tradecraft. In protecting ‘the sensitive nature of 
the American intelligence capability to manipulate human 
behavior, they apply-“"need to know" doctrine to iets 
on professional associates and to their clerical assistants to 
a maximum degree. Gcuiidengedu thei: competence and 
discretion has been a vital featars of the wsnagerment of 
MKULTRA, | 
& Aavadeea testing of MKULTRA materials: 
It is ihe firm doctrine in TSD that testing of materials 


under accepted scientific procedures fails to disclose the 


full pattern of reactions and attributions that may occur 


ee 


oN ee 


ee eeacy 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


See ee 


in operational situations. TSD initiated a program for 


covert testing of materials on unwitting U. S. citizens 
Ss Serine se 


in 1955, The present report reviews the rationale and 
risks attending this activity and recommends termination 
of such testing in the United States, cf, paragraphs 10-18 
below. 7 
I. Modus Operandi 
| 6. The research and development of materials capable of producing 


behavioral or physiological change in humans is now performed within 


& 


ne 


a highly elaborated and stabilized MKULTRA structure. The search 
for new materials; e.g., psilocybin from Mexican mushrooms, ora 
fungi occurring in agricultural crops, is conducted through standing 7 


arrangements with specialists in universities, pharmaceutical houses, 


' hospitals, state and federal institutions, and private research organi- . 


zations who are authorities in the given field of investigation in their 
own right. [ Annual grants of funds are made under ostensible research 
foundation auspices to the specialists located in the public or quasi-public 
institutions. This approach conceals from the institution the interest of 


CIA and permits the recipient to proceed with his investigation, publish 
his findings (excluding intelligence implications), and account for his 


expenditures in a manner normal to his institution. A number of the 


grants have included funds for the construction and equipping of research | 


ae anes serene i ee er 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 ee 


_CC“‘(TCAspproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


, C facilities and for the employment of research assistants. Key individuals 
must qualify for top secret clearance and are adie witting of Agency 
sponsorship. | As a rule each specialist is managed unilaterally and is 
not witting of Agency support of parallel MKULTRA research in his 

field. The system in effect "buys a piece" of the specialist in order to 
enlist his aid in pursuing the intelligerice implications of his research. | 


His services typically include systematic search of the scientific 


literature, procurement of materials, their propagation, and the appli- 
cation of test dosages to animals and under some circumstances to 
volunteer human subjects. No quarrel is found with the rationale of 


-this program to the extent that it fits the original MKULTRA charter. ; 


However, for inspection purposes, there were lacking records, year 


by year, of the progress of each project and the recorded judgments 


of the project monitors on operational benefits vis-a-vis costs. 


: 7.| The funding of sensitive MKULTRA projects by sterile grants _ 


in aid as noted in the preceding paragraph disclosed one of the principal 


controversial aspects of this program, | ‘The original charter of MKULTRA 
assumed that the sensitivity of activities would be sufficient to justify 


both a) special protection for the researcher; and b) compartmentation 


ye of MKULTRA knowledge within the Agency. On this basis the inherent 
aad safeguards of DD/S procedures were waived, the DD/S was not ecnsuited 


in the design of the MKULTRA m nagement: system, and established Agency 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


audit procedures were waived, In the subsequent administration of 

the program, however, TSD has found it feasible to contract for some 

of the research on MKULTRA objectives in accordance with prescribed 
DD/S procedures. The DD/S, in turn, has evolved various secure 
systems for the funding of sensitive activities. It appears feasible 

and appropriate, therefore, to propose that the DD/S be consulted 
during the re-chartering of MKULTRA in the deaign of an administrative 
system that dees justice to his responsibilities as well as to the ean 
ment and security requirements of TSD. The Inspector General 
accordingly has as recommendedfat the end of this réport that the Do/ Ss 


be » consulted i in the zerneeiee of the system; that the Chief, ‘Support, 


‘TSD, be assigned responsibility for the a Raa support of MKULTRA; 


and that the latter" constitute a bridge to the DD/S for monitoring the 


future evolution of the system, | 


8. The next phase of the MKULTRA program invelves Pay etciene, 


toxicologists, and other specialists in mental, narcotics, and sereval 


hospitals and in prisons, who are provided the products and findings of 
the basic research projects and proceed with intensive testing on human 
subjects. These specialists are also recipients for testing purposes of 


the flow of new products from pharmaceutical laboratories. Materials 


and procedures with intelligence potential may be identified through this 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 _ 4e,- | 


; : 

oe C relationship. The testing programs are conducted under accepted 
scientific procedures including the use of control populations, the 
employment of placebos, and the detailed observation, measurement, 


recording, analysis, and publication of findings. Where health permits, 


test subjects are voluntary participants in the program. 


9. A current development in the testing of nese pt oduets is the 
Fignteniog of controls over dosages and procedures by the U. S. F:ood 
and Drug Administration. Since MKULTRA files contained no focus 
mentation on this pabieee it was not possible to appraise the signifi- 

2 cance of this development for MKULTRA objectives. However, 
ae interviews with the. TSD erhcets concerned indicated that the new rules 
‘are affecting procadires: and pissing controversy in an hospitals | 
vend pharmaceutical ok TSD officers have close relationships 


with key individuals in many of the leading U.S. pharmaceutical houses 


and count on » their continued close cieueeatten in obtaining materials 


and eee deemed vital to U.S. 5. intelligence, _| 

tog! : 10. The final phase of testing of MKULTRA wiaterial’s involves 
their application to uene punlects in normal life settings. . It was 
noted earlier that the capabilities of MKULTRA substances to produce 
disabling or discrediting effects or to increase the effectiveness of 

=e interrogation of hostile subjects cannot be established sicily through 


‘testing on volunteer populations. Reaction and attribution patterns are 


a 10a? - 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


clearly affected when the testing is conducted in an atmosphere of 
confidence under skilled medical supervision. 

ll. TSD, therefore, entered into an informal arrangement 
with certain cleared and witting individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics 
in 1955 which provided for the release of MKULTRA materials for 
on : , : . 
such testing as those inl ividuals deemed desirable and feasible. The 
initial arrangement obtained the services of a senior representative 
of the Bureau and one of his assistants on the West Coast. A parallel 
arrangement was established on the East Mosse in 1961. The Director 

ts —_—_—~— 
‘of the Bureay has been briefed on the activity, but the Deputy Chief, 
TSD, who has guided MKULTRA from its inception, is of the opinion 
‘that the former would disclaim all knowledge and responsibility i in 


the event of compromise. ‘The MKULTRA program director has, in 


- fact, provided c close sa sala of the testing program ade the. beginn: ng 


one 
re 


and makes periodic visits to the sites. The sum of{f10, 000 he es 


provided annually to each of the two projects to cover cost of cultivation 


of targets and of mia utaniance of a safehouse in each area for the 
observation of effects of substances on selected test individuals, 

12. The so cteniae advantage of these arrangements with the 
Bureau of Naccutics officials has been that test subjects could be sought 


ee and cultivated within the setting of narcotics control. Some subjects 


< : . . | -ll- 
| OOTP LRT 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 | 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


have been informers or members of suspect criminal elements from 
whom the Bureau has obtained results of Ssapacoanl value dixough the 
tests. On the other aed the effectiveness of the substances on - 
individuals at all social levels, high and low, native American and 
ao foreign, is of great significance and testing has been performed on a 
variety of individuals within these categories. 

13. A significant limitation be the effectiveness of such testing 
‘s the infeasibility of performing scientific observation of ‘saeuites | 
The Haresn agents are not qualified scientific observers. Their 
subjects are seldom accessible beyond the first hours of the test. The 


testing may be useful in perfecting delivery techniques, and in identifying 


surface characteristics of onset, reaction, attribution, and side-effect. © 
In a number of instances, however, the test subject has become ill for 
hours or days, including hospitalization in at least one case, and the 


agent could only follow-up by guarded inquiry after the test subject's 


return to ional life. Pos sible sickness and attendant economic ios s 
are inherent contingent effects of the testing. | 
14. The MKULTRA program officer stated that the objectives of 
covert testing concern the field of toxicology rather than medicine; 
further, that the program is not intended to harm test individuals, and 
that the medical consulates snd sesistance is obtained when appropriate 


through separate MKULTRA arrangemetts. The risk of compromise of 


- Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO6767515 


t . 
44 an Vs 


the program through correct diagnosis of an illness by an unwitting 
medical specialist is regularly considered and is stated to be a 


governing factor in the decision to conduct the given test. The 


eds Bureau officials also maintain close working relations with local 
police authorities which could be utilized to protect the activity in 
critical situations. | 

15. There have been several die cuctiods in ihe public piese in 
recent months on the use of certain MKULTRA-type anes to influence 
human behavior. Broadly speaking, these have argued that regearch 
aawledge of possible advecsé Seecesal such subsiances on human 


beings is inadequate, that some applications have done serious harm, 


and that professional researchers in medicine and psychiatry are split 
on the ethics of performing such research. Increasing public attention 


to this subject is to be expected. 


16. The final step in the research and development sequence is 
the delivery of MKULTRA materials into the MKDELTA control system 
governing their employment in clandestine operations. The subject is 


discussed further in the next sectinn; however, it is appropriate here 


- to note that the employment of MKDELTA materials remains an art 


rather than a scientific procedure. A significant number of variables 
in the target individual, including age, sex, weight, general health, 
social status, and personality structure, may account for widely varying 


a and unpredictable reactions to a given drug in a given dosage. 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


17. The final stage of covert nie of materials on unwitting 
subjects is clearly the most sensitive aspect of _e No 
effective cover story appears to be available. TSD officials state 
that responsibility for covert testing is transferred to the Bureau of 
Narcotics. Yet they also predict that the Chief of the Buseau would 
disclaim any iscacdes of the activity. Present practice is to maintain 
no records of the planning and approval of test programe. The prin- 
cipal responsibility £ for the propriety of such testing 2 rests sath the 


MKULTRA progt eet director and the Deputy Chief of TSD.. ‘The i 


handling of test subjects in the last. analysis rests with the Narcotics 


_ agent iitahg alone. Bacecuions of rasieasa of exiticai results few 


“> 


the top ISD and CIA management is an inherent risk in hese Peer stone. 


18. Final phase. faering by MKULTRA substances or vices on 
unwitting gubjects is aa casi to be an ery of genuine eats 
in the development of some but not all MKULTRA products, ‘Termination 
of such testing would have some, oat an essentially indeterminate, mee 
on the development of operational capability oa this field. Of more 

c ritical disniiicands, however, is the risk ee serious damage to the 


- 


Agency in the event of compromise of the true nature of this activity. 


As now performed under Bureau of Narcotics auspices, non-Agency 


personnel are necessarily fully witting of the true nature and signficance: 


of their assignments, and of the sponsorship of CIA. Compromise of 


- 14 - 


SOT SECRET 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


———_eeeeeeseSsSsSSSSSSSSSSFSSFSFSCAprroveedd for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515. 


aa * Pig a 


Ct tS eee 


plant We : 
ta ba eet Gen, tat Oe 
Perak Wen oie 


this information intentionally or unwittingly by these individuals at some 


time in the future is a hazard that cannot be ruled out. A test subject 


may on some occasion in the future correctly stehibutis the cause of his 
reaction and secure independent professional medical assistance in 
ey identifying the exact nature of the substance employed, and by short: 
An extreme reaction to a test substance ewuld lead toa Biseau veauawt ' 
for cooperation from local stnetiiee in suppressing itormiation of the 
situation. This waite an turn broaden the civcle of individuals we 
possessed at least circumstantial evidence of the sates of the activity. | 
Weighing possible benefits of such testing against the risks of dot cteane: 
and of resulting damage to CIA has led the Inspector General to recommend 
“termination of this phase of the MKULTRA program.. Existing checks | 
and balances on the ee level Haden eement of such esting do ati 
afford the geeian command of CIA adequate protection against the high 
risks fyaiyeds , | 
19.[ does ‘ek follow that termination of covert testing of MKULTRA 


materials on unwitting U. S. citizens will bring the program to a halt. 


Some testing on foreign nationals has been occurring under the present 
. < e 
| _ arrangements. Various U. S, deep cover agents overseas would appear 
— to be more favorably situated than the U. S. narcotics agents to perform, 


realistic testing. | Finally, the operational use of the substances clearly 


serves the testing function in view of the lack of predictability of human 


reactions. 


| 
i 
oN 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ees Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO06767515 


hI daw :@ 


C Ul. Current estimate of the MKULTRA/MKDELTA capability 
20. The present Deputy Chief of TSD, Dr. Sidney Gottlieb, 


in his then capacity of scientific advisor to the Deputy Director/Plans 


(DD/P), released a study (hereafter referred to as the Gottlieb report) 


on 2] April 1960, covering his six-month investigation of "Scientific 


and Technical Problems in Covert Action Oper ations''. Appendix B 
of the report vas entitled, "The Applicability of Special Chemicals and 
Biologicals to Qandestine Operations", The inspectors found this 
Appendix to hee eueteaity prepared and very useful treatment of the 

. Pubject. The remaining paragraphs ee Su the Gottlieb Seale take 
account of developments since that date, and discuss management - _ 
:and funding aspects of MKULTRA. | | 


21. The author opened his discussion with the question of what 


an investment of approximately He observed that the | 


Clandestine Services had encouraged TSD on yarious occasions to 


develop and maintain the operational capability in special drugs and 


chemicals, but that TSD had received little or no guidance in directing 
the work and that the Clandestine Services had up to that time shown 


little inclination to use the end products operationally. He indicated 


a that there had been approximately 100 operations over the eight years 


the operational returns had been from an: eight-year program involving 


oH 


Lf. 


es 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C0676751 oe 


rr 


Ss Spit 
ne SEL 


employing harrassment materials (not controlled under the MKDELTA 


regulation) and only nine operations employing disabling drugs, (NB: 


two-thirds of these involved the use of drugs ininterrogations). No 


use of lethal substances was reported. 


22. The factors accounting for the low rate of use of this capa- 


bility were considered to be the following: 


a. 


b.. 


‘the technical shortcomings of the drugs 


the problem of testing in realistic pilot operations 
limitations on the dissemination of pertinent 
information to operations officers 

organizational and administrative restrictions on 
operations 


negative attitudes toward the use of MKDELTA Soatexiaic 


problems in the training of case officers in this field 
the risk of stimulating increased use of MKDELTA 
materials by opposition intelligence services — . 


23. Technical shortcomings of the drugs: 


As of Nae no effective knockout pill, truth serum, aphro- . 


eee or ‘Fecruitment pill v was ‘known to exist. MDE ETS was 


described as inherently a high-risk, low- tela field of operations. 


Three years datas the situation remains substhatianly inchangeds 


with the exception that real progress has been made in the use of 


drugs in support of interrogation. Ironically, however, the 


progress here has occurred in the development of a total psycho- 


logical theory of interrogation, in which the use of drugs has been 


relegated to a support role. 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


oy ; - 24, The problem of testing in realistic pilot operations: 
This subject has been discussed above, beginning with 

paragraph 10. . It should also be noted that testing on sverational 

targets overseas is considered by some Apebatiine otticess to 


be quite impracticable. Unilateral operations are imperative 


_which substantially complicates the delivery problern. The 


+35" ; possibilities of unexpected or critical reactions in test subjects 
eis a and of ensuing compromise of the activity make most senior 
WH ¢epmmand personnel unwilling to take the risks involved. 


25. Limitations on the dissemination of pertinent information to 


o 
° 


case officers; organizational and administrative restrictions on 


i 
| 
i ~ 
{ 


Sega 


operations: 
The present-day situation conceming both of these problem 


areas is improved over 1960. TSD now regularly briefs a variety 


oo 
P x 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


of senior officers’on its MKDELTA capability. Approval of . 
the use of MKDELTA materials is ee accomplished aie 
the chain of command of the DD/P. The DD/P may consult, * 
for example, with the Chief, Medical Staff, conce rning 
wiedieal risks involved 2, MKDELTA operations, but the 


latter surely would not expect to exercise final authority for 


the disapproval of operations. 


ee a 26. TSD has found that TDY visits of MKULTRA officers to the. iy 


field in support of specific operations increases the awareness of the 


» 


MKDELTA capability and stimulates proposals for. additional projects, 


Of equal significance, however, has been the TSD decision in 1961 to 


station in te officer who is 


informed on MKDELTA matters. A second officer is scheduled to 


move PCS ta during the summer of 1963 to ‘support and 


Ca 


adjacent stations. While the principal responsibility of these officers 


H 


lies in the field the arrangement in the 


has proved useful in the MKDELTA field--notably in interrogation--as 


well. It now appears that increased reliance can be placed on this 


approach to promoting responsible use of the MKDELTA capabilities, _ 


27. Negative attitudes toward the use of MKDELTA materials; 
problems in the training of case officers in this field: 
The 1960[Gottied Feport observed that some case officers 


have basic moral objections to the concept of MKDELTA and 


' 

t 

i 
— 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


—_—___SS—S—CSFsSSSS Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Dee ro 


therefore refuse to aoe the materials. Some ee officers 
were wesueied to believe that the proper employment of the 
capability required woneaoameuediied than most case 
officers possessed and that there would be a tendency toward 
over-reliance on and misuse of dues in lieu of perfecting 
classic espionage techniques. Finally, it was suggested that 
MKDELTA controls were a restrictive as to have generated 
aan an) 
a general defeatism among case officers concerning the chances 
of settuavapeeoeal for use of materials in seating rather than . 
_ extreme situations. These matters will be reviewed in future 
field inspections of gla area divisions. |= the meanwhile, 
‘he stationing of qualified TSD consultants in the field and 


* 


increasing operational experience will tend to aaveinns over time 


a category of case officers who have acquired direct appreciation 


Pas 


of the potential Re limitations of the MKDELTA capability. | 


28. The risk of stimulating increased use of MKDELTA materials 
by ene res intelligence cetvicea: 
The|Gotttied report stated that sopoaition aries taes 
services are active in the MKDELTA field ang recommended 
that the CI Staff of the DD/P conduct a systematic study of the 
evidence. This recommendation has not been implemented. 
It is a subject of increasing significance as new materials and 


< techniques become available. 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


—— Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO6767515. 


It is recommended that: 


Deputy Director /Plans instruct Chief, CI Staff, to 


perform a study of the evidence of use of MKDELTA 
materials by opposition intelligence services and recommend 
appropriate measures for training DD/P case officers to 
recognize and counter hostile activity in this eo 


29. In summary, present evidence concerning the operational 


judgments of the 1960[Gotslied keport. There is an extremely low rate 
of operational use of the controlled ieatetinis: [on the othe r hand, 
Significant progress has been achieved in the development of an inter- 
I ; rogation theory employing nmin substances, and in providing com- 
petent guidance to the field in MKDELTA matters ieeough. TSD officers 


‘working overseas. | 


“ane IV. Management of MKULTRA 


30. TSD has initiated{144]projects relating to the control of human 


behavior; i.e. i __]euring the ten 


years of operation of the MKULTRA program. | Twenty-five (25) of these 


projects remain in existence at the present time, while a number of others 


are in various stages of termination. | 


31. Active projects may be grouped under the following arbitrary 


OE i 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


value of the MKDELTA capability ‘would appear to confirm the principal 


Wo nh Smet toe oe eae at 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 
| ; po 


headings. Many projects involve activity in two or more of the areas 


C listed. 


a. basic research in materials and processes 

b. procurement of research materials 

c. testing of substances on animals and human beings 

d. development of delivery techniques 

e. projects in offensive/defensive BW, CW, and radiation. 

f. miscellaneous projects;je.g.f{ (1) petroleum sabotage, 
(2) defoliants, (3) devices for remote measurement of 
physiological processes : 


32. The current management of TSD has initiated a policy of 
directing the activities of MKULTRA aud of the Behavioral Activities 
Branch towards operations ind away from long-range veseayeh. Prior 
to this change in policy wien Sceaxted in 1962, MKULTRA sponsored, : 

‘a large nicnbee of projects in the fields of applied psychology, sociology, 
anthropology, and graphology. . The present management is unlikely o 


return to these fields of research under the MKULTRA charter. The 


inspectors concluded that many of these projects were of insufficient 
sensitivity to justify waiver of normal Agency control procedures. It 


is recommended at the end of this report that projects falling outside the 


authorized scope of MKULTRA henceforth require the prior written 
approval of the DD/P to qualify for MKULTRA processing. | 


33. The TSD chain of command for administration of the MKULTRA 
program comprises the following: 


a. Chief, TSD providing overall management 
b. Deputy Chief, TSD, (a trained scientist) providing - 
top substantive guidance for the MKULTRA program 
c. Assistant Chief, TSD, for Research and Development, 
contributing management but not substantive guidance 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


a Ses 


d. Chief Scientist (reporting to c., above), (a trained 
scientist), contributing substantive guidance in some 
areas and responsible for the technical administrative 
processes of MKULTRA. He is supported by a GS-12 
budget officer. 


€. program manager for MKULTRA, also serves as 
Chief of Biology Branch, (a trained scientist) 


f. project monitors located in various branches of TSD 
and specialized in the subject fields of the specific 
Projects for which they are assigned responsibility 
To ants this chain of command has relied primarily on oral communica~ 
tion in the management ae MKULTRA, Files are notably icomplets, 
poorly Organized, and lacking in evelistive: statements mae might give 
penspectye to eran a peers over time. A substantial portion 


of the MKULTRA record so abi to rest in the memories of the 


inetoal sificesa: and § is therefore almost certain to be lost with their 


_departures. The senior officers in the MKULTRA chain of command 


who are not substantively qualified need better records to measure the | 
validity of projects through ee and to identify key areas.in which to 
require detailed periodic peiehiage from working specialists. 

34, It will be noted that the Chief of Support, TSD, dose not parti- 
cipate in the MKULTRA.administration. The predecessor of the spredent 


Chief of Support served in TSP throughout the life of the program until: 


1962 without ever being associated with its management. In his stead, 


the Chief Scientist and a GS-12 budget officer have provided administrative 


support. The Chief Scientist has set policy on the funding of MKULTRA 


23 < 


t oes = 
 Oeukel, 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C0676751 Go em, al 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


( ‘ projects in all respects including salaries, overhead rates, fees, 
material, equipment, facilities, travel, and the like: The support 
officer was only added in 1962 under pressure of critical audit 
| . 
findings. This use of the Chief Scientist in a field where Chief of 
, a Support possesses superior qualifications and facilities constitutes 
a misuse of talent. The proposed on charter for MKULTRA should 
take account of this siete an also provide that Chief of Support 
‘advise in the future on decisions to fund projects under the MKULTRA 
authority and thereby to waive the application of DD/S Sspcua eed, 
It is recommended that: 
= Deputy Director/Plans draft and submit for the 
approval of the Director of Central Intelligence a revision 
and vo deck navies of the authority psioeea him in 1953 


fet \ (Tab A) to operate the MKULTRA program, incorporating 


the following provisions: 


a. Deputy Director/Plans assign Chief, Technical: 
Services Division, to operate MKULTRA as a 
program for research and development of chemical, 
biological, and radioactive materials, and of 
techniques for the employment of elegtro-shock, 
capable of producing human behavioral or physio- 
logical change. Subsequent changes in scope of 

aes \ MKULTRA shall require the written approval of 
pies oe the Deputy Director/Plans. 


. 
ee eg. ori -nmearenepered meer 


~ 24 - 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO6767515 


C8 oy oF 


4 a ~b. 


? Cc e 
Pee 
d, 
e e 
Ase j 
a Be 


Deputy Directoy Plans arrange with Deputy Director/ 
Research for the coordination of research relating 

to MKULTRA objectives to control duplication of 
effort and to provide for exchange of information of 
new capabilities. 


Chief, Technical Services Division, consistent with 
established policy, :may negotiate for research in 
MKULTRA materials and techniques to be conducted 
by Deputy Director/Research and by other component 
offices of CIA, He shall consult regularly with the 
appropriate officers of such components to control 
duplication of effort. 


. Chief, Technical Services Division shall approve the 
addition of MKULTRA developed materials to the 


list of operationally available MKDELTA substances | 
and keep the Deputy Director/Plans advised of such 
additions. (cf. Clandestine Services Instruction : 
No. 220-10, MKDELTA MATERIALS, dated 22 July 


‘1960--Tab B--which governs the employment of 


behavioral control materials in clandestine operations. ) 


“Deputy Director/Plans, jointly with the Deputy Director/ 
. Support, establish policy for the administration of 


support functions under MKULTRA. Such policy shall 
seek to limit to the maximum the waiver of established 
Agency support procedures for activities. of unusual 
sensitivity. 


- Chief, Technical Services Division shall maintain 
' exacting internal controls and records of all substantive 


and support matters within each MKULTRA project. 
Records shall include: 


(1) A plan of the research and development to be ‘ 
performed. — ; ° : 


f] t 

(2) An administrative annex setting forth security, i 

budget and accounting arrangements agreed to 

by the parties to the project. Chief of Support, | . 

TSD, shall then certify to the DD/S for each { 
such project that this annex is in accord with 

the agreed DDS/DDP policy. Pursuant to this | 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


CA proved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


fe a4 


' 


C ao ‘responsibility, Chief of Support, TSD, 

‘ : i shall have right of unlimited access to 
. the substantive and administrative records 
. of MKULTRA. 


; (3) An annual written review by the project 
monitor setting forth in reasonable detail 

the nature of the work performed, the 
prospects for results of eventual opera- 

: tional significance, and a recommendation 

! for continuance or termination of the project. 


ioarteed 


g. Testing of MKULTRA materials and devices shall only ~ 
be performed in accredited ‘research institutions under 
accepted scientific BROS rr ee 


h. Chief, Technical Services Division, shall brief the 
Deputy Director/Plans at least semi-annually on s 
MKULTRA activities. The Deputy Director/Plans 
after each briefing shall promptly notify the Deputy 
‘Director of Central Intelligence that he has personally 
conducted a semi-annual review of the program. 

The MKULTRA program be audited in accordance 

with the provisions of HR 31-1, including auditor access 

to substantive as well as administrative records. 


a 


— aoe * 
Se y | Tf? SECRET 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ya s 3 th 


————— proved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


atte Ee PART ita vinnie enn wane 01 ~. ct Stele ARTS NRE EE Rash re 


tvs 
2 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


pproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ehanene FS sels oe eon Nemes a OR we: 


Hii Kee" a a ONG Ba 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director, Central Intelligence 


a SUBJECT: T¥0 Extremely Sensitive Research Programs — 


: ‘2. Approximately 6% of the TSS research and development effort lies in 
. two highly sensitive fields in which it is not possible to conduct the work 
- through the customary contracts for security reasons and other considerations. 


. ‘: 2. “These two sensitive fields are: 


a) ‘Covert studies of biological and chemical warfare . 
b) i : 


Ce 3. Permission of the DCI is requested to handle work in these two 
. fields in the manner outlined in Tab A without contracts and with reimburse- 
ment to be made. against invoices properly certified by TSS. 


© ee h. All controls established in the PRC approval of the original Re- 
: gearch Program (other than signing of a contract) would remain unchanged. 

_ Periodic financial and progress reports will be made. All documents will be 
' petained by TSS. : = a ae 


‘funds are involved. ‘This procedure would apply to funds 


Se No new 
previously approved for research. 


6. tab B is a memorandum to the Deputy Director (Administration) for 
your signature authorizing this procedure. ie! 


pices * oe . ee Se Richard Helns pr 
ee b> ee: wap, Soe nr Acting Deputy Director (Plans) 


| Attachments: (2) ee Se 
| fab A - Description of Project MKULTRA and 

_. .. the controls which will be exercised . 
| > og over its execution ; a fae 
| 
| 


fab B = Suggested Memorandum from DCI to | a eg r : 
. DD/A authorizing payment of invoices © bi roa, 
_» wader Project MKULTRA gt fn ee 
- Distribution: fe ar ee ee 
“3 _ Addressee ~ Orig & 1 w/attachnents . SP a VG os | nae 
Cc: pp/P - 1 w/attachments . a | es 
TSS/0C - 1 w/attachnents ee oe BY r eat 
- Exec. Rege= 1/attachments - a ¥ at _ M _ ; 
Le | Typ stent AW aa. 076 : 
oe ee ee : er rl a are Bti bere a 
Pee: on . can Se Pe OBES = wa aS te Se ae as Se Be, ees na oe ocd = a 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


iy ae ie, as . 
gear ftom a | ve / wb se Ax _ 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ae Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO06767515 
, OS a esi retina ee RR an nA AINE et ta et he a = . sree ena = mann 


Security Informetion 


rr re (PAB A: 


om on ne, PROJECT MKULTRA 


"Extremely Sensitive Research and Development Programs 
aE 
7 


a On 6 June 1952, the Project Review Committee approved the TSS 
Research Program for Fiscal _ ke ee eee 
Year 1953. . - ; ee ee ne ete 


2. The PRC approval authorized the Director of Research, at his dis- 
cretion and with the approval of the Research Chairman, to apportion 
and obligate the research funds among individual projects, such projects 
to be subject to the usual Agency procedures and administrative 
‘controls, , ; 


3. This Research Program has been actively underway since the middle 

- of 1952 and has gathered considerable momentum during the past few 

! -  .-months. It is now evident on the basis of work currently underway that 

"approximately 94% of the projects contemplated can be handled through 
regular procurement channels by means of the customary contracts 
signed jointly by the Agency and the organization undertaking to carry 
out the work, It has also become apparent that approximately 6% of 
the projects are of such an ultra-sensitive nature that they cannot and 
should not be handled by means of contracts which would associate CIA 

' or the Government with the work in question. This 6% of the current 
research effort now lies entirely within two well- defined fields of 
endeavor, namely: 


a La Research to develop a capability in the covert use of: 
: .. .‘ biological and chemical materials. This area involves the 
'. production of various physiological conditions which could 
support present or future clandestine operations, Aside 
from the offensive potential, the development of a compre- 
'- hensive capability in this field of covert chemical and bio- 
‘logical warfare gives us a thorough knowledge of the enemy's 
theoretical potential, thus enabling us to defend ourselves 
against a foe who might not be as restrained in the use of' 


rs FO scrt } 


. Security Information Copy # c i of 5 copies 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


2 sep Ecrst 9 mes. oreza 


= pproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 ae oF 


> 


oa SECRET as a a 


“Security Information fai 8s. 61828: 


- these techniques as we are, For example: we intend to 
investigate the development of a chemical material which 
causes a reversible non-toxic aberrant mental state, the 
specific nature of which can be reasonably well predicted for 
each individual, This material could potentially aid in dis- 
crediting individuals, eliciting information, implanting 
suggestion and other forms of mental consol 


(b) Research ind engineering development in the field of 


‘4. Itis highly undesirable from a policy and security point of view that 
contracts should be signed indicating Agency or Government interest 

in either of these two fields. Ina great many instances the work in 

field (a) must be conducted by individuals who are not and should not be 
aware of our interest, In all cases dealing with field (b), it is mandatory 
that any connection with the A Agency should be known only to an absolute 
minimum number of people who have been specifically cleared for this 
purpose. In no case should any manufacturer or r supplier be aware of 
Government interest. 


5. In many cases in field (a) where the researcher can be cleared and. 
may be aware of our interest in the program, he is unwilling to have his © 
‘Mame on a contract which remains out of his control in our files. 
Experience has shown that qualified, competent individuals in the field 

of pharmacological, physiological, psychiatric and other biological 
sciences are most reluctant to enter into signed agreements of any sort 
which connect them with this activity since such a connection would 
sae cied eaetr prOice nee: mepranons: 


6. Even internally in CIA, as few individuals ; as possible should be 
: aware of our interest in these fields and of the identity of those who are 
_ working for us, At present this results in ridiculous contracts, often 

with cut-outs, which do not spell out the scope or intent of the work 


re SECRET 


Security Sepa 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


+ Security Information éo2 [ae T. S. 87624 


ae which contain terms which the cut-out cannot incorporate in his 
” — eontract with the researcher without revealing Government interest. 
_ Complete Government audits of such contracts are impossible for: 
i ' the same reason, , ; 


 ”. Itis, therefore, requested that the DCI authorize TSS to handle 6% 
ar atin ie _ of the previously approved research budget . 

- for FY '53 without the establishment of formal contractual relations. 

- his program will be known as Project MKULTRA. 


| 8 Itis suggested that payment of invoices under Project MKULTRA 
forwarded by TSS be authorized, provided that: : = 


bad . 


‘(a) the total of such invoices does not exceed 6% for 
Fiscal Year 1953; : 


“(b) the invoices carry a certification by the TSS Research 
_ Director that payment of funds is authorized and that the 
- dnvoices represent work accomplished within the program 
approved by the DCI under Project MKULTRA as outlined 
in this memorandum; , 


(c) the invoices carry the certification of the Executive 
Secretary of the Research Board that the scope of the program ~ 
has been approved; 4° Es 


(d) the invoices carry the certification of the cognizant TSS 
_ Division Chief that the work has been satisfactory from a 
technical point of view, bo? or te ; 


9. It should be emphasized that this authorization does not involve any 
new allocation of funds, but merely applies to a portion of a previously 
‘approved budget. The TSS certifications mentioned above will mean 
that: 7 ts Pe ee ee er eat 2 


(a) the project is being handled under the conditions set forth 
in this description and specifically falls within one of the. 


Skies 


53g) hry ie. x id 
Smears ea ae Tall 


‘two ultra-sensitive fields mentioned above; 


(b) the project has been approved in the manner provided for 
. in the PRC document which originally set up and approved | 
‘the over-all TSS Research Program. Each project will thus 


“have been presented by the Chief of the Division monitoring 


Security Information an : 


Hy e oe 


: 2, st en eel . he Z : 2, F oe 
. Ses . do; y # 7 of 5 copie . 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


“cf 


f ae, 2 SECRET a on ne 
eR. = TS, 87624 


Pa ecurity Information 


“| the work to the Research Director and to the Research 
Chairman and will have, as in the past, to be approved 
by both before any expenditures are made; 


(c) technical control over the project will be exercised by 
the TSS Division Chief and Project Engineers to the same | 
extent now applying to projects handled in the normal fashion. 
Technical reports will be rendered when necessary and 
_ advisable and will be available for inspection in TSS files 


at any time; 


(d) in the case of each project, TSS will reach an understanding | 

' with the individuals who will perform the work as to the 
. conditions under which the work will be performed and re- 
_{mbursement arranged. No standard contract will be signed. 
| In some cases when possible, a memorandum of agreement 
- will be signed and retained in the TSS files, Under no 
. circumstances would copies of such agreements leave TSS 

files where they will be kept available for inspection; 


(e) the manner in which the work will be handled and methods 
__ of maintaining Agency ‘and Government sterility will be worked 
out with the Inspection & Security Office as in the past, and 
 Slearance of individuals to the extent deemed necessary by 


TSS and I & SO will be obtained; ue 


. (f) invoices, when received by TSS, will be forwarded to 
Finance Division for payment and will be certified as outlined 
in Paragraph 8 above. Whenever documents are available 

|. supporting a portion or all of a given invoice, such as cancelled 

* -:  ehecks, receipted bills, etc., these will be requested by TSS 

and retained in the TSS files in support of the invoice, where 
- they will at all times be available for inspection, They will 
‘not be forwarded with the invoices. Such documents at best 
' will only cover a portion of the total expenditures, and regular 
- audit procedures will not be followed; tye BS “i 


v 


(g) other provisions and controls over the Research Program _ 
specified in the original PRC approval will remain unaltered, — 
Technical progress under the separate projects handled under 


» Project MKULTRA will be included whenever necessary in . 
\ 


JQP SECRET 
sieges Bae copy LZ of be 


ity Information 


opies 


——- 
—- 
neers rn a 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


5 secret Ts ao 
ae: -.  “T.S, 87624 


am 


- Security Lsrmation 
: the regular progress reports now submitted by the Director 
of Research, The monthly budget and financial report being 
7 submitted by TSS to DD/A will include full financial informa- 
tion on these projects, including how much of the ‘6% 
has been committed, how much has been spent and how much 
“. yemains, vo 


_* 


10, The establishment and approval of Project MKULTRA will allow 

TSS to undertake highly desirable and necessary re search in these two 
_ pensitive fields which would not be possible unless the work canbe 

handled in this manner, 


S 


Distribution: | ee de "af 
Addressee - Orig. &1 me . 
DD/P - 1 : : 2 


TSS/OC - 1 “ a ee 8 
. Exec, Registry-1 eee ee ea a os 


er 


; 
‘ 
= 
§ 
f 


— one ~ — = 
Neem, = I RI = 


nae ee : aS ee ee Ie ee aaa on = mys RET eTNEEN Perr 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


a eae for Release: es €0676751 Pe 
yoeret 8g 


Security fnfereet on 


a 


ome gis ne 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


a a , SECRET. - 
wo: °° ZF -Seearity tnformation J 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
‘ ' WASHINGTON 25, D. é. 


AFR i v 1393 


OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 


" MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (ADMINISTRATION) 


" SUBJECT s Project MKULTRA - Extremely Sensitive 
; Research and Development Program 


no On 6 June 1952, the Project F Review Catentnce approved 


the DD/P/TSS Research Program 
for Fiscal Year 1953. ~ 


2. The PRC approval authorized the Director of Research, 
‘at his discretion and with the apzroval of the Research Chairman, to 
obligate the research funds and apzortion them among individual ; ro- 
.jects, such projects to be subject to the pee Agency procedures and 
acoumstralve controls. 


‘3. A small part of the Research Program contemplated - TSS 
and discussed with me consists of ultra-sensitive work, The nature of 
the research and the security considerations involved preclude handling 
the projects by means of the usual contractual sErcementa: 


.& 1 have, therefore, approved the obligation and exrenditure by 
» TSS of 6% - of the total budget ) already approved by the PRS 
for research for FY '53 without the signing of the usual contracts or 
other ‘written ‘agreements, er ; ar 


5. This 9 6% will be handled as Phoiect MKULTRA. 
Would you please make the necessary arrangen.ents so that invoices 
. forwarded by TSS applying to MKULTRA will be paid, provided that: 


a) inthe see beuate: they do not exceed | 6% for FY '53 
. Without Agsther authorization from me; ti a: 2 


— each lnvoice is to bear a certification by the Chief, 
SECRET 
Security Information 


= me ee oe a (a tele ee ee rere ee ee ee ee 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


pproved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ae Ae eee 
ian QZ * Security Informatiot ie) 


yoo Se ae. Gee 


DD/P/TSS, as the Research Director, that the invoice 
' applies to Project MKULTRA and that the conditions .- 
,  . outlined in the DD/P memorandum for DCI dated 3 April 
_ . bave been com;lied with. The certification will also 
” ” vequest that payment be made; 


_€) the invoice shall bear the certification of the Executive 
_  - Secretary of the Research Board that the scope of the 
a "program has been approved; iets 


a) the invoice shall bear the certification of the cognizant 
TSS Division Chief that the work has been satisfactorily — P 
performed from a technical point of view and has been 
carried out in accordance with the understandings reached 
between TSS and the individual or concern doing the work. 


6. No further documents will be required to justify payment of 
the invoices. Exacting control will be maintained over the Project by 
“ |SS, Although no formal contract will be signed, it will occasionally 
* be possible for TSS to sign an informal agreement with the individual 
or concern performing the work, In such cases, TSS will retaininits — | 
files all documents. TSS will endeavor wherever possible to obtain 7 
documentary support of invoices, such as cancelled checxs, recei;ted 
bills, etc., and these will remain in TSS files, Such documents at best 
will only cover a portion of the total expenditures, and the regular audit 
procedure will not be followed. a. 


7. Other provisions and contro] over the Research Program 
: gpecified in the original i RC apzroval remain unaltered. The monthly 
' budget and financial record being submitted by TSS to DD/A will include 
. financial information on the work being conducted under Project MaAULTRA, ~ 
-  ghowing how much of the 6% has been committed, how much has . 
been spent, and how much remains. - _ 


s OT eee ee tO ee ae es ALLEN W, DULLES 
_ Director, Central Intelligence 


ay ee 


Fee eee TE 


Distribution: 


Addressee - Orig. & 1. 4. . au - hee - a alo ee ; 
DD/P -1 _ pa eS, a = 
' FSS/0C -1 as ae : 
a Exec. Registry - 1 SECRET : 
x0 pat SF of *: Sgeurity information 2% 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


oO Sec 


Beeurity Irfeemation 


te, G3 Oe > °° 2a April 1953) 


MEMORANDUM. FOR THE FILE 


- SUBJECT :. Project MKULTRA 


1. Project MKULTRA was established by means of a memorandum 
dated 3 April 1953 from DD/P to DCI as a result of which on 13 April 
1953, DCI wrote to DD/A approving the project subject to certain controls 
and limitations which TSS has agreed to maintain. : ae 


| 2. In order to comply with these controls, subprojects under MKULTRA 
will be handled as outlined in the DD/P memorandum to the DCI dated 
3 April 1953. In brief: . gee, & a 


“.... (a) A separate file will be kept on each subproject, The 
: . foundation of each file will be an agreement between 
_ TSS and the contractor outlining the work to be done, 
_the conditions under which it will be accomplished, the 
estimated costs of so doing, etc. Wherever possible, 
“this agreement will be signed by both parties, but in 
extreme cases need not be signed by the contractor. 
_. Im such an event, it is still necessary to prepare such a 
' document outlining the verbal agreement and listing 
dates and places when meetings took place. . 


Pad  (b) At the same time, the Division Chief will prepare a 
memorandum for file outlining the scope of the program, 
the reasons for its activation, etc., and containing all 
pertinent information, This memorandum will bear the 


‘following: 
_ PROGRAMAPPROVED = | APPROVED FOR 
‘’ AND RECOMMENDED; _ _ OBLIGATION OF FUNDS: 
eng a ‘ a ; eye F 4 ; ; : 
Sa eee i Sais 
Research Chairman re -. Research Director 
Date: 7 Date: 3 


SECRET 4 a r a 


Security Information 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


— : ; —Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515— 


nn? Pee <P 


a . . : Security Intormatian 


_° (ce) When preparing (b), the Division Chief will also prepare 

; "a memorandum addressed to the Comptroller, Attention: 
Finance Division. This memorandum will state that 
subproject has been approved, and $ ‘of the 
over-all project MKULTRA funds have been obligated to 
cover the project's expenses, This memorandum will be 
signed by the Division Chief and will provide space for the 
approval of the Research Director and the Research . 
Chairman as outlined above. This memorandum will 

~ allow Finance to obligate funds so they will not be lost 
at the end of the Fiscal Year and will provide a document 
' against which action can be taken when invoices are ‘ 
later presented for payment, This memorandum should 
contain absolutely no technical details or information as 
to the scope of the work. Copies of the memorandum will 
be prepared for: 
- Comptroller, Original and € A 
Exec. Sec'y., Res. Board - 1 
. TSS/Budget - 1 
TSS Registry - 1 
Initiating Division, whatever number is 
required 


‘ 


(d) Memoranda (b) and (c) will be presented together to the 
Research Director and the Research Chairman for ; 
signature. Memorandum (b) will be returned for inclu- 

' gion in the project file, and memorandum (c) will be 
routed to TSS/Budget, .TSS/Supply & Services, TSS 
Registry and Comptroller. 


‘(e) It will be the responsibility of the Division Chief handling 
‘the project to see that the Research Director is kept in- 
formed of progress and that reports, correspondence with 
-- the contractor and other documents are kept in the project 
' file, < . j 


ts (f) When an invoice is received by the Division, it shall be 
forwarded to Chief, Finance Division, via TSS /Budget 
_ Officer, with a memorandum stating it applies to subproject 
; ' ‘wnder Project MKULTRA, The memorandum 
‘should provide any special instructions involving method of E ‘§ 
¢ 


f-2-8 x *S _ . ’ De 7s 
LS | Mae SRN SIT Ie ee Pag MEY SN hak ( 


payment, i.e., whether by check or cash, etc, The 
following certifications must appear on the invoice or be 


SECRET Myre 7 a 


 Seeurity Information | eee 


er oe ois 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


‘secret Og 


a ‘@ | 
os ie — Seeetty Informatio’ 


attached to it: 
(i) “It is hereby certified that this is Invoice No. 
applying to subproject of Project MKULTRA, | 

that technical performance by (name of the contractor) 
has been satisfactory, that the work was accomplished 
jn accordance with the mutual agreement reached with 


(name of contractor), that this bill is just and correct 


and that payment thereof has not yet been made, 


Date: : < | 
va ts Gy - (Division Chief)" ao 


(2) “It is hereby certified that this invoice applies to 
subproject under Project MKULTRA which was 

duly approved and that the project has been carried out 

in accordance with the DD/P memorandum to DCI dated 

3 April 1953 and the DCI memorandum to DD/A dated 

13 April 1953, Payment is authorized and requested, 

: Date: é oS 


Research Director" 


(3) “It is hereby certified that the scope of the program of 
. subproject of Project MKULTRA has been approved. - 


Date: , ce 


Exec. Sec'y.» Res. Bd." 


_- TSS /OC:evsr /jet (20 April 1953) | 
Distribution: TT. 
ASSIOC - Orig. & 1 
_. TSS/CD-1 
_° TSS/ADMIN - 1 


“SECRET 


Security Information 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


rites for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515. 


Sas AAR a i < ccailatbabinatha ithe Sactemnaee ee a ~r 


@ ' SECRET é 


TECHNICAL SUPPORT 
+ 92 July 1960 


‘MKDELTA MATERIALS 


Rescission: '20 October 1952 


1. GENERAL 


. @. MKDELTA materials are certain chemical and biological materials 
’ (including K and L tablets) capable of producing human behavioral or 
physiological changes. Such materials may be obtained only in accord- 
ance with the provisions of this instruction. ~ 


_ db. The provisions of the instruction are not intended to cover those mate- 
rials commonly known as harassment materials. . 


2. POLICY - 


a. The use of MKDELTA materials will be limited to situations in the ex- 
ercise of official duties which clearly justify such use. 


} b. Their issuance will be strictly controlled and will require in each in- _ 
stance the written approval of the Deputy Director (Plans). 


@. MKDELTA materials not used for the purpose for which they were ieaued 
) ‘will be promptly returned to TSD; on-the-shelf onset aeeee poseiole 
future needs will not be permitted. ; 


.. 8. PROCEDURES 


a Informal discussion of the vequtrement to determine its technical feast 
bility will be heid with TSD before preparation of any formal request or 
any coordination with other elements. 


bo Requests for the issuance of these materials will be scapated in memo- 
randum form for the signature of the Chief or Deputy Chief of the Op- 
erating Division or Staff concerned. No other signature is authorized. 


¢ This memorandum will be routed first to any other division(s) or ataff(s) | 
. | whose coordination {s necessary, then to the Chief, TSD, who will append 
his comments and return it to the originator for transmittal to the Deputy 
Director (Plans) for approval. Transmittal of the memorandum will be 
"Oman Eyes Only basis. 


da. Procedures used in the past that ae have differed from the above will 
“no ae be used. 


erate ss 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


a 
. ba 
. 2 - 
eae 
ae : 
Pa 3 TECHNICAL SUPPORT 
: oti 22 July 1960 
4. RECORDS 


} The Chief, TSD, will maintain a record of all issuances, to include the date. 
of issuance, the name and signature of the immediate recipient, and a refer- 


ence to the approved memorandum requests which he will keep ina peed 
available supporting file. : 


RICHARD M. BISSELL, JR. 
Deputy Director 
._. (Plans) 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


$$$ Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 


ea 8 Fa 


Ben oproved for Release: 2019/04/03 CO676751 


EL ernie BD UL ee 


Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515 




=================== PASS 2: pdftotext -layout ===================

                                                                                                                                          ,_,_,_,Appr0ved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                               '15.‘..    .. _‘f'
                               .
      ’
                                         3*»
                       ~

                  1:                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '-
                                    .                                                                                                 -                                                                                                  .


                                              .-.~"/J

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Euu TQ7“
                                                                                                                                                                  ‘.                              _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ."
                       f,_;, 4
                               »                                                                                                          ,_                                                                .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                 -                                                                                                                                                                                                           .-
                                                                                                 r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,-_u_i-                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -


                                                                                     "
          ~
                                                                                                                                                  (   Q-_                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST.     --"1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -


                                                         J                                                                                                                                                                                                            __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ._                                                                                                                              3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '




                                                                                             .*"r“w¢"v'.
                                                                                                                                          i




                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,?6.I=»1v.1~>='>3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E                                   -.,                                   ,vi
                                                                                             ‘MEMOKANDUM FOR:. Director 5: ¢......1 Intelligence                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                 SUBJECT                                                                                                   Report of Inspection of,MKULTRl\
                                                                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                     -
1                                                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                     .



                                                                                                                                                                                                      :’
I




                                                                                                                                          In connection with oursurvey of Technical Services
                                                                                                                           '




                                                                                                                                1’.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '

                                                                                                              -




                                                                                             Division, DD/P, it was deemed advisable to prepare_the report
                                                                                             A




                                                                                             of the MKULTRA program in one copy only, in view of its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '


                                                                                 _




                                                                                         -
                                                                                 .




                                                                             ~

                                                                                             unusual sensitivity.                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _




                                                                                                                                                  .               .                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .




                                                                                                                                Z. This report is forwarded herewith.
                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .




                                                                                                     3. The MKULTRA activity is concerned with the research
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                       ~




                                                                                             and development of chemical, biological, and radiological
                                                                                     ‘

                                                 -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '




                                                                                             materials capable of employment in clandestine operations to
                                                                                     »
                                                                                             control human behavior. The endproducts of such research                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /_.


                                                                                             are subject to very strict controls including a requirement                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 '5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                             for the personal approval of the Deputy Director/Plans for
                                                                             __
                                                                                                                                                         any
                                                     .
                                                                         A


                                                                                             operational use made of these end products.                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '




                                                                         _.                      The cryptonym MKULTRA encompasses the R&D
                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                               44’.

                                                                                    phase and a second cryptonym MKDELTA denotes the DD] P
                                                                 *
                                                     »




                                                                                    system for control of the operational employment of such mat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                 4/The provis_ioans‘_oi._t_he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b)(1)
                                                                                             ‘ ‘    H
                                                                                                              M.l{ULTRA authority also
                                                                                                                  J‘                              N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /h\l’2\
                                                                                                                     The administration and control of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I’
                                                                                                                                                                              '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b )(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '"




                                                                                  Y   ‘s latter activity were
                                                                                                                found to be generally satisfactory and
                                                             '                                                                                                                                                       \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b)(
                                                                                    are discussed in greater detail in the main body of the report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,

                                                     -




                                                                                             onTSD.                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                             ~                                                                                                                                             --                                         v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                             r
                                                                                                         _'
                                                                                                              '



                                                                                                                               5..        MKULTRA was authorized by.the then Director of                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '




                                                                                                             Mr.lA1len W. Dulles, in l953_. The TSD
                                                                                         :aCentral Intelligence,
                                                                                       was assigned responsibility thereby to employ a portion of its
                                                             _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _




                                                                                            budget, Yeventually set at 20%, Ior research in behavioral
                                                                         l


                                                                                       materials                         under purely internal and com-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b)( 1
                                                         _
                                                                                     1-partmented co rols, (further etails are provided in paragraph 3
                                             4                                         of theattached report). Normal procedures for project approval,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      an

                                         -
                                                                 .                    -funding, and accounting were waived. However, special arrange-




                           _,
                                                                                       ments for audit of expenditures have been evolved in subsequent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                         '




              A
                       A
                                                                                     yyears.       --     V                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '            A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '




    ._-.._¢_..-,-..__
                                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                           _.                                                                                                  /*4§”i:=,£”7‘”’7‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      091                                              "
                                                                                                              _.                                                          Q                                                                                                                                -e                   .¢<>Pv1<>f1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       “
                                                                         ,__j.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     —                            -
                                                                                                                                              _                                                                                          .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - ———




                                                                                                                                                                          Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                   for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
z



                                       "           ‘   51'           '   i
                                                                                                                          M'i'»'A7
                                                                                                                                                           *1“
                                                   9
                                                                     '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘




                                                                                                                                                   (O                              ;u%§i=".;'.;"-I                                                               j_,=')

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4




                                                                                           The scope of MKULTRA is comprehensive and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -=.»e~.l4
                                                                                                     ,5‘                              '6,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1. fr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9..


                                                                                 ranges from the search for and procurement of botanical and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   au
                                                                                 chemical substances, through programs for their analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..     z-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in-.


                                                                                 in scientific laboratories, -to progressive testing for effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '-




                                                                                 on animals and human beings. The testing on individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1:’

                                                                                 begins under laboratory conditions employing every safeguard                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '»..



                                                                                 and progresses gradually to more and more realistic opera-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;_..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ??"¥=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \-

                                                                                 tional simulations. The program requires and obtains the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .\_.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 :-'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :1»:


                                                                                 services of a number of highly specialized authorities in many
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1"‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~21.»-

                                                                                 fields of the natural sciences.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           »

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _                                                                      »~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I .1:-5'
                     51                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                     \-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -‘ie



                                                                                                                                                 The concepts involved in manipulating human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘...v                                                               .




                                                                                                                                      7.
                                                                                 ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _..,-_                     »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .._.                                                        .
                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                             ~_




                                                                                 behavior are found by many people both within and outside the
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                      .

              jg
              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -"vi                  -'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "-.=~.


                                                                                 Agency to be distasteful and unethical. There is considerable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                821'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .i..__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .__,‘_




                                                                                 evidence that opposition intelligence services are active and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .]                                  »..




                                                                                 highly proficient in this field. The experience of TSD to date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aw‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .'-.1‘




                                                                                 indicates that both the research and the employment of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,1‘.




                                                                                 materials are expensive and often unpredictable in results.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ._.>-                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                 Nevertheless, there have been major accomplishments both                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1        :15.
                                                                                 In research and operational employment.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5'-xi

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9.
         '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                 The principal conclusions of the inspection are that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘
         ~                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3:5»

                                                                                                                                      8.
                                                                                                     '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .-_-                       ~.=_;,,§-_1
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q 1"."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I




                                                                                 the structure and operational controls over this activity need
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,1.‘




                                                                                  strengthening“; improvements are needed in the administration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .            -»-.                                pg

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3*ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >_t,




                                                                                 of the research projects; and some of the testing of substances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I                          -4


                                                                                 “under simulated operational conditions was judged to involve                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .11’, .-.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M 4sf
                                                                                  excessive risk to the Agency.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _;                                    J



                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -,
         ‘i




                                                                                            Attached for the signature of the Deputy Director of
                                                                                             f


                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                      9.
                                                                                                                                  ‘
         I




                                                                                 Central Intelligence is a memorandum transmitting the report
                                                                                     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r                      »;




                                                                                 to the Deputy Director/Plans requesting a summary of-action
         I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e:
         F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,.



                                                                                 taken or comments on the recommendations contained therein.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,»

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~..

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v-;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .=...-_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘.1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l
                  __




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ._:.




              -...



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Inspector General
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
1...."




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




              _-_.
                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1‘                                                                             .                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <

                                                                                 Attachments - as stated
                                                                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _;....-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ._-.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -'._--1,




                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              0 N 0                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~        »;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -$4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .\
                                                                                                                                                                                              ( K
                               .




                                                                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                   I‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '_-.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L‘-2"‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,_aP_'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F


                                   ‘   "   "                 '   i           ’                   ‘
                                                                                                                              *‘ -""’~**         ‘-"‘~ *"."I-‘v~"*~'-%'~""~#"$'~                                                                                  =>.:-. ‘-.-'.;;;?.—.> .-_=                                                                                             .— "c:~"".'S7B—'
                                                                                                                                                                                           -3--*.';.4-;'*-_..-~*~.--s:--5-.-'.-"Y~‘-'-r-:.--"r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “
                                               ‘                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                            »-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .-‘

                           ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .;¢.v.                                                                                                        .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '                                                                                 .-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _V__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _   _   p




                                                                                                                                                        Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                           ..»»                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                             T3. ix; an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i


                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                     '




                                                                                                                                                                                              <13 = s... m
                                                                                                                                                      _\




                                                                                                                              .'\‘
                                                                                                                                     fl-'1
                                                                                                                                                 1'
                                                                                                                                                      III‘:

;




                                                        V


                                                            (   ’


                                                                                                          REPORT OF INSPECTION OF MKULTRA/TSD


                                                                                    I.    Introduction

                                                                                              1.   Technical Services Division (TSD), (then Technical Support
                                  -1                .




                                                                                               received authorization from the_t-hen Director of Central
                              _:,._-,'

                                                                                    Staff),
             V
                 _.   ..,._.,,_




                                                                                    Intelligence,     Mr. Allen W. Dulles, on 3 ‘Apri1.'..l953 to develop and
                      \
                                                                                    maintain continuing operational capabilities in the fields of                                                                    (b)(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b\(3\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b)(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Band
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b)(3)
                                                                            ‘




                                                                                    b_)   chemical and biological materials capable of producing human
                                                                                .
                                                                                                                          ‘                                                  '


                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                    behavioral and physiological changes, (see Tab A). The cryptonym

                                                                                .MKUL'I‘R.A was assigned to encompass TSD's research, development

                                                                                    and equipment activities in these two fields. The cryptonym MKDELTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             '

                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A




                      .4                                                            had already been assigned by DD/P Notice No. Z20-1 on Z0 October                                                     A




                      ~‘                       ..
                                                                        -
                                                                                    1952 (since revised - see Tab B) as the indicator covering DD/P“ policy

                                                                                "and procedure for the use of biochernicals in clandestine operations.
                                  Iv




                                                                                    "
                                                                                              Z.   The MKULTRA charter provides only a brief presentation
                      :3".-
                  .-...;                        -




                                                                                    of the rationale of the authorized activities.                                   The sensitive aspects
                                                                    '

                                                                                    of the program as it has evolvedover the ensuing ten years 'a‘re the
                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                    following:
                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                     e

                                                                                                                                                                     _




                                                                                                     a.   Research in the manipulation of human behavior is

            -<-Inf»                                                                           considered by many authorities in medicine and related fields
                                                             Declassification Review E.0. 12065                                                                                                  ~




                                                             Conducted on ‘I7 June 1981
                                                             Derivative Classificationi by 531025
                                                            Review I7 June 2001"
                 —~\1.n-Q                                    Derived from C9c.2; C9e                                                                       -_.

        ~.4\h....“
                          "'5-'
                                                            Downgraded                                      61140                                                                                                      (b)(3)
        q".'r                 .
                                       '




    .
                          ‘
                                           ,

        ='_-__-n


                                                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                              Approved for Re|egse;g2019/04/03 C06767515
                               (‘$2,           Y1                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I




                                                                                                                                                                         \




                                                                                                                            _‘   "             ,~_. __
                                                                                                                                 -,_             4
                                                                                                                                                         7.-""
                                                                                                                                           \'“‘\'-"KL-I
                                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                           .




                                  .
                                       .                                                                                               4                             .                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                       0




                                  <        ~
                                                                                  to be professionally unethical, therefore the reputations                                                           .




                                                                                                            ‘                                                                    .




                                                                              _
                                                                                  of professional participants in the                                     MKULTRA program are
                                                                                  on occasion in jeopardy.
                                                                              X"
                                                                  _




       r
                                                                                                   _


                                                                                               Some MKULTRA activities raise questions of
                                                                                                                                                                                              .




                        ’..

                                                                                         b.

      .1,       .        -.                                           "

                                                                                  legality implicit in the original charter.                                                             '_




                                                                                               A final phase of the testing of MKULTR.A4products
    <..,._.._:‘.,


                                                                                         c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘




       ,-ls
        ~                                                                         places the rights and interests of U. S.‘ citizens in jeopardy.                                                                                       i




       ¢~



                                                                                         d.    Public“ disclosure of some aspects of MKULTRA_                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '




                                                              -

                                                                                  activity could induce serious adverse reaction in U. S.                                                         '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




                                                                                  public opinion, as well as stimulate offensive and defensive                                                                                      -




                                                                                  action in this field on the "part of foreign intelligence services.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I




                                                          p               _
                                                                                  3.   In recognition of the sensitivity of MKULTRA,                                             TSD was                                    »




                          I.




                                                     .   authorized exclusive control of the administration, records, and                                                                                                   .'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _




                                                     _
                                                         financial accountings of the program. Simple statements of certification
      ~_ ~-___

                                                         were all that were required of TSD to obtain advances of funds from
        .-
                    ‘_


     .v___- ..                                                                                                          L                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                 _           V
                                                                                                                                                                                     .                    -_—           -




                                                         Finance Division. The DCI's memorandum also exempted MKULTRA
            4
                                                         from audit, but this provision was modiﬁed to perrnit"lirnited audit
                                                         before the ‘end of the first year. Funding of MKULTRA was eventually
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                I




                                                         stabilized at 20 percent of TSD"s annual research andidevelopment budget.
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7



                                                _-

                                                         It has fallen in the                      neighborhood                                                          year over the ten-year                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b)(3)


   »=-.~.:_-q.c
                                                         history of the program,(f which about 30 percent has beenallocated to                                                                                                                                          i




                                                                                                                                           _3_
                                                                                                                    '




    '/3'"-*2.‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
    » .._~’..A_
_ .'.;_-            ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?




                                                                                              Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                     Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
               n                   I".                 I1                                                                               _                                                                                                                                                                                                            i

                                                                                                                   ,-                                                                          1'




                   \
                   I
                              ,



                                     .
                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                  ----=1.
                   |




                                     ('
                                                                                                                                                                                             C for MKULTRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                            _,/support of the‘                                                                                              ‘cf. ‘Tab                                                                              ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V /\



                                                                    funding record FY 60-63.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -\__-__83
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "°_"""_‘*-+...




                                                                                           The inspection of TSD activities in the field
                                                   '                                                                                                                                                .




                                                   i
                                                                              4.

                                                   fwhile
                                                                     -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




                   _'l



                                                                                              chartered under MKULTRA is discussed for reasons
                                                                                                                                                    "
                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .                             E                                                     0-00-cr                            eto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \_/\_¢\/\_/

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /U/U/U/U                           /U/U/U/U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to

                                               '
                                                                    noted below in the section of the Inspector General's Survey dealing                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _____




                                                                                   —



                                                                    with theL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            >




                                                                                                                                                                                                        rsn, cf. dis-                                                                                         U III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :




                                                                                                                                                                                               \<>r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rU‘                                                           c_,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U 00      XII1

                                                                    icussions beginning with paragraphs:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /*5‘



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U 4W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rU‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U III 00                                               c_,




                                                                    The security considerations applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    found to                                                                                  U III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .A                                                                                                  —\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rU‘                                                           c_,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _



                                                                         I.                           _                                                   _                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rU‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U III 00                                               c_,




                                                                    be signiﬁcantly different from those governing manipulation of human
                                                                     .u                                                 '   '                   '
                                                                                                                                                    '-                                                                        5p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    II_\IA\
                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                '                                                      '                                                                                                                      ‘
                                                                                               -'         .                                                   -                                                 *




                                                                                                    Manyziexternal projects
                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X



                                                                .

                                                                    behavior. a)                                                                                                            support                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fb\ f1\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fb\ f3\

                                                                                                                            being funded and managed securely outside the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WAMl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b)(§_’>)

                                                                    'MKULTRA mechanism. db) Chief, Support, TSD, believes that it may                                                                                                                              '                           '




                                                                    also be possible in the ‘future to                                                                                                    projects by                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b)(1)
                                                                                                .     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b)(3)
      >-ue-:-
                           ‘ 4'?
                                                            ‘H,-"secure methods more compatible with DD/S responsibilities.                                                                                               cl       The              '




         ._   ..-. -..




                                                                    very nature of th                                                                                                         requires that a high                                                           ~__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Iiiiif                         /T/T




                                                                    percentage of its staff contribute and be witting of each operation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 @’3-.235:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              as                       ;/;/




                                                                    security practices are tight and the Inspector Genera.l's survey recom-
                                                       '




                                               Wu
                                                            _

                                                                                                              ._                                                                                                     -_                                                                I




                                                                    mends further refinements in security procedures.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~


                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                ~




                                                                              5.       The inspection of MKULTRA projects in biochemical controls
              ..



 ._--,___                                                           of human behavior raised questions in the following area of policy and
         .    -4 in-u.
                                                                    management which are dealt with in the balance of this report:



mi   ~ t_r,.\i
                            v.
                                    <\’_
                                                                                                                                                          -       3 -                                                                                                                                                                                   ~




                            3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ii




mm
 _   p




                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                         ;-1"'....;-;:l_
.~7A_;_-                    \.
                       ‘



_~.--_.)
 >,__--‘>:
                       .




                                                                                                     Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                    i\,_        ll

                                       '
                                                                                                 l

                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                     ~-A              ...
                                                                                                                                    ..,___,
                                                                                                         ,-       -   \¢.--...l._.4
                                           I




                                                                                                                                                                                               I

                                      ('
                                                                                                     *

                                                                                                                                                                                               I

                                           W.
                                                                          at     Scope of.the MKULTRA charter:

                                                                                      (1)    Over the ten-year life of the program many                                                    ~




                                                                          additional avenues to the control of human behavior

                                                                          have been designated by the TSD management as

                                                                          appropriate to investigation under the MKULTRA charter,
                                                                      "




                                                                          including radiation, electro-shock, various fields of

                                                                          psychology, psychiatry, sociology, and anthropology,

                                                                          graphology, harrassment substances, and paramilitary

                                                                          devices and materials .
                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                          '




                                                                                                                                                              ~-                   i




                                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                             Various projects do not appear to have been
                                                                                  '


                       ,.-.
                                                                                      (2)


                                                     5,
                                                                          sufficiently sensitive to warrant waiver of normal Agency
                                                          "
                                                                  1       procedures‘forauthorization and control.1                                                    *

                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                      (3)1 Other secure channels for establishment and
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q




                                                                          funding of Agency-sterile activities have been evolved
             _   .          .   .




             '-j.'¢'_'J\.‘
         ~' i'!",1‘
          ‘-'~7'.i“i"                                                     over th;e past ten years by Deputy Director/Support (DD/S)
                                                                                       g
                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                              -


                                                                                                                                              .




                                                                          and in some cases could reasonably be employed by TSD

                                                              .           in lieu of         MKULTRA procedures.                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                               "                   ‘




                                                      In view of these developments there is substantial agreement                                                                                                                  i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I




                                                      among all parties concerned that redefinition‘ of the scope of                                                                                                       ...




                                                      lvﬂ{ULTRA is_now appropriate.                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                  V



                                                                                                                                                                                                           ._._.-.___....._....-_




                                                                          b."    MKULTRA management policies:                                                                                                 -..




                                                                                      (l)'   The original charter documents specified that                                                                    ‘:

                                                                                                                                                                                                              F




                                                                          TSD maintain exacting control of MKULTRA activities.
                 .‘.                  \
    .

    -1_.          .- .
                       M                                                                                                                                                                                   {

         _
                       I’                                                                                                                                                                                  if

    .2       ;r, -'                                                                                                                                                                                        ?l
.   _- “.-\--Q’                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -‘I




                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                    Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                 1
                    ,
                                     1   \   1




                                                                                                                 -'4_   \4'____\___J




                                                                              In so doing, ‘however,                      TSD has pursued a philosophy
                                                                              of minimum documentation in keeping with the high

                                                                              sensitivity of some of the projects.                                    Some files were
                                                                                                                                                                                                       '




                                                                              found to present a reasonably complete record, including
         L‘-..;_        ._
            -,      ~..      I




                                                                              most sensitive matters, while others with parallel 1
     _¢~‘.-1‘-,4.
 “ -            _       .    ..

     .
          .._,_.',_'.'




                                                                              objectives contained little or no data at all.                                          The lack

                                                                                                  records precluded use of routine inspection
                                                                      ¥of consistent                                                                                  _




                                                                              proceduresand raised a variety of questions concerning
                                                                  _‘                i             _
                                                                                                      "     -


                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                          4,       I—'_,          J   mil         .




                                                                                                                                                                                           if
                                                                              management and fiscal controls.
                                                                  I

                                                                                                                                                      '




                                                                                                                                                              -                            _


                                                                                                                                                          A




                                                                                -
                                                                                                                          -                   -                                   4'

                                                                                               _Lack of records essential to inspection of
                                                                      .




                                                                          _
                                                                                    .,
                                                                                         (2)                                                                                                       Q




                                                                              MKULTRA moved to the forefront among issues as the
                                 l
                                                                              present survey proceeded. Under normal circumstances

                                                                              the inspectors would have examined an inventory of dis-                                                                              \




                                                                              crediting, disabling, and lethal substances perfected-or
                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                               i

                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
          IJIA‘ _,




                                                                              procured from whatever sources. The records on
         .--I            4-.                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                               I

         ;-s'--                                      --                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                              ,




                                                                              ‘representative items would have been reviewed according

                                                                              to such standard criteria as:

                                                                                                      (a)       How were the substance and its                                                                 f

                                                                                                                "properties identified‘? ,                                _
                                                                                                                                                                              Y




                                                                                                      (b)        What researcher was selected to
                                                                                                                 perform the research, and why?

                                                                                                      (c)       When was the work begun, where,                                        ;




                                                                                                                 involving what costs, at what rate
                                                                                                                 of progress, based on what tests ?




     .--:~‘-__;~,.»
,;_=':?-'-..                                                                                                     .1‘
   '~*_.                                                                                                                       "_ ."§'\ _&U
                                                                                                                _,g?F.TS_-s     M;-1’
 4          .-
  '-1           '




                                                                                                                   ~<.»-_
                         1


                                                                                                                          '-.\¢}'\..                                                                       ’




_,-.--.. - ...




                                                                                    Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                             \\           1\                                                                    .



                                                                                                                                                                l

                                                                                  ,                                         .




                                                  .


                                                  (
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                    t
                                                      I

                                                                                        ‘

                                                                                            (d)       What are the present capabilities
                                                                                                      and limitations of the substance
                                                                                                      for clandesinte operations?

                                                                                            (e)       What further research is being
                                                                                                      conducted on this and related sub-
                                                                                                      stances a.nd how does this reﬂect
            "<11
                   -..               .
                                         ‘
                                                                                                      existing TSD capabilities, opera-
                                                                                                      tional requirements and budget factors ?
                                 -




            \--     4.




                                                                        .
                                                                                (3)   -MKULTRA records afforded no such approach
                                                                   to inspection.             There are just two individuals in TSD who
                                                                   have full substantive knowledge of the program and most

                                                                   of that knowledge is unrecorded.                             Both are highly skilled,
                                                               .
                                                                   highly motivated, professionally competent individuals.

                                                                   Part of their competence lies in their command of intel-

                                                                   ligence tradecraft.                     In protectingjthe sensitive nature of

                                                                   the American intelligence capability to manipulate human

               '--.
                                                                   behavior, they 3.pplY"'need to know" doctrine to their                                   3
      ‘   *:"‘.r- ff
           :>’~*I3-“Z

                                                                   professional associates and to their clerical assistants to

              -.                                                   a maximum degree. Conﬁdence inctheir competence and

                                                                   discretion has been a vital feature of the management of

                                                                   MKULTRA.                                                             .
                                                                                                                                            ‘




                                                                   c.        Advanced testing of MKULTRA materials:                                    ~




                                                                               It is the firm doctrine in                 TSD that testing of materials
                                                                   under accepted scientific procedures fails to disclose the

                                                                   full pattern of reactions and attributions that                              may occur
           3.‘-.;=-'




  ;;                     .       4
                                                                                                            -6-
'"-

          ,.il&<-"_='
      ‘:€"' -.9‘             .
                                                                                                               .;;:;:T.
__-_.__

                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                      Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                   I
                                  :1   1|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \




                                                                                                                        .4.:-._v           __,_ _______
                                                                                                                           '..     __'     '.            --s                                                                                          »

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D



I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \




                                                                               in operational situations.                                                TSD initiated a program for
                                                                               covert testing of'rr_1a_ter_i_a1s_ pnuunwitting
                                                                                                                     “i__"~"_’ U. S. citizens
                                                                                                    -   -
                                                                                                            '


                                                                                                                                                                                       .   ___   __>__ .             _




                                                                               in 1955.
                                                                               _____'_,__-   _...
                                                                                                            The present report reviews the rationale and

                                                                               risks attending this activity and recommends termination‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '




               ‘-1                                                             of such testing in the United'States, cf. paragraphs 10-18
                            A.‘
    ~11.




                                                                               below.
                                                                                                                '


                                                                       4




                                            II.               Modus Operandi                                                                         ~

                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                           _       _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .       4




                                                                           The research and development of materials ‘capable of producing
                                             '




                                                                  6.
                                                              '




                                                          _




                                            behavioral or physiological change in humans is now performed within
                                                     .:                         _
                                                                                                                    .                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                                                                                                           _.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V




                                            a highly elaborated and stabilized MKULTRA structure. The search
                                                                                             ,                                                                                 -
                                                 _                                                                                                             _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ___




                                            for new materials; e. g. , psilocybin from Mexican mushrooms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ._._-._..l...__..._




                                            fungi occurring in agricultural crops, is conducted through standing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i




                                            arrangements with specialists in universities, pharmaceutical houses,                                                                                                                             _           _~=-H-»__.a.-......




                                            hospitals, state and federal institutions, and private research organi-
                                                                           '




                       “:--E


                                            zations who are authorities in the given field of investigation in their
               .       I,   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ._




                                            own right. Emnual grants of funds are made under ostensible research                                                                                                                                  ‘




                                            foundation auspices to the specialists located in the public or quasi-public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )-;




                                                                                    This approach conceals from the institution the interest of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l;



                                            institutions.

                                            CIA and permits the recipient to proceed with his investigation, publish
                                            hisfindings (excluding intelligence implications), and account for his

                                            expenditures in a manner normal to his institution.                                                                                A number of the
                                            grants have included funds for the construction and equipping of restearclij


     __...,.                                                                                                              -~                -r7.=-~
                                                                                                                                     -,
                                                                                                                                      ~.
                                                                                                                                                ,4..     _,
     -§*>.'.E.                                                                                                                 .,__,,>          ~...u.....:
      ~    '   '--           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ﬁr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                      Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                               Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515


                                       .-I
                                                                                                ""                     c"":-"=*-‘;~".‘"
                                                                                           _'          --'~'       '-.'-\-:\l-1‘



                                                             facilities and for the employment of research assistantsJKey individuals
                                                         I




                                                             must qualify for top secret clearance and are made witting of Agency
                                                             sponsorship.C‘_\s a rule each specialist is managed unilaterally and is

               --':‘.l=_'
               .
                     ,';;»__._\;-._,
                                                 *           not witting of Agency support of parallel MKULTRA research in his
                     '.1’5»:_=-‘-.




                          A             ...
                                            5‘
                                                             field.      The system in effect "buys a piece" of the specialist in order to
                   ._.=§=:»

                                                     ,
                                                             enlist his aid in pursuing the intelligence implications of his researchﬂ

                     _
                                  .,.
                                                 .
                                                             His services typically includesystematic search of the scientific                                            ~_




                    _"~       -.‘. 5'
                   .552“. q-'


                                                                             procurement of materials, their propagation, and the appli—
                    .'.‘;'.‘!’#~"



                    ._
                          _
                              _
                                             .               literature,
                   0-.71‘
                         :7.
                                                             cation of test dosages to animals and under some circumstances to
                                        1'




                                   I
                                                             volunteer human subjects.          No quarrel is found with the rationale of                                           _




                                  1



                                                             this program to, the extent that it fits the original                                     MKULTRA charter.         _




                                                             However, for-inspection purposes, there were lacking records, year

                                                             by year, of the progress of each projectpand the recorded judgments                                                        »




                                                             of the project monitors on operational benefits vis-a—vis costs.                                         '




                                                                    .
                                                                        7.[i['he funding of sensitive                    MKULTRA projects by sterile grants                                 .




    .




               .'-§»$‘.=}-1.?
                                                                                                                                  ‘I
                                                                                                                                       V
                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                           _.             I»,

                                                             in aid as noted in the preceding paragraph disclosed one of the principal
              ;-_¢,=.5:                2‘




                                                             controversial aspects of this prograi-n3_'_';Ihe original charter of _h/HIKULTRA
               _"J':I| ,'.


                                                             assumed that the sensitivity of activities would be sufficient to justify
                                                             both a) special protection for the researcher; and b) compartmentation
                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                       1          '
                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                             of   MKULTRA knowledge within the Agency. On this basis the inherent
                                                             safeguards of DD/S procedures were waived, the DD/S was not consulted
I




          .~ 1:11-—r




                                                             in the design of the     MKULTRA rmnagement system, and established Agency

          .   \n~aa~
                                                                                                 ___     ..                 ._
                                                                                                                                 -.~__ -~
              —.-                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                   _     ',, 1-: §_. 5.1                                                        1
                          -..-_=                                                                                         'v'-a\~.\.-4
               e ,_.
                     V
                                                                                                               I
          .

        -'20-=-a-.-<
             ~-   .-
-       "r»§'al=.-I:-'

         -~.'>‘*.'_;-7
        '-A41-a‘.v;~§




                                                                               Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                    Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

                                                       i".
                                                       1'
                                                                            ~'          '                '
                                                                                                                               -           .
                                                                                                                                                        .


                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                             _




                                                                                      -_—'_-\__
                                                             I


                                                                 --I
                                                                  ,.   .,-
                                                                        I
                                                                                      \._.,    _,.T
                                                                                      ~.¢'_-..|'...._
                                                                       4_




                             audit procedures were waived.                                  In the subsequent administration of

                             the program, however,               TSD has found it feasible to contract for some
                             ofhthe research on MKUL'_[‘R.A objectives in accordance with prescribed

                             DD/S procedures. The DD/S, inturn, has evolved various secure
                             systems for the funding of sensitive activities.                                                                  It appears feasible
       .-sq -.1 --zi
    '-sslszqll
        ..-.,-.~-




                             and appropriate, therefore, to propose that the DD/S be consulted

                             during the re-chartering of MKULTRA in the design of an administrative

                             Sxstem that does justice to his responsibilities as well as to the manage-
                             ment and security requirements of TSD. The Inspector General
                             accordingly has recoznmendedﬁt the end of this reppi-t that the no/s
                                                                 ‘

                                     \                                                                                                                                          _




                             be consulted in the re-design of the system: that the Chief, Support,

                             TSD, be assigned responsibility for the day-to-day support of MKULTRA
           ~*        1
                             and that the latterconstitute a bridge to the DD/S for monitoring the

                             future evblution of the systemg
                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                            '           '
                                                                                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                 '



                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                           V           _



                                                                                                                                                                    g




                     1.‘?
                             -   -
                                         8.   The next phase of the MKULTRA program involves physicians,
                             toxicologists, and other specialists in mental, narcotics, and general
                .~




                             hospitals and in prisons, who are provided the products and findings of

                             the basic-research projects and proceed with intensive testing on human

                             subjects.         These specialists are also recipients.for ‘testing purposes of

                             the flow of new products from pharmaceutical laboratories.                                                                                 Materials
    -- ,.qx-:.-;-.
                             and procedures with intelligence potential may be identified through this


                                                                                            -9-                        A




           _-|-_n\-.~
            ~
                -;.-.'                                                           *_              H
                                                                                                     _,.-_»-'-"I
     .~;T-65>’ '-
     ->-ix;-'.'§2
                                                                                 '
                                                                                            i’       Q..-'~...;\L-                 .



     I _;q‘-\!‘~1

      "I-‘Z“-..
       ._.   _.
                Q
                         .

       _
     -==».<1"*.:'~
    ...._.._...
I




                                                    Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
'
                                        1
                                            ,   ‘           1   I                                      >   -




                                                                                                           r




                                                                                                               .7.     _ \.¢-\4.\'-a
                                                                                                                     -It
                                                                                                                         ':~"-..'"o:T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                    I




                                                                                                 The testing programs are conducted under accepted
                                                        '


                                                                                relationship.

                                                                                scientific procedures including the use of control populations,_ the

                                                                                employment of placebos, and the detailed observation, measurement,
                  ..   .-
                                                                                                                                    .                                                           '




                                                                                recording, analysis, and publication of findings.                                         Where health permits,
    \
                  =1"*;"i.Z
                    rw
             - ‘ u‘$,;\>,'                                                      test subjects are voluntary participants in the program.                                                                          '




                 L1 .. _-       .-.5‘




                                    .
                                                                                      9.    A current development in the testing of new products is the
                                                                                tightening of controls over dosages and procedures by the U. S. Eood

                                                                                and Drug Administration. Since MKULTRA ﬁles contained no docu-

                                                                                mentation on this subject, it was not possible to appraise the signifi-
                                                                    .
                                                                                                   .




                                                                                cance of this development for MKULTRA‘pbjectives_. However,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .,,                    '
                                                                        ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '_



                                -
                                                                                interviews with the TSD officers concerned indicated that the new rules

                                                                            are affecting procedures and causing controversy in research hospitals
                                                                                and pharmaceutical houses'.tThe TSD officers have close relationships
                  ~
                            -

                                                                            with key individuals in many of the leading U. S. pharmaceutical houses

                                                                            and count on their continued close cooperation in obtaining materials
                                                                            and services deemed vital to U. S. intelligence.                                                           --                     -



                                                                                                                                                                          !                           I

                 ,_._-~

                                                                                            The final phase of testing of MKULTRA materials involves
                                                                            .                                                                                                      '


                                                                                                                                                                                                          _




                                                                                      10.

                                                                            their application to unwitting subjects in normal life settings.                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                    It was

                                                                            noted earlier that the capabilities of MKULTRA substances to produce

                                                                            disabling or discrediting effects or to increase the effectiveness of

             ..,_,_,-.___                                                   interrogation of hostile subjects cannot be established solely through
                                                                                                                                                                      ¢



                                                                            -testing on volunteer populations.                                 Reaction and attribution patterns are

                                                <5                                                                                       -19..-A
                  ',_?;.w
                            '
                                                                                                                           .-- ,-               -.;- ,._'\-_--an
                                                                                                                              .'
                                                                                                                                         _      ~~   -.,   __;   .0
        ~~;-;-»*:r:                                                                                                                     '.»'
                                                                                                                                                ~..‘5..~..a\i.l,
            .!ﬁf".\§.!‘:

            .;'F’_-‘.7. ~43-



             .
                  .‘._..
        _




                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
i

                                             I‘.               Il                                                                                                                                     -




                                                       _                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                   i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                v



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                            4       ..- ,-.               _--- /~_-- ---~
                                               '
                                                           '                                                                         =               _,   \. '.|       ~       -I
                                                                                                                                             ~..»_¢‘      »-.2\.-- -~--J



                                               C                                 clearly affected when the testing is conducted in an atmosphere of

                                                                                 confidence under skilled medical supervision.




                                                                                 W
                                                                                         ll.           TSD, therefore, entered into an informal arrangement

                                                                                with certain cleared and witting individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics

                                                                                 in 1955 which provided for the release of                                                               MKULTRA materials for                                             -




                                                                                               '                        '

                         :1            ,.                                                                                                                                                                         '




                                                                                 such testing as those ird ividuals deemed desirable and feasible.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          p                       _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The
                                                                                initial arrangement obtained the services‘ of a senior representative

                                                                                of the Bureau and one of his assistants on the West Coast.’                                                                                       A parallel
                                                                    -
                                                                                arrangement was established on the East Coast in 1961. The Director
                                                       .
                                                                                     -




                                                                                "of the Bureau has_ been briefed on the activity,
                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _.‘,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1



                                                                                                                                                                                                     but the Deputy Chief,

                                                                                TSD, who has guided MKULTRA from its inception, is of the opinion
                                                                                -that the formei-__would disclaim all knowledge and responsibility in

                                                                                the event of compromise.                                 The MKULTRA program directorthas, in

                  _     A_
                                                                    »
                                                                                fact, provided close supervision of the testing program from the beginning
                      :__._'_.                                                                                      .                            .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _               .




                                                                                and makes periodicvisits to the sites. The sum of @0, Oﬂllkias been
        B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                      ,'~'                                       ‘                                                                                                                                                         t




                                                                                                   ‘
                                                                            V
                                                                                                         4                      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -I
                                                                                                                                         V




                                                                        .
                                                                                provided annually to each of the two projects to cover cost of cultivation
                                                                                                              ~&.
                                                                                of targets" and of maintenance of a safehouse in each area for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '




                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                observation of effects of substances on selected test individuals.

                                                                                         12.           The particular advantage of these ar.r'a.ngerrients with the                                                                                            A




                                                                                Bureau of Narcotics officials has been that test subjects could be sought
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1

                                 .-




                _,~4_,.7,,                                                      and cultivated within the setting of narcotics control. Some subjects



                                                                                                                                                              - 11 -
                                               Q
                                                           _




         -nnlnuu                                                                                                                                "’\                    "' "‘~". ""
                                                                                                                                                .=J&'§~_-c;";_'1
                                                                                                                                                                   <




    !                        _:;
            -   ¢eZ3*».‘
                ‘.5:
        ~"*"'*-"'
                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                 _

                                                                                                                                                                           “
                                                                                                                                                                                    ..   .                .._-._          .   _



                                                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
               ‘   -       I   I                                                                                            .




                                                                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                               "                      t/"\.-*-- .                                                                                »
                                                                                                                 '.
                                                                           ~



                                                                                         '“-
                                                                                          _
                                                                                                      '-\.,i‘.,'_
                                                                                                             ,




                                       have been informers or_mernbers of suspect criminal elements from
                       '
           '




                                       whom the Bureau has obtained results of operational value through the
                               '


                                       tests.    On the other hand, the effectiveness of the substances on                                                            -




                                       individuals at all social levels, high and low, native American and

                                       foreign, is of great signiﬁcance and testing has been performed on a
                                                  _




                                       variety of individuals within these categories.                                                                    .




                                                13.   A significant limitation on the effectiveness of such testing
                                       is .the infeasibility of performing scientific observation of results.

                                       The Bureau agents are not qualified scientific observers. Their                                            .                            .




                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                       subjects are seldom accessible beyond the first hours of the test.                                                                     The
                                                                                                  .                                                                       _




                                       testing may be useful in perfecting delivery techniques, and in identifying

                                       surface characteristics of onset, reaction, attribution, and side-effect.
                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘H




                                       In a. number of instances, however, the test subject has become ill for

      .'
                                       hours or" days, including hospitalization in at least one case, and the                                                                      _




                                       agent could only follow-up by guarded inquiry after the test subject's

                                       return to normal life. Possible sickness and attendant economic loss‘
                                                                                                                                                                                             \
                                       are inherent contingent effects of the testing.
                                                               _
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                          '



                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                  A




                                                14.   The MKULTRA program officer stated that the objectives of
                                       covert testing concern the field of toxicology rather th'an medicine;

      ,-                           _   further-, that the program is not intended to harm test individuals,                                                                   and

       .                               that the medical “consultation and assistance is obtained when appropriate

                                       through separate MKULTRA arrangements.                                                   The risk of compromise of

                                                                                                - 12
 :‘>,
 35:‘:
                                                                                                Q —,\_W "- F
                                                                               --                                     .-.
 vs}-‘y-_
.‘;:;i.;
.-
_-_ ..,
                                                                               ;
                                                                               -
                                                                                    _




                                                                                        -.¢-_
                                                                                          .
                                                                                          _
                                                                                              4 \---\-¢A\h
                                                                                                      '--1
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                 .-   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     E




                                                        ~
                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                               Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
           1                              'n-           I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                .                                                                                       »




                                                                                                                                                        ‘ .. ,
\




                                                                                                                -I,-an               4,...     -

                                                                                                                     _.*   1.        '\_~...           .‘   ‘._   '




                                            (
                                                    .
                                                                                                            \


                                                            the program through correct diagnosis of aniillness by an unwitting

                                                            medical specialist is regularly considered and is stated to be a

                                                            governing factor in the decision to conduct the given test. The

        ,1-4,. .,                                           Bureau officials also maintain close working relations with local
    1;, ‘-‘.1:
                1                  :14’




                                                            police authorities which could be utilized to protect the activity in

                                                            critical situations.
                                                                                                                                                   ‘
                                                                                                        '




                                                            '


                                                                4                   15.    There have been several discussions in the public press in
                                                            recent months on the use of certain MKULTRA-type drugs to inﬂuence

                                                            human behavior. Broadly speaking, these have argued that research
                                                                                                    '




                                                            knowledge of" possible adverse effects of such substances on human                                                                            .




                                                            beings is inadequate, that some applications have done serious harm,

                                                            and that professional researchers in medicine and psychiatry are split

                                                            on the ethics of performing such research. Increasing public attention

                                                            to this subject is to be expected.
                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                         .
           .
                                                                                                                                                                      A‘            '__
                                                                                                                                                                               _




                             '~.




                                                                                    16. 'The final step in the research and development sequence is
                                                                            '




                                                                    Q



                                                            the delivery of MKULTRA materials into the MKDELTA control system
                                                                                -     ~.
                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘




                                                            governing their employment in clandestine operations. The subject is

                                                            discussed further in the next sectinn; however, it is appropriate here                                                                            _




                                                            to note that the employment of      MKDELTA materials remains an art
                                                                rather than a scientific procedure. A significant number of variables

                                                                in the target individual, including age, sex, weight,                                                      general health,

                                                                social status, and personality structure, may account for widely varying

    5 _;._~..,_.‘.
                                            Q               and unpredictable reactions to a given drug in a given dosage._
                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                            "T
       _
    ...~_-.1;
    -'<s_-;-
       - 4:-
                43,’
                    -_
                                   -
                                                                                                                                               13 -..
        v...   \.
                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                _"              -.    -..-.4...-t'..-1_




                                                                                               Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

                                                     I


                                                              0




                               l7.        The final stage of covert testing of materials on unwitting

                      subjects is clearly the most sensitive aspect of MKULTRA.                                              No
                      effective cover story appears to be available.                              TSD officials state
                      that responsibility for covert testing is transferred to the Bureau. of
           .~1':


                      Narcotics. Yet they also predict that the Chief of the Bureau would
      ..:';_-_   4




                      disclaim any knowledge of the activity. Present practice is to maintain

                      no records of the planning and approval of test programs. The prin-
                      cipal responsibiliiry for the propriety of such testing rests with the

                      MKULTRA program director andthe Deputy Chief of TSD- The
                                                 '


                                                                                      ~
                                                                                          '
                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                 »



                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                              -.9
                                                                                                                                    it
                                                                                                                                         t




                                                                                                                                             .       .




                      handling of test subjects in the last. analysis rests with the Narcotics                                                           _




                      agent working alone. Suppression of knowledge of critical results from                                                                     .




                           .   -
                                   ..-‘                  -.                -
                                                                                                         -                                       -




                                           and CIHAC management is an inherent riskin these operations.‘
                                                                  p
                                                                                              _




                      the top                                                                                                                                                                           4




                                          Final phasetesting of MKULTRA substances or devices on
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I




                       1       18.                                                                                                                           '



                                                                                                                                                                                                    \




                                                                                                                                                                                                    <




                     unwitting subjects is recognized to be an activity of genuine irnportance
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I




            v
           1.

                     in the development of some but not all MKULTRA products.                                            -


                                                                                                                             Termination
                     of such testing would have some, but an essentially indeterminate, effect

                     on the development of operational capability in this field.
                                                                                                                                                                                 i

                                                                                                                 Of more                                                             i‘




                     c ritical significance, however, is the risk of serious damage to the
                                                                                                                                                                         §

                                                                                                     1
                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                         r




                     Agency in the event of compromise of the true nature of this activity.
                     As now performed under Bureau of Narcotics auspices, non-Agency                                                                                     _..-._._,.---1-H.»-»~=»—




                     personnel are necessarily fully witting of the true nature and signficance:
                                                                                                                                                                         i



                     of their assignments, and of the sponsorship of CIA.                                    Compromise of
                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                     b


     ‘<-




 .   :.~\:'-
                                                                      ..       14 _
      + "'r --I

-n-1-as-..a.
                                                                                                                                                                     I



                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                    1
                                            0       ,       ;


                                                                                                                                                                                               e




                         /                      (                   this information intentionally or unwittingly by these individuals at some
    '




1
                                                                                                                                         v




                                                                    time in the future is a hazard that cannot be ruled out.                                                     A test subject
                                                                    may on some occasion in the future correctly attribute the cause of his
                                                                    reaction and secure independent professional medical assistance in
                                                                                                                                                   '


                                                                    identifying the exact nature of the substance employed, and by whom.

                                                                    An extreme reaction to a test substance could lead to a Bureau request                                                                                        \




                                                                    for cooperation from local authorities in suppressing information of the

                                                                ,
                                                                    situation.          This would in turn broaden the circle of individuals who

                                                                    possessed at least circumstantial evidence of the nature of the activity.
                                                                                                                     .               .


                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1up
                                        0                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                                                             .




                                                                    Weighing possible benefits of such testing against the risks of compromise
                                                                                                                                                            _




                                                                    and of resulting damageto CIA has led the Inspector General to recommend

                                                                    termination of this phase. of the MKULTRA program- Existingcchecks

                                                                    and balances on the working level management of such testing do not                                                                           »




                     _          p
                                                                    afford the senior command of CIA adequate protection against the high                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~




                Jtmﬂéﬂi
                  .,.-..-q
                                                                                    _
                                                                                            '           -~
                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                   -

                 _                                                   _                                                       _
                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                       ._                                                     .




                                                                    risks involved.
                                                                                                                                                            '



                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a




                                                                                 l9.Et does not follow that termination of covert testing of MKULTRA
                                                        w

                                                                    materials on unwitting U. S. citizens will bring the program to a. halt.
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      »




                                                                    Some testing on foreign nationals has been occurring under the present
                                                                    arrangements. Various U. S. deep cover agents overseas would appear

                                                                    to be more favorably situated than the U. S. narcotics agents to perform_
                         ..,.                                            .
                                                                             I                                                                                      ‘_




                                                                    realistic testingl Finally, the operational use of the substances clearly

                                                                    serves the testing function in view of the" lack of predictability of human                 i




                                                                                                             -



            \




                __g___                                              reactions .
            p




                                                (

        r




                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                             - 1-5 -



                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

                                                                                1"




                                                    III.       Current estimate of the MKULTRA/MKDELTA capability

                                                               20.‘    The present Deputy Chief of TSD, Dr? Sidney Gottlieb,
                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                      A

                                                                                            .




                                                    in his then capacity of scientific advisor to the Deputy Director/Plans

                                                    (DD/P), released a study (hereafter referred to as the Gottlieb report)
‘




                                       -1--
                » ,4\                      :_
                .

              -~s>'%*‘*:1ii
                            /I                      on Z1 April'1960, covering his six—mon_tl'i investigation of "Scientific
                        X                   .

                            v~              ..
                                       .

                                                    and Technical Problems in Covert Action Operations". Appendix B
                                                .




                                                    of the report was entitled,           "The Applicability of Special Chemicals and

                                                    Biologicals :5 Oandestiinei Operations".                  The inspectors found this
                                                    Appendix to be acarefully prepared and very useful treatment of the                                                             I

                                                                                                                                                                                    I




                                                                       -                                       -
                                                           _                                                       .              .
                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                          ‘I
                                                                                                                                                      _,'
                                                                      The remaining paragraphs draw on the Gottlieb report, take
                                                       .
                                                                                                                              .




                                                    subject.

                                                    account of developments since that date, and discuss management
                                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                    and funding aspects of MKULTRA.
                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                              0                '
                                                                                                                        ~                 -       4   ~                         1
                                                                                                                                      ~



                                                                                                          _




                                                               Zl.    The author opened his discussion with the question of what
                                       -4


                                                    the‘ operational returns had been from an eight-year program involving
                                                                                                                                                                                1



                                                                                                                                                                                I

                                                                                                                                                                                \




                    .   ..--.>__-'_-
                                   4.. .
                        _
                             _g_




              -~n".' 14.5.
               _.. .._;..._€
          <E__\‘§'g‘P’t‘{:I
                                            ‘
                                                    an investment of                                                   He observed that the                            (b)(3
              '.~‘-‘?‘:-               "


                   ':'-
               .+.



                                                    Clandestine Services had encouraged TSD on various occasions to

                                                    develop and maintain the operational capability in special drugs and
                “H.-
              ; I .1
                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                é




                                                    chemicals but that -TSD had received little or no guidance in directing                                                 fa


                                                                                                                                                                            K
                                                                                                                                                                            :




                                                    the work and that the Clandestine Services had up to that time shown
                                                                                                                                                                            1_|
                                                                                                                                                                            \




                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                            l’




                                                    little inclination to use the end products                operationally.          He indicated                          f


                                                                                                                                                                            ?




          _-_ ,..¢,.
                                                    that there had been approximately 100 operations over the eight years


                                                                                                -15-
         >---..
          -
               .....L ..
         " =~.">?T"
                                                                                                S-‘ii?-LET‘
          I-,.~.'-fr--.

         .».,
          -   ._
             -r ‘;;.
        ,*f_{§.;.:..'.

                            N;
    '                              '
        :1.-u.i.§7
    =‘}¢1;



                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

I
                                                                                                      r"




                                                            employing harrassmentmaterials (not controlled under the MKDELTA

                                                            regulation) and only nine operations employing disabling drugs, (NB:

                                                            two-thirds of these involved the use of drugs in interrogations’).                                                                 No
                                                            use of lethal substances was reported.                                                                               _




                                                                          22.           The factors -accounting for the low rate of use of this capa-

                                                            bility were considered to be the fol1owing:_
                                                                                                                                                                         -                          i
                                                                                                                                          .




                                                        I
                                                    n



                                                                                            the technical shortcomings of the drugs
                              ~.
                                   ’
                                                    I                                    a.                                                                      -                    -




                                                                                         b. the; problem of testing in realistic pilot operations
                                                                                -




                                                                                              _




                                                                                         c. limitations on the dissemination of pertinent                                             -




                                                                                            information to operations officers
                                                                                    i



                                                                                                                                                  »




                                                                                         d. organizational and administrative restrictions on                                                   _




                              \                                                                   operations
                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                             -


                                                                                                                                                                                     ._
                                                                                                                                                  MKDELTA
                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                                                         ,




                                                                                         e. negative attitudes toward the use of              materials
                                                                                                                _




                                                _

                                                                                         f. problems in the training of case officers in this field M
                                                                                         g. the risk of stimulating increased use of                           MKDELTA
                                                                                                    materials by opposition intelligence services                                         _'




                                                              »
                                                                          23.           Technical shortcomings of the drug-s:_                        -_




                                                                                         As of 1960 no effective knockout pill, truth serum, aphro-
                                                                      .   disiac, oisrecruitment pill was known to exist.                                  _
                                                                                                                                                               MKDELTA was                                  _




             2-           —
                                        '                         s
                                                                          described "as inherently a high-risk, low-yield field of operations 0                                                                        P

                                                                          Three years later the situation remains substantially unchanged,                                                                         \



                                                              ~
                                                                          with the exception that real progress has been made in the use of

                                                                          drugs in support of interrogation. Ironically, however, the

                                                                          progress here has occurred in the development of a total psycho-

                                                                          logical theory of interrogation, in which the use of drugs has been
                          -.=\         1»
                                                                          relegated to a support role.                         ‘_
                                                                                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /\/-\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w_\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       @'\./\/




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          66%?



                                                    (..k                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i_ /\/-\

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xx ()0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~ ,/-_’
                  --.-_.
                      ' 5’.
                              '.§:.                                                                                                 17-
                                                                                                                    ‘-
                                                                                                                             CIPZP
                 .'>lI'3¢:I-5'5                                                                                 '
                          ’ 1"
                                                                                                                         -§.~.,.;I
                      .

                                       H’
             .-\,f--Qﬂw

             l
                              4.. _; .
    .
                 -_            _/_          7
                  ‘

        __
                              ‘I
                                   cu



                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
._                                                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                           I
                                                   \              3




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                            f




                                                                                                                                                                 "'               "                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                        -;.
                                                                                                                                              an       ‘
                                                                                                                                                           -1:


                                                                                                                                         I         -             ...   -




                                 -(p                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b)(1 )1
                                                                             g, ‘/K                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (b)(3)
                                                                       .1‘




1




                                                                  I

                             .
                                                                  I
                                                         _




                 '       '

                                                                  I
           ‘,        Z.              ;,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i




F




                                                             '1

                                                             .
                                                             .



                                                             i




                ..,                                                                   ~

                                                                                              24.       The problem of testing in realistic pilot operations:                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .¢
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               »

                                                                                                    _




                                                                                                          This subject has been discussed above, beginning with

                                                                                              paragraph 10.             4
                                                                                                                                It should also be noted that testing on operational


                                                                                              targets overseas is considered by some operationsofficers to
                                                                                                           '

                     ‘                                                                                                                        .                                                                   .




                                                                                              be quite impracticable. Unilateral operations are imperative
                                                                                 '




                                                                                              which substantially complicates the delivery problern. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '




                                                                                          _




                                                                                              possibilities of unexpected or critical reactions in test subjects

       "
                                                                                              and of ensuing compromise of the activity make most senior
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i




                                                                                              command personnel unwilling to take the risks involved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I




                                                                      L.       _'_V                                                                                                                                        ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _,../~
                                                                                              25.       Limitations on the dissemination of pertinent information "to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                                                                          I       1           .




                                 _
                                                                                              case officers; organizational and administrative restrictions on
     .-_-..¢
                 "
                                                                                              ope rations:          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                          '




            H
                                                                                                          The present-day situation concerning both of these problem
                                               Y                                              areas is improved over 1960.                                            TSD now regularly briefs a variety
                                                   <4:

                                                                                                                                       MC-
                                                                                                                                                             - 1a -
                                                                                                                                       _,._._          _
                                                                                                                                                           ,_    .'
                                                                                                                                                                           .




                                                                                                                                                                       c.;'.__;       ~




                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                   .

     E.-    -,




                                                                                                               Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                      Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                  I       ‘               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘




                                              -

                              I                                                    .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,




                                                                                                                  __,'        .\    _..'._              u~~§~_P§
                                                                                                                  ¢                '\.-L-‘*\_..'.L-1




                                                                                       of senior officers‘0n its              MKDELTA capability. Approval of                                                                                                      ~




                                                                                                      MKDELTA materials is now accomplished within
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       »


                                                                                       the use of

                                                                                       the chain of command of ‘the DD/P.                                                            The DD/P may consult,                                                         5;‘




                                                                                   for example, with the Chief, Medical Staff, concerning
                                                                                                                          I


                                                                                   medical risks involved in MKDELTA operations, but the

                                                                                   latter surely would not expect to exercise final authorityfor
                                                                   '




                                                                                   the disapproval of operations.                                                                                     -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




                                                              ~/                   26.      TSD has found that TDY visits of MKULTRA officersto the                                                                                                                          "‘"~
                                                      I
                                                                                                                               ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -                      \_\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                      l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .



                                                              field in support of specific operations increases the awareness of the
                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                      _             ..                                    -

         -.1                                                           _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -4~
                                                              MKDELTA capability and stimulates proposals for-additional projects                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                           ~                                                                         v
                                                                                                             .




                                                              Of equal significance, however, has been the TSD decision 111 1961 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I                                                      ,.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _\~.?




                                                                                            ~-
                                                              station 111                                                                                                                                                 ‘officer who is
                                                                           -            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <;b><>
                                                                                                                                                                                             --
                                                                                                           l_.                     _,                                              -~_   _            -.-~---.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kb Q)
                                                                               -
                                                                                                  .                                                                                               -                          ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘Z /T                          ‘Z




                                                              informed on MKDELTA matters.                                                 A second officer is scheduled to
         ~_                                                   move PCS                                           during the summer of 1963 tosupportgand                                                                                                                       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _




                                      l
                                                  ,
                                                              adjacent stations. While the principal responsibility of these officers

                                                              lies in the field‘                                                                                                  the arrangement in                                                                                                                                        m \/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \/ /\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CT                  00
                                                                                                                                                                              '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C C
                                                              has proved useful in the MKDELTA field--notably in interrogation--as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \\_/                           \\_/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -//'\



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /»




                                                              well.                    It now appears that increased reliance can be placed on this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                              approach to promoting responsible use of the MKDELTA capabilitie‘s__._____~’
                                              \                                                                                                                                                   .                                                            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                                                                              1»-*




                                                                                   Z7.      Negative attitudes toward the use of MKDELTA materials;

                                                              problems in the training of case officers in this field:

                                                                                                The l960Eott1ie%eport observed that some case officers

      7..-....-_
                                                                                   have basic moral objections to the concept of MKDELTA and                                                                                                                                                                                            Y


        :v~_~
                '
                    _'   4
       3-.    -13".‘
      _.-           2;‘-
      --.-{:5-\1‘.l"


                                                                                                                                   an                               ~_,.
      EA                                                                                                                             (/1
                                                                                                                                           ~ (‘P
                '\- \    -.
                                                                                                                                           .._,,.


                                                                                                                                                                    .5.




    *1-‘=.1='2.-.:~.
                                                                                                                                                           ,_~iTJ




    >1-wr-_"                                                                                                                                                        .-.
    .'."::~'r'_-‘                                                                                                                                   1




l




                                                                                                      Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                         Approved for Relea Se: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                       I   '
                 ll


                                                                                                                                                          -

                                                                                                                                                 .    I


                                                                                                                                                     -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                             therefor e refuse to use the materia ls .                           Some senior officers
                                                                             were reported togbelieve that the pr 0 p er employment of the
                                                                             capability required more ‘sophistication than most case

                                                                             officers possessed and that there would be a tendency toward

                                                                             over—reliance on and misuse of drugs in lieu of perfecting
                                                                '



            ‘.1 ‘--'.
                 . _v_a
             _
               p-._-_          _
                      ‘F
        »~+-A.
                 I

                                                                                                                                                          was suggested that
                               f


                                                                             classic espionage techniques.                     F:inally,         it

                                                            '




                                                                    .
                                                                             MKDELTA controls were so restrictive as to have generated
                                                                                                                                                                               ‘
                                                                                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                                                             _

                                                                                                                                                 _




                                                                             a general defeatism among case o£_ficers concerning the chances
                                                                                                                                                                                           H




                                                                .            of gettiingiapproval for use of materials in routine rather than

                                                                        __
                                                                             extreme situations. These matters will be reviewed in future
                                                    .




                                                                             ﬁeld inspections of DDI P area divisions.Kn. the meanwhile,‘                              '           '
                                                                                                       ~                                                                   »
                                                                                                               .                                                                                           I




                                                                             the stationing of qualiﬁed TSD consultants in the field and
                                                                                                                                                                                                           I




                                                                                                                                                                                               A




                                                                    A




                                   I




                                                                             increasing operational experiencewill tend to develoapfover time

                                                            I
                                                                             a category. of case officerswho have acquired direct appu-ecgiation
                                                                                                                                                                                                   N

    1'-=.?">;~t
       ._ -_.
                                                                             of the jgcztential anﬁ lirnitatlionsiof the                     MKDELTA c-apabili.ty.j
        -'-‘-.'..A<
                      _. .


                                                                                                                                                                   MKDELTA rnaterials
        .,,_-__‘



                                                                             Z8.     _The r isk of stimulating increased use of
                                                                                                           g




                                               v




                                                   by oppositio'n intellige nce services:                                         V                           __




                                                                                     <

                                                                                         Theéotﬂiegeport stated that opposi'tion intelligence
                                                                             services are active in the MKDELTA field and recommended                                                  -




                                                                             that the CI Staff of the DD/P conduct a systematic study of the
                                                        I




                                                                             evidence.       This recommendation has not been implemented.

                                                                             It is   a subject of increasing significance as new materials and
                                                                                                                   '




                           I

                                                                             te chnique s beco me available.
                      1                                                                        A




                 g


    -1»:-._._.
    -   =   '.i*'I'E*:
    -1;.-£5‘
.   1-~r..           ._                                                                                                l-   \:~-*\~.\._.j.
                 ‘\



                                                                                         Approved for Release: 2 019/O4/03 CO6767515
                                                                           \
                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                            -       -~-                      ,__.              __              ,_
                                                                                                                          ~_
                                                                                                             r.




                                                                                                                          3, ..'_.u
                                                                                                                                     :1"



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘~/

                                 <*
                                                     It is    recommended that:                                                                                                                                 '




                                                t
                                                               Deputy Director /Plans instruct Chief, CI Staff, to

                                            X
                                                     perform a study of the evidence of use of MKDELTA                                                                                                                                                                             ‘




                                                     materials by opposition intelligence services and recommend

                                                     appropriate measures for training DD/P case officers to
                                                                                                                                                              _                                         \


           uh-»¥                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                     recognize and counter hostile activity in this area.                                                                                    '




                                                     Z9. In summary, present evidence concerning the operational

                                          value of the MKDELTA capability 'would'appea.r_ to‘ confirm the principal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            _




                                          judgments of the 1960E§’ottlieﬂ-eport. There is an extremely low rate.

                                          of operational use of the controlled materials.
                                                                                                                                                                      En the other hand,
                                          signiﬁcant progress has been achieved in the development of an inter-

   A




                         g
                                      .   rogation theory employing chemical substances, and in providing com-                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘i




                                          petent guidance to the field in MKDELTA matters through TSD_ officers                                                                                                                                                             ;




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




                                          "working overseas.                        '
                                                                                                  '                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                                                                                 -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i




                                                    Management of MKULTRA
                             ’




                                          IV.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _.~...-




                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1




                                                    30.      TSD has initiatedﬁljigprojects relating to the control of human                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _<,,,.,.»-.




                                          behavior; i. e.                                                                                                                             Rduring the ten
                                                                iv
                                          years of operation of the MKULTRA program. Lllwenty-five (Z5) of these                                                                                                                                     --»--.~_-




                                          projects remain in existence at the present time‘, while a number of others
                                                                                                                                                                      _                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                              '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f



                                          are in various stages of termination.                                                                                                                                                          _.....‘=,__-'__...




                                                    31.      Active projects may be grouped under the following arbitrary                                                                                                                -_.....-




                                                                                                                                     -21-

  __...,--4                                                                                                                                         ..-
                                                                                                                               ‘,,
           Y‘      '4                                                           '
                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                               ‘-
                                                                                                                                           _

                                                                                                                                                     5‘ ;‘
                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                      1
  *.As‘9'--v
     >
                                                                                                      s...        A            \v.¢\~1’\J-                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




           ~Tn_‘
                   21‘                                                                        ‘
       -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '




  *'
           if:     .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
.._..*..~..._.
                                                                                                                                                                  _               _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                _        ___       _-_




                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                 Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
\

                     |            ,                                                                                                       .




                                                                                           ¢’_
                                                                                                                               -




                                                                                                 '.
                                                                                       1




                                              ‘headings.        Many projects involve activity in two or more of the areas                                                                             .




                              \




                                              listed.
    mi’
                 ~
                                                                                                      ~       *

                                                                                                                  ~.                                                                                       ;




                                                                                   basic research in materials and processes
                                                                                   procurement of research materials
                                                                                   testing of substances on animals and human beings
                                                                 3*‘S"?"f’?'§”




                                                                                   development of delivery techniques                                                         .




                                                                                   projects in offensive/defensive BW, CW, and radiation                                                   "




                                                                                   miscellaneous projects;E;. g. {(1) petroleum sabotage,
                                                                                   (2) defoliants, (3) devices for remote measurement of
                                                                                   physiological processes                             1             -




                                                         32.    The current management of TSD has initiated a policy of
                                              directing the activities of MKULTRA and of the Behavioral Activities                                                                     -




                                      I
                                              Branch towards operations and away from long—range research. Prior
                                              to this change in policy which occurred in 1962,                                                MKULTRA spOI_JSO1'€dA               g.




                                          '


                                              a large number of projects in the fields ofapplied psychology, sociology,

                                              anthropology, and graphology.                                            ~


                                                                                                                               The present management is unlikely to
                                              return to these fields of research under the MKULTRA charter. The                                                                                        ;




                                              inspectors concluded that many of these projects were of insufficient                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                       "




                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




         _
             .                                sensitivity to justify waiver of normal Agency control procedures.                                                     It

                                              is   recommendeéthe end of this report that projects falling outside the                                                                             ‘




                                              authorized scope of MKULTRA henceforth require the priorwritten

                                              approval of the DD/P to qualify for MKULTRA processinglj
                                                                                                                                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




                                                     '


                                                          33.    The TSD chain of command for administra_tion of the MKULTRA

                                              program comprises the following:
                                                                                                                                                 C




                                                                                                                                   _


                                                                                                                                          _




                                                                         a.         Chief,            TSD providing overall management
                                                                         b.         Deputy Chief, TSD, (a trained scientist) providing                           -




                                                                                    top substantive guidance for the MKULTRA program
                                                                          c.        Assistant Chief, TSD, for Research and Development,
                                                                         c
                                                                                    contributing management but not substantive guidance

             _
    '-55.,£#':
                         (~                                                                               4


                                                                                                                                   _22_                  t




     .
                                                                                                      g




                                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                 Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
"'                                               4.   .v
                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

                                                                                     I                                                               I




                                                                                             _
                                                                                                  -—.
                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                            .=\_
                                                                                                           :5‘
                                                                                                            _,      Q  7' - "‘~."-‘fl’
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                    ~':-.‘\.i\"..-




I



                                                                            d.   Chief Scientist (reporting to c. above), (a trained          ,

                                                                                 scientist), contributing substantive guidance in some
                                                                                 areas and responsible for the technical administrative
                                                                                 processes of MKULTRA. He is supported by a GS-12
                                                                                 budget officer.

                                                                            e.   program manager for VMKULTRA, also serves as
                                                                                 Chief of Biology Branch, (a trained scientist)

                                                                            f.   project monitors locate'd in various branches of TSD
                          5 '.=#.-~.
                     .~".'-
                                .     .‘,.
                                             ;
                                                                                 and specialized in the subject fields of the specific
                                                                                 projects for which they are assigned responsibility                                           .


                                                           -To date this chain of command has rélied primarily on oral communica-

                                                           tion in the management of MKULTRA.                                       Files are notably incomplete,

                                                           poorly organized, and lacking in evaluative, statements that might give

                                                           perspective to management policies overtime.                                           A substantial portion                                                                  v




                                                                                                                                                                           _




                                                           of the   MKULTRA record appears to rest in the memories of the
                                                           principal officersand is therefore almost certain to be lost with their

                                                           departures. ‘The senior officers in the MKULTRA chain of command                                                                                                          I




                                                           who are not substantively qualiﬁed need better records to measure the
                .    .1   -   -"E-Z     .-




               ‘-
                     5.-'5?
                ."m"*_=_-"-Q‘ ."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.._._.4




                                                           validity of projects through time and to identify key areas.in which to
                ~'-?~“‘,7~"."
               --                   -
                    ..'.-,1’;            -




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ’-P-.._~.




                                                           require detailed periodic briefings from working specialists."                                                                                      a-.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.-Q.




                                                                    34.   It will be noted that -the Chief of Support,                               TSD,’ does not parti-

                                                           cipate in the MKULTR.A_ administration.
                                                                                                                                                                                               --,9-»--1‘.--_-.-,..—.-.




                                                                                                                                         The predecessor of the present
                                                           Chief of Support served in TSD throughout the life of the program until
                                                                                                                                                                                               _.




                                                                                                                                                                                        'Il§?'_~




                                                           1962 without ever being associated with its management.                                         In his stead,                \


               _. :~n.-<


                                                           the Chief Scientist and a GS-12 budget officer have provided administrative                                                  >




                                                           support.       The Chief Scientist has set policy on the funding of MKULTRA
    1

    4




                                                 <.
    @




                .54           '_                                                                                    - Z3       ..
                    4~._
            "ad ed-
                _                                                                                                  !"'.'-""')*I"'                                                  v
             -
                                                                                                 "3;       -.
                                                                                                  L’               _JL-‘\¢i\l..L
                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                   ls



               i-‘~'~’€-=-
        .-“:
                    Q  .-
                                                                                                                                                                                   V
        '.>-’-"r-‘.7.-' ~
                                                                                                                                                                                   E
         L-;\< Z". -" ..
             .._




                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                             1“   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                l




                                                                                                 1   5*    .          .



                                                                                                           ,'1.*.....--
                                                                                                                  ,




                                                                                             I
                                                                                                     ';
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                           ,




                                      projects in all respects including salaries, overhead rates, fees,

                                      material, equipment, facilities, travel, and the like.                                                        The support
                                      officer was only added in 1962 under pressure of critical audit

                                      findings.                            This use of the Chief Scientist in a field where Chief of

                                      Support possesses superior qualifications and facilities constitutes

                                      a misuse of talent. The proposed new charter for MKULTRA should
                                                                             \           .




                                      take account of this anomaly and also provide that Chief of Support

                                      advise in the future on decisions to fund projects under the MKULTRA.

                                      authority and thereby to vvaive the application of DD/S procedures.
                                                                                     '



                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                      »



                                                                   It is   recommended that:                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                         -        _




                                                               -



                                                                   '_,_      Deputy Director] Plans draft and submit for the                                                               5*“
                                                                   approval of the Director of Central Intelligence a revision                                                         ~




                                        '\\
                                                                   and re-confirmation of the authority granted him in 1953                                                   .-




                                                                   (Tab A) to operate the MKULIRA program, incorporating
          _.\._.,


    ‘.i--Q-ti
          .e+.;--=-
     '.>-_ .~'--..
     -,.~~...*t"
               ZA                                                                                                                                        ~'
                                                                   the following provisions:
      '                                                                                                                            D
          -,
               ,..__                                                                                                       ‘   '            '

                                                                                                                                       --


                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘Z


                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                          '

                                                                                                                                                              _                                    I




                                                                                  Deputy Director/Blane assign Chief, Technical"
                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘




                                                                             a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   \




                                                                                  Services Division, to operate MKULTRA as a
                                                                                                                                                                                                        \




                                              .._--_.....___



                                                                                                                                                                                           .




                                                                                  program for research and development of chernical,                                                               l



                                                                                  biological, and radioactive materials, and of                                                                    i




                                                                                  techniques for the employrnentpf electro-shock,
                                                                                  capable of producing human behavioral or physio-



                                                                   D
                                                                                  logical change. “Subsequent changes in scope of
                                                                   \
                                                                                  MKULTRA shall require the written approval of                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘




                                                                                  the Deputy Director/Plans.                                                                  /,/~‘

                                                                                                                 ..g4_

    -cm
      .r_           .-        <                                                                                                                                                                             »




                                                                                              ‘=1     ,1
                                                                                                               P"-="-:;".'?
     _f.,'-:f            .
                                                                                                 s             C=~_...'.~-.‘_1
    »t<x:'.-=___-
          ,c        ..

          3-           '



     _‘        '7   .-'_t
g




                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                        Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515




                                                                              S‘
                                                                                         ;::.;.*:::;
                                                                                                                                       »




                                                                                                                                       @
                                                                          n

                                                                                         .
                                                                _                                                                              .

                                                                     _



                                ,
                  (av               b.                Deputy Director/Plans arrange with Deputy Direct0r/
                                                      Research for the coordination of research relating
                                                      to MKULTRA     objectives to control duplication of
                                                      effort and to provide for exchange of information of
                                                      new capabilities.
                                                      Chief, Technical Services Division, consistent with
             ,-
                        ,
                                    c.
                                                      established policy, imay negotiate for‘ research in
                                                      MKULTRA materials and techniques to be conducted
                                                      by Deputy Director/Research and by other component
  -§-   -.-i.-3
    t-- -":3

                                                      offices of CIA. He shall consult regularly with the
                                                      appropriate officers of such components to control
                                                      duplication of effort.                                                   e
                                                                                                                                       ~




                                d.                    Chief, Technical Services Division shall approve the
                                                      addition of        MKULTRA
                                                                              developed materials to the
                                                                                                                                                       '




                                                      list of operationally available           substances               MKDELTA
                                                      and keep the Deputy Director/Plans advised. of such
                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                      additions. (cf. Clandestine Services Instruction g
                                                      No. Z20-10,        MKDELTAMATERIALS, dated 22 July
                                                      1960--Tab B--which governs the employment of       A                                                             '




                                                      behavioral control materials in clandestine operations.)

                                e                     Deputy Director/Plans, jointly with the Deputy Directorl
                                                      Support, establish policy for the administration of
                                                      support functions under MKULTRA. Suchpolicy shall
                                                                                                                                                           _




                                                      seek to limit to the maximum the waiver of established
                                                      Agency support procedures for activities of unusual
                                                      sensitivity.

                                                      Chief, Technical Services Division shall maintain
  __,>..:_
                            I
                                fO
                                                      exacting internal controls and records of all substantive
                                                      and support matters within each              project.               MKULTRA
                                                      Records shall include:                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                          (1)       A plan of the research and development to be                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                              I




                                                                    performed.                              _

                                                                                                                           _               .
                                                                                                                                                                                              l




                                                                                                                                   _
                                                                                             p




                                                                                                                                                                                             -




                                                          (Z) An administrative annex setting forth security,
                                                                                                                                                                                             .-




 ..._.__                                                            budget and accounting arrangements agreed to                                                                       ¢—-.-—--.--a-.




                                                                    by the parties to the project. Chief of Support,                                               .



,¢.~__.-_-
                                                                    TSD, shall then certify to the DD/S for each                                                                       m


                                                                    such project that this annex is in accord with
                                                                    the agreed DDS/DDP policy. Pursuant to this                                                                    E




                                                                                                 -25-
                                                                                                                                                                   ,,.-    _-v-,-.----»--_




                                                  _




                                         =
                                             ..                                    .1‘            --_   "           -I
                                                                                   1.            §_"I..:i"7.-;_1'                                                          i

                                                                                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                                                           E




                                                        Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515

                                                                           I
                         E




                                                                                    a


                                                                                            I’
                                                                                                 '

                                                                                                 1)‘
                                                                                                       av:



                                                                               "responsibility, Chief of Support, TSD,
                                                                               shall have right of unlimited access to
                                                                               the substantive and administrative records
                              /‘
                                                              .                of MKULTRA.

                             ./                               (3)              An annual written review by the project
                                                                               monitor setting forth in reasonable detail
                                                                       .
                                                                               the nature of the work performed, the
                                                                               prospects for results of eventual opera-
                                                                               tional signiﬁcance, and a recommendation
                                                                               for continuance or termination of the project.

                                        g.
                                                 ’



                                                          Testing of MKULTRA materials and devices shall only -
                                                          bepperforrned in accredited ’research institutions under
                                                          accepted scientiﬁc procedures.'
                                                                                                                         '                '
                                                                                                                             -




                                        h.                Chief, Technical Services Division, shall brief the
                                    "


                                                          Deputy Director/Plans at least semi-annually on ;
                                                          MKULTRA activities. The Deputy Director] Plans
                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                      _




                                                                                                                                                      _




                                                       after each briefing shall promptly ‘notify the Deputy
                                                      -Director of Central Intelligence that he has personally
                                                       conducted a semi-annual review of the program.                                             .




                                                     -_           .1



                                             // The MKULTRA program be audited in accordance
                                                                                                              .      .




                                        i.
                                             .            with the provisions‘ of HR il___2.‘__including auditor access
                                                          to substantive as well as administrative records.                                   .




                             _/-’
         .        .\»~




                                         ,‘\
  _§_i,_'..-_'     5-




                                                                                                       26“-
 -.,
    .-4¢, ._‘§ ~.
             .,
                                                                                        "



                                                                                             T          Si;-'c?;;T
                                                                                                                                                              I




_*-an-_;.
     _       v                                                                                                                                            I




                                                                                                                                 --

                                                          Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
            _    _
                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                              __           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                     ;:~~--'“>»                                  ~ ~                                            .*,.-».-_-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _




                                         ‘                                  '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -               »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .                     -

                                                 \ ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                ‘                                                    :3
                              1|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                         1.-;.F                                                   .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n5...
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                                                        4



                                         ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ..-0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .5_'“':"‘
                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                             .    .._....                 ..               .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .                                                             .   Q                               .           _                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .   ,           .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..‘_‘,_3'§‘.<

                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _


                                                                -                               ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    var;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              we




                                                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~f:?5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘

                                                                                            -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                     ‘                                                                                                                                                   ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                   '               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4                            Q~%§'".¢’
                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                        -                                      ~                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "$3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        __           __       _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _.                                   ‘R


                                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ._.=.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1‘                                                                                                                                      .                                            .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .                                                 .~_                           ..i~z




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘3-‘:‘&:-‘-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1322
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                  »
    \

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘
1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                                                                                                     '.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .n ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ;                                                   ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _+q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                     _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _                                   _                                                                                      .,,H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ...                                    .
                                                                                                                '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -                             -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘                                                                           ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                               ?'-'?l}"?.~r
                                                            .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,                     ,...,                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5-1 :Il‘1|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '..                              .~.~'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                    :;f"..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                    l:.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -                  ---$1».
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .:-=2
\




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1                                                                                                                                                                                                           *-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -_                         ~4.._,..
\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _                     ._               ~51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "_:__                                              --<.-



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _<

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _.;-._,_'_‘_J,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2




                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    we      V.-~.*»'-s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              kl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                »                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .                4;.-.-1!:
                                                                                                .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ._.._


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .,*__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yb‘!-“,o'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '-;f;_",v-,'_iw                                                             0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "'1                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .%.-                                                       .7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :*~.-                                                     +.
                                                                                                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ."~""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V'.’5=g" #4                                       .         .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lé
                                                 _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ..-%'t_.                                                    ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '1"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,§,-                                                                    ~.
                                                                                                                                                                             _                                                                                                                                      .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :_»,--                                                         __ _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $3.2:-..                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2-‘;                 \-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~. >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;3i§"_.-~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H "Y-T".
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \'i                                                                                   -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .                                                                                             1?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1*.-1». .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U               4                                                                                                                                                                                                                ""-.:.,4



                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                        '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ..;                                                             .3-_4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ','                                                   ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '-.'--'-"if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '51? P‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .~‘.~.                                                                  .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                                                                                         .                                                                                                                                                                            =1:                                                           .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2           .                                                                                                                                                            -,-0                -                                1--_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                    r                       1                           ':1..-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    --§
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,           €                   _                                                                                                                                                        "-'u.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘-'*~h‘r_,'~f?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;.;_»Z




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ___‘-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘L,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                                                                                 _.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                    _-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .!
            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       op-b*(




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          §                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |



                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _.                                                                                                                       .i                                                                                                                V.                                                             ~_                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1‘
                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _‘
                                                                                                                             ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V
                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _8\
                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘I
                         l-- L! -:~4—, ~,—:._..__.. --—-—_-2:: __;__..~
                                                                                                                                                            V



                                                                                                                                                                                                           _;__; _.___, __ ;..—._—;_';_. W —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —'                                                                                                                                                    i‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                     7177-Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  »
                                                                                                                                                        *
                .»                                                                                          .                              :                    .'                   _v_;-.~._                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .—_=_=                     —_'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _._:            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _'_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .....:__                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .-                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                    ~                                                                                                                                 ..-.__. -_—‘-9~r@—-—-?@-—'-1*"--*-—4————                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ---":_'_~'. -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {__


                                                                                                                                                                                     ----...._._..._._......-.._-_,__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _                                                                                                                                                                                                           --__———....._§_-q-Q-__,
                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                --                         r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                              -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  __'
                                                                            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '~.
                                     -                                                  -           »                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -<
        \
                                                                                                                                                                         -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         __
                                                                    ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                               e.                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ﬁznkﬁi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   »                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         szcua\:v:z;:aa;;\1\e:                                                                                                                     f

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tl

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                              wt;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ._
                                I


I



1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,


                                                                                        J
                                                                                                                   '                                                                                                      4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jspril 1953
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J
    r




                                                     .<
                                                         -,-/                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                           >
                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                                   .                                             Z_-     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '




                  _i




                                    _
                                                                  ummnannlm F011;“ Director, Central intelligence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              two Ebctrenely Sensitive Research Programs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '




                           .~                    .
                                                                  $UBJI~I}Tg                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _




                                                                     Approximately 6% of the TSS research and development effort lies in
                                                                                                       fl.
                                                 .



                                                          '-two highly sensitive fields in which it isnot possible to conduct the
                                                                                                                                   work j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -,
                                                                                                                           considerations.
                                '_-



                                                           through the customary contracts for security reasons and other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -'       ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "bl
                                            -

    I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '




                                                                  ‘F:                                                      2. ‘These two sensitive fields are:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _



                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ..


                                                                                                                                                                      a) Covert studies of biological and chemical warfare
                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \"
                                                                                                                                                                      b)\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b)(1)F
    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




    I
                                                                                                                       .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .

                                                                                    -                                                       <                                          .       \_




                                                                 Permission of the DCI is requested to handle work in these two
                                                                       I
                                                                                             -l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .(b)(3)
                                                                                                                           3.
                                                     -_1’ie1de in the manner outlined in -rah A without contracts and with
    _



                                                                                                                           reimburse-_
                                                       nent to be made'- against invoices properly certified by TSS.
                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I

    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                                                                                     ".~<               _.


                  ._                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z_‘



[..
                                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .



                                                                     controls established in the H10“ approval of the original Re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r,-.
    I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q-V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~-~~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                --A

                                                             I5.
                                                       search Program (other than signing of a contract) would remain unchanged. be
    -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3




                                                                                                                              will
                                                     -‘




                                                       Periodic financial and progress reports will be made. All documents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                ,                           \



                                                                                                                                    '-'
                                                                                           =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        »?<’~..-


                                                       retained by TSS.
                                                     '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -J‘                       ’-":1




                                                                                                                                                                                               new ‘funds are involved. This procedure would apply to _fund_s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -




                                                                                                                           $._                                            _2Io
                                                                                                                                                                                                      previously approved for research;
                                                                               _              _                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _

                                                                                              _                                    p                                                                        _




                                                                                    Tab B is a memorandum to the Deputy‘ Director (Administration) for
                                                                                                                           6.
                                                                           your signature authorizing this procedure.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘Ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            My
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >-                                '1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           £1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Richard Helms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1:                                ":>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4     41                                 ;,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Deputy Director (Plans)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -'



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Acting
5
                                                                                        ,,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ..".              _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -



»-
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                           ..                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ».
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -              I)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ”
                                                                               Attachments: (2)
                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .-                                                                 .-




                                                                                 ‘Rab A - Description of Project MKUIERA and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '



              ~




                                                                                          the controls which will be exercised
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                            "
                                                                                                       -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _.




                                                                                          over its execution
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                       _                 _


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                       ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             44
                                                                                                                                                             _’
                                                         -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I




                                                                                -lab B S1ggested Memorandum from DCI to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .-1

                                                                                                                                                                  '_-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A




                                                                                          my/A authorizing payment of_ invoices        __
                                                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                          under Project                                             _
                                                                                                                                                              --                                                                                                                                                                                          4,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _._,‘-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~
                                                                               Distribution:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _                                                                                                                                                                     -W.
                                                                                 Addresses - Orig & l w/attachments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -                                                           L;   ..                                                                                                                   Iél                                  »_

                  _.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \.5

         L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                           - 1 w/attachments
                                                                                   _,

                                                                                 m’/P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                    ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .                                                                                                                                                                                        '“4-,_\_§}_~.-                                                                                                                                                   1*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *


                                                                                           - 1 w/attachments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '




                                                                                 TSS/OC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hg“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1':
                                                             --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ___;-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _
                                            ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h
                                                                                 kec. Reg.- 1/attachments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '_                                                                                                                                                                                 .;'
          '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -

                                                                               --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _                               4_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S 8 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                      0“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *9‘?-E'»"~".£r


                       _
                       --

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i_               i_atcua..r::;§§a;;~.rwx                                                                               "W                                             ?_.,;:’;fi‘qe1.s,
                                                             _,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘___~_”____:___.H;___!e_ﬁvT;__l    - l-                                                                                                                                                                                                     I'.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 aw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -

                                                                                                       ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _- __,_ ___
                                                                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -s--""1"..-
                                                                                                                                                                                                    _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '._.;.':;;: ..‘,;.___ ""—-"*-—-~—---=--
                                                                                                                           -4,,                                                                                     _.».-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~.==.-_—_.“’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '-_-_-.A-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                           -                                                                            ..        .                                                                                                                                                              -               -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0                                                                                                   I
'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                -            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ._.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >

                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -                                                                                                                                              '
                                            -.                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _-,_"
                                                                                                          _
        PFP*“@III\z*-
                                                                                             ‘~_""'-'?1""*""-“-.\'@'v'II':=>-.12,-,.._,_.__;,W                                                                                                                                                                                                       -_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                  '-
                                                                                                                                               _r___                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                        ..
               ‘                                     '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _'



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                          _                                                                                                                                 Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                    U" ‘N
,,_



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      94 3 ,1’.
                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                          '       '       '



                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘

                                                                                                                                    ‘
                                                                                                              ~       ~                                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘




                                                                                                                                    5:?”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                  ~        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -

                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                    Q;-_'f_:_:77.‘.-£300


                                                                                                                                   J:                                                                                                                                         _..._-j-———-—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             j

                                                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ix

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,.        .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ..
                                                                     V                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I                               -\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !        .    ‘w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          »             .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘:0
  r                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -\‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -_..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *0;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2*


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                              I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _“.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A                   ‘\



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     u...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /                                 -                   "=-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \-.-       .~




 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '



 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘.                                           -3<‘                        ")1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2

 1
          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I                                            ~-              ,,                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .":
                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \."-7:.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘X              w--t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,_



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _ é.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  “ix
 I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '2                                                               '~_                 i"
  \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .;~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              K           .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 »._

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —~wO~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..-v

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       §


              \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C‘



p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .~-1                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.               .-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¢
 ‘nu-n‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '.-f.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v‘
 i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _                             .1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
  ii‘;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L                                               )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .




                                                                                                                                                                Iy       .   .           ...-                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             “                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *—’”/‘                                                            -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 g-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       QJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3»




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            iii,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;_.....--—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .-r‘

                                                                                                                                                                _.__‘..*__._.._ ._.-‘_~_.._._____.__._...-._......_-_.-_-_:                                                                                                                      1?‘-I-—-I"“"‘ ___ "9_                    .          -,'-J4"-'
                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                              '-




                              f
                                                                                                     ,_                            .__‘.-.._‘
                                              '-

      \




                                                       _                         ,                                                                                                                                  ._..._._                                                                                 _ ‘                                                                    -171*”, _.,;:;..'.:;":".' /'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5'Q
      \
                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                            -,-             ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.—"‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    >_~_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -'>
                                                            .                                                                                                                             .                   .                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                     .                .                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,;-'-                       "__‘
                                                   _                                                                  >,


                                          ..                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -____~__                       ....~.._-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘..-->. -
                                                                                     -
                                                           .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     __—___
                                                                ..                                                                                              ~

                                                       ---.-'-~-— -iefuf--L----i=\;—.<.--‘--<~¢=_.,. .._.__ .11-x-—*">                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                         »
                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                      .
                  ;
                                          ...                                                                                                                   .. ...--.—"_                                                                                                              ._ ..                                     ,,..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~
                      _           ~                                                                                                                                                           ,                               .                                  .1               .          .       .                     ,_   _                                                                                                                         _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                              .                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _



                                          "'#=~ i
                                                                                                          .                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'E_


                                                                                                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03
                                                                                                                                                                                   1..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                 _,1_‘»—A '~ --\.g|—-~ V-___ ~¢_~ ‘_--~._..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _...:_           7-_                                                                                                                                                                              .1:           -—           -- ~ -—=                             -               -         _-
                                                                                                                               ‘   _                                                                                                     -                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7



                         \
                                                          I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~                      -                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -




                                                                                                                                                                                                           gap"igu-..CR§T‘                                                                                                                                                                    "'1'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              s. s-1624
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                              ~_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i                                    -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                securikyl.-nfor.-nation
                                                                                                                                                                        '                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                   -.




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .’_-                                                                                                                                                                                                                "'l'A_BA-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I                                              ~                                                                                                                                                           .



             I
                                                                                                                                                                                     PROJECT mcuurru.
                                                                               '




                                                                                                                                            '-
                                                                                                                                                        ~




       r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              »
                                                                                                                                                                -

                                                                                           .                           .




                                                                       Extremely Sensitive Research and Development Programs
                                                                   H




                                 1.                           On 6 June l95Z, the Project Review Committee approved the TSS
                                 Research Program for Fiscal                                                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ':       '_'_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _       _,_______                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '_

                                 Year 1953.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                              _




                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .             .                                 .       --
                                                                                                                               '

                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                    I                                                                                                                                                                         4

                                 _            .
                                                                                   -                       >       s       '                -~    -Y                        -            -'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                                                                  -_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -                            -                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘

                                      _




                                     The PRC approval authorized the Director of Research, at his dis-
                                                  i




                                 Z.
                                 cretion and with the approval of the Research Chairman, to apportion
                                 and obligate the research funds among individual projects, such projects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -




                                 to be subject to the usual Agency procedures and administrative                                                                                                                    '

                                 ‘controls.
                                                                                                           '                                 -'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '

                                                                                                                                                                                .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _                                                                                                                                           .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _                                                            _           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _                            j




                                 3.  This Research Program has been actively underway since the middle
                                 of 1952 and has gathered considerablemomentum during the past few
                                 months. It is now evident on the basis of work currently underway that
 i


                                 approximately 94% of the projects contemplated can be handled through
                                 regular procurement channels by means of the customary contracts
                                 signed jointly by the Agency and the organization undertaking to carry
                                 out the work. lt has also become apparent that approximately 6% of
                                 the projects are of such an ultra-sensitive nature that they cannot and
                                 should not be handled by means of contracts which would associate CIA
                                 or the Governrnent with the work in question, This 6% of the‘ current
                                 research effort now lies enﬁrely within two well-defined fields of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '




                                 endeavor, namely:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     __                                                                   p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V




                                 /(’a) Research to develop a capability in the covert use'of'
                                  _
                                                      ___4biological and chemical materials.'        This area involves the-
                                          ‘               .
                                                              production of various physiological conditions which could                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -




                                                  4

                                                              support present or future clandestine operations. Aside                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .




                                                              from the offensive potential, the development of a compre-
                                                      "

                                                              hensive capability in this field of covert chemical and bio-'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '4.


                                                              logical warfare gives us a thorough knowledge of the enemy's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W;
                                              -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -




                                                              theoretical potential, thus enabling us to defend ourselves
                                  '           '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ﬂﬂ
                                                              against a f_oe who might not be as restrained inpthe use of‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _




                                                                       04                                  ..
        3                                                                                                                                                                       pg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1‘-‘1.:;,_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~
._Z_




                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                *.IO{S.'ECRETr                                                                                                                        e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AF
                                                               -
                                                                       .
                                                                                               .


                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                        .

                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Information.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c.°PY£                                                4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Of 5 copies
                                                                                                                                                                                                       _                                                                                                      -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > ll“
                                                                                                                                   .-
                                                                                                                                                                                         .                                                    .                                          ~   --                       1                                                              .


           »-       -~       -   ~‘-~ <-»                                                  s-_..-- =v'_.|==-----.-----                                                                                                                                                              ____--                                                                                   -                                                                                                                .--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '-_,,,__:__                                                                                                      _~_--;,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _:_
                                                                                       -
|‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       __                     ‘_~_                                __.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    __:_,-"v,                                                                                                    .-___ T-1..



       \_‘      .                                                          -                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .,                   L.                                                     _-. ._. _,V—~-_——.—_.e-                                                                  _           no-—-—-~                          -   "       '




                                                                                                                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                 v_   Approvedgfor Release: 2019/04/03 C0§_Y_6_75_@                                                       ____               _   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~15-




            _                                            y
                                                             ~>I
                                                                              ,{/wRET
                                                                           '.__L.sWWn‘;naﬁ°n                                                   _
                                                                                                                                                     _.
                                                                                                                                                                'r.        s. s1ez4._                             ..       ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ....,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q



                            these techniques as we are.                                            For example: we intend to
                                                                                                                                                                               I
                    ‘




                            investigate the development of a chemical material which
                            causes a reversible non-toxic aberrant mental state,' the                                                                                                                                           »-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘:16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          if-5

                            specific nature of which can be reasonably well predicted for                                                                                                                                            1    ‘C;


                            each "individual. This material could potentially aid in dis-                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ww-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \‘_',_

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -49        :.-‘



                            crediting individuals, eliciting information, implanting                                                                                                                                                 .1:        -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -,*.\‘




                            suggestion and other forms of mental ‘control;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ._=       1.


                '
                                                                                V


                                         Research and engineering development in the field of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '_"~.'lé.

                            (b)                                                                                                                                                                                                .-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /\/\.l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-0-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /\   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    »/\/




      4.                It is highly undesirable from a policy and security point of view that
      contracts should be signed indicating Agency or Government interest
      in either of these two fields. In a great many instances the work in
      field (a) must be conducted by individuals who are not and should not be
      aware of our interest. In all cases dealing with field (b), it is mandatory
      that any connection with the-Xgency should be known only to an absolute
      minimum number of people who have been specifically cleared for this
      purpose. In no case should any manufacturer or supplier be_aware of
      Government i-riterest.                                                                          ~


                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                      '




                                                                                                                                                                                         »




      5.‘               In many cases in field (a) where the researcher can be cleared and.
      may be aware of our interest in the program, he is unwilling to have his                                                                                                                           "




      name on a contract which remains out of his control in our ﬁles.
      Experience has shown that qualified, competent individuals in the field
      of pharmacological, physiological, psychiatric and other biological "
      sciences are most reluctant to enter into signed agreements of any sort
      which connect them with this activity since such a connection would                                                                                                                            -




      jeopardize their professional reputations.                                                                                                               --          -

                                                                                                                                                                                   __




      6.  Even internally in CIA, as few individuals as possible should be
      aware of our interest inthese fields and of the identity of those who are
      working for us. At present this results in ridiculous contracts, often
      with cut-outs, which do not spell out the scope or intent of the work
                            ‘




                                                                      _"     ._   Jofszcszsr
                                                                                    soeurily lnlormation                                                   "                            -_




                                                   ~.'                                        '.‘.'2-9
                                                                                                                                     H




                                                             .
                                                                                     -0
                                                                                                                                                   CopyI__Lof5cop_ie_s_ __ _
___   ;,~                                __                                _-._'______'_;_;__-__-______-__,_ .>__-_;_;¢____~;_-_=_-'-__~~--'       -;__-
                                                                                                                                                                                        —““              __
                        -
                                    _'
                                _             ‘_         ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,

                                                                      Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                              1-       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                           n->_ ._   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      »-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _.        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..s'¢c“,_“y\nlor’\=\=-93°“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .~                            _'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '1‘.                  S.            07§Z4
                                                                                                                \


                                                                                                         cannot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                incorporate in his
                                                            ~//and which contain terms which the cut-out
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A




                                                                                                              Government interest.
                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '


                                                               contract with the researcher without revealing a re im ossible for'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4



                                                           -/

                                                               Complete Government audits of such contracts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                      -R

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                               the same reason.
                                                                Q




                                                                                                     ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                            ‘                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _           _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _




                                                                                    H



                                                                                                                      therefore, requested that the DCI authorize
                                                                                                                                         ‘It is
                                                                                                                                                                    TSS to handle 6%
                                                                                                            7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _




                                                                                                                                                                 budget
                                                                                                                           of the previously approved research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                                                                                    ?

                                                                                                                                                      formal contractual relations.
                                                                                '-
                                                                                                            for FY '-53 without the establishment of
                                                                                                                                          as” Project MKULTRA.
                                                                                                            Frhis program will be known
                                                                                                                                                                         '.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '


                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H




                                                                                                                                                 It is su g gested that payment of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        invoices under Project MKULTRA
                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                            forwarded by TSS be authorized, provided that:
                                                                                                '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7                         .'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                .


                                                                    '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _                                               .



                                                                                                                                                                                          exceed                                                                                                                                                                                           6%_                                                           for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                 '(a) the total of such invoices does not
                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                ,'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _


                                                                                                        -                       -




                                                                                                                                                  Fiscal Year 1953;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘
                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p




                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                     "(b)  the invoices carry alcertification by the TSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Research                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _




                                                                                                                                                      Director that payment of funds is authorized   and  that‘ the
                                                                                                                                                                                                      the program
      ¥




                                                                                                                                                     .invoic es re p resent work accomplished within
                                                                                                                            "                                                    '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _




                                                                                                                                                      approved by the DCI under Project MKULTRA as outlined
                                                                                                                                             "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H                                    D                                                                                       '




                                                                                                                                                      in this memorandum;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _

         I




                                                                                                                                                                                            certification of the                                                                                                                                                                       Executive
                                                                                                                                                                 (c) the invoices carry the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *



      4                                                                                                                     '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the program
                                                                                                                                                                 Secretary of the Research Board that the scope of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '




                                                                                                                                                                 has been approved;
                 l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >                                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -                                                                                                       t




             pa.‘--.




                                                                                                                                                             "(d)i the: invoices carry the certification of the cognizant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TSS
                                                                                                                                                             Division Chief that the work has been satisfactory from a
                                          .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .'
                                                                                                                                                     '


         Q‘.




                                                                                                                                                             technical point of view,                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                        '                                                                                                                                                               ~                                                        I
                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _
             4--4




                                                                                                                                        emphasized’ that this authorization does not involve any
                 Y




                                                                                                                                                         It should be
                                                                                 0
                                                                        '




                                                                                                                        9_
                                                                                                                                                                                 of a previously
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '




                                                                                                                        new allocation of funds, but merely applies to a portion    will mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _




                                                                                                                                                                              above
             i

         .*
                                                                                                            '



                                                                                                                        approved budget. The TSS certiﬁcations     mentioned                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


         J

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         p-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _..v.
                                                                                                                        that:                                                                              --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  __
         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                                                 .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
         K                                                                                                                                                                           .
-

         “-




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -“conditions set forth
                                                                                                                                                                      the project is being handled under the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                '



                                                                                                                                ;»"-
                                                                                                                                                                      (ii)
                              _~_1-wq-n




-




                                                                                                                                                                 in this description and specifically falls within one
      """""°'~‘*'-
                                 .




                                                                                                                                     '                                                                                   of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p




                                                                                                                                                                 itwo ultra-sensitive fields mentioned above;
'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t




                                3".




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mannei\- “provided for
                                                                                                                                                                              the project has been approved in the
    *'~"‘-“"“-
                                                                                                                                                         '


                                                                                                                                                 -                    .(b)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R




     -


      "
             "5


                                                                                                                                                                          in the PRC document which originally set up and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            approved                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '




                                                                                                                                                                          the over-all TSS Research Program. Each project will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    thus
                                                                                                                                                         ~
      ...

                                                                                                                                         .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            monitoring
     ,1;-i
                                                                                                                                                                 '_




                                                                                                                                                                          have been presented by the Chief of the Division
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '


                                                                                                                            l                1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

     P”.

     >                                                                                                                              "_
    1.                                                                                                                                                       _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -                                                                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                         '|
                                                                                                                                                                             _




    wnww
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        soeurif-y lﬂlﬁfmsfion                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1       _           ;_“_                        -_:>\_                                                                                                                           p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “                                                  ""-3-
         ‘='Wﬂ‘.‘1!_wne~»r*




                                                                                                                                                                             '                             '                                       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _doy# "-1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /of_5copies__                                                                                                                                                                         _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "                                                                                                                                    _   - __;-____                                     _-§-..':._::::;+:¢;:.;-4-»*~‘.‘                                                           11-,
                                                                                                            —                                                                                                                         ;_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '                                                                                          -                                .                                                   _

                                                                                                                            ----.-»-»                            -..-tr.-~.-.-_-,.__.-.-._—..-.___                                                         -    -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -"                                                                 "_':::_-._.._,.;’--_-2-.-
                                                                                        -


                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -                                '~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -'-'1‘                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADQ[_c_>v_ed for Release: 2019/04/03 CO6767515
                                         ‘
                                                                                                  ,




                                                                                                                                               /.                                                    '2                                          2)/SECRET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '12‘                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T‘ 5' 87624
                                                                             '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                                                    I           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                         '                '_"                         ecurilylnformaﬁon
                                                                         ,7’,/"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




                                                             Z.

                                                                                                                                                                     and to the Research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -

                                     /’                                                                                            the work to the Research Director
                                                                                          '
                                                         '




                                                                                                                                   Chairman and will have, as in the past, to be approved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “3;f---I
l




                                 '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2|
                                                                                                                                                                       made;
                                                                                                                                   by both before any expenditures are
                                                                                              .

                                                                 .                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                              '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                                                                                                                                                                 ..f,___-JLI
                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _


                                                                                                                                                                                    .                                 .


             I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <.-




                                                                                                                                       (cl technical control
                                                                                                                                                             over the project will be exercised by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        'v'~,;.*.‘




                                                                                                                                                                           Engineers to the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .-




                                                                         -




                                                                                                                                       the TSS Division Chief and Project
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~',‘;,_|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -i_".=_5



                                                                                                                                                           to projects handled in the normal fashion.
                                                                                                                                           extent now applying
                                                                                      '
                                                                                                    '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _:_-:=.-ii



                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                           Technical reports will be rendered when necessary
                                                                                                                                           advisable and will be available for inspection in
                                                                                                                                                                                             TSS files                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p                             J                                   _




                                                                                                                           ._


                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~.

                                                                                                                                           at any time;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘


                                                                 -A’                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _                                                                                                                _




                                                                                                                                                  project, TSS will reach an under standing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                          (d) in the case of each
                                                                                                                          with the individuals who will perform the work
                                                                                                                                                                           as to the
                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                           _




                                                                                                                                                                               and re-
                                                                                                                          conditions under which_ the work will be performed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _




                                                                                                                                                                               be signed.
                                                                 <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "ii.


                                                                                                                          imbursement arranged. No standard contract will
                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J,’


                                                                                                                                                                             agreement
                                                                                                                          In some cases when possible, a memorandum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t




                                                                                                                                                                          of
                                                                                                                               -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,




                                                                                                                                                             TSS  ﬁles.  Under  no
                                                                                                                          will be signed and retained in the
    1.
                                                                                                                       ‘I

                                                                                                                                                                                   TSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _




                                                                                                                          "circumstances would copies of such agreements     leave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘-1;

                                                                                                                   '




    1
                                                                             ".
                                                                                                                          files where they will be kept available
                                                                                                                                                                  for inspection;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘.7



                                                                                          -
                                                                                                   N                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




                                                                                                                                                                                               handled and methods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I




                                                                                                                                                                            the manner in which the work will be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,: -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :~-..'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _

                                                                                                                                                                                             sterility will be worked
                                                                                                                                                    of maintaining Agency and Government
                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V»;
                                                                             V




                                                                                                                                                                                                  in the past, and
                                                                                                                                                    out with the Inspection & Security Office as
                     .
     ‘

         5
                                                                                                                                           '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,1

                                                                                                                                                    clearance of individuals to the extent deemed necessary by
                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                                                                                           __



                                                                                                                                                    TSS and I 8: SO will be obtained;
    '2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .'                                                                 e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                       '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y



     1                                                                                             .                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X1}
    \»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~_




                                                                                                                                                    .(f)_ invoices," when received by TSS,
                                                                                                                                                                                             will be forwarded to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '1




                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                             as outlined
                                                                                                                                                     Finance Division for payment and will be certifiedavailable
                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L»




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \-.~.,u»-‘ai




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '




                                                                                                                                                     in Paragraph 8 above. Whenever
                                                                                                                                                                                         documents are                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A

                                                                                                               '



                                                                                                                                                     supporting a portion or all of a  given  invoice, such as cancelled
                                                                                                                                                                                                      requested by TSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A




                                                                                                                                                     checks, receipted bills, etc. , these will be
                                                                                                                                                .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I-f7‘

                                                     °                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it


                                                                                                                                                                                                        invoice, where
                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                     and retained in the TSS files in support of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘


                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.;

                                                                                                                                                                                               inspection. They will
                                                                                                                                                     they will at all times be available for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                   documents at best
                                                                                                                                                     not be forwarded with the invoices. Such
                                                                                                                                               .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ._,
                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     £-

                                                                                                                                                                                             expenditures, and regular
                                                                                                                                                      will only cover a portion of the total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -_
                                                                                                                                               '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                                                                                                                                                                        “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                                                                                                                            ‘



                                                                                                                                                      audit procedures will not be followed;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘                        '                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;_-

                                                                                                                                   .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "I;-"




                                                                                                           A

                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5-:




                                                                                                                                                                   other provisions and controls over the Research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Program                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            §~s.~.~.-.»..




                                                                                                                                                               specified in the original PRC approval will remain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  unaltered.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       under
                                                                                                               '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘                                                                                             ‘




                                                                                                                                                               Technical progress under the separate projects"‘handled in
                                                                                                                                                .


                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                             necessary
                                                                                                                                                               Project MKULTRA will be included whenever
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~

                                                                                                                                                        '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .




                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             bﬂ}-l3_'§--=,y?_9¢.\,f@.-¢Q\li~:~u$551:";




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \‘ ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘Z?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  seen                                                                                                                              .'-;                                                                                                                    ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                'ty lnlomalion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -


                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v\.-_                                                                                              _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .'                       .4"- '~                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Copy'§V1_Z_of5cop_i_es_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y"'5- '
                                             '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      __--_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “' __-_—_
                                                                                                                                                -                                       V



                                                                                                                                                                                                ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _
                             .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -               .                                                                                                      -3-                                                                                                ‘.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ---_-_--—__                                                                                                           -___ _',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ""‘"'.:_'__' ‘_"_______-—""
                                                                                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T                                                                                                           -_-_ -.. ....-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .__                                                                                     ,_.___>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -- ~                                                                                                                                                                          .—-—~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                                        '

                                                                                                                                                                                           —--                                                                                                                           ..                                                                                                                                            __                                                                                 -It
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          . ...,_. __'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .



                                                                                                                                                                                    1 - .-.T',_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .._.'                         .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -"                                                                                                                                                                                                                               --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ""‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                             '   ‘
                                                                                                                                       ---                         =.~-- —.- --_<                                                 ~.       --__»_~                      v                                        "                             -       '                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .L'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an-aqua
                                     ‘
                                                                                                  -.»:L-                                                    _'..                                                                                                                                                                                                                       --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~~                                                           -
                                                     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -                                                                    ,




                         ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -" -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               »        _____                                                                                          _                                                    i   _ _f __      P        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M )_v>_                                                                                                                    l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C0676751b
                                                                                                                                            Ap_pr0ved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                            ,
                                                '
                                                                             2                                                  A
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   _




                                                                                                                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _’.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                               >.'
                                                                                                                                                                            v
l

                                                                             -                                                      -~                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _    _




                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                "'                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "“‘"“‘                                                     '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~'r.                s.   81624
                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                             'Secu.'E%y Information‘
                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                _
                                    _




                       .1
                                                                                                                                               Director
                                                                                                              -




                                                                                          the regular progress reports now submitted by the
                                                                                 -                                          .




                                                                     '



                                                                                          of Research, The monthly budget and financial
                                                                                                                                           report being
         '
                                                                                          submitted by TSS to DD /A will include full financial informa-
                                                                                                                                              '6%
                                                                                          tion on these projects, including how much of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘




                                                                                          has been committed, how much has been spent and how much
                                                        '

                                                                                          remains.                                                                                                                                                       A4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _




                                                        10.                                   The establishment and approval of Project MKULTRA will allow
                                                TSS to undertake highly desirable and necessary research in these two
                                                sensitive fields which would not be possible unless the work can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '




                                                        handled in this manner.
                                        .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                  '                                                                                 ~


                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .                                                  ,                        \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
                                                        Distribution:
                                                                                                                                                                        '



                                »



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~
                                                                         Addressee - Orig. 8: 1
    I

                                                    -




                                                                         DD/P - l                                                                           _




                                                                         TSSIOC
                                                                                                                                                                    y


                                            '

                                                                                                                  — 1                       .
                                                                                                                                                    '




                                                            .'
                                                                         Exec. Registry - 1                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                n                                                                                ._                                                                           _




         \_                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SECRH
                                                                                                                                                                                            rily lr.!:m-.'aIion


                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -—~       - '-                     —_
                                                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~---
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .-- -V .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '                                                                                                                                        -   ~       -




                       ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '___..':___..-
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .-’            ._                          _                                                                                                             I-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~-—-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ._                                                                "‘-:.'.?;:__“'
                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                       ___.__‘__- _;--.~-- ___-—_—f-_—-'----—- --—:.-V---:
                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -v_—-~- “I-I:
        _____                                                                                                 - -—~-.—-- —- -                                                                                                                                                           ..‘...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .

                                                                                              _-.,-=.. -L, --_.-.-_--.-;._.....‘.....:
I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .




<-           -   ---            -           '-=~~.,-;\:I
                                                                         r
                                                                                     .»
                                                                                                                                                -,-__._r_r;-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '                                           ..       .
                                                                                                          .
1                  .




                                                                                                                                            Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
        _                                                                                                                                  0-          0           -                          _APPF0Ve<1_[9LB_<-3%|ea$_@_IZ919/04[Q§_QQ§l6751_5__ ‘_____,______,                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~_
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        yr                        ‘
                                               .\
                                                                 q        I'll            4?‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “L.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;gL;§tg1.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "£3;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘

                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ":CRET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1-‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V4.4:-=;;.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                        ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -I
                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                       L)§e¢urih'.|nl:.:r.z.!?:n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -‘i          -




                                                                                  “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ___--


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I20: J? 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       »2s;2‘:¥i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _'-its.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B,
                                                                                                                                              ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .                                                   E1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \--P-:.-r‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :


                                                                                                                            n                      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                                                          v‘\.‘¢._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,,                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     41
                             ,-
                                      .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .£_.,..}:_ﬁ

                        _/            .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ...;\_~.-_
I

I
              y.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ”"i‘                                     \..

E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                       .4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '._-‘_-11;;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .-E9/T**?;‘;.T                                              -




                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             §;-;,
    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '                                                          -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -' 'r»?:~:-.~3 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "‘-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~‘+5-|\a:_-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -“:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        . ‘am.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ..‘},1;_.'_;,~.                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?i€$-                                                       ~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  »=$=-,Y4~<,:_=.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '~i.*:.    .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      §‘§-.1‘-::%‘4'3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~-:u.»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 “~-»_.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4?.';1~. ;7»'.;»'_

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘Ii’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;:~<~|L
                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I

                                                                                          .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                .~\-.2i‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘:'~'3'-.~;'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pp                                 .       sq»?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          23.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "Ti;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      51*,                                                                 ;_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘,1,                                              <»                   .‘._-.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J. 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1651'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ":~';'I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    __,.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '-“@iK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :2‘:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *5’                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -$1                                                    “'3?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH                                                     .    ".1"?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -A-'2.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v.~=




    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                               4_

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ii;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $3‘:                                           3??
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.1:’;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a                      .;{1>;1;.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ?"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .;.;'!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r                                                                                                   »-al

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                                      #5:.‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘3§§.'.‘                                                    ~5i~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          >:.K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _\>:'=_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘$.47-_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        113$:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -Q-_.'..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                             .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .44

                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        »                                                                                                -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...‘__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -:-‘>'_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           »":
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;_                                ',-'.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4_~_‘=;~,':_t_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .             ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ....¢-.'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -v                                                     .-é,
                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      luv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                F.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ....‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :25
                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  “:';9_.-._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ._<.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  712$‘;                                                                              L’!
                                                        -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -._.~1_>a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :ta5s :1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .v..‘...-...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P’                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3}?-?:§
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :               *‘,“‘_‘.g'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  51- Y-~»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _5x-                                   1'.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘xii-5;;




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -5-,.-pp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¢

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      In-‘h




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V.‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V,                                                                              ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .,
        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              __'                                           v
        I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I                                                                               X.                                    it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   >.— -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P’
                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘                                                                                                          .k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¢-
        ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   >7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                <1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >                       1                 7




                                                                                                                                                           JP SECRET.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘..


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            'r:f‘*Hj‘_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \                                                                                                                                                                                    ._._,.>-__--_-     j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .-»- F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      »'1.._._...._

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~=.-



                                                                                                                                                                                                              ..._._._._;;_.__,._-;.;_-__-                                                                                          .. _.. .__._."._                                                 ..._.._..,=_.__                         "—-' —-.-=--- 1--
                                               '


                                                                                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                                                  ""                                     -.
                                                                                                                                                                                              --~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~
        ;.,                                                                                    _;__>,__                             _ _'                                                                                                                                                                                       ..
            ...._.
                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                              .       l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .—.—=-_+=--_                                                                                                                                _..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .<                                                                                   ..
                                                                                                                                _




                       v,~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _.___.'.;-_.=-i---_'
                                                                                                                                                               "                         -
                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.~.                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5.

                                                                                                                        -                                                                                                                      -


                                      1*"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W
                                                                                                                                                                            '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b

                                                                                               ‘-'.\-                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “"'*                                                                                                                                       _~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                         _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                   -4;;-.-‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I



                                                                                                                                    >                      <-                                                   ‘_.                                                                                               *"
                                                                          ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         >-
                   ‘                                                          -                                                                                        -v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘-"-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                      _'“".11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                 P’                                                                      ,-
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -- -a                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -                          »-

                                                                                               9.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                      --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,.                                                                                                                                                         _--                                      -»-.--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                   -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘ ---
                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                ~:..»-                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ._                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
             ‘.‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘,.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                            ,-_»v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~»,.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ".-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -_~                       V
                         ’                              ‘-- —-"_                                                                                                                                                    '.'                                                                                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                                                                        ,.
                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                               ,                                                                                                                                                                                        _»_.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    --
                                  '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ’~.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    )3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                               Q:-'I..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ""                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '

                                                                                  ._'                                                                                                                                                                               _r~                                      .¢
                                          ,,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             __                          ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~.,.;4




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
    _       -



                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                             s               '                     0                                           -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E,‘-.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  un ‘W T. ;;_;_._;::.}L1‘:"_.‘;_:V
                                                                                                                                                                                                       I,                          ',_
                                                                                                                                              ,.:_-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g       H ";                             ,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ?‘r'                                                                                J‘       V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _‘               -&_M_>_U.~




                                                                  .                                                                                                                                    ,SECRET;'_                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                          3-’
                                                                                                                                                                                                   gggmity Iniocmsholl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                 -


                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                      0                                                                                    _

                                                                              A                                                                                                        .




                                                                   °"'
                                                                                                                                                          CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
                                                      '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                                                                                                                   WASHINGTON 25 D C

                                                                                                                                                                               omcs or THE ovntcro 8'                                                                                                                     APR1ow:>3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8

                '
                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              __




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :._

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1v              ~-



                                         I
                                                 MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (ADMINISTRATION)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          >._


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "._




                                                 SllBJECT
                                     I

                                                                                                                                                                       t       Project MKlIL'i‘RA - Extremely Sensitive                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1»-,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢_               -.


                                                          -
                                                                                                                                     '


                                                                                                                                                                               Research and Development Program                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~'             '-'            .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3'1,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -;,_<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




                                                        I. On 6 June I952, the Project Review Committee approved
                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .¢‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \
                                     -
                                                                                          I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .'




                                                 the DD/PITSS Research Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .._JA-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .               .




                                                          {or Fiscal Year I953. _'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _                _         _       _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                      ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '


                                                     U                                    _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1'4"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I




                                                  _                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ..’_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.




                                                          The PRC approval authorized the Director oi’ Research,
                                                              -'
                                                                          -
                                                                                                               Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >4 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                              at his discretion and with the a;»;roval of the Research Chairman, to
                                         ‘


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                             '



                                              obligate the research funds and apportion them among individual pro-
                                             ejects, such projects to be subject to the usual Agency procedures and
\




                                                 administrative controls.                                                                                                                                                                          "                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ’




                                                                                Research Programcontemplated by T35
                                                                                                       -3.                      A small part                                    oi’ the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      »a




                                                 and discussed with me consists oi ultra-eensitive work. The nature oi
1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -r




                                                 the research and the security considerations involved pfcciude handling
                                                 the projects by means of the usual contractual agreements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -




                                                have, therefore, approved the obligation and expenditure by
                                                              '


                                                                              .
                                                                                                  -

                                                                                                               4.               i4

                                 , TSS of _6%       of the total budget       already approved by the PRC
                                                                                                                                                 A



                                                                                                                                         -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a


                                   for research for FY '53 without the signing of the usual contracts or
                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I




                                   other written agreements.                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '




                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                __                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                               _                                    _.                                                                                                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _




                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                              This     6%‘         will be handled as Project MKULTRA.
                                                                                                                                                              '


                                                                                                           5'.
                                                                                                                                                                                           '



                                             J                                            »                                                                                                                 _'




                                    Would you please make the necessary arrangements so that invoices
                                                          _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  »-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -        ~




                                    lorwarded by T55 applying to MKULTRA will be paid, provided that:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t




                                                ‘~
                                 .



                                 -1                                               .                        -
                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                       .‘                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _lor FY '53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -




                                                                                                           a)                   "in the aggregate, they do not exceed                                                                                                                                                          6%
                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                      _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i‘.'>:

                                                                                                                                 without further authorization from me; ~
                                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '4                                                                   ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¢__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;
                                                                                                      ~.
                                                                                                                           4_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1    '_            ‘)1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l.
                                                                              .



                                                                                                                                 each invoice is to bear a certification by the Chief,
                                                                                                                                                          -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                  I‘
                                                                                                           b)
                                                                                              ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .   --fe                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .:-¢..
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~                           <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .~.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~



                                                                                                                                                                                   SECRET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~                       gill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '-_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                        _




                                                                                                                                                                           '§oeuritylnIom\eli'oI_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               —-
    .   .           V.                           -rt                                                           -                                -                               '-~~~~--.-                  -—~--—:.5— -.1               .-I     ~—---           ~           --                                   '       -'            -                                                                                             2'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5__ =1’                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                    _M_1dﬁ_“_*A_4§_Qp[Q\§ed_[g_r Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                       H
                                                                                                                              4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I




       .           U                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sE_CRET
                                                                                                                                                                                                           i



                                                             _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              §,¢\,my' lnlormalioli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '-"



                                                                                          .




                                                                      /I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                  ».,.\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~           <                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a              "L
                                                    .-=                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         as
                                        .9‘,                                                                                                                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sf,
                                                                                                   .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .,




           /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :




                               17"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                                                                                                  '-                                                                                                        ::                                                   __
                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                          I                                                                                     1                                                                                                          "                                                                     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .. _-as
                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ._           5'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .,_.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ._Y
       "
                                                                                                                                                                                     '-




                                                                                                                                                    DD/PITSS, as the Research Director, that the invoice
                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r.--
                                                     0

                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                um
     --J                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '.~.-:




                                                                                                                                                    applies to Project ->.u~:u1.'rxu'\ and the conditions ,
                                                                                                                         __                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '-dr-
                                                                                                                                   '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o




                                                                                                                                                    outlined in the DD/P memorandum for DC! difed 3 April
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :               "-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                    have been comjalied with. The certification will also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .i~:r.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘

                                                                                                                                           -_




                                                                                                                                                    request that payment be made;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1'13 57-’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             »


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              - -'.-;-.1’;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _                                                                                                     l'=‘-T=‘3}_-'.                                    '1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .__




                                                                                                                                                    the invoice shall bear the certification of the Executive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ."

                                                                                                       in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -._.x.                        -.


                                                                                                                                                    Secretary of the Research Board that the scope of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                              44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A                                                                           at?‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3'5?
                                                                                                                                                    program has been approved;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘                                                                            ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '.j_. t
                                                                                                                   j A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ><
                                                                                              -                                                                                                                                                                                        __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _                                                                                                                              '_ -,_.-                                    :.\




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -iX>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :1 ‘~‘:)..,,,~‘




                                                                                                                                                    the invoice shall bear the cer_ti_fica\t_i_on of the cognizant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =-z V".-

                                                                                                       ll                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1..-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \W; . -,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                    ‘T55 Division Chief that the work has been satisfactorily                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "._..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -




                                                                 _~
                                                                                                                                                    performed from a technicalfpoint of view and has been
                                                                                                                                                    carried out in accordance with the understandings reached
                                                                                                                                                    between TSS and the individual or concern doing the work.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5%..

                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '4


                                                                                                                                                               payment of 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ._




                                                                                                           5. No further documents will be required to justify                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _                         -,5;
                       '




               “
                                                         the invoices. Exacting control will be maintained over the
                                                                                                                         Project by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          at;


                                                         TSS. Although no formal contract will be signed, it will      occasionally
                                        "
               '




                                   "
                                                         be possible for TSS to sign aninformal agreement with the individual                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _c

                                                         or concern performing the work. ln such cases, TSS will retain in its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on                               V



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -~05.




                                                         files all documents. TSS will endeavor wherever possible to
                                                                                                                            obtain
                                                         documentary support of invoices,     such  as  cancelled checks,  l’¢C¢ip!¢d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E




                                                                                                 ‘l‘SS files. Such documents at best
                                                         bills, etc.', and these will remain in
'4

                           Y

                                                         will only cover a portion -of the total exgenditures, and the regular
                                                                                                                                  audit
                                                          procedure will not be followed. .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "

                                                                                                                       _                                                                                                                                                                                   ,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I‘                                                                                                                                 I




                                                                         Other provisions and control over the Research Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t

                                                                                                               7.
                                                                              '




                                                             specified in the original l'RC approval remain unaltered. The monthly
                                                -


                                                                                      a




                                                             budget and financial record being submitted by TSS to DDIA will include
                                   -"




                                            '




                                                             financial information on the work being conducted under Project MAULTRA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <.




                                                             showing how much of the 6%          has been committed, how much has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '




                                                             been spent, and how much remains.
                                                                                                                                                                                              _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -




                                                                                                                _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        »


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _                                              l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '.u_.i.sn w.                                              DULLES                                                                                        .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Director, Central Intelligence
                                                                                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -~.‘




                                                                 ‘Distribution:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -gt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ’




                                                _3                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q».

                                                                              Addressce - Orig. in I Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lil‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                           J-_
                                                '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _4                                                                                                                  _                                                                                                                      #-
                                                                  DDIP - l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘t
                                                                                                                                                                                                               __             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~".



                                                                 _,?$5l0C - l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '       ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                    _
                               -




                                                                              Exec. Registry - l
                                   ’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘tr-mfé




                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,_..


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ssinuitv hkrmlﬁﬂ
                                                                                                                                                                                              '"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1?

                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                     1                      -
                                                                                                                                                        V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v.
;                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q‘.
                                                                                                           .



‘



                                                                                                                                                       ‘j               --                '-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .-=;;:»-,--:~.-c___‘_1
           .
                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _Q..__; _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -»---;"*"j '                                          T




                                                                                                                                                                             Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                              Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                              Ii‘                     ‘
                                                                                        :;P1                                  ‘ml.
                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ’




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y


                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                    _.SECRET
                                                                                                       '




                                                                   .                                                                                    e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '


                                                                                                                                                                Sqicurm/lr'-""f*“°“'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                  ‘                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t

                                                                                                                                            I                                                                                            _        -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .?;~.\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z1Apm~19sa"
                                                                                                       '

                                                                        '                                                                                   ‘-.                                                             '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               it»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~-
                                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~~.--


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E


                                      MEMOHANDUM_FOR Til-IE FILE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      "




                                                                                                                                                                                         -,               .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1


                                      sunincr          Project MKULTRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                »



                                                                                                                              =-
                                  ~


                     ..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ».—.=<.<--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \'~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .-‘   1!,                   -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -t.             »_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           'L.{                        |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


                                              Project MKL-ILTRA was established by means of a memorandum
                                          I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '0



                                                          1,
                          2           dated 3 April 1953 from DD/P to DCI as a result of which on 13 April                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                   ___J3__

                                      I953, DCI wrote to DD/A approving the project subject to certain
                              "                                                                        controls                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                      and limitations which TSS has agreed to maintain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vi
                                                                                                _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.»




                                               In order to comply with these controls, subprojects under MKULTRA
                                                          Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              was




                                      will be handled as outlined in the DD/P memorandum to the DCI dated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sf... ~.~_'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =1.
                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l




                                      3 April 1953. In brief;
                                                                                                                                                                    '




                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V


             .                                                                                                                                                                                                             A:                                           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                     A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                              "
                                                          -
                                                                       (a)                                 A
                                                                               separate file will be kept on each subproject. The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <




                                                                            foundation of each file will be an agreement between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q
                                                               H




                                                                            TSS and the contractor outlining the work to be done,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                            the conditions under which it will be accomplished, the
                                                                            estimated costs of so doing, etc. Wherever possible,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _




                                                                           "this agreement will be signed by both parties, but in
                                                                            extreme cases need not be signed by the contractor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j3‘
                                                                            In such an event, it is still necessary to prepare such a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       »

                                                                        '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4!

                                                                            document outlining the verbal agreement and listing
                                                                                    A
                                                                                              ;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,




                                                                            dates and places when meetings took place.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 »
                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _




                                      .                                (b)                                 Atthe same time, the Division Chief will prepare a
                                                                                                           memorandum for file outlining the scope of the program,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t


                                                                            »




                                                                                                           the reasons for its activation, etc. , and containing all                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vt


                                                                                                           pertinent information. This                  will bear the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '




                                                                                         '-
                                                                                                           following:                 f‘            ‘_                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _




                                                                                                           PROGRAM APPROVED                                                                                                  APPROVED FOR.                                                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '




                                                                                                           AND RECOMMENDED:                                                                                                f OBLIGATION or runes;
                                                                                        -_
                                                                                                                                                                                              '




                                                                                I                 '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,\                                                                                                                            _




                                                                                                                                                            h               -"                                                                                                                           *                                   \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘I
                                                                                                                                                -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _..S                                              _d'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .



                                                                                                       C‘_                  ;~_-V
                                                                                                                                                                                     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Q’.                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -

                                                                                                                       4-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                .




                                                                                                                   Research Chairman                                                                                                --                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Research Director

                                                                                                           Date:-——--—-——-——-i-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Date:                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                                                                                                                            _

                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       z

        ;_
                                                                                                                                                                                                              V.                                                                                     a               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             »-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -

                                                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                                                                                        _:                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I               |\}

                                                                                                                                                                             SECRET                                                                                                              3*
                                                                                                                                                            i




I
    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0



        l

                                                                                                                                                    '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I                                           _'.'
                 0
                                                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                    sit!-rfifylniornialiol                                                                     1                                                                                             __                                                                               fa

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A.                    ._                                                                                                .    _..                     ______'_i_4


                                                                                                                              Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                    /’
                      r                         _
                                                                     __
                                                                                          ___»ippr0ved forﬁelease:
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                      9/04/Q§QQ_67g67,515_ _“_ ___
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        __




                                                                                                                                                                        l"'°'m*M“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '



                                                                                                                                            '


                                                                                                                                                         $'¢;uriI‘I                                                 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R. 3"‘.                        1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                     _’.._




                M When                 Division Chief
                  a memorandum addressed
                                                          also prepare
                                                Comptroller,
                                                                              preparing.(b), the
                                                                                    Attention:                                                                               to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   will                                                                                                                                                           vI I’_;"':‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ’-4~j~_*-‘I




                                   Finance Division. This memorandum will state that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1:35-.1


                                                     has been approved, and $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {Q-'1                         '




                                                                                           of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '




                                   subproject                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -~-I



                                   over-all project MKULTRA funds have been      obligated  to
                                   cover the project's expenses. This memorandum will be                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘-3;


                                   signed by the Division Chief and will provide space for the
                                   approval of the Research Director and the Research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ."'.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




                                   Chairman as outlined above. This memorandum will                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¢

                                   allow Finance to obligate funds so they will not be lost                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gem
                                   at the end of the Fiscal Year and will provide a document
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .§. kl-




                                   against which action can be taken when invoices are
                                   later presented for payment. This memorandum should
                                   contain absolutely no technical details or information as
                                   to the scope of the work. Copies of the memorandum will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~'~                                                                .-'.'.¢'



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2. -‘$3


                                   be prepared for:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "




                                                Comptroller, Original and E ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \“
                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "?.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5..




                                                Exec. Sec'y., Res. Board - 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘Pit


                                            4’  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -



                                                            .
                                                                              -
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P4

                                                TSSIBudget - l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <-
                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _




                                                TSS Registry - l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                   u




                                                Initiating Division, whatever number is                   -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -H

                                                                                                                                                                                                           required
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘“,§1!"'l"‘I*.1i-€'!\'-‘<v“.'=>.1¥?_i'#_’-i‘**l'.'1




                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .--,1
                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                     »




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J

                (5)
                          ’


                                    Memoranda (b) and (c) will be presented together to the
                                    Research Director and the Research Chairman for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ._.....



                                    signature. Memorandum (b) will be returned for inclu-F
                                        lion in the project file, and memorandum (c) will be
                                        routed to TSS/Budget, .TSS/Supply & Services, TSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IE                                                        ~-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ti




                                        Registry and Comptroller.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ’                                                                                                     fr                                                               fl




                                        It will be the responsibility of the Division Chief handling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ...i..i.-.'Aa..‘L\_lf’




                (¢l
                                        the project to see that the Research Director is kept in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <




                                        formed of progress and that reports, correspondence with
                                        the contractor and other documents are kept in the project
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h---'-L.-n_1_-_...___'




                                        nu.      Q ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




                Q

                "m When an invoice is received by the Division, it shall be                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i---




                   forwarded to Chief, Finance Division, via TSS /Budget
                                        Cfficer, with a memorandum stating it applies to subproject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _-_:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                 ‘under Project MKULTRA. The memorandum
                                                                                  C


                                   _‘                                     »




                                        should provideany special instructions involving method of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.




                                        payment, i, e. , whether by check or cash, etc. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :4                                                                                        ~.




                                        following certifications must appear- onythe invoice or be                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘if "‘


                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L.


                                                                                                                                                                    SEcRa._
                                                                     ,.p_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i                                            e                                                                              _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,\.,\p‘\_i,,_,;,.5\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5;».
                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \




                                                                                                                                                 '_s.~r=w\»'°r"""'°“
                                                                                                                                                              '.        -'-Z-_                                                                                                                                           ~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l_.-<w-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                                         ..j

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IL.--“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _._/7'




      _   ' '                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _'         '                           -'                          '_,,,       __s____._,____ _'—
“i”
                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         --A-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                              --,
                                                                                                                                   -'
                 .¢                                                                                                                                               _..                                                                                                     .-—-                                  ._i_I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l_
                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                        ,                                 .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.          ._       _,____                                                                                          _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                           *.
                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                              ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |_,
                                        _


                      _       ..
                                    '               '
                                                                .,                    ‘       -
                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                              -I            ~\   .       -»                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                          _       __   ._r.T._._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .—_   ___          ._..            __ ______>_                              __‘___i___          ,___,_: _ _..
                                                                                                                                                                         _




                                                                                                  Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                                               _ Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '.'»‘1v-TQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        --4: r
                                                                                                                                           ’
                                                                                                                                                                                       _
    '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '



                                                0             I                            j
                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "\
                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         55515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P‘
                                                                                                                     v‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,~                                .
                                                                                                                                            '

i
                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "    0                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '




                                                                                                        /'
    I



;                                                                                                                                                                                                              ./.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               g€ct"=1!ylnl:>rmaYle4
*




                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                j.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ..‘_-,..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s=_.~_‘-.5\
                                                                               __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <11-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -L-,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       V


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘


                                                         -I                                                                                                 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.

                                                    I                                                                                                                              Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               '

                                                                                                                          4.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                            attached to it:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _




                                                                                                                                                                                    certified that this is
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Invoice No.
                                                                                                                                                                (ll "It is hereby
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .                                                                                                                   £-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Iv

                                                                                                                                                                                               of Project                                                                                                                                                                             MKULTRA;
                                                                                                                                                                aPPl Y‘'ng to subproject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =|_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 contractor)
                                                                                                                                                                                performance by (name of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                    that technical                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                    the work was accomplishe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F

                                                                                                                                                                    has been   satisfactory,  that
                                                                                                                                                                                              rnutualagreement reached with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            é"-">§'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ;v¢--                    ___




                                                                                                                                                                    in accordance with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..‘.J


                                                                                                                                                                                                   this bill is just and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         correct
                                                                                                                                                                    (name   of contractor),  that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I                            -_.=

                                                                                                                                                                                                      not yet been made’.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :|'_;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .A >_H':|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~,.

                                                                                                                                                                    and that payment thereof has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -I-7..I'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~~.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _,           .~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5,‘




                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                        Date:p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '                                     '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P (Division Chief)"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                  ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "§~.',‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘.1’-34>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -'_                   .,-,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4? l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~




                                                                                                                                                                        ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _7~_.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            " --w-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   »                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                        '_*1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applies to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ="---.,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    this invoice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '                          -_».-'._L]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "It is hereby certified that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [5-


                                                                                                                                                                                            under Project MKULTRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      which was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               J‘
                                                                                                                                                                        (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w Q11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                                                                                            subproject
                                                                                                                                                                                                       project has been carried out
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 »l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~/

                                                                                                                                                                            duly approved and that the    memorandum to DCI dated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~.




                                                                                                                                                                            in accordance with the DD/P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3


                                                                                                                                                                                                      memorandum to DD/A dated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .           l        .            -.




                                                                                                                                                                            3 April 1953 and the DCI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      41.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ."<                                    :




                                                                                                                                                                                                        authorized and requested.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '




                                                                                                                                                                            13 April 1953. Payment is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :3?’ 1-»,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _               A
                                                                                                                                                            ';Date:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -



                                                                                                                                   <


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1


                                                                                                                                                                    d


                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Research Director"
        g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -                                    ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                program ofv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .i1!'.|
                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11-;


                                                                                                                                                                                                certified that the scope of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‘.1                                                 K




                                                                                                                                                                               (3) "Itis hereby
                                                                                                                                                                                                of Project MKULTRA has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            been approved.
                                                                                                                                                        A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               »
                                                                                                                                                                               subproject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                   Date:_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        p       _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘$.-
                                                                                                                                       »_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _‘.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sec'y. ,’ Res. Bd, "y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1'-.“Zx'ec'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2’!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          __i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               51


                                                                       ‘
                                                                               '1‘SSIOC:evsr Ijel (20 April 1953)
                 '
                                                                  _
                                                                                       -




                                                                                               ~;
                                                                                                                ::4::                                                                                                              -.                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -:




                                                                                                                                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                   Distribution:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '



                                                                  "'                                                                                                                                                                                                 1   _i_




                                                                                           /1’ss/oc - Orig. a 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _'E'__-I-4L1;




                                                                      _i                   frss/cn - 1
                                                                           A
                                                                                   "


                                                                                               TSS/ADMIN - 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '_l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ._.,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "sscm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                         '




            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Security lniormaﬁoﬁ
                                            .
            I



                                    ’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qr’ -._-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _f                   ”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -....___.__.___‘»——-—'__.|n_.j_,_._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.    .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ._                                            -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ._.. __,_._,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '~       4-.                ..                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ___...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '“""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .. ' ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _. .. ._    ._.....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _                                                                                                                                                                   _ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -v-                                                           .‘~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          “                                                                -                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "                                                                                                                            -   --                                                 I»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '1 1"’-"-‘~"'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -                                                                _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "“'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -



                 ,»_Q-T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘V
                                                                                                                                                '                                                          -                                                                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.__-_ .__€___
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           " '
                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .-‘r’                           ~



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘



                     '
                                                              -F’
                                                                                               '
                                                                                                        ---1     _
                                                                                                                          -.~ ~
                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                            . >'           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -' _                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _}
                                                    --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                                §
                .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        __________ ' ""-—-*—~~~—-,_.__-r_,_
                                        _


                         ____   _   _____                 _                    '                        "            "'        '                    '                                                                      .                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ___                                                                                              ,_                               i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515                                                                                                                                                                                     _




                                             ;
                                                                                                                                                        N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ._.,



             ‘                                       4
                                                                                                                      I‘

                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          —                                    L‘ °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -"-‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .' =1                                                                                      1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .»...».@                                                              |                                  \



                                                 ~._.        .
                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     --‘:7:
                                                                             I‘                                                                                                                                                             -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *3 )(3)
                                         '/J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘


                                                             I

                                                         -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s»                        12:?

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mcimxcn. suproar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :2 July 1960
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1-41;‘                     :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '

                         -
                                     "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *.§1..§(,b)(3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1'.-$1                               ,         ,




                                                                                                                                                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ..--;>



                                                                                                                                                                                                      -MKDELTA MATERIALS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *=-=-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '1':
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .;="_\,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘$5                                __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &.<"’<-‘-,=-                                       ->




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V. W '3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ?

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1'




                                                                     .
                                                                             -
                                                                                              llescission:                                                                                                                                  October 1952                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 §)<8>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘:1;



                                                                     .i.0sm'-:nA1._                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -~                                  i,                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >‘.'.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “#41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ._,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            =3 .___


                                                                                                                                                                MKDELTA materials are certain chemical and biological materials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fig‘.                       .1

                                                                                                              »
                                                                                                                                   1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           If-1""



                                                                                                                                                                (including K and L tablets) capable oi producing human behavioral or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _                     _c__                                 _   =


                                                                                                                                                    ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -'.'».;,'=.                                            .4‘


                                                                                                                                            '


                                                                                                                                                                physiological changes. Such materials may be obtained only in accord-                                                                                                                                                                                                   _                                            _'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘£95.-._            \'.


                                                                                                                                                                nnce with the provisions oi this instruction.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     _                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                The provisions oi the instruction are not intended to cover those mate-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‘~11.

                                                                                                                                   b.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S                    w_‘l                    _




                                                                                                                                                                rials commonly known as harassment materials..
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                              '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1           _-4



                                                                         ‘aroma?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                          ;;~_


                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .-         .4                            __                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I


                                                                                                                                   n.- net use oi MKDIZLTA materials will be limited to situations in the ex-
                                                                         '




                                                                                                                                                                ercise oi oiiicial duties which clearly justiiy such use.

                                                                                                                                   b. ‘ﬂteir issuance will be strictly controlled and will require in each in-                                                                                                                                                                                                   _




                                                                                              \                            1
                                                                                                                                      stance ‘the written approval oi the Deputy Director (Plans).
                                                                                                                                        ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :1-;_i




                                                                                                                               _¢. _Ml(I)EL'!‘A materials not used ior the purpose ior which they were issued
                                                                                 »

                                                                                                                                                                will be promptly returned to TSD; on-the-sheli storage against possible
                                                                                                                                                                iuture needs will not be permitted.
                                                                                                                       '
                                                                             '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        --                                        4


                                                                                                          _                                                                                                                                               _                                               _




                                                                                 .                a.                               raocsouass                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -,           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.       _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e-_.,,.._._...




                                                                                                                                                                Informal discussion oi the requirement to determine its technical teasi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    “
                                                                                     '"
                                                                                              ,-
                                                                                                                                   an.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                                                                                bility will be held with TSD beiore preparation oi any iormal request or
I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _.4--.



                                                                                                                                    '


\

                                         ‘           “                                                                     7                                    any coordination with other elements.                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -,3,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _                            4
                                                                                                                                            y

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                   b." Requests ior the issuance oi these materials will be prepared in rnetn0~
                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                       randum iorm ior the signature oi the Chiei or Deputy Chiei oi the Op-
                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                      '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8



                                                                                                                                       crating Division or Stati concerned. No other signature is authorized.
                                                                                                                               _

                                                                                                                           ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r

I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
                 ..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
1                    .
                                                                                                                      _
                                                                                                                                                        .             .                                                                                                                                                                                                                _

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r


                                                                                                                                    6. This memorandum will be routed iirst to any other division(s) or staii(s)
    \
        H‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                             -

                                                                                                                                       whose coordination is necessary, then to the Chiei, TSD, who will append
                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                 *                                                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                   ‘"
                                                                                                                                       his comments and return it to the originator ior transmittal to the Deputy
                                                                                                                                       Director (Plans) ior approval. Transmittal oi the memorandum will be
                                                                                                                                        '


                                                                                                                      -




                                                                                                                                                                    on an Eyes Only basis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '

                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                                                                                               -                                                                                      <             =
                                                                                                                       --
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I.                                                                                   _




                                                                                                                                       d. Procedures used in the past that may have diiiered irom the above will
                                                                                                                                                                ‘mlongerbeused.                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s                    »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                        ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,-r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |




                                                                                                                                       '                                                                                   '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sscru-:-r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i

    -
                             "   '                   '=          '
                                                                                     ',
                                                                                                          A‘                                    '           1')‘ "            1‘            ._.=e"'   '-                                            --'{'i‘.4'!"‘7“=—="!!‘\jvr'~_\!~»=;\-~Téc\i.-w——-=_..                                                                                                  —.».-'-r>.--_--.- __.-It-—.——:-.-."-"'                                                                   ,;




                                                                                                                                                                                           Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                     _
                              ‘
                                  \ 4
                                            I
                                            _.




                                            "
                                                 -‘
                                                      n
                                                          ‘
                                                          '


                                                          1
                                                              _
                                                              ‘
                                                                  u




                                                                  I



                                                                      '




                                                                          1
                                                                              n




                                                                                  LRECORDS
                                                                                  t
                                                                                  .
                                                                                              -e. ~
                                                                                                   .7‘




                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                         ;-
                                                                                                              ~   -
                                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                                      ;-_'-
                                                                                                                              -»
                                                                                                                              -




                                                                                                                              Q:
                                                                                                                                  F
                                                                                                                                          Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                                                                                                      , '_~
                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                       *.
                                                                                                                                                            ‘J
                                                                                                                                                                 ,.--
                                                                                                                                                                    _;‘




                                                                                          The Chief, TSD, will maintain a record of all issuances, to include the date
                                                                                          of issuance, the name and signature oi the immediate recipient, and a refer-
                                                                                          ence to the approved memorandum request, which he will keep in a readily
                                                                                                                                                                  ~           - er ‘.1;        .~» ..;.~~~_.-_“_--T’ ~ .~




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ““?“"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0                       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -7;




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _"l'ECI'1NlCALSUPPOR'l‘__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :2 July 1960
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -vi».-'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              'j-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _..;_'.j




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _:   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~~_'--U,’ :§




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ll)|'-"1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '_       ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P)§3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          j_;.;




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O"




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              §I<,)‘_(13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1»;-;_\




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ='
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i




                                                                                          available supporting tile.                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ./\1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mczwzn M. mssr-21.1., m.                                                                                                                                                                :                                        ;"j"7;;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Deputy Director



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Plw)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .- .~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =4

        l

                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,_.':g.=_;;~,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.‘;&_:,_-»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,"._                      ,1'ﬁ



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gr?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,_
    \                                                                                                                                             _u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ---_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .'.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _-.1              -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :;€

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =-»I\_                               t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F2;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                      ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3,.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘*'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                ~.                                                 ,~
                                                                                                         ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             >I;                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,2-__

                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~                      -



                                        '
    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                  ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I-‘I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                          \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1"
                --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ::--                              1+                                         -'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,1.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .-_¢

            '
                     E"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5'
I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1El.1.f=3
    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .' ~(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f                                 '._-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .f:,:?*’e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in
    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _=:                      ;_\=,                                          '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                                 -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -\-.-                                     -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a

                                                                                      -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /'.             4-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \



_
                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                         “                  <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I                   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |-'\;
                                                                                                                                                                                     »


                "                                                                                                                                                         '

!


                                                                                                                                                                                              'sr:cms:'r                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘?“'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F‘                   '\-.7»

                                                                                                                                                                                          '

E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ',~_                          I




                 '                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1                A                                              -s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ""’
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A                                                        |                                                               ->

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1                       _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                                                       "                "7"‘l, 1‘                                               \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,_..‘;_ll~._.;m=‘;-9. '_IIi'1;;._Te                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘




                                                                                                                                          Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                   i                                        _‘                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03                                                                                                C06767515_.E~____ ___‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                                                                                            4




                                                               q,                        3           1'                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                           ,~......~.,.\_..,_               ..           .       .4        .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '.;,\.,-.\_                       ..                                ,-                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -',_...                                                _»-..                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ll                                                                                                                                                                   '_.                                                       >_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I":
                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u_
                                                                                                                                                                               ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            --                                                                                                                                                                                                          >
                                                                                                                              .~o'i(.‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ’           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1‘

                                                                                                     Q                                                                         A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D                                        .                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    153-                                                                                3..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            “
I
                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '                '                                             _                                                                                                      '                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                       .,:“"                     <                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                  ,-                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            »_‘5§,'___;_,’.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Q
                                                                        I
                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I

                                                                                                              r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ixwégia
                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <--
                                                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .




                                                                                     ,,.“<'                               r                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -



                                                                                 .                                                 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (_




                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                          .‘.                                                                                I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .



                                                           -
                                                                                                                                           ,_                              I   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F»-‘Y:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘

                                           0   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (‘>12-_.:~                                                                          >

    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1'                     »'
    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.-..~;~.?<::'§!



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .,,,.=-__.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘\'1;,5-=“§S'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .::.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,1‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘

                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             “-.u~'? -_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I                                                    I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?2$@;E-ea.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3$.                                                                                           '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,4.‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _.a-.    .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I                        -




    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ﬁ*~’=‘~.‘“~i3
    ~1
                                       _
                                                           ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                gzﬁ-‘..\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -                                                                                                                                            "_..;:;-L.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ._|»‘ ---




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ._!'§-"”-'1'

                                                                                     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25*»?                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘1-..._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *1"                                 -                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3;;-'1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        91:’: -F-*5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '                       '*=\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ' "‘
                                                                                                     ,                                                                                 _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    j_-.,.--                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -                                                   ~
        \
                                                                                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _                                                                                                                                _                            .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :5; .;-_;                                                            .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '7-'1’-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f;_._




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                    1';

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;»-                                                                      "'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,"'._.                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :4‘-"~                                                               7'"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ';
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.,_.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r’-'                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ...

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =:‘                               .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    €".7<                                                               -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                                                         -‘-5": 5"                                            V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                                             sag                                                ,'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1!"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i3‘.‘.Y¢




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I                                                                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vi‘?



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =5;-1-'                                                                           ’.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q--,:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .'           I                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EV-I.                                                                                     L



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                              '
            1;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \'-:~




            ‘.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '."




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1&0»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -..;-




                                                                                                                  ,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i J1%qu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ..




                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .' X -=‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -_               .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                               '
                               4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘I-_-.¢.'......




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '=>?‘1"~'~:@*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5!.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '~""*z                       ,._                           ‘}'*'2§:\.v.,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -~.i




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \                                                                                                                            »</"




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘_           '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                --_"A_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 its-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '                -_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ."




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '\ ~~ -'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                g‘                            3                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '.                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ..,.




                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \                                                                                                                                      v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,1
            ‘_‘.4._v...___._




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n-=..                                                 ‘»_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _-_~__,__/




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                                                                                                                                                    <

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ___,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                               V                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -_"'...=,'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘T7’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5'




               .

               _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -                                                                                                              '_.--.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .;;-                         10;,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,8!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _


                                                                            »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |___...;-I-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,,_..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1--'




                                                                                                                                                                                                          ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                   __.___




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                                    -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘fl
                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                                                       ...‘..__..-....._.-_--,---_- _------~-------- »-~_- ~—-- ~ »-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  J:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *\
                                                                    0       .    __.                 ._.._.            .._.
                                                                                                                              .-.
                                                                                                                                           .    ...       ....._:_,.
                                                                                                                                                                   ,..                                         ,.                                                              ..   -.                      ._._.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘           -- <~-.X

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ._.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U                           ww                                                      H_=I".                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -                                                 H                                1
                                                                                                 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ._...                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                   5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                          .                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -                    ,1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _
                                                   ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z
                                                       .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .                                                                                                                                             _       ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  é
                   .                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                __




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Approved for Release: 2019/04/03 C06767515
                                                    ;;E_',1.:.'E,                                                                                                                  7;;--a 'v              ~ -A---— .-Y-~         ~-=~-~-~-\-—-J- J5-~                                      -   ~-                                .                                                         -.-~
                                                                                                                                                                                               approved for Release: 2019/04/03 006723751
                                                                                                                             ;73~‘§.»‘i'f*_5'¢'*'f‘f"'.-.'.‘.-”\=!31,‘.'!f,§‘-"
                                                                                                            5
_                                                                                                                        ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ll»            ~¢
                                                                          f

-
            4%-
            -.-                                                       J                        -    .
                                                                                                                 0
             2,121,                                               v   '1                                .




                                                2
                                                                          "-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \


                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                          nnsmnca
                            ‘.v{,
                                                                                                                                                                                                ~

            __                       .;_                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                   e

                                                                                                                                          .
                                     -pk;


                                                                                                                                                                                                          PROGRAM
                        .



                 .L                            ..-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MKULTRA
             .       .                          .


                 ':.
                                                                                                                                                    §_Y_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i                       TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
            .<,;>
            -1-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                         s"

             :12
            _, ';
                                                                                                                                               196°
                                               ..
            ..0                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \‘



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3-7
                                   ».,§                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                            5%
                                                                                                                                                                                           .




            _                      -Ki                            .                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    @;#,~1e¢;J@9",;9.Qa<*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                          1|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H

                                                                                                                                              1961
                                                                              '
                 1.                      '5              ‘

        |
                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Q"   "'.i*1|v~5'        -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1;‘                                .


                                    ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2-




                                                         \ .1
                                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                              @
            -ﬁt

            re                  °;,"‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (W1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.1.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                        _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |           '_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v
                                   '°-A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~-_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b_)(3)1.8,,=,99_9.-$5. ,5, .,                            “L,--_'        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                 -~.~




                 -=
                            7
                             -9'




                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                      »
                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                              1963* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q »,@9s;mQ"                                                               7-3                          -»

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '-'_".'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1       .




                                     @-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                .                    4




                                                                                                                             ".*- Thrwsh8M=y1963.’
                                    .1?

                                       /.



                        -Y
                                   n
                            ?sf
                                       -nr


                        4".


                 L

                            Ts"
                                                                      '
                                                     '
                 ._


                                   >27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ->




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4

            A _J.
            W}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ii




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                  .4,‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T~.|

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
            <1”                                              ..




            <»
                                    [:._;¢.E




                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vi},



                                                                  ‘\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T1‘




                                                                                               _e
                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                              \‘§                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \




                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -_

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..            ‘.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -P.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \




    \




        ,_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l',<:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¢ ;
            '-'\¢                                                                         .                 xs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~"                   =




pvt
 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,-I

            :1                                       _
                                                                                                                     V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‘er

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I

                              ‘Q.
                                4                                 .




                                               ..q'                                                                                                                               -—'-n_______.-‘I’ '_n|-nip, __                   _       _   ___—_~;—_   ,__                 ___                         W
                        "

r
                                                                                                                                                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                                          W                    Approved for Release: 2019/O4/O3 CO676%515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \
