[RAW OCR — 'CIA R&D and Testing of Behavioral Drugs,' Inspector General memorandum for the Director
of Central Intelligence, 5 February 1975, with attached summary paper]
[Source: CIA CREST document C01434878, mirrored at https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-01434878]

Seer 


17/ 43¢ 


Sawctassirieo Ch (eyaqenerreewse ardomne co 


SPROUTING AND RECORD. SHEET 


Pan " 
e ‘ % 2 ied oe x 
4 * 


eee ies [Sees se Februar 


(Number each comment ‘te show from2whoms 
_gi tine across columa after each comment. 


SE PREVIOUS 
. EDITIONS 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


| RABE ee ee 
. § ‘tp pproved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 
aoe ™ Oe ees Maes = lcgetues 


5 February 1975 ; 
MEMORANDUM.FOR: Director of Central Intelligence | 


_ SUBJECT |... 4 GIA R&D and Testing of Behavioral 
a ee Drugs — : ane 


o. /° , Attached is a paper summarizing CIA interest over the - 
~. years in behavioral drugs. We believe that this touches on all. 


-. R&D programs that the Agency has conducted in the past, including — 
. the incident involving the death of an employee of the Department ~ 


.. of the Army in 1953... Records do not permit a description of such 
- yelationships as may have existed between these various activities; - 
itis apparent that there was some sharing of information between 
different components in the Agency, and some overlap in time, “~ 
but there also are indications of independent approaches to the - 
problem. a ee ee, aes ee po ee 


2. ‘We have been informed by ADDO that although the DDO 
has an instruction on behavioral drugs -- MKDELTA -~ this was : 
established against the event that same such materials became 
available and has never been implemented in fact. There are 
no operational records in the DDO in this connection. 


3. We can sanitize the paper for. transmittal to the 
investigating authorities when you have reviewed it.” 


~ Donald ¥. Unamneriam 
pares Inspector General 
ttachment a/s eng 


ce: Mr. Enoche.. 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


'  gubject is of general interest because of the operational applications 


- Mindszenty in February 1949. 


PES, hh ae 2 oo ee Mo £2 Re? con 3~Ye 
." Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 la 79 alee ae 


7 Behavioral Drugs, and Testing . - Chaevcene) 2 
1. ClAhas hada recurring interest in behavioral drugs. The | 


that could be made against Agency employees by hostile forces, for 
which there would be a defensive requirement, as well as for possible - . 
use against foreigners to influence their behavior. The earliest 

. record of this interest dates. ta the post-WWIL period when there were . 
indications of Soviet interest in the use of drugs for such purposes, | 
the most famous example being the bizarre confessions of Cardinal 


' '2,. In the past CIA's interest in behavioral drugs was expressedin . 
at least three programs, which have been identified. These programs 
apparently proceeded on largely independent courses, subject to some a: 
' inforraal coordination by a group referred to as the ARTICHOKE Committee,” 
which started in April 1952. This mechanism provided the means for ‘ 
exchanging information and for deciding which components would assume » 
responsibility for certain study and research. Representation on the 
ARTICHOKE Committee was from the Offices of Scientific Intelligence 


'-. (QSI) and Medical Services (OMS) and the predecessor organizations ofthe. 
| Offices of Security (OS) and Technical Services (OTS). The ARTICHOKE 


Committee initially was concerned with drugs that would assist in 
interrogation, but the concept expanded to include drugs that would serve — 
as a defense against hostile application to Agency employees as well as 
drugs that would afford some control when administered to an individual. 
Remaining records, which are not complete, refer to sodium. pentothal 
and sodium amytal, as well as LSD. | Pee 


"+ BLUEBIRD/ARTIGHOKE 
* 3. In 1949 the Office of Scientific Intelligence (OSI) undertook the 
‘ analysis of foreign work on certain unconventional warfare techniques, 
including behavioral drugs, with an initial objective of developing a 


capability to resist or offset the effect of behavioral drugs. Preliminary 
nhases included the review of drug-related work at institutions such as (b)(3) 
| 
( 


a 


There also was extensive review of foreign literature, particularly work 


(b)(3) 8, 


‘(b)(3) 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


ae 


‘Approved for Release: 2017/01/11 8 C01434878 


Were cad Si acs 


in. the Soviet Bloc. This program shortly became Project BLUEBIRD, 
with the objectives of (a) discovering means of conditioning personnel 
to prevent unauthorized extraction of information from them by known 
means, (b) investigating the possibility of obtaining control of an © 
individual by application of special interrogation techniques, (c) memory 
enhancement, and (d) establishing defensive means fOr preventing hostile 
control of Agency Beeeonnet: 


4, In August 1954 Project BLUEBIRD was renamed Project ARTICHOKE 
which, in 1952, was transferred from OSI to the predecessor organization 
of the Office of Security. OSI did retain a responsibility for evaluation of 
‘foreign intelligence aspects of the matter and in 1953 made a proposal that 
experiments be made in testing LSD with Agency volunteers; OSI records 
indicate that no.such experiments were made. OSI's involvement in this: 
project was terminated in 1956. Meanwhile, the emphasis given ARTICHOKE 


dn the predecessor organization to the Office of Security became that of usé 


of materials such as sodium pentothal in connection with interrogation 
fechhiques and with the polygraph. 


| 5. There are cpetersnwes to ARTICHOKE Teams eine to Eiieee 
and East Asia during the 1950s, for the apparent purpose of interrogation 


—. of foreign agents, but the results of such operations are not revealed by — 


.. of which drugs were only one aspect, others being radiation, electro- 


exiseing: records. 
MKDELTA/MKULTRA/MKSEARCH 


6. On 29 October 1952 a formal policy was established by the Deputy 
Director of Plans (as then styled, now Deputy Director for Operations) for 
the use of biochernicals in clandestine operations (MKDELTA). This was 
‘in anticipation of the development of behavioral drugs, but was never 
. implemented operationally. MKDELTA research was brought under a 
‘special funding procedure established on 3 April 1953 (MKULTRA). The(b)(3) | : 
. program considered various possible means for controlling human behavior — 


shock, psychology, psychiatry, sociology, anthropolozy, harrassment  (b)(3) 
‘substances, and paramilitary devices and materials. There were contacts 


with individuals at such institutions as 
= ——___(b)(3)_ 
as well as with various pharmaceutical houses, 


hospitals and federal institutions, the names of which are no longer available. 


a — (b)(3) 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 - 


Among the materials studied were psylocbin from Mexican mushrooms, 
a fungus occurring in certain crops, and LSD. Following laboratory 
testing a second phase was begun which involved testing on voluntary _ 
participants. The final phase involved application on unwitting subjects, 
in normal social situations, commencing in 1955 under an informal 
arrangement with individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics. Originally 
conducted on the West Coast, a similar arrangement was instituted 


in 1961 on the East Coast. Such tests were conducted from time to time 
‘until 1963 when the Inspector General discovered the activity and questioned 


the program. At that time it was reported that in a number of instances 
test subjects became ill for hours or days following the application, and 
there was one reported instance of hospitalization, the details of which 
are no longer available. Project records do not now exist, but it is 
reported that the project was decreased significantly each budget year 
until'it was completely terminated in the late 1960's, 


ae ‘Follwing tis Inspector Gshevilic challenge of the program, 
there was a review of its nature and it was resubmitted for approval 
under the name of Project MKSEARCH. The written proposal did not 
specify whether testing was to be limited to volunteers, Records 


‘indicate that the DCI did not approve unwitting testing; it is understood 


that there was no renewal of this aspect of the activity. Funding for 
MKSEARCH~commenced in FY-1966, running through 1972. There were 
various research activities carried on under it, but the only aspect 


' yelated to behavioral drugs deal with an inquiry in improvement by 


drugs of learning ability and memory retention; under this there is a. 
record of testing at Iden1 State Prisonin Iden5 _. on volunteers, 


Drug-related Death of an Investigator 


8. The predecessor organization of the Office of Technical Service: 


. was the focal point for the operational investigation of behavioral drugs, 
although none of the office's records on this activity are in existence, 


having been destroyed in January 1973. As noted above it participated 


in the meetings of the so-called ARTICHOKE Committee. That office 


maintained liaison with personnel at Iden 6 :, with whom meetings 
were held once or twice a year to discuss questions involving behavioral 
drugs. At one such meeting at Iden 7 in Maryland, 

‘Iden 8 1953, with seven representatives from Iden6 ¢and 


*. three from CIA, eight of those present were administered LSD which had 
-been introduced into a bottle of Cointreau. Although records of an inquiry 


by the Inspector General into the incident indicate that those present 


‘Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


i ll nani et at nen a ete a tet Sa tt 


wenbitoe -fe he sale. 


0 Oe aneaamten naan manatee tie att neettitatn tos Ae eA ee ne whahenehenin nie eee 


.. not drink alcoholic beverages at all and the other refrained be- wes Pine et 
-cause.of a heart condition. - a 


° "this" treatment. he threw himself through a closed window in his. room. o 
"on the tenth floor of the Iden 1I, falling to his death. 


.. death resulted from "circumstances arising out of an: experiment ~ 


, Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 *: a 


Pe ee eet eet cl al ad eter oe Bao “oo 
Facto FA eae hw aaa A at yn tat mane St NaN rett Nake fn climes 


- 


aiscupece testing a on: anwitting persons, and agreed | in principle Be 
that such a program should be explored, none of them were advised 
‘until some 20 minutes after ‘they drank the Cointreau that it had | 
been treated with LSD. Of the two who did not take it, one did 


One of the members of the. group, a 
civilian employee of the Department of Army named Iden 9, had. 
serious after-effects: He was sent at CIA expense, with an’ 
escort from CIA ta New York where he received treatment = s. 

. While. in. New. York fox 


from a psychiatrist, commencing Iden 10... 


document of. Iden 12, signed by.its General Counsel, certified Iden Le 


undertaken in the course of his official duties for. the. United States 


* Government." ‘This was the official position of the Agency, established 
'. for the purpose of assuring that the survivors of Iden 9 received’com_: 


pensation from the BEC. Iden 9 had experienced some instability and | 


delusions prior to the incident, and it was judged that the drug served . 


ee '*. to trigger the act. leading to his death. Reprimands wére ‘issued by 
. ae DCI to two CIA Seer eress held | responsible for the pecan 


fo, 


“OF TEN/CHICKWIT 
9. ‘In leer the Office ‘of Research and Seer ne (ORD) : and 
the Edgewood Arsenal Research Laboratories undertook a program for’ 


. doing research on the identification and characterization of drugs that 


_ could influence human behavior. 


Edgewood had the facilities for the 


: | full range of laboratory and clinical testing. A phased program was | a 
‘envisioned that would consist of acquisition. of-drugs and chemical - 


se compounds believed to have effects on the behavior’ of humans, “tna ip a 
_ testing and evaluating these materials through laboratory procedures 


. 7 of tests on animals were then to be evaluated clinically with human ~~ haa 


on hee 


and toxicological studies. Compounds believed promising asa result ~ 


subjects at Edgewood. Substances of potential use would then be 
analyzed structurally as a basis for identifying and synthesizing © ~ 


possible new derivatives of Er cate® utility. 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


“CIA, in. a re re os wa ba 


vee 


. Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 - 


10. The program was divided into two projects. Project 
-OFTEN was_to deal with testing the toxicological, transmisivity - 
and behavioral effects of drugs in animals and, ultimately, 
humans, Project CHICKWIT was concerned with acquiring infor-. 
mation on new drug developments in Europe and. the Orient, and 
with acquiring samples. 


ll. Samples of drugs and chemicals were obtained from 
_ drug and pharmaceutical. companies, government agencies such as 
- .Edgewood, NIH, FDA and the Veterans Administration, as well as 
. from research laboratories and individual researchers. Most of 
the materials came from. the drug ihdustry, consisting largely of 
substances that had been rejected because of undesired side effects 


_ from the point of view of medicinal use. 


12. A panel was established to review ‘the program, with 
‘membership from ORD, and the predecessor. organization of the 
Office of Technical Service. Meetings. were held periodically, 
and briefings were given senior officials from time to time. The 
principal contractor. under OF TEN was Iden 2, commencing 
-FY-1966, The association with Edgewood started with a transfer 
of funds to Edgewood in FY-1967, for work to be done by Iden 3 
under CHICKWIT. Synthesis of new drugs and derivatives was 
contracted with Iden 4, starting FY-1971. Data from this program 
was merged into a computer controlled data base with test data. 
and information from other sources. One substance identified as ~ 
a potential incapacitant was in an area known to be the subject of 
research by the Soviet Union, being considered a potential threat | 
to U.S. leaders because of the ease with which it could be administered. 


13. CIA's program was terminated in January 1973, its final 
billing from Edgewood being received in April of that year. Edge- 
wood did not progress to testing materials on human volunteer 
a under the work epeuspred vy CIA. 

14. With CIA's termination of the program, the program 
data was withdrawn from the CIA computers, the tapes and limited 
records being sequestered and stores under ws icces controls where 
they still are. 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


e: 2017/01/18 C01 434878 


1, CIA has had a recurring interest in behavioral drugs. _ Son fe 
The subject is of general interest because of the operational #S 
applications that could be made against Agency employees by. 
hostile forces,. for which there would be a defensive require- 
.ment, as well.as for possible use against foreigners to influence 
_ their behavior.:. The earliest record of this interest dates to 
the post-WWII period when there were indications of Soviet 
interest in the use of drugs for such purposes, the most famous 
example being the bizarre confessions of Cardinal adeadecenty ie 
in: aaa a ae 


coe 2. In the ae CIA's interest has taken fora in four programs. 
Some of these activities, described separately below, have some 
coincidence or overlap in time, but existing records: do not make 
possible a clear determination of what relation, if any, there may 
have been between them, 


BLUEBIRD/ARTICHOKE 


3. In 1949 the Office of Scientific Intelligence (OSI) under-. 
took the analysis of foreign work on certain unconventional warfare (b)(3) 
techniques, including behavioral drugs, with an initial objective 
of developing a capability to resist or offset the effect of behavioral 
drugs. Preliminary phases included the review of drug-related _(b)(3) 
work at institutions such as 


| There also was extensive review of 

foreign literature, particularly work in the Soviet Bloc. This 

program shortly became Project BLUEBIRD, with the objectives 

of (a) discovering means of conditioning personnel to prevent un- (b)(3). 
authorized extraction of information from them. by known means, 
(b) investigating the pos sibility of obtaining control of an individual 

by application of special interrogation techniques, (c) memory 
enhancement, and (d) establishing defensive means for preventing 

hostile control of Agency personnel, 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


pase oa 


2017/01/18 C01434878 


ie bd EL 
canciilvk 


‘Approved for Release: 


Tec 5 
nee 


jl 


4, In August 1951 Project BLUEBIRD was. renamed Project 
ARTICHOKE which, in 1952, was transferred from OSI to the 
predecessor organization of the Office of Security. OSI did retain 
a responsibility for evaluation of foreign intelligence aspects of 
the matter and in 1953 made a proposal that experiments be made 
“in testing LSD with Agency volunteers; OSI records indicate that 
no such experiments were made. OSI's involvement in this 
project was terminated in 1956. Meanwhile, the emphasis given Se 
ARTICHOKE in the predecessor organization to the Office of _ es 
Security became that of uge of materials such as sodium pentothal ha 

in connection with interrogation techniques and with the polygraph. 
yO Be During this period there was an informal Agency group 
known as the ARTICHOKE Committee, with representation from 
the Offices of Scientific Intelli gence (OSI) and Medical Services 
(OMS), and the predecessor organizations of the Offices of Security 
and Technical Services (OTS). There are no records indicating the 
details of the exchanges in this committee, although there are 
references in fragmentary records of continued interest in LSD. 
It ig believed that the exchanges were technical in nature but there 
is reference in papers in the records held by the Office of Security 
of something referred to as an ARTICHOKE Team travelling aver~ 
seas in 1954, with indications of operational applications to individuals © 
representing a Communist Bloc country. There is no record of the 
operation or its results. . 


Drug-related Death of an Investigation - 


6. The predecessor organization of the Office of Technical 
‘Service also was interested in behavioral drugs, although none of 
the office's records on this activity are in existence, having been 
destroyed in January 1973. As noted above it participated in the 
meetings of the so-called ARTICHOKE Committee. That office 
maintained liaison with personnel at Camp Dietrick, with whom 
meetings were held once or twice a year to discuss questions 
involving behavorial drugs. At one such meeting at Deep Creek 
Lake in Maryland, 18-19 November 1953, with seven representatives 
from Camp Dietrick and three from CIA, eight of those present were 
- administered LSD which had been introduced into a bottle of Cointreau. , 
Although records of an inquiry by the Inspector General into the 
incident indicate that those present discus sed testing on unwitting 
persons, and agreed in principle that such a program should be 
s. 


ee 


FR oe ene et 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


, ™~. z : LAM™a am eA owe 
Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


re Ses id dad eh, 


explored, none of them were advised until some 20 minutes after 
they drank the Cointreau that it had been treated with LSD. Of the 
two who did not take it, one did not drink alcoholic beverages at 
all and the other refrained because of a heart condition. One of 
the members of the group, a civilian employee of the Department 
of Army named Frank R. Olson, had serious after-effects. He 
‘was sent at CIA expense, with an escort from CIA, to New York 
where he received treatment from a psychiatrist, commencing» 
24 November. ..While in New York for this treatment he threw 
himself through a closed Window in his room on the tenth floor .. 
Of the Statler Hotel, falling to his death. CIA, ina document of 

9 December 1953, signed by its General Counsel, certified ‘that 
Dr. Olson's death resulted from "circumstances arising out of an 
experiment undertaken in the course of his official duties for the 
United States Government."' This’ was the official position of the 
Agency, established for the purpose of assuring that the survivors 
of Dr. Olson received compensation from the BEC. Dr. Olson. 
had experienced some instability and delusions prior to the 
incident, and it was judged that the drug served to trigger the 

act leading to his death. Official reprimands were issued by the 
DCI to three CIA employees held responsible for the incident.. 


MKDELTA/MKULTRA/MKSEARCH 


7. On 29 October 1952 a formal policy was established by 
the Deputy Director of Plans (as then styled, now Deputy Director 
for Operations) for the use of biochemicals in clandestine operations 
(MKDELTA). This was brought under a special funding procedure 
established on 3 April 1953 for special research purposes (MKULTRA). 
The program considered various possible means for controlling 
human behavior of which drugs were only one aspect, others being 
radiation, electro-shock, psychology, psychiatry, sociology, 
anthropology, harrassment substances, and paramilitary devices (b)(3) 
and materials. There were contacts with individuals at such 
institutions as 


(b)(3) 


as well as with various pharmaceutical houses, 


hospitals and federal institutions, the names-of which are no longer > 
available. Among the materials studied were psylocbin from - ~ (b)(3) 
Mexican mushrooms, a fungus occurring in certaim crops, and 

LSD. Following laboratory testing a second phase was begun which 


2 


involved testing on voluntary participants. The final phase involve())(3) | 


7 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


ae po cece che A BERETS CA OL I en —- 


or Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 . 


% 


ets ak il ats 
Approved f 


da Ne] Nae ES 
Oto Cie. 


application on unwitting subjects, in normal social situations, 
commencing in 1955 under an informal arrangements with | 
“individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics. Originally conducted | 
| - . .. on the West Coast, a similar arrangement was instituted in 
1961 on the East Coast. Such tests were conducted from time to » 
-- time until 1963 when the Inspector General discovered the activity 
and. questioned the program. At that time it was reported that in 
a number of instances test subjects became ill. for hours or days 
following the application, and there was one reported instance of 
x os hospitalization, the details of which are no longer available. .- 
ae: Project records do not now exist, but it is reported that the 
project was decreased significantly each budget year until ite 
was completely terminated in the late 1960's. 


«Be Following the Inspector General's challenge of the program, 
there was a review of its nature and it was resubmitted for. approval 
’ under the name of Project MKSEARCH, recommending continuation 
of the testing; the written proposal did not specify whether it was 
to be limited to volunteers.” Records indicate that the ‘DCI did not 
approve this, ‘and it is understood that there was mo renewal of. 
this aspect of the activity. Funding for MKSEARCH commenced 
in FY-1966, running through 1972. There were various research 
activities carried on under it, but the only aspect related to be- 
havioral drugs dealt with an inquiry in improvement by drugs of 
learning abilitw and memory retention; under this there is a record 
_of testing +i on volunteers. — (b)(3) eee 


OFTEN/CHICKWIT 
9, +In 1967 the Office of Research and Development (ORD) 
and the Edgewood Arsenal Res earch Laboratories undertook a 
program for doing research in influencing human: behavior with | 
drugs. A phased program was. envisioned that would consist of 
acquisition of drugs and chemical compounds believed to have 
effects on the behavior of humans, and testing and evaluating 
these materials through laboratory procedures and toxicological 
‘studies. Compounds believed promising as a result of tests on 
animals were then to be evaluated clinically with human subjects 
at Edgewood. Substances of potential use would then be analyzed 
structurally as a basis for symthesizing new derivatives of 
. greater utility. os a 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


N ee ae 
Approved for Release: 201 7/01/18 C01434878 


oy _ BERET wed dae 


10. Samples of drugs and chemicals were obtained from drug 
and pharmaceutical companies, government agencies such as Edge- 
wood, NIH, FDA and the Veterans Administration, as well as from 
research laboratories and individual researchers. Most of the 
materials came from the drug industry, consisting largely of 

- gubstances that had been rejected because of undesired side: 
effects from the point of view of medicinal use. 


cal. 11, Project OFTEN dealt with testing the behavioral and : 
- toxicological effects of drugs in animals and, ultimately, humans. 
_ Project CHICKWIT was. to acquire information on new drug 
a developments in Europe and the Orient, and acquiring samples. 


wes be A panel was established to review the program, with 
' ‘membership from ORD, and the predecessor organization to the 
Office of Technical Service. Meetings were held periodically, . 

“ and briefings were given senior officials from time to time. The 
_ principal contractor under OFTEN 


commencing FY-1966. @ association with Edge- (b)(3)3).: 

wood started with a transfer of funds to Edgewood in FY -1967, for ee 

“work to be done by under CHICKWIT. 
Synthesis of new drugs and derivatives was contracted with (b)(3) 


starting FY-1971. Data from this program was! 


merged into a computer controlled data base with test data and 
information from other sources. One substance identified as @ 
' potential incapacitant was in an area known to be the subject of — (B)(3)- 
-xesearch by the Soviet Union, being considered a potential threat _ 
“to U.S. leaders because of the ease with which it could be admin- 
_. istered. Study of this material progressed to testing in 1971-1972. 
“at Edgewood. This involved twenty volunteers, five from the 
| land fifteen military ie 
volinteers. Records and evaluations held by CIA are limited, _ b ae 
| ; ; _ « (b)(3) 
_ the program being terminated in January 1973 when final reports 
had not yet been prepared. Edgewood completed the follow-up 
testing required because of the prolonged after-effects, for which 
it billed CIA jn April 1973, but did not provide CEA with the resulis. 
The work. that continued after CIA's termination of the project was 
the completion of testing protocol, including interviews of subjects. 


With CIA's termination of the program, the material was 
withdrawn from the CIA computers, the tapes and: limited records 
being sequestered and stored under special controls where they 
still. are. 


i, See 
CSE ETIUE 


Approved for Release: 2017/01/18 C01434878 


