U.S.  DOCS 
REF, 


Public  Li 

Kansas  City i 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


REPORT 


OF   THE 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN 
AFFAIRS 


TO    THE 


SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


FOR  THE 


FISCAL  YEAR  ENDED  JUNE|30,11918 


Public 

Kansas  City,  Mo. 


WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 
1918 


Public  Library 

Kansas  City.  Mo. 


CONTENTS. 

Page. 

The  Indian's  war  activities 7 

As  to  separate  Indian  organizations 7 

Registration 8 

Army  and  Navy  accessions % 9 

Liberty  bonds 10 

Red  Cross  work : 11 

Four  minute  service 14 

Cooperative  agriculture 14 

The  labor  situation — 15 

Public  food  regulations 17 

Philosophical  phases 19 

The  new  declaration  of  policy 22 

Educating  the  Indian 23 

The  course  of  study •- 24 

Sample  daily  lesson  plan 26 

Public  school  enrollment 31 

General  school  policy 31 

Public  schools  in  eastern  Oklahoma 33 

School  changes 33 

Certificates  of  competency  to  graduates , 34 

The  Carlisle  Indian  School 36 

Health 38 

Irrigation 40 

Colorado  River  Reservation,  Arizona 41 

Crow  Reservation,  Montana 41 

Fort  Hall  Reservation,  Idaho 42 

Gila  River  Reservation,  Arizona '. 42 

Navajo  Reservation,  Arizona  and  New  Mexico 43 

Uintah  Reservation,  Utah 43 

Yakima  Reservation,  Washington 44 

Wind  River  Reservation,  Wyoming .' 44 

Zuni  Reservation,  New  Mexico 44 

Salt  River  Valley,  Arizona 45 

Agriculture  and  stock  raising: 

Farming 45 

Stock  raising 47 

Experimentation 52 

Indian  fairs 53 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 1 53 

Oil  and  gas  in  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  of  Oklahoma 55 

Osage  oil  and  gas  leases 56 

Opening  the  west  side 56 

Oil  and  gas  outside  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  Osage  Nation 57 

3 


4  CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Probating  Indian  estates 57 

Probate  work  in  Oklahoma 58 

A  woman  probate  attorney 60 

Reimbursable  funds 60 

Individual  Indian  money 62 

Annuity  and  per  capita  payments 62 

Employment  for  Indians 62 

Arkansas  Valley  agricultural  activities 63 

Native  industries 64 

Allotments 64 

Public  domain  allotments 65 

White  Earth  litigation 65 

Appraisement  and  reappraisement  of  surplus*  reservation  areas 66 

Extension  of  trust  periods 66 

Sale  of  Indian  lands 66 

Forestry 66 

Roads  and  bridges 68 

Purchase  of  supplies 68 

New  system  of  bookkeeping  and  accounting 69 

Legislation 69 

Court  decisions 72 

Suppression,  of  the  liquor  traffic 73 

Seminoles  of  Florida 82 

Mississippi  Choctaws 83 

Alabama  Indians  in  Texas 85 

Missionaries  and  humanitarian  agencies 85 


Statistical  tables  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918,  unless  otherwise  noted. 


Page. 

Table  1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 87 

2.  Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  1918 87 

3.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted 96 

4.  Marriages,    missionaries,    churches,    language,    dress,    citizenship, 

crimes,  misdemeanors 99 

5.  Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 104 

6.  Reservations,  authority  for  establishing 107 

7.  Lands  set  aside  temporarily  for  mission  organizations 126 

8.  Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations 127 

9.  Industries  other  than  farming  or  stock  raising 127 

10.  Incomes  of  Indians 134 

11.  Use  of  agricultural  lands,  farming,  leasing 139 

12.  Use  of  grazing  lands,  stock  raising,  leasing 144 

13.  Employment  of  Indians 148 

14.  Vital  statistics,  housing,  and  disease 152 

15.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria 15 7 

16.  Indians,  self-supporting,  and  those  receiving  rations  and  miscella- 

neous supplies  issued 

17.  School  population,  number  in  school,  capacity 

18.  Schools,  location,  enrollment,  attendance 172 


CONTENTS.  0 

Page. 

Table  19.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876 181 

20.  Demonstration  farms 182 

21.  Experimentation  farms 182 

22.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 183 

23.  Timber  on  reservations,  sawmills,  timber  cut 184 

24.  Areas  irrigable  and  under  projects,  expenditures : 187 

25.  Miles  of  ditches,  use  of  irrigated  areas 190 

26.  Allotments  approved,  and  made 193 

27.  Sales  of  allotted  lands 194 

28.  Patents  in  fee  issued 195 

29.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land 198 

30.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25,  1910 198 

31.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians 198 

32.  Lands  leased  for  mining,  production  of  minerals,  and  royalty 199 

33.  Buildings  erected 200 

34.  Buildings  under  construction 202 

35.  Live  stock  belonging  to  Indians,  sold,  and  slaughtered 203 

36.  Government  property  valuations  classified 208 

37.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 212 

38.  Employees  in  Indian  school  and  agency  service 217 

39.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field 218 

40.  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 219 

41.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 2i9 

42.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements 220 

43.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians 222 

44.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled 224 

45.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks 224 

46.  Disbursement  of  funds,  Five  Civilized  Tribes 225 

47.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 225 

48.  Expense  at  warehouses 226 

Index  to  Statistical  Tables. . .  227 


REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR, 

OFFICE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 

Washington,  D.  C.,  September  30,  1918. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  this,  the  eighty-seventh,  annual 
report  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs,  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1918. 

THE  INDIAN'S  WAR  ACTIVITIES. 

During  the  last  fiscal  }^ear  the  affairs  of  the  Indian  Bureau  have  been 
interwoven  with  the  problems  of  the  war  and  its  grave  pending 
issues.  We  have  done  nothing  without  considering  its  relation  to 
this  overshadowing  situation.  We  have  released  from  the  Indian 
Service,  for  transfer  to  more  direct  war  duty,  every  employee  who 
could  reasonably  be  spared,  observing  the  principle  that  no  man  who 
can  be  replaced  is  indispensable.  We  have  endeavored  to  give  the 
Indians  a  clear  understanding  of  their  relation  to  the  war  and  their 
part  in  its  prosecution,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  and  have  seen 
them  fall  in  line  with  marked  intelligence  and  inspiring  patriotism 
for  service  in  every  kind  of  activity  to  which  the  white  man  responds. 

They  have  signally  honored  themselves  and  their  country  by  enter- 
ing some  branch  of  the  Army  or  Navy;  by  offering  their  money  hi 
war  loans  to  the  Government;  by  increasing  the  product  of  the  coun- 
try's foodstuffs  and  complying  with  the  public  food  regulations;  by 
swelling  the  ranks  of  wage  ea'rners  in  periods  of  labor  depletion; 
by  generous  and  eager  contributions  in  money  and  service  to  every 
phase  of  organized  relief. 

As  TO  SEPARATE  INDIAN  ORGANIZATIONS.  —Early  in  the  period 
covered  by  this  report,  I  dissented  from  proposed  encouragement  of 
separate  units  of  Indian  soldiers  in  the  Army  as  not  in  harmony  with 
our  plan  for  developing  the  Indian's  citizenship  and  said: 

We  want  to  make  him  a  vital  part  of  our  national  life  and  have  him  feel  that  he  is, 
but  I  doubt  if  that  thought  can  be  properly  upheld  by  encouraging  a  racial  recognition 
in  defense  of  a  common  cause.  It  is  increasingly  apparent  that  our  American  civiliza- 
tion is  to  have  a  profound  influence  upon  European  conditions.  It  may  yet  be  the 
leading  power  to  rescue  some  of  the  Old  World  peoples  from  medievalism.  If  so,  we 
must  retain  in  its  definition  larger  than  anything  else,  the  word  "Unity." 

I  want  the  Indian  to  go  into  this  conflict  as  the  equal  and  comrade  of  every  man  who 
assails  autocracy  and  ancient  might,  and  to  come  home  with  a  new  light  in  his  face  and 
a  clearer  conception  of  the  democracy  in  which  he  may  participate  and  prosper.  I 

7 


8  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

feel,  therefore,  that  his  logical  and  inevitable  place  is  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  the 
white  man,  that  his  rights  and  duties  are  there,  and  that  our  obligations  are  due  him 
in  that  relation  to  the  end  that  he  shall  receive  under  like  discipline  the  same  respect 
and  consideration  given  to  other  soldiers.  I  think  we  should  give  special  care  to  the 
maintenance  of  this  military  relation  and  see  to  it  that  the  young  Indian  soldier  feels 
no  discrimination.  I  think  the  best  military  status  for  the  Indian  is  with  the  organi- 
zations of  white  soldiers,  where  under  the  usual  Army  discipline  the  benefits  are  meas- 
urably reciprocal,  with  a  definite  educational  advantage  to  the  Indian.  The  military 
segregation  of  the  Indian  is  altogether  objectionable.  It  does  not  afford  the  associa- 
tional  contact  he  needs  and  is  unfavorable  to  his  preparation  for  citizenship. 

My  personal  observation  when  visiting  cantonments  and  reports  to  me  show  that 
the  Indians  are  making  remarkably  good  soldiers,  and  I  am  gratified  to  learn  that  they 
are  placed  without  regard  to  the  fact  that  they  are  Indians.  This  mingling  of  the  In- 
dian with  the  white  soldier  ought  to  have,  as  I  believe  it  will,  large  influence  in  moving 
him  away  from  tribal  relations  and  toward  civilization. 

From  the  standpoint  here  suggestively  stated,  to  which  other  reasons  might  be 
added,  I  regard  it  as  inadvisable  to  call  a  council  for  the  purpose  of  arousing  sentiment 
by  agitational  appeals  to  the  Indians  in  the  direction  of  separate  military  units,  but 
that  on  all  reservations  and  at  Indian  schools  on  and  off  reservations  throughout  the 
service  and  among  Indians  everywhere,  the  spirit  of  patriotism  and  loyalty  should  be 
taught  and  emphasized,  and  that  all  Indians  acceptable  under  military  regulations 
should  be  encouraged  to  enlist  in  some  organization  of  the  regular  establishment. 

REGISTRATION. — The  registration  arranged  for  June  5,  1918,  of 
Indians  who  became  21  years  of  age  since  June  5,  1917,  was  con- 
ducted as  that  of  the  preceding  year  by  cooperation  of  the  superin- 
tendents with  the  State  authorities,  which  proyed  to  be  the  most 
expeditious  and  least  expensive,  and  was  acceptable  to  the  Provost 
Marshal  General,  as  expressed  in  the  following  paragraph  from  his 
letter  to  me  of  May  2,  1918,  outlining  the  necessary  preliminaries: 

The  rules  for  conducting  the  registration  of  Indians  are  not  to  be  inflexible,  and 
much  will  be  left  to  your  discretion  and  judgment.  Remembering  the  effective  man- 
ner in  which  your  organization  conducted  the  registration  last  June,  it  is  the  dis- 
position of  this  office  to  leave  the  details  of  the  forthcoming  registration  entirely  in 
your  hands. 

The  registration  of  the  Indians  has  been  generally  very  successful, 
notwithstanding  the  currency  of  one  or  two  news  items  to  the  con- 
trary, which  may  never  be  fully  overtaken  by  corrected  reports. 
There  has  been  practically  no  resistance,  except  through  misunder- 
standing, and  no  conditions  have  arisen  obstructive  to  the  intent 
of  the  conscription  act. 

Considerable  uncertainty  arose  in  connection  with  the  first  registra- 
tion as  to  what  constitutes  Indian  citizenship,  and  while,  usually, 
the  question  of  citizenship  is  an  individual  one  involving  a  con- 
sideration of  the  facts  in  each  case,  the  situation  was  later  much 
clarified  by  furnishing  superintendents  with  the  following  general 
rules  for  use  in  doubtful  cases: 

I.  Indians  whose  trust  or  restrictive  fee  patents  are  dated  prior  to  May  8,  1906,  are 
citizens  by  virtue  of  section  6  of  the  act  of  February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388). 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  9 

II.  Indians  whose  trust  or  restrictive  fee  patents  are  dated  May  8,  1906,  or  subse- 
quent thereto  and  who  have  received  patents  in  fee  for  their  allotments  are  citizens 
by  virtue  of  said  section  6  of  the  act  of  February  8, 1887,  as  amended  by  the  act  of  May 
8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182). 

III.  Section  6  of  the  act  of  February  8, 1887,  both  before  and  after  its  being  amended 
by  the  act  of  May  8,  1906,  provided  that: 

"Every  Indian  born  within  the  territorial  limits  of  the  United  States  who  has 
voluntarily  taken  up,  within  said  limits,  his  residence  separate  and  apart  from  any 
tribe  of  Indians  therein,  and  has  adopted  the  habits  of  civilized  life,  is  hereby  declared 
to  be  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  is  entitled  to  all  the  rights,  privileges,  and 
immunities  of  such  citizens  *  *  *." 

IV.  The  solicitor  of  this  department  has  held  that  where  Indian  parents  become 
citizens  upon  allotment  their  minor  children  became  citizens  with  them,  and  that 
children  born  subsequent  thereto  were  born  to  citizenship. 

ARMY  AND  NAVY  ACCESSIONS. — In  my  last  annual  report  I  could 
not  give  with  much  certainty  the  number  of  Indians  in  war  service. 
Later  a  systematic  effort  was  made  to  procure  reliable  data  as  to  the 
number  enrolled  for  active  duty  by  enlistment  and  draft,  which  is 
still  incomplete,  but  sufficient  for  a  close  approximation,  and  justifies 
an  estimate  of  8,000  Indians  now  in  training  or  actually  in  some 
branch  of  the  Army  and  Navy.  Of  this  number  approximately 
6,500  are  in  the  Army,  1,000  in  the  Navy,  and  500  in  other  military 
work.  It  is  also  significant  that  fully  6,000  of  these  entered  by  enlist- 
ment. Moreover,  it  should  go  into  the  record  that  many  Indians 
from  our  northern  reservations  enrolled  in  Canadian  military  organ- 
izations before  the  declaration  of  war  by  the  United  States.  I  am 
perfecting  as  rapidly  as  possible  this  roster,  the  work  of  which  has 
brought  me  into  intimate  touch  with  many  of  our  Indian  soldiers 
whose  letters  from  cantonments  or  abroad  are  full*  of  interest  and 
in  unpretentious  language  sound  a  note  of  steadfast  courage,  opti- 
mism, and  a  broadened  view  of  the  great  events  in  which  they  mingle. 
Letters  reaching  me  from  abroad  show  that  the  Indians,  some  of  them 
from  "blanket"  tribes,  are  acquiring  a  better  use  of  English,  and 
even  learning  French.  They  also  note  the  methods  of  foreign 
agriculture  and  the  intensive  economies  of  peasant  life,  and  are  thus 
students  of  conditions  more  or  less  applicable  to  their  own  occupa- 
tions. Considering  the  large  number  of  old  and  infirm  Indians  and 
others  not  acceptable  under  the  draft,  leaving  about  33,000  of  military 
eligibility,  I  regard  their  representation  of  8,000  in  camp  and  actual 
warfare  as  furnishing  a  ratio  to  population  unsurpassed,  if  equaled,  by 
any  other  race  or  nation.  I  am  very  proud  of  their  part  in  this  war. 
They  have  placed  themselves  in  a  concrete  and  vital  relation  to  the 
Government  under  whose  protection  they  live  and  in  the  administra- 
tion of  which  they  are  destined  to  participate,  and  have  entered  a 
school  of  rugged  experience  that  can  not  fail  to  fit  them  more  thor- 
oughly for  the  service  and  the  competition  of  civil  life.  The  day 


10  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

is  not  beyond  my  vision  when  the  brain  and  soul  of  him  whose  ances 
tors  dwelt  in  this  land  before  the  white  man  dreamed  of  its  existence 
shall  find  illustrious  expression  in  the  order  and  liberty  and  power  of 
our  national  greatness. 

I  reluctantly  withhold  a  detailed  account  of  the  many  instances 
of  tribal  and  personal  patriotism  and  of  individual  valor  and  achieve- 
ment by  our  Indian  soldiers  in  the  service  of  both  Canada  and  the 
United  States  that  came  to  my  attention  during  the  year,  for  no 
record  here  would  seem  fittingly  impartial  that  did  not  include  the 
hundreds  of  noteworthy  and  authenticated  incidents  on  the  reserva- 
tion, in  the  camps,  and  in  France  that  have  been  almost  daily 
recounted  in  the  public  prints.  The  complete  story  would  be  a 
voluminous  narration  of  scenes,  episodes,  eloquent  appeal,  stirring 
action,  and  glorious  sacrifice  that  might  better  be  written  into  a 
deathless  epic  by  some  master  poet  born  out  of  the  heroic  travail  of 
a  world-embattled  era. 

LIBERTY  BONDS. — Hardly  less  important  than  the  man  with 
a  gun  is  the  man  with  a  bond.  The  Indians  on  the  reseivations 
ineligible  for  enlistment  or  diaft  were  prompt  to  see  the  Govern- 
ment's financial  needs  in  all  the  operations  of  warfare.  Last  year  I 
reported  that  their  subscriptions  to  the  first  issue  of  liberty  bonds 
amounted  to  $4,607,850.  Subscriptions  to  the  second  issue  were 
$4,392,750,  and  to  the  third  issue  $4,362,300.  They  are  only  such 
results  as  are  known  to  the  various  field  superintendences  and 
reported  by  them.  However,  I  have  enough  reliable  information 
from  numerous  sources  to  show  that  many  subscriptions  were  made 
through  banking  channels  in  localities  where  the  Indians  quite 
generally  have  acquired  citizenship  or  have  no  fiscal  relation  with  a 
reservation,  official  report  of  which  did  not  reach  this  bureau,  arid  I 
am  sure  that  a  conservative  estimate  of  such  additions  to  the  list 
would. raise  the  grand  total  to  $15,000,000,  or  a  per  capita  subscrip- 
tion of  approximately  $50.  It  is  true  that  the  moneys  thus  invested 
were  largely  individual  trust  funds  drawing  a  rate  of  interest  less 
or  nor  exceeding,  the  rate  of  the  bond,  but  the  subscriptions  were 
in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Indians  and  were  a  true  index 
of  their  sentiment.  The  equivalent  of  a  $50  liberty  bond  for  every 
man,  woman,  and  child  of  the  Indian  race  in  the  United  States  at 
the  close  of  our  first  year  in  the  war  needs  little  comment.  It  speaks 
for  itself.  It  writes  itself  indelibly  into  American  history  and  into 
the  annals  of  all  progress;  it  is  an  expression  of  patriotic  allegiance 
to  the  right  side  of  a  contest  involving  the  fate  of  humanity,  as  ex- 
traordinary as  it  is  gratifying. 

In  all  these  transactions  I  have  been  amazed  by  the  wonderful 
and  spontaneous  fidelity  of  the  Indian  to  the  highest  welfare  of  the 
Nation,  as  well  as  his  ready  appreciation  of  a  desirable  investment. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  11 

The  promise  of  thrift  and  the  saving  habit  as  a  coordinate  feature 
of  his  response  to  our  present  colossal  needs  is  a  most  encouraging 
evidence  of  growth  toward  the  principle  of  self-support,  so  essential 
to  his  stability  and  progress  as  a  citizen.  I  have  had  occasion  to 
say  that  man  has  no  stronger  element,  when  properly  developed, 
than  the  disposition  to  acquire  property,  own  a  home,  and  be  a 
substantial  factor  in  society,  and  I  hail  this  growing  manifestation 
in  Indian  life  as  a  sure  basis  for  the  strong  and  trustworthy  citizen- 
ship to  which  our  efforts  are  directed. 

RED  CROSS  WORK. — The  cooperation  of  the  Indians,  young  and 
old,  with  the  Red  Cross  and  other  agencies  for  war  relief  developed 
during  the  year  into  a  most  important  factor  of  philanthrophy.  In 
many  instances  the  Indians  inaugurated  with  but  little  outside 
assistance,  lively  campaigns  for  funds  through  social  gatherings, 
auction  sales  of  contributions,  and  various  community  activities. 

The  reports  coming  from  the  different  Indian  schools  and  field 
workers  show  little  more  than  a  fragment  of  the  relief  work  done  by 
the  Indians,  for  the  reason  that  large  numbers  in  localities  near 
towns  and  white  communities  affiliated  with  local  chapters  in  gifts 
of  both  money  and  service,  of  which  only  estimates  are  at  hand,  but 
it  is  known  that  on  many  reservations  practically  every  adult  sub- 
scribed a  Red  Cross  membership  fee  or  more.  The  actual  data 
received  justifies  a  report,  in  round  numbers,  of  10,000  Indian  Red 
Cross  memberships,  100,000  hospital  garments,  knitted,  and  miscella- 
neous supplies.  Some  500  Christmas  boxes  were  sent  from  the 
boarding  schools,  where  the  students  are  very  proud  of  their  soldier 
representatives.  The  larger  schools  collected  "  Students'  Friend- 
ship War  Funds"  aggregating  thousands  of  dollars,  and  in  many 
cases  coordinated  their  relief  activities  with  the  vocational  outlines 
of  the  course  of  study. 

Although  it  would  be  gratifying  to  swell  the  above  estimates,  as 
assuredly  could  be  done,  with  complete  data,  I  am  content  with  the 
prevailing  situation  which  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  Indians  are 
largely  mingling  their  efforts  with  the  whites  and  are  glad  to  do  their 
work  for  the  great  good  it  accomplishes  rather  than  from  a  spirit  of 
racial  emulation.  There  is  thus  the  same  union  of  purpose,  opportu- 
nity, and  service  in  the  doing,  of  great  and  unselfish  things  that 
prevails  in  the  fighting  ranks  and  that  knits  together  all  our  higher 
interests  as  Americans. 

The  limits  of  this  report  could  be  easily  filled  with  matters  of  rele- 
vant interest.  A  few  incidents  only  are  given. 

The  championship  in  knitting  has  been  geneially  conceded  to 
Mrs.  Sarah  Valandre,  an  Indian  of  a  South  Dakota  reservation, 
who  began  a  soldiei's  sweater  at  2  p.  m.  and  completed  the  garment, 
which  was  an  excellent  piece  of  work,  at  10.30  the  same  evening. 


12  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

The  Indians  often  write  letters  to  the  superintendent,  accompany- 
ing their  donations.  One  of  them  begins :  '  'I  inclose  here  $5  to  the 
American  Red  Cross,  the  great  organization  of  mercy  whose  activities 
know  no  bound  in  teiritory,  no  limit  in  service." 

A  superintendent  in  Utah  reports  511  subscribing  members  among 
the  Ute  Indians,  with  total  subscriptions  of  $4,980.  At  a  public 
gathering  on  this  jurisdiction,  among  the  scores  who  lifted  hands  as 
contributors,  was  an  old  woman  of  75  years  who  spread  all  fingers 
of  one  hand.  The  superintendent,  understanding  that  one  finger 
meant  a  sign  to  give  $10,  recorded  her  for  $50.  A  few  days  later, 
when  she  limped  to  the  agency  to  fill  out  her  Red  Cross  card,  she  was 
indignant  at  the  amount  and  explained  through  an  interpreter  that 
she  meant  $500.  "But,"  said  the  superintendent,  uy°u  nave  om<y 
$513  to  your  credit."  Quickly  came  the  answer,  "$13  left?  That's 
enough  for  me."  Another  superintendent  reports:  " Three  Indians 
have  each  contributed  a  steer  which  sold  for  $70,  a  total  of  $210,  to 
the  Red  Cross." 

On  a  small  reservation  far  north,  where  the  winters  are  long  and 
severe  and  the  Indian  must  struggle  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  more 
than  $1  per  capita  for  every  adult  was  paid  in  cash  for  the  Red  Cross 
and  other  war-relief  purposes.  In  the  far  Southwest,  where  the 
parched  desert  gives  scant  returns  and  sheep  raising  is  the  chief 
means  of  support,  many  of  the  Indians  have  each  promised  a  fleece 
of  wool  for  the  Red  Cross,  and  the  superintendent  plans  the  spinning 
of  this  wool  and  knitting  it  into  socks,  sweaters,  etc.,  by  the  Indian 
women.  In  a  Montana  district,  where  the  Indians  are  nearly  all 
fullbloods,  they  voluntarily  held  meetings  and  each  one  who  had  a 
growing  wheat  crop  promised  bo  donate  one  sack  of  wheat  for  war- 
relief  work.  On  another  reservation  where  the  Indians  are  very 
poor  and  have  little  ready  money  they  donated  an  abundance  of 
handsome  bead  work  and  other  curios  to  be  sold  for  the  Red  Cross. 

One  of  the  smaller  schools  in  Oklahoma  reports: 

Our  school  has  affiliated  with  the  county  chapter  of  the  Junior  Red  Cross  and  has 
a  working  organization  of  176  members,  being  the  total  enrollment  of  the  school. 
Wednesday  evening  of  each  week  and  such  other  time  as  can  be  spared  is  devoted 
to  making  Red  Cross  supplies. 

The  lady  superintendent  of  one  of  the  boarding  schools  for  girls 
of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  on  her  request  was  author- 
ized to  introduce  Red  Cross  work  as  a  regular  feature  of  domestic- 
science  training  and  has  accomplished  splendid  results.  From  her 
full  report  the  following  is  gleaned: 

Our  girls  are  deeply  interested  in  all  war  work  and  respond  so  readily  to  our  requests 
for  additional  garments.  Several  supervised  periods  are  given  the  girls  each  week  to 
insure  a  certain  output  of  knitted  articles.  Then  the  interest  is  kept  up  by  means 
of  parties  held  by  the  various  teachers,  and  at  which  time  Hooverized  refreshments 
play  an  important  part. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  13 

The  very  small  girls  knit  up  the  scraps  of  yarn  into  refugee  caps,  afghan  squares, 
etc.  Also  they  utilize  the  scraps  from  the  hospital  garments  making  quilt  blocks. 
Larger  scraps  are  used  for  small  underskirts  for  the  refugees.  The  lesson  in  thrift  in 
this  one  feature  is  invaluable  to  us.  Gun  wipers  have  been  cut  by  the  hundred. 
Prizes  have  been  offered  for  activities  to  stimulate  interest. 

Small  Red  Cross  dolls  have  been  made  and  sol  4  for  our  fund.  These  the  children 
enjoyed  making  and  selling.  Each  month  children  write  letters  to  their  guardians, 
in  which  they  send  report  cards.  They  ask  earnestly  that  money  be  sent  to  them  that 
they  may  take  part  in  this  great  war.  Their  letters  show  their  enthusiasm  and 
patriotism. 

We  are  reading  "Red  Cross  Stories,"  and  our  children  will  all  leave  us  with  a  good 
general  knowledge  of  how  the  Red  Cross  began,  its  struggle  and  success.  This  line 
of  thought  is  kept  before  our  girls  and  teachers  continually  and  if  in  no  other  way 
than  by  absorption,  they  will  surely  get  the  spirit  of  and  necessity  for  this  war  work. 

We  are  not  willing  for  our  girls  to  go  back  home  and  sit  with  folded  hands  all  summer, 
so  the  plan  of  giving  personal  letters  of  introduction  to  girls  efficient  with  the  needle 
to  be  handed  the  heads  of  Red  Cross  chapters  in  their  community  will  be  carried  out. 

Regular  flag  salutes  are  given  on  the  campus  and  in  the  dining  room.  The  Red 
Cross  has  strengthened  our  heads  hearts,  and  hands,  and  has  brought  to  -us  just  the 
lesson  we  have  so  badly  needed — the  lesson  of  service  and  thrift. 

An  interesting  account  comes  from  a  northern  Minnesota  reserva- 
tion, where  it  is -believed  the  first  Indian  Red  Cross  auxiliary  was 
started  in  the  spring  of  1917,  in  the  course  of  which  the  president  of 
the  auxiliary  says: 

There  was  no  spectacular  coming  of  hundreds  of  Indians  to  unite  in  the  then  almost 
unknown  work  of  the  Red  Cross.  One  Indian  woman  was  present  at  the  first  meeting 
and  has  since  been  most  faithful  in  her  efforts.  Week  after  week  the  little  band  of 
wromen  met  and  carried  on  the  work  assigned  them .  Week  after  week  the  cautious 
Indian  women  came  and  took  part  in  the  work,  until  at  the  end  of  nine  months  three- 
fourths  of  the  members  are  Indians.  The  auxiliary  numbers  48,  and  this  from  a  com- 
munity of  less  than  a  hundred  adults.  Some  of  these  women  have  walked  to  the 
weekly  meeting  place  across  the  ice  from  Old  Agency  when  the  temperature  was 
20°  below  zero.  They  have  sewed  on  hospital  shirts  and  socks  and  learned  to  knit" 
the  various  garments  just  as  their  white  sisters  of  the  cities  have  done.  The  most 
remarkable  and  encouraging  part  of  the  Indian  work  is  that  it  has  been  one  of  in- 
creasing personal  interest  and  continued  activity. 

One  evening  recently  an  Indian  and  his  wife,  living  17  miles  away,  came  to  the 
home  of  the  treasurer  and  inquired  about  the  work  being  done,  the  woman  bringing 
her  dollar  for  membership,  saying,  "I  want  to  do  something  for  my  country." 

I  can  not  refrain  from  this  reference  to  the  interest  of  the  Indians 
in  Red  Cross  work,  although  it  can  give  little  more  than  an  intima- 
tion of  their  wide-spread  and  open-hearted  response  to  the  sacred 
appeal  which  more  than  anything  else  tells  the  difference  between 
the  civilization  of  a  free  people  and  the  barbaric  cruelties  of  autocracy. 
Among  the  compensations  coming  to  the  Indian  from  the  war  is  the 
one  he  has  already  accepted,  viz,  that  the  great  principles  and  ideals 
that  are  worthy  of  a  trained  warrior's  daring  are  one  with  the  divine 
impulse  to  do  good  and  help  others;  that  the  cool  bravery  of  his 
son  in  the  trench  and  the  gentle  ministry  of  his  daughter  in  a  Red 
Cross  hospital  are  the  sublime  coordination  of  human  service  to  the 
highest  end. 


14  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

FOUR-MINUTE  SERVICE.— Early  in  February,  1918,  I  issued  in- 
structions to  all  superintendents  to  participate  so  far  as  possible  as 
four-minute  men  in  the  campaign  for  the  sale  of  war  savings  certifi- 
cates, furnishing  them  with  appropriate  bulletins  and  literature. 
This  was  done  in  cooperation  with  the  Committee  on  Public  Informa- 
tion whose  representatives  found  it  difficult  to  reach  many  of  our 
reservations  and  schools  situated  some  distance  from  the  towns 
where  they  were  scheduled  to  speak.  The  plan  was  generally  suc- 
cessful and  developed  much  interest  among  the  Indians,  both  adults 
and  the  children  in  the  schools,  and  the  sale  of  war  savings  stamps 
grew  into  large  proportions  among  those  of  limited  means.  Stamps 
were  in  many  instances  purchased  from  individual  and  unrestricted 
funds  representing  the  actual  earnings  of  the  purchasers  who  thus 
evinced  a  special  inclination  to  save  and  acquire  an  interest-bearing 
investment.  They  were  usually  purchased  through  the  postmaster, 
or  other  agency  provided  for  their  sale,  and  held  by  the  Indians 
themselves.  It  is  not  practicable  to  submit  a  definite  report  of 
these  sales,  but  returns  from  the  field  service  generally  show  a  wide- 
spread and  growing  demand  for  "baby  bonds,"  and  a  feeling  that 
their  purchase  is  a  patriotic  "bit"  within  the  reach  of  all. 

COOPERATIVE  AGRICULTUHE. — It  was  our  purpose  throughout  the 
year  to  place  all  agricultural  and  industrial  pursuits  of  the  Indians 
upon  a  war-winning  basis,  and  in  correspondence  with  superintendents 
upon  spring  farming  operations  for  1918,  I  said  in  part: 

I  assume  that  you  have  already  done  much  preliminary  work  among  the  Indians 
for  the  coming  planning  season,  and  feel  sure  that  you  will  join  me  in  the  purpose  to 
make  last  year's  campaign  for  increased  production  on  Indian  land  only  the  beginning 
•  of  a  much  more  successful  one  this  year.  The  results  of  the  previous  year  were 
very  gratifying,  but  the  demands  upon  us  have  increased.  The  industrial  welfare  of 
the  Indian  is  itself  a  perpetual  call  to  improve  upon  each  preceding  year;  not  by  at- 
tempting too  much,  but  by  handling  intelligently  and  intensively  as  much  land  as 
means  and  equipment  will  justify.  I  urge  you  to  impress  upon  the  Indians  that  any- 
thing less  than  this  is  not  successful  farming.  Keep  it  before  them  as  convincingly  as 
you  can  that  the  farmer  or  stock  grower  who  does  well  is  always  trying  to  do  a  little 
better. 

Again,  our  international  demands  promise  to  be  much  more  extraordinary  than 
hitherto.  Our  soldiers  are  going  to  the  front.  They,  with  the  armies  and  all  the 
people  of  our  allies,  must  be  fed.  Our  fields  are  not  overrun  and  laid  waste  by  the 
enemy.  The  yielding  capacity  of  our  acres  should  be  larger  than  ever.  The  troops 
we  send  abroad  increase  rather  than  lessen  our  obligations  to  produce  subsistence  for 
export.  We  are  this  year  confronted  by  a  more  exacting  emergency  than  ever  before 
and  every  productive  energy  should  respond  to  the  utmost.  The  loyalty  of  the 
Indians  has  called  forth  the  strongest  praise  everywhere.  Thousands  of  them  have 
entered  active  military  service.  1  can  not  doubt  that  those  on  the  reservations  are 
equally  patriotic  and  will  give  full  proof  of  it  by  making  every  unused  acre  of  land  a 
war-winning  factor  in  addition  to  supplying  food  and  forage  for  home  supply.  Agri- 
culture, industry,  labor  everywhere  must  lift  this  year  every  ounce  that  it  can  carry, 
not  only  for  the  actual  and  physical  needs  of  the  present,  but  for  ideals  and  principles 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  15 

sacred  and  essential  in  our  national  life,  and  the  Indians  must  and  will  gladly  do 
their  part. 

Therefore,  I  urge  with  increased  emphasis  that  your  season's  campaign  be  well  and 
aggressively  organized.  I  need  hardly  add  to  your  experience  the  suggestion  for  an 
unfaltering  follow-up  plan  of  work  and  supervision,  the  pivotal  features  of  which  will, 
of  course,  consist  (1)  in  getting  the  employees  and  Indians  to  see  the  situation  as  it  is, 
and  in  arousing  their  responsibility  as  faithful  promoters  of  their  own  interests  and 
as  patriotic  Americans  willing  to  match  at  home  the  loyal  zeal  and  purpose  of  those 
on  the  sea  or  battle  fields  of  Europe,  and  (2)  by  leaving  nothing  practicable  undone 
in  providing  the  necessary  means  and  equipment,  such  as  seeds,  implements,  and 
other  supplies,  for  accomplishing  the  desired  result. 

Notwithstanding  the  war  loss  to  our  Service  of  many  valuable 
farmers  and  stockmen,  causing  a  shortage  of  supervision  still  unsup- 
plied,  there  was  last  year  a  large  increase  of  acreage  cultivated  by 
the  Indians,  often  doubling  that  of  the  preceding  year.  Many  also 
made  a  beginning  in  a  small  way,  producing  enough  for  their  own 
needs  and  a  little  more.  Many  others  exchanged  their  wandering 
habits  for  more  settled  farming  purposes.  A  quickened  impulse  for 
home  building  appeared  on  many  reservations.  Greater  preparation 
than  ever  was  made  for  exhibits  at  Indian  and  State  fairs  and  interest 
in  the  canning  and  preservation  of  vegetables  greatly  increased. 
The  Indians  became  conspicuously  more  interested  in  the  better 
methods  of  stock  growing,  the  improvement  of  breeds,  proper  pas- 
turage, winter  feeding,  and  protection,  and  adequate  water  supply. 
Many  of  them  are  the  rivals  of  the  most  successful  white  stock  growers. 
Although  handicapped  in  some  sections  by  severe  drought,  the  Indians 
last  year  responded  with  splendid  interest  and  unprecedented  results 
that  show  not  only  a  steady  progress  but  motives  of  aroused  patriot- 
ism and  a  comprehension  of  the  supreme  war  demands  upon  all  our 
productive  resources. 

THE  LABOR  SITUATION. — In  order  to  cooperate  to  the  fullest  extent 
with  the  aims  and  efforts  under  Federal  direction  for  providing  ade- 
quate labor  for  all  lines  of  productive  employment,  I  brought  the 
matter  to  the  attention  of  all  reservation  superintendents  early  in 
April,  and  said,  in  part: 

Sufficient  labor  for  all  our  productive  and  industrial  demands  is  an  instant  and 
growing  need.  The  casual  reader  knows  how  all  belligerent  nations  abroad  have  been 
caught  in  the  clutch  of  the  labor  problem;  how  their  women  and  children,  their  old 
folks  and  cripples  have  had  to  help  farm  the  fields  and  work  in  factories;  how  adjacent 
neutral  countries  are  pinched  by  the  scarcity  of  toilers  in  domestic  activities.  We 
are  now  facing  a  similar  situation,  and  the  causes  are  clear  without  graphic  descrip- 
tion. We  must  fill  the  places  of  our  sturdy  fellows  who  are  in  the  trenches  or  on  their 
way  there.  We  must  increase  immensely  our  normal  products  for  food  and  clothing 
to  satisfy  export  demands,  besides  creating  extraordinary  supplies  for  actual  warfare. 
These  things  are  obvious  without  statistics.  We  face  a  labor  shortage  in  certain  areas 
and  occupations  and  we  should  drive  a  wedge  of  workers  into  that  condition  wherever 
it  is  found.  The  Indian  Service  must  help  do  this  as  far  as  possible. 


16  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

As  should  be  expected,  agriculture  will  feel  first  and  most  the  shrinkage  in  labor, 
for  in  addition  to  its  contributions  to  the  Army  and  Navy,  many  farm  laborers  are 
attracted  to  industrial  centers  by  higher  wages.  Farming  enterprises  in  various 
sections  need  Indian  labor,  and  the  Indians,  if  not  profitably  occupied  with  their 
own  allotments  or  otherwise,  need  this  employment.  They  need  any  employment 
that  will  associate  them  with  the  white  man's  operations  in  farming  and  live-stock 
interests  or  other  successful  vocations.  They  should  also  have  every  encouragement 
to  respond  from  patriotic  motives  to  the  labor  demands  of  the  country. 

It  is  very  important  that  there  be  no  idlers  or  intermittent  workers  among  the  able- 
bodied  adult  Indians  this  year  when  every  ounce  of  productive  energy  is  needed  as  a 
war-winning  factor,  and  I  feel  assured  that  I  can  count  on  your  prompt  cooperation 
in  this  matter  with  a  view  of  determining  approximately  the  number  of  Indians  on 
your  reservation  who  can  be  spared  for  work  in  other  localities  and  the  probable 
number  of  such  Indians  who  can  be  induced  to  accept  employment  at  reasonable  wages. 
In  arriving  at  your  estimates,  I  do  not  want  you  to  overlook  the  importance  of  our 
duty  to  induce  the  Indian  to  cultivate  his  own  land,  engage  in  the  raising  of  stock,  or 
in  some  other  productive  occupation. 

Having  in  mind  that  at  most  of  the  nonreservation  schools,  a 
number  of  which  give  the  advanced  courses  in  vocational  training, 
there  are  considerable  numbers  of  students  sufficiently  mature  to  per- 
form manual  labor,  I  addressed  the  superintendents  of  these  juris- 
dictions as  follows: 

I  have  recently  requested  reservation  superintendents  to  make  special  effort  in  the 
direction  of  having  all  surplus  Indian  labor  employed  as  far  as  possible  throughout 
the  coming  season  of  planting  and  harvesting,  and  desire  your  earnest  cooperation 
with  this  plan  to  the  extent  of  securing  employment  during  the  vacation  period  for 
your  larger  students  who  will  not  be  needed  at  home  or  to  assist  in  school  activities. 

All  full-grown  or  nearly  mature  boys  and  girls,  if  in  reasonable  health,  should  be 
occupied  all  of  their  vacation  in  some  capacity  that  will  help  produce  and  take  care 
of  the  necessities  of  life.  It  is  of  crucial  importance  that  no  part  of  this  year's  harvest 
be  neglected  or  wasted,  and  wherever  help  is  needed  in  the  fields  or  homes  of  farmers 
or  gardeners  Indian  students  competent  for  such  work  should  be  aided  in  securing  it 
unless  otherwise  properly  occupied.  Please  give  this  matter  your  careful  thought 
and  organize  your  efforts  to  the  end  that  every  young  man  or  woman  shall  find  a  busy 
corner  somewhere  during  the  summer. 

You  can  not  too  urgently  impress  upon  all  these  intelligent  young  Indians  their 
present  patriotic  obligation  to  join  actively  the  ranks  of  workers  whose  toil  is  indis- 
pensable to  our  liberties. 

I  hope  to  hear  that  you  will  be  able  practically  to  aid  and  direct  many  of  your 
pupils,  particularly  the  older  ones,  into  temporary  employment  that  will  be  educa- 
tional to  them  and  helpful  to  the  cause  we  must  make  victorious. 

The  past  year  shows  a  comparatively  low  percentage  of  unemployed 
able-bodied  Indians.  They  answered  the  call  for  labor  in  something 
of  the  militant  spirit  that  in  these  days  has  become  essential  to  Ameri- 
can activities,  and  wherever  there  was  bridge  or  road  work,  lumbering 
or  milling,  fishing,  planting  and  harvesting,  irrigation  construction, 
cotton  or  hop  picking,  orcharding,  and  vegetable  gardening,  or  any- 
thing else  that  had  to  be  done  on  a  reservation,  and  often  far  from  one, 
the  Indian  was  generally  in  evidence  with  few  words  but  with  dextrous 
hands,  patient  endurance,  and,  what  has  been  noticeable,  with  a  dawn- 
ing comprehension  that  American  labor  everywhere  is  a  part  of  our 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  17 

war  force.  I  have  learned  of  no  suspicion  that  the  Indian  ever  drove 
spikes  in  a  saw  log  or  threw  a  wrench  into  any  industrial  machinery. 
I  believe  he  is  under  no  indictment  or  sentence  for  sabotage. 

The  schools  quite  generally  gave  to  Indian  pupils  the  patriotic 
impulse  to  do  their  part.  In  many  instances  boys  of  12  years  and 
over  signed  pledge  cards  for  summer  work.  The  outing  service  of 
girls  for  domestic  and  boys  for  farm  work  with  white  families  greatly 
increased,  one  school  reporting  300  thus  employed  by  the  end  of 
June.  The  larger  boys  going  to  the  beet  fields,  fruit  farms,  and  other 
summer  occupations  far  exceeded  former  records.  Older  students  of 
mechanical  preferences  have  been  successful  in  munition  plants,  and 
some  40  or  50  were  placed  in  the  Hog  Island  shipbuilding  service. 
A  letter  from  one  of  the  large  motor  companies  to  our  Supervisor  of 
Employment  closes  as  follows :  "I  wish  to  thank  you  at  this  time  for 
the  valuable  assistance  you  have  been  to  me,  as  all  the  boys  are 
turning  out  to  be  first-class  men  and  steady."  "First-class  men  and 
steady"  has  the  right  ring.  It  tells  the  product  we  covet  for  our 
Indian  schools.  It  answers  well  the  Nation's  need  in  times  of  stress 
and  peril. 

PUBLIC  FOOD  REGULATIONS. — In  view  of  the  extraordinary 
undertaking  of  the  Federal  Food  Administration  to  handle  and 
control  the  whole  question  of  foodstuff  supplies  as  related  to  our 
domestic  and  foreign  demands,  and  to  do  it  very  largely  by  persua- 
sion and  appeal  to  the  intelligent  patriotism  of  the  country,  I  beg  to 
submit  in.  full  my  Circular  Letter,  of  April  13,  1918,  in  cooperation 
therewith. 

To  SUPERINTENDENTS: 

From  the  day  the  United  States  entered  the  war  I  have  urged  an  increased  produc- 
tion of  foodstuffs  at  all  Indian  schools  and  on  all  reservations  and  have  recently  sought 
greater  cooperation  with  the  Federal  Food  and  Fuel  Administrations.  I  desire  now 
to  give  even  greater  emphasis  to  the  necessity  for  saving  and  the  elimination  of  waste. 

This  year  may  not  end  the  war;  it  may  last  much  longer.  In  any  event,  there  must 
go  on  persistent  team  work  in  intensive  production  and  simplified  consumption — the 
greatest  yield  and  the  utmost  saving.  Investigation  Jias  clearly  shown  that  by  a 
frugal,  yet  fully  health-supporting  use  of  foods,  and  a  radical  reduction  of  waste,  we 
can  maintain  our  national  vigor  in  all  lines  of  work  and  add  enough  to  the  home  sup- 
plies of  our  allies  to  give  them  the  energy  they  need  for  work  and  warfare.  If  we 
who  remain,  support  with  loyal  efficiency  the  magnificent  man-power  going  abroad, 
we  will  keep  the  world  fit  to  live  in.  But  we  must  get  the  feeling  in  every  heart  beat 
that  the  war  is  more  than  a  distant  danger;  that  the  din  of  battle  at  our  doors  would 
not  be  more  real  and  threatening. 

Reliable  estimates  gave  the  supply  of  wheat  in  our  country's  mills  and  elevators  on 
March  1  as  20,000,000  bushels  less  than  one  year  previous  and  show  that  existing 
stocks  of  flour  were  much  below  50  per  cent  of  the  normal  quantity  needed  until  July  1. 
The  90,000,000  bushels  of  wheat  promised  our  allies  between  January  1  and  July  1  is 
their  minimum  need,  and  we  dare  not  curtail  it.  Some  of  the  States  have  successfully 
substituted  more  than  50  per  cent  of  other  grains  and  vegetables  for  wheat,  and  the 
food  scientists  declare  that  the  country  generally  can  thrive  on  a  fifty-fifty  menu. 
86770—18 2 


18  COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

It  is  now  well  known  that  the  consumption  of  our  food  staples,  wheat  and  meat,  can 
be  reduced  by  using  substitutes  which  are  equally  nourishing  but  not  suitable  for 
export,  and  the  present  emergency  tells  us  that  we  must  have  "  wheatless"  and  "meat- 
less" days,  if  we  expect  to  have  warless  days. 

The  Food  Administration  has  given  exhaustive  study  to  the  whole  question  of  food 
supply  and  consumption  as  a  war- winning  proposition  and,  in  cooperation  with  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  has  put  out  in  simple  and  complete  form  information  for 
following  a  "saving  schedule"  in  nearly  everything  we  eat  and  yet  keeping  well  and 
energetic  on  a  properly  balanced  diet.  It  has  issued  a  war  cook  book,  pamphlets  on 
war  economy  and  food,  and  a  number  of  valuable  bulletins  and  leaflets  covering  in  a 
practical  manner  the  preparation  and  serving  of  the  various  substitutes  for  wheat  and 
meat  with  special  reference  to  maintaining  the  health  of  growing  children  and  the 
working  vigor  of  adults,  including  also  timely  lessons  in  the  use  of  scraps  and  left- 
overs. The  Administration  has  told  the  country  things  of  incalculable  worth  in  its 
eating  and  drinking,  things  as  good  for  peace  as  for  war.  You  will  find  in  its  publica- 
tions the  requisite  instruction  as  to  the  kind  and  preparation  of  substitutes  and  their 
nutrient  strength  with  the  value  and  best  food  combinations  of  many  kinds  of  grains 
and  vegetables.  Some  of  our  Indian  schools  are  reproducing  this  information  in  their 
publications,  and  more  of  them  should  do  so.  I  am  informed  that  each  State  college 
has  an  official  designated  to  give  war-food  instruction  and  suggest  that  you  avail 
yourself  of  this  assistance  wherever  practicable. 

I  feel  that  the  Indian  Service  should  get  into  closer  accord  with  this  great  movement 
authorized  by  law  and  strongly  sanctioned  by  the  President.  With  this  circular  will 
go  to  you  samples  of  information  for  public  guidance,  and  you  are  urged  to  cooperate 
with  your  State  food  administrator  and  secure  such  supplies  and  instructions  as  will 
bring  effective  results  within  your  jurisdiction.  The  Administrator's  suggestions 
should  be  followed  in  all  school  kitchens  and  dining  rooms  and  at  the  mess  tables  of 
all  employees  so  far  as  local  conditions  and  the  maintenance  of  health  will  permit. 

The  Food  Administration  is  giving  strict  attention  to  health  needs  in  its  dietary 
regime,  as  a  study  of  its  prescribed  munus  with  their  nutritive  properties  will  show. 
It  is  also  furnishing  lessons  in  war-time  food  problems  suitable, for  high  schools  which 
should  be  of  supplemental  value  to  our  vocational  work  in  home  economics.  Some 
of  our  schools  are  now  doing  excellent  work  closely  in  line  with  the  Administration's 
orders.  Even  in  such  little  things  as  scrap  savings  from  the  tables,  organized  com- 
petitive work  is  eliminating  waste  and  training  the  girls  for  practical  "bits"  in 
housekeeping. 

This  is  to  be  the  year  for  school  war  gardens  the  country  over.  Let  us  be  in  the 
front  rank  for  all  such  work.  This  year  we  should  plan  and  labor  for  not  only  the 
fullest  bounty  of  the  soil  on  every  school  farm  and  garden  and  every  Indian's  allot- 
ment, but  we  must  care  f  pr  the  harvest  with  scrupulous  diligence.  Our  canning,  dry- 
ing, and  preservation  of  fruits  and  vegetables  must  have  greater  attention  than  ever. 
Our  protection  of  crops  and  the  feeding  of  stock  must  show  the  minimum  of  wastage. 
Every  kitchen  and  root  cellar,  every  silo  and  feed  lot  must  be  a  war-winning  auxiliary. 
We  must  make  a  working  maxim  of  the  fact  that  a  weekly  saving  of  a  pound  of  bread 
for  each  person  in  the  United  States  will  increase  our  annual, wheat  exports  a  hundred 
million  bushels.  This  is  the  year  to  translate  every  pulsation  of  patriotism  into 
activity  that  produces  and  conserves. 

It  is  quite  as  important  to  save  as  it  is  to  produce;  in  fact  waste  involves  loss  of 
energy  as  well  as  expense.  Conditions  over  which  we  have  no  control  may  prevent 
production,  but  waste  is  preventable  and  should  not  be  permitted  or  tolerated;  it  is 
inexcusable.  I  am  sure  that  much  can  be  accomplished  by  farmers,  field  matrons, 
physicians,  day-school  teachers  and  all  workers  in  practical  contact  with  the  home 
life  and  activities  of  the  Indians.  The  Indians,  young  and  old,  have  shown  willing 
and  marvelous  support  of  our  American  ideals  against  the  mad  challenge  of  despotism 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  19 

and  they  will  under  wise  counsel  respond  to  our  plan  for  increased  products  and  re- 
organized consumption.  The  very  stress  and  tragedy  of  these  days  may  be  turned  to 
their  advantage  by  teaching  them  how  to  save,  how  to  take  care  of  the  small  things, 
how  to  value  thrift,  how  to  lay  up  for  the  future,  how  to  be  provident  and  happy  in 
temperate  and  industrious  living.  The  program  thus  far  outlined  by  the  Food  Ad- 
ministration is  not  oppressive.  It  is  rather  educational  toward  sane  and  simplified 
living.  We  should  get  behind  it  with  complete  loyalty.  Superintendents  should 
see  that  traders  comply  with  it.  Where  flour  mills  are  in  operation  on  reservations, 
superintendents  should  give  careful  attention  to  the  output  in  order  that  the  food 
policy  of  the  Government  may  be  fully  supported. 

In  all  this  work  it  is  well  to  remember  the  warning  from  eminent  authorities  that  the 
American  as  a  rule  eats  too  much,  that  as  a  people  we  would  be  healthier,  stronger,  and 
more  effective  in  accomplishment,  if  more  frugal  in  our  eating.  We  eat  beyond  our 
physical  requirements  and  suffer  corresponding  injury. 

Our  system  of  purchasing  supplies  may,  under  contracts  now  closed,  prevent  com- 
plete adjustment  of  rations  to  the  food  regulations  immediately,  but  for  such  supplies 
as  can  be  carried  over  with  entire  safety,  there  should  be  made,  wherever  practicable, 
the  substitutions  recommended  by  the  Food  Administrator,  and  if  funds  are  lacking 
for  this  compliance,  you  may  for  school  purposes,  draw  on  funds  already  hypothe- 
cated for  salaries  arid  other  expenses,  and  the  amount,  or  so  much  thereof  as  may  be 
necessary,  will  be  replaced  from  the  emergency  fund  recently  appropriated. 

I  desire  you  to  give  this  matter  your  personal  and  prompt  attention,  and  shall  ex- 
pect every  employee  under  your  jurisdiction  to  cooperate  with  you  fully. 

The  general  tenor  of  many  responses  by  superintendents  regard- 
ing compliance  with  the  food  regulations  is  indicated  by.  the  follow- 
ing extract: 

The  schools  have  been  put  on  a  fifty-fifty  basis  as  to  wheat  products,  and  really  a 
little  more  so.  The  pupils  seem  to  enjoy  the  diet,  and  there  is  no  question  as  to  its 
wholesomeness.  Waste  is  reduced  to  the  minimum,  and  then  what  there  is  in  way  of 
unavoidable  waste  as  to  human  consumption  is  fed  to  chickens  and  pigs,  so  that  there 
is  no  ultimate  waste,  nor  is  there  any  thing  left  for  the  flies  to  lay  eggs  in. 

A  liberal  use  of  food  leaflets  was  made  among  the  Indians  who,  in 
some  localities,  did  not  readily  understand  why  they  must  purchase 
substitutes  with  certain  supplies,  but  upon  having  the  matter  ex- 
plained and  finding  that  the  same  rule  was  applied  to  all  white  cus- 
tomers, they  adjusted  themselves  to  the  situation  and  in  many  in- 
stances became  champions  of  the  Federal  food  policy. 

PHILOSOPHICAL  PHASES. — The  war  in  its  earlier  stages  was  appall- 
ing in  its  proportions  and  bewildering  in  its  possibilities.  To-day 
we  are  getting  its  vast  perspective.  We  are  seeing  ourselves  in  it, 
and  glimpsing  in  its  clearing  vistas  the  destiny  of  many  nations. 
Amidst  unspeakable  evil  we  are  finding  the  good.  From  the  black- 
ness of  error  and  falsity;  white  truth  emerges.  Moral  and  spiritual 
principles,  old  as  eternity,  have  appeared  because  we  have  been 
searching  for  the  good,  the  true,  and  the  just.  The  war's  necessities 
are  creating  its  compensations.  Many  of  its  victories,  perhaps  the 
greatest  and  most  enduring,  are  already  won,  not  only  "over  there" 
but  here  and  everywhere— on  "no  man's  land"  and  on  every  man's 
land,  and  in  every  man's  brain  and  soul  and  lifted  ideals.  These 


20  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

victories  are  bringing  us  hard  sense  as  well  as  sublime  motive;  they 
are  practical  because  of  high  moral  value;  they  are  teaching  us  how 
to  live  and  what  to  live  for.  Here  in  America  they  mean  all  that 
comes  with  thrift,  discipline,  temperance,  conservation,  curtailment 
of  luxury,  the  peace  that  follows  hard  work  for  great  ends,  the  dig- 
nity and  joy  of  pulling  together  unselfishly,  the  inspiration  to  fulfill 
the  struggling  hopes  of  oppressed  peoples.  We  fight,  not  as  our 
enemy  for  conquest  and  subjugation,  but  for  government  by  the 
governed  and  for  international  justice.  The  great  moral  issue  voices 
the  difference  between  a  despotic  and  an  altruistic  spirit;  the  differ- 
ence between  Deutschland  liber  alles  and  America  for  all. 

In  America  we  are  building  imperishable  traditions  and  unifying 
our  democratic  individualism  into  deep,  common  purposes.  We 
are  strengthening  both  national  consciousness  and  national  con- 
science, proving  democracy's  excellence  and  stability  and  com- 
mending, as  a  moral  obligation,  its  liberty  and  justice  to  all  govern- 
ments. The  supreme  peril  of  the  ages  is  developing  not  only  our. 
heroic  and  ambitious  virtues,  but  all  the  finer  and  sympathetic 
humanities.  The  deeds  done  for  freedom  will  throb  in  the  breast 
of  the  world  forever,  and  no  super-imagination  can  foretell  the  progress 
and  achievement  that  will  follow  the  present  intensity  and  concen- 
tration of  man's  thought,  whether  applied  to  land  or  sea  or  air,  or 
the  countless  activities  there.  The  ministrations  of  the  Red  Cross 
and  all  other  humanitarian  agencies  for  relief  are  lifting  mankind 
into  an  atmosphere  of  universal  good  will.  The  great  movements 
to  restore  and  reeducate  disabled  soldiers  and  to  find  for  them  the 
means  for  self-support  that  are  essential  to  self-respect  are  recon- 
structive processes  that  bring  to  our  collective  life  the  habits  of 
cooperation  and  brotherhood. 

But  how  is  the  Indian  related  to  all  this?  He  is  a  part  of  it,  ac- 
tively, integrally.  It  is  his  opportunity,  his  education,  his  experience, 
his  remaking.  In  the  midst  of  the  most  decisive  and  expansive 
achievements  of  all  history  he  is  a  learner  of  the  eternal  principles 
involved;  he  is  a  student  of  the  rights  of  individuals,  of  nations,  and 
of  international  ethics.  He  is  in  contact  with  very  much  both  at 
home  and  abroad  that  has  to  do  with  the  war.  Moreover,  he  has 
arrived  at  the  intelligence  and  moral  attitude  of  the  American  view- 
point. It  is  something  to  challenge  attention  when  eight  or  ten 
thousand  of  a  race  which  within  the  memory  of  living  men  knew 
little  beyond  the  restraints  of  barbarism  cross  the  ocean  as  crusaders 
of  democracy  and  civilization. 

It  is  reasonably  due  the  Indian  to  mention  the  contributions  of 
his  more  primitive  endowments  to  the  methods  and  strategy  of 
modern  warfare,  as  disclosed  in  individual  adroitness  of  attack,  in 
trench  tactics,  in  concealed  approach  and  creeping  offensive  and  in 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  21 

many  successful  features  of  reconnoissance  and  maneuver,  which  are 
conceded  to  be  largely  borrowed  from  the  aboriginal  American  who 
was  ever  a  natural  trailer,  who  slipped  noiselessly  through  tanglewood 
and  made  himself  a  part  of  the  trees,  who  was  a  born  sharpshooter, 
a  scout  by  intuition  and  an  instinctive  artist  in  the  intricacies  of 
camouflage.  The  student  of  American  military  operations  tells  an 
interesting  story  of  the  accretions  to  military  science  and  practice 
filtered  from  Indian  warfare  between  colonial  days  and  the  tragedy 
of  the  Little  Big  Horn. 

Severe  indictments  against  the  Government's  connection  with  the 
Indians  have  appeared  in  former  years,  from  sources  acting  under 
executive  authority,  proclaiming  "a  shameful  record  of  broken 
treaties  and  unfulfilled  promises."  It  will  not  be  denied  here  that  the 
Indian  through  long  years  of  disappointment  was  crowded  back  and 
back  until  literature  lamented  him  as  a  vanishing  race  with  broken 
arrows  and  dead  campfires,  and  art  sculptured  him  in  hopeless  desola- 
tion at  the  end  of  the  trail.  Certainly  the  original  American  who 
felt  himself  the  first  homesteader  of  this  continent  and  in  his  native 
honesty  could  comprehend  no  prior  rights  to  all  its  plains  and  rivers 
and  forests  has  found  himself  too  often  relegated  to  rocky  regions 
or  arid  wastes  where  sustenance  must  be  coaxed  from  unwatered 
sands.  Recent  administration,  however,  has  had  no  part  in  such 
conditions.  The  later  attitude  of  the  Government  toward  the 
Indian  has  been  a  sympathetic,  humane,  yet  definitely  practical 
one.  It  has  recognized  him  as  a  man,  the  first  and  hyphenless 
American,  possessing  a  quick  intellect,  a  glowing  spirituality,  an 
ardent  love  for  his  children,  a  brave  heart,  and  fidelity  to  his  promise 
until  betrayed.  These  must  be  accepted  as  human  attributes  and 
are  so  proven  by  the  large  percentage  of  Indians  who  to-day  attend 
church,  live  in  well-arranged  houses,  are  English-speaking  citizens 
and  voters,  capable  artisans,  successful  in  business,  in  the  learned 
professions,  in  literature,  and  in  legislative  assemblies. 

Our  recent  policy  clearly  has  been  that  we  want  no  dead  Indians, 
good  or  bad,  but  will  do  all  in  our  power  to  save  their  lives  and  keep 
them  in  health.  That  much  has  been  fundamental,  and  every 
possible  energy  has  been  directed  to  that  end.  The  facilities  have 
not  been  fully  adequate,  but  the  remarkable  results  are  seen  in  better 
homes,  better  sanitation  and  hygiene,  more  healthy,  laughing  babies, 
and  more  vigorous,  happy  adults. 

After  life  and  health  has  come  the  Indian's  education,  and  all 
previous  efforts  have  been  increased  to  provide  for  him  schools  and 
industrial  training,  to  teach  him  to  use  his  brain  efficiently  and  his 
hands  skillfully,  to  send  men  of  practical  experience  to  assist  him  in 
farming,  gardening,  and  stock  raising.  The  splendid  output  of  our 


22  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

school  system  and  the  greatly  enlarged  product  of  Indian  tillage  and 
live  stock  are  the  answer  to  these  efforts. 

Under  that  policy  it  has  heen  our  purpose  to  protect  the  Indian's 
property  and  his  personal  rights,  to  make  it  difficult  for  sharks  and 
shysters  to  despoil  him  of  his  just  possessions  or  exploit  him  for 
mercenary  gain,  and,  so  far  as  possible,  to  stand  as  a  friend  and  coun- 
selor between  him  and  unscrupulous  mischief-makers,  who  encourage 
discontent  in  quest  of  fat  fees  for  correcting  conditions  that  do  not 
exist. 

Finally,  we  have  begun  the  speedy  release  from  guardianship  of 
all  Indians  found  to  be  competent  to  transact  their  own  affairs,  giv- 
ing to  all  such  a  full  control  of  their  property  of  whatever  description 
and  recognizing  their  status  to  be  the  same  in  every  respect  as  the 
white  man's. 

In  all  these  things  our  aim  has  been  to  extend  the  helping  hand, 
to  restore  the  Indian's  faith  in  friendship,  and  give  him  reason  to 
feel  that  his  welfare  is  a  part  of  the  general  welfare,  his  interests  one 
with  the  white  man's,  his  advancement  essential  to  our  collective 
progress.  We  have  endeavored  especially  to  further  his  desire  for 
individuality,  self-reliance,  initiative  and  the  ability  to  stand  alone, 
upon  the  truism  that  no  man  will  become  interested  and  progressive 
in  the  things  he  does  not  desire. 

This  policy  has  been  in  a  marked  degree  fruitful.  It  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  it  has  developed  notably  the  Indian's  confidence 
in  the  Government,  made  him  feel  that  its  flag  is  his  flag,  its  weal  his 
weal,  its  warfare  his  warfare,  its  destiny  his  destiny.  It  has  revived 
the  dauntless  spirit  of  his  ancestry  and  transformed  it  into  the  valor- 
ous stuff  of  American  patriotism,  so  that  he  feels  it  an  honor  and  a 
privilege  to  volunteer  his  service  in  defense  of  all  that  our  Govern- 
ment with  its  laws  and  institutions  means  to  ourselves  and  to  the 
world.  This  policy,  if  continued,  I  believe  can  not  fail  to  dissolve 
tribal  bonds,  remove  inter-racial  barriers,  rescue  the  Indian  from  his 
retarding  isolation,  and  absorb  him  into  the  general  population  with 
the  full  rights  and  immunities  of  our  American  life  to  which  he  is 
entitled  from  any  standpoint  of  justice  and  wise  statesmanship. 

THE  NEW  DECLARATION  OF  POLICY. 

On  April  17,  1917,  we  announced  a  declaration  of  policy  which 
contemplated  the  release  from  governmental  supervision,  with  all  of 
their  property,  of  practically  all  Indians  having  one-half  or  more  white 
blood,  and  those  with  more  than  one-half  Indian  blood  shown  to  be 
as  capable  of  transacting  their  own  affairs  as  the  average  white  man, 
also  all  Indian  students  over  21  years  of  age  who  complete  the  full 
course  of  instruction  in  the  Government  schools,  receive  diplomas  and 
demonstrate  competency. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  23 

In  the  workout  of  the  "new  policy"  the.  department  is  able  to 
release  from  governmental  control  the  "white  Indians,3'  and  those 
who  have  demonstrated  their  capacity,  at  the  same  time  enlarge  and 
intensify  its  interest  in  the  Indian  who  really  needs  aid  and  protec- 
tion. In  its  application  thousands  of  Indians  have  been  given  their 
freedom,  and  while  some  of  those  released  have  not  sustained  them- 
selves, on  the  whole,  this  advanced  step  has  been  fully  justified.  It 
is  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the  Indian  problem. 

Since  the  passage  of  the  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.,  182),  and 
modifying  acts,  there  have  been  issued  16,500  patents  in  fee,  covering 
2,086,722  acres  of  land.  Since  April  17,  1917,  the  date  when  the 
declaration  of  policy  became  effective,  there  have  been  issued  6,456 
patents  in  fee,  involving  987,844  acres.  In  other  words,  the  number 
of  acres  patented  since  the  declaration  of  the  "new  policy,"  less  than 
18  months,  nearly  equals  the  area  patented  during  the  preceding  10 
years,  and  the  number  of  patentees  is  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  num- 
ber to  whom  patents  have  issued  during  the  10  preceding  years. 

Of  the  550  Blackfeet  Indians  who  were  declared  competent  during 
the  year  1918,  120  have  been  issued  patents  in  fee,  only  two  of  whom 
have  disposed  of  their  lands. 

Competency  commissions  have  visited  the  following  reservations: 
Cheyenne  River,  Coeur  'd'Alene,  Fort  Berthold,  Fort  Peck,  Hay- 
ward,  Kiowa,  Klamath,  Lower  Brule,  Otoe,  Oneida,  Ponca,  Pawnee, 
Pottawatomi,  Shoshone,  Standing  Rock,  and  Umatilla.  They  have 
also  visited  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 

EDUCATING  THE  INDIAN. 

We  are  more  and  more  recognizing  the  faqt  that  the  Indian  in  his 
tribal  state  was  not  without  a  system  of  education  suited  to  his 
needs.  The  young  men  were  trained  in  adventure,  endurance,  and 
skill.  The  young  women  were  trained  in  making  the  camp  and  in 
keeping  it  in  order,  in  providing  fuel,  and  in  tanning  and  dressing 
skins  and  making  them  into  articles  of  clothing.  In  other  words, 
the  Indian  youth  was  taught  the  things  he  needed  to  know  in  order 
to  protect  himself  and  to  pi o vide  for  his  physical  needs  with  due 
regard  to  the  prevailing  conditions  of  his  environment.  While  the 
chief  aim  of  his  education  was  to  enable  him  to  get  a  living,  just  as 
the  chief  aim  of  our  education  is  to  give  us  knowledge  and  the  ability 
to  make  a  living,  still  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  the 
Indians'  system  of  education  did  not  neglect  cultural  training.  His 
tribal  ceremonies,  tribal  lore,  tribal  art,  tribal  handicrafts,  and  his 
native  music  are  all  evidences  of  his  appreciation  of  the  cultural 
side  of  life.  While  he  constantly  emphasized  the  individualistic 
point  of  view,  he  also  pursued  cultural  occupations  for  the  satisfac- 
tion they  afforded;  he  developed  skill  and  courage  for  the  purpose 


24  COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

of  advancing  his  personal  standing  in  the  tribe;  and  he  acquired  a 
knowledge  of  tribal  ceremonies  for  the  sake  of  individual  salvation 
and  influence  over  others. 

This  individualistic  aim  of  education  was  necessarily  narrow  and 
selfish.  It  tended  to  subordinate  the  welfare  of  the  whole  to  the 
advancement  of  the  individual.  The  progress  of  the  tribe  as  a  whole 
was  not  definitely  planned  and  sought.  The  Indian  under  his 
tribal  organization  did  not  reach  the  state  of  conscious  evolution. 
He  was  content  to  pursue  the  even  tenor  of  his  way  with  little 
thought  of  social  progress  or  efficiency. 

In  our  policy  of  absorbing  the  Indian  into  the  body  politic  of 
the  Nation,  the  aim  of  his  education  must  be  broad  enough  to  include 
both  the  welfare  of  the  individual  and  the  good  of  society.  We 
must  also  take  into  account  the  development  of  those  abilities  with 
which  he  is  peculiarly  endowed  and  which  have  come  down  to  him 
as  a  racial  heritage— his  religion,  art,  deftness  of  hand,  and  his 
sensitive,  esthetic  temperament. 

THE  COURSE  OF  STUDY. — The  course  of  study  for  Indian  schools 
provides,  through  its  prevocational  and  vocational  courses,  for 
educating  the  Indian  youth  along  practical  lines.  The  best  part 
of  all  human  knowledge  has  come  to  us  through  the  five  senses — 
the  senses  of  sight,  hearing,  taste,  smell,  and  touch — and  the  most 
important  part  of  education  has  always  been  the  training  of  those 
senses  through  which  that  best  part  of  knowledge  comes.  The 
faculty  of  accurate  observation,  the  acquisition  of  skill  in  doing, 
and  the  habit  of  careful  observation,  reflection,  and  measured  rea- 
soning are  best  acquired  through  the  proper  training  of  the  senses. 
The  opportunities  enjoyed  by  the  boy  on  a  farm  for  training  eye, 
ear,  and  mind;  the  discipline  and  motor  training  of  the  fundamental 
trades,  such  as  those  of  the  carpenter,  blacksmith,  mason,  painter, 
plumber,  etc.,  for  boys;  and  practical  courses  in  domestic  science, 
domestic  art,  housekeeping,  hospital  mursing,  etc.,  for  girls,  are 
recognized  by  the  leading  educators  of  the  day  as  affording  the  best 
training  possible  for  secondary  schools,  and  they  are  characteristic 
features  of  the  curriculum  for  Indian  schools. 

The  central  idea  of  the  course  of  study  for  Indian  schools  is  the 
elimination  of  needless  studies  and  the  employment  of  a  natural 
system  of  instruction  built  out  of  actual  activities  in  industry, 
esthetics,  civics,  and  community  interests.  The  development  of 
the  all-round  efficient  citizen  is  the  dominating  feature.  So  we  are 
now  teaching  the  Indian  boy's  and  girls  to  design  and  make  beautiful 
and  useful  things  with  their  hands;  to  study  and  understand  the 
practical  application  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  to  apply  and  appre- 
ciate art  in  the  cooking  and  serving  of  a  meal,  in  the  making  and 
fitting  of  a  garment,  and  in  the  furnishing  and  decorating  of  homes ; 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  25 

in  designing  and  making  useful  tools  and  furniture,  in  building 
convenient,  comfoi  table,  and  sanitary  houses*;  or,  per  adventure,  in 
making  two  ears  of  corn  grow  where  only  one  grew  before. 

Nor  is  the  cultural  side  of  the  Indian  child's  education  neglected. 
In  our  larger  schools  we  have  literary  societies,  religious  organiza- 
tions, brass  bands,  orchestras,  choirs,  athletic  clubs,  physical  cul- 
ture classes,  art  classes,  and  various  other  student  organizations  and 
enterprises  for  promoting  cultural  training. 

Educators  everywhere  are  more  and  more  recognizing  the  fact  that 
the  conventional  curriculum  of  the  ordinary  school  is  an  accumula- 
tion of  years  of  custom,  and  that  there  is  all  too  much  of  nonessentials 
and  unprofitable  repetition  in  the  elementary  courses.  Especially  is 
this  true  as  to  the  subjects  of  geography,  arithmetic,  history,  physi- 
ology, etc.  For  a  long  time  these  subjects  were  usually  taken  up 
in  the  primary  grades  in  simple  form  and  repeated  in  the  intermediate 
and  grammar  grades  with  slight  modification  and  in  a  little  different 
language.  Such  repetition  is  not  calculated  to  arouse  the  enthusiasm 
of  the  average  boy  or  girl,  and  it  is  a  waste  of  time  to  require  a  pupil 
to  go  over  and  over  the  same  subject  through  two,  three,  or  four 
grades  in  the  usual  perfunctory  way  without  much  serious  considera- 
tion as  to  the  aim  to  be  attained  or  the  motive. 

As  to  nonessentials,  it  is  a  saving  of  time  and  expense  to  leave 
them  out  and  thus  make  room  for  more  practical  and  useful  subjects. 
For  example,  in  arithmetic,  such  subjects  as  powers  and  roots,  ratios, 
and  average,  approximations,  divisibility,  foreign  money,  metric 
system,  partial  payments,  duodecimals,  stocks  and  bonds,  etc.,  have 
been  eliminated  from  the  course  of  study  for  Indian  schools. 

As  the  Government  Indian  schools  constitute  an  independent  edu- 
cational system  they  are  at  liberty  to  .deviate  from  the  conventional 
and  to  fit  their  courses  of  study  to  conform  to  the  needs  of  their  pupils. 

With  studies  properly  adjusted  to  the  pupils'  needs  and  with  non- 
essentials  and  useless  repetition  eliminated,  it  is  possible  to  provide 
daily  three  to  four  hours  of  productive  industrial  work  on  the  farm, 
in  the  shops,  or  in  the  various  domestic  departments  of  the  schools? 
without  serious  handicap  to  the  academic  work.  Along  with  this 
productive  work  is  given  definite,  systematic  instruction,  so  that  the 
pupil  learns  the  theory  while  acquiring  skill  in  doing. 

The  chief  educational  value  of  any  sort  of  productive  work  lies  in 
•the  plan  employed  in  organizing  and  supervising  the  work  and  in 
logical,  definite,  systematic  method  of  giving  the  class  instruction. 
Experience  has  demonstrated  that  no  teacher  ever  becomes  so  pro- 
ficient that  definite  lesson  plans  are  not  essential  to  the  best  results. 

The  course  of  study  for  Indian  schools  requires  that  all  teachers, 
both  academic  and  industrial,  prepare  daily  lesson  outlines  and  follow 
them  as  closely  as  possible. 


26  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIES. 

The  following  daily  lesson  plans  in  cooking  for  one  week  illustrates 
the  form  recently  adopted  and  now  in  general  use  throughout  the 
Indian  School  Service: 

SAMPLE    DAILY   LESSON   PLAN. 

For  week  ending  September  5,  1917. 
LESSON  NO.  1. 

Subject:  Cooking  (pre vocational)! 

Lesson  assignment:  The  kitchen,  page  130,  Course  of  Study. 
Aim:  To  teach  propsr  equipment  for  the  home  kitchen. 

Plan:  1.  Take  pupils  to  kitchen  and  explain  parts  of  cookstove,  how  to  operate,  and 
how  to  build  fire. 

2.  Teach  names  of  utensils — their  cost,  use,  and  care. 

3.  Discuss  arrangement  of  kitchen  furniture  and  equipment. 

References:  The  Home  and  the  Family,  Kinne  and  Cooley,  page  131.     From  Kitchen 
to  Garret,  Van  de  Water. 

LESSON   NO.   2. 

Lesson  assignment:  Personal  Hygiene  in  Kitchen,  page  130,  Course  of  Study. 

Aim:  To  teach  order,  neatness,  and  sanitation. 

Plan:  1.  Discuss  proper  dress,  care  of  hands,  nails,  hair,  etc. 

2.  Write  important  rules  on  blackboard. 

3.  Make  inspection  of  class  as  to  neatness  of  person,  calling  attention  to  any 

untidiness. 
References:  Food  and  Health,  Kinne  and  Cooley.    Manual  of  Personal  Hygiene,  Pyle. 

LESSON   NO.    3. 

Lesson  assignment:  Dishwashing,  page  130,  Course  of  Study. 

Aim:  To  teach  proper  method. 

Plan:  1.  Discuss  requisites — hot  water,  soap,  dishcloth,  etc. 

2.  Demonstrate  and  explain  proper  method. 

3.  Discuss  relation  of  dishwashing  to  garbage  can. 

References:  Kitchen  and  Dining  Room  Work,  Willard.    House  Sanitation,  Talbot. 

In  addition  to  the  primary  and  prevocational  courses,  the  following 
vocational  courses  are  provided: 

COURSE   IN   AGRICULTURE. 

First  year. 

FIRST   TERM    (20    WEEKS).  SECOND   TERM    (20    WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Vocational  arithmetic.  ,                                Vocational  arithmetic. 

Industrial  geography.  Agricultural  botany. 

General  exercises.  General  exercises. 

Music  l  (band  or  orchestra).  Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Farm  practice. 2  arm  practice. 2 

Farm  implements.  d  selection  and  testing. 

*  Optional.  2  Theory,  1 J  hours  per  week;  practice  22£  hours  a  week. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  27 

Second  year. 

FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS).  SECOND   TERM    (20    WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Vocational  arithmetic.  Arithmetic. 

United   States  history  and   community    United    States  history  and   community 

civics.  .                    civics. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music  1  (band  or  orchestra).  Music  1  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Farm  practice. 2  Farm  practice. 2 

Horticulture  and  poultry.  Horticulture  and  gardening. 

Soils  and  soil  fertility.  Farm  "machinery;  gas  engines. 

Third  year. 

FHIST  TERM    (20   WEEKS).  SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Agricultural  physics.  Agricultural  chemistry. 

Farm  accounts.  Farm  accounts. 

General  history.  General  history. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music  l  (band  or  orchestra).  Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Farm  practice. 2  Farm  practice. 2 

Farm  animals  (types  and  breeds).  Farm  animals  (diseases  of). 

Fourth  year. 

FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS).  SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Field  crops.  Plant  diseases. 

Insects  and  insecticides.  Rural  economics. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music  l  (band  or  orchestra).  Music  *  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Farm  practice.  Farm  practice. 

Feeds  and  feeding.  Farm  management. 

The  above  course  in  agriculture  is  planned  and  conducted  with 
the  vocational  aim  clearly  and  definitely  dominant.  The  work  in 
agriculture  is  the  important  and  determining  work,  the  nucleus 
about  which  the  academic  work  is  arranged.  The  character  and 
amount  of  the  academic  work  is  determined  by  its  relation  and 
importance  to  the  problems  of  agriculture  and  its  vital  necessity 
to  the  future  Indian  farmer.  The  aim  is  to  produce  not  a  scientist 
nor  a  specialist,  but  a  practical,  efficient  farmer,  whose  success  will 
depend  fully  as  much  upon  his  skill  in  doing,  which  results  from 
practice  and  training,  as  it  results  from  scientific  knowledge  and 
managerial  ability.  The  course  includes  al1  of  the  work  which  is 
found  on  the  ordinary,  diversified  farm.  This  will  fit  the  Indian 

1  Optional.  2  Theory,  1J  hours  per  week;  practice,  22£  hours  a  week. 


28 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


boys  to  return  to  their  own  land,  situated  under  whatever  condi- 
tions it  may  be,  and  adapt  themselves  to  those  conditions  and 
successfully  undertake  the  type  of  farming  which  must  be  followed 
there. 

The  work  in  history,  civics,  economics,  and  English  aims  definitely 
at  training  for  citizenship.  The  general  living  conditions  and  school 
atmosphere  as  well  as  the  social  life  and  student  enterprises  add 
materially  to  the  effectiveness  of  this  work. 

COURSE   IN   MECHANIC  ARTS. 


First  year. 


FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS). 

English. 

Vocational  arithmetic. 

Industrial  geography. 

General  exercises. 

Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training. 

Mechanical     drawing     or     architectural 

drafting. 
Shop  practice. 2 


SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 


English. 

Vocational  arithmetic. 

Elementary  botany. 

General  exercises. 

Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training. 

Mechanical     drawing     or     architectural 

drafting. 
Shop  practice. 2 


Second  year. 


FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS). 


SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 


English. 

Vocational  arithmetic. 

United    States   history  and   community 

civics. 

Current  events. 
Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 
Physical  training. 
Mechanical     drawing     or     architectural 

drafting. 
Shop  practice.2 


English. 

Vocational  arithmetic. 

United   States   history  and   community 

civics. 

Current  events. 
Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 
Physical  training. 
Mechanical     drawing     or     architectural 

drafting. 
Shop  practice. 2 


Third  year. 


FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS). 


SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 


English. 
Physics. 

Shop  mathematics. 
General  history. 
Current  events. 
Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 
Physical  training. 

Mechanical  drawing  or  architectural  draft- 
ing. 
Shop  practice.2 


English. 
Chemistry. 
Shop  mathematics. 
General  history. 
Current  events. 
Music  1  (band  or  orchestra). 
Physical  training. 

Mechanical  drawing  or  architectural  draft- 
ing. 
Shop  practice.2 


Optional. 


2  Theory,  1}  hours  a  week;  practice  20i  hours  a  week. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN"   AFFAIKS.  29 

Fourth  year. 

FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS).  SECOND  TERM   (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Industrial  history.  Rural  economics. 

Shop  mathematics.  Shop  mathematics. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music  x  (band  or  orchestra).  Music  l  (band  or  orchestra). 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Shop  practice.2  Shop  practice.2 

Trades  may  be  selected  from  the  following:  Carpentry,  blacksmithing,  painting, 
printing,  masonry,  plumbing,  steam  fitting,  steam  and  electrical  engineering. 

No  course  in  mechanic  arts  in  any  school  conducted  as  a  school 
can  turn  out  experienced  master  craftsmen.  The  function  of  this 
course  is  (1)  to  help  a  boy  to  find  himself  and  to  select  that  life  work 
for  which  he  seems  best  fitted  and  has  most  chance  of  success,  and 
(2)  to  give  him  such  trade  and  technical  information  and  training 
as  to  enable  him  to  leave  school  not  a  finished  workman,  but  a 
partially  trained  workman,  who,  after  getting  real  trade  experience, 
will  become  the  exceptionally  trained  and  skilled  workman,  capable 
of  acting  as  foreman,  boss,  contractor,  or  manager. 

The  academic  work  contributes  definitely  and  distinctively  to 
trade  problems,  so  that  this  work,  too,  may  function  in  the  future 
life  of  the  mechanic.  This  work  supplements  the  practical  work, 
and  fits  the  student  to  plan  work,  to  follow  the  plans  of  others,  to 
make  estimates,  and  to  do  work  in  a  businesslike,  orderly  way. 
The  practice  work  aims  to  give  an  orderly  experience  in  and  reason- 
able familiarity  with  processes,  operating  machines,  doing  trade 
work,  selecting  and  using  materials,  planning  jobs,  and  directing 
work.  In  all  practical  work  the  student  is  taught  to  apply  and  use 
the  academic  work. 

COURSE   IN   HOME    ECONOMICS. 

First  year. 

FIRST  TERM   (20   WEEKS).  SECOND  TERM   (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Vocational  arithmetic.  Vocational  arithmetic. 

Industrial  geography.  Agricultural  botany. 

General  exercises.  General  exercises. 

Music.  Music. 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Cooking.3  Cooking.3 

Sewing.3  Sewing.3 

1  Optional. 

2  Theory,  1J  hours  a  week;  shop  rapctice,  20£  hours  per  week. 

3  Theory,  1J  hours  per  week;  practice  in  cooking,  sewing,  and  housekeeping,  20^  hours  per  week. 


30  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

Second  year. 

FIRST  TERM   (20   WEEKS).  SECOND   TERM    (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Vocational  arithmetic.  Vocational  arithmetic. 

United  States  history.  United  States  history. 

Community  civics.  Community  civics. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music.  Music. 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Cooking.1  Cooking.1 

Sewing.1  Sewing.1 

Third  year. 

FIRST  TERM    (20   WEEKS).  SECOND  TERM   (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Household  physics.  Household  chemistry. 

General  history.  General  history. 

Current  events.  Current  events. 

Music.  Music. 

Physical  training.  Physical  training. 

Cooking.1  Cooking.1 

Sewing.1  Sewing.1 

Fourth  year. 

FIRST  TERM   (20   WEEKS).  SECOND  TERM   (20   WEEKS). 

English.  English. 

Child  study  and  motherhood.  Rural  economics. 

Household  insects.  Household  accounts  and  household  man- 
Home  architecture,  decoration,  and  sani-         agement. 

tation.  Current  events. 

Current  events.  Music. 

Music.  Physical  training. 

Physical  training.  Cooking.1 

Cooking.1  Sewing.1 
Sewing.1 

The  girls  who  take  the  course  in  home  economics  should  become 
the  model  housewives  and  mothers  in  the  communities  to  which  they 
return.  This  course  bends  all  its  efforts  to  training  them  to  that 
end.  All  of  the  work  in  housewifery  is  planned  and  conducted  with 
the  home  of  the  farmer  or  workman  of  moderate  means  in  mind. 
Therefore  the  work  is  essentially  practical  rather  than  idealistic. 
Management  of  such  a  home  and  of  such  an  income  is  emphasized 
throughout.  Training  for  motherhood  and  for  the  cultural  and  artis- 
tic part  of  the  home  life  is  also  provided,  i.  e.,  these  girls  must  be  able 
to  make  their  future  homes  pleasant  and  attractive  as  well  as  eco- 
nomically and  hygienically  efficient,  and  they  must  give  to  their 

1  Theory,  li  hours  per  week;  practice  in  cooking,  sewing,  and  housekeeping,  20£  hours  per  week. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  31 

children  the  culture  and  refinement  essential  to  racial  progress.  This 
part  of  their  education  must  be  secured  through  training  in  social 
observances  and  usages  through  the  special  type  of  English  work 
provided  for  this  course,  through  the  special  courses  dealing  with 
home  management,  motherhood,  and  the  care  of  children,  and 
through  the  several  art  courses. 

Special  effort  is  made  to  preserve  all  that  is  best  in  Indian  folk 
tales  and  hero  stories  as  a  race  heritage,  which  is  to  be  handed  down 
by  mothers  to  their  children  as  an  inspiration  for  racial  advancement 
and  progress.  In  the  same  way  but  in  larger  measure  Indian  art  is 
fostered  and  encouraged  in  every  possible  way.  Girls  are  encouraged 
to  get  all  that  is  best  in  their  tribal  art,  to  become  proficient  in  its 
use,  to  understand  its  symbolism,  and  to  apply  it  to  the  materials 
and  furnishings  of  their  new  types  of  homes. 

Special  attention  is  also  given  to  fitting  these  girls  to  take  part  in 
the  social  and  community  life  of  their  future  neighborhood  and  to 
enable  them  to  exercise  a  helpful  and  wholesome  influence  on  all 
community  activities. 

By  fully  appreciating  and  keeping  constantly  in  mind  the  probable 
future  living  conditions  of  Indian  students,  the  difference  which  must 
be  made  in  teaching  the  various  subjects  of  these  courses  as  a  part 
of  a  vocational  course,  and  in  teaching  the  same  subjects  as  merely 
cultural  or  college  preparatory  courses,  there  is  little  trouble  experi- 
enced in  properly  correlating  the  academic  and  the  vocational  work 
of  the  schools,  and  in  giving  to  the  Indian  boy  and  girl  the  academic 
and  vocational  training  which  will  function  properly  in  their  lives 
after  they  return  to  their  homes,  or  take  up  the  work  of  their  chosen 
vocation  in  competition  with  whites  away  from  the  reservation. 

PUBLIC  SCHOOL  ENROLLMENT. — Indian  children  other  than  those 
of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  have  been  enrolled  in  public 
schools  to  an  approximate  number  of  10,828.  Of  these,  2,436  chil- 
dren have  been  received  in  these  schools  under  contracts  made  with 
186  school  districts,  which  have  provided  for  payment  of  a  fixed 
amount  per  pupil  per  day  of  actual  attendance,  in  accordance  with 
the  practice  adopted  a  few  years  ago.  The  daily  rate  so  paid  is  deter- 
mined chiefly  by  the  cost  to  the  school  district  for  operation  per  pupil. 
The  total  amount  of  money  obligated  for  payment  of  tuition  under 
all  of  these  contracts  was  over  $60,000.  The  amount  actually  paid 
will  of  course  fall  below  the  amount  obligated  because  of  a  failure  to 
maintain  a  perfect  measure  of  attendance  of  the  Indian  children 
enrolled. 

GENERAL  SCHOOL  POLICY. — Increased  attendance  of  Indian  chil- 
dren in  the  State  public  schools  has  an  important  and  a  direct  bearing 
upon  the  entire  problem  of  Indian  education.  In  communities  where 
the  public-school  system  has  been  developed  the  eventual  enrollment 


32  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

of  Indian  children  therein  will  of  course  take  them  out  of  the  Gov- 
ernment Indian  day  and  boarding  schools.  This  will  lead  first  to  a 
decrease  in  the  size  of  the  Government  school  and  in  some  instances 
it  will  become  possible  to  abolish  certain  schools  with  a  consequent 
material  saving  to  the  United  States,  as  the  cost  of  education  of 
Indians  in  the  public  schools  is  less  than  in  the  Government  schools. 
Especially  is  this  the  case  with  a  boarding  school.  In  my  declara- 
tion of  policy  of  April  17,  1917,  which  was  given  in  full  in  the  annual 
report  for  the  fiscal  year  1917,  I  pointed  out  that  in  many  of  our 
boarding  schools  Indian  children  are  being  educated  at  Government 
expense  whose  parents  are  amply  able  to  pay  for  their  education  and 
where- the  children  have  public-school  facilities  at  or  near  their  homes, 
and  that  such  children  should  not  hereafter  be  enrolled  in  Govern- 
ment Indian  schools  supported  by  gratuity  appropriations  except  on 
payment  of  actual  per  capita  cost  and  transportation.  Pursuant  to 
this  policy,  the*  elimination  from  Indian  boarding  schools  of  those 
children  not  properly  eligible  has  been  carried  on  during  the  past 
year,  but  has  not  been  fully  consummated. 

The  amount  of  money  available  for  support  of  the  Government 
Indian  schools  has  for  many  years  been  limited  by  law  to  a  fixed 
sum  per  capita:  Up  to  the  last  few  years  this  amount  has  been  fixed 
at  $167  per  pupil,  but  at  present  the  law  permits  the  use  of  $200  in 
schools  where  the  attendance  exceeds  100  pupils  and  $225  where -the 
attendance  falls  below  100,  special  authority  therefor  being  granted 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  in  the  latter  case. 

The  last  legislation,  upon  this  subject  is  contained  in  the  Indian 
appropriation  act  of  March  25,  1918,  to  the  effect: 

That  hereafter,  except  for  pay  of  superintendents  and  for  transportation  of  goods 
and  supplies  and  transportation  of  pupils,  not  more  than  $200  shall  be  expended  from 
appropriations  made  in  this  act,  or  any  other  act,  for  the  annual  support  and  education 
of  any  one  pupil  in  any  Indian  school  unless  the  attendance  in  any  school  shall  be 
less  than  100  pupils,  in  which  case  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  authorize  a  per 
capita  expenditure  of  not  to  exceed  $225 :  Provided,  That  the  total  amount  appropriated 
for  the  support  of  such  school  shall  not  be  exceeded:  Provided  further .  That  the  num- 
ber of  pupils  in  any  school  entitled  to  the  per  capita  allowance  hereby  provided  for 
shall  be  determined  by  taking  the  average  attendance  for  the  entire  fiscal  year  and 
not  any  fractional  part  thereof:  Provided  further ,  That  the  foregoing  shall  also  apply 
to  expenditures  for  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  30,  1918. 

The  effect  of  this  legislation  has  been  to  necessitate  a  large  enroll- 
ment or  attendance  in  the  boarding  schools,  and  superintendents 
have  felt  impelled  to  obtain  sufficient  pupils  to  enable  them  to 
expend  such  an  amount  of  money  as  they  have  found  essential  to 
the  proper  conduct  of  their  schools,  although  they  have  been  given 
definite  instructions  to  eliminate  from,  or  not  to  enroll,  noneligibles 
in  their  schools  and  have  endeavored  to  comply. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  33 

Legislation  of  this  character  has  worked  to  the  disadvantage  of  the 
schools  by  placing  a  premium  upon  a  full  enrollment  rather  than 
upon  the  character  of  such  enrollment  and  on  eligibility  of  the  appli- 
cants. During  the  period  of  the  war  every  possible  economy  is 
being  exercised  in  the  operation  of  the  Indian  schools  in  spite  of 
well-known  conditions  which  have  resulted  in  increased  cost  of  labor 
and  materials  and  an  endeavor  is  being  made  to  operate  the  schools 
within  the  amount  of  money  so  limited  for  support  of  each  pupil. 
However,  during  normal  conditions  these  amounts  so  allowed  are 
entirely  inadequate,  and  it  is  hoped  that  after  war  demands  have 
ceased  and  conditions  become  normal  a  more  liberal  policy  will  per- 
mit the  expenditure  of  sufficient  funds  to  properly  maintain  the 
Indian  boarding  schools  and  enable  full  adherence  to  the  present 
course  of  study,  and  especially  the  industrial  training  which  is  covered 
thereby. 

PUBLIC  SCHOOLS  IN  EASTERN  OKLAHOMA. — An  appropriation  of 
$275,000  was  given  in  aid  of  the  public  schools  within  the  territory 
comprising  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Quapaw  Af  ency  in 
Oklahoma,  and  of  this  there  has  been  expended  the  sum  of  $261,614 
in  payments  to  2,292  public-school  districts.  In  these  schools  about 
18,869  Indian  children  were  enrolled  and  have  been  attending  in 
association  with  tne  white  children  of  the  community.  The  total 
enumeration  of  Indian  children  in  the  same  territory  is  25,612,  of 
whom  there  were  enrolled  in  tribal  boarding  schools  1,347,  in  private 
mission  schools  565,  and  in  Indian  nonreservation  schools  827,  mak- 
ing a  total  of  21,608  Indian  children  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in 
schools  of  some  character. 

An  important  decision  regarding  the  right  of  Indian  children  to 
attend  white  schools  was  obtained  as  a  result  of  the  suit  of  Dorothy 
Sunrise  v.  District  Board  of  Cache  Consolidated  School  District  No.  1, 
Comanche  County,  Okla.  The  Cache  Consolidated  District  refused 
to  accept  for  enrollment  several  children  presented  by  the  local 
superintendent.  Every  means  of  persuasion  having  failed,  the  case 
was  filed  in  the  district  court,  praying  for  a  writ  of  mandamus  com- 
pelling the  acceptance  of  one  of  these  children,  which  resulted  in  a 
decision  by  the  court  that  the  Indian  child  was  entitled  to  attend 
the  school  as  a  pupil  and  to  all  rights  and  privileges  of  the  school. 
The  children  were  admitted  to  the  school  and  have  been  properly 
and  graciously  treated  since. 

The  decision  is  a  very  important  one,  bearing  on  the  rights  of  these 
Indian  children  to  attend  the  white  schools. 

SCHOOL  CHANGES. — About  20  day  schools  were  abolished  because 
of  public-school  facilities  available  to  the  pupils,  or  suitable  accommo- 
dations for  them  in  other  Indian  schools;  and  3  boarding  schools  were 
86770—18 3 


34  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

discontinued  for  similar  reasons.  On  the  other  hand,  5  day  schools 
were  established  in  localities  where  educational  provisions  were  lack- 
ing, and  the  Bloomfield  Seminary,  Five  Tribes,  was  reopened.  These 
changes  were  made  to  better  supply  the  actual  school  needs  of  the 
Indian  children  and  to  reduce  expenses. 

CERTIFICATES  OF  COMPETENCY  TO  GRADUATES. — In  the  work  of 
our  advanced  schools  giving  thorough  courses  in  vocational  train- 
ing, conscientious  effort  has  been  made  to  carry  out  the  purpose  of 
the  declaration  of  policy  of  April  17,  1917,  in  its  following  provision: 

Indian  students,  when  they  are  21  years  of  age  or  over,  who  complete  the  full  course 
of  instruction  in  the  Government  schools,  receive  diplomas,  and  have  demonstrated 
competency,  will  be  so  declared. 

During  the  year  eight  nonreservation  schools  were  authorized  and 
equipped  for  four-year  periods  of  vocational  instruction,  with  appro- 
priate academic  work,  above  the  sixth  grade.  This  instruction 
and  practice  was  along  the  lines  of  agriculture  and  practical  trades 
best  suited  to  the  occupational  needs  of  the  boys  and  in  home 
economics  for  the  girls.  Since  the  introduction  of  these  course 
requirements  in  February,  1916,  not  all  of  these  vocational  schools 
have  accomplished  the  equivalent  of  work  necessary  for  graduation. 
Last  yaar  six  of  them  reported  successful  graduates,  varying  in 
number  from  half  a  dozen  to  40  or  50.  About  one-half  or  more  of 
these  students  were  below  the  age  of  21  and  therefore  not  immediately 
eligible  for  competency  recognition,  but  will  be  considered  when 
they  reach  the  age  required.  Of  the  remaining,  some  30  odd  were 
considered  educationally  competent  and  so  declared.  Young  men 
graduates  were  fewer  in  number  last  year  because  of  those  who 
entered  war  service  before  completing  their  education.  Special 
care  is  exercised  in  passing  upon  the  qualifications  of  these  grad- 
uates, regarding  not  only  their  proficiency  at  school  but  their  expe- 
rience and  contact  with  white  people,  their  property  interests  and 
probable  capacity  for  handling  the  same,  their  industry,  habits 
and  character,  to  the  end  that  a  certificate  of  educational  com- 
petency, when  issued,  shall  be,  in  the  absence  of  later  adverse 
developments,  a  reasonable  basis  for  issuance  of  a  patent  in  fee. 
A  certain  percentage  of  these  cases  are  therefore  held  in  abeyance 
until  the  graduates  shall  have  further  proven  their  ability  by  actual 
contact  with  the  practical  conditions  of  life  out  of  school.  It  is 
my  purpose  to  keep  in  some  degree  of  personal  and  friendly  touch 
with  these  young  men  and  women  who  are  commissioned  to  go 
out  and  make  their  own  way,  and  so  a  letter  of  helpful  and  sug- 
gestive spirit  is  written  to  each  recipient  of  a  competency  certificate 
inviting  a  response  after  a  year  or  so  of  experience  in  the  outside 
world.  I  feel  that  this  may  have  a  human  and  sympathetic  value 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  35 

and  that  it  is  worth  while.  School  and  reservation  superintendents 
are  also  requested  to  follow  up  these  young  people  and  report  as  to 
their  progress  in  self-support.  Below  are  two  samples  of  such 
letters  to  competent  graduates,  together  with  a  copy  of  the  certi- 
ficate awarded  in  another  instance. 

MAY  2,  1918. 
Miss  BELLE  PENTSKA 

(Through  Superintendent  Carlisle  School). 

MY  DEAR  Miss  PENISKA:  I  send  you  the  inclosed  certificate  of  educational  com- 
petency, feeling  that  you  have  earned  such  recognition.  I  am  pleased  with  some  of 
the  things  said  about  you,  one  of  which  is  that  you  are  conscientious  and  always  try 
to  do  your  best.  That  trait  of  character  will  go  far  toward  bringing  success  to  anyone, 
and  it  is  needed  just  as  much  in  one  calling  as  another.  I  note  also  that  you  incline 
to  the  duties  of  home  making,  which  is  commendable,  because  there  is  nothing  in 
the  world  that  helps  more  to  make  people  happy  and  progressive  than  well-ordered, 
efficient,  and  refined  housekeeping.  These  conditions  are  the  purifying  and  elevat- 
ing influence  of  all  community  life.  High-minded,  sweet-tempered  home-keepers 
are  the  bringers  of  strength  and  virtue  to  social  welfare.  Hold  fast  to  your  highest 
ideals;  they  will  be  among  your  best  friends  in  any  work  you  do.  Should  you  acquire 
any  land  hereafter,  be  careful  in  its  management,  and  feel  free  to  consult  this  bureau, 
if  you  desire,  about  any  matter  affecting  it. 

I  give  you  my  best  wishes  and  would  like  you  to  write  me  a  year  hence  and  tell 
me  how  you  are  doing  and  something  of  your  plans.    I  will  also  ask  for  a  report  about 
you  from  the  superintendent  at  Carlisle. 
Sincerely  yours, 

(Signed)  CATO  SELLS, 

Commissioner. 

JUNE  1,  1918. 
Mr.  HARRY  PERICO 

(Through  Superintendent  Chilocco  School). 

MY  DEAR  MR.  PERICO:  In  pursuing  the  course  of  printing,  I  am  pleased  to  note 
that  you  have  attained  proficiency  and  have  done  good  work  in  your  craft  away  from 
the  school,  and  feel  that  you  will  be  worthy  in  every  way  of  the  confidence  expressed 
in  the  inclosed  certificate  of  educational  competency. 

I  commend  your  attitude  of  readiness  for  war  service,  if  called  upon,  and  your 
desire  to  extend  your  education.  No  one  is  ever  too  old  to  become  better  educated. 
I  also  note  that  you  are  reported  to  have  an  allotment  of  120  acres  of  land,  besides 
some  money  on  deposit,  and  I  wish  you  to  be  very  careful  in  the  handling  of  your 
property.  Every  young  man  should  add  to  his  money  savings  each  year.  Let  me 
urge  you  to  develop  and  study  the  best  productive  value  of  your  land;  keep  it  free 
from  encumbrance  and  do  not  place  yourself  in  a  position  where  you  have  to  sell  it. 
No  material  possession  is  better  to  keep  than  good  land. 

You  have  the  true  progressive  spirit,  and  I  shall  expect  to  hear  favorable  reports 
about  you  from  your  school  superintendent.    I  should  also  like  you  to  write  me  a 
year  hence  something  of  your  plans  and  prospects. 
Sincerely  yours, 

(Signed)  CATO  SELLS, 

Commissioner. 


36  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

UNITED     STATES    BUREAU     OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS — CERTIFICATE     OF     EDUCATIONAL    COM- 
PETENCY. 

This  certifies  that  Everidge  Benton,  a  five-eighths  blood  Indian,  of  the  Choctaw 
Tribe,  having  satisfactorily  completed  the  course  in  commercial  training  at  the 
Haskell  Institute  Indian  School,  as  authorized  by  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs, 
was  awarded  a  diploma  of  graduation  at  the  close  of  the  school  year  1917,  and  from  this 
record  and  other  information  submitted  concerning  his  work  as  a  student  he  is  regarded 
as  possessing  such  character,  judgment,  and  educational  qualifications  as  render  him 
reasonably  competent  to  transact  his  own  business  and  to  care  for  his  own  individual 
affairs. 

Given  at  Washington.  D.  C.,  on  this  12th  day  of  June,  nineteen  hundred  seventeen. 

[SEAL.]  CATO  SELLS. 

Commissioner. 
THE  CARLISLE  INDIAN  SCHOOL. 

The  United  States  Indian  School  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  will  not  continue 
as  an  institution  for  the  academic  and  vocational  training  of  Indian 
boys  and  girls,  but  is  being  turned  over  to  the  War  Department  to 
be  used  for  Army  hospital  purposes,  and  for  the  rehabilitation  and 
reeducation  of  sick  and  wounded  soldiers.  While  the  actual  transfer 
will  not  be  finally  made  until  September  1,  1918,  yet  the  plans 
therefor  have  been  fully  perfected  and  partly  carried  into  effect. 
The  educational  system  of  the  Indian  Department  will  not  suffer 
because  of  the  abolishment  of  the  Carlisle  School,  as  the  student 
body  has  been  considerably  depleted  by  enlistments  in  the  Army  and 
Navy,  and  the  war  industrial  requirements  are  such  as  to  demand 
many  older  pupils  who  might  otherwise  be  enrolled  as  students. 
Therefore  accommodations  for  the  Carlisle  students  are  available  in 
other  Indian  schools  and  arrangements  are  being  made  for  their 
transfer  to  well-equipped  schools  located  nearer  the  vicinities  in 
which  they  reside,  which  will  be  to  their  advantage  in  many  respects 
rather  than  otherwise. 

This  important  transaction  will  create  surprise  among  many,  and 
possibly  regret  to  those  who  have  had  intimate  knowledge  of  the 
great  influence  of  this  school  as  an  educational  factor  among  the 
Indians,  but  it  can  not  fail  to  meet  with  general  approval  and  the 
most  cordial  patriotic  sanction  when  the  facts  and  demands  of  the 
present  conditions  are  considered.  The  sick  and  disabled  soldiers 
of  the  American  Army  must  have  adequate  care  and  treatment  and 
this  need  is  constantly  increasing.  The  medical  department  of  the 
Army  has  been  in  quest  of  suitable  buildings  and  sites  for  hospitals, 
and  there  is  present  urgent  need  for  such  facilities  as  can  be  utilized 
with  the  least  possible  delay.  Moreover,  post-war  problems  are 
already  at  hand  and  reconstructive  measures  must  be  initiated.  A 
large  factor  in  this  work  is  the  reeducation  of  soldiers  physically 
disabled  in  the  war.  The  school  plant  at  Carlisle  is  well  adapted 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  37 

to  this  purpose  and  many  of  its  buildings,  with  a  little  alteration, 
can  be  speedily  used  for  hospital  purposes,  while  its  extensive  shops 
and  much  of  its  machinery  and  equipment  afford  the  requisites 
for  vocational  training  and  for  the  practice  of  new  occupations  or 
the  new  ways  of  following  old  trades. 

The  following  correspondence  between  the  Secretary  of  War  and 
the  Secretary  of.  the  Interior  concerning  the  transfer  of  the  Carlisle 

School  is  self-explanatory: 

WAR  DEPARTMENT, 
Washington,  July  9,  1918. 

MY  DEAR  MR.  SECRETARY:  The  Army  medical  department  has 
been  looking  for  suitable  buildings  and  sites  for  hospitals.  We  are 
greatly  in  need  of  hospital  facilities  at  the  present  time.  My  atten- 
tion has  been  drawn  to  the  Carlisle  Indian  School,  which,  because 
of  its  far  eastern  location  and  remoteness  from  the  centers  of  Indian 
population,  might  be  available  for  this  purpose,  especially  as  under 
the  law  of  1882,  which  created  the  Indian  School  at  Carlisle,  its 
return  to  the  Army  was  provided  for  under  certain  eventualities. 

I  am  wondering  whether  the  Department  of  the  Interior  would 
care  to  consider  the  advisability  of  turning  this  property  back  to 
the  Army  for  hospital  purposes  and  for  the  rehabilitation  and  reedu- 
cation of  the  sick  and  wounded  from  the  war.  I  am  informed  that 
there  is  a  very  considerable  equipment  there  which  might  be  utilized 
for  this  purpose. 

Cordially,  yours,  .. 

(Signed)  NEWTON  D.  BAKER, 

Secretary  of  War. 
The  honorable  the  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


THE  SECRETARY  OP  THE  INTERIOR, 

WASHINGTON,  July  16,  1918. 

DEAR  MR.  SECRETARY:  I  have  your  letter  of  July  9,  asking  whether  the  Indian 
School  plant  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  could  be  turned  over  to  the  Army  for  hospital  purposes 
and  for  the  rehabilitation  and  reeducation  of  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers. 

I  find  that  the  pupils  now  enrolled  in  the  Carlisle  School  can  be  accommodated  in 
other  Indian  schools,  and  in  view  of  the  need  by  the  Army  of  an  institution  of  this 
character,  I  have  given  my  consent  to  the  turning  over  of  the  plant  for  the  purposes 
indicated. 

I  have  asked  Commissioner  Sells  to  arrange  to  vacate  the  plant  by  September  1, 
and  suggest  that  any  matters  pertaining  to  the  use  of  furnishings  or  equipment  be 
taken  up  with  him  by  such  official  of  your  department  as  you  may  designate. 
Cordially,  yours, 

(Signed)  FRANKLIN  K.  LANE. 

Hon.  NEWTON  D.  BAKER, 

Secretary  of  War. 


38  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

HEALTH. 

The  health  work  of  the  Indian  Service  throughout  the  past  fiscal 
year  was  conducted  under  increasing  difficulties,  owing  to  the 
patriotic  response  of  many  of  our  physicians  and  nurses  to  their 
country's  call,  yet,  due  to  the  impetus  given  the  campaigns  on  the 
various  reservations  during  the  immediately  preceding  years,  a 
definite  progress  has  been  recorded. 

All  our  health  activities  are  planned  and  promoted  upon  the 
principle  that  permanent  results  in  these  matters  must  come  through 
popular  education  in  sanitation,  ventilation,  care  of  children,  care  of 
the  sick,  domestic  economy,  etc.  Despite  the  loss  of  many  health 
workers  this  line  of  endeavor  has  been  faithfully  carried  forward  to 
the  greatest  possible  extent  and  much  good  has  been  accomplished. 
Another  hardship  which  has  been  keenly  felt  is  the  greatly  increased 
prices  of  all  supplies,  particularly  medicines,  drugs,  and  surgical 
instruments,  the  cost  of  which  it  has  been  necessary  to  meet  with 
appropriations  no  larger  than  those  of  former  years,  or  not  increased 
proportionately  to  the  advanced  cost  of  the  material,  for  the  pur- 
chase of  which  they  were  intended.  A  patriotic  spirit  of  endeavor, 
however,  has  actuated  our  employees,  and  a  faithful  attempt  has 
been  made  to  secure  the  best  possible  results  with  the  facilities 
available. 

Tuberculosis  and  trachoma  continue  to  furnish  two  hard  problems 
to  solve^in  upbuilding  the  health  of  the  Indian  race.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  loss  of  physicians,  it  has  been  possible  to  operate  all  of  our 
sanatoria  during  the  year,  and  many  cases  of  tuberculosis  have  been 
treated  therein.  Additional  facilities  have  also  been  provided,  and 
in  some  instances  existing  institutions  have  been  enlarged,  where 
the  need  was  imperative,  either  by  limited  new  construction,  or 
through  the  purchase  of  buildings  already  completed,  or  by  remodel- 
ing. 

The  endeavors  to  eradicate  trachoma  have  suffered  principally 
from  the  loss  of  specialists  who  were  employed  particularly  for  this 
work.  These  losses,  however,  occurred  during  the  latter  part  of  the 
fiscal  year,  so  that  the  work  was  continued  with  but  little  abatement, 
and  much  has  been,  and  is  being,  done  to  suppress  this  disease  among 
the  Indians.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  trachoma  entirely  under 
control  and  practically  eradicated  at  many  of  the  boarding  schools, 
due  to  the  effective  treatment  which  is  possible  when  suitable  con- 
trol can  be  exercised  over  the  cases.  The  greatest  difficulty  in  this 
work  exists  among  the  older  infected  Indians  who  are  more  difficult 
to  reach  and  treat,  and  as  a  consequence  remain  as  foci  for  the  dis- 
semination of  the  disease.  Accordingly  everything  possible  is  done 
to  place  them  under  treatment  where  feasible,  and  to  educate  them 
in  cleanliness,  in  order  to  prevent  contagion. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIES.  39 

Continued  emphasis  has  been  laid  upon  the  better  babies'  move- 
ment, which  was  actively  inaugurated  year  before  last,  and  which 
demonstrated  such  remarkably  immediate  and  gratifying  results. 
This  campaign  has  now  become  a  regular  feature  of  the  reservation 
activities  and  will  continue  to  receive  the  earnest  attention  and 
efforts  which  it  merits. 

A  number  of  schools  and  reservations  were  visited  during  the  past 
year  by  epidemics,  including  smallpox,  " liberty"  measles,  pneu 
monia,  and  acute  influenza.  Measles  is  always  dreaded  among 
Indian  children,  a  common  sequel  being  tuberculosis,  and  for  this 
reason  all  possible  steps  were  taken  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the 
disease  and  to  give  those  infected  proper  care  and  after  treatment. 
Fortunately,  the  epidemics  for  the  most  part  have  not  been  of  a 
severe  nature  and,  as  a  rule,  serious  results  did  not  follow. 

Among  the  Navajos  and  Hopi  Indians  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico 
considerable  trouble  has  been  experienced  with  smallpox,  which, 
though  of  a  rnild  form,  became  epidemic  among  these  people  during 
the  last  year.  Vigorous  steps  were  immediately  taken  to  suppress 
this  contagion,  special  physicians  and  the  medical  supervisor  being 
detailed  for  the  purpose  of  conducting  a  campaign  of  vaccination. 
Hundreds  of  Indians  were  vaccinated  and  it  is  now  known  that  the 
efforts  of  these  physicians,  which  were  augmented  and  continued 
after  their  departure  by  the  regular  medical  forces  on  the  reservations, 
have  placed  the  disease  under  control.  Of  especial  interest  in  this 
connection  is  the  campaign  of  vaccination  conducted  by  the  super- 
visor of  hospitals  among  the  Hopi  Tribe  living  upon  the  Moqui 
Reservation.  These  people  dwell  in  communities  and  for  that 
reason  are  more  amenable  to  quarantine  and  control  than  the 
nomadic  Navajos.  The  supervisor  in  his  report  upon  this  work 
states  that  every  Hopi  Indian  not  presenting  a  history  of  recent 
successful  vaccination,  or  who  had  not  had  smallpox,  was  immunized 
in  this  campaign,  and  he  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  whole  tribe  has 
been  rendered  immune. 

At  the  Haskell  Institute  during  the  past  spring  a  severe  epidemic 
of  influenza,  or  as  observed  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States  a 
combination  of  streptococci  and  influenza  bacilli,  accompanied  by 
pulmonary  complications  suddenly  developed,  resulting  in  several 
deaths  among  the  pupils.  For  the  purpose  of  assisting  the  local 
medical  force  in  handling  this  epidemic,  and  for  the  purpose  of 
investigating  its  source,  a  special  physician  and  nurse  were  imme- 
diately detailed  to  the  school,  and  the  services  of  an  epidemiologist 
from  the  Public  Health  Service  were  secured.  Prompt  measures 
succeeded  in  keeping  the  mortality  down  to  a  minimum.  High 
winds  and  dust  storms  were  prevailing  at  that  time  in  the  country 
surrounding  this  school,  and  the  consensus  of  opinion  seemed  to  be 
that  the  infection  was  wind-borne. 


40  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

Altogether,  the  health  propaganda  of  the  Indian  Bureau  is  render- 
ing its  most  righteous  service.  The  perpetuation  of  the  race  is  a  first 
consideration.  Education,  and  the  protection  and  accumulation  of 
property  are  greatly  to  be  desired;  to  this  end  we  are  exerting  our- 
selves to  the  uttermost,  but  everything  is  necessarily  secondary  to 
life. 

IRRIGATION. 

Irrigation  was  practiced  to  a  considerable  extent  by  many  Indians 
of  the  southwest  long  before  the  white  man  came  to  this  country. 
Evidences  of  prehistoric  canals  and  ditches,  among  the  Pimas  in 
Arizona,  bear  mute  testimony  of  the  genius  and  industry  of  these 
people  who  eagerly  grasp  the  improved  facilities  offered  by  the 
white  man  and  the  belated  assistance  extended  by  the  Government. 
When  the  Spaniards  came  to  New  Mexico  they  found  the  Pueblo 
Indians  packing  baskets  of  earth  on  their  backs  to  repair  their  old 
ditches  or  construct  new  ones  to  irrigate  additional  lands. 

Irrigation  is  or  should  be  resorted  to  in  those  localities  where 
rainfall  is  insufficient  or  is  not  dependably  sufficient  for  crop  pro- 
duction. Fundamentally,  it  consists  of  the  artificial  application  of 
water  to  land  for  agricultural  purposes. 

Water  for  irrigation  is  ordinarily  secured  by  damming  rivers, 
pumping  from  underground  reservoirs  or  impounding  flood-waters. 
The  first  has  been  longest  used  and  is  the  most  general.  Pumping 
water  has  been  resorted  to  with  satisfactory  results,  and  in  some 
localities  is  the  best,  if  not  the  only  means,  of  supply.  The  impound- 
ing of  waters  which  would  otherwise  be  wasted  is  a  method  of  con- 
servation which  has  been  utilized  to  a  great  advantage  and  is  certain 
to  be  more  extensively  employed.  There  are  millions  of  acres  of 
land,  particularly  in  the  southwest,  that  could  in  this  way  be  brought 
under  cultivation.  Such  land  lies  largely  in  semiarid  sections,  where 
drought  and  crop  failures  are  so  frequent  and  disastrous  as  to  make 
failure  to  employ  this  feasible  solution  an  economic  crime.  A 
notable  example  of  flood-water  conservation,  from  an  intermittent 
and  ordinarily  limited  flow,  has  been  successfully  effected  in  dam- 
ming a  branch  of  the  Trinity  River,  near  Fort  Worth,  where  a  great 
lake,  containing  an  immense  and  permanent  supply  of  water,  has 
been  created.  What  has  been  done  to  furnish  water  for  the  city  of 
Fort  Worth,  and  for  pleasure  purposes,  can  be  as  successfully  accom- 
plished for  irrigating  land  not  only  in  Texas  but  everywhere,  under 
like  conditions,  throughout  our  entire  country. 

The  fast  growing  population  of  the  United  States  and  the  constantly 
increasing  requirements  for  food  production  demand  that  every  acre 
of  tillable  land  should  be  made  to  yield  each  year  to  the  full  extent 
of  its  possibilities. 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS  41 

It  is  indefensible  and  inexcusable  that  man  whom  God  has  ordained 
to,  reign  on  earth  over  animate  and  inanimate  things  should  fail  to 
bring  together,  for  his  own  benefit,  immeasurable  land  and  water 
waste. 

Irrigation  has  been  made  enormously  profitable  by  diverting  the 
waters  of  constantly  flowing  streams,  likewise  by  pumping  from 
undersurface  reservoirs,  and  the  impounding  of  flood  waters  has  been 
successfully  used  in  a  limited  way  in  semiarid  sections,  but  the  time 
has  come  when  the  limit  of  our  possibilities  in  this  last  respect  must 
be  employed. 

The  world's  war  is  being  directed  by  the  master  mind  in  the  White 
House.  The  downfall  of  autocratic  governments  is  writ  so  plain  that 
he  who  runs  can  read.  The  aftermath,  with  the  successful  termina- 
tion of  the  war  behind  us,  will  involve  much  more  than  the  recon- 
struction incident  to  enlarged  human  liberty.  A  people  responsible 
for  revolutionizing  our  all-powerful  but  faulty  financial  system 
through  the  creation  of  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  law,  making  possible 
the  greater  local  use  of  wealth  production,  is  certainly  capable  of 
taking  advantage  of  the  gifts  of  nature,  readily  within  reach,  and 
subduing  the  untamed  land  and  water  conditions  awaiting  the  head 
and  hand  of  man. 

Truly,  America  has  been  prodigal  of  its  natural  resources.  Golden 
opportunities  lie  right  at  our  feet  in  the  development  of  those  great 
areas  of  the  Southwest  where  the  soil  is  fertile,  the  climate  salubrious, 
and  the  possible  yields  truly  marvelous. 

On  one  Indian  reservation  alone  the  aggregate  value  of  the  crop 
r.aised  during  the  past  year  exceeded  $6,000,000.  On  another  reser- 
vation a  5-acre  tract  in  alfalfa  yielded  over  $2,000,  the  hay  having 
been  harvested  nine  times  during  the  calendar  year. 

COLORADO  RIVER  RESERVATION,  ARIZ. — To  accommodate  the  ever- 
increasing  demand  for  water  at  this  point,  an  additional  pumping 
unit  was  installed  during  the  year.  The  irrigable  lands  on  this 
reservation  are  highly  adapted  to  the  production  of  long  staple 
cotton,  and  every  acre  that  can  be  brought  under  ditch  is  eagerly 
sought.  The  pumping  plant  is  designed  to  provide  water  for  lands 
allotted  to  the  Indians  only.  Upward  of  100,000  acres  of  equally 
fine  land  within  the  reservation  could  be  irrigated  by  gravity  from 
the  Colorado  River.  A  project  of  this  size,  however,  would  cost 
several  million  dollars.  Congress  has  not  yet  authorized  the  work, 
although  the  recent  Indian  appropriation  act  carries  a  small  sum 
for  preliminary  surveys  and  investigations  at  this  point.  The 
work  should  be  undertaken,  as  the  latent  agricultural  possibilities 
here  are  tremendous. 

CROW  RESERVATION,  MONT. — The  aggregate  amount  expended  in 
irrigation  work  on  this  reservation  during  the  year  approximates 


42  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

$150,000.  Main  canals  and  laterals  were  enlarged  and  extended  so 
as  to  bring  additional  land  under  ditch;  suitable  concrete  headgates 
and  other  structures  installed,  and  many  bridges  and  smaller  struc- 
tures of  timber  erected.  When  completed  the  system  on  this  reser- 
vation will  serve  upward  of  70,000  acres.  During  the  year  just 
passed  some  13,720  acres  were  cultivated,  with  an  aggregate  crop 
yield  valued  at  $223,176.  The  recent  Indian  appropriation  act 
makes  $200,000  available  to  continue  the  work. 

FORT  HALL  RESERVATION,  IDAHO. — Some  12,000  acres  within  this 
reservation  were  cultivated  during  the  past  year,  7,712  acres  by 
lessees  of  Indian  land  and  5,085  acres  by  the  Indians  themselves,  an 
increase  of  over  3,000  acres.  The  principal  crops  are  alfalfa,  grain, 
potatoes,  and  sugar  beets,  the  aggregate  value  of  the  crops  raised  on 
this  project  during  the  year  exceeding  $500,000.  A  number  of  diffi- 
culties hamper  the  most  successful  operation  of  this  system.  The 
canals  and  ditches  constructed  years  ago  are  not  of  sufficient  grade 
and  carrying  capacity  to  serve  the  area  ultimately  to  be  irrigated. 
The  rapid  growth  of  aquatic  plants  quickly  diminishes  the  carrying 
capacity  of  the  canals,  already  too  limited;  concrete  structures 
improperly  designed  and  constructed,  without  steel  reinforcing,  are 
constantly  cracking  and  settling.  Exposure  to  rigid  frost  action 
during  the  long  winters  augments  this  trouble.  Other  appropriators 
on  the  Blackfoot  River,  above  the  reservation  headings,  divert  water 
justly  belonging  to  the  Indians  and  constant  attention  is  demanded 
to  see  that  their  rights  are  protected.  Excess  waste,  return  and 
drainage  waters  discharged  into  Sand  Creek  by  white  irrigators, 
flow  down  into  one  of  our  main  canals  in  such  intermittent  quantities 
as  to  seriously  jeopardize  its  successful  operation,  frequently  resulting 
in  considerable  damage  to  the  Government's  property. 

GILA  RIVER  RESERVATION,  ARIZ. — The  Indian  appropriation  act 
of  May  18,  1916,  carried  two  items  for  the  construction  of  diversion 
dams  across  the  Gila  River,  one  near  the  agency  at  Sacaton  and  the 
other  outside  the  reservation,  above  the  town  of  Florence.  When 
constructed  the  dam  at  the  agency  will  serve  Indian  lands  exclusively, 
while  the  one  above  Florence  will  serve  lands  belonging  to  both 
Indians  and  whites.  Extensive  unexpected  erosion  of  the  south 
bank  of  the  Gila  River,  at  the  lower  dam  site,  so  widened  the  river 
channel  as  to  render  the  appropriation  insufficient  for  the  work. 
Congress  gave  additional  funds  in  the  recent  Indian  appropriation 
act.  Plans  and  specifications  covering  this  dam,  which  is  to  carry  a 
bridge  superstructure,  have  been  completed  and  approved  and  it  is 
expected  that  the  work  will  be  undertaken  at  an  early  date. 

Construction  of  the  upper  diversion  near  Florence  is  contingent 
upon  a  satisfactory  adjustment  of  conflicting  claims  to  water  between 
the  Indians  and  the  whites.  Negotiations  have  been  continuous, 


COMMISSIONER  OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  43 

conferences  repeated,  and  even  tentative  agreements  reached. 
Binding  contracts  have  not  been  executed,  however,  and'  recent 
developments  indicate  that  the  owners  of  certain  interests  in  and 
around  Florence  have  repudiated  the  former  tentative  agreement  as 
to  a  division  of  these  waters.  This  postpones  actual  construction 
indefinitely,  as  the  work  is  not  to  begin  until  these  conflicting  claims 
are  settled. 

NAVAJO  RESERVATION,  ARIZ.  AND  N.  MEX.— The  scarcity  of  water 
in  the  large  territory  occupied  by  the  Navajo  and  Moqui  Indians 
renders  the  irrigation  possibilities  there  exceedingly  limited.  Out 
of  an  aggregate  area  exceeding  12,000,000  acres,  water  is  now  avail- 
able for  some  6,500  acres  only;  1,500  acres  under  the  Ganado  Project 
in  the  southern  part  of  the  reserve;  4,000  acres  under  the  Hogback 
Project,  near  the  San  Juan  School,  and  1,000  acres  near  Marsh  Pass, 
in  northern  Arizona.  Investigations  are  being  continued  from  time 
to  time  as  funds  are  available,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining  additional 
areas  for  which  water  may  be  developed,  but  at  best  these  will  be 
very  small,  and  as  far  as  can  be  seen  at  present  this  vast  domain  must 
primarily  remain  a  stock-raising  proposition. 

In  my  last  annual  report  I  referred  briefly  to  the  development  of 
underground  water  for  domestic  and  stock  watering  purposes,  inti- 
mating that  the  problem  confronting  the  Navajo  is  not  one  of  grass 
but  of  water.  Winter  rains  and  summer  cloudbursts  produce  con- 
siderable vegetation  in  regions  bare  of  living  streams  or  perennial 
springs.  Ample  forage  is  frequently  at  hand  if  water  for  domestic 
and  stock  needs  can  be  found.  The  underground  water  developed  for 
these  Indians  during  the  past  few  years  has  been  of  untold  value  to 
them  during  the  extreme  drought  that  has  visited  the  southwest 
recently.  Not  only  have  thousands  of  head  of  stock  been  saved  to  the 
Navajos,  but  it  has  helped  in  no  small  way  to  augment  the  supply  of 
wool,  mutton,  and  beef  available  for  market.  These  Indians  have 
always  been  practically  self-supporting,  wresting  at  least  a  bare 
existence  from  an  inhospitable  country,  but  under  recent  market 
conditions  many  of  them  are  becoming  well-to-do,  and  a  number 
even  independent.  Raw  wool  has  been  commanding  such  fancy 
prices  lately  that  the  making  of  Navajo  rugs,  formerly  a  source  of 
considerable  revenue,  has  practically  ceased. 

UINTAH  RESERVATION,  UTAH. — The  controversy  over  water  rights 
in  the  Uintah  Valley,  adverted  to  in  my  previous  report,  is  still  pend- 
ing before  the  District  Court  for  the  State  of  Utah,  a  decision  in  the 
matter  not  yet  having  been  handed  down.  In  the  meantime  a 
reasonably  satisfactory  division  of  the  available  water  between  the 
Indians  and  the  whites  is  being  had  through  a  water  commissioner 
appointed  by  the  court. 


44  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Large  areas  of  unallotted  land  within  this  reservation  were  opened 
to  homestead  entry  years  ago  and  it  is  the  settlers  on  these  lands  who 
are  now  contesting  the  prior  right  of  the  Indians  to  sufficient  water 
for  their  needs.  In  the  entire  district  there  are  some  46,000  acres 
under  irrigation,  being  an  increase  of  11,000  acres  over  the  past 
year.  This  represents  an  increase  of  over  30  per  cent.  The  value  of 
the  crops  raised  by  the  Indians  themselves  exceeded  $95,000. 

YAKIMA  RESERVATION,  WASH. — One  of  the  most  successful  large 
irrigation  projects  with  which  the  Indian  Service  has  to  deal  is  located 
on  the  Yakima  Reservation,  Wash.  Designed  to  supply  120,000 
acres,  ultimately,  we  find  over  64,000  acres  now  under  actual  culti- 
vation. During  the  past  year  the  crop  yield  exceeded  $6,000,000. 
The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  present  fiscal  year  carries 
$500,000  for  the  continuation  of  this  work,  which  is  being  pushed  as 
rapidly  as  existing  conditions  will  permit.  Machinery  is  resorted  to, 
wherever  possible,  as  a  substitute  for  hand  labor,  and  the  three  drag- 
line excavators  at  work  on  this  project  removed  602,354  cubic  yards 
of  earth  at  an  average  cost  of  10  cents  per  cubic  yard.  This  is  50 
per  cent  cheaper  than  estimated  for  several  years  ago,  when  labor 
and  supplies  were  less  expensive. 

WIND  RIVER  RESERVATION,  WYO. — Present  plans  call  for  the 
irrigation  of  approximately  73,000  acres  within  this  reservation,  of 
which  some  50,000  acres  are  now  under  ditch.  About  $200,000  was 
expended  in  this  work  during  the  year  just  ended,  resulting  in  the 
addition  of  many  miles  of  main  canals  and  distributing  laterals,  with 
the  attendant  diversion  structures,  bridges,  etc.  Drainage  of  certain 
seeped  areas  had  to  be  resorted  to,  with  satisfactory  results.  Con- 
siderable areas  within  this  reservation  are  leased,  and  still  others  are 
devoted  to  the  cattle  industry.  The  area  actually  cultivated  yielded 
a  gross  return  of  over  $325,000,  of  which  $142,181  belonged  to  the 
Indians  and  $182,883  to  the  whites. 

ZUNI  RESERVATION,  N.  MEX. — About  5,000  acres  within  this 
reservation  are  now  under  ditch,  being  supplied  with  water  from  a 
reservoir  constructed  years  ago.  The  rapidity  with  which  this 
reservoir  is  filling  with  silt  is  becoming  alarming.  Since  its  completion 
1 1J  years  ago  the  reservoir  has  lost  54  per  cent  of  its  capacity  from 
this  cause.  At  this  rate  the  life  of  the  reservoir  is  about  21  years,  of 
which  Hi  years  have  already  passed.  The  capacity  of  the  reservoir 
is  decreasing,  of  course,  in  proportion  to  the  deposit  of  silt,  and  unless 
some  form  of  relief  is  soon  devised  the  reservoir  will  be  practically 
useless.  The  life  of  the  reservoir  may  be  extended  temporarily  by 
elevating  the  crest  of  the  present  dam  and  spillway,  but  the  extent 
to  which  this  can  be  carried  is  limited  by  natural  surroundings, 
it  has  been  estimated  that  an  expenditure  of  $13,000  in  increasing 
the  height  of  the  dam  will  add  possibly  11  years  to  the  life  of  the 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  45 

reservoir,  but  eventually  some  other  form  of  relief  must  be  devised 
or  the  project  abandoned.  These  Indians  are  industrious,  are  expert 
agriculturists,  and  make  full  use  of  the  facilities  offered  for  industrial 
advancement. 

SALT  RIVER  VALLEY,  ARIZ. — One  of  the  largest  and  most  success- 
ful irrigation  projects  in  the  country  is  located  in  the  Salt  River 
Valley,  Ariz.  Here  some  200,000  acres,  a  part  of  which  belongs  to 
the  Indians,  are  being  supplied  with  water  from  the  Salt  River, 
augmented  during  the  dry  season  with  stored  water  from  the  Roose- 
velt dam.  The  unit  cost  of  this  project  has  been  fixed  at  $60  per 
acre  for  construction  purposes.  During  the  past  several  years  many 
acres  in  this  valley  have  been  shown  to  yield  between  $300  and  $400 
per  acre.  These  lands  lie  within  that  area  adapted  to  the  growth  of 
the  long  staple  Pima  cotton,  a  product  developed  and  brought  to 
its  present  state  of  perfection  on  the  Pima  Indian  Reservation. 
For  this  cotton  there  is  a  most  urgent  demand,  as  it  weaves  into  a 
fabric  of  great  textile  strength  which  is  used,  when  obtainable, 
exclusively  in  the  manufacture  of  automobile  tires  and  aeroplane 
wings.  For  many  years  to  come  the  demand  for  this  cotton  will  be 
insatiable.  Within  the  past  12  months  the  market  price  of  this 
cotton  has  been  between  70  and  80  cents  per  pound.  Under  reason- 
ably favorable  conditions  the  normal  yield  from  this  cotton  averages 
a  bale  to  the  acre.  Many  acres  produce  more.  Even  at  70  cents  per 
pound  this  would  give  an  average  gross  yield  of  $350  per  acre.  Allow- 
ing $250  which  is  excessive,  to  cover  all  costs  of  production,  labor, 
etc.,  it  would  still  leave  a  net  yield  of  $100  per  acre  annually.  This  is 
from  the  lint  alone.  In  the  past  it  has  been  impossible  to  supply  the 
demand  for  the  seed  from  this  cotton  and  additional  areas  are  being 
planted  to  this  pioduct  as  rapidly  as  the  seed  can  be  obtained.  The 
value  of  the  seed  produced,  added  to  the  returns  from  the  lint,  yields 
a  net  income  on  the  investment  that  is  truly  marvelous. 

These  figures  sound  astonishing  but  they  are  being  demonstrated 
daily,  and  all  of  this  comes  from  intelligent  application  of  water  to 
arid  areas,  otherwise  worthless  for  agricultural  purposes. 

AGRICULTURE  AND  STOCK  RAISING. 

FARMING. — The  campaign  for  increased  production  on  Indian 
land  to  meet  war-time  conditions,  as  outlined  in  my  last  annual 
report,  has  been  further  systematized  and  aggressively  followed  up 
during  the  year  with  continued  good  results.  Reports  thus  far 
received  indicate  that  the  Indians  on  75  reservations  are  cultivating 
370,101  acres  of  land,  as  compared  with  317,101  acres  last  year, 
which  represents  an  increase  of  52,990  acres. 

Practically  every  reservation  showed  an  increase  ranging  from  5 
per  cent  to  100  per  cent.  Lack  of  rain  on  several  of  the  reservations 


46  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

where  the  percentage  of  increase  was  comparatively  small  pre- 
vented a  better  showing.  Hundreds  of  Indians  are  cultivating  their 
land  this  year  who  never  farmed  before,  but  who  have  enthusiasti- 
cally caught  the  spirit  of  the  campaign  for  increased  production,  and 
many  others  have  enlarged  their  cultivated  acreage.  Here  are 
several  typical  extracts  from  field  reports: 

James  Baker  is  38  years  old,  has  a  wife  and  six  children,  and  is  one  of  the  Indians 
to  whom  citizenship  papers  were  issued  last  year.  Jim  is  a  sober,  industrious  fellow, 
and  has  about  50  acres  of  wheat,  30  acres  of  oats,  and  25  acres  of  flax,  and  has  acquired 
a  nice  herd  of  cattle.  He  is,  I  feel,  an  Indian  who  since  receiving  his  citizenship 
has  really  been  prosperous. 

Wallace  Altaha,  R-14,  is  the  one  large  stockman  of  the  tribe.  His  herds  have  long 
been  notorious  for  the  poor  breeding  and  lack  of  intelligent  management.  He  has 
always  stood  against  improved  breeding.  During  the  winter  and  spring  he  has  pur- 
chased 31  pure-bred  Hereford  bulls,  of  fine  quality,  and  15  grades  that  are  very  good. 
Also,  during  the  winter  his  herds  were  worked  and  some  400  or  500  old  steers,  bulls, 
and  cows  gathered  and  sold.  Some  of  these  were  12  to  15  years  old,  and  quite  a  men- 
ace to  breeding  and  proper  handling. 

These  results  have  been  accomplished  in  spite  of  the  handicap  of 
an  inadequate  farmer  force.  There  are  approximately  250  such 
positions  authorized,  with  about  80  vacancies  at  the  present  time, 
only  20  farmers  having  been  appointed  on  certification  from  the 
Civil  Service  during  the  past  year,  largely  owing  to  the  small  salaries 
that  can  be  paid  from  the  limited  funds  available  for  this  purpose 
and  the  more  attractive  opportunities  outside  this  service. 

That  the  impetus  of  the  campaign  inaugurated  last  year  might 
be  further  stimulated,  the  following  follow-up  letter  was  sent  out  by 
me  on  August  15,  1917: 

To  SUPERINTENDENTS: 

Reports  show  increased  acreages  cultivated  by  the  Indians  this  season  on  practi- 
cally every  reservation,  ranging  from  5  per  cent  to  100  per  cent,  the  average  being 
31.6  per  cent.  While  this  is  gratifying,  it  should  mark  only  the  beginning  of  our 
labors.  The  reports  likewise  disclose  considerable  areas  of  unused  tillable  land  on 
the  different  reservations,  with  many  able-bodied  male  adult  Indians  not  now  engaged 
in  farming  or  other  gainful  occupations,  the  majority  of  whom  undoubtedly  should 
be  cultivating  their  allotments. 

But  this  is  only  one  feature  of  the  campaign.  In  addition  thereto  every  Indian 
now  farming  must  be  induced  to  increase  his  cultivated  acreage  to  the  limit  of  his 
capacity  in  man,  animal,  and  machinery  power.  Present  conditions  portend  a 
continued  and  perhaps  an  increasing  shortage  of  foodstuffs  in  the  Old  World  and  a 
consequent  greater  responsibility  on  the  United  States  to  utilize  every  acre  of  tillable 
land  in  the  production  of  foodstuffs  to  feed  ourselves  and  our  allies.  Press  home  the 
tremendous  import  of  this  fact  to  employees  and  Indians  alike,  with  the  view  of 
keeping  alive  and  further  developing  the  enthusiasm  and  momentum  of  the  campaign 
inaugurated  last  spring.  Two  things  especially  should  be  strongly  emphasized  dur- 
ing the  remainder  of  this  season:  (1)  The  necessity  of  the  Indians  saving  seed  for 
next  year  and  of  the  superintendents  making  provision  for  an  adequate  supply  of 
seed  in  ample  time  for  next  season's  planting  on  the  agency  and  school  farms.  This 
is  vitally  important  and  must  not  be  neglected,  especially  in  view  of  partial  crop 
failures  in  some  parts  of  the  country.  (2)  Fall  plowing:  On  those  reservations  where 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  47 

fall  plowing  is  proper,  according  to  the  best  agricultural  practice,  effort  should  be 
made  to  have  as  much  land  plowed  this  fall  by  the  Indians  and  on  the  agency  and 
school  farms  as  will  be  put  in  crops  next  spring.  See  that  this  is  accomplished  so  far 
as  advisable  and  practicable  on  your  particular  reservation. 

The  reports  also  indicate  an  increase  of  approximately  48  per  cent  in  the  acreage 
cultivated  on  the  agency  and  school  farms.  This  could  not  have  been  accomplished 
without  the  whole-hearted  cooperation  of  superintendents  and  employees,  and  I 
wish  here  to  express  my  appreciation.  However,  the  success  of  the  past  season  sh6uld 
only  spur  us  on  to  greater  efforts  to  bring  under  cultivation  as  much  of  the  unused 
ill  able  land  on  the  agency  and  school  farms  as  can  be  handled  properly  consistent 
with  available  facilities  and  funds.  Example  is  much  stronger  than  precept,  and  if 
we  expect  our  appeal  to  the  Indians  to  be  effective,  we  must  surpass  our  own  record 
of  the  past  season  on  the  agency  and  school  farms. 

Please  acknowledge  receipt  of  this  letter,  with  information  as  to  the  Dlans  which 
you  have  formulated  to  increase  the  number  of  Indians  farming  and  the  total  culti- 
vated acreage,  and  to  provide  for  the  necessary  seed  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  Indians 
and  the  Government. 

The  important  subjects  of  food  conservation  by  the  elimination 
of  waste  and  cooperation  with  the  National  and  State  food  adminis- 
trations, canning  and  drying,  cooperative,  extension  work  with  the 
United  States  Department  of  Agriculture  and  the  various  State 
colleges,  bee  culture,  and  the  utilization  of  surplus  Indian  labor  were 
also  emphasized  during  the  year  and  are  more  fully  referred  to  in 
connection  with  war  activities  in  this  report. 

STOCK  RAISING. — During  the  past  year  the  need  for  increased  food 
production  has  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Indians  and  the 
employees  of  the  Indian  Service  with  a  view  of  having  them  exert 
their  energies  toward  the  development  of  the  live-stock  industry  on 
all  Indian  reservations  in  order  that  meat  production  might  be 
increased.  The  scope  of  the  activities  necessary  to  accomplish  this 
can  best  be  presented  by  reproducing  my  instructions  to  superin- 
tendents and  others  under  date  of  May  2,  1918,  as  follows: 

To  THE  SUPERINTENDENTS: 

The  Indian  Service,  and  by  that  I  mean  the  Indians  and  the  employees  of  the 
service,  has  responded  effectively  to  the  war  call  for  increased  food  production  along 
all  lines,  and  in  every  way  has  shown  a  willingness  and  ability  to  do  its  part.  Large 
areas  of  hitherto  unproductive  agricultural  lands  have  been  brought  under  cultiva- 
tion and  the  live  stock  grazing  on  Indian  lands  has  been  materially  increased,  so  that 
the  grain,  meat,  and  other  food  supplies  of  the  country  have  been  largely  augmented 
by  the  energetic  handling  of  Indian  resources. 

But  while  I  feel  that  the  results  of  the  past  year's  work  have  been  splendid,  I  am. 
sure  that  this  year,  by  reason  of  the  valuable  experience  gained  last  year,  can  be  made 
to  show  greater  results,  both  to  the  country  and  to  the  Indians  themselves.  It  is  with 
that  purpose  in  view  that  I  want  to  call  your  attention  to  several  things  which  I 
believe  will  greatly  increase  the  output  of  meat  and  other  live-stock  products  through 
the  efforts  of  the  Indians  themselves  and  the  more  intensive  use  of  their  grazing 
lands. 

At  the  present  time,  when  requests  are  made  by  cattlemen  for  grazing  lands,  I  am  tell- 
ing them  that  practically  all  the  Indian  lands  are  carrying  stock  to  their  full  capacity, 
and  this  is  literally  true  as  conditions  now  exist;  but  I  am  convinced  that  proper 


48  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

attention  given  to  certain  factors  of  the  grazing  problem  will  enable  us  to  increase 
the  capacity  and  output  of  the  Indian  ranges  to  a  surprisingly  large  extent.  These 
factors  are: 

1.  Water  supply. 

2.  Fencing. 

3.  Winter  protection,  including  proper  relation  of  summer  and  winter  grazing. 

4.  Wild  or  worthless  horses. 

5.  -Predatory  animals. 

6.  Scrub  stock. 

7.  Care  and  handling  of  bulls. 

8.  The  salt  supply. 

9.  Winter  feeding. 

I  want  you  to  take  up  the  subjects  enumerated  in  the  preceding  paragraph  and 
make  a  careful  study  of  conditions  on  your  reservation  with  respect  to  each  one  of 
them. 

WATER  SUPPLY. — Probably  the  most  important  factor  in  connection  with  the  utili- 
zation of  grazing  ranges  and  the  one  where  most  effective  improvement  may  be  made 
is  that  of  water  supply.  There  are  ranges  where  large  areas  of  grass  are  never  eaten 
over  because  of  the  distance  the  cattle  must  travel  in  grazing  to  and  from  water. 
On  nearly  all  of  these  ranges  it  is  possible  to  develop  water  at  points  so  located  as  to 
make  the  entire  range  available;  or,  if  not  all  of  it,  at  least  to  largely  increase  the 
grazing  capacity,  and  this  at  a  cost  so  as  to  be  well  within  the  bounds  of  practicability. 
To  allow  this  waste  of  grass  to  continue  is  unbusinesslike  and  indefensible,  and  I 
want  you  to  be  exceedingly  careful  in  your  investigation  of  the  water  supply  on  the 
grazing  lands  of  your  reservation. 

It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  range  is  used  by  the  Indians  or  is  under  permit. 
If  under  permit,  and  you  find  that  the  capacity  can  be  increased  by  water  develop- 
ment, the  matter  will  be  called  to  the  attention  of  the  permittee,  and  he  will  be 
required  to  make  such  development  and  then  stock  to  capacity,  or  vacate  and  the 
permit  given  to  some  one  who  will.  If  the  needed  development  is  on  Indian  range, 
ways  and  means  will  be  found  to  do  the  work.  No  grass  must  be  allowed  to  go  to 
waste  that  can  possibly  be  made  available. 

After  you  have  carefully  gone  over  the  situation  sufficiently  to  enable  you  to  make 
a  general  outline  of  your  plans  I  want  you  to  submit  a  special  report  to  me  on  this 
matter  of  water  supply,  and  this  report  should  be  in  my  hands  not  later  than  July 
1,  1918. 

FENCING.' — First-class  fencing  is  a  highly  important  factor  in  promoting  the  stock 
industry.  The  out-boundaries  of  all  grazing  ranges  should  be  well  fenced  to  prevent 
controversy  between  permittees  and  to  protect  homesteaders  or  other  occupants  of 
the  contiguous  lands;  it  also  makes  it  much  easier  to  keep  check  on  the  number  of 
cattle  being  run  by  permittees  and  gives  a  general  feeling  of  security  that  is  very 
beneficial. 

But  important  as  it  is  to  have  the  range  boundaries  well  fenced,  it  is  even  more 
essential  that  all  Indian  allotments  actually  being  used  by  the  Indians  and  lying 
within  a  grazing  range  be  so  fenced  as  to  give  adequate  protection  to  the  crops  and 
improvements.  I  am  constantly  receiving  complaints  from  Indians  because  of  cattle 
trespassing,  due  to  poor  fences.  In  granting  permits  hereafter,  one  of  the  require- 
ments must  be  a  provision  for  adequate  fencing  of  boundaries  and  improved  Indian 
allotments,  and  this  provision  must  be  strictly  enforced.  Many  existing  permits 
contain  the  provision,  but  the  fences  are  not  being  kept  up  as  they  should  be.  Have 
your  fences  inspected  as  soon  as  possible  and  take  vigorous  steps  to  have  them  repaired 
and  kept  in  good  condition. 

WINTER  PROTECTION,    INCLUDING   PROPER   RELATION    OF   SUMMER   AND   WINTER 
GRAZING.— Where  the  grazing  area  on  a  reservation  is  divided  into  two  or  more  ranges 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  49 

the  division  lines  should  have  been  so  run,  if  possible,  as  to  give  each  range  the  proper 
proportion  of  winter  and  summer  grazing,  with  its  share  of  winter  protection.  This 
has  not  always  been  done  when  the  ranges  were  first  laid  out,  and  as  a  result  there  are 
ranges  that  are  not  carrying  the  number  of  cattle  they  should. 

On  most  reservations  the  I.  D.  herd  occupies  a  range  set  apart  for  it,  and  if  in  any 
instance  this  I.  D.  range  does  not  have  good  winter  feed  and  protection,  and  other 
ranges  under  lease  or  permit  do  have  it,  I  desire  that  some  rearrangement  be  made  at 
the  first  practicable  opportunity,  so  that  the  cattle  of  the  Indians  may  have  the  needed 
protection.  Good  management  of  a  cattle  range  requires  the  conservation  of  grass 
on  some  part  of  it  for  winter  use,  and  this  should  be  accomplished  by  keeping  the 
cattle  off  of  such  parts  of  the  range  during  the  summer  as  are  most  suitable  for  winter 
grazing.  In  some  cases  this  can  be  done  by  riders,  but  probably  in  the  majority  of 
cases  a  dividing  fence  is  the  most  economical  and  efficient  method  of  dividing  the 
summer  and  winter  ranges.  Of  course,  no  hard  and  fast  rule  can  be  laid  down  to  cover 
this  phase  of  the  grazing  question  since  so  many  different  factors  enter  into  its  con- 
sideration, but  I  want  to  impress  each  superintendent  with  the  importance  of  giving 
the  subject  careful  attention  along  the  lines  suggested. 

WILD  OR  WORTHLESS  HORSES. — The  grass  being  consumed  each  year  by  wild  horses, 
and  also  worthless  Indian  ponies,  if  eaten  by  cattle  or  sheep  would  bring  a  revenue 
at  least  five  times  as  large  to  the  Indian  owners  and  would  have  a  material  bearing 
on  the  world's  meat  supply.  A  very  conservative  estimate  of  the  total  number  of 
these  animals  on  Indian  reservations  would  be  not  less  than  75,000  head,  and  since 
two  horses  consume  as  much  feed  as  three  head  of  cattle,  this  is  equivalent  for  pasturage 
of  112,500  head  of  cattle,  or  at  the  ratio  of  five  sheep  to  one  of  cattle — 562,500  head  of 
sheep. 

The  horses  included  in  the  above  estimate  are  only  those  which  have  never  been 
improved  by  breeding,  and  they  are  running  on  territory  which  makes  it  exceedingly 
difficult  to  accomplish  much  in  the  way  of  upbreeding,  and  where  the  difficulty  of 
catching  them  largely  prevents  the  Indians  from  disposing  of  them  at  the  proper 
time,  hence  they  remain  on  the  range  far  beyond  the  time  of  greatest  profit;  in  fact 
the  larger  proportion  of  these  horses  die  from  old  age,  disease,  or  lack  of  feed  during 
hard  winters,  so  that  the  owners  never  get  anything  for  them. 

The  extreme  need  of  the  country  for  meat  and  wool  will  not  permit  of  any  delay  in 
working  out  the  problem  of  ridding  the  ranges  of  these  worthless  horses.  We  must 
expect  opposition  from  some  of  the  older  Indians  and  from  the  nonprogressive  Indians 
generally.  This  opposition  is  not  based,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  on  mere  contrariness  or 
desire  to  be  obstructive,  but  because  they  retain  the  old  idea  that  the  power  and 
influence  of  the  man  was  largely  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  his  pony  herd;  and  it 
occurs  to  me  that  this  very  habit  of  thought  may  be  turned  to  splendid  advantage  in 
inducing  the  Indians  to  increase  their  holdings  of  cattle  and  sheep,  if  the  greater  value 
of  cattle  and  sheep  can  be  impressed  upon  them. 

If,  after  everything  possible  in  the  way  of  persuasion  has  been  tried,  the  Indian 
still  refuse  to  dispose  of  worthless  stock,  I  believe  the  superintendents  should  be 
authorized  to  require  that  each  Indian  keep  this  class  of  horses  within  fenced  inclos- 
ures,  and  that  all  such  horses  found  on  the  open  range  should  be  seized  and  sold,  the 
proceeds  to  be  turned  over  to  the  owner  of  the  brand,  less  the  cost  of  capture  and 
shipment. 

I  desire  that  every  superintendent  on  whose  reservation  this  problem  exists  give 
the  matter  his  best  thought  and  attention  and  that  reports  be  made  to  me  at  an  early 
date  with  recommendations  covering  plans  for  disposing  of  horses  of  the  class  herein 
discussed. 

PREDATORY  ANIMALS. — I  find  that  on  many  of  the  larger  and  more  unsettled  reser- 
vations there  is  a  considerable  loss  each  year  from  predatory  animals.  Some,of  the 
86770—18 i 


50  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

Indians,  lessees,  and  permittees  are  very  active  in  ridding  their  ranges  of  these  pests 
while  others  are  careless  and  do  practically  nothing.  This  "do-nothing"  policy 
results  in  the  propagation  of  stock-killing  animals  which  range  far  beyond  the  bound- 
aries of  the  careless  stockman,  causing  loss  to  other  lessees  and  to  Indians  whose  cattle 
are  either  with  the  lessees'  stock  or  on  the  range  set  aside  for  exclusive  Indian  use. 

I  want  the  superintendents  to  take  up  this  matter  of  predatory  animals  with  the 
Indians,  and  with  each  lessee  and  permittee,  and  insist  that  vigorous  measures  be 
taken  to  destroy  them.  In  this  connection  it  is  suggested  that  the  cooperation  of  the 
lessees,  permittees,  Indians,  and  superintendent  would  make  possible  a  comprehen- 
sive and  thorough  campaign  which  would  be  far  better  than  desultory  and  unconcerted 
effort  on  the  part  of  each. 

SCRUB  STOCK. — Indian  cattle  run  on  many  of  the  ranges  which  are  under  lease  or 
permit,  and  because  of  this,  if  for  no  other  reason,  the  lessee  or  permittee  should  be 
required  to  keep  only  first-class  bulls  in  order  that  the  Indian  stock  may  be  bred  up. 
This  is  just  as  essential  for  the  good  of  the  lessee  or  permittee  as  it  is  for  the  Indian, 
and  the  country  at  large  constitutes  another  interested  party  because  of  the  fact  that 
a  first-class  beef -producing  animal  will  consume  no  more  grass  than  will  a  poor  scrub 
animal  that  will  go  to  the  market  weighing  less  than  half  as  much. 

On  some  reservations  it  has  been  found  difficult  to  induce  the  Indians  to  use  good 
male  stock  on  account  of  the  seemingly  high  prices  at  which  first-class  breeding  animals 
are  sold.  Many  of  the  Indians,  when  starting  out  for  themselves,  have  perhaps  two 
or  three  head  of  the  stuff,  and,  of  course,  it  would  not  be  practicable  to  require  each 
of  these  small  owners  to  provide  a  pure-bred  bull  for  his  stock.  However,  this  diffi- 
culty is  overcome  in  some  instances  by  following  a  sort  of  community  plan  whereby 
bulls  are  provided  from  tribal  funds  and  the  Indians  are  required  to  pay  pro  rata  for 
their  services,  and  this  plan  should  be  followed  generally. 

In  the  case  of  an  Indian  who  owns  sufficient  she  stuff  to  require  the  entire  service 
of  one  or  more  bulls,  it  would  certainly  not  be  any  hardship  to  require  him  to  provide 
a  first-class  animal,  because  it  would  pay  him  to  dispose  of  enough  of  his  she  stuff  to 
enable  him  to  make  such  purchase. 

Of  course,  it  goes  without  saying  that  every  superintendent  and  every  stockman 
and  farmer  should  talk  "better  stock"  to  the  Indians,  in  season  and  out  of  season, 
and  be  ready  to  help  the  moment  an  Indian  evinces  a  desire  to  raise  better  stock. 

CARE  AND  HANDLING  OF  BULLS. — In  all  tribal  herds,  and  among  Indian-owned  range 
cattle  as  well,  the  bulls  should  be  held  apart  from  the  she  stuff  during  such  part  of 
the  year  as  will  prevent  the  dropping  of  calves  at  an  unseasonable  time.  The  proper 
breeding  season  varies  according  to  the  location  of  the  range,  but  generally  the  bulls 
should  be  gathered  at  the  time  of  the  fall  roundup  and  held  in  separate  range  until 
after  the  following  spring  roundup,  when  they  should  be  thoroughly  distributed 
over  the  range. 

This  segregation  of  the  bulls,  in  addition  to  insuring  the  dropping  of  calves  at  a  time 
when  weather  conditions  are  apt  to  be  favorable  also  affords  the  opportunity  to  give 
special  care  and  attention  to  the  bulls  during  the  winter.  The  bull  pasture  should  be 
kept  free  of  stock  during  the  time  the  bulls  are  with  the  herd,  so  as  to  conserve  the 
natural  feed  for  the  winter.  In  addition  to  this,  extra  feed,  consisting  of  hay,  and  in 
some  cases  a  little  grain,  should  be  provided,  to  be  used  when  necessary  to  keep  the 
animals  in  good  condition.  In  short,  do  everything  possible  to  have  the  male  stock 
in  first-class  physical  condition  when  turned  onto  the  breeding  range.  When  placing 
the  bulls  with  the  herd  be  careful  to  have  them  well  scattered,  and  have  the  range 
riders  see  to  it  that  they  keep  well  apart  and  do  not  bunch  up  or  become  separated 
from  the  remainder  of  the  her  .1. 

The  number  of  bulls  required  for  a  given  number  of  cows  varies  with  the  condition 
of  the  range,  the  water  supply,  and  age  of  the  bulls.  Give  the  matter  careful  thought 
and  attention  and  see  to  it  that  enough  bulls  are  on  the  range  to  insure  adequate 
service. 


OOMMISSIONEE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  51 

THE  SALT  SUPPLY. — It  is  of  great  importance  that  all  cattle  ranges  be  well  supplied 
with  salt.  This  is  in  many  respects  essential  to  securing  the  best  results,  and  each 
lessee  or  permittee  must  be  required  to  distribute  salt  over  his  range  in  appropriate 
places  and  in  sufficient  quantities  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  animals.  Where  tribal 
herds  are  run,  the  superintendent  should  see  to  it  that  the  range  occupied  by  the 
herd  and  individual  Indian  cattle  is  well  supplied. 

WINTER  FEEDING. — In  past  years,  when  the  western  country  was  open  grazing  for 
all  comers,  it  was  the  practice  among  cattlemen  to  let  the  stock  rustle  for  themselves 
the  year  around.  As  a  general  rule,  the  cattle  came  through  the  winter  in  pretty 
fair  shape,  because  the  cattlemen  had  almost  unlimited  territory  from  which  to  select 
their  winter-grazing  ranges,  but  conditions  have  changed,  and  the  cattleman  now  finds 
himself  restricted  to  a  limited  range  on  which,  in  all  probability,  there  is  no  good 
winter  protection,  and  if  he  wants  to  bring  his  cattle  through  he  must  in  many  cases 
provide  protection  and  feed,  at  least  for  the  weaker  cattle,  and  the  proportion  of  fed 
cattle  is  rapidly  increasing  each  year. 

Good  business  practice  requires  that  animals  worth  from  $80  to  $150  apiece  be  not 
allowed  to  die  for  want  of  a  litttle  protection  and  a  few  dollars'  worth  of  hay  and  grain; 
the  need  of  the  country  for  conservation  of  all  foodstuffs,  including  meats,  also  demands 
that  no  cattle  be  allowed  to  starve  or  die  from  exposure  during  the  winter. 

In  view  of  the  foregoing  it  is  incumbent  upon  every  superintendent  to  wage  a  vigor- 
ous campaign  each  summer  to  induce  every  Indian  cattle-owner  to  put  up  sufficient 
hay  to  carry  his  stock  through  the  winter,  and  further,  wherever  the  severity  of  the  , 
climate  makes  it  advisable,  the  Indians  should  be  required  to  provide  sheds  or  other 
artificial  protection. 

In  the  case  of  tribal  herds  the  superintendent  should  take  up  early  in  the  season 
the  matter  of  providing  hay  for  winter  feeding,  so  as  to  get  on  the  market  for  the  first 
cutting,  when  the  price  is  usually  the  lowest  and  the  quality  the  best.  Plenty  of 
hay  is  the  best  insurance  against  loss.  And  as  one  of  the  primary  reasons  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  tribal  herd,  in  most  instances,  was  to  provide  a  market  for  the  Indians' 
hay,  it  should  be  the  aim  of  the  superintendent  to  have  the  Indians  furnish  every 
ton  possible,  after  putting  up  an  ample  quantity  for  their  own  individual  needs. 
The  advantages  of  this  home  market  for  their  hay  should  be  preached  to  the  Indians 
constantly  as  an  incentive  to  greater  efforts  along  farming  lines,  thus  demonstrating 
the  value  of  the  combination  of  stock  raising  and  farming. 

On  northern  reservations,  where  the  danger  from  sudden  severe  storms  is  ever  present 
during  the  winter  months,  it  would  be  advisable,  where  practicable  to  do  so,  to  gather 
the  poorest  cattle  on  the  fall  roundup  and  throw  them  into  a  fenced  pasture  held  in 
reserve  during  the  summer  and  where  they  could  be  easily  gathered  for  feeding  when 
the  storms  come  on. 

The  superintendent  should  carefully  observe  the  practice  of  the  lessees  or  permit- 
tees on  his  reservation,  and  if  any  of  them  are  careless  with  respect  to  winter  protec- 
tion and  feeding,  and  allow  their  cattle  to  die  of  neglect,  this  fact  should  be  reported 
to  me,  in  order  that  steps  may  be  taken  to  stop  the  waste,  and,  if  necessary,  cancel  the 
permit  and  give  the  range  to  someone  who  will  take  proper  care  of  the  stock  and  thus 
conserve  the  meat  supply. 

I  have  gone  somewhat  at  length  into  the  various  phases  of  the  cattle  business,  with 
a  view  to  making  proper  use  of  the  grass  on  Indian  reservations.  I  do  not  want  any 
ranges  overstocked;  in  fact,  I  am  afraid  that  under  present  conditions  there  are  some 
reservations  where  too  many  cattle  are  now  being  run,  and  if  this  is  the  case  the  results 
will  be  an  eventual  loss  of  cattle  more  disastrous  by  far  than  would  be  the  loss  from 
allowing  some  of  the  grass  to  go  to  waste.  There  is,  however,  a  point  of  efficiency  in 
this  matter,  which  is  reached  when  well-bred  cattle  are  eating  all  the  grass  that  can 
be  made  available  on  Indian  reservations,  and  it  should  be  the  ambition  of  every 
superintendent  to  reach  this  point  on  his  reservation. 


52  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

These  suggestions  have  met  with  a  hearty  and  gratifying  response 
from  the  field  employees,  Indians  and  lessees,  largely  due  to  the 
fact  that  it  is  in  line  with  the  aggressive  policy  of  the  Indian  Bureau 
for  the  last  five  years  to  utilize  the  natural  resources  of  the  reserva- 
tions to  the  greatest  possible  advantage. 

I  regard  the  water  supply  in  connection  with  stock  raising  as  of 
very  great  importance.  It  is  the  essential  factor  in  increasing  the 
carrying  capacity  of  a  large  part  of  the  grazing  lands  on  Indian 
reservations.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the  Southwest,  where,  I 
believe,  sufficient  water  development  can  be  secured,  at  a  justifiable 
expense,  tp  more  than  double  the  present  carrying  capacity. 

Sinking  wells  on  grazing  lands  during  the  last  year  or  two  in  sections 
of  the  country  where  rainfall  is  almost  unknown  has,  altogether, 
given  gratifying  results,  and  it  is  my  purpose  to  intensify  these 
activities,  not  only  in  sinking  wells,  but  in  impounding  the  flood 
waters  which  at  rare  intervals  fall  from  cloud-bursts  and  which, 
together  with  melted  snow  from  higher  elevations,  rush  in  great 
torrents  over  countless  acres  of  thirsty  territor}^. 

Marvelous  results  have  been  secured  from  irrigating  arid  and 
semiarid  lands  for  agricultural  purposes,  and  it  is  equally  important 
that  the  vast  area  of  grasslands,  now  practically  worthless  for  want 
of  stock  water,  be  made,  by  similar  means,  to  sustain  the  herds  it 
would  then  support. 

My  nearly  six  years  experience  as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs, 
during  which,  among  many  other  things,  I  have  had  to  do  with  the 
administration  of  immense  irrigation  projects  and  the  handling  of 
millions  of  cattle,  sheep,  and  horses,  largely  in  sections  of  the  country 
where  rain  seldom  falls  or  where  devastating  droughts  frequently 
occur,  has  convinced  me  that  the  most  important  constructive 
accomplishment  now  demanded  is  the  proper  development,  conserva- 
tion, and  use  of  water. 

EXPERIMENTATION. — The  operation  of  the  cooperative  experi- 
mental farm  at  Sacaton,  on  the  Pima  Reservation,  by  this  office  and 
the  Bureau  of  Plant  Industry  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  was 
continued  during  the  year,  with  the  view  of  developing  seeds  and 
plants  specially  adapted  to  conditions  on  the  Indian  reservations  in 
that  part  of  the  county.  The  results  have  justified  the  establishment 
of  this  farm,  which  has  been  somewhat  enlarged  in  order  to  increase 
its  usefulness  to  the  Indians,  and  three  wells  have  been  drilled  for  the 
purpose  of  providing  additional  irrigation  water. 

An  experimental  date  farm  was  established  at  Palm  Springs,  on 
the  Malki  Reservation,  in  California,  in  cooperation  with  the  experts 
of  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  by  whom  work  is  also  being  carried 
on  at  Fort  Berthold,  San  Juan,  and  Shoshone. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  53 

INDIAN  FAIRS. — The  policy  of  holding  agricultural  fairs  on  the 
Indian  reservations  has  been  continued  during  the  year,  with  in- 
creasingly successful  results.  The  first  fair  of  this  nature  was  held 
on  the  Crow  Reservation  in  1906,  the  number  being  gradually  increased 
each  year  until,  in  1917,  58  such  fairs  were  held.  At  these  fairs  the 
Indians  displayed  their  agricultural  products,  live  stock,  etc.,  in 
competition  with  each  other,  suitable  prizes  being  awarded  on  best 
exhibits.  Most  of  the  fairs  are  managed  entirely  by  the  Indians, 
which  gives  them  training  in  business  administration  and  organiza- 
tion. 

Numerous  Indian  exhibits  were  also  made  at  county  fairs,  likewise 
with  good  results,  the  Indians  winning  many  prizes  in  competition 
with  the  whites.  In  addition,  displays  of  Indian  products  were 
shown  at  nearly  every  State  fair  in  States  where  Indian  reservations 
are  located,  which  were  equally  successful  in  showing  the  agricultural 
progress  of  the  Indians.  At  the  South  Dakota  State  Fair  Baby  Show 
the  first  prize  was  awarded  to  Guy  M.  Howe,  jr.,  an  Indian  baby 
from  the  Crow  Creek  Reservation,  who  scored  95.5  per  cent  .out  of  a 
possible  100  per  cent  in  competition  with  babies  from  all  over  the 

State. 

FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

The  area  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  aggregated  19,525,966  acres, 
of  which  15,794,208  acres  have  been  allotted  to  the  enrollees  of  said 
tribes  or  to  their  heirs.  By  various  acts  of  Congress  and  by  approval 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  restrictions  against  alienation  of 
allotted  lands  by  allottees  have  been  removed  from  12,825,196 
acres,  leaving  as  restricted  acreage  2,888,162  acres,  or  about  18.3 
per  cent  of  the  entire  allotted  area.  One  hundred  and  thirty-nine 
thousand  two  hundred  and  eighty-four  acres  of  tribal  lands  have  been 
reserved  for  town  sites,  railroad  rights  of  way,  churches,  schools, 
cemeteries,  etc. 

The  total  enrollment  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  corrected  to 
date,  is  101,506,  including  Freedmen,  to  which  enrollees,  with  few 
exceptions,  there  have  been  made  complete  allotments  of  land  or 
payments  of  money  in  lieu  of  or  in  equalization  of  allotment.  Of 
the  above-mentioned  enrollees,  78,101  are  citizens  by  blood,  adop- 
tion, or  intermarriage,  26,774  being  full-blood  citizens;  23,405  en- 
rollees are  Freedmen.  There  are  at  present  23,441  of  the  enrollees 
who  are  in  the  restricted  class  of  Indians;  that  is,  Indians  whose 
allotments  are  restricted  as  to  alienation  and  whose  funds  derived 
from  said  allotments  or  from  the  individual  shares  of  the-  tribal 
funds  are  subject  to  Government  supervision.  Looking  to  the  carry- 
ing out  of  the  purposes  of  the  agreements  with  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  and  acts  of  Congress  for  the  disposal  of  the  tribal  property 


54  COMMISSIONEB  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

and  the  closing  of  the  tribal  affairs  of  said  Indian  Nations,  further 
sales  of  the  tribal  land  have  been  held  during  the  year,  and  further 
per  capita  payments  of  about  $3,000,000  have  been  made. 

To  date  of  June  30,  1918,  3,558,165  acres  of  tribal  lands  of  the 
several  Five  Civilized  Tribes  were  sold  for  an  aggregate  of  $20,249,- 
032.58,  being  $4,505,563  more  than  the  appraised  value,  an  average 
of  $5.39  per  acre.  Of  the  total  acreage  sold,  1,905,139  acres  of  unal- 
lotted land  brought  $10,625,324;  385,935  acres  of  the  surface  of  the 
segregated  coal  and  asphalt  land,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations, 
brought  $3,328,731;  and  1,267,821  acres  of  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
tribal  timber  lands  brought  $6,294,977.  There  remain  unsold  of 
Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  tribal  lands  324  acres  of  school  lands  with 
improvements,  2,280  town  lots,  and  14,800  acres  of  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  tribal  lands,  including  7,700  acres  of  timber  land,  6,700 
acres  of  the  surface  of  the  coal  and  asphalt  land,  and  400  acres  of 
other  unallotted  tribal  lands,  which  will  be  offered  for  sale  at  public 
auction  from  October  9  to  October  17,  1918. 

The  coal  and  asphalt  deposits,  leased  and  unleased,  underlying  the 
surface  of  441,107  acres  of  the  segregated  mineral  land  in  the  Choc- 
taw and  Chickasaw  Nations,  Okla.,  will  be  offered  for  sale  at  public 
auction  to  the  highest  bidder,  at  McAlester,  Okla.,  on  December  11, 
12,  13,  and  14,  1918.  Three  hundred  and  twenty-eight  thousand 
two  hundred  and  seventy-six  acres  of  unleased  lands  will  be  first 
offered  for  sale  to  be  followed  by  an  offer  of  112,831  acres  of  leased 
lands.  The  coal  and  asphalt  deposits  are  appraised  in  the  aggregate 
at  $14,461,041.73. 

Eleven  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety-five  acres  of  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  tribal  timber  land  in  McCurtain  County  have  been  sold 
to  the  State  of  Oklahoma  for  a  game  preserve  for  $71,718.05,  as 
authorized  by  the  act  of  Congress  approved  May  25,  1918,  Public 
No.  159,  65th  Congress.  The  coal  and  asphalt  deposits,  both  leased 
and  unleased,  underlying  the  surface  of  441,107  acres  of  segregated 
mineral  land  in  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations,  appraised  at 
$14,461,041.73,  will  be  sold  at  public  auction  to  the  highest  bidder  on 
December  11,  12,  13,  and  14,  1918,  as  authorized  by  the  act  of  Con- 
gress approved  February  8,  1918,  Public  No.  98,  65th  Congress. 

Competency  commissions  have  visited  allottees  of  the  Five  Civil- 
ized Tribes  during  the  fiscal  year  and  are  still  at  work  to  ascertain 
who  are  competent  and  capable  of  handling  all  transactions  affecting 
their  allotted  lands  without  departmental  assistance. 

There  were  constructed  during  the  year  127  houses,  at  a  cost  of 
$134,466.67;  51  barns,  at  $22,912.95,  and  96  wells,  at  $8,093.94. 
There  were  purchased  472  horses  and  mules,  at  a  cost  of  $63,739.78; 
494  cattle,  at  $35,766.84;  509  hogs,  at  $13,088.66,  and  228  wagons,  at 
$35,092.15.  Miscellaneous  farm  implements  were  purchased  at  a 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  55 

total  cost  of  $25,544.10.  There  was  disbursed  on  account  of  per 
capita  payments,  improvements,  and  individual  cash  payments  to 
Indians,  salaries  and  expenses,  a  total  of  $12,455,146.08.  There  was 
received  of  individual  and  tribal  funds  and  congressional  appropria- 
tions a  total  of  $16,175,520.73,  showing  a  grand  total  of  all  moneys 
handled  for  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  during  the  fiscal  year  of 
$28,630,666.81. 

Four  thousand  Indians  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  have  entered 
the  United  States  Military  Service.  Six  million  nine  hundred  and 
twenty-three  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy  dollars  of  the  indi- 
vidual Indian  funds  of  restricted  Indians  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes 
have  been  invested  in  Liberty  loan  bonds  and  war-saving  stamps. 

In  the  Cherokee  Nation  all  the  land  and  tribal  property  of  said 
tribe  has  been  allotted,  sold,  or  otherwise  disposed  of  except  30  acres 
erroneously  platted  as  allotted  land.  The  only  unfinished  work  is 
in  relation  to  the  disposition  of  said  30  acres,  the  completion  of  per 
capita  payments  heretofore  authorized,  execution  of  138  deeds  .to 
allottees,  and  3  deeds  to  purchasers  of  unallotted  land,  and  the 
settlement  under  the  provisions  of  section  18  of  the  Indian  appro- 
priation act  of  May  25,  1918,  of  all  claims  against  said  tribe. 

In  the  Seminole  Nation  all  the  tribal  land  and  property  of  the 
Seminole  Nation  has  been  disposed  of  except  122  acres  of  unallotted 
land  and  640  acres  of  land  that  was  reserved  for  a  tribal  school. 
The  remaining  work  to  be  done  relates  to  the  disposition  of  said 
remaining  tracts  of  land,  the  completion  of  the  per  capita  payments 
heretofore  authorized  out  of  the  tribal  funds,  and  the  execution  and 
delivery  of  a  few  deeds  to  allottees  and  .purchasers  of  -tribal  land. 

In  the  Creek  Nation  the  unseld  tribal  property  consists  of  the 
tribal  council  building  in  Okmulgee,  124  town  lots  in  Muskogee, 
Tulsa,  and  Lee,  353  acres  of  tribal  land,  and  3  tracts  of  school  prop- 
erty. The  value  of  said  unsold  property  is  estimated  at  $272,650. 
The  remaining  unfinished  work  relates  to  the  sale  or  disposition  of 
said  tribal  property,  the  equalization  of  allotments,  investigation  of 
alleged  duplicate  and  fraudulent  enrollments,  and  in  connection  with 
suits  instituted  to  recover  for  the  Creek  Nation  certain  valuable  oil 
and  gas  lands,  including  the  beds  of  the  Arkansas  and  Cimarron 
Rivers  within  said  nation. 

OIL  AND  GAS  IN  THE  FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES  OF 
OKLAHOMA. 

The  total  production  of  oil  from  restricted  Indian  lands  in  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918, 
amounted  to  approximately  13,000,000  barrels  of  oil  from  about 
116,000  acres.  The  revenue  to  the  tribe  from  oil  and  gas  produc- 
tion during  the  fiscal  year  amounted  to  about  $4,000,000.  These 


56  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

oil  and  gas  leases  cover  allotted  lands  and  are  made  for  a  period  of 
10  years  or  as  long  thereafter  as  oil  and  gas  is  found  in  paying  quanti- 
ties, except  leases  covering  lands  of  minors  which  are  made  to  expire 
when  the  minor  becomes  of  age,  unless  oil  and  gas  is  found  in  paying 
quantities.  The  leases  provide  for  a  royalty  of  one-eighth  of  the 
gross  proceeds  of  "the  sale  of  the  oil  on  the  basis  of  the  highest  price 
posted  by  a  responsible  purchasing  company. 

On  August  10,  1917,  regulations  were  promulgated  governing  the 
utilization  of  casing-head  gas  produced  from  oil  wells.  The  regula- 
tions provide  that  the  gasoline  productivity  of  the  casing-head  gas 
per  thousand  cubic  feet  shall  be  determined  by  a  physical  field  test 
of  the  gas,  the  royalty  being  computed  at  12J  per  cent  on  the  basis 
of  a  fixed  schedule  according  to  the  yield  of  gasoline  per  1,000  cubic 
feet  and  the  sale  price  of  the  refined  product. 

OSAQE  OIL  AND  GAS  LEASES. 

'  On  November  12,  1917,  February  14,  1918,  and  May  18,  1918,  there 
were  sold  at  public  auction  at  Pawhuska,  Okla.,  leases  covering 
certain  Osage  lands  for  oil-mining  purposes,  aggregating  90,286 
acres,  for  a  bonus  consideration  of  $3,258,312.50,  an  average  of  about 
$36  per  acre.  These  lands  consisted  of  scattered  tracts  on  the  east 
side  of  the  reservation  selected  with  the  object  in  view  of  opening 
up  new  pools  of  oil.  Leases  covering  these  tracts  are  for  a  period  of 
five  years  and  as  long  thereafter  as  oil  is  found  in  paying  quantities, 
and  provide  for  a  royalty  in  addition  to  the  bonus  consideration  of 
16§  per  cent,  except  when  wells  on  quarter-section  tracts  or  frac- 
tional parts  of  quarter  sections  are  sufficient  to  average  100  or  more 
barrels  per  well  per  day.  The  royalty  on  oil  produced  is  20  per  cent. 

The  Osage  Reservation  under  which  oil  and  gas  is  reserved  to  the 
tribe  until  1931  comprises  approximately  1,500,000  acres,  of  which 
680,000  acres  on  the  east  side  were  leased  for  oil  and  gas  under  a 
blanket  lease  authorized  by  Congress,  which  expired  March  16,  1916. 
New  leases  have  been  made  covering  about  919,000  acres  for  gas  and 
about  323,000  acres  for  oil;  the  oil  leases  aggregating  about  323,000 
acres  are  included  in  the  919,000  acres  leased  for  gas. 

On  June  30,  1918,  there  were  1,450  dry  and  abandoned  wells  in 
the  Osage  Reservation,  3,755  producing  oil  wells,  and  364  gas  wells. 
The  gross  production  of  oil  from  July  1,  1917,  to  June  30,  1918, 
amounted  to  10,906,376.59  barrels,  of  which  the  Osage  tribe  received 
as  royalty  1,842,692.21  barrels.  The  total  receipts  of  the  Osage 
tribe  from  oil  and  gas  leases  from  July  1,  1917,  to  June  30,  1918, 
amounted  to  approximately  $8,000.000. 

OPENING  THE  WEST  SIDE. — Advertisements  have  recently  been 
approved  and  authority  granted  to  offer  for  lease  for  oil-mining 
purposes  on  November  9,  at  public  auction  sale  at  Pawhuska,  Okla., 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  57 

approximately  15,000  acres  on  the  east  side  of  the  Osage  Reserva- 
tion, that  is,  east  of  range  7,  and  approximately  28,000  acres  on  the 
west,  side,  that  is,  west  of  range  8.  Authority  was  also  granted  to' 
offer  for  lease  for  gas  mining  purposes  on  November  9,  approximately 
315,000  acres  on  the  west  side.  No  leases  have  heretofore  been 
made  on  the  west  side  of  the  Osage  Reservation  for  oil  or  gas  mining 
purposes.  As  the  time  during  which  the  title  to  the  minerals  will 
remain  in  the  Osage  tribe  will  expire  on  April  8,  1931,  unless  other- 
wise provided  by  Congress,  and  in  view  of  the  demand  for  an  increased 
production  of  oil  to  meet  existing  conditions,  it  has  been  decided  to 
make  this  opening  on  the  west  side  as  the  initial  lease  sale  on  this 
vast,  heretofore  practically  untouched  territory  of  supposed-to-be 
oil-bearing  lands. 

OIL  AND  GAS  OUTSIDE  THE  FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES 
AND  OSAGE  NATION. 

There  has  been  considerable  activity  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry 
in  Oklahoma  outside  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osage  Nation 
during  the  past  fiscal  year. 

The  bringing  in  on  March  9,  1918,  of  an  oil  well  with  an  initial  pro- 
duction of  several  hundred  barrels  per  day  greatly  stimulated  oil  and 
gas  leasing  on  the  Kiowa  Reservation.  Since  that  time  Indians  hav- 
ing allotments  in  the  vicinity  of  this  well  have  received  exceptionally 
high  bonuses,  the  largest  being  at  the  rate  of  $755  per  acre.  This  is 
reported  to  be  the  highest  rate  of  bonus  ever  paid  in  that  field,  re- 
gardless of  the  distance  from  the  well. 

Several  wells  with  a  large  initial  production  have  also  been  brought 
in  on  the  Ponca  Reservation,  and  at  Pawnee  12  producing  wells  were 
drilled. 

One  hundred  and  twenty-five  tracts  of  land  on  the  ceded  part  of 
the  Shoshone  Indian  Reservation,  Wyo.,  each  containing  160  acres, 
or  less,  were  advertised  for  oil  and  gas  mining  leases,  bids  being 
opened  on  October  10,  1917.  Seventy-four  tracts  were  bid  in  and 
leases  covering  69  tracts  have  been  regularly  executed.  Under  the 
terms  of  the  advertisement  and  the  leases  the  lessee  is  required  to 
drill  at  least  one  well  on  each  tract  within  one  year  from  the  date  of 
execution  of  the  lease  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  The  drilling 
of  wells  during  the  calendar  year  will  largely  determine  whether  the 
land  on  the  ceded  part  of  the  reservation  is  valuable  for  oil  and  gas. 

PROBATING  INDIAN  ESTATES. 

The  probating  of  the  estates  of  deceased  Indians,  under  the  pro- 
visions of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stats.  L.,  855,  856),  for  the 
fiscal  year  ending  June  30,  1918,  progressed  very  satisfactorily. 
During  the  year  2,415  cases  were  finally  disposed  of. 


58  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

The  heirs  of  deceased  Indians  also  must  be  determined  where  per- 
sonal property  of  a  value  less  than  $250  is  involved;  where  Indians 
hold  restricted  fee  patents,  in  which  no  fee  can  be  collected;  where 
Indians  hold  inherited  interests  at  a  value  less  than  $250,  and  cases 
in  which  modifications  were  made  in  the  original  findings.  One 
hundred  and  fifty-seven  cases,  coming  within  these  classes,  were 
disposed  of. 

One  hundred  and  fifty-five  Indian  wills  were  finally  acted  on. 
There  were  also  disapproved  during  the  year  22  wills. 

There  are  now  employed  in  the  field  12  examiners  of  inheritance, 
who  are  engaged  in  conducting  hearings  on  28  of  the  reservations 
and  on  the  public  domain. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  3,745  miscellaneous  cases  were  disposed 
of  and  7,586  letters  were  written. 

PROBATE  WORK  IN  OKLAHOMA. 

In  previous  years  the  reports  related  to  the  probate  work  in  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  have  been  largely  statistical,  but  it  is  intended 
by  this  report  to  explain  more  particularly  the  aims  of  the  probate 
service  and  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  various  lines  of  work  and  to 
describe  the  ends  attained  as  a  whole. 

Bearing  in  mind  that  the  courts  of  Oklahoma  have  been  given 
jurisdiction  by  acts  of  Congress  over  the  estates  of  minor  and  other 
incompetent  members  of  those  tribes,  it  will  be  readily  appreciated 
that  in  a  jurisdiction  comprising  40  counties,  marvelously  rich  in 
deposits  of  oil  and  gas,  of  lead  and  zinc,  and  of  coal  and  asphalt,  from 
which  "rich  streams  of  revenue  gush  forth/'  that  are  materially  aug- 
mented by  the  returns  from  great  crops  of  wheat,  corn,  cotton,  and 
other  staples,  into  swollen  streams  of  wealth,  there  will  necessarily 
be  vast  properties,  collectively  speaking,  as  well  as  large  individual 
estates,  which  must  be  disposed  of  by  those  tribunals  in  such  a  way 
as  to  conserve  and  promote  the  interests  of  many  Indian  citizens  or 
to  throw  them  and  their  estates  upon  the  mercy  of  designing  specu- 
lators who  in  every  community  stand  ready  to  prey  upon  those  who 
most  need  protection. 

And  in  connection  with  the  foregoing  it  is  an  impressive  fact  that 
the  number  of  names  of  restricted  Indians  appearing  upon  the  ap- 
proved rolls  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  is  upward  of  37,000,  of  which 
nearly  27,000  are  full-blood  Indians.  No  proof  is  necessary  to  show 
that  a  multitude  of  cases  will  arise  affecting  these  Indians  and  their 
heirs. 

It  is  the  duty  of  the  probate  attorneys — a  duty  which  they  fully 
appreciate  and  faithfully  attempt  to  discharge — to  stand  guard  like 
sentinels  over  the  property  and  persons  of  these  Indian  wards.  To 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  59 

perform  this  duty  it  is  necessary  for  the  probate  attorneys  to  keep 
an  ever-vigilant  eye  upon  the  dockets  of  probate  cases  in  the  several 
counties  assigned  to  them  and  to  take  whatever  action  that  may  be 
necessary  in  the  premises,  either  by  institution  of  civil  suits  or  criminal 
prosecutions. 

With  respect  to  guardians  and  other  trustees  it  is  the  aim  of  the 
probate  attorneys  to  scrutinize  their  every  act  to  the  end  that  they 
shall  be  held  to  the  faithful  discharge  of  their  trust,  and  as  a  result 
of  this  vigilance  many  of  the  guardians  have  been  removed  or  dis- 
charged and  others,  found  to  be  more  worthy,  have  replaced  them; 
in  like  manner  it  has  been  necessary  for  the  probate  attorneys  to 
maintain  a  constant  watchfulness  with  respect  to  the  financial  status 
of  each  case,  to  ascertain  in  each  instance  whether  the  bond  is  ade- 
quate, to  require  a  new  bond  whenever  necessary,  and  to  take  appro- 
priate action  to  recover  from  bondsmen  or  other  sureties  whatever 
losses  may  result  from  the  misconduct  of  their  principals. 

With  such  care  there  has  resulted  a  great  conservation  of  Indian 
money  which,  under  the  direction  of  the  probate  attorneys,  has  been 
applied  to  useful  and  beneficial  purposes  instead  of  being  recklessly 
squandered.  Investments  have  been  made  in  homes,  in  land,  in 
interest  bearing  securities,  and  the  purchase  of  Liberty  bonds. 
Thus  the  probate  attorneys  have  been  instrumental  in  teaching  the 
great  financial  lesson  that  saving  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  hoarding 
alone,  but  rather  for  profitable  use. 

There  is  an  ever  present  attempt  on  the  part  of  land  speculators 
to  induce  sales  of  minor  lands  through  the  instrumentality  of  guard- 
ians of  their  own  selection,  and  in  some  cases  such  sales  have  been 
made  upon  appraisals  made  by  men  chosen  for  the  purpose  by  the 
prospective  purchasers.  This  evil  has  been  strenuously  opposed  by 
the  probate  attorneys  who  seek  to  keep  down  as  much  as  possible 
the  number  of  sales  of  minors'  lands,  unless  reinvestment  of  a  more 
desirable  nature  can  be  found,  and  to  insist  upon  the  highest  prices 
possible  through  appraisals  by  the  regular  Government  appraisers. 

There  is  another  part  of  the  work  of  these  attorneys  which  can 
not  be  expressed  by  numbers,  but  it  is  perhaps  more  beneficial  than 
any  other  work  performed  by  them.  Reference  is  had  in  this  con- 
nection to  the  countless  daily  conferences  that  are  held  with  the 
many  persons  who  seek  the  advice  and  counsel  of  these  representa- 
tives of  the  Government  with  respect  to  matters  which  affect  not 
only  their  property  but  also  their  personal  interests,  including  the 
education  of  their  children  and  other  domestic  matters  which  are 
necessarily  involved  in  the  advisory  relation  which  they  bear  to  a 
dependent  people. 

Responsive  to  the  call  of  patriotism  the  probate  attorneys  have 
unhesitatingly  contributed  their  efforts  to  the  national  cause  in  the 


60  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

war  that  is  now  pending,  and  their  numbers  have  been  repeatedly 
lessened  by  transfers  to  the  military  branch  of  the  Government  or 
to  other  branches  of  service  where  their  assistance  was  needed. 
And  so,  while  it  is  true  that  temporary  lapses  have  occurred  in  the 
work  of  individual  districts,  it  must  be  realized  that  each  man,  in 
the  time  available  to  him  at  his  post  of  duty,  has  done  his  utmost 
for  the  probate  service  until  assigned  to  other  work. 

A  WOMAN  PROBATE  ATTORNEY. 

It  may  be  of  interest  that  during  the  year  a  woman  was  appointed 
probate  attorney.  There  was  general  approval  of  the  appointment, 
and  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  this  innovation  will  prove  entirely 
satisfactory.  Concerning  it  and  reflecting  many  similar  expressions, 
the  Fort  Worth  Record,  in  an  editorial,  said: 

Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  Cato  Sells  has  appointed  Miss  Florence  Etheridge, 
of  Miami,  Okla.,  probate  attorney,  with  headquarters  at  Vinita.  Her  appointment, 
it  is  said,  is  in  line  with  Commissioner  Sells 's  policy  of  appointing  women  to  respon- 
sible positions  in  the  Indian  Service.  The  duties  of  probate  attorney  involve  the 
protection  of  the  property  of  minors  and  incompetent  Indians  and  the  prosecution 
of  wrongdoers  in  the  same  connection. 

Miss  Etheridge  was  for  several  years  employed  in  the  Probate  Division  of  the  Indian 
Office  at  Washington,  where  she  demonstrated  unusual  ability  as  a  lawyer.  She  is 
vice  president  of  the  National  Federation  of  Federal  Employees,  and  made  a  vigor- 
ous fight  before  Congress  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  Borland  amendment.  She 
is  a  member  of  the  law  firm  of  Swanson  &  Etheridge. 

There  are  millions  of  women  wage  earners  in  America.  There  are  millions  of  girls 
who  are  wage  earners.  There  are  millions  of  women  and  children  who  are  doing 
farm  work.  There  are  millions  of  women  engaged  in  war-service  work.  There  are 
millions  of  women  Red  Cross  workers,  and  the  call  has  been  made  for  25,000  Red 
Cross  nurses  in  addition  to  those  already  in  the  service  of  their  country. 

Texas  women  have  been  given  the  primary  ballot.  Texas  women  are  coming  into 
their  own.  This  is  as  it  should  be. 

Cato  Sells  is  a  champion  of  equal  suffrage.  He  believes  that  a  woman  who  does 
the  work  of  a  man  should  receive  the  pay  of  a  man.  If  woman  is  an  intelligent  and 
efficient  worker  why  shouldn't  she  receive  the  pay  of  a  man? 

REIMBURSABLE  FUNDS. 

The  act  of  March  2,  1917  (39  Stat.  L.,  969-973),  appropriated  the 
sum  of  $400,000  for  use  in  the  purchase  of  seed,  animals,  machinery, 
tools,  implements,  and  other  equipment,  to  be  sold  to  Indians  under 
regulations  prescribed  for  its  repayment  to  the  Government.  The 
enthusiasm  of  the  Indians  in  agricultural  and  stock  raising  pursuits 
has  been  greatly  aroused  during  the  year  and  in  consequence  of 
their  increased  activities  the  demands  for  equipment  and  stock 
taxed  to  the  fullest  extent  the  limited  reimbursable  appropriation 
available.  Unfortunately  it  has  been  necessary  in  many  instances 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  61 

to  withhold  plans  for  new  development  work  in  order  that  the  most 
urgent  needs  might  be  cared  for.  Through  the  use  of  the  money 
available,  however,  a  large  number  of  Indians  have  been  able  to 
accomplish  a  vast  amount  of  improvement  work  on  their  lands 
which  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  reimbursable 
assistance  given  them.  The  Indians  on  some  of  the  northwestern 
reservations  are  now  fairly  well  equipped  so  that  it  will  be  possible 
to  withdraw  much  of  the  aid  heretofore  given  them. 

The  benefits  derived  from  reimbursable  funds  appropriated  by 
Congress  are  being  reflected  more  and  more  in  the  industrial  improve- 
ments on  all  of  the  reservations.  The  Indians  as  a  rule  are  cautious  in 
requesting  assistance  from  reimbursable  funds  and  restrict  their 
prospective  obligations  to  actual  needs  and  in  amounts  which  they 
feel  capable  of  liquidating. 

The  prospects  for  the  return  to  the  Treasury  of  the  money  ex- 
pended for  the  benefit  of  the  Indians  are  exceptionally  good.  Although 
the  money  appropriated  for  the  past  and  previous  years,  excepting 
$30,000,  under  the  law  need  not  be  returned  to  the  Treasury  until 
the  year  1925,  it  is  estimated  that  more  than  $300,000  has  already 
been  collected.  The  sum  of  $30,000  appropriated  in  the  act  of  March 
3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1062),  was  under  the  law  available  for 
use  until  June  30,  1917.  The  collections  from- the  Indians  are  more 
than  ample  to  reimburse  this  entire  appropriation  at  this  time.  Not- 
withstanding the  crops  last  year  were  comparatively  poor,  and  in 
fact  in  some  of  the  places  the  Indians  did  not  get  back  the  seed  they 
planted  in  the  spring,  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  amount  which  the 
Indians  at  some  of  the  northwestern  reservations  repaid  during  the 
fall  of  last  year  and  the  early  part  of  this  year.  At  Crow  Agency 
approximately  $27,000  were  returned;  at  Tongue  E-iver  approximately 
$15,000  were  returned;  at  Blackfeet  approximately  $10,000  were 
returned;  at  Warm  Springs,  where  the  crops  were  practically  an 
entire  failure,  approximately  $5,000  were  returned.  The  collections 
at  many  of  the  other  reservations  were  equally  as  good,  indicating 
that  the  Indians  are  rapidly  reaching  the  point  where  they  are  deriv- 
ing incomes  through  the  use  of  property  furnished  to  them,  thereby 
justifying  the  inauguration  of  the  reimbursable  plan. 

At  places  where  tribal  herds  of  sheep  and  cattle  have  been  estab- 
lished from  reimbursable  funds  for  the  benefit  of  the  tribes  of  Indians 
as  a  whole,  excellent  results  are  being  accomplished.  The  stock  itself 
is  ample  security  for  the  repayment  of  the  money  expended,  and  the 
present  indications  are  that  all  of  the  money  spent  for  the  tribal  herds, 
both  cattle  and  sheep,  will  be  fully  repaid  and  a  good  margin  of  profit 
remain  for  the  tribe. 


62  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEY. 

Special  attention  has  been  given  to  the  method  of  handling  indi- 
vidual Indian  money  during  the  past  year.  The  rules  and  regulations 
have  been  modified  materially,  making  it  possible  for  Indians  to  ob- 
tain their  funds  more  easily,  thus  giving  them  a  chance  to  show  their 
ability  to  manage  their  own  business  affairs. 

While  the  general  policy  of  conserving  minors'  funds  has  not  been 
changed,  a  more  liberal  course  was  followed  in  the  disbursement  of 
their  funds.  In  the  case  of  minors  who  were  nearly  of  age  their  funds 
were  sometimes  used  to  secure  higher  education  or  for  some  special 
kind  of  training. 

Where  the  minors  were  young  their  combined  funds  were  frequently 
expended  in  the  purchase  of  property  or  for  improvements  to  the 
homestead,  it  being  realized  that  a  comfortable  sanitary  home  and 
proper  surroundings  would  be  of  more  value  to  them  than  would  the 
small  amount  of  money  turned  over  to  them  when  they  reach  their 
majority.  Through  the  use  of  their  own'  or  their  children's  funds  a 
large  number  of  Indians  were  enabled  to  purchase  seed  and  raise 
crops  for  the  common  benefit  of  the  family,  which  would  not  other- 
wise have  been  possible. 

When  justifiable,  the  funds  of  both  adults  and  minors  have  been 
used  to  purchase  Liberty  bonds,  but  this  subject  is  fully  gone  into  in 
another  part  of  the  report. 

ANNUITY  AND  PER  CAPITA  PAYMENTS. 

The  practice  of  placing  their  funds  in  the  hands  of  competent 
Indians  for  expenditure,  without  supervision,  as  announced  in  my 
report  last  year,  in  conformity  with  the  declaration  of  policy  referred 
to  therein,  has  been  continued,  on  the  whole,  with  encouraging 
results,  most  of  the  Indians  seeming  to  appreciate  the  opportunity 
to  handle  their  own  funds  and  recognizing  the  consequent  responsi- 
bility devolving  upon  them  to  spend  the  money  wisely,  although  of 
course  there  have  been  individual  exceptions  to  this  rule.  How  ver, 
this  is  the  only  way  the  Indians  will  ever  learn  to  stand  on  their  own 
feet  as  independent  citizens  of  the  community. 

EMPLOYMENT  FOR  INDIANS. 

Economic  conditions  on  many  reservations  are  much  the  same  as 
last  year,  in  that  Indians  do  not  have  to  leave  home  to  find  work  in 
abundance.  Their  concern  in  home  conditions  shows  a  deepening 
civic  interest.  State  officers  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  are 
cooperating  with  the  Indian  Service  in  utilizing  the  labor  of  Indians 
for  general  farm  work.  In  some  localities  wheat  and  alfalfa  hay 
harvest  hands  were  offered  from  $4  to  $6  dollars  a  day. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  63 

Next  in  importance  to  raising  food  is  transportation.  Owing  to 
the  value  of  motor-driven  vehicles  in  pioneer  development  it  is  both 
practical  and  profitable  to  give  Indians  opportunity  to  learn  the 
construction  and  repair  of  such  vehicles,  and  many  of  them  are  placed 
in  the  high-class  factories,  where  they  are  switched  from  one  depart- 
ment to  another  to  receive  all-around  mechanical  experience.  In  the 
evening  they  amplify  the  day's  manual  practice  by  attending  auto- 
mobile schools  for  theoretical  information.  Two  or  three  years  of 
combined  study  and  experience  will  develop  first-class  mechanics. 
Over  300  Indians  have  taken  advantage  of  such  factory  training. 

It  is  especially  necessary  to  have  trained  operators  for  tractors  who 
understand  the  importance  of  minor,  yet  essential,  details  and  can 
make  prompt  repairs  in  the  field,  when  accidents  occur,  that  plowing 
may  not  be  retarded.  Many  who  have  enlisted  in  the  Army  and  Navy 
are  now  repairing  trucks,  aeroplanes,  etc.,  with  the  American  Expe- 
ditionary Forces. 

One  of  the  strong,  self-reliant  Indian  boys  working  in  the  Packard 
plant  has  without  compensation  looked  after  the  welfare  of  the  Indian 
workers  of  Detroit  factories  by  meeting  strangers  as  they  reach  town, 
helping  them  to  find  the  factories  to  which  they  have  been  assigned, 
etc.  State  prohibition  now  gives  a  wholesome  environment  at  De- 
troit for  Indian  youths. 

Young  men  and  women  of  Indian  blood  are  filling  clerical  positions 
in  the  different  departments  of  the  Government.  Two  young  girls 
are  officers  of  the  National  Service  School  of  the  District  of  Columbia, 
preparing  to  become  instructors  in  industrial  arts  to  the  soldiers  in- 
valided home  from  foreign  service.  Indians,  both  men  and  women, 
are  selling  Liberty  bonds  and  war-savings  stamps  all  over  the  coun- 
try. The  largest  stamp  sales  of  this  bureau  for  one  day  were  made 
by  a  little  Indian  girl.  Some  of  the  finest  war  gardens  of  the  coun- 
try are  planted  and  cultivated  by  Indian  women.  A  number  of 
returned  students  have  gladly  declared  their  ability  to  support  the 
children  to  release  their  husbands  for  war  duty.  One  little  full-blood 
woman  pays  her  mother-in-law  to  stay  home  and  look  after  the  babies 
while  she  works  faithfully,  and  has  paid  for  her  home  and  furni- 
ture. The  husband  is  at  the  front.  Many  other  mothers  are  doing 
practically  the  same  thing. 

ARKANSAS  VALLEY  AGRICULTURAL  ACTIVITIES. — Several  hundred 
students  from  six  schools  of  the  Southwest  again  spent  their  summer 
vacation  working  for  over  100  farmers  and  for  the  American  Beet 
Sugar  Co.  in  the  Arkansas  Valley.  The  Indian  boys  took  their  band 
instruments  along  for  bugle  calls  and  concerts  and  their  baseball 
outfits  for  recreation.  This  colony  of  workers  lives  in  15  camps  scat- 
tered through  the  valley  from  Garden  City,  Kans.,  to  Rocky  Ford, 
Colo.  Each  camp  conducts  a  separate  cuisine;  a  few  unemployed 


64  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

young  men  in  the  draft,  awaiting  call,  and  the  wives  of  soldiers  and 
sailors  who  are  supporting  their  families  to  release  men  are  selected  for 
cooks.  Women  having  small  children,  who  are  considered  undesirable 
in  many  households  and  for  that  reason  find  it  difficult  to  secure 
employment,  are  given  the  preference.  The  cooks  have  given  special 
attention  to  conserving  food  and  eliminating  waste,  in  accordance 
with  Government  regulations.  They  are  using  the  recipes  published 
by  the  Food  Commission. 

Twenty-eight  thousand  dollars  covers  the  aggregate  earnings  of  the 
Indians  for  the  season;  in  addition  the  health  of  the  boys  was  toned 
up  by  out-of-door  life,  work,  and  an  invigorating  altitude. 

Letters  "are  frequent  from  Indians  offering  their  services  as  car- 
penters for  shipyard  work,  as  tailors,  and  for  other  industrial  activi- 
ties. The  Indian  in  khaki  is  a  familiar  visitor  to  the  Indian  Office. 
Among  callers  may  be  listed  clerks,  physicians,  nurses,  privates,  non- 
commissioned and  commissioned  officers,  Red  Cross  and  Y.  M.  C.  A. 
workers.  Their  high  spirit  and  purpose  and  their  desire  to  render 
service  is  immensely  stimulating. 

NATIVE  INDUSTRIES. 

There  has  not  been  as  much  activity  during  the  past  year  on  the 
part  of  the  Indians  in  native  industries,  due  to  the  diversion  of  their 
efforts  to  agricultural  and  other  pursuits  in  order  to  increase  the  pro- 
duction of  food  products,  so  necessary  because  of  existing  conditions 
growing  out  of  the  war. 

The  Navajo  Indians  have  continued  to  make  blankets,  though  not 
on  such  an  extensive  scale  as  heretofore.  They  have  been  selling  their 
wool  for  use  in  the  manufacture  of  clothing  and  other  necessary 
articles  rather  than  to  weave  it  into  native  blankets. 

There  are  apparently  good  markets  for  most  of  the  better  things 
made  by  the  Indians,  either  through  local  trading  establishments  or 
the  tourist  trade;  therefore  no  aggressive  campaign  was  pursued  dur- 
ing the  year  to  widen  the  markets  for  products  of  this  character. 

The  lace  industry  also  is  more  or  less  inactive,  due  largely  to  the 
inability  to  get  supplies  and  also  to  the  fact  that  the  Indian  women 
are  working  in  the  fields  in  agricultural  pursuits.  It  is  believed  this 
industry  in  future  years  will  become  an  important  one  on  many  of 
the  reservations,  and  every  encouragement  is  given  the  Indians  to 
utilize  their  spare  moments  in  the  making  of  salable  articles  to  such 
extent  as  is  now  possible. 

ALLOTMENTS. 

On  the  Gila  River  Reservation,  Ariz.,  a  special  allotting  agent  is 
making  additional  irrigable  allotments  of  10  acres  to  each  Indian. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  65 

Further  allotments  on  the  Umatilla  Reservation,  act  of  Congress 
approved  March  2,  1917  (39  Stat.  L.,  969-986),  to  provide  for  80  acres 
to  each  living  Indian  not  theretofore  allotted,  is  progressing  in  a  very 
satisfactory  manner.  About  one-half  of  the  Indians  entitled  to 
allotment  rights  have  made  selections  in  the  field. 

Two  hundred  and  seventy-seven  allotments  of  irrigable  land  have 
been  made  to  Indians  on  the  Morongo  Mission  Reservation,  Cal., 
under  authority  found  in  the  act  of  March  2,1917,  but  these  selections 
have  not  been  approved. 

Reallotments  have  been  made  through  changes  in,  and  exchanges 
of,  allotments  under  the  acts  of  October  19, 1888  (25  Stat.  L.,  611-612), 
and  March  3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  781-784),  on  various  reservations, 
more  especially  on  the  Cheyenne  River  Reservation,  S.  Dak.,  where 
many  Indians  are  taking  advantage  of  a  better  character  of  land  for 
allotment  purposes.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  acts  of  June  25, 
1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  August  4,  1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  534),  and 
June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.  L.,  94),  71  allotments  were  made  and  ap- 
proved to  the  Fort  Sill  Apaches. 

A  list  of  the  reservations,  number  of  allotments  approved  during 
the  year,  and  the  number  made  in  the  field  and  not  yet  approved  will 
be  found  in  Table  No.  26. 

PUBLIC=DOMAIN  ALLOTMENTS. 

By  departmental  order  of  October  27,  1913,  the  making  of  allot- 
ments under  the  fourth  section  of  the  general  allotment  act  of  Feb- 
ruary 8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  as  amended,  was  suspended,  pending 
the  promulgation  of  new  rules  and  regulations  to  govern  applications 
made  under  said  act.  On  April  15,  1918,  these  new  rules  and  regu- 
lations were  approved  and  work  is  now  progressing  thereunder. 

WHITE  EARTH  LITIGATION. 

On  the  White  Earth  Reservation,  Minn.,  a  plan  for  the  settlement 
of  litigated  cases  has  been  agreed  upon  and  this  work  is  progressing 
in  a  highly  satisfactory  manner.  These  cases  are  the  outgrowth  of 
the  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  353),  removing  restrictions  as  to 
adult  mixed  bloods.  The  act  specifically  declares  that  patents  to 
adult  mixed-blood  Indians  of  the  White  Earth  Reservation  shall  be 
construed  to  pass  the  title  in  fee  simple,  thus  giving  the  Indians  that 
may  be  so  classified  full  control  of  their  property.  The  work  of  de- 
termining just  who  are  mixed  bloods  is  being  handled  by  a  commis- 
sion under  the  act  of  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.  L.,  88),  and  upon  the 
completion  of  the  so-called  "blood"  roll,  a  basis  will  be  obtained  for 
proper  disposition  of  pending  cases. 
86770—18 5 


66 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


APPRAISEMENT   AND    REAPPRAISEMENT    OF    SURPLUS 
RESERVATION  AREAS. 

During  the  fiscal  year  many  applications  for  appraisement  and 
reappraisement  of  surplus  reservation  areas,  otherwise  subject  to 
homestead  disposition,  have  been  handled.  Authority  for  such  work 
is  found  in  the  act  of  June  6,  1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  125). 

EXTENSION  OF  TRUST  PERIODS. 

The  following  table  shows  the  tribes  whose  period  of  trust  has  been 
extended,  number  of  allotments  on  each  reservation,  including 
public  domain,  the  number  so  extended,  date  of  expiration  of  trust, 
and  length  of  extension: 


Tribe. 

Allot- 
ments. 

Allot- 
ments 
extended. 

Date 
trust 
period 
expires. 

Ex- 
tended. 

Mission,  Cal.  (  Potrero  and  Rincon  bands)  

Tribal. 

Tribal 

1917 

years. 
10 

Prairie  band  of  Pottawatomies,  Kans      .  . 

115 

110 

1917 

10 

Mission,  Cal.  (Campo,  Augustine,  Cuyaripe,  Inaja,  Laguna,  La 
Posta,   Manzanita,   Mesa   Grande,   Pala,   Ramona,    Santa 
Ysabel>  Sycuan,  Temecula,  San  Manrel  bands) 

Tribal 

Tribal 

1918 

10 

Pub'ic  domain 

757 

715 

1918 

1 

Devils  La*te,  N.  Dak.  (Sioux)  

872 

872 

1918 

10 

Pawnee,  Okla 

820 

820 

1918 

10 

Oneida,  Wis  

1,501 

35 

1918 

9 

Toikawas,  Okla     ...          

73 

27 

191S 

10 

Authority  for  these  extensions  will  be  found  in  section  5  of  the 
act  of  February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  the  act  of  June  21,  1906 
(34  Stat.  326),  and  the  act  of  March  2,  1917  (39  Stat.,  969). 

SALE  OF  INDIAN  LANDS. 

During  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918,  662  pieces  of  allotted 
land,  covering  74,126.24  acres,  were  sold  for  $1,541,177.95  under  the 
provisions  of  the  noncompetent  act;  438  pieces,  covering  49,216.19 
acres,  were  sold  for  $1,174,854.97  under  the  inherited  act.  The 
average  price  received  from  both  allotted  and  inherited  Indian 
land  is  $22  per  acre.  This  is  the  largest  average  price  that  has 
ever  been  received  from  the  sale  of  Indian  land. 

FORESTRY. 

Subsequent  to  the  declaration  of  war  against  the  German  Imperial 
Government  on  April  6,  1917,  a  special  effort  has  been  made  in  the 
forestry  branch  of  the  Indian  Service  to  place  upon  the  market 
timber  suitable  for  war  purposes  and  to  encourage  hi  every  practical 
way  the  production  of  those  timber  products  that  would  be  of  spe- 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIES.  67 

cial  advantage  in  supplying  the  military  and  industrial  needs  inci- 
dent to  the  war. 

Large  sales  of  timber  have  been  made  on  the  Bad  River,  Flathead, 
Fort  Apache,  Klamath,  Eed  Lake  and  Spokane  Indian  Reserva- 
tions. While  the  timber  cut  from  these  reservations  has  not  gone 
directly  into  military  uses  it  has,  and  will,  supply  needs  that  arise 
through  the  diversion  of  other  timber  products  to  military  purposes. 
Sales  of  lesser  importance  have  also  been  made  on  the  Coeur  d'Alene, 
Jicarilla,  and  Leeoh  Lake  Reservations  and  the  timber  on  allotments 
under  the  Nett  Lake  jurisdiction  has  been  offered  for  sale. 

At  the  large  sawmill  operated  by  the  Government  on  the  Men- 
ominee  Indian  Reservation,  Wis.,  an  especial  effort  has  been  made 
to  produce  such  products  as  will  be  of  special  use  in  war  industries. 
Arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  supplying  of  materials  from 
that  mill  to  a  large  shipbuilding  corporation  at  Manitowoc,  Wis., 
and  other  industrial  plants.  Lumber  produced  at  these  mills  has 
also  been  offered  to  the  Government  for  the  construction  of  can- 
tonments. 

An  effort  has  been  made  to  develop  production  of  special  timber 
products  for  military  purposes  on  reservations  in  western  Wash- 
ington and  Oregon.  On  the  Tulalip,  Port  Madison,  Chehalis, 
Swinomish,  and  Skokomish  Reservations  sales  of  timber  suitable 
for  the  manufacture  of  ship  knees  have  been  effected.  Sales  of 
timber  suitable  for  aeroplane  construction  have  been  made  from 
the  Hoh,  Siletz,  and  Quinaielt  Reservations,  and  arrangements 
completed  for  extensive  operations  in  the  production  of  aeroplane 
material  on  the  two  reservations  last  named. 

An  effort  has  been  made  to  locate  supplies  of  black  walnut  on 
Indian  reservations  in  the  Plains  region  and  to  arrange  for  the 
disposal  of  this  timber  in  such  manner  as  to  assist  the  Government 
in  the  production  of  gunstocks  and  aeroplane  propellers.  Black 
walnut  is  being  produced  on  the  Sac  and  Fox,  Osage,. Pawnee,  Kiowa, 
Winnebago,  Eastern  Cherokee  and  other  reservations. 

.During  the  autumn  of  1917  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Spokane 
Indian  Reservation  was  cruised  and  a  contour  map  prepared.  The 
information  thus  obtained  was  immediately  used  in  the  offering  of 
about  275,000,000  feet  of  timber  for  sale. 

Because  of  the  enlistment  and  calling  of  technical  men  into  the 
military  forces  of  the  United  States  and  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
suitable  employees  for  appraisement  and  map  work  the  making  of 
valuation  surveys  has  been  practically  suspended.  During  the  sum- 
mer and  autumn  of  1918  the  timber  will  be  cruised  on  allotments 
of  the  Siletz  Reservation  and  on  the  nonreservation  allotments  in 
Oregon  and  northern  California  which  are  now  under  the  jurisdic- 
tion of  the  Siletz  and  Greenville  Indian  Schools. 


68  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

The  general  regulations  and  instructions  for  officers  in  charge  of 
forests  on  Indian  reservations,  which  were  first  approved  on  June  29, 
1911,  and  modified  on  March  17,  1917,  were  revised  and  approved 
on  February  5,  1918. 

A  new  form  of  scale  book  and  several  other  books  and  forms  for 
the  keeping  of  records  of  timber  operations  on  Indian  reservations 
were  devised,  printed,  and  distributed.  The  introduction  of  these 
forms  will  greatly  promote  efficiency  and  uniformity  in  timber  records 
at  agencies. 

Detailed  information  regarding  the  stand  of  timber,  the  number 
of  sawmills  in  operation  and  the  amount  of  timber  cut  from  each 
Indian  reservation  will  be  found  in  the  Statistical  Appendix  to  this 
report. 

ROADS  AND  BRIDGES. 

The  important  place  occupied  by  good  roads  in  contributing  to 
the  industrial  welfare  and  progress  of  the  Indians  has  been  further 
recognized  during  the  year  by  the  expenditure  from  the  regular 
appropriations  of  thousands  of  dollars  for  Indian  labor  in  the  con- 
struction and  repair  of  roads  and  bridges  on  the  different  reserva- 
tions, besides  specific  appropriations  of  $42,500  for  two  bridges 
across  the  Little  Colorado  and  Canyon  Diablo  Rivers  near  the  Leupp 
School,  in  Arizona;  $10,000  for  road  work  on  the  Chippewa  reser- 
vations in  Minnesota;  $15,000  on  the  Gallup-Mesa  Verde  National 
Highway  across  the  Navajo  Reservation,  in  New  Mexico;  and  $25,000 
for  roads  and  bridges  on  the  Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming. 

PURCHASE  OF  SUPPLIES. 

Recognizing  the  unparalleled  need, for  supplies  of  all  kinds  for 
the  Army  and  Navy,  the  Indian  Service  has  tried  to  fill  its  require- 
ments from  those  lines  which  would  least  interfere  with  the  proper 
conduct  of  the  .war.  The  service  has  closely  cooperated  with  the 
United  States  Food  and  Fuel  Administrations,  their  State  officers, 
with  the  War  Industries  Board  and  subordinate  branches,  and  with 
other  organizations  established  for  the  purpose  of  regulating  the 
production  and  use  of  materials  and  supplies.  The  rule  requiring 
the  use  of  flour  substitutes  has  been  strictly  enforced.  Woolen 
uniforms  have  been  dispensed  with  for  the  time  being,  and  require- 
ments in  other  lines  curtailed.  Taking  into  consideration  existing 
conditions  affecting  both  the  purchasing  of  supplies  and  their  trans- 
portation to  the  points  of  consumption,  the  Indian  Service  has  fared 
very  well.  The  service  was  indeed  gratified  at  the  manner  in  which 
its  coal  supply  was  furnished  and  delivered  during  the  past  winter, 
but  little  or  no  trouble  being  experienced  through  delay  in  the 
delivery  of  coal  even  at  the  most  remote  points  using  that  kind  of 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIES.  69 

fuel.  To  aid  in  the  conservation  of  coal,  wood  is  being  used  more 
than  heretofore  and  to  the  greatest  extent  possible.  Prices  in  all 
lines  naturally  were  abnormally  high,  but  were  in  keeping  with 
market  conditions. 

NEW  SYSTEM  OF  BOOKKEEPING  AND  ACCOUNTING. 

The  "fund  accounting"  feature  of  the  new  system  of  bookkeeping 
and  accounting  referred  to  in  my  last  annual  report  (p.  54)  was 
installed  as  of  July  1,  1917,  and  disbursing  officers  at  this  time  are 
generally  familiar  with  its  requirements  and  able  to  make  fairly 
prompt  and  accurate  reports  of  their  financial  operations  thereunder. 
The  " general  accounting"  feature  was  installed  at  most  of  the  units 
at  various  times  during  the  year,  but  some  of  the  disbursing  officers, 
for  one  reason  and  another,  failed  to  get  it  in  efficient  working  order* 
with  the  result  that  no  reliable  reports  of  cost  by  activities  would 
be  possible  this  year. 

To  aid  in  the  installation  and  operation  of  the  new  system  of  book- 
keeping and  accounting,  as  well  as  to  obtain  a  more  effective  checking 
of  the  accounts  of  disbursing  officers  in  the  field,  three  expert  account- 
ants were  selected  from  the  field  clerical  force  and  appointed  as 
traveling  auditors.  The  results  obtained  thus  far  have  fully  justified 
the  plan. 

LEGISLATION. 

Congress  passed  the  Indian  appropriation  act  on  May  25,  1918, 
aggregating  approximately  $11,000,000,  for  the  usual  appropriations 
for  the  current  and  contingent  expenses  of  the  Indian  Service. 
Among  the  items  of  especial  interest  are  the  following: 

Irrigation  appropriations  were  made  for  specific  projects  by  dis- 
tricts. These  sums,  together  with  appropriations  for  irrigation 
employees,  surveys,  and  incidental  expenses,  total  $250,750.  Con- 
gress provided,  however,  that  no  part  of  the  appropriation  was  to  be 
expended  on  any  irrigation  system  or  reclamation  project  for  which 
public  funds  are  or  may  be  otherwise  available.  It  also  provided 
that  the  appropriations  were  to  be  available  interchangeably  for 
necessary  expenses  for  damage  by  floods  and  other  unforeseen  acci- 
dents, the  amount  so  interchanged  not  to  exceed  in  the  aggregate 
10  per  cent  of  the  amount  so  appropriated. 

On  and  after  September  1,  1918,  possession  by  a  person  in  the 
Indian  country  where  the  introduction  of  liquor  is  or  was  prohibited 
by  treaty  or  Federal  statute  shall  be  an  offense  and  punishable  in 
accordance  with  the  acts  of  July  23,  1892  (27  Stat.  L.,  267),  and 
January  30,  1897  (29  Stat.  L.,  506). 

The  annual  per  capita  cost  for  schools  was  limited  to  not  to  exceed 
$200  unless  the  attendance  numbered  less  than  100  pupils,  in  which 


70  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

case  the  per  capita  expenditure  of  not  to  exceed  $225  may  be 
authorized.  The  number  of  pupils  entitled,  in  any  one  school,  to 
the  per  capita  allowance  shall  be  determined  by  taking  the  average 
attendance  for  the  entire  fiscal  year  and  not  any  fractional  part. 

The  sum  of  $10,000  was  appropriated  for  the  construction  of  a 
fence  along  the  international  boundary  line  between  Mexico  and  the 
Papago  Indian  Reservation  in  Arizona. 

Hereafter  no  Indian  reservations  shall  be  created,  nor  shall  any 
additions  be  made  to  any  heretofore  created,  within  the  limits  of 
the  States  of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  except  by  act  of  Congress. 

The  Florida  Seminole  Indians  are  given  an  appropriation  of  $10,000 
for  civilization  and  education,  including  the  construction  and  equip- 
ment of  necessary  buildings  on  lands  set  aside  by  the  State  of  Florida, 
by  act, of  its  legislature,  for  the  perpetual  use  of  said  Indians. 

An  appropriation  of  $75,000  is  made  for  the  relief  of  distress  among 
the  full-blood  Choctaw  Indians  of  Mississippi.  This  is  for  the  pur- 
pose of  payment  for  employees,  the  establishment  and  maintenance 
of  schools,  purchase  of  lands,  encouragement  of  industry  and  self- 
support,  and  purchase  of  seed  and  agricultural  implements. 

The  withdrawal  from  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  of  the  sum 
of  $200,000  of  the  tribal  funds  on  deposit  to  the  credit  of  the  Crow 
Indians  in  the  State  of  Montana  is  authorized  for  the  purpose  of 
necessary  improvements  to  the  irrigation  systems  in  the  Big  Horn 
Valley  on  that  reservation. 

The  sum  of  $25,000  is  appropriated  for  continuing  work  on  the 
Indian  highway  extending  from  Mesa  Verde  National  Park  to  Gallup, 
N.  Mex. 

The  proviso  to  section  1  of  the  act  of  March  4,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1413),  relating  to  the  expenditure  of  the  proceeds  derived  from  the 
sale  of  timber  on  the  Jicarilla  Reservation  was  amended  so  as  to 
authorize  the  expenditure  of  said  proceeds,  with  the  consent  of  the 
allottees  whose  property  is  appropriated,  in  the  purchase  of  live  stock, 
seeds,  agricultural  equipment,  and  for  other  community  or  individual 
purposes  beneficial  to  the  Indians. 

The  sum  of  $8,000  is  appropriated  for  the  construction  of  a 
bridge  across  the  Oconalufty  River  near  the  Indian  School  at 
Cherokee,  N.  C. 

The  act  of  May  28,  1908  (35  Stat.  L,.  460),  and  the  act  of  February 
14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675),  was  amended  so  as  to  authorize  the  per 
capita  distribution  to  the  Standing  Rock  Indians,  or  the  use  of  such 
moneys  arising  under  the  acts  mentioned  for  their  benefit. 

Receipts  from  leasing  oil,  gas,  and  other  mineral  lands  of  the 
Osage  Indians  until  the  same  are  paid  out  as  provided  by  existing 
law,  may  be  deposited  in  national  or  State  banks  in  Oklahoma. 

The  construction  of  a  fire-proof  office  building  for  the  Osage 
Agency  is  authorized. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  71 

Allottees  of  the  Osage  Nation  may  change  the  present  designation 
of  homesteads  to  an  equal  area  of  unincumbered  surplus  lands  under 
regulations  to  be  prescribed. 

The  Five  Civilized  Tribes  appropriation  contains  a  limitation  pro- 
hibiting the  use  of  the  appropriation  for  forwarding  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior  undisputed  claims  to  be  paid  from  individual  moneys  of 
restricted  allottees  or  their  heirs,  or  uncon tested  agricultural  and 
mineral  leases,  excluding  oil  and  gas  leases.  An  appeal  is,  however, 
authorized. 

A  per  capita  payment  of  not  to  exceed  $200  to  the  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  Indians  is  provided  for. 

Not  to  exceed  $100  per  capita  is  authorized  to  be  paid  to  the 
Seminole  Indians  out  of  their  funds. 

The  distribution  of  Creek  funds,  except  $150,000,  so  as  to  equalize 
the  pro  rata  share  received  by  each  member  of  said  tribe  in  either 
land  or  money,  is  authorized. 

The  sale  to  the  State  of  Oklahoma  for  a  game  preserve  of  certain 
lands  within  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations  is  authorized. 

All  claims  against  the  Cherokee  Nation  are  to  be  filed  not  later  than 
one  year  after  the  approval  of  the  act. 

The  Court  of  Claims  is  authorized  to  adjudicate  the  claims  of  J.  F. 
McMurray,  provided  adjustment  is  not.  made  by  mutual  agreement 
within  60  days  after  the  approval  of  the  act. 

The  sum  of  $400,000,  reimbursable,  is  appropriated  for  encouraging 
industry  and  self-support  among  the  Klamath  Indians  in  Oregon. 

The  sum  of  $8,000  is  appropriated  for  the  education  of  the  Ala- 
bama and  Coushatta  Indians  located  in  Polk  County,  Tex.,  and  for  an 
investigation  to  be  made  as  to  the  necessity  and  advisability  of 
purchasing  land  for  said  Indians. 

An  additional  sum  of  $500,000  is  appropriated  for  the  Wahpeto 
irrigation  and  drainage  system  in  the  State  of  Washington. 

The  withdrawal  of  $300,000  of  the  tribal  funds  of  the  Menominee 
Indians  in  Wisconsin  for  their  benefit  is  authorized. 

The  expenditure  of  tribal  funds,  not  exceeding  $2,500,000  during 
the  fiscal  year-ending  June  30,  1919,  in  addition  to  such  sums  as  may 
be  required  for  equalization  of  allotments,  education  of  Indian 
children,  per  capita  and  other  payments  to  Indians,  and  expenditures 
for  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  in  accordance  with  existing  law,  is 
authorized. 

The  withdrawal  from  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  of  com- 
munity funds  of  any  Indian  tribe  which  are  susceptible  of  segregation, 
so  as  to  credit  an  equal  share  to  each  and  every  recognized  member 
of  the  tribe,  except  those  whose  shares  have  already  been  withdrawn, 
and  the  deposit  of  such  funds  in  banks  to  be  selected,  subject  to 
withdrawal  for  payment  to  the  individual  owners,  is  authorized. 


72  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

COURT  DECISIONS. 

There  were  a  number  of  very  important  decisions  rendered  by  the 
courts  on  Indian  matters  during  the  past  year.  The  most  important 
decision  was  that  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  in  the 
case  of  Brader  v.  James,  which  was  decided  March  4,  1918,  wherein 
the  court  held  that  the  act  of  1906,  requiring  conveyances  by  full-blood 
heirs  of  members  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  be  approved  by  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior  was  constitutional,  even  though  the  lands 
descended  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  act.  This  was  based  on  the 
theory  that  Congress  has  power  to  reimpose  restrictions  on  lands 
allotted  to  Indians  and  is  the  first  definite  holding  of  the  Supreme 
Court  on  this  point. 

The  same  court,  on  November  5,  1917,  decided  the  case  of  the 
United  States  v.  Hiram  Chase.  The  decision  of  the  court  was  to  the 
effect  that  assignments  to  individual  members  of  the  Omaha  tribe 
under  Article  IV  of  the  treaty  of  March  6,  1865  (14  Stat.  L.,  667), 
passed  only  the  Indian  or  tribal  right  to  occupancy;  did  not  pass 
title  in  fee,  and  was  not  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  allotment 
of  these  lands  under  the  act  of  August  7,  1882  (22  Stat.  L.,  341). 

In  the  case  of  United  States  v.  Soldana  the  Supreme  Court  rules 
that  the  station  platform  of  the  Chicago,  Burlington  &  Quincy  Rail- 
road at  Crow  Agency,  Mont.,  is  Indian  country  within  the  provisions 
of  the  act  of  1897  forbidding  the  introduction  of  liquor  into  the  In- 
dian country. 

In  Lane  v.  Morrison  the  decision  of  the  court  was  to  the  effect 
that  the  joint  resolution  of  March  4,  1915,  continuing  for  another 
year  the  appropriations  for  current  and  contingent  expenses  of  the 
Indian  Department  and  for  fulfilling  treaty  stiuplations,  included 
the  appropriation  for  promoting  civilization  and  self-support  among 
the  Minnesota  Chippewa  Indians. 

The  title  to  the  Spokane  Indian  Reservation  was  quieted  in  the 
Indians  of  that  reservation  by  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Northern  Pacific  Railway  v.  Emma  A.  Wismer.  It  was  held  by  the 
Supreme  Court  that  the  reservation  was  legally  established  and  the 
lands  removed  beyond  the  scope  of  the  grant  to  the  railroad. 

In  Egan  v.  McDonald  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  heirs  of  a 
deceased  Indian  had  power  to  convey  trust  lands  with  the  approval 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  under  the  act  of  May  27,  1902  (32 
Stat.  L.,  275),  and  the  approval  of  the  conveyance  did  not  require 
an  antecedent  finding  by  a  Federal  court  as  to  heirs. 

There  was  also  an  important  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  District  of  Columbia  in  which  an  Osage  Indian  asked  the  court 
to  compel  payment  of  moneys  which  were  part  of  the  payment  to 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  73 

the  Osages  withheld  under  the  provisions  of  section  2087,  Kevised 
Statutes,  which  reads: 

No  annuities,  or  moneys,  or  goods  shall  be  paid  or  distributed  to  Indians  while 
they  are  under  the  influence  of  any  description  of  intoxicating  liquor,  nor  while  there 
are  good  and  sufficient  reasons  leading  the  officers  or  agents,  whose  duty  it  may  be  to 
make  such  payments  or  distribution,  to  believe  that  there  is  any  species  of  intoxicat- 
ing liquor  within  convenient  reach  of  the  Indians,  nor  until  the  chiefs  and  headmen 
of  the  tribe  shall  have  pledged  themselves  to  use  all  their  influence  and  to  make  all 
proper  exertions  to  prevent  the  introduction  and  sale  of  such  liquor  in  their  country. 

The  court  dismissed  the  case. 

SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  LIQUOR  TRAFFIC. 

liecent  Federal  and  State  legislation  prohibiting  the  sale  of  intoxi- 
cating liquors  either  at  large  or  in  war  zone  districts  has  been  so  pro- 
gressive and  effective  as  to  substantially  improve  conditions  through- 
out the  entire  country. 

The  item  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1919, 
providing  that  on  and  after  September  1,  1918,  possession  by  a  per- 
son of  intoxicating  liquor  in  Indian  country,  where  its  introduction 
is  or  was  prohibited  by  treaty  or  Federal  statute,  shall,  in  itself,  con- 
stitute an  offense  punishable  as  provided  hi  previous  statutory  en- 
actments, has  made  possible  law  enforcement  certain  to  be  far- 
reaching  and  exceedingly  helpful  in  securing  convictions  of  violators 
who  have  frequently  theretofore  escaped  punishment. 

While  these  new  conditions  have  already  resulted  in  better  control 
of  the  liquor  traffic  and  a  marked  decrease  in  the  violations  of  the 
law,  it  is  apparent  that  continuous  and  uncompromising  vigilance 
will  be  necessary  to  insure  the  accomplishment  of  such  results  as, 
with  our  present  legal  weapons,  are  reasonably  to  be  expected. 

The  fiscal  year  just  closed  has  been  a  very  active  one.  As  in  pre- 
vious years,  bootleggers  have  been  the  ever-present,  persistent,  and 
malicious  enemy  of  the  Indian.  Of  all  men  they,  as  a  class,  are  the 
most  despicable.  They  have  no  respect  for  God  or  man.  There  is 
no  legitimate  place  for  bootleggers  anywhere  on  earth.  They  are 
without  a  defender. 

Public  sentiment  was  at  one  time  considerably  divided  in  Minne- 
sota as  to  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  the  Indian  Office  activities 
in  connection  with  the  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  Chippewa 
treaty  of  1855  prohibiting  the  introduction  and  sale  of  liquor  into  a 
large  part  of  the  State  covered  by  this  treaty.  The  change  in  sen- 
timent in  Minnesota,  among  those  who  for  business  reasons  or  other- 
wise were  slow  to  accept  this  new  condition,  has  amounted  to  a 
revolution,  and  it  is  gratifying  that  now  there  is  practically  unani- 
mous support  of  our  activities  in  harmony  with  the  decision  of  the 


74  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  which  on  June  12,  1914,  held 
that  the  Chippewa  treaty  of  1855  was  in  full  force  and  effect. 

Our  operations  in  Minnesota,  and  particularly  in  the  treaty  terri- 
tory, have  continued  unabated.  While  several  counties  have  re- 
cently voted  dry,  and  the  Public  Safety  Commission  has  ordered 
other  places  to  cease  traffic  in  intoxicants,  there  is  much  aggressive 
work  to  be  done. 

The  case  wherein  the  John  Gund  Brewing  Co.  sought  to  compel  the 
Great  Northern  Railway  Co.  to  accept  shipments  of  beer,  etc.,  to 
persons  residing  within  the  treaty  territory  in  Minnesota,  referred 
to  in  my  report  of  last  year,  was  disposed  of  by  the  United  States 
Supreme  Court  on  March  18,  1918,  favorably  to  the  contention  of 
the  Government  and  against  the  contention  of  the  Brewing  Co. 

A  case  involving  the  act  of  May  18,  1916,  providing  that  possession 
by  a  person  of  intoxicating  liquors  in  the  country  where  introduction 
is  prohibited  by  treaty  or  -Federal  statute  shall  be  prima  facie  evi- 
dence of  unlawful  introduction,  was  tried  in  the  United  States  c  ourt 
for  the  district  of  Minnesota  and  the  law  upheld.  The  convicted 
defendant  appealed  the  case  to  the  United  States  Circuit  Court  of 
Appeals  on  a  writ  of  error,  where  the  judgment  of  the  lower  court, 
at  the  December  term,  1917,  was  sustained. 

The  enforcement  difficulties  in  Minnesota  were  perhaps  greater 
than  in  any  other  State  than  Oklahoma,  although  there  have  been 
continuous  and  varying  problems  everywhere,  probably  most  acute 
in  Wisconsin  and  Montana.  However,  Montana  will  go  dry  at  the 
close  of  this  calendar  year  and  a  great  improvement  there  is  confi- 
dently expected.  In  Oklahoma  liquor  conditions  have  been  very 
bad  and  are  still  far  from  satisfactory. 

The  practice  of  loading  liquors  into  big  automobiles  and  driving 
at  high  speed  into  Indian  country  will  probably  decrease  in  popu- 
larity by  reason  of  the  legislation  extending  the  provisions  of  section 
2140  of  the  Revised  Statutes,  referred  to  in  my  last  report.  In  a 
case  under  this  section  in  the  United  States  court  for  the  eastern 
district  of  Oklahoma,  it  was  held  that  the  mortgagee  had  no  rights, 
that  the  act  of  March  2,  1918,  removed  the  ownership  question 
entirely.  The  automobile  in  that  case  was  ordered  confiscated  and 
sold.  Many  automobiles  used  in  attempting  to  outwit  the  law  have 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  our  liquor  suppression  officers  and  suffered 
a  similar  fate. 

Seizure  of  conveyances  does  not  stop  with  automobiles  and  wagons. 
Illegal  shipments  of  liquor  from  Joplin,  Mo.,  into  the  eastern  dis- 
trict of  Oklahoma  are  a  source  of  vexatious  trouble.  Information 
reached  our  liquor-suppression  officers  that  railroad  trainmen  were 
involved  in  an  introduction  conspiracy.  On  January  4,  1918,  it 
was  learned  that  a  large  quantity  of  liquor  had  been  secreted  in  a 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS  75 

freight  car  en  route  for  Wagoner,  Okla.,with  knowledge  of  the  train 
crew.  Upon  investigation  the  liquor  was  discovered  in  a  sealed 
box  car  of  crushed  ore.  On  top  of  the  ore  were  41  sacks  containing 
984  quarts  of  whiskey.  In  a  coal  car  of  the  same  train  was  found 
a  noted  bootlegger  who  was  arrested.  The  train  engine  and  the  car 
which  contained  the  liquor  were  seized  as  conveyances  under  sec- 
tion 2140  as  amended. 

Early  in  my  administration  of  Indian  affairs  I  discovered  the 
provious-to-that-time  unenforced  Federal  statute,  section  2087, 
which  provides  that  no  annuities  or  moneys  or  goods  shall  be  paid 
or  distributed  to  Indians  while  they  are  under  the  influence  of  any 
description  of  intoxicating  liquor,  nor  while  there  are  good  and 
sufficient  reasons  for  those  whose  duty  it  may  be  to  make  such  pay- 
ments or  distribution,  to  believe  that  there  is  any  species  of  intoxi- 
cating liquor  within  convenient  reach  of  the  Indians. 

This  law  seemed  to  me  to  be  a  certain  and  speedy  remedy  for 
improving  the  wicked  and  debauched  condition  prevailing  where 
Indians  were  receiving  payments,  and  thereafter  I  proceeded  to 
exercise  the  power  so  conferred. 

At  its  first  enforcement,  now  more  than  four  years  ago,  it  became 
apparent  that  the  white  citizens  of  the  community,  for  business 
reasons  or  otherwise,  who  either  participated  in  or  condoned  the 
traffic  in  liquor  in  violation  of  law,  were  quick  to  respond  and  give 
cooperation  to  the  Indian  Bureau  enforcement  officers  when  money 
payments  were  withheld  from  the  channels  of  trade. 

About  two  years  since  I  successfully  used  this  legal  weapon  by 
withholding  the  payment  of  more  than  a  million  dollars  from  the 
Osages,  in  Oklahoma,  and  for  a  considerable  time  thereafter  sobriety 
among  these  Indians  was  so  noticeable  that  the  locality  thereabouts 
was  regarded  as  dry  country. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1918  information  reached  me  that 
the  bootlegger  was  again  continuing  his  nefarious  business  with 
increasing  activity  in  Osage  County.  Just  previous  to  the  quar- 
terly payment  ordinarily  due  about  the  first  of  March,  I  was  depend- 
ably advised  that  the  sale  of  liquor  had  increased  until  conditions 
there  were  worse  than  ever  before,  that  many  who  had  previously 
given  support  to  the  apprehension  and  conviction  of  those  engaged  in 
illicit  traffic  in  liquor  were  by  their  inactivity  or  approval  making 
possible  a  defiance  of  law  not  confined  to  the  criminal  violator  but 
indirectly  profited  in  by  the  venders  of  merchandise  and  the  un- 
scrupulous politician.  The  situation  in  Osage  County  at  this  time 
was  revolting,  degrading,  and  in  every  way  destructive  of  the  morals, 
the  industry,  and  the  very  life  of  the  Osage  Indians. 

For  several  months  every  other  means  within  my  reach  had  been 
exercised  without  satisfactory  results,  consequently  on  March  2,  1918, 


76  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

I  directed  the  superintendent  at  Pawhuska  to  withhold  payments  of 
all  royalties  and  bonus  money  to  Indians  residing  in  Osage  County 
until  further  advised.  This  order  suspended  the  payment  of 
$1,660,600.  Pandemonium  soon  reigned  at  Pawhuska  and  vicinity. 
A  " hurry-up  call"  was  made  for  a  meeting,  which  was  attended  by 
something  like  500  representative  citizens  and  about  $6,000  was 
subscribed  to  assist  in  law  enforcement,  immediately  after  which  an 
appeal  was  made  to  me  to  permit  the  payment.  My  answer  was 
this  telegram  to  Superintendent  Wright: 

Liquor  conditions  Osage  Nation  exceedingly  bad  and  indefensible.  Enforcement 
as  formerly  promised  by  local  authorities  has  been  spasmodic  and  temporary.  I  shall 
not  be  satisfied  with  less  than  demonstration  of  absolute  good  faith.  This  order 
should  be  enforced  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  certain  that  it  will  not  be  violated  in  the 
future.  Liquor  has  been  the  curse  of  these  Indians.  Its  results  are  intolerable  and 
vicious. 

A  personal  visit  and  investigation  further  convinced  me  that  the 
suspension  order  was  fully  justified  and  that  it  should  not  then  be 
revoked.  Strenuous  appeals  were  made  and  political  influence  was 
not  overlooked,  but  we  insisted  that  the  payment  would  not  be  made, 
nor  would  the  next  one,  when  due,  unless  public  sentiment  was  so 
aroused  that  enforcement  committees  and  local  officials  would 
earnestly  join  in  our  efforts  to  drive  liquor  from  within  the  reach  of 
the  Osage  Indians. 

As  an  indication  of  the  situation  the  following  from  an  article, 
published  in  the  Tusla  Democrat  of  March  31,  1918,  will  be  of  interest: 

Up  in  the  Osage  a  new  war  is  being  waged.  Osage  County  really  has  nothing  on 
Germany.  It  is  fighting  for  its  existence  and  not  even  calling  upon  God  to  take 
notice.  But  for  the  great  world  war  which  affects  everybody,  though  its  front  is 
thousands  of  miles  away,  the  present  war  in  Osage  County  would  attract  Nation-wide 
attention.  But  even  as  things  are  the  war  which  means  the  financial  life  or  death 
of  Osage  County  is  getting  the  lion's  share  of  attention  just  now  throughout  the  biggest 
county  in  Oklahoma,  the  world  war  having  been  backed  off  the  boards  for  the  time. 

Osage  County  is  making  war  upon  the  bootleggers.  Heretofore  the  county  has 
done  more  or  less  desultory  fighting  against  that  enemy  of  order  and  decency,  but 
that  was  only  skirmishing.  It  was  a  matter  of  getting  Cato  Sells,  Commissioner  of 
Indian  Affairs,  to  release  suspended  quarterly  and  other  payments  on  assurance  that 
the  bootleggers  and  their  business  has  been  driven  out. 

Now  Osage  County  is  at  war  in  earnest.  John  Barleycorn,  high  chief  commander 
of  the  enemy's  forces,  is  well  aware  of  this  fact.  If  the  bootleggers  are  not  defeated, 
which  means  driven  out  utterly  or  annihilated  physically,  Osage  County  will  lose  its 
proud  position  as  the  home  of  the  richest  nation  of  people  on  earth,  the  Osage  Indians. 

The  die  is  cast,  and  the  issue  is  joined.  The  fight  is  to  the  finish.  That  it  is  not 
going  to  be  the  finish  of  Osage  County's  prosperity  is  a  foregone  conclusion,  and  for 
that  very  reason  it  is  permitted  this  war  correspondent  to  predict  ultimate  victory 
for  the  allied  forces  of  Ofl^ge  County,  including  the  whites  and  the  Indians. 

No  bootlegger  peace  will  be  accepted.  The  peace  must  be  a  respectable  citizens' 
peace.  Bootlegging  must  be  uprooted  and  overthrown  and  cast  out  and  done  for. 
Nothing  else  will  suffice.  The  Great  White  Father  at  Washington  has  said  it.  Through 
the  mouth  of  his  general  manager  of  all  the  Government-ward  Indians  in  the  United 
States,  Cato  Sells,  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  he  has  said  it;  and  he  means  it. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  77 

If  you  doubt  that,  ask  Cato  Sells  if  Uncle  Sam  doesn't  mean  what  he  says— through 
Mr.  Sells  officially— to  wit: 

"The  bootlegger  must  go  and  bootlegging  must  cease  before  another  dollar  of  Osage 
Indian  money  is  released  for  expenditure  in  Osage  County." 

What  that  means  may  be  explained  in  a  few  short  words.  It  means  that  approxi- 
mately $6,000,000  a  year,  including  bonuses  on  the  sale  of  oil  lands  and  the  four  quar- 
terly payments  of  oil  and  gas  royalties,  these  $6,000,000  being  almost  the  only  visible 
support  of  Osage  County,  will  be  held  out  of  payment  until  Commsisioner  Sells  has 
actual  and  visible  proof  that  Osage  County  has  conquered  and  exterminated  the  boot- 
leggers; and  that  is  the  war  in  its  first  lap  up  in  the  Osage,  just  above  Tulsa.  *  *  * 
Pawhuska  is  a  beautiful  little  city  of  about  5,000  people,  the  county  seat  of  Osage 
County.  It  has  grown  from  a  small  Indian  trading  post  in  the  past  10  years  since  the 
Osages  got  their  allotments  and  waxed  opulent  on  oil  and  gas  royalties.  It  is  the 
Osage  Indian  money  that  has  made  Pawhuska.  *  * 

Save  as  to  bootlegging,  the  people  of  Osage  County  are  law-abiding.  Of  course  reser- 
vation must  be  made  for  the  offenses  incident  to  bootlegging.  The  average  of  intelli- 
genpe  is  high.  There  are  good  schools,  both  for  whites  and  for  Indians.  Osage  citi- 
zenry is  by  no  means  of  the  wild  and  woolly  sort.  It  is  a  composite  of  the  all-American 
type.  Some  of  the  Osages  are  highly  educated.  They  have  been  to  Carlisle  and 
other  Indian  schools  elsewhere.  In  the  Osage  school  on  the  terrace  at  Pawhuska  arc 
many  Indian  children  of  both  sexes.  J.  George  Wright,  superintendent  of  this  school, 
is  the  local  Indian  agent.  It  is  from  his  office  that  the  checks  are  distributed  to  the 
Indians.  Disbursing  Agent  Wise  signs  checks  on  the  United  States  Treasury  and  they 
go  to  the  2,229  Osages  each  quarter,  except  when  suspended,  as  at  present.  It  is  a 
considerable  job  that  Mr.  Wise  has. 

Though  a  town  of  but  5,000  people,  Pawhuska  had  until  recently  57  licensed  jitnevs. 
Citizens  who  wish  to  minimize  the  impression  as  to  the  prevalence  of  bootlegging  will 
tell  you,  perhaps,  that  the  jitneys  do  a  big  business  carrying  Indians  to  and  from  the 
Indian  village  and  between  Pawhuska  and  other  towns  in  the  county.  Those  who 
admit  that  bootlegging  is  jitneyized  will  tell  you  that  most  of  the  "jits"  are  subsidized 
by  the  wholesalers  in  booze,  who  farm  the  stuff  out  to  the  jitney  drivers,  who  in  their 
turn  sell  it  to  the  Indians.  The  jitneys  get  $1  a  head  for  carrying  Indians  between 
Pawhuska  and  the  village — 2  miles — 50  cents  a  mile. 

And  here  is  what  an  authoritative  official  told  a  representative  of  the  Democrat, 
when  recently  at  Pawhuska: 

"These  jitneys  will  bring  an  Indian  in  from  the  village  and  take  him  back  home, 
charge  $2,  and  on  the  trip  the  driver  will  sell  the  Indian  a  quart  of  whisky,  price  to 
Indians,  $12;  total  $14  for  the  quart,  including  the  ride  that  is  necessary  to  get  the 
booze  placed.  An  Indian,  especially  a  booze-fighting  Indian,  never  worries  about 
the  price.  If  he  has  the  money,  and  he  usually  has  for  some  time  after  the  quarterly 
payment,  he  will  give  up  gracefully.  If  he  is  broke,  as  he  usually  is  before  his  next 
hand-out  from  the  Government,  he  finds  it  easy  to  borrow  money  at  hugely  usurious 
rates.  Anyhow,  he  gets  the  booze,  gets  drunk,  gets  into  trouble,  and  raises  hades." 
It  is  said  that  booze  is  brought  into  Osage  County  in  high-powered  automobiles 
bought  and  fitted  especially  for  the  business,  and  that  whisky  caches  are  almost  as 
common  as  gopher  holes.  Queer  tales  are  told  of  the  ingenuity  displayed  by  the 
bootleggers  in  concealing  their  stocks.  Near  Pawhuska  is  an  old  Indian  graveyard. 
A  certain  chief,  gathered  to  his  fathers  many  years  ago,  is  buried  in  a  grave  of  archi- 
tecture superior  to  the  common  run.  The  grave  is  walled  up  and  covered  with  rocks, 
making  it  a  sort  of  vault. 

One  of  the  officers  on  the  scent  of  a  booze  cache  trailed  a  jitney  to  the  graveyard. 
The  officer  secreted  himself  and  watched  the  jitney  man  remove  a  flat  slab  of  stone 
from  one  corner  of  the  grave  and  take  out  some  bottles.  He  pounced  upon  the  fellow. 
The  old  chief's  grave,  like  the  tomb  of  the  kings  of  Egypt,  the  great  pyramid,  was  a 
hiding  place  for  treasure,  though  in  this  case  the  treasure  was  booze. 


78  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

In  the  same  issue  of  the  Tulsa  Democrat — that  is  to  say,  March  31 
last — appeared  the  following  statement  made  by  me: 

I  spent  Wednesday  at  Pawhuska  in  conference  with  agency  officials,  enforcement 
officers,  white  citizens,  and  representative  Osage  Indians,  concerning  liquor  conditions 
in  Osage  County. 

The  representations  heretofore  made  to  me  in  this  connection  are  in  no  wise  exag- 
gerated. As  a  result  of  my  interviews  it  is  my  conclusion  that  liquor  conditions  there 
are  not  only  bad  but  without  precedent.  However,  it  is  gratifying  that  local  business 
men  are  cooperating  with  Federal  authorities  and  Superintendent  Wright  in  the  effort 
to  clean  up  and  drive  the  bootlegger  out  of  the  locality. 

I  was  a'so  greatly  pleased  to  find  numerous  Indians  disposed  to  cooperate  in  the 
enforcement  of  the  law  for  the  welfare  of  their  own  people,  and  especially  the  younger 
men,  who  are  more  addicted  to  the  liquor  habit  than  the  older  Indians. 

There  is  a  promising  outlook,  but  I  shall  not  be  satisfied  until  there  is  effective  per- 
formance. The  law  must  be  enforced  permanently,  and  the  payments  will  not  be 
made  until  such  a  condition  is  apparent. 

During  the  year  ending  December  31,  1917,  there  was  disbursed  through  the  agency 
office  to  Osage  Indians  $6,290,087,  or  an  average  of  $3,170  to  each  man,  woman,  and 
child. 

For  the  past  two  years  the  agency  office  has  restricted  payments  to  about  50  Indians, 
who  are  most  seriously  and  persistently  addicted  to  the  liquor  habit,  and  the  records 
show  that  on  December  31,  1917,  such  Indians  had  an  aggregate  of  $58,800  in  banks  to 
their  credit,  in  addition  to  which  considerably  over  $100,000  was  expended  in  pay- 
ments of  debts  previously  contracted  by  them,  erection  of  permanent  improvements, 
and  the  purchase  of  implements  and  other  necessaries.  When  the  payments  to  these 
Indians  were  withheld  they  were  largely  in  debt  and  did  not  have  a  dollar.  They  are 
now  practically  free  from  debt  and  are  owners  of  property  which  they  would  not 
otherwise  have  acquired  had  their  payments  been  made  to  them  unrestricted.  This 
money  was  expended  for  them  as  they  desired,  under  supervision;  consequently, 
they  were  unable  to  use  any  of  it  for  the  purchase  of  whisky. 

The  amount  of  the  oil  payment  bonus  suspended  is  $1,660,600.  The  regular  quar- 
terly payment  of  oil  and  gas  royalties  and  interest  on  trust  funds,  aggregating  some- 
thing over  $1,200,000,  is  also  being  withheld  under  this  same  order,  or  a  total  amount 
of  $2,860,600. 

On  April  22, 1  wrote  the  following  letter  to  Superintendent  Wright, 
at  which  time  for  reasons  therein  stated,  I  authorized  the  payment 
of  $1,660,600,  the  same  being  the  amount  first  withheld,  and  con- 
tinued the  order  as  to  the  second  payment  in  the  sum  of  $1,200,000: 

Information  before  me  represents  that  liquor  conditions  in  Osage  County  have 
improved  since  the  order  was  made  withholding  payments  and,  while  they  are  still 
unsatisfactory,  I  think  we  are  justified  in  making  the  bonus  payment,  largely  because 
of  the  opportunity  it  will  afford  for  the  purchase  of  liberty  loan  bonds  of  the  third 
issue,  the  time  for  subscribing  to  which  will  expire  May  6. 

I  wish  it  understood  that  in  coming  to  all  conclusions  in  this  connection  I  have  been 
guided  only  by  the  earnest  desire  to  secure  the  best  results  obtainable  for  all  concerned. 

Before  making  the  order  I  was  reliably  informed,  and  a  personal  visit  there  has 
confirmed  my  opinion,  that  the  Indians  have  and  are  suffering  irreparably  from  the 
introduction  and  sale  of  liquor  in  Osage  County;  that  the  extent  to  which  it  has  been 
carried  on,  together  with  other  evils  that  follow,  has  brought  about  the  permanent 
injury  of  numerous  men,  women,  boys,  and  girls  of  the  Osage  tribe.  To  permit  its 
continuance  when  a  lawful  remedy  is  available  would  be  a  serious  reflection  not  only 


COMMISSION  EK    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  79 

upon  the  entire  community  and  trie  Federal  officers  but  upon  every  man  holding  a 
local  office  in  any  manner  associated  with  the  betterment  of  conditions. 

The  Federal  authorities  are  sympathetic  with  our  efforts  and  I  have  reason  to 
believe  that  some  of  the  local  officers  are  giving  earnest  cooperation,  but  this  is  not 
true  of  all  public  officers  in  Osage  County.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  say  that  the  best 
citizens  thereabouts  want  the  law  enforced  or  that  they  have  contributed  their  money 
to  an  enforcement  fund.  More  than  this  is  required  to  demonstrate  good  faith.  If  an 
officer  is  doing  less  than  his  duty  public  sentiment  should  retire  him. 

It  is  folly  to  say  that  the  bootlegger  can  not  be  driven  out  of  Osage  County.  It  can 
and  should  be  done.  If  the  Indians  are  to  have  the  protection  the  law  contemplates 
and  which  I  regard  as  absolutely  necessary  for  their  welfare  and  happiness,  it  must  be 
done. 

Make  the  bonus  payment  now,  encourage  the  purchase  of  liberty  loan  bonds,  and 
await  the  action  of  the  officers  and  the  public  to  so  change  conditions  there  as  to 
dependably  indicate  permanent  relief  from  the  degrading  and  destructive  effects  of 
the  liquor  traffic. 

The  efforts  being  made  by  some  of  the  citizens  and  part  of  the  officers  are  gratifying 
and  promising. 

Please  keep  me  advised  as  to  the  situation  following  the  bonus  payment,  to  the  end 
that  while  we  are  firm  in  the  performance  of  our  duties  we  may  in  no  way  fail  to  be 
just. 

Thereafter  the  withholding  order  of  the  $1,200,000  continued  until 
I  made  another  visit  to  Pawhuska,  when,  after  a  conference  with 
Superintendent  Wright,  a  trip  to  several  towns  of  the  county  and 
interviews  with  numerous  white  citizens  and  representative  Indians, 
I  authorized  the  $1,200,000  payment  and  gave  out  the  following 
interview,  which  appeared  in  the  Tulsa  World,  of  May  9,  1918: 

I  am  so  much  concerned  in  doing  the  very  right  thing  in  connection  with  the  liquor 
situation  in  Osage  County,  with  especial  reference  to  the  suspension  of  payments  to 
the  Indians,  that  I  have  made  another  trip  from  Washington  to  Pawhuska  that  I  might 
personally  acquire  further  dependable  information  upon  which  to  base  action. 

I  am  just  returning  from  Pawhuska  en  route  back  to  Washington,  having  spent 
Tuesday  and  Wednesday  with  Superintendent  Wright  and  others.  While  there  I 
made  close  inquiry,  with  the  result  that  I  am  convinced  that  the  liquor  situation  has 
been  greatly  improved  since  early  in  March,  when  I  suspended  the  first,  and  a  short 
time  thereafter  the  second,  payment. 

Some  time  ago  I  directed  the  payment  of  bonus  money,  amounting  to  $1,600,000, 
chiefly  for  the  reason  that  I  did  not  Want  to  interfere  with  the  purchase  of  liberty  loan 
bonds,  and  to-day  I  have  authorized  the  quarterly  payment  due  March  1  of  $1,200,000. 
There  will  be  another  payment  due  about  the  first  of  June.  I  am  not  yet  satisfied  with 
the  liquor  situation  there,  but  it  is  very  much  better.  A  large  part  of  the  white  people 
and  the  Indians  are  apparently  acting  in  good  faith  in  their  efforts  to  suppress  the 
liquor  traffic.  However,  the  bootleggers  still  remain  thereabouts,  and  1  am  not  certain 
that  the  experience  of  two  years  ago  will  not  be  repeated.  When  I  suspended  a  pay- 
ment at  that  time  there  were  many  evidences  of  a  sincere  intention  to  permanently 
enforce  the  law,  but  it  was  not  long  until  conditions  were  again  bad,  and  they  con- 
tinued to  grow  worse  until  immediately  previous  to  the  last  suspension  of  payments 
they  were  exceedingly  bad,  worse  than  they  had  ever  been  before. 

There  were  "wholesale  bootleggers"  and  "retail  bootleggers."  The  wholesalers 
were  defiant  and  apparently  proud  of  their  business.  The  retailers  were  numerous, 
and  as  low  down  in  the  scale  of  life  as  it  is  possible  for  men  to  become.  However, 


80  COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIKS. 

they  were  not  leas  avaricious,  vicious,  or  criminal  than  those  engaged  in  the  whole- 
saling of  whisky. 

While  there  are  many  high-class  white  men  and  Indians  in  Osage  County,  there  is  a 
considerable  element  there  that  has  no  regard  for  law  or  order.  'Their  chief  purpose 
in  life  seems  to  be  to  get  the  Indian's  money.  They  are  especially  active  immediately 
following  each  payment. 

I  would  be  less  than  fair  if  I  failed  to  say  that  some  of  the  county  and  city  officials 
are  earnestly  sympathetic  with  our  efforts  to  clean  up  conditions.  This  is  especially 
so  of  Mayor  Carroll,  of  Pawhuska,  recently  elected,  and  the  county  attorney's  office, 
but  it  is~ equally  true  that  this  does  not  apply  to  all  local  officials,  some  of  whom  are 
at  least  indifferent,  with  many  indications  that  they  are  in  sympathy  with  the  law- 
breakers. 

Altogether  the  Osage  Indians  have  suffered  irreparably,  and  it  will  not  be  possible 
to  bring  about  an  entirely  satisfactory  solution  of  this  situation  until  there  is  a  much 
stronger  sentiment  than  now  exists  for  full  cooperation  and  an  earnest,  united  effort 
against  those  who  introduce  and  sell  liquor.  It  can  only  come  about  when  every 
agency,  private  and  public,  indicates  unmistakably  by  action  as  well  as  words  that 
they  are  determined  to  make  it  impossible  for  the  bootlegger  and  other  violators  of 
the  law  to  remain  in  Osage  County. 

I  have  now  ordered  the  last  payment  due  paid,  and  it  will  be  paid  immediately. 
There  will  soon  be  another  payment  due,  which,  if  conditions  justify,  I  shall  withhold. 

I  am  not  going  to  stop  this  fight  until  the  law  is  vindicated  by  good  faith  enforce- 
ment. We  are  now  reenforced  in  this,  that  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  District  of  Colum- 
bia has,  within  the  last  10  days,  denied  a  writ  of  mandamus  compelling  payment 
holding  that  section  2087  of  the  Revised  Statutes  is  in  full  force  and  effect,  the  same 
being  the  law  under  which  the  Osage  payments  were  suspended.  The  pending  Indian 
bill  contains  a  clause,  which  has  passed  the  Senate  and  House,  making  the  possession 
of  liquor  in  Indian  country  a  crime,  so  that  hereafter  we  will  not  only  have  the  adjudi- 
cated fact  that  section  2087  is  operative,  but  the  additional  statute  which  makes  it 
easy  and  certain  to  convict  every  person  found  in  Indian  country  with  liquor  in  his 
possession.  We  are  going  to  use  both  of  these  legal  weapons,  and  there  will  be  no  com- 
promise. 

These  payments  have  been  ordered  made  because  we  believe  conditions  warrant 
our  action.  We  are  not  disposed  to  discredit  those  who  proclaim  their  intention  to 
permanently  enforce  the  law.  If  they  do,  the  payments  will  be  regularly  made.  If 
they  do  not,  they  will  be  suspended,  and  the  fight  will  be  kept  up  until  there  is  such 
a  condition  of  enforcement  as  is  contemplated  by  the  law. 

I  have  but  one  purpose  in  my  action  in  this  connection,  and  that  is  to  do  my  full 
duty.  I  have  no  satisfaction  in  the  exercise  of  authority  other  than  as  it  may  be  the 
instrument  of  good.  I  do  not  want  to  unnecessarily  embarrass  anyone,  and  shall  not, 
but  I  am  fixed  in  my  determination  to  save  the  Osage  Indians  from  the  inevitable  wreck 
awaiting  them  if  they  are  not  rescued  from  the  licentious  conduct  of  those  who  would 
push  them  on  in  idleness,  debauchery,  and  crime,  and  to  this  end  I  invite  the  coop- 
eration and  support  of  every  good  citizen  in  Osage  County  and  elsewhere  in  Oklahoma. 

Thus  ended  a  victory  for  law  and  order,  unequaled  in  our  five 
years'  struggle  for  enforcement  of  statutes  prohibiting  the  sale  of 
liquor  to  Indians  and  in  Indian  country.  Its  results  have  not  only 
been  wholesome  in  Osage  County  but  throughout  Oklahoma  and 
everywhere  in  the  26  States  where  Indians  reside. 

With  the  decision  of  Judge  Stafford  declaring  section  2087  in  full 
force  and  effect,  and  the  enactment  by  the  Sixty-fifth  Congress 
making  possession  of  liquor  in  Indian  country  a  crime  without  further 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  81 

evidence  of  guilt,  the  outlook  for  rapid  and  permanent  improvement 
in  liquor  conditions  is  altogether  gratifying,  provided  that  when 
convictions  are  secured  the  penalties  imposed  by  the  court  are 
enforced  and  that  pardons  are  not  granted  except  upon  newly  dis- 
covered evidence  or  for  reasons  fully  justifying  clemency. 

It  was  my  experience  as  a  State's  attorney,  and  afterwards  as'  a 
Federal  prosecuting  attorney ;  and  now  when  writing  opinions  re- 
quested of  me  as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  in  connection  with 
applications  to  the  President  for  pardons,  that  it  is  an  exception  to 
the  rule  when  a  defendant  who  has  been  convicted  is  not  guilty. 
Conditions  sometimes  arise  when  pardons  should  be  granted,  and  I 
believe  that  every  case  presented  should  be  judicial-mindedly  re- 
viewed and  courageously  acted  upon,  whether  it  be  for  or  against 
the  applicant  or  whatever  the  nature  of  the  crime.  However,  I  am 
opposed  to  the  granting  of  pardons  on  popular  petition  for  senti- 
mental reasons  or  because  of  political  or  other  influence. 

I  do  not  covet,  neither  do  I  shirk,  the  responsibility  of  taking  a 
position  on  applications  for  pardon  in  cases  of  conviction  for  viola- 
tions of  law  in  Indian  country,  and  yet  I  would  be  less  than  frank  if 
I  failed  to  say  that  this  duty  has  been  one  of  the  most  trying  I  have 
been  called  upon  to  perform. 

Notable  among  the  many  pardon  applications  I  have  reviewed  and 
upon  which  I  have  written  opinions  is  the  case  in  which  U.K.  Warren, 
of  Hugo,  Okla.,  was  convicted  in  the  United  States  court  for  viola- 
tion of  the  Federal  liquor  laws.  In  commenting  upon  his  applica- 
tion for  pardon  and  its  denial  by  President  Wilson,  the  American 
Issue  of  August  17,  1918,  said: 

Warren  was  arrested  by  an  Indian  Bureau  suppression  officer,  William  R.  Houston, 
son  of  Gen.  Sam  Houston,  when  carrying  several  hundred  bottles  of  beer  in  an  auto- 
mobile near  the  hour  of  midnight  from  Texas  to  Hugo,  Okla.,  for  use  at  a  social 
gathering  of  young  men.  At  the  same  time  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  for  the  county 
in  which  he  was  delivering  the  beer  and  was  then  a  candidate  for  the  legislature. 
He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  and  soon  thereafter  convicted  in  the  Federal  court, 
from  which  he  appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  where  the  judg- 
ment against  him  was  affirmed. 

The  members  of  the  legislature,  without  a  dissenting  vote,  petitioned  the  President 
to  pardon  him.  Then  followed  an  array  of  appeals  such  as  have  never  been  presented 
in  favor  of  any  violator  of  the  liquor  laws. 

Fortunately  for  the  friends  of  law  and  order,  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs, 
Cato  Sells,  is  always  requested  to  give  the  President  his  opinion  as  to  whether  or  not 
applications  for  pardon  for  crimes  committed  in  Indian  country  should  be  granted. 
Commissioner  Sells  courageously  and  vigorously  opposed  granting  the  pardon,  taking 
the  position  that  as  prosecuting  attorney,  sworn  to  enforce  the  law,  Warren  was  even 
more  guilty  than  a  private  citizen  committing  the  same  offense  and  that  there  was 
no  possible  justification  for  the  mitigation  of  his  sentence.  The  recommendation  of 
the  Commissioner  was  followed  by  the  President  instead  of  the  multitude  that  came 
to  him  in  behalf  of  Mr.  Warren. 

86770—18 6 


82  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

This  incident  is  encouraging  and  inspiring  to  officers  and  citizens  who  are  fighting 
for  law  enforcement.  It  gives  a  stronger  confidence  in  the  integrity  and  efficiency 
of  our  Government  and  its  officers.  It  is  in  harmony  with  that  splendid  declaration 
of  the  President  concerning  riots  and  mobs. 

Another  case  typical  of  many  more  is  the  application  of  H.  C. 
Badger,  a  prominent  farmer,  stock  raiser,  and  business  man,  who 
was  convicted  of  introducing  liquor  into  Indian  country  and  for 
whose  pardon  numerous  business  men.  and  leading  citizens,  including 
many  public  officials,  petitioned.  Concerning  which  case,  on  April 
17,  1918,  I  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  pardon  attorney  of  the 
Department  of  Justice,  which  was  submitted  to  the  President: 

I  have  your  letter  of  March  25,  inclosing  the  application  of  H.  C.  Badger  for  execu- 
tive clemency,  together  with  a  number  of  testimonials,  and,  complying  with  your 
request  for  recommendation,  submit  the  following: 

I  have  given  this  case  close  personal  attention  and  have  read  the  entire  file  in 
which  I  find  two  undisputed  facts:  First,  that  defendant  Badger  did  at  the  time  charged 
ship  from  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  to  Keifer,  Okla.,  the  latter  place  being  in  Indian  country, 
24  quarts  of  whisky  and  2  quarts  of  wine,  the  same  being  conveyed  in  a  trunk  checked 
by  him  between  the  two  points  named,  and  that  at  the  same  time  he  carried  with 
him  in  a  grip  1  quart  of  whisky.  Second,  that  he  is  a  man  of  wealth  and  influence 
in  the  community  where  he  resides,  at  or  near  Keifer. 

There  can  be  but  one  conclusion — that  he  is  guilty  of  the  offense  charged,  and 
seeks  mitigation  for  his  offense  because  of  his  potential  relations. 

To  my  mind  the  showing  in  his  behalf  emphasizes  his  crime.  He  is  presumed  to 
know  the  law  and  because  of  his  apparent  intelligence  he  certainly  did  know  both 
the  law  and  its  consequences.  To  grant  him  immunity  under  the  circumstances 
would  be  to  announce  a  doctrine  incompatible  with  every  principle  of  just  law 
enforcement.  It  would  be  unmistakable  evidence  of  willingness  to  determine  pun- 
ishment upon  the  element  of  wealth  and  power  rather  than  justice,  which  never 
can  be  justified. 

Position  or  influence  should  not  be  a  factor  in  the  enforcement  of  the  law  against 
the  introduction  or  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  to  Indians  or  in  Indian  country.  It 
is  an  axiomatic  and  good  principle  that  all  men  should  stand  equal  before  the  law. 
In  fact,  the  institutions  of  our  country  are  in  no  way  better  reflected  than  when  this 
idea  is  faithfully  executed. 

My  conclusion  is  that  to  pardon  Badger  would  strongly  tend  to  destroy  confidence 
in  those  who  have  immediately  to  do  with  the  enforcement  of  the  law.  . 

Altogether,  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  he  should  not  be  pardoned  and  that  his  sen- 
tence should  be  enforced. 

Badger's  application  for  pardon  was  denied  by  President  Wilson. 
SEMINOLES  OF  FLORIDA. 

As  a  basis  to  the  working  out  of  a  constructive  plan  for  their 
betterment  I  detailed  one  of  the  most  experienced  Indian  Service 
field  men,  who  is  himself  of  Indian  blood,  to  act  in  the  capacity  of 
superintendent  of  the  Seminoles  of  Florida,  with  instructions  to  make 
a  close  investigation  of  conditions  there. 

My  attitude  toward  the  Seminoles  and  other  neglected  tribes  and 
remnants  of  tribes  of  Indians  is  indicated  in  the  following  lot  lor 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  83 

addressed   by   me   to   this  field   representative  preliminary   to  his 
activities  in  Florida : 

Complying  with  our  verbal  understanding,  you  are  directed  to  proceed  to  Florida 
for  work  in  connection  with  the  Seininole  Indians,  practically  assuming  the  relation 
to  them  of  superintendent,  where  you  will  remain  until  you  receive  orders  otherwise. 

I  am  sure  you  understand  and  appreciate  my  great  interest  in  the  Florida  Seminoles. 
I  feel  that  they  have  not  been  given  the  encouragement  to  which  they  are  entitled, 
and  that  for  this  and  other  reasons  they  have  not  responded  to  the  comparatively 
few  attentions  extended  them  by  the  Government. 

I  am  persuaded  that  human  sympathy  is  the  first  and  most  important  element  in 
our  efforts  to  induce  Indians  to  accept  educational  and  industrial  opportunities,  and 
that  this  is  particularly  true  of  the  Seminoles  of  Florida.  I  greatly  desire  them  to 
realize  our  interest  in  their  welfare,  and  I  believe  that  your  experience  and  the  fact 
that  you  are  an  Indian  will  enable  you  to  accomplish  the  betterments  necessarily 
involved  in  their  advancement.  For  this  reason  I  have  requested  you  to  undertake 
bringing  about  a  cooperative  and  constructive  attitude  among  these  people. 

It  is  my  intention  to  visit  the  several  small  tribes  and  bands  of  Indians  in  the 
Southern  States,  when  I  will  hope  to  spend  enough  time  in  each  locality  to  secure 
the  first-hand  information  which  will  enable  me  to  develop  a  helpful  policy  for  the 
heretofore  overlooked  Seminoles  of  Florida,  Choctaws  of  Mississippi,  Chitimachas  of 
Louisiana,  and  Alabama  Indians  of  Texas,  as  I  have  for  other  neglected  tribes,  notably 
the  Papago  in  Arizona  and  the  Rocky  Boys  in  Montana.  I  am  aroused  to  the  right- 
eousness of  doing  something  for  the  forgotten  Indian,  encouraging  without  spoiling 
him. 

Reports  received  and  an  interview  with  the  acting  superintendent 
outlining  plans  for  extending  educational  and  industrial  aid  to  the 
Seminoles  along  practical  lines  are  in  part  being  administratively 
executed,  and  it  is  my  purpose,  with  this  information,  to  make  a 
personal  visit  among  these  Indians  in  the  immediate  future,  when  a 
further  and  definite  program  will  be  put  in  operation. 

MISSISSIPPI  CHOCTAWS. 

The  sixty-fifth  Congress  appropriated  $75,000  to  provide  school 
facilities  and  other  relief  for  the  Choctaws  in  Mississippi.  As  a  pre- 
liminary to  the  expenditure  of  this  money,  and  that  I  might  be  forti- 
fied with  first-hand  information,  I  made  a  personal  visit  to  Mississippi, 
where  I  traveled  overland  among  these  Indians,  principally  in 
Neshoba,  Leake,  Kemper,  Newton,  and  Scott  Counties.  I  saw  them 
in  their  homes,  at  work,  on  their  sick  beds,  and  in  their  varied  rela- 
tionships of  life. 

Practically  all  of  the  Mississippi  Choctaws  are  full-bloods.  Very 
few  own  their  homes.  They  are  almost  entirely  farm  laborers  or 
share  croppers.  They  are  industrious,  honest,  and  necessarily  frugal. 
Most  of  them  barely  exist,  and  some  suffer  from  want  of  the  neces- 
saries of  life  and  medical  aid.  In  many  of  the  homes  visited  by  me 
there  was  conspicuous  evidence  of  pitiable  poverty.  I  discovered 
families  with  from  three  to  five  children,  of  proper  age,  not  one  of  whom 


84  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

had  spent  a  day  of  their  life  in  school.  With  very  few  exceptions 
they  indicated  willingness  to  go  to  school,  as  did  their  parents  to 
send  them.  Several  young  Choctaw  boys  and  girls  expressed  an 
ardent  desire  for  an  education. 

Generally  speaking,  the  white  citizens  thereabouts  showed  a  marked 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Choctaws,  and  many  of  them  were 
warmly  sympathetic.  However,  there  were  a  few  exceptions,  con- 
fined to  those  who  selfishly  profit  from  their  labor. 

While  in  Mississippi  I  visited  the  State  Agricultural  College  at 
Starkville  and  the  Industrial  School  for  Girls  at  Columbus.  They 
are  splendid  institutions.  Indeed,  I  was  surprised  at  the  extent  and 
the  results  of  their  work.  The  girls'  school  is  the  oldest  and  one  of 
the  best  of  its  kind. .  I  think  it  may  be  fairly  said  of  the  State  Agri- 
cultural College  of  Mississippi  that  it  ranks  among  the  first  half 
dozen  similar  schools  in  the  United  States.  Its  accomplishments  in 
modern  agriculture,  animal  industry,  and  kindred  subjects  reflect 
great  credit  upon  the  State  and  are  an  unmistakable  demonstration 
of  the  results  to  be  secured  in  the  practical  application  of  progressive 
farming  and  stock-raising  methods  throughout  the  South.  The 
president  and  members  of  the  faculty  of  each  of  these  institutions 
assured  me  of  their  great  interest  in  the  movement  to  better  the  con- 
dition of  the  Choctaw  Indians  and  volunteered  active  cooperation. 

Starkville  and  Columbus  are  located  within  a  radius  of  about  75 
miles  of  the  great  body  of  these  Indians,  consequently  the  assistance 
from  the  Agricultural  College  and  Industrial  School  is  readily  acces- 
sible. 

With  the  information  secured  on  this  trip  I  am  working  out  the 
details  of  an  administrative  plan  from  which  I  expect  constructive 
and  gratifying  results. 

In  compliance  with  the  congressional  enactment,  a  special  agent, 
who  is  also  a  physician,  and  who  has  had  large  experience  among 
Indians,  has  been  appointed.  He  has  commenced  his  supervisory 
work,  with  headquarters  at  Philadelphia,  Miss.,  and  I  am  confident 
that  with  this  and  other  comparatively  small  appropriations  we  will 
be  able  to  relieve,  the  deplorable  condition  now  existing  among  these 
Indians. 

'  Notwithstanding  a  heroic  effort  on  the  part  of  the  Senators  and 
Representatives  from  Mississippi  and  their  other  friends  in  Congress, 
it  is  apparent  that  the  Oklahoma  rolls  have  been  finally  closed 
against  the  Mississippi  Choctaws,  and  that  their  future  is  in  Missis- 
sippi, where,  everything  considered,  I  am  persuaded  that  these 
deserving  people  should  receive  kind,  prompt,  and  substantial  con- 
sideration from  the  Government. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  85 

ALABAMA  INDIANS  IN  TEXAS. 

In  carrying  out  the  direction  of  Congress,  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  detailed  one  of  his  inspectors  to  visit  the  Alabama  Indians 
located  in  Polk  County,  Tex.  This  investigation  has  been  made  and 
the  report  will  be  presented  to  the  next  Congress. 

These  Indians  are  in  the  same  class  as  the  Seminoles  of  Florida 
and  the  Choctaws  of  Mississippi,  and  I  anticipate  will  be  found 
worthy  of  serious  and  friendly  consideration. 

The  following  editorial  from  the  Springfield  (Mass.)  Republican 
may  be  of  interest  in  this  connection: 

"THE  LOST  TRIBES"  OF  THE  SOUTH  RECEIVING  ATTENTION  OF  COMMISSIONER  SELLS. 

The  name  of  the  Interior  Department  implies  that  it  is  busied  with  home  problems, 
and  so  it  is  little  talked  about  in  war  time.  It  embraces,  among  many  other  things, 
the  Office  of  Indian  Affairs,  with  Commissioner  Cato  Sells  in  charge.  Little  criti- 
cism has  been  directed  at  Government  work  for  the  Indians  under  this  Commissioner. 
Possibly  the  attention  of  former  critics  is  now  centered  upon  the  war,  but  the  thorough 
and  systematic  attention  given  to  Indian  matters  is  the  real  reason.  Commissioner 
Sells  has  kept  himself  fully  acquainted  with  the  Indians  of  the  West,  and  special 
thought  is  now  to  be  given  to  what  may  be  called  "The  Lost  Tribes"  of  the  South. 
Who  can  remember  when  an  Indian  Commissioner  visited  the  Seminoles  of  Florida 
the  Choctaws  in  Mississippi,  the  Choctaws  and  Chitimachas  in  Louisiana,  and  the 
Alabama  Indians  in  Texas  with  a  view  to  working  out  a  helpful  program  looking  to 
their  educational  and  industrial  advancement?  This  is  what  Commissioner  Sells 
plans  to  do.  It  is  to  be  suspected  that  the  Southern  Indians  have  received  none 
too  much  attention,  and  some  intelligent  official  persuasion  is  surely  worth  trying. 

Altogether  I  am  strongly  disposed  to  extend  a  helping  hand  to  the 
forgotten  fellow — not  in  lavish  expenditure  nor  in  indefinite  exten- 
sion of  paternal  aid,  but  that  he  shall  have  an  opportunity  to  lift 
himself  from  the  condition  into  which  he  was  thrust  by  other  hands, 
and  a  power  not  his  own.  "The  Lost  Tribes"  appeal  to  me  as 
meriting  a  crumb  from  the  bountiful  table  that  for  well-nigh  a 
century  has  conferred  its  favors  upon  their  brothers  in  other  sections 
of  the  country. 

MISSIONARIES    AND    HUMANITARIAN    AGENCIES. 

The  events  and  experience  of  the  year  have  deepened  my  appre- 
ciation of  the  earnest  labors  and  helpful  cooperation  of  missionaries 
at  large  and  throughout  the  field.  The  period  has  been  one  of 
unusual  affiliation  in  purpose  and  methods  of  work  among  all  agencies, 
both  individual  and  organized,  for  the  spiritual  and  moral  betterment 
of  the  Indians,  and  has  reflected  the  broad  fraternity  of  aim  and 
effort  so  clearly  developed  by  the  great  unity  of  our  American  cause 
in  the  relief  of  war-stricken  nations.  I  am  sincerely  grateful  for  all 
that  has  been  achieved  through  individual  philanthropy  and  denom- 


86  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

inational  endeavor,  and  in  this  connection  would  include  my  sincere 
obligation  to  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  the  Knights  of 
Columbus,  the  organizations  of  the  American  Red  Cross,  and  other 
organized  instrumentalities  working  to  the  same  great  ends.  I  have 
been  often  assisted  through  these  wonderful  helpers  of  humanity,  both 
in  procuring  important  information  about  the  Indian  soldiers  and  in 
reaching  some  of  them  with  a  word  of  encouragement  where  condi- 
tions seemed  to  invite  a  personal  note  of  sympathy  and  reassurance. 

Your  helpful  cooperation  in  all  matters  affecting  the  Indians  is 
appreciated,  and  has  been  a  source  of  strength  in  carrying  out  success- 
fully our  policies  regarding  these  people. 
Very  respectfully, 

CATO  SELLS, 
Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES.1 

TABLE  1. — Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  Affairs  since  1899. 


Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received. 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(—  )  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(-)  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

1899 

59,707 
62,601 
67,376 
79,237 
79,115 
86,588 
98,322 
106,533 
117,556 
152.995 
176,  765 
194.241 
197,637 
222,  187 
275,452 
280,744 
298,240 
284,195 
281,618 
242,938 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 
245 
260 
260 
262 
260 

Per  cent. 

1900  ..   . 

+  4.84 
+  7.62 
+17.60 
+     .22 
+  9.03 
+13.55 
+  8.35 
+10.34 
+30.  14 
+15.  53 
+  9.88 
+  1.74 
+12.37 
+23.97 
+  1.92 
+  6.23 
-  4.70 
-     .91 
-13.73 

+13.86 
+  3.48 
+10.92 
-    .75 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
—  2.68 
+10.34 
+  11.87 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+11.82 
-  1.32 
+  5.80 
+  3.37 
+  6.12 

1901 

1902...  . 

1903 

1904  

1905 

1906  

1907. 

1908  

1909.  . 

1910  ,  

1911.. 

1912  

1913.  .  .  . 

1914 

1915  

1916 

1917  

+    .77 
—    .76 

1918 

Per  cent. 

Increase  in  work,  1918,  over  1899 306.88 

Increase  in  force,  1918,  over  1899 157.43 

1  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  and  scattered  Indians  under  Government  jurisdiction 
except  where  indicated. 

TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1918. 

[Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 
census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  representative  is  located.] 

Grand  total 336, 243 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  whites 101, 506 

By  blood 75,519 

By  intermarriage 2, 582 

Freedmen 23, 405 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. . . : 234,  737 


INDIAN   POPULATION   BY  STATES   AND   TERRITORIES. 


Alabama  

909 

Idaho 

Arizona  

44,  499 

Illinois 

Arkansas  

460 

Indiana 

California  

.   .        15,725 

Iowa 

Colorado  

877 

Kansas  

Connecticut  

152 

Kentucky  . 

Delaware  

5 

Louisiana 

District  of  Columbia  

68 

Maine  .   

Florida  

585 

Maryland 

Georgia.  . 

95 

Massachusetts... 

4,144 
188 
279 
356 

1,414 
234 
780 
892 
55 
688 


87 


88 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30. 

1918— Continued. 


Michigan 7,  514 

Minnesota 12, 003 

,  Mississippi 1,  253 

Missouri 313 

Montana 12,  079 

Nebraska 2, 463 

Nevada 5,  854 

New  Hampshire 34 

New  Jersey 168 

New  Mexico 21,186 

New  York 6,342 

North  Carolina 8, 179 

North  Dakota 8, 940 

Ohio. . .  127 


Oklahoma *  119, 175 

Oregon 6,  657 

Rhode  Island 284 

South  Carolina 331 

South  Dakota 23,  217 

Tennessee 216 

Texas 702 

Utah 3, 120 

Vermont 26 

Virginia 539 

Washington 11, 082 

West  Virginia 36 

Wisconsin 10,  302 

Wyoming 1,  696 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Total  population  2        

336,243 

106,489 

105,  385 

96,486 

113,612 

-•--"'  '---•    • 

169,355 

46,808 

72,  316 

Alabama:  Not  under  agent  

»909 

Arizona 

44,  156 

270~ 

73 

44,499 

22,  047 

= 

221 
659 

1,224 
89 
58 
704 

2,191 

22,452 

214 
525 

1,232 
82 
44 
737 

2,034 

20,  622 

23,877 

Camp     Verde     School—  Mohave- 
Apache 

435 
1,184 

2,456 
171 
102 
1,441 

4,225 

169 
446 

1,213 
50 
45 

779 

2,007 

266 

738 

1,243 
121 
57 
662 

2,218 

41$ 
1,105 

2,348 
171 
102 
1,441 

4,225 

17 
18 

108 

Colorado  River  Agency  —  Mohave- 
Chemehuevi 

61 

Fort  Apache  School—  White  Moun- 
tain Apache 

Havasupai  School—  Ha  vasupai  
Kaibab  Agency—  Kaibab  Paiute.  .  . 
Leupp  School  —  Navaho 

Moqui  School         

= 

=== 

Moqui  (Hopi)  

2,285 
1,940 

12,  080 

1,206 
985 

1,079 
955 

6,250 

1,057 
950 

7,068 

1,228 
990 

5,012 

2,  285 
1,940 

11,991 

Navaho      t      ... 

Navajo  School  —  Navaho  *  8    .  . 

'    -- 

88 



8 

--—   ---'       '--    - 

1 

5,830 

Pima  School  «  

6,253 

3,164 

3,089 

2,830 

3,423 

6,243 

2 

Maricopa  (Gila  River) 

269 
3,984 

130 
2,034 

139 
1,950 

127 
1,703 
1,000 

142 
2,281 
1,000 

269 
3,974 
2,000 

Pima  (Gila  River)  

8 

2 

Gila  Bend  Reservation—  Papago.. 
Salt  River  School  

2,000 

1,000 

1,000 

1,277 

682 

595 

567 

710 

1,275 

2 

Maricopa 

99 
249 
929 

49 
135 
498 

50 
114 
431 

40 
90 
437 

59 
159 
492 

99 
247 
929 

Mohave  —  Apache  

2 

Pima 

San  Carlos  School    

2,623 

1,372 

1,251 

1,216 

1,407 

2,594 

20 

9 

\pacho 

2,560 
63 

5,  237 
450 

1,340 
32 

~2,  619 
224' 

1,220 
31 

2,  618 
226 

1,185 
31 

1,200 
171 

1.  375 
32 

4,037 
279 

3,704 

2,531 
63 

5,237 
441 

6,565 

20 

9 

Mohave  

San  Xavier  School    Papago 

_ 

Truxton  Canon  School—  Walapai... 
Western  Navajo  School 

9 

= 

6,565 

3,010 

3,555 

2,861 

Moqui  (Hopi)  .                  ... 

288 
6,087 
190 

8460 

148 
2,782 
80 

140 
3,305 
110 

161 
2,620 
80 

127 
3,467 
110 

288 
6,087 
190 

Navaho 

Paiute 

Arkansas:  Not  under  agent.  .  . 

1  Includes  23,405  freedmen  and  2,582  intermarried  whites. 

2  Correct  as  reported  by  superintendents. 
» 1910  census. 

« Includes  Indians  -n  New  Mexico  under  this  school. 
5  1917  report. 
•  Former  report. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


89 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  80, 

1918 — Continued . 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribos. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
hall. 

California 

15,725 

— 

1,588 
229~ 

7,975 

7,750 

5,857 

9,868 

10,020 

4,175 

—  — 

7     187 

-  '"•""_•     '   -' 

25 

1,530 

108 
1 

Bishop  School—  Paiute,  Shoshoni, 
and  Moache 

764 

824 

562 

1,026 
149~ 

1,293 

Campo  School 

115 

114 

80 

203 

Mission  Iniians  at  Campo  

139 
10 
4 
10 
66 

299~~ 

79 
4 
2 
3 
27 

60 
6 
2 
7 
39 

49 
1 
1 
4 
25 

90 
9 
3 
6 
41 

127 
10 
3 
9 
54 

45 

12 

Laguna  

i 

1 
11 

234 
2T 

La  Posta 

Manzanita  

1 

Digger  Agency  —  Digger 

147 

152 
399 

99 

200 

20 

Fort  Bidwell  School       

750 

351 

246 

504 

725 

4 

Digger  

9 
209 
532 

5 
120 
226 

4 
89 
306 

9 
116 
379 

3 

198 
524 

2 
11 

8 

4 

Paiute           .... 

93 
153 

Pit  River 

Fort  Yuma  School  —  Yuma 

835 
693 

449 
369 

386 
324 
762 

320 

277 

515 
416 
852~ 

800 
340 

886~ 

31 

171 
551 

4 
182 

Greenville  School—  Digger,  Washo, 
Concow  and  Ukie 

Hoopa  Valley  School  

1,485 

723 

633 

48 

Bear  River 

26 
48 
476 
600 
335 

16 
26 
236 

297 
148 

10 
22 

240 
303 
187 

12 
26 
201 
252 
142 

14 
22 
275 
348 
193 

26 
36 
210 
376 
238 

Eel  River  

12 
243 
224 

72 

Hupa 

23 

Klaraath  

Lower  Klaraath 

25 

Malki  School  

634 

352 

282 

216 

418 

559 

33 

42 

Mission  Iniians  at  Augustine  
Cabazon  

22 
31 
122 
13 
250 
49 
57 
90 

13 
17 
75 
8 
134 
27 
28 
50 

9 
14 
47 
5 
116 
22 
29 
40 

6 
7 
38 
4 
101 
9 
14 
37 

16 
24 
84 
9 
149 
40 
43 
53 

22 
31 

120 
13 
177 
49 
57 
90 

Martinez 

1 

1 

Mission  Creek  

Moron  'ro 

32 

41 

Palm  Springs  

San  Manuel  

Torres  

Pala  School 

1,025 

528 

497 

358 

667 

902 

121 

2 

Mission  In  lians  at  Pala  

205 
140 
235 
56 
199 
140 

4 

97 
75 
127 
26 
101 
76 
1 
25 

108 
65 
108 
30 
98 
64 
3 
21 

72 
60 
86 
20 
43 
52 
2 
23 

133 
80 
149 
36 
156 
88 
2 
23 

161 
123 
234 
55 
199 
88 
1 
41 

42 
17 
1 
1 

2 

Capitan  Gran  Je  .  .  . 

LaJolla  

.  Pauma  

Pechanga  

Rincon  

52 
3 

5 

San  Pasqual  

Syquan  

Roseburg  (Oreg.)  School—  scattered 
Wichumni,  Kawia,   Pet  River, 
an  I  others  in  northern  California. 
Rouni    Valley    School—  Concow, 
Ukie,  ani  others  

5,000 
1,818 
926~ 

12,500 

922 

= 
522 

12,500 
896 
40T 

U,800 
743 

13,200 
1,075 
604~ 

12,500 
1655 

esT 

11,875 

1684 

1625 
1479 

Soboba  School 

322 

230 

15 

Mission  Iniians  at  Soboba  .  .  . 

132 
130 
35 
116 
203 
62 
71 
177 

443~ 

72 
69 
18 
70 
124 
35 
37 
97 

233 

60 
61 
17 
46 
79 
27 
34 
80 

210~ 

41 
34 
12 
42 
81 
12 
24 
76 

201 

91 
96 
23 
74 
122 
50 
47 
101 

117 
123 
18 
116 
108 
62 
3 
134 

15 
7 
17 

Cahuilla  

Inaja  

Los  Coyotes  

Mesa  Gran  Je  

81 

14 

Santa  Rosa  

Santa  Ynez  

68 
42 

Volcan  

1 

Tule  River  School  

242 

431 

12 

Tule  River  

156 
150 
137 

94 
72 
67 

62 
78 
70 

1      201 

242 

431 

12 

Auberry  - 

Burrough  .  .  . 

Estimated. 


90 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska.    June  SO, 

1918— Continued. 


Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superiutendencies,  and  tribes. 

popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

?emale. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Colorado 

877 

451 

426 

440 

437 

861 

15 

1 

Southern  Ute  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute 

369 

177 

192 

164 

205 

353 

15 

1 

Ute  Mountain  School  —  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute 

508 

274 

234 

276 

232 

508 

Connecticut:  Not  under  agent  

1  152 

Delaware*  Not  under  agent 

i  5 

District    of    Columbia:  Not    under 
agent 

i  68 

Florida:  Seminole  

585 

336 

249 

255 

330 

569 

3 

13 

Georgia'  Not  under  agent 

*95 

Idaho  

4,144 

2  067 

2,077 

1,569 

2,575 

3,252 

517 

375 

Coeur  d'  Alone  School 

829 

412 

417 

310 

519 

625 

108 

96 

Coeur  d'Alene 

613 

305 

308 

240 

373 

423 

94 

96 

Kalispel..  .    

91 

51 

40 

35 

56 

91 

Kootenai                                   .  . 

125 

56 

69 

35 

90 

111 

14 

Fort  Hall  School  

1  764 

907 

857 

630 

1,134 

1  487 

210 

67 

358 

191 

167 

Shoshoni 

1  356 

694 

662 

•      608 

1,106 

1,437 

210 

67 

Skull  Valley 

50 

22 

28 

22 

28 

50 

Fort  Lapwai  School—  Nez  Perce... 
Illinois'  Not  under  agent             .  ... 

1,551 

i  188 

748 

803 

629 

922 

1,140 

199 

212 

Indiana:    Not  under  agent—  Miami 
and  others                               

*279 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  School—  Sac  and 
Fox                     

356 

187 

169 

122 

234 

356 

Kansas  

1,414 

742 

672 

771 

643 

720 

336 

358 

Kickapoo  School 

637 

326 

311 

342 

295 

205 

.  —  '  '  

199 

233 

Iowa                                          •  • 

322 

159 

163 

173 

149 

12 

77 

233 

Kickapoo 

222 

120 

102 

126 

96 

182 

40 

Sac  and  Fox 

93 

47 

46 

43 

50 

11 

82 

Potawatomi     Agency  —  Prairie 
Band  of  Potawatomi    

777 

416 

361 

429 

348 

515 

137. 

125 

i  234 

Louisiana*  Not  under  agent 

1  780 

1892 

i  55 

i  gSS 

Michigan 

7,514 

565 

532 

516 

581 

200 

400 

497 

Mackinac  Agency—  L'Anse,  Vieux 
Desert,  and  Ontonagon  Bands  of 
Chippewa  

1,097 

565 

532 

516 

581 

200 

400 

497 

Not  under  agent—  Scattered  Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa,  Potawatomi,  and 

6,417 

Minnesota  

12,003 

5,944 

6,059 

6,042 

5,961 

3,178 

4,315 

3,014 

Fond  du  Lac  School—  Chippewa... 
Grand  Portage  School  —  Chippewa  .  . 

1,067 
321 

556 
138 

511 
183 

550 
137 

517 
184 

80 
8 

553 
202 

434 
111 

Leech  Lake  School 

1  786 

901 

885 

760 

1,026 

980 

727 

79 

Cass  and  Winibigoshish  .  .  ..... 

471 

227 

244 

209 

262 

302 

160 

9 

Leech  Lake 

815 

403 

412 

366 

449 

450 

344 

21 

White  Oak  Point  (Miss.)  Chip- 
pewa   

500 

271 

229 

185 

315 

,228 

223 

49 

1910  census. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


91 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1918— Continued. 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

M  innesota—  Continued  . 
Nett  Lake  School—  Chippewa  (Bois 
Fort) 

614 

164 
1,496 

284 

79 
741 
3,245 

330 

85 
755 

282 

84 
770 

332 

80 
726 
3,096 

380 

65 
C1) 

..-.....,,     » 

1,665 

172 

85 
(*) 
2,576 

62 
14 

0) 

2,314 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley)  Mdewak- 
anton  and  Wapaguita,  Sioux  and 
Sisseton  and  Wahpeton.  

Red  Lake  School—  Red  Lake  Chip- 
pewa   

White  Earth  School  

6,555 

3,310 

3,459 

White  Earth  (Miss.)  Chippewa.. 
Mille  Lac  (removal)  . 

2,551 
1,236 
856 
433 
290 
436 
283 
292 
114 
64 

21  253 

1,263 
590 
430 
210 
138 
240 
134 
139 
66 
35 

1,288 
646 
426 
223 
152 
196 
149 
153 
48 
29 

3,459 

3,096 

1,665 

2,576 

2,314 

Otter  Tail  Pillager 

Gull  Lake  (Miss  )  

Mille  Lac  (nonremoval)  • 
Pembina-  Pillager     

Leech  Lake  Pillager 

White  Oak  Point  (removal).. 

Fond  du  Lac  (removal) 

Cass  and  Winibigoshish. 

Missouri*  Nor  under  agent 

»313 
12,079 

Montana  

6,187 

5,892 

5,586 

6,493 

6,551 

3,210 

2,318 

Blackfeet  School—  Blackfeet  
Crow  Agency  —  Crow 

2,773 
1,703 

2,426 

1,472 
853 

1,234 

1,301 
850 

1,192 

1,402 
763 

1,023 

1,371 
940 

1,403 

1,146 
1,240 

645 

1,119 
262 

788 

508 
201 

993 

Flathead  School  —  Confederated 
Flathead 

Fort  Belknap  School  

1,208 

628 

580 

502 

706 

843 

243 

122 

Assiniboin 

638 
570 

2,039 

326 
302 

312 

268 

992 

260 
242 

—  —  ^__^ 

1,047 

378 
328 

463 
380 

98 
145 

77 
45 

Grosventre  

Fort  Peck  School  

1,047 

992~ 

1,078 

527 

434 

Yankton  

1,287 
752 

670 
377 

617 
375 

}  1,047 

992 

1,078 

527 

434 

Assiniboin  

Rocky  Boy's  Agency—  Rocky  Boy 
Band 

460 
1,470 
»2,463 

232 
721 
1,295 

228 
749 
1,168 

211 
638 
1,101 

249 
832 
1,362 

259 
1,340 
1,960 

201 
70 
199 

Tongue   River   School—  Northern 
Cheyenne 

60 
304 

215 

89 

150 

Nebraska 

Omaha  School—  Omaha  

1,377 
1,086 

5,854 
420 

716 
579 

2,919 

r     -  _         

215 

661 
507 

2,935 
205~ 

708 
393 

2,078 

669 
693 

2,000 
296~ 

1,066 
894 

5,285 
399~ 

•    96 
103 

419 
2T 

Winnebago  School:  Winnebago  
Nevada  

FallonSchool  

124 

Paiute  at  Fallen  

308 
112 

349~ 
113 
561 

sbT 

164 
51 

-l—_.-  - 

171 
58 
242 

404~ 

144 

61 

178~ 
55 
319 

400~ 

87 
37 

143~ 
29 
212 

280~ 

221 
75 

299 
100 

9 
12 

Lovelocks  

Fort  McDermitt  School—  Paiute... 
Moapa  River  School  —  Paiute 

206 
84 
349 

524~ 

335 
109 
557 

728 

14 
4 

4 

76~ 

Nevada  School  —  Paiute 

Walker  River  School  . 

—  = 

Paiute.... 

501 
303 

607 

250 

154 

251 
149 

278~ 

}      280 
290~ 

524 
3TT 

728 
607~ 

76 

== 

Paiute  (Mason  Valley)  
Western  Shoshone  School 

— 

329~ 

Hopi  

26J 

342 

1 
107 
170 

|      290 

317 

607 

Paiute... 

157 
172 

Shoshoni  

1  Unknown. 

"  1910  census. 

3  This  does  not  include  1,531  Indians  on  Santee  Reservation  now  listed  under  Yankton,  . 


Iik. 


92 


COMMISSIONED    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska.    June  SO, 

1918 — Continued . 


Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superintendences,  and  tribes 

popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female 

Minors 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Nevada—  Continued- 
Reno,  special  agent  *  

3  000 

1,500 

1,500 

1,000 

2,000 

2,550 

300 

150 

Paiute. 

1  400 

700 

700 

] 

Shoshoni  

I'ooo 

500 

500 

\  1,700 

3,400 

4,500 

400 

200 

Washo  

600 

300 

300 

j 

New  Hampshire:  Not  under  agent 

234 

New  Jersey:  Not  under  a^ent  " 

2  igs 

New  Mexico... 

21  186 

10  725 

10  461 

10  526 

10,  660 

20  718 

382 

86 

Jicarilla  School  —  Jicarilla  Apache 

621 

335 

286 

271 

350 

620 

1 

Mescalero  School—  Mescalero  Apache 
Pueblo  Bonito  School  —  Navaho 

3630 
2  724 

303 
1  200 

327 
1  524 

276 
1,362 

354 
1,362 

597 
2,724 

22 

11 

Pueblo  day  schools     

8  896 

4  632 

4,264 

3,927 

4,969 

8,462 

359 

75 

Navaho  . 

625 

303 

322 

281 

344 

625 

Pueblo  

8  271 

4  329 

3  942 

3,646 

4,625 

7,837 

359 

75 

San  Juan  School  —  Navaho 

6  500 

3  275 

3  225 

3  900 

2  600 

6  500 

Zuni  School  —  Pueblo 

1  815 

'980 

'835 

790 

1  025 

1  815 

New  York  

6,342 

3,078 

2,904 

2,472 

3,510 

5,982 

New  York  Agency.  . 

5  982 

3  078 

2  904 

2,472 

3,510 

==== 

5,982 

Cayuga  

177 

83 

94 

64 

113 

177 

Oneida  

271 

146 

125 

92 

179 

271 

Onondaga 

553 

293 

260 

182 

371 

553 

Seneca  (Allegany) 

953 

497 

456 

415 

538 

953 

Seneca  (Cattaraugus) 

1  321 

669 

652 

472 

849 

1,321 

Seneca  (Tonawanda) 

511 

285 

226 

206 

305 

511 

St.  Regis  (not  a  part  of  Six  Na- 
tions)   

1  584 

781 

803 

799 

785 

1,584 

Tuscarora. 

?362 

199 

163 

117 

245 

362 

Montauk  

30 

15 

15 

15 

15 

30 

Poospatuck  . 

20 

10 

10 

10 

10 

20 

Shinnecock  

200 

100 

100 

100 

100 

200 

Not  under  agent  .  . 

4  360 

North  Carolina.  ... 

8  179 

1  198 

1  145 

1  227 

1,116 

1  000 

900 

443 

Cherokee  School—  Eastern  Cherokee 
Not  under  agent 

2,343 

2  5  836 

1,198 

1,145 

1,227 

1,116 

1,000 

900 

443 

North  Dakota  

8,940 

4,471 

4,469 

4,301 

4,639 



4,212 



2,156 

2,572 

Fort  Berthold  School 

1  204 

599 

605 

580 

624 

848 

317 

39 

Arikara  

417 

200 

217 

199 

218 

259 

147 

11 

Grosventre  ... 

513 

257 

256 

244 

269 

375 

124 

14 

Mandan  

274 

142 

132 

137 

137 

214 

46 

14 

Fort  Totten  School—  Sisseton,Wah- 
peton,  and  Cuthead  Sioux  (known 
as  Devils  Lake  Sioux)  

983 

509 

474 

-..  L..,~Z^= 

482 

501 

565 

270 

148 

Standing  Rock  School—  Sioux  6  
Turtle    Mountain    School—  Turtle 
Mountain  Chippewa  

3,455 
3  298 

1,705 
1  658 

1,750 
1  640 

1,424 
1,815 

2,031 
1,483 

2,640 
159 

783 
786 

32 
2,353 

Ohio:  Not  under  agent 

2  127 

Oklahoma  

119,  175 

8,875 

8,794 

8,683 

8,986 

34,267 

16,016 

45,487 

Cantonment  School.  .  . 

780 

:  

420 

360 

•      T-  ._-  

341 

439 

695 

54 

31 

Arapaho  .'. 

233 

129 

104 

103 

130 

212 

11 

10 

Cheyenne  

547 

291 

256 

238 

309 

483 

43 

21 

, 

^— 

i 

— 

=— 

= 

= 

1  See  Roseburg,  California. 

2 1910  census. 

3  Includes  182  Apaches;  1913  Fort  Sill  removal. 

4 1910  census  minus  250  Montauk,  Poospatauk  and  Shinnecock. 

&  1917  report. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   APFAIES. 


93 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1918— Continued. 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
fotion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School  

Arapaho 

1,252 

632 

620 

544 

708 

902 

284 

66 

515 
737 

262 
370 

2,265 

253  \\      ,,, 
367    f 

708 
2,282 

902 
2,2SO 

284 
2,000 

66 
293 

Cheyenne  .  . 

Kiowa  Agency  

4,583 

2,318 

2,301 

Apache  

181 
1,600 
1,577 
1.139 

86 

85 
794 
766 
571 
49 

96 
806 
811 
568 
37 

2,301 

965~ 
309 
359 

2,282 

2,290 

2,000 

1,384 
58 
124 

437 

293 

(!) 

20 
34 

235 

Comanche  

Kiowa  

Wichita  and  affiliated  bands  
Apache  prisoners  

Osage  School  —  Osage 

2,186 
524 
716 

1,125 
271 
350 

535 

1,061 
253 
366 

1,221 
215 
357 

802 
446 

558 

3ST 

Otoe  School  —  Oto  and  Missouri  .  
Pawnee  School  —  Pawnee 

PoncaSchool  

1,060 

525 

641 

419 

Kaw  (Kansas)  

365 
648 

47 

68JF 

190 
321 

24 
332 

175 
327 
23 

35T 

2?3 
Sfifi 
22 

357" 

112 
282 
25 

326~ 

98 
2ro 
40 

32 

398 

7 

145 

235 

Ponca.  ..,  

Tonkawa  

Sac  and  Fox  School 

396 

142 

Iowa  

83 
600 

747~ 

34 

298 

49 
302 

28 
320 

308 

55 

'-?  .  1 

45 
351 

692~ 

38 
107 

Sac  and  Fox  

142 

Seger  School  

367 

380 

439 

55 

Arapaho  

140 
607 

2,100 

62 
305 

1,039 

78 
302 

66 
242 

74 
365 

106 
586 

117 

34 
21 

Cheyenne  

Seneca  School  

1,061  |    1,126 

974 

492 

1,491 

Eastern  Shawnee 

158 
274 
337 
470 
468 
393 

70 
146 
165 
232 
245 
181 

88 
128 
172 
238 
223 
212 

81 
173 

192 
272 
178 
230 

77 
101 
145 
198 
290 
163 

3 
3 
79 
14 

.     62 
10 
27 
292 
27 
74 

93 
261 
231 
164 
441 
301 

Ottawa  

Quapaw  

Seneca  

Wyandot  

Peoria—  Miami  (citizen)2.  .  . 

18 

Shawnee  School.  . 

3,038 

1,539 

1,499 

1,432 

1,606 

207 

590 

2,241 

Absentee  Shawnee  .  .  . 

538 
2,288 
212 

282 
1,148 
109 

256 
1,140 
103 

261 
1,085 
86 

277 
1,203 
126 

3 

535 
47 

8 

Citizen  Potawatomi... 

2,241 

Mexican  Kickapoo  .  .  . 

204 

Five  Civilized  Tribes..  . 

101,506 

26,774 

10,393 

40,934 

Cherokee  Nation  

41,  824 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

By  blood  

36,432 
286 
187 
4,919 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

Bv  intermarriage  

r»ela^ares  

Freedmen  

Chickasaw  Nation  

10,966 



1,515 

.  _  .__  -.,   -  -—  — 

966 

3,823 

By  blood  

1 

5,659 
645 
4,662 

1,515 

966 

3,823 

By  intermarriage  
Freedmen  

Choctaw  Nation  

26  828 

8,444 

2,473 

9,882 

By  blood  

17,488 
1,651 
1,660 

6,029 

8,444 

2,473 

9,882 

By  intermarriage  

Mississippi  Choctaw.. 

Freedmen  

Creek  Nation  

18,761 

6,858 

1,698 

3,396 

By  blood... 

11,952 
6,809 

6,858 

1,698 

3,396 

Freedmen  

".,  ~  '  ~  ~^: 

1  Included  with  mixed  one-half  or  more. 


2 1916  report. 


94 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  SO. 

1918— Continued. 


States,  super!  ntendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

409 

Oklahoma  —  Continued. 
Five  Civilized  Tribes-Continued. 
Seminole  Nation  ... 

3,127       . 

1,254 

478 

Bv  blood... 

2,141 
986 

6,657 

1,254 

478 

409 

Freedmen 

Oregon  

3,227 

3,430 

2,515 

4,142 

3,931 

1,694 

1,032 

Klamath  School—  Klamath  Modoc, 
Paiute,  and  Pit  Ri  .  er  

1,160 

3,000 
446 

1,229 
822 
2284 

2331 
23,217 

545 

1,500 
233 

574 
375 

615 

1,500 
213 

655 
447 

518 

1,0*0 
193 

439 
285 

642 

1,920 
253 

790 
537 

818 

1,500 
225 

598 
790 

265 

1,125 
207 

05 

32 

77 

375 
14 

566 

Rosebura:    School  —  Scattered    In- 
dians on  public  domain  l 

Siletz  School—  Confederated  Siletz.. 
Umatilla    School—  Caytise,    Uma- 
tilla,  and  Walla  Walla.... 

Warm  Springs  School—  Wasco,  Te- 
nino,  and  Paiute  .                .... 

Rhode  Island:  Not  under  agent 

South  Carolina:  Not  under  agent— 
Catawbas,  Cherokee,  Oneida,  and 
others 

South  Dakota  . 

11,729 

11,488 

11.064 

12,  153 

12,  898 

6,271 

4,048 

Cheyenne  River  School—  Blackfeet, 
Miniconjou,  Sans  Arc,  and  Two 
Kettle  Sioux 

2,845 
970 
293 

513 
7,340 
5,521 

2,280 

1,422 
466 
156 

264 

3,703 

2,897 

1,175 

1,423 
504 
137 

249 
3,637 
2,624 

1,105 

1,260 
407 
114 

256 
3,479 
2,816 

1,080 

1,585 

563 
179 

257 
3,861 
2,705 

1,200 

1,644 
710 
226 

252 
4,697 
3,147 

700 

594 
212 
67 

181 
1,321 
1,602 

1,200 
1,094 

607 

48 

80 
1,322 
772 

380 
839 

Crow  Creek  School—  Lower  -Yank- 
tonia  Sioux 

Flandreau  School—  Flandreau 
Sioux  

Lower  Brule  School—  Lower  Brule 
Sioux  .  . 

Pine  Ridge  School—  Oglala  Sioux.. 
Rosebud  School—  Rosebud  Sioux.. 
Sisseton  School—  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux  

Yankton  School  

3,455 

1,646 

1,809 

1,652 

1,803 

1,522 

Yankton  Sioux 

1,924 
1,193 
338 

2  216 

905 
588 
153 

1,019 
605 
185 

955 
483 
214 

969 
710 
124 

915 
513 
94 

640 
316 
138 

369 
364 
106 

Santee  Sioux'  

Ponca  «  

Tennessee*  Not  under  agent 

Texas:  Not  under  agent 

702 

Alabama 

M92 
2510 
3,120 

Koo.-ati,    Seminole,    Isleta,    and 
others 

Utah 

846 

858 

723 

981 

1,586 

4icT 

95 

iT 

23 

Goshute  Agency 

423 

209           214 

162 

261 

Goshute  .  . 

168 
34 
16 
37 
37 
14 
117 

89 
17 

7 
18 
18 
9 
51 

79 
17 
9 
19 
19 
5 
66 

162 

261 

410 

13 

Cedar  Citv 

Indian  Peake  

Kanosh  .  . 

Kooskarum 

Warm  Creek  .  .  . 

Washakie 

Shivwits  School—  Paiute  

119 

56 

63 

48 

71 

119 

Uintah  and  Ourav  Agency  . 

1,162 

581 

5*1 

513 

649 

1,057 

82 

23 

Uinta  Ute 

442 
439 
•281 

212 
215 
154 

230 
224 
127 

513 

649 

1,057 

82 

23 

Uncompahgre  Ute  

White  River  Ute...  

Not   under  agent  —  Paiute  and 
others  

2  1,  416 

i  Fstimated. 
3  1910  census. 
3  Formerly  listed  under  Nebraska. 


« 1916  report. 

s  Special  agent's  report,  1910. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


95 


TABLE  2  —Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1918— Continued. 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Mixed  blood. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more.  . 

Less 
than 
half. 

To 

126 
1539 

11,  082 

Washington  

5,495 

5,587 

•  

1,293 

4,797 

6,285 

6,952 

2,513 

= 

469 

1,617 

••  y       —  — 

644 

Colville  School—  Confederated  Col- 
ville  

2,566 

1,273 

1,160 

1,406 

1,453 

2,143 

1,091 

1,052 

982 

1,161 

1,343 

571 

229 

Chehalis 

116 

174 
82 
204 
87 

69 
75 
45 
99 

48 

47 
99 
37 
105 
39 

46 
73 
22 
102 
39 

70 
101 
60 
102 

48 

87 
136 
51 
132 
37 

6 
37 
21 
72 
35 

23 
1 
10 

Muckleshoot          

Nisqualli                           

Skokomish  (Clallam) 

Squaxon  Island  

15 

Unattached  

1,480 

755 

725 

700 

780 

900 

400 

180 

Cowlitz 

1490 
534 
1152 
304 

240 
288 
75 
152 

250 
246 
77 
152 

I   2700 

2780 

2900 

2400 

2180 

—  ™-  -  ' 

Clallam                             

Various  other  Indians  

Neah  Bay  School           

682 

351 

331 

283 

399 

640 

42 

Hoh                        

46 
411 
15 
210 

25 
210 
6 
110 

21 
201 
9 
100 

15 
182 
1 

85 

31 
229 
14 
125 

46 
371 
15 

208 

M  akah 

40 

Ozette                

Quileute                        

2 

Spokane  School  —  Spokan         

604 
734 

48~ 

268 
357 

20 

336 
377 

= 
28 

253 
302 

-    ' 

15 

351 
432 

= 
23 

319 
310 

46~ 

73 

225 

2~ 

212 
199 

Taholah  School 

Queets  River  Reservation 

Quileute                        

15 
33 

4 
16 

11 
17 

2 
13 

13 

20 

409 

13 
33 

264 

2 

Quinaielt 

Quinaielt    Reservation  —  Quin- 
aielt                             

223 

199 

686 

337 

349 

287 

Tulalip  School              

1,353 

674 

679 

632 

721 

887 

433 

33 

Lummi                  

513 
204 
221 

415 

3,000 
136 
10,  302 

250 
104 
109 

211 
1,481 

263 
100 
112 

204 
1,519 

252 
103 
97 

180 
1,185 

261 
101 
124 

235 

= 

1,815 

299 
84 
196 

308 

===== 

2,000 

200 
105 
24 

104 
700 

14 
15 

1 

3 

300 

Port  Madison—  Susquamish  
Swinomish  

Tulalip  (remnants  of  many  tribes 
and  bands)  

Yakima  School—  Confederated  Ya- 
kima         

West  Virginia:  Not  under  agent  

Wisconsin    

5,257 

5,045' 

4,461 

5,841 

5,465 

2,697 

2,140 

Grand  Rapids  Agency  —  Potawa- 
tomi  and  Winnebago  

2  1,  372 
31,276 

679 
629 

693 
647 

•;-^L  _..  _..'..-  

1,105 

545 

498 

1,086 

827 
778 

1,358 
216 

9 
866 

5 
194 

Hayward  School  —  Chippewa  
Keshena  School                        

2,364 

1,259 

1,278 

420 

897 

1,047 

Menominee  

1,758 
606 

744 
355 

1,054 
2,610 
527 

1,696 

944 
315 

349 
196 

528 
1,340 
277 

873 

814 
291 

395 
159 

526 
1,270 
250 

823 

812 
274 

277 
165 

434 
1,220 
236 

758 

946 
332 

467 
190 

620 
1,390 
291 

938 

420 

897 

441 
*606 

121 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  *  

Lac  du  Flambeau  School—  Chip- 
pewa    ... 

456 
355 

48 
2,610 
2 

1,218 
1,218 

167 

Laona  Agency  —  Potawatomi  

La    Pointe   School—  Chippewa  at 
Bad  River  

354 

652 

Oneida  School—  Oneida  

Red  Cliff  School—  Chippewa  

404 
225 

=^=^= 

225 

121 

253 
253 

Wvoming  . 

Shoshone  Agency 

1.696 

873 

823 

758 

938 

Arapaho     

853 

843 

438 
435 

415 
408 

391 
367 

462 
476 

734 
484 

108 
117 

11 
242 

Shoshoni 

1910  census. 


*  Estimated. 


s  1917  report. 


4  Now  citizens. 


96 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 

patents,  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total  In- 
dians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total  al- 
lotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Indians  who  have 
received  — 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Total,  1918 

309,  755 
309,  409 
312,  654 
309,911 
307,  891 
300,  784 
300,930 
296,  320 
247,  522 
230,  437 

178,094 
179,  374 
184,  865 
182,  289 
180,  605 
170,444 
177,  626 
164,215 
64,  853 
15,  156 

64,098 
67,972 
72,  508 
68,  980 
69,  944 
6r>,  762 
70.  478 
88,182 

3,593 
3,495 
3,492 
2,623 
1,643 
1,420 
1,926 

110,  403 
107,  907 
108,  865 
110,686 
109,018 
103,  W? 
103,843 
i  76,  033 

131,661 
130,035 
126,547 
126,379 
124.  797 
121,  233 
120,  S76 
120,  780 

1917.. 

1916  . 

1915 

1914.. 

1913 

1912.. 

1911. 

1901..     .       . 

1890  

Arizona  ... 

44,  499 

5,277 

5,277 

39,222 
'   435 

Camp  Verde  

435 
1,184 
2,  456 

Colorado  River.. 

1,184 

1,184 

Fort  Apache  

2,456 
171 
102 
1,441 
4,225 
12,  080 
3.010 
518 
2,  623 
5  146 

Havasupai.. 

171 

102 
1,441 

Kaibab  

Leupp  

Moqui  

4,225 

Navajo2  

12.080 
6,253 
1,  277 
2  623 

Pima2  

3,243 
759 

3,243 
759 

Salt  River  .... 

San  Carlos  

San  Xavier.  .  . 

5,237 
450 
6,  565 

91 

91 

Truxton  Canon  .  . 

450 
6,565 

Western  Navaj  o  

California 

10.725 

3,122 

3,097 

1 

24 

7,603 

Bishop 

1,588 
229 
299 
750 
835 
693 
1,485 
634 
1,025 
1,818 
926 
443 

877 

235 

231 

4 

1,353 
229 
277 
538 
138 
487 
476 
634 
839 
1,326 
926 
380 

731 

Campo      .... 

Dialer.  .  .  . 

22 
212 
697 
206 
1,009 

22 
212 
697 
206 
989 

Fort  Bidwell 

Fort  Yuma.  .  . 

Greenville 

Hoopa  Valley 

20 

Malki  

Pala 

186 
492 

186 
491 

Round  Valley... 

1 

Soboba  

Tule  River.  ... 

63 
146 

63 

Colorado 

146 

Southern  Ute  

369 
508 

585 
4,144 

146 

146 

223 

508 

585 
1,315 

Ute  Mountain 

Florida:  Seminole  

Idaho. 

2,829 

2,543 

37 

249 

Coeur  d'Alene 

829 
1,764 
1,551 

356 
1,414 

488 
1,544 
797 

384 
1,499 
660 

104 

45 
100 

341 

220 

754 

356 

684 

Fort  Hall... 

Fort  Lapwai 

37 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox.  

Kansas.... 

730 

453 

92 

185 

Kickapoo 

637 

111 

1,097 
of  their  all 

269 
461 

73 
otment. 

166 

287 

73 

13 

79 

90 
95 

368 
316 

1,024 

Potawatomi... 

Michigan*  Mackinac  ... 

i  Includes  fee  patents  for  part 

2  1917  report. 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


97 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervisi,on — unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  80,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total  In- 
dians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total  al- 
lotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Indians  who  have 
received- 

Part  of  al 
lotment. 

Entire  al 
lotment. 

Minnesota..                                      

12,003 

4,971 

4,  056 

506 

409 

7,032 

Fond  du  Lac  

1.067 
321 
1.786 
'     .    614 
164 
1,496 

284 
164 
959 
282 
43 

245 
146 
802 
223 
43 

9 

30 

18 
153 
59 

783 
157 
827 
332 
121 
1,496 
3,316 

4,798 

CJrand  Portas-re  1 

Leech  Lake 

4 

Nett  La\e     .. 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley) 

Red  Lake. 

White  Earth 

6,555 
12,  079 

3,239 
7,281 

2,597 
6,231 

493 

207 

149 
843 

Montana  .  . 

Blackfeet... 

2,773 
1,703 
2,426 
1,208 

2,236 
1,197 
1,809 

2,130 
1,100 
1,326 

106 
95 
473 

537 
506 
617 
1,208 

Crow 

2 
10 

Flathead.. 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck... 

2,039 
460 
1,470 

22,463 

2,039 

1,675 

195 

169 

Rocky  Boy's  Agency 

460 
1,470 

1,614 

Tongue  River 

N  ebraska  

849 

364 

59 

426 

Omaha 

1,377 
1,086 

5,854 

556 
293 

1,397 

231 
133 

1,391 

41 

18 

284 
142 

6 

821 
793 

4,457 

Winnebaeo.  .  . 

Nevada  

Fallon... 

420 
349 
113 
551 
804 
607 
3,000 

21,  186 

284 
86 
113 

284 
86 
113 

136 
263 

Fort  McDermitt  

Moapa  River 

Nevada... 

561 
500 
607 
2,390 

20,  713 

Walker  River  

304 

304 

Western  Shoshone  . 

Reno,  special  agent  a.  . 

610 
473 

604 
473 

6 

New  Mexico 

Jicarilla. 

621 
630 
2,724 
8,896 
6,500 
1,815 

5,982 

473 

473 

148 
630 
2,724 
8,896 
6,500 
1,815 

5,982 
2,343 
1,871 

Mescalero  

Pueblo  Bonito  

Pueblo  day  schools.. 

San  Juan  

Zuni.. 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee 

2,343 
8,940 

North  Dakota  

7,069 

5,923 

292 

854 

Fort  Berthold  

1,204 
983 
3,455 
3,298 

116,494 

926 
413 
3,257 
2,473 

110,283 

832 
281 
3,100 
1,710 

6,213 

49 
81 
92 
70 

946 

45 
51 
65 
693 

103,124 

278 
570 
198 
825 

6,211 

Fort  Totten  

Standing  Rock*  

Turtle  Mountain  

Oklahoma  

780 
1,252 
101,506 
4,583 
2,186 
524 
716 
1,060 
683 
747 
1,707 
»750 

363 
627 
101,506 
3,023 
1,812 
300 
291 
627 
238 
365 
771 
360 

303 
431 
(4) 
2,873 
1,355 
132 
196 
329 
98 
306 

1 
21 

'"w 

457 
120 
6 
230 
16 
15 

59 
175 
<  101,  506 
140 

417 
625 

""i,*560 
374 
224 
425 
433 
445 
382 
936 
390 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

Five  Civilized  Tribes  

Osage  

Otoe    

48 
89 
68 
124 
44 
771 
100 

Seger  

i90               70 

1 1917  report. 

2  This  does  not  include  1,193  Indians  on  Santee 
reservation  now  listed  under  Yankton,  S.  Dak. 

86770—18 1 


*  See  Roseburg,  Oreg. 

* 29,719  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation. 

5  Does  not  include  citizen  Potawatomi. 


98 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  SO.  W18 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencles. 

Total  In- 
dians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total  al- 
lotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Indians  who  have 
received- 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Oregon  

11,657 

3,873 

3,489 

19 

365 

7,784 

Klamath1  

1,160 
8,000 
446 
1,229 
822 

22,879 

783 
2,000 
210 
449 
431 

17,745 

759 
1,977 
114 
212 

427 

14,388 

24 
23 
79 
235 
4 

2,058 

377 
6,000 
236 
780 
391 

5,134 

Roseburg  2  

Siletz 

17 

2 

TJmatilla  

Warm  Springs      

South  Dakota  

1,299 

Cheyenne  River 

2,845 
970 
293 
513 
7,340 
5,521 
2,280 
3  3,  117 

1,704 

2,714 
970 

2,422 

888 

81 

211 

80 

131 

Crow  Creek  

Flandreau 

293 
40 
1,064 

Lower  Brule 

473 
6,276 
5,521 
683 
1,108 

620 

407 
5,272 
4,914 
161 
324 

615 

10 
599 
102 
295 
210 

1 

56 
405 
505 
227 
574 

4 

Pine  Ridge  

Rosebud    

Sisseton 

1,597 
2,009 

1,084 

Yankton  

Utah  

Goshute  

423 
119 
1,162 

11,082 

423 
119 
542 

4,116 

Shivwits  

Uintah  and  Ouray  

620 
6,966 

615 
6,381 

1 

80 

4 
505 

Washington.  

Colville  

2,566 
2,143 
682 
604 
734 
1,353 
3,000 

9,696 

2,486 
168 
276 
489 
486 
176 
2,885 

3,064 

2,304 
159 
276 
397 
447 
162 
2,636 

1,877 

2 

4 

180 
5 

80 
1,975 
406 
115 
248 
1,177 
115 

6,632 

Cushrnan 

Neah  Bay  

Spokane  .  . 

4 

88 
39 
13 
180 

1,138 

Taholah     ..  . 

Tulalip... 

1 

69 

49 

Yakima  

Wisconsin  

Grand  Rapids  

1,372 

1,372 
767 
1,758 
390 
355 

Hay  ward  

1,276 
4  1,758 

509 

423 

86 

Keshena  

Lac  du  Flambeau 

744 
355 
1,054 
2,610 
527 

1,696 

354 

329 

25 

Laona  

La  Pointe  

1,054 
1,021 
126 

1,326 

931 
109 

85 

1,254 

4 

45 

119 

867 
41 

67 

Oneida  

1,589 
401 

370 

Red  Cliff  

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

5 

1 1917  report. 

2  Includes  5,000  Indians  in  California;  now  under  Greenville,  Siletz,  and  Warm  Springs. 

8  Includes  1,193  Indians,  Santee  Reservation,  formerly  under  Nebraska. 

4  Does  not  include  Stockbridge  and  Munsee  citizen  Indians. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN    AFFAltib. 


99 


1C  O  ^^  00      '      ' 


aqi  jo  suazt^ro  aay 


,S  U  8  Z  ^  I  0 


PUB 


*O  OO  O  ^f  cD  TF      • 


•  CO  Tf  CO  CO 


S-BS 


rtrHiO       CO 


-going 
ans. 


Chu 
I 


•suBtpuj  SUOUTC  saupanqo 


Arrests 
drunk 
ness 


co  o  »o  -»•  co  1-1 


•     oooo 


.^TflCq       -CO 


Sic »— 1 10  c^  oo  i 
C^  C^  CO  T— <  -^  < 

•*  co  <M  I-H  >n  co  i 


<  CO  -^  C*3  T-* 

1C  O5  ^  OO 

s  -H  o  01  oo 


CO  05  »0  (N  C<l  Tf  0 


10     »O^H 


'8I6T  ' 


><NQ  r^ 


8 


-eooad 


•ajnp 


•raojsmo  IBQJJJ  A"a 


SUBIPUI 


oo  10  r^  I-H  cc 


IOC00005COOOCO     • 
tH  •«*<  •*  . 


HISS 

oo 


100 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


'? 

.S? 


« 


going 
ns. 


•SJ910A  gay      Hr 


i 


,S  U  8  Z  1  1  0 


PUB 


•sumpui  Sumac  seqoanqo 


a- 
k- 


ies work 
ng  amon 
Indians. 


He 
|la 


t^fOOOOOcCCQ       -TO^O        1C 
cDiCOiOCOOO(N        OOCO1C        O 
W^^CDCOTji        OO^f^H        ^H 


*—  t  Oi  O  O  CC  O  O  ^O  ^O  T*  C5 
^H  O3  lO  O  O  Q  CO  (N  t--  OO  <M  C 


O      • 
O« 


t>-  Tfi  CO        •*}< 
-^OiiO        CO 


O5  O4  1^-        1C 


CM  C<l  1C  OO  !>• 


rH  T-ICN  «N  kO  CO 


eo     oo         <N<N 


ill    8 


ill 


CON  o     t-i 


co  *oeo     eo 


'8T6I C08 
9urtf  2ur^six9  sg: 


-pgooad 


i-ii-icocococorH 


•tnojsno  IBQIJ?  Ag 


illll  : 


P3S 
IP 

v^cagtHOcp       6      *3      .. 


*!! 

S-i->  +* 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


101 


!-§   3  : 


:3  : 


.-H  i-«CO        0 


1  S 


I 
11 


i 


£jS8«3§csi|>    g 


8 


-O 

'c» 


as 

t»io 


C4C1O  C4C4 


co  co  co  o» 


£  1 


^S^-     S 


a 


^^     eo 


S2    8 


SE:   S 


o»«o^»oooco 


-  \r--e*  *3 


eo>0 


22    S 


Spqpn  >,§     co 

fe€«e¥i  J3 


ill 


i* 


II- 1!  i  1  II  $  I  lllli 

M^    S     g    feO^^a,^^    S    woEN^fetfH     2    o^     a    fSfe^^^^«    "7    KS(Sp4M 


II 


8         a 


102 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

i  10          05          CO     I'T'tNCO          Tf          CO  !>•  Q  10  CO  rH  I 

•SJ9;OA9Jy   I 


9ifl  jo  suazpro  eay 


,S  U  9  Z  11  3  JB9A1 


cf     oo" 


«    -r 


8838 


o  1000  co 


OOO^OQ 

sllss 


!~i   g 


IIS 

«    -r  *f 


•SUBJPUI  Suorae  sgipinqo 


siona- 
work- 
mong 


i-l  C*  rl  Tt«  N         «S 


•sumpui 


'8161 '08 

9UTlf  30pSJX9  S93BIJJBUI  IBJnjJ 


-pgooid 


•rao^sno  i^qu^  ^g 


S  :      s 


'^        i-H  r- 


, 

-3  •  o  a 


i 


i 

2  55 


a 


1^  §  § 

5?       5?    fc 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


103 


^t*  CO  »O  •  1 


c^l  oo 


00  O5  »  lO  C<»  CO  CO 


S3§  1 


i  to  qo  ^f  «i  ^;  o  i>- 

t^  fi  Tf  1C  10  ^H  C^ 

wr-i>cooco«o 


C^l  CO  C^  O'O  ^ 


I«S  i 


COi-HOC^^ 


s 


C  0  IM  •*  i-l  CO  CO 


i-l  CO  CO  rH  CC 


CO  CON    CO 


t~  t^  (N  iO  •«*<  CO  "3   «O 

*—  i   i—i    i—  *  c^i   r~ 


cooocococog 


f  CO  OO  C<«  -^          OO 


C<«  -^          OO 


:-    S 


|»0       «D 


•  O      -r-l         T-l 


i 

i  o  S'll^lsill 


Penns 
South 


"  w        a          •  H  ra  »  <a     •  rrt  B5  "H  3  ^     •  rl     I  $3       M 

i!  i  iiiiii  i  Siil  i 

r     ••!'''     *  i 


104 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  reservations. 

Number 
allotments. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Grand  total  .  . 

224,  133 

36,860,634 

34,233,174 

71,093,808 

Total  reservations  ...                                      

216,  409 
7,724 

35,  751,  792 
1,108,842 

34,  233,  174 

69,984,966 
1,108,842 

18,653,014 

24,971 
400 
240,699 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,  231 
371,422 
518 
730,940 
138,240 
2,472,320 
8,783,997 
2,129,114 
155,954 
46.  720 
1,834,240 

517,038 

Total  public  domain  .  .  . 

Arizona  

1,758 

81,639 

18,571,375 

Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River).  . 

24,971 
400 
234,670 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
371,422 
518 
730.  940 
138,240 
2,472,320 
8,774,397 
2,  129,  114 
114,348 
22,316 
1,834,240 

434,866 

Cocopali  

Colorado  River 

603 

6,029 

Fort  Apache  ... 

Fort  Mojave  (Colorado  River) 

Gila  Bend  (Pima).. 

Gila  River  (Pima)     . 

Ha  asupai  (Suppai)  ... 

Hualapai  (Truxton  Canon) 

Kaibab  

Moqui  (Hopi) 

Na\  ajo  (see  New  Mexico  and  Utah)  . 

60 

9,600 

Papago  

Papago  (San  Xavier) 

291 
804 

41,606 
24,  404 

Salt  River....     .. 

San  Carlos  .  .  . 

California  

2,593 

82,  172 

Digger  

530 
99,051 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
4,400 
1,920 
11,069 
3,084 
3,896 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
120 
15,042 
5,461 
370 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,806 

530 
128,  142 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,  520 
19,680 
1,280 
4,400 
1,920 
11,069 
4,480 
5,195 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
120 
15,042 
5,461 
640 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,806 
42,106 
48,551 
39,386 

468,874 

Hoopa  Valley  .  . 

639 

29,091 

Mission— 
Agua  Caliente  (Malki) 

Augustine  (Malki)  .  .  . 

Cabazon  (Malki)  .  .  . 

Cahuilla(Soboba)..    .      .            

Campo...  . 

Capitan  Grande  (Pala) 

Cuvapipa  (Campo).                                 

Inaja  (Soboba)  . 

Laguna  (Campo)...                              

La  Post  a  (Campo) 

Los  Coyotes  (Soboba)..              

Manzanita  (Campo) 

Martinez  (Malki).                        

Mesa  Grande  (Soboba) 

Mission  Creek  (Malki) 

Morongo  (Malki)  . 

Pala.  .. 

177 

85 

1,396 
£286 

Pechanga  or  Temecula  (Pala) 

Potrero  or  La  Jolla  (Pala) 

Ramona  (Soboba)  

Rincon  (Pala)     . 

San  Manuel  (Malki).. 

San  Pasqual  (Pala)   . 

Santa  Rosa  (Soboba) 

Santa  Ynez  (Soboba)     . 

Santa  Ysabel  (Soboba) 

Soboba  

Syquan  (Pala).. 

17 

270 

Torres  (Malki)                ***; 

Tuolumne  "' 

Twentv-nine  Palms  (Malki) 

Paiute...:.. 

Round  Vallev 

877 

42,106 

TuleRrer..".  . 

48,551 
31,376 

396,143 

Yuma  (Fort  Yuma)     . 

798 
372 

8,010 
72,731 

Colorado  

Ute  (Ute  Mountain  and  Southern  Ute) 

371 
1 

72,651 
80 

396,  143 

468,794 
80 

23,542 
682,939 

Absentee  Wvandot  

Florida:  Seminole  

23,542 

54,841 

Idaho.. 

4,377 

628,098 

Coeur  d'Alene 

'    638 
1,863 
1,876 

104,077 
345,  209 
178,812 

104,077 
366,472 
212,390 

3,251 

Fort  Hall 

21,263 
33,578 

3,251 

Lapwai  (Nez  Perce)..                                           ..  . 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox... 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


105 


TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  reservations. 

Number 
allotments. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Kansas 

3,079 

272,519 

272,  519 

Chippewa  and  Munsee  (Potawatomi)     .   -  - 

100 
143 
351 
2.363 
122 

2,648 

4,195 
11.769 
27,691 
220,785 
8,079 

153,227 

4,195 
11,769 
27,691 
220,  785 
8,079 

153,418 

Iowa  (  Kickapoo)                                            

Kickapoo 

Potawatomi     .                                           

Sa°  and  Fox  (Kickapoo) 

Michigan                                                               

191 

Isabella  .  .                                                    

1,943 
669 
36 

8,365 

98,395 
52,201 
2,631 

954,615 

191 

98,581 
52,206 
2,631 

1,508,513 

L'  ^.nse 

Ontonagon                                                     

Minnesota  

553,898 

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

712 
4 
596 
304 
631 
135 

56,782 
296 
36,846 
24,191 
48,520 
12,582 

56,782 
296 
36,846 
24,  191 
48,520 
12,582 
543,528 
1,080 
719,955 
64,733 

5,927,396 

JDeer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)                                

Fond  du  Lac 

Drand  Portage  .                                        

Leech  Lake 

Mdewakanton  (Birch  Cooley) 

Red  Lake 

543,528 
1,080 
9,290 

Vermillion  Lake 

White  Earth 

5,1.17 
826 

10,001 

710,665 
64,733 

2,448,126 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake)  

Montana 

3,479,270 

Blackfeet                                                             .  .  . 

2,656 
2,451 

889,  199 
481,269 

604,188 
1,831,944 
497,600 

1,493,387 
2,313,213 
497,600 
849,  250 
228,408 
489,500 
56,038 

359,542 

Crow  .         

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck      ..             

2,466 
2,428 

849,250 
228,408 

Jocko  (Flathead) 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River)    

489,500 
56,038 

6,118 

Rocky  Boy 

Nebraska 

4,037 

353,424 

Omaha  .  .         .            

1,460 
168 
850 

130,642 
27,236 
73,251 

4,380 

135,022 
27,  236 
73,251 
640 
U23,393 

735,  610 

Ponca  (Santee) 

Santee  (Niobrara)               .                   ... 

Sioux  (additional)    

640 
1,098 

721,477 

Winnebago                                               .  . 

1,559 
979 

U22,295 
14,  133 

Nevada     .  . 

Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone)  

321,920 
523 
990 
322,000 
L  75,  204 
840 

4,024,049 

321,920 
1,128 
4,640 
322,000 
85,082 
840 

4,697,224 

Moapa  River  

117 
366 

605 
3,650 

Paiute(Fallon)  

Pyramid  Lake  (Nevada)    ... 

Walker  River 

496 

9,878 

Winnemucca      

New  Mexico  

2,800 

673,  175 

Jicarilla  Apache 

796 

353,812 

407,300 
474,240 
1,980,637 

95,792 
24,256 
110,080 
42,359 
101,511 
150,000 
13,  586 
17,461 
13,  520 
24,187 
17,545 
34,  7fi7 
17,361 
49,369 
92,  398 
17,  515 
17,  293 
17,361 
17,  471 
288,  040 

761,  112 
474,240 
2,300,000 

95,  792 
24,256 
110,080 
42,  359 
101,511 
150,000 
13,586 
17,461 
13,520 
24,187 
17,545 
34,767 
17,361 
49,369 
92,  398 
17,515 
17,293 
17,361 
17,471 
288,040 

Mescalero  Apache 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  Utah) 

2,004 

319,363 

Pueblo- 
Acoma  (Albuquerque)  .  .  . 

Cochiti.......  

Isleta  (Albuquerque)  

Jemez  

Laguna  (Albuquerque)  

Laguna  withdrawals  a    

Nambe  

Picuris  

Pojoaque     

Sa^i  Dia  (Albuquerque)    

San  Tuan      

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque)  

Santa  Ana  (Albuquerque) 

Santa  Clara  . 

Santo  Domingo  

sia  i;.;.;..;........".. 

San  Ildefonso  

Taos  

Tesuque  

Zuni  

1  Includes  12,348  acres  purchased  from  the  Omaha  Indians.        *  Executive  orders  1910  and  1917. 


106  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Number1 

Area  in  acres 

. 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted 

Total. 

New  York          

87  677 

87  677 

Allegany  

30  469 

30  469 

Oattaraugus    

21  680 

21  680 

Oil  Spring 

640 

Oneida  

350 

350 

Onondaga 

6  100 

6  100 

St.  Regis  

14  640 

14  640 

Tonawanda 

7  549 

7*  549 

Tuscarora 

6  249 

6  249 

North  Carolina1  Qualla 

63  211 

63  211 

North  Dakota    

8  380 

2  005  320 

100  000 

2  105  320 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)  

1  189 

137  381 

137  381 

Fort  Berthold      

2  165 

435  708 

100  000 

535  7^3 

Standing  Rock 

4*700 

1  388  411 

1  388*411 

Turtle  Mountain  

326 

43  820 

43  $20 

Oklahoma 

116  701 

19  548  888 

15  361 

19  5(  4  °49 

Cherokee  .  .  . 

40  193 

4  346  203 

30 

4  341'  233 

Chickasaw 

lo'  955 

3  800  350 

10 

3  800  360 

Choctaw        .   .  . 

26*  723 

4  291  036 

14  4fO 

4  305  496 

Creek 

18*  710 

2  997*  114 

352 

2*  997*  466 

Seminole  «. 

3*118 

359  535 

122 

3r>9  (;57 

Cherokee  Outlet  

*   62 

4  949 

4  949 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

3  331 

528  789 

528  789 

Iowa  (Sac  and  Fox) 

*108 

8  605 

8  ('05 

Kansa  (Kaw  now  Ponca) 

247 

99*644 

*  gq'  £44 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee) 

280 

22  650 

22  050 

Kiowa,  Comanche,  and  Apache 

3  451 

547'  236 

547  236 

Modoc  (Seneca) 

'   68 

3  °66 

3*  966 

Oakland  (  Ponca)      

73 

•     11*456 

11*456 

Osage  

2  230 

1  465  350 

1  465  350 

Otoe 

*514 

128  351 

12S  351 

Ottawa  (Seneca)        .  . 

160 

12  995 

12*995 

Pawnee 

820 

112  701 

112*  701 

Peoria  (Seneca)        

218 

43*  334 

43  334 

Ponca  

782 

100.  745 

387 

10l'l32 

Potawatomi  (Shawnee) 

2  109 

291  736 

291  736 

Quapaw  (Seneca) 

248 

56  245 

56  245 

Sac  and  Fox  

548 

87'  684 

87*  684 

Seneca  

435 

41  813 

41  813 

Shawnee  

117 

12  745 

12  745 

Wichita  (Kiowa) 

957 

152  714 

152  714 

Wyandotte  (Seneca)  

244 

20  942 

20,  942 

Oregon  

4  253 

508  657 

1  209  349 

1,718  006 

Grande  R6nde  (Siletz) 

269 

32  983 

32  983 

Klamath.  .  . 

1  351 

208  279 

812  707 

1  020  986 

Siletz  

551 

44*459 

44  459 

Umatilla  

1  115 

82  644 

74  130 

156  774 

Warm  Springs  

967 

140  292 

322*512 

462  804 

South  Dakota    

27  377 

6  259  958 

403  714 

6,663  672 

Cheyenne  River  

3  686 

992  681 

218  149 

1,210  830 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago 

1  460 

272  560 

272  560 

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton)  

2  006 

308*  838 

308,  838 

Lower  Brule  ... 

868 

201  991 

24  000 

225  991 

Pine  Ridge 

8  257 

2  363  813 

161  565 

2  525  378 

Rosebud  

8  487 

1  851  812 

1,851,812 

Yankton 

2  613 

268  263 

268  263 

Utah  

1  367 

111  947 

1  529  360 

1,641,307 

Goshute  and  Deep  Creek  

34.  500 

34,500 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  New  Mexico) 

600  000 

600,  000 

Paiute  (Navajo) 

600  000 

600  000 

Shivwits 

26  880 

26  880 

Skull  Vallev 

18  640 

18,  640 

Uintah  Valley 

777 

39  620 

249  340 

288  960 

Uncommhere.  .  . 

590 

72.  327 

72.327 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  SO,  19.7  #— Continued. 


107 


Number 

irea  in  acres 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total.       . 

Washington                                .          

9,960 

1,  019,  079 

1,  699,  807 

2  718  886 

Chehalh  (Cushman)         

36 

3,  799 

3  799 

Col  ''  ibia  (Colvillc) 

35 

22,  618 

22  618 

Colvl.3     

2,918 

332,  795 

1,009,580 

1,342  375 

iloh  l^ver  (Neah  Bay)-                   ....             "... 

640 

640 

Kali1-!-)",!  (Coeur  d'Alene) 

4  629 

4  029 

L  in  u  (T  ulalip)           .              .                        

109 

12,  561 

125  561 

M  -ka:i  (Neah  Bav) 

373 

3,728 

19  312 

23  040 

43 

3  491 

3'  491 

Ni-onalli  (Cushman) 

30 

4,717 

4J717 

O  ,  tte  (Neah  Bay)      

640 

640 

P  Kt  Madison  (Tulalip) 

51 

7,219 

65 

7  284 

167 

17  4^ 

17  463 

Quilcutc  (Neah  Bav) 

837 

'837 

Q  liuaielt  (Taholah)    

690 

54,990 

168,  553 

223,  543 

335 

335 

Skjlcomish  (Cushman) 

134 

7  803 

7  8Q3 

Snohomish  (Tulalip)  
Spjkane 

164 

028 

22,  166 
64  954 

324 

82,488 

22,490 
147  442 

Squaxon  Island  (Cushman) 

23 

1  494 

1  494 

Swinomish  (Tulalip) 

71 

7  359 

7?  359 

Yakima    

4,488 

451,  922 

412,  404 

S64,  326 

Wisconsin 

4  965 

319  026 

270  734 

589  760 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Havward) 

881 

68  910 

540 

69  450 

Lac  du  Flambeau    

600 

45,  756 

24,  424 

70  180 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

1,608 

115  808 

14,090 

129  898 

Msnominee  (Keshena) 

231  680 

231  680 

Oneida 

1  504 

65  466 

65  466 

Red  Cliff 

205 

14  166 

14  166 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  (Keshena)     .  . 

167 

8  920 

s'920 

Wyoming:  Wind  River  (Shoshone)     

2,397 

245,  058 

584,940 

829  998 

Public  domain 

7  724 

1  108  842 

1  108  842 

TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

ARIZONA. 

Camp  McDowell  

Acres. 
24,971 

Executive  order,  Sept.  15,  1903-  act  of  Apr  21,  1904,  vol  33 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribe:  Mohave  Apache. 
Cocopah  

400 

p.  211.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1905,  p.  98.) 
Executive  order,  Sept.  27,  1917,  school  reserve 

Colorado  River  l 

2  3  236,  010 

Act  of  Mar  3  1865  vol  13  p  559'  Executive  orders  Nov  22 

(Under     Colorado      River" 
School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Ka- 
wia,  Cocopa,*  Mohave. 

Fort  Apache 

2  i  681  920 

1873,  Nov.  16,  1874,  and  May  15,  1876.    (See  sec.  25,  Indian 
appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  224.) 
Act  Apr.  30,  1908  (35  Stat.,  77);  act  Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat., 
273);  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1063);  act  Aug.  24,  1912)  37 
Stat.,  523);  Executive  order,  Nov.  22,  1915.    616  Indians 
allotted  6,160  acres. 
Executive  orders   Nov   9   1871   July  21    1874  Apr   27   1876 

Under  Fort  Apache  School.) 
Tribes:   Chilion,   Chirica- 
hua.     Coyotero,    Mim- 
brefio,     and     Mogollon 
Apache. 
Fort  Mojave 

31  328 

Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31,  1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  469; 
agreement  made  Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June  10. 
1896,  vol.  29,  p.  358.    (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  64.) 

Executive  orders  Dec  1  1910  and  Feb  2  1911     Sec  11  act 

(Under  Fort  Mojave  School.) 
Tribe:  Apache. 
Gila  Bend 

3  10  231 

June  25,  1910  (36  Stat!,  855^-858).    (See'l857&-1910.)    Area 
original  military  reservation,  14,000  acres. 
Executive  orders  Dec  12  1882  and  Jan  17  1909     (See  4106 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 
Qila  River            .  . 

8  371  422 

1909.) 
Act  of  Feb  28  1859  vol  11  p  401*  Executive  orders  Aug  31 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribes:    Maricopa    and 
Pima. 

1876,  Jan.  10,  1879,  June  'l4,'l879,  May  5,  1882,  and'  Nov.'  15^ 
1883;  Mar.  22,  May  8,  July  31,  1911;  Dec.  16,  1911;  June  2, 
1913;  Aug.  27,  1914;  Mar.  18,  1915,  and  July  19,  1915. 

1  Partly  in  California.         2  Outboundaries  surveyed.         »  Surveyed.         «  Not  on  reservation. 


108 


COMMISSIONED  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  Q.-^-General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

ARIZONA—  continued  . 
Havasupai  (Supai)  

Acres. 
1  518 

Executive  orders  June  8  and  Nov  23  1880  and  Mar  31  1882 

(Under  Havasupai  School.) 
Tribe:  Havasupai. 
Hopi  (Moqui)  ".... 

2,472,320 

Executive  order  Dec  16  1882     Act  of  Mar  1  1907  (34  Stat 

(Under  Moqui  School.) 
Tribe:  Hopi  (Moqui)  and 
Navajo. 
Kaibab  

138,240 

L.,  1021.)    (See  45096-1910.) 
Secretary's  withdrawal    Oct    15    1907     (See   73684-1907  ) 

(Under  Kaibab  School.) 
Tribes:  Kaibab  and  San 
Juan  Paiute. 
Navajo  * 

11  887  793 

Executive  order,  June  11,  1913. 
Treaty  of  June  1  1868  vol  15  p  667  and  Executive  orders 

(Under     Leupp,     Navajo, 
Western    Navalo,    San 
Juan,  and  Pueblo  Boni- 
to  Schools.) 
Tribe:  Navajo. 

Papago  

2.443.462 

Oct.  29,  1878,  Jan.  6/1880,'  two  of  May  17,  1884,  and  Nov.  19,' 
1892.    1,769,600  acres  in  Arizona  and  967,680  acres  in  Utah 
were  added  to  this  reservation  by  Executive  order  of  May 
17,  1884,  and  46,080  acres  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  public 
domain,  but  again  reserved  by  Executive  orders.  Apr.  24, 
1886,  Jan.  8,  1900  and  Nov.  14,  1901.    By  Executive  orders 
of  Mar.  10  and  May  15,  1905,  61,523  acres  were  added  to  res- 
ervation and  by  Executive  order  of  Nov.  9,  1907,  as  amended 
by  Executive  order  of  Jan.  28,  1908,  2,972,160  acres  were 
added.    2.064  Indians  have  been  allotted  328,963  acres  under 
the  act  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  as  amended.    By 
Executive  orders  of  Dec.  30.  1908,  and  Jan.  16  1911,  the  sur- 
plus lands,  approximately  1,641,180  acres,  in  that  part  of  the 
extension  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  the  public  domain. 
(See  35  Stat.  L.,  457  and  787.)    (See  1277-9.)    Act  of  May  27. 
1902  (32  Stat.,  264),  and  Mar.  3,  1913  (37  Stat.,  1007),  R.  R. 
exchanges.    Executive  orders  May  24,  1911,  Feb.  17,  1912 
(2),  Feb.  10,  1913  (2),  May  6,  1913,  Dec.  1,  1913,  July  23, 
1914,  and  Feb.  19,  1915.    Also  94,000  acres  set  aside  tempo- 
rarily for  allotment  by  Executive  order,  May  7,  1917. 
Executive  order  July  1  1874,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22, 

(Under  San  Xavier  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 

Salt  River.... 

22  317 

p.  291.    41,606  acres  allotted  to  291  Indians,  and  14  acres 
reserved  for  school  site,  the  residue,  27,563  acres,  unallotted. 
(See  letter  book  208,  p.  408.)    Executive  orders,  June  16, 
1911,  and  May  28,  Sept.  2,  Oct.  8.  and  Dec.  5,  1912,  Oct.  27, 
1914,  Jan.  14,  1916,  and  Feb.  1,  1917. 
Executive  orders  June  14,  1879,  and  Oct.  20,  1910;  Sept.  28  and 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribes:     Maricopa     and 
Pima. 
San  Carlos 

i  i  834  240 

Oct.  23,  1911.    (See  26731-1910.)    (See  Senate  Doc.  90,  58th 
Cong.,  2d  sess.)    804  Indians  allotted  24,403  acres  under 
general  allotment  act. 
Executive  orders   Nov   9   1871,  Dec.  14,  1872,  Aug.  5,  1873, 

(Under  San  Carlos  School.) 
Tribes  :Arivaipa,  Chilion, 
Chiricahua,     Coyotero, 
Mimbreno,      Mogollon, 
Mohave,  Pinal,  San  Car- 
los, Tonto,  and  Fuma 

Walapai.  

730  940 

July  21,  1874,  Apr.  27  and  Oct.  30,  1876,  Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31, 
1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27.  p.  469;  agreement  made 
Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p 
358.    (For  fuller  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doc.,  vol.  39,  p. 
35910.)    (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  64;  act  of  Mar.  2, 
1901,  vol.  31,  p.  952.)    Executive  order  of  Dec.  22,  1902. 

Executive  orders   Jan.  4,  1883,  Dec.  22,  1898,  May  14,  1900, 

(Under     Truxton     Canon 
School.) 
Tribe:  Walapai. 

June  2,  1911,  May  29,  1912,  and  July  18,  1913. 

Total  

21,  886,  112 

CALIFORNIA. 

Camp  or  Fort  Independence... 
Cold  Springs 

360 
160 

Executive  orders,  Oct.  28,  1915,  and  Apr.  29,  1916. 
Executive  order  Nov  10,  1914. 

Colony  or  Nevada  

75 

Executive  order,  May  6,  1913. 

Digger  

370 

Act  of  Mar  3,  1893  (27  Stats.,  612),  provides  for  purchase  of 

(Under  a  farmer.) 
Tribe:  Digger. 

Fort  Bidwell    . 

320 

330  acres;  not  allotted.    40  acres  were  reserved  by  order 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  28,  1908,  for  Digger 
Indians.    (See  46597-1907,71861-1908,  39245-1909.) 
Executive  order,  Aug.  8,  1917,  school  reserve. 

Guidiville  band 

160 

Secretary's  withdrawal  for  wood  lot.    (See  22266-1909.) 

Hoopa  Valley  

i  8  99  051 

Act  of  Apr.  8.  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39;  Executive  orders,  June  23, 

(Under  Hoopa  Valley 
School.) 
Tribes:  Hunsatung,  Hu- 
pa,     Klamath     River, 
Miskut,  Redwood. 
Saiaz,    Sermalton,   and 
Tishtanatan. 

1876,  and  Oct.  16,  1891.  There  have  been  allotted  to  639 
Indians  29,143.38  acres,  reserved  to  3  villages  68.74  acres, 
and  opened  to  settlement  under  act  of  June  17,  1892  (27 
Stats.,  p.  52),  15,096.11  acres  of  land  (formerly  Klamath 
River  Reservation).  (Letter  book  263,  p.  96;  382,  p.  480: 
383,  p.  170.) 

1  Outboundaries  surveyed.         »  Partly  in  New  Mexico.    (See  Table  5.)         3  Partly  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


109 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30.  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

CALIFORNIA—  continued. 
Mission  (28  reserves) 

Acres. 
181  844 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  31,  1870,  Dec.  27,  1875.  May  15,  1876 

(Under     Martinez,  Soboba, 
Pechanga.  Malki, 
Campo     and      Volcan 
Schools.) 
Tribes:  Diegueno,  Kawia, 
San  Luis  Rev,  Serranos, 
and  Temecula. 

Chuckekansies  

160 

May  3,  Aug.  25,  Sept.  29,  1877,  Jan.  17,  1880,  Mar.  2,  Mar.  9, 
1881,  June  27,  July  24,  1882,  Feb.  5,  June  19,  1883,  Jan.  25, 
Mar.  22  1886,  Jan.  29,  Mar.  14,  1887,  and  May  6,  1889.    270.24 
acres  allotted  to  17  Indians  and  for  church  and  cemetery 
purposes  on  Syquan  Reserve  (letter  book  303,  p.  297),  and 
1,299.47  acres  allotted  to  85  Temecula  Indians,  2.70  acres 
reserved  for  school  purposes  (letter  book  351,  p.  312).    Ex- 
ecutive order,  Dec.  29,  1891.    Proclamations  of  President  of 
Apr.  16,  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1970,  and  May  29,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
2005;  act  of  Feb.  11,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  822.    174,936.73  acres  pat- 
ented by  the  Government  to  various  bands  under  acts  of 
Jan.  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712),  and  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1015-1022).    (See  misc.  tract  book  36,  and  President's  proc- 
lamation, Aug.  31,  1915.)    See  Ex.  Ords.  Aug.  16,  1917;  Jan. 
26,  1918,  extending  trust  periods  10  years. 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  24,  1912,  and  Aug.  14,  1914. 

Los  Coyotes                    

3,840 

Executive  order,  Apr.  13,  1914. 

Morongo 

Proclamation  of  Nov.  12,  1913,  partly  canceling  Executive 

Paiute 

1  75,  806 

order  withdrawal. 
Executive  orders,  Mar.  11,  1912,  May  9,  1912,  Sept.  7,  1912, 

Pala.            

Sept.  16,  1912,  Feb.  14,  1913,  and  July  22,  1915. 
119.99  acres  allotted  to  15  Indians  (letter  book  303,  p.  57).    162 

(Formerly  Warner's  Ranch 
Indians.) 

Round  Valley 

allotments  of  approximately  2  acres  of  irrigable  land  and  6 
acres  of  grazing  land  approved  and  patented  under  act  of 
Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  as  amended.    Lands  reserved 
under  authority  of  acts  of  Jan.  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712),  and 
Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1022),  and  bought  under  act  of  May 
8,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  257).    See  authority  7971  and  letter  book 
580,  p.  113.    Deed  recorded  in  Miscellaneous  Record  Book 
No.  5,  p.  193. 
Acts  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p  39,  and  Mar  3   1873   vol   17 

(Under   Round   Valley 
School.) 
Tribes:  Clear  Lake,  Con- 
cow,  Little  Lake,  No- 
melaki,  Pit  River,  Pot- 
ter   Valley,    Redwood 
Wailaki,  and  Yuki. 

Tule  River 

48,  551 

p.  634;  Executive  orders,  Mar.  30,  1870,  Apr.  8,  1873,  May 
18,  1875,  and  July  26,  1876;  act  of  Oct.  1,  1890,  vol.  26  p.  658. 
42,  105.56  acres  allotted  to  1,034  Indians,  1,110  acres  reserved 
for  school  and  agency  purposes  (72088-1907,  letter  books 
298,  p.  17,  and  395?  p.  260).    (See  act  of  Feb.  8,  1905,  pro- 
viding for  a  reduction  of  area  of  reservation,  vol.  33,  p.  706.) 
36,692.23  acres  additional  allotments  made  to  619  Indians 
and  740  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes. 
Executive  orders,  Jan.  9  and  Oct  3,  1873,  and  Aug  3  1878 

(Under  Tule  River  School.  ) 
Tribes     Kawia,2      Kings 
River,  Moache,  Tehon, 
Tule,  and  Wichumni.s 
Yuma  

30,  949 

Executive  order.  Jan.  9,  1884;  agreement   Dec  4   1893  rati- 

(Under  Fort  Yuma  School.) 
Tribe:  Yuma-Apache. 

fllee  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  332.    (See  sec.  25,  In- 
dian appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
p.  224.)    7,756.54  acres  irrigable  land  opened  under  act  of 
June  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stats., 
1063).     8,110  acres  allotted  to  811  Indians. 

Total  

441,  646 

COLORADO. 

Ute»  

396  143 

Treaties  of  Oct  7   1863  vol  13,  p  673  and  Mar  2  1868  vol 

(Under  N  a  v  a  i  o  Springs 
and    Southern    Ute 
Schools.) 
Tribes:  Capote,   Moache, 
and  Wiminuche  Ute. 

15,  p.  619,  act  of  Apr.  29,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  36:  Executive  or- 
ders, Nov.  22,  1875,  Aug.  17,  1876,  Feb.  7,  1879,  and  Aug.  4, 
1882,  and  act  of  Congress  approved  June  15,  1880,  vol.  21, 
p.  199,  and  July  28,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  178,  May  14,  1884,  vol.  23, 
p.  22,  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  337,  Feb.  20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p. 
677.    72,651  acres  allotted  to  371  Indians  and  360  acres  re- 
served for  use  of  Government  (letter  book  321,  p.  86);  also 
7,360.32  acres  allotted  to  39  Indians  (letter  book  331,  p.  395). 
523,079  acres  opened  to  settlement  by  President's  proclama- 
tion dated  Apr.  13,  1899  (31  Stats.,  1947).    The  residue, 
375,960  acres,  retained  as  a  reservation  for  the  Wiminuche 
Utes.    Act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  82),  exchange  of  lands 
with  Indians.    Executive  order,  Nov.  12,  1915. 

Total  

396  143 

i  Partly  in  Nevada. 


2 Not  on  reservation. 


s  Partly  in  New  Mexico. 


110 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  ^.—General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Seminole 

(Under  special  agent.) 


Acres. 
126,741 


Total. 


26,741 


Coeur  d'Alene 

(Under    Coeur    d'Alene 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Coeur  d'Alene. 
K  u  t  e  nai , «  Pend 
d'Oreille,2  and  Spokan. 


Fort  Hall 

(Under  Fort  Hall  School.) 
Tribes:   Bannock  and 
Shoshoni. 


121,263 


Lapwai 

(Under  Fort  Lapwai  School. 
Tribe:  Nez  Perce. 


34,190 


Lemhi. 


Total. 


55,453 


Saukand  Fox 

(Under  Sac  and  Fox 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Potawatomi,Sauk 
and  Fox  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, and  Winnebago. 


3,480 


Total. 


3,480 


KANSAS. 


Chippewa  and  Munsee 

(Under  Potawatomi  School.) 
Tribes:  Chippewa  and 
Munsee. 


Surveyed. 


Acts  Aug.  15,  1894  (28  Stats.,  303),  Mar.  2,  1895  (28  Stat.,  892), 
June  10,  1896  (29  Stat.,  337),  June  7,  1897  (30  Stat.,  78), 
Mar.  1,  1899  (30  Stat.,  938),  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  302), 
Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat.,  274).  23,061.72  acres  purchased  for 
Seminole  Indians  in  Florida  under  acts  mentioned  (see 
Annual  Report  for  1900,  p.  101).  3,680  acres  reserved  by 
Executive  order  of  June  28,  1911.  (See  20817-1909.) 


Executive  orders  June  14,  1867,  and  Nov.  8,  1873;  agree- 
ments made  Mar.  26,  1887,  and  Sept.  9,  1889,  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar  3,  1891,  vol. 
26,  pp.  1026,  1029.  Agreement,  Feb.  7,  1894,  ratified  by 
act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  322.  638  Indians  have  been 
allotted  104,077  acres  and  1,906.99  acres  have  been  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  church  purposes  and  for  mill  sites. 
(See  86950-1908,  and  acts  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L., 
325-355),  Mar.  3,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  1026-1029),  Aug.  15,  1894 
(28  Stat.  L.,  322),  Mar.  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  56),  Apr.  30. 
1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  78).  President's  proclamation  issued 
May  22,  1909,  opening  224,210  acres  surplus  lands  to  settle- 
ment. (37  L.  D.,  698.) 

Treaty  of  July  3,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  Executive  orders.  June 
14,  1867,  and  July  30,  1869;  agreement  with  Indians  made 
July  18,  1881,  and  approved  by  Congress  July  3,  1882,  vol. 
f  May  27,  1887,  ratified  by  acts  of 
.  452,  Feb.  23,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687, 
,  p.  1011.  Agreement  made  Feb.  5, 

1898,  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  672,  ceding 
416,000  acres,  of  which  6,298.72  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
79  Indians  (see  letter  book  527,  p.  478);  remainder  of  ceded 
tract  opened  by  settlement  June  17  1902  (President's  proc- 
lamation of  May  7,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  1997)  act  of  Mar.  30,  1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  153,  act  of  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1064);  1,863  allot- 
ments, covering  338,909  acres,  approved  Oct.  28,  1914 
(37100-13). 

Treaty  of  June  9,  1863,  vol.  14,  p.  647;  agreement,  May  1,  1893, 
ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  326.  178,812  acres 
allotted  to  1,876  Indians,  2,170.47  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  mission,  and  cemetery  purposes,  and  32,020  acres  of 
timberland  reserved  for  the  tribe:  the  remainder  restored 
to  public  settlement.  (President's  proclamation,  Nov.  8, 
1895,  29  Stats.,  873.) 

Unratified  treaty  of  Sept.  24,  1868,  and  Executive  order,  Feb. 
12,  1875:  agreement  of  May  14,  1880,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb. 
23,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687.  (See  34  Stat.  L.,  335.  and  agreement 
executed  Dec.  28,  1905,  approved  by  President  Jan.  27; 
1906.)  Act  of  June  21.  1906  (34  Stat.,  334),  about  64,000 
acres  opened  in  1909. 


22,  p.  148;  agreement  of  May  27,  1887,  ratified  by  acts  of 

Sept.  1,  1888.  vol.  25,  p. 

and  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1011. 


By  purchase.  (See  act  of  Mar.  2. 1867,  vol.  14,  p.  507.)  Deeds 
1857,  18i5.  1867,  1868,  1889,  1876,  1880,  1882,  1883,  1888,  June, 
July,  and  Oct.,  1892-1895.  (See  act  of  Feb.  13, 1891,  vol.  26, 
p.  749.)  (See  Ann.  Repts.,  1891,  p.  681;  1898,  p.  81.)  Deeds 
recorded,  vol.  6.  (See  95856-1907.) 


Treaty  of  July  16, 1859,  vol.  12,  p.  1105.  4,195.31  acres  allotted 
to  100  Indians;  the  residue,  200  acres, allotted  for  missionary 
and  school  purposes.  Patents  issued  to  allottees;  balance 
of  allotments  sold  and  proceeds  paid  to  heirs.  (See  ninth 
section  of  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  92;  L.  B.,  332, 
p.  63.) 

a  Not  on  reservation. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ill 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  I 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
•                                  reserves. 

KANSAS—  continue  d  . 
Iowa  l                       

Acres. 

Treaties  of  May  17,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1069.  and  of  Mar.  6,  1861. 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Iowa. 

vol.  12,  p.  1171.    11,768.77  acres  of  land  allotted  to  143 
Indians;  162  acres  reserved  for  school  and  cemetery  pur- 
poses.   (Letter  book  266,  p.  86.)    Acts  Mar.  3,  1885  (23  Start., 
352),  and  Jan.  26,  1887  (24  Stat.,  367). 
Treaty  of  June  28,  1862,  vol.  13,  p.  623.    27,691.27  acres  allotted 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Kickapoo. 

to  351  Indians:  245  acres  reserved  for  church  and  school; 
the  residue,  398.87  acres,  unallotted  (letter  books  304,  p.  480. 
and  772.  p.  54).    (Acts  of  Aug.  4,  1886  (24  Stat.,  219),  Feb. 
28,  1899,  vol.  30,  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1007.) 
Treaties  of  June  5,  1846,  vol.  9,  p.  853;  of  Nov.  15,  1861,  vol  12, 

(Under  Potawatomi  School.) 
Tribe:    Prairie    Band   of 
Potawatomi. 

p.  1191;  treaty  of  relinmrishment,  Feb.  27,  1867,  vol.  15, 
p.  531.    220,785  acres  allotted  to  2,363  Indians;  319  acres 
reserved  for  school  and  agency,  and  1  acre  for  church. 
(Acts  of  Feb.  28,  1899,  vol.  30,  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol. 
32,  p.  1007.)    980  acres  surplus  tribal  land  sold  under  act 
Feb.  28,  1«99.    Executive   order  Nov.  12,  1917,  extending 
trust  period  10  years,  except  in  11  cases. 
Treaties  of  May  18,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1074,  and  of  Mar.  6,  1861, 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Sauk  and  Fox  of 
the  Missouri. 

vol.  12,  p.  1171;  acts  of  June  10,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391.  and 
Aug.  15,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  208.    2,843.97  acres  in  Kansas, 
4,194.33  acres  in  Nebraska,  aggregating  7,038.30  acres,  allot- 
ted to  84  Indians,  and  under  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats., 
324-349),  960.91  acres  were  allotted  to  37  Indians,  leaving  57 
acres  unallotted.    (Letter  books  233,  p.  361;  383,  p.  37;  and 
512,  p.  110.) 

Total  

MICHIGAN. 

Isabella* 

191 

Executive  order  May  14  1855*  treaties  of  Aug  2  1855  vol 

Tribe:  Chippewa  of  Sagi- 
naw,  Swan  Creek,  and 
Black  River. 
L'Anse 

11,  p.  633,  and  of  Oct.  18,  1864,  vol.  14,  p.  657.    98,395  acres 
allotted  to  1,943  Indians. 

Treaty  of  Sept  30  1854  vol  10  p  1109     52  121  acres  allotted 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:  L'Anse  and  Vieux 
Desert  Bands  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 
Ontonagon  

to  668  Indians.    Payment  for  lands  in  sec.  16,  see  93879- 
1907.    Unappropriated  tracts,  see  10293-1915. 

Sixth  clause,  second  article,  treaty  of  Sept.  30  1854  vol  10 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:   Ontonagon   Band 
of  Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 
Ottawa  and  Chippewa 

p.  1109;  Executive  order,  Sept.  25,  1855.     2.561.35  acres 
allotted  to  35  Indians. 

Treaty  July  31,  1855.    (11  Stat    621  )    120  470  acres  allotted 

to  1,818  Indians. 

Total  

191 

MINNESOTA. 

Bois  Fort 

Treaty  of  Apr  7  1866  vol  14  p  765*  act  of  Jan  14  1889  vol 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort    Chip- 
pewa. 

Deer  Creek 

25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess., 
p.  63.)    56,467.20  acres  allotted  to  721  Indians  and  434.63 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.,  purposes.    (L.  B.  359,382); 
residue,  51,863  acres,  opened  to  public  settlement. 
Executive  order  June  30  1883'  act  of  Jan  14  1889  vol  25  p 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 

Fond  du  Lac  

642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  'Cong.,  1st  sess.,'  p!, 
63.)    295.55  acres  allotted  to  4  Indians;  residue,  22,744 
acres,  opened  to  public  settlement.    (Executive  order  of 
Dec.  21,  1858.) 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854  vol  10  p  1109-  act  of  May  26  1872 

(Under  Fond  du  Lac  School.) 
Tribe:  Fond  du  Lac  Band 
of  Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

Grand  Portage  (Pigeon 

vol.  17,  p.  190.    37,121  acres  allotted  to  593  Indians;  act  of 
Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.     (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p.  60.)    The  residue,  76,837  acres,  re- 
stored to  settlement.    Agreement  of  Nov.  21,  1889.    (See 
act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.)    Act  June  30,  1913  (Pub- 
lic No.  4),  and  Executive  order,  Mar.  4,  1915. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30  1854  vol  10  p   1109'  act  of  Jan  14  1889 

River). 
(Under  Grand  Portage 
agency.) 
Tribe:  Grand  Portage 
Band   of  Chippewa   of 
Lake  Superior. 

vol.  25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  p.  59.)    24,191.31  acres  allotted  to  304  Indians;  208.24 
acres  reserved  for  agency  and  wood  purposes;  residue, 
16,041.97  acres,  opened  to  public  settlement.    Executive 
order,  Mar.  21,  1917,  setting  aside  two  small  unsurveyed 
islands  for  reservation  purposes. 

In  Kansas  and  Nebraska. 


a  Agency  abolished  June  30, 1889. 


112 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
»  •                 reserves. 

MINNESOTA—  continued  . 
Leech  Lake      

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10.  p.  1165:  Executive  orders, 

(Under  Leech  LakeAgency.) 
Tribes:   Cass   Lake,    Pil- 
lager, and  Lake  Wini- 
bigoshish  Bands  of 
Chippewa. 

Nov.  4,  1873,  and  May  26,  1874;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
49.)    48  446  acres  allotted  to  630  Indians  and  321.60  acres 
reserved  for  agency  and  school  purposes.    (Act  of  June  27, 
1902,  vol.  32.  p.  402.)    Minnesota  National  Forest  act,  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.,  268).    Executive  order  Feb.  16,  1911. 
By  purchase.    (See  acts  of  July  4  1884  Mar  3  1885  May  15 

(Under  Birch  Cooley  School.) 
Tribe:    Mdewakanton 
Sioux. 

Mille  Lac      

1886  June  29,  1888  (25  Stat.,  228);  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.  ,992), 
and  Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  349).    339.70  acres  deeded  to  47 
Indians;  12,242.76  acres  allotted  to  88  Indians  and  held  in 
trust  by  the  United  States;  8.90  acres  reserved  for  school. 
(See  Ann.  Rpt.,  1891,  pp.  Ill  and  179,  and  schedule  ap- 
proved Nov.  21,  1904.)    Act  Mar.  4,  1917  (39  Stat.  L.,  1195). 
Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855.  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  article  12,  of  May 

(Under  White  Earth 
School.) 
Tribe:     Mille     Lac    and 
Snake  River  Bands  of 
Chippewa. 

Red  Lake 

543,  528 

7,  1864,  vol.  13.  pp.  693,  695;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 
642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong..  1st  sess.,  p.  45.) 
Joint  resolution  (No.  5),  Dec.  19,  1893.  vol.  28,  p.  576,  and 
joint  resolution  (No.  40)  approved  May  17,  1898,  vol.  30, 
p.  745.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1890,  pp.  38-43.)    Purchase  of 
land  act  of  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.,  591). 
Treaty  of  Oct.  2,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  667;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol. 

(Under  Red  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:  Red  Lake  and 
Pembina  Chippewa. 

Vermillion  Lake        

i  1,080 

25,  p.  642.    (See  agreement  July  8,  1889,  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No. 
247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  27  and  32),  and  Executive 
order,  Nov.  21,  1892.    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1009, 
and  act  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  ratifying  agreement  made  Mar.  10, 
1902,  vol.  33,  p.  46,  for  sale  of  256,152  acres.    Act  of  Feb.  8, 
1905,  vol.  33,  p.  708,  granting  320  acres  as  right  of  way  for  the 
Minneapolis,  Red  Lake  &  Manitoba  Ry.  Co.    Executive 
order,  Feb.  16,  1911. 
Executive  order,  Dec.  20,  1881,  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 

(Under    Vermillion    Lake 
School.) 
Tribe:    Bois   Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 
White  Earth            

9,290 

p.  642. 
Treaty  of  Mar.  19,  1867,  vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders, 

(Under  White  Earth  School.) 
Tribes:  Chippewa  of  the 
Mississippi,     Pembina, 
and  Pillager  Chippewa. 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chip- 

Mar. 18,  1879,  and  July  13,  1883,  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.    (See  agreement  July  29,  1889,  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  34  and  36.)    Under  act  of  Jan.  14, 
1889  (25  Stat.,  642),  428,401.05  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
5,152  Indians,  and  1,899.61  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school, 
and  religious  purposes,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  28,  1901  (33 
Stat.,  539),  246,956.13  acres   have   been  allotted  to  2816 
Mississippi  and  Otter  Tail  Pillager  Chippewa,  being  addi- 
tional allotments  to  a  part  of  the  allottees  under  act  of  Jan. 
14,  1889,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  9,290  acres. 
Act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  353.) 
Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10.  p.  1165,  and  of  Mar.  19,  1867, 

pewa. 
(Under  Leech  Lake  Agen- 

Tribes:    Lake    Winibigo- 
shish  and  Pillager 
.     Bands  of  Chippewa  and 
White  Oak  Point  Band 
of     Mississippi     Chip- 
pewa. 

vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders,  Oct.  29,  1873,  and  May  26, 
1874;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  742.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc. 
No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  42,  49.)    64,732  acres 
allotted  to  826  Indians;  the  residue  opened  to  public  settle- 
ment; 240  acres  reserved  for  ball  park.    (See  289-1908.) 

Total          

553,898 

MONTANA. 

Blackfeet 

604  826 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 

(Under  Blackfeet  School.) 
Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Blood, 
and  Piegan. 

July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  Sept.  1,  1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15. 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Feb.  11,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  129;  agreement  made 
Sept.  26,  1895,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29, 
p.  353;  act  of  Feb.  27,  1905,  confirming  grant  of  356.11  acres 
of  land  and  120  acres  of  unsurveyed  land.    (See  vol.  33, 
p.  816.)    Act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stats.,  1035).    2,656  Indians 
allotted  886,979  acres.    44,240.07  acres  timber  reserved. 
(See  4021-1913.) 

Outboundaries  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


113 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonyinq  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


MONTANA— continued . 


Crow 

(Under  Crow  School.) 
Tribes:    Mountain    and 
River  Crow. 


Fort  Belknap  

• 

2  497,600 

(Under    Fort    Belknap 
School.) 
Tribes:     Grosventre  and 
{::       Assiniboin. 

Fort  Peck 

(Under  Fort  Peck  School.) 
Tribes:  Assiniboin,  Bnile" 
Santoe,   Teton,   Hunk- 
papa,   and   Yanktonai 
Sioux. 

Flathead    . 

(Under  Flathead  School.) 
Tribes:   Bitter  Root,  Car- 
los    Band.     Flathcad, 
Kutenai,  Lower  Kalis- 
pel,  and  Pend  d'Oreillc. 

Northern  Cheyenne  

s  489  500 

(Under      Tongue       River 
S-hool.) 
Tribe:     Northern    Chey- 
enne. 
Rocky  Bov  

56  038 

Total 

3  480  073 

Area  (unal- ; 
lotted).    ! 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Acres. 
1,832,109 


Treaty  of  May  7,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  649;  agreement  made  June 
12,  1880,  and  approved  by  Congress  Apr.  11,  1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  42,  and  agreement  made  Aug.  22,  1881,  approved  by 
Congress  July  10,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  157;  Executive  orders. 
Oct.  20,  1875,  Mar.  8,  1876,  Dec.  7,  1886;  agreement  made 
Dec.  8,  1890;  ratified  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1039-1040;  agreement 
made  Aug.  27,  1892.  (See  Ann.  Kept.,  1892,  p.  748;  also 
President's  proclamation,  Oct.  15,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1034. 
Act  of  Apr.  27.  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  352,  to  amend  and  ratify 
agreement  of  Aug.  14.  1899.  Under  act  Feb.  8,  1887  (24 
Stat.,  388),  and  act  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stat.,  794),  and  Execu- 
tive order,  June  8,  1901  (modifying  Executive  order  of 
Mar.  25,  1901),  482,584  acres  have  been  allotted  to  2,453 
Indians,  and  1,822.61  acres  reserved  for  administration. 
church,  and  cemetery  purposes,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  1,832,109  acres;  14,711.%  acres  on  ceded  part 
have  been  allotted  to  81  Indians.  (See  L.  B.  743,  p.  50; 
852,  p.  160,  and  956,  p.  416.)  37  Indians  (Schedule  A)  have 
been  allotted  7,429.55  acres  under  acts  of  Apr.  11,  1882  (22 
Stat.,  42),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.,  388),  and  amendments 
thereto.  President's  proclamation,  May  24.  1906  (34  Stat., 
3200). 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  Sei  1.  1,  1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15, 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Jan.  21,  1887,  arr  roved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  124;  agreement  made 
Oct.  9,  1895,  arproved  by  act  of  June  10,  18C6.  vol.  29,  p.  350. 
Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18;  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  of  Sept.  1,  1868; 
Executive  orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874,  a<*t  of 
Apr.  15,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875, 
and  July  13,  1880;  and  agreement  made  Dec.  28,  1886,  ap- 
proved by  Congress  Mav  1,  1888,  vol.  25.  p.  113,  a^t  May  30, 
1908  (35  Stat.,  558),  2,032  Indians  allotted  724,695.77  acres; 
1,225,849  acres  surplus  land  opened  to  settlement  and  entry 
by  President's  proclamation  July  25,  1913.  (See  42  L.  D.. 
264.)  1,032.84  acres  reserved  for  town  site,  religious,  and 
administrative  purposes.  Act  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  593), 
allotments  to  children.  126,054  acres  allotted  to  438  chil- 
dren, approved  Nov.  13,  1917.  Act  Feb.  26,  1917  (Pub.  355.) 
Sale  to  Great  Northern  R.  R.,  and  President's  proclama- 
tion Mar.  21,  1917,  rel.  homestead  entries  on  lands  classified 
as  coal. 

Treaty  of  July  16,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  975.  Under  a"ts  of  Apr.  23, 
1904  (33  Stats.,  302),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  and  Feb. 
28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  2,431  Indians  have  been  allotted 
227,113  acres,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  2,524.70  acres 
have  been  reserved  for  tribal  uses,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23, 
1904,  as  amended  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1905  (33  Stats.,  1049-1080), 
6,774.92  acres  have  been  reserved  for  agency  purposes, 
18,521.35  acres  reserved  for  Bison  Range  under  a°ts  of  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  267),  and  Mar.  4,  1909  (35  Stats.,  927). 
See  51019-1908.  May  22,  1909,  proclamation  issued  by  Presi- 
dent opening  surplus  lands.  Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats., 
795).  45,714  acres  reserved  for  power  and  reserv<  ir  sites., 
a"t  Apr.  12,  1910  (36  Stats.,  863).  Executive  order  Jan.  14, 
1913.  Act  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  863). 
Executive  orders,  Nov.  26,  1884,  and  Mar.  19,  1900,  act  of  Mar. 
3,  1903,  vol..  32,  p.  1000. 


Part  of  Fort  Assinniboine  abandoned  military  reservation. 
Reserved  by  a"t  Sept.  7, 1916  (39  Stat., 739),  amending  act  of 
Feb.  11, 1915  (38  Stat.,  807). 


1  Outboundaries  surveyed;  partly  surveyed. 
86770—18 8 


2  Surveyed. 


» Partly  surveyed. 


114 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


NEBRASKA. 


Niobrara 

(Under    Yankton    School, 

S.  Dak.) 
Tribe:  Santee  Sioux. 


Omaha 

(Under  Omaha  Agency. 
Tribe:  Omaha. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


Act  of  Mar.  3,  1863,  vol.  12.  p.  819,  4th  paragraph,  art.  6; 
treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  637;  Executive  orders, 
Feb.  27,  July  20,  1866,  Nov.  16,  1867,  Aug.  31, 1869,  Dec.  31, 
1873,  and  Feb.  9,  1885.  33,515.92  acres  selected  as  home- 
steads, 38,951.71  acres  selected  as  allotments,  and  1,087 
acres  selected  for  agency,  school,  and  mission  j  rsrj  tscs;  un- 
ratified  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  mcdifk alien,  see 
sundry  civil  appror nation  act  aj  r roved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624.  For  text,  see  misc.  Indian  doo.,  vol.  14,  p.  305. 
Act  of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Executive 
order  Apr.  29, 1916. 

4,420  j  Treaty  of  Mar.  16, 1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1043:  selection  by  Indians 
with  President's  an  roval,  May  11, 1855;  treaty  of  Mar.  6, 
1865,  vol.  14,  p.  667:  a<-ts  of  June  10, 1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391,  and 
of  June  22, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  to  Winnehago  Indians, 
dated  July  31,  1874;  a^tofAug.  7, 1882,  vol.  22,  p.  341;  act 
of  Mar.  3/ 1893  (27  Stats.,  p.  612);  130,602  a<-res  allotted  to 
1,460  Indians;  the  residue,  4,420  acres,  unallotted;  act  May 


Ponca 

6,  1910  (36  Stat.,  348),  taxation;  act  May  11,  1912  (37  Stats., 
Ill),  sale  of  surj  lusland. 
Treatv  of  Mar    12    1858   vol   12   p    997   and  supplemental 

(Under    Yankton    School, 
S.  Dak.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 

Sioux  (additional)  .  .  . 

640 

treaty,  Mar.  10,  1865,  vol.  14,  p.  675;  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  sec. 
13,  vol.  25,  p.  892.    27,236  acres  allotted  to  168  Indians;  160 
acres  reserved  and  occui  icd  by  agency  and  sfhee.1  build- 
ings.   (See  letter  book  205,  p.  339;  also,  President's  procla- 
mation, Oct.  23,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1559.) 
Executive  order,  Jan.  24,  1882. 

(Under  Pine  Ridee  School.) 
Tribe:  Oglala  Sioux. 
Winnehago     

1,098 

Act  of  Feb.  21,  1863,  vol.  12,  p  658;  treaty  of  Mar.  8,  1865,  vol 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency.' 
Tribe:  Winnebago. 

14,  p.  671;  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  from 
Omaha  Indians,  dated  July  31,  1874.    (See  vol.  6,  Indian 
deeds,  p.  215.)    122,374.20  acresallotted  to  1.559  Indians;  480 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.;  610.10  acres  sold;  act  July  4, 
1888;  the  residue,  1,098  acres,  unallotted;  act  May  6,  1910  (36 
Stat    348)  taxation 

Total  

6,158 

NEVADA. 

Duck  Valley 

1  321  920 

Executive  orders,  Apr.  16,  1877,  May  4,  1886,  and  July  1,  1910. 

(Under  Western  Shoshone 
School.) 
Tribes:  Paiute  and  West- 
ern Shoshoni. 
Moapa  River    . 

523 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  12,  1873,  and  Feb.  12,  1874;  act  of  Mar. 

(Under  Moa^  a  River  School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Kai- 
bab,    Pawipit,   Paiute, 
and  Shivwits. 

Paiute 

960 

13,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  445;  selection  approved  by  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  July  3,  1875;  Executive  orders  of  June  28,  1875, 
July  3,  1875,  July  31,  1903,  Oct.  28,  1912,  and  Nov.  26,  1912. 
604.52  acres  of  irrigable  land  allotted  to  117  Indians  under 
general  allotment  act. 
7J  sections  (4  640  acres)  reserved  under  second  form  with- 

(Under Fallon  School.) 

Paiute  and  Shoshone  scattered 
bands. 
Pyramid  I  ake  

280 
322,  000 

drawal,  reclammatu  n  act,  June  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  for 
reallctment  to  Indians;  3,730  acres  have  been  allotted  to  369 
Paiute  Indians  and  10  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes 
(see  76C82-1907);  960  acres  unallotted  and  unreserved. 
Executive  order,  Sept.  16,  1912.  setting  aside  120  acres  for  allot- 
mentpurposes;160acres  added  bvExecutive  order  Feb.8,1913. 
Executive  order,  Mar.  23,  1874;  a<t  Julv  1,  18C8  (30  Stats.,  594). 

(Under  Nevada  School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 

Summit  Lake,  Paiute  and  Sho- 
shone. 
Walker  River  . 

5,025 
75  204 

(See  sec.  26,  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  225.)    Executive  order  Sept.  4,  1913,  creating 
bird  reserve  out  of  Anaho  Island. 
Executive  order,  Jan.  14,  1913,  withdrawing  from  settlement 
for  use  of  Paiute-Shoshone  5,025.98  acres. 
Executive  order  Mar  19  1874-  joint  resolution  of  June  19, 

(Under  Walker  River 
School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 

Winnemucca  and  Battle 
Mountai  n  bands  of  Shoshone. 

840 

1902,  vol.  32,  p.  744;  act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  pp.  245, 
260);  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  pp.  982-997;  act  of  June  21,, 
1906,  vol.  34,  p.  325;  proclamation  of  President,  Sept.  26, 
1906,   opening  ceded  part  to  settlement.    It  contained 
268.005.84   acres.    Allotted   to   496   Indians,  9,878   acres; 
reserved  for  agency  and  school,  80  acres;    reserved  for 
cemetery,  40  acres;   reserved  for  grazing,  37,848.29  acres; 
reserved  for  timber,  3,355.62  acres;    reserved  for  church 
purposes.   160  acres.    (L.   B.,   885,  p.    187.)    34.000  acres 
added  to  reserve  by  Executive  order  Mar.  15,  1918. 
Executive  order,  June  18.  1917,  setting  aside  840  acres  of  public 
domain  for  2  bands  of  homeless  Indians. 

Total  

726,  752 

1  Surveyed;  partly  in  Idaho. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


115 


TAIJLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

NEW  MEXICO. 

Jicarilla  Apache  

Acres. 
407,300 

474,  240 
49,244 

i  42,  359 
195,792 
i  17,  545 
117,461 
i  34.  767 
i  24.  256 
i  92,  398 
117,361 
i  49,  369 
U7,471 
U7,293 
i  13,  520 
U7,515 
i  24,  187 
i  110,  080 
l  13,  586 
i  101,  511 
150,  000 
i  17,  361 
i  288,  040 

2,092,656 

(Under  Jicarilla  School.) 
Tribe:  Jicarilla  Apache. 

Mesoalero  Apache 

(Under  Mescalero  School.) 
Tribes:      Mescalero    and 
Mimbreno  Apache. 
Navajo                            

Pueblo: 
(Under  Santa  Fe  and  Albu- 
querque Schools.) 
Tribe:  Pueblo— 
Jemez       

Acoma 

San  Juan 

Picuris              

San  Felipe 

Cochiti           

Santo  Domingo 

Taos 

Santa  Clara 

Tesuque  

San  Ildef  onso  

Pojoaque 

Sia                       

San  Dia 

Isleta  

Nambe 

Laguna  

Laguna  withdrawals  
Santa  Ana 

Zufii                  

(Under  Zufii  School.) 
Tribe:  Zuni  Pueblo. 

Total    .. 

NEW  YORK. 

Alleghany 

2  30,  469 
2  21,  680 
2640 

2350 
6,100 

14,640     ' 

3  7,  549     ' 

6,249     r 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondaga    and 
Seneca. 
Cattaraugus      .        ... 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga,  Ononda- 
ga, and  Seneca. 
Oil  Spring    

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Seneca. 

Oneida 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 
Onondaga  

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Oneida,  Ononda- 
ga, and  St.  Regis. 
St.  Regis 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  St.  Regis. 
Tonawanda  

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga  and  Tona- 
wanda Bands  of  Seneca. 
Tuscarora 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondaga    and 
Tuscarora. 

Total 

87,  677 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Executive  orders,  Mar.  25,  1874,  July  18,  1876,  Sept.  21,  1880, 
May  15  1884,  and  Feb.  11,  1887;  129,313.35  acres  allotted  to 
845  Indians  and  280.44  acres  reserved  for  mission,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.  (L.  B.  335,  p.  323.)  Executive  or- 
ders of  Nov.  11,  1907,  and  Jan.  28,  1908.  The  above-men- 
tioned 845  allotments  have  been  canceled;  reallotments 
have  been  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1413).  (See  64513-1909.)  (Allotments  to  797  Indians  cover- 
ing 354,294  acres  approved  Aug.  28, 1909.) 

Executive  orders.  May  29,  1873,  Feb.  2,  1874,  Oct.  20,  1875, 
May  19,  1882,  and  Mar.  24,  1883.  (See  25961,  48680,  75169, 
75469-1908,  and  14203,  26542-1909  and  Senate  bill  5602,  60th 
Cong.,  1st  sess.) 

Executive  order,  Jan.  15,  1917,  setting  aside  49,244  acres  for 
Navajo  and  other  Indians. 


Confirmed  by  United  States  patents  in  1864,  under  old  Span- 
ish grants;  acts  of  Dec.  22, 1858,  vol.  11,  p.  374,  and  June  21, 
1860,  vol.  12,  p.  71.  (See  General  Land  Office  Report  for 
1876,  p.  242.  and  for  1880,  p.  658.)  See  Executive  orders  of 
June  13  and  Sept.  4,  1902,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for 
San  Felipe  and  Nambe  Pueblos,  and  Executive  order  of 
July  29,  1905,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for  Santa  Clara 
Pueblo.  (See  60806-1905.)  Approximately  32,000  acres 
added.  Area  original  Santa  Clara  Pueblo,  17,368.52.  Ex- 
ecutive orders,  Dec.  19,  1906,  Sept.  1.  1911,  and  Oct.  4.  1915, 
withdrawing  23,900  acres  for  Jemez  Indians.  Area  of  origi- 
nal Spanish  grant,  17,510  acres.  Executive  order,  July  1, 
1910,  28,800  acres.  Area  of  Pueblo  proper,  125,225.  (See 
55714-1910.)  Total  area  Pueblos,  including  Zufii  and  Ex- 
ecutive order  res'n,  1,008,346.  Resurveys  33149-14.  Execu- 
tive order  Mar.  21,  1917,  setting  aside  '. acres  for  In- 
dians of  Laguna  Pueblo. 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  16, 1877.  May  1, 1883,  and  Mar.  3, 1885. 
Irrigable  lands  surveyed.  (Area  of  original  Spanish  grant, 
17,581.25  acres.)  Approximately  73,000  acres  added  to  Pue- 
blo by  Executive  order  of  Nov.  30, 1917. 


Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  of  May  20,  1842, 
vol.  7,  p.  587. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601;  June  30,  1802,  vol.  7, 
p.  70,  and  of  May  20, 1842,  vol.  7,  p.  587.    (See  Ann.  Rept., 

By  arrangement  with  the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann. 

Rept.,  1877,  p.  166.)    Seneca  agreement  of  Jan.  3,  1893, 

ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20, 1893,  vol.  27,  p.  470;  act  of  June  7, 

1897,  vol.  30,  p.  89. 
Treaty  of  Nov.  11,  1794,  vol.  7,  p.  44,  and  arrangement  with 

the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  168.) 

Do. 


Treaty  of  May  13.  1796,  vol.  7,  p.  55.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877, 
p.  168.)    They  hold  about  24,250  acres  in  Canada. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797.  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  Nov.  5,  1857,  vol. 

12,  p.  991;  purchased  by  the  Indians  and  held  in  trust  by 

the  comptroller  of  New  York;   deed  dated  Feb.  14,  1862. 

(See  also  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  165.) 
Treaty  of  Jan.  15  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  551,  and  arrangement  (grant 

and  purchase)  between  the  Indians  and  the  Holland  Land 

Co.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  167.) 


Outboundaries  surveyed. 


2  Partly  surveyed. 


Purveyed. 


116 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


NORTH  CAROLINA. 

Qualla  boundary  and  other 
lands. 
(Under   Eastern    Cherokee 

School.) 

Tribe:    Eastern  Band  of 
Cherokee. 


Total 

NORTH  DAKOTA. 


Devils  Lake 

(Under  Fort  Totten  School.) 
Tribes:    Assiniboin,  Cut- 
head,  Santee,  Sisseton, 
Yankton,  and  Wahpc- 
ton  Sioux. 


FortBerthold 

(Under  Fort  B  e  r  t  h  o  1  d 

School.) 

Tribes:     Ankara,     Gros- 
ventre,  and  Mandan. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 


!  48, 000 
115,211 


211 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


100,000 


Standing  Rock 

(Under    Standing    Rock 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Hunk- 
papa,  Upper  and  Lower 
Yanktonai  Sioux. 


Tujtle  Mountain 

(Under    Turtle    Mountain 

Agency.) 
Tribe:  PembinaChippewa. 


Total.. 


100,000 


Held  by  deed  to  Indians  under  decision  of  U.  S.  Circuit  Court 
for  Western  District  of  North  Carolina,  entered  at  November 
term,  1874,  confirming  the  award  of  Rufus  Barringer  and 
others,  dated  Oct.  23, 1874,  and  acts  of  Aug.  14, 1876,  vol.  19, 
p.  139,  and  Aug.  23. 1894,  vol.  28,  p.  441,  and  deeds  to  Indians 
from  Johnston  and  others,  dated  Oct.  9,  1876,  and  Aug.  14, 
1880.  (See  also  H.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  196,  47th  Cong.,  1st  sess., 
and  No.  128,  53d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)  Now  held  in  fee  by  In- 
dians, who  are  incorporated.  Act  of  Mar.  3, 1903,  vol.  32,  p. 
1000.  (See  Opinions  of  Asst.  Atty.  Gen.,  Mar.  14, 1894,  and 
Feb.  3,  1904.)  35,000  acres  of  the  98,211  acres  sold.  Deeds 
dated  Oct.  4,  1906:  approved  Dec.  12,  1906. 


Treaty  of  Feb.  19,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505,  agreement  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June 
22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337,  Comp.  Indian 
Laws.)  137,381  acres  allotted  to  1,189  Indians;  727.83  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  193.61  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes.  Act  of  Apr.  27,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  319,  to 
amend  and  ratify  agreement  made  Nov.  2,  1901.  Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  June  2, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2368.  Trust 
period  extended  10  years.  Executive  order,  Feb.  11,  1918. 

Unratified  agreement  of  Sept.  17,  1851,  and  July  27.  1866  (see 
Laws  relating  to  Indian  Affairs,  Department  of  Interior, 
1883),  pp.  317  and  322;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  12, 1870,  July 
13, 1880,  and  June  17, 1892:  agreement  Dec.  14, 1886,  ratified 
by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1032.  (See  Pres.  proc. 
May  20,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  979.)  229,634.91  acres  allotted  to 
1,379  Indians  (see  letter  book  445,  p.  311).  Under  acts  of 
Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1042),  and  June  1, 1910  (36  Stat.  L.. 
455),  532  allotments,  aggregating  35,687  acres,  were  approved 
Aug.  15, 1910, 579  allotments,  aggregating  112,544  acres,  were 
approved  Apr.  5,  1912,  and  787  allotments,  aggregating 
206,154  acres,  were  approved  Nov.  29, 1915.  (See  61f 02-1910, 
proclamation  June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  151),  227,504  acres 
open;  see  H.  J.  Res.  Apr.  3, 1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  631),  and  procla- 
mation of  Sept.  17,  1915,  opening  surface  of  lands  classified 
as  coal  to  homestead  entry,  authorized  by  act  of  Aug.  3, 1914 
(38  Stat.  L.,  681). 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders 
Jan.  11-Mar.  16,  1875,  and  Nov.  28,  1876.  Agreement  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and  Executive 
orders  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884  (1,520,640  acres  in 
South  Dakota);  unratified  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882. 
(For  modification  see  sundry  civil  appropriation  act  ap- 
proved Mar.  3, 1883,  vol.  22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian 
Doc.,  vol.  14,  p. 305.)  Act  of  Congress  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol. 
25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Congress,  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol. 
25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 18GO,  vol.  26, 
p.  1554.  Under  acts  Mar.  2,  1889,  supra,  Mar.  1,  K07  (34 
Stat.  L.,  1041),  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451-460),  and  Feb. 
14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675),  4,717  Indians  have  been  allotted 
1,388,612  acres.  Under  President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  19, 
1C09  (36  Stat.  L.,  2500),  l,061,f  00  acres  were  opened  to  settle- 
ment. Remainder  of  lands  opened  to  settlement  by  proc- 
lamation Mar.  15,  1915,  as  authorised  by  act  Feb.  14,  1913 
(37  Stat.  L.,  675,  680). 

Executive  orders  Dec.  21,  1882,  Mar.  29  and  June  3,  1884. 
Agreement  made  Oct.  2,  1892,  amended  by  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  and  ratiPed  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
p.  194.  43,820  acres  allotted  to  326  Indians  and  186  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  school  purposes  under  the  above- 
named  act.  Allotments  to  2,691  members  of  this  band  on 
public  domain  aggregating  399,S17."2  acre.--  ha\c  l-oen  ap- 
proved. 


Surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


117 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  jand  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OKLAHOMA. 


Apache 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 


Cherokee 

( Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes.) 


Cherokee  Outlet. 


Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

(Under  Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho, Cantonment,  and 
Seger  Schools.) 
Tribes:  Southern  Arapaho 
and  Northern  and 
Southern  Cheyenne. 


Chickasaw 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 


Choctaw 

( Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 


Creek 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
CivilLed  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 


Iowa 

(Under  Sac  and  Fox  School.) 
Tribes:  Iowa  and  Tonka- 
wa. 


Kansa  or  Kaw 

(Under  Pon^a  School.) 
Tribe:  Kansa  or  Kaw. 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


10 


14, 460 


352 


Formerly  Fort  Sill.  (See  Executive  order  Feb.  26,  1897.) 
Act  Mar.  3, 1S01  (31  Stat.,  1173);  act  June  28,  K02  (32  Stat., 
467).  Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong.,  2d  sess.,  act  Aug.  24, 
1912  (37  Stat.,  534);  act  June  30, 1913  (38  Stat.,  92).  Lands 
to  be  purchased  for  those  members  of  this  band,  some  80  in 
number,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma. 

Treaty  with  Western  Cherokees  at  city  of  Washington,  May  6, 
1828  (7  Stat.,  311)  as  amended  by  the  treaty  at  Fort  Gibson, 
of  Feb.  14,  1833  (7  Stat.,  414);  referred  to  in  treaty  with 
Cherokees  at  New  Echota,  Ga.,  Dec.  29, 1835  (7  Stat.,  478); 
July  19,  1866  (14  Stat.,  799),  as  supplemented  by  treaty  of 
Apr.  27,  1868  (16  Stat.,  727).  Agreement  of  July  1,  K02  (32 
Stat.,  716).  Approximately,  41,824  Cherokees,  including 
4,919  freedmen,  were  allotted  an  average  of  110  acres.  40 
acres  of  which  was  a  homestead  to  be  nontaxable  while 
held  by  the  original  allottee.  Total  acreage  allotted 
4,346,173:  sold,  £0,985:  remaining  unsold,  30. 

Agreement  of  Dec.  19, 1891;  ratified  sec.  10  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 
1893  (27  Stat.,  640),  unoccupied  part  of  Cherokee  Outlet, 
not  included  in  Territory  of  Oklahoma  (26  Stat.,  81).  62 
Indians  allotted  4,949.45  acres  under  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893. 

Executive  order  Aug.  10,  1869;  unratified  agreement  with 
Wichita,  Caddo,  and  others,  Oct.  19,  1872.  (See  Ann. 
Kept.,  1872,  p.  101.)  Executive  orders  of  Apr.  18,  1882, 
and  Jan.  17, 1883,  relative  to  Fort  Supply  Military  Reserve - 
(relinouished  for  disposal  under  act  of  Congress  of  July  5, 
1894,  by  authority  of  Executive  order  of  Nov.  5,  1894;  see 
General  Land  Office  Report,  1899,  p.  158).  Executive  order 
of  July  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Reno  Military  Reserve. 
Agreement  made  October,  18f  0,  and  ratified  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26, 
pp.  1022-1026.  528.789  acres  allotted  to  3,331  Indians; 
231,828.55  acres  for  Oklahoma  school  lands;  32,343.93  acres 
reserved  for  military,  agency,  mission,  etc.,  purposes;  the 
residue,  3,500,562.05  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (See 
Pres.  proc.  Apr.  12, 1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1018.)  Executive  order, 
July  12,  1895.  President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  12,  1903, 
vol.  33,  p.  2317.  Act  of  June  17, 1910  (36  Stat..  533),  57,637- 
10.  Executive  order  Dec.  29, 1915,  setting  aside  40  acres  for 
agency  and  school  purposes. 

Treaty  of  June  22, 1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611;  agreement  of  Apr.  23, 
1897,  ratified  by  act  of  June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  £05;  act  of 
July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  641,  ratifying  agreement  of  Mar.  21, 
1902;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1C04,  vol.  33,  p.  209;  act  of  Apr.  28,  K04, 
vol.  33,  p.  544.  10,966  Indians  have  been  allotted  3,800,350 
acres:  sold,  870,095,  remaining  unsold,  10  acres. 

Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611.  Same  as  Chickasaw. 
Approximately  26,828  Indians  have  been  allotted  4,291,036 
acres:  sold,  2,567,210  acres;  unsold,  14.460  acres.  There 
remains  unsold  also  the  coal  and  asphalt  deposits  within 
the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  area  of  the  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  Nations. 

Treaties  of  Feb.  14,  1883,  vol.  7,  p.  417,  and  June  14.  1866, 
vol.  14,  p.  785,  and  the  deficiency  appropriation  act  of  Aug.  5, 
1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.  (See  Ann.  Rept.  1882,  p.  i.iv.)  Agree- 
ment of  Jan.  19,  1889,  ratified  by  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1889, 
vol.  25,  p.  757;  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  23, 1889,  vol. 

26,  p.  1544;  agreement  of  Sept.  27,  1897,  ratified  by  act  of 
June  28,  1898,  vol.  ". 

ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  *,  *,.>*/*.,  .»*».  «*,  ^.  i.u*,  +  i^*-^~~~~ 
proclamation  of  June  25,  If  01,  vol.  32,  p.  1971;  supplementa- 
agreement  of  June  30,  ir02,  vol.  32,  p.  £00;  President's  proc- 
lamation of  Aug.  8,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2021.  (See  act  of  May 

27,  If02,  vol,  32.  p.  258;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  204.) 
Approximately  18,761  Indians  have  been  allotted  2,997,114 
acres:  sold,  65,612  acres;  remaining  unsold.  3£2  acres. 

Executive  order,  Aug.  15, 1883;  agreement  May  20, 1890,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  753.  8,605  acres 
allotted  to  108  Indians:  20  acres  held  in  common  for  church, 
school,  etc.;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement.  Proclama- 
tion of  President  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol  27,  p.  989.  (See  Ann. 
Rept.  1891,  p.  677,  and  letter  book  222,  p.  364.) 

Act  of  June  5, 1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.  260  a-  res  reserved  for  ceme- 
tery, s-hoof,  and  town  site.  Remainder,  99,644  acres, 
allotted  to  247  Indians;  art  of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  636, 
ratifying  agreement,  not  dated.  Act  Mar.  3, 1909.  (35  Stat., 
778.) 


I,  p.  514;  agreement  of  Mar.  8.  1600, 
r.  1,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  861;  President's 


118 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Kickanoo  

Acres. 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Mexican  Kickapoo. 

Kiowa  and  Comanche 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:    A}  ache,  Coman- 
che,     Delaware,     and 
Kiowa. 

Fort  Sill  Apaches  

( 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 
Modoc          

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Modoc. 

Oakland     

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribes:      Tonkawa   and 
Lipan. 

Osage 

(Under  Osage  School.) 
Tribes:  Great  and  Little 
Osage. 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


Executive  order,  Aug.  15, 1883;  agreement  June  21, 1891;  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  557.  22,650  acres 
allotted  to  280  Indians;  479.72  acres  reserved  for  mission, 
agency,  and  school  purposes:  residue  opened  to  settlement 
by  proclamation  of  the  President  May  18,  1895,  vol.  29,  p. 
868:  act  of  Mar.  3, 1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1001.  June  21, 1906.  (34 
Stat.,  362.) 

Treatv  of  Oct.  21,  1867,  vol.  15,  pp.  581  and  589;  agreement 
made  Oct.  6,  1892;  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31, 
p.  676,  ceding  2,488,893  acres'  of  which  445,000  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  3,444  Indians;  11,972  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  religions,  and  other  purposes.  The  residue 
2,033,583  acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  books  486,  p. 
440;  488,  p.  478).  President's  proclamation  of  July  4,  1901, 
vol.  32,  p.  1975;  June  23,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2007;  Sept.  4,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  2026;  and  Mar.  29,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.  Of  the 
480,000  a^res  gracing  land  set  ar  art  under  act  of  June  6, 
1900, 1,841.92  a°res  were  reserved  for  town  sites  under  act 
Mar.  20, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  801),  82,059.52  acres  were  allotted 
to  513  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  213), 
and  480  acres  allotted  to  3  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  as 
amended  by  af:t  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Slat.  L.,  1018).  The  Gen- 
eral I  and  Office  reports  the  sale  and  entry  of  approximately 
401,465.92  acres  under  act  of  June  5,  and  of  21,251.75  acres 
underact  of  June  28. 1906.  to  June  30, 1911.  (See  87404-1909.) 
(See  75344-1908.)  Under  a"t  Mav  29,  1908  (35  Stat.,  471), 
anu  act  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.,  861),  20,498  a'-res  allotted  to 
169  Indians.  Sale  of  unused,  unreserved  lands.  a<-t  Mar.  3, 
1911  (36  Stat.,  1069).  Act  Mar.  4,  1915,  Department  of 
Agriculture  experiment  station.  Sale  of  school  and  agency 
reserves,  a^t  June  30, 1913  (38  Stat.,  92). 

Formerly  prisoners  of  war,  remnants  and  descendants  of 
Chief  Geronimo's  Band.  6,149  a<?res  of  inherited  Kiowa, 
Comanohe,  and  Apa'he  lands  were  purchased  by  the 
United  States  for  reallotment  to  81  Indian?  and  3  waites 
of  this  band,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma.  (187 
of  the  band  removed  to  Mes^alero.  See  Ann.  Rei  t.  1913.) 
These  lands  were  purchased  under  the  a^-ts  of  June  25, 
1910  (36  Stat.,  855),  Aug.  24,  1912  (37  Stat.,  534),  ajpro- 
priating  $200,000;  June  30, 1913  (38  Stat.,  94),  appropriating 
$100,000;  and  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.,  587).  See  Executive 
order  Feb.  26,  1897,  act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173):  act 
June  28,  1902  (32  Stat.,  467);  Ex.  DC.  No.  117,  49th  Cong., 
2d  sess. 

Agreement  with  Eastern  Shawnees  made  June  23,  1874  (see 
Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  271).  and  confirmed  in  Indian  ai  pro- 
priation  apt  arr  roved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.  I  ands 
all  allotted— 3,966  acres  all(  tted  to  68  Indians,  8  a' res  re- 
served for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  2  a<  res  f(  r  s<  hool 
and  24  acres  f <  r  timber.  (Letter  book  220,  p.  102.)  Act 
Mar.  3, 1909.  (35  Stat.,  752.)  Ex.  order  Sei  1. 14, 1916.  ex- 
tending trust  reriod  10  rears  with  excej  ticn  of  12  alK  ttces. 

Act  of  May  27, 1878,  vol.  20,  p.  84.  (See  Ann.  Rei  t.  for  1882, 
p.  i,xn.)  (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  C  herokee, 
vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  476.)  (See  deed  from  Nez  Perce, 
May  22,  1885,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  504.)  11,456  a^res 
allotted  to 73  Indians;  160.50 a^res reserved  for  Government 
and  school  purposes.  The  residue,  79,276.60  a'  res,  o]  ened 
tosettlement.  (Letter book  257,  p.  240.)  Agreement  made 
Oct. 21, 1891, ratified  by  Indian  a^i  roj  riatic  n &<  tan  roved 
Mar. 3, 1893,  vol.  27,  p. 644.  ( Ff,r text, see  Ann.  Pei  t.,  1893, 
p.  524.)  Trust  period  extended  10  years  on  27  allotments. 
Executive  order,  May  24,  1918. 

Arti'  le  16,  Cherokee  treaty  of  July  19,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  804; 
order  of  Secretary  of  the  Interi<  r,  Mar.  27, 1871;  &ft  of  June 
5, 1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.  (See  deed  dated  June  14, 1883,  from 
Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  482.)  (?ee  a' t  of  June  28, 
1906  (34  Stats.,  539),  act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Ptats.,  787),  and 
Public  Resolution  No.  51,  art  roved  Feb.  28,  1909.)  2,230 
Indians  have  been  allotted  1,065,134.31  a^res  (3  seleotk  ns). 
Sinre  July  1,  1909,  these  2,230  Indians  have  been  all(  tted 
1,465,350  acres  from  sun  Irs  lands,  and  5,178.53  &<  res  have 
£een  reserved  for  r-hurch,  town-site,  and  railr«  ad  )  rrr  cses. 
Act  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.,  778).  Act  Apr.  18, 1912  (37  Stat., 
86),  and  Executive  order  June  1, 1914,  rates  of  royalty  on  oil. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


119 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  ivhat  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation'and 
tribe. 


OKLAHOMA— continued. 


Otoe 

(Under  Otoe  School.) 
Tribes:  Otoe  and  Missouri. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 


Ottawa 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:    Ottawa  of 
Blanchards    Fork    and 
Roche  de  Boeuf. 

Pawnee 

(Under  Pawnee  School.) 
Tribe  ^Pawnee. 


Peoria . 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:      Kaskaskia,  Mi-  j 
ami,    Peoria,    Pianka-  , 
shaw,  and  Wea. 

Ponca 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 


1387 


Potavratomi 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribes:   Absentee    Shaw- 
nee  and   citizen   Pota- 
watomi. 


Qua  paw 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  .Quapaw. 


3auk  and'Fox 

(Under  Sac  and  Fox  School.) 
Tribes:  Ottawa,  Sauk  and 
Fox  of  the  Mississippi. 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


Act  of  Mar.  3,  1881,  vol.  21,  p.  381;  order  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  June  25, 1881.  (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883, 
from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  479.  Under  acts 
of  Feb.  8, 1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  Feb.  28, 1891  (26  Stats..  794). 
and  Apr.  21, 1904  (33  fetats.,  189),  128,251  acres  were  allotted 
to  514  Indians  (885  allotments— see  letter  book  929,  F.  326), 
720  acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  cem- 
etery purposes,  and  640  acres  set'aside  for  tribal  uses.  Also 
act  June  22,  1910  (36  Stat.,  580-581). 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513;  12,995  acres  were 
all  tted  to  160  Indians;  557.95  acres  were  authorized  to  be 
sold  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891  (vol.  26,  p.  989).  The  residue, 
1,587.25  acres  sold.  Letter  book  229,  p.  115,  and  act  Mar.  3, 
1909  (35  Stat.,  752). 

Act  of  Apr.  10,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  29.  Of  this,  230,OT4  acres  are 
Cherokee  and  53,006  acres  are  Creek  lands.  (See  deed  dated 
June  14, 1883,  from  C  herokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  470.) 
112,701  acres  allotted  to  820  Indians;  840  acres  were  reserved 
for  school,  agency,  and  cemetery  purposes;  the  residue, 
169,320  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (Letter  books  261, 
p.  388,  and  263,  p.  5.)  Agreement  made  Nov.  23,  1892, 
ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.  (For  text  see 
Ann.  Kept.,  1893,  p.  526.)  Trust  period  extended  10  years. 
Executive  orler,  Mar.  2,  1918. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.  43,334  acres  allotted 
to  218  Indians.  The  residue,  6,313.27  acres,  sold  under  act 
of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  245). 


Acts  of  Aug.  15,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  192;  Mar.  3,  1877,  vol.  19,  p. 
287;  May  27, 1878,  vol.  20,  p.  76:  and  Mar.  3. 1881,  vol.  21,  p. 
422.  (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  C  herokee,  vol.  6, 
Indian  Deeds,  p.  473.)  There  have  been  allotted  to  782 
Indians  100,734  acres,  and  reserved  for  agency,  school,  mis- 
sion, and  cemetery  purposes  523.56  acres,  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  387  acres.  (Letter  books  302,  p.  311,  and 
813,  p.  401.)  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  217.  (See  38067-1915.) 

Treaty  of  Feb.  27, 1867,  vol.  15,  p.  531;  act  o'f  May  23,  1872,  vol. 
17,  p.  159.  (222,716  acres  are  Creek  ceded  lands;  3C5.851 
acres  are  Seminole  lands.)  Agreements  with  citizen  Pot- 
awatomi  June  25  and  absentee  Shawnees  June  26,  18CO 
ratified  and  confirmed  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  of 
Mar.  3, 1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1016-1021.  215,899.42  acres  allotted 
to  1,490  Potawatomi,  and  70,791.47  acres  allotted  to  563 
absentee  Shawnees,  and  510.63  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement  by  the 
President's  proclamation  of  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  989. 
(See  letter  book  222,  pp.  442,  444,  and  Ann.  Kept,  for  1891, 
p.  677.)  Executive  order  Nov.  24,  1916,  and  Jan.  15,  1917, 
extending  trust  period  10  years  with  exception  of  15  ab- 
sentee Shawnees,  85  citizen  Potawatomi. 

Treaties  of  May  13,  1833,  vol.  7,  p.  424,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867, 
vol.  15,  p.  513.  56,245.21  acres  allotted  to  248  Indians,  400 
acres  reserved  for  school  and  40  acres  for  church  purposes. 
(Letter  book  335,  p.  326.)  Agreement  of  Mar.  23,  1893, 
ratified  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  2.  1895, 
vol.  28,  p.  907.  Agreement  of  Jan.  2, 1899,  ratified  in  Indian 
appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  1067. 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  18,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  495;  agreement  June  12, 
1890;  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  13, 1891,  vol.  26,  p.  749.  87,683.46 
acres  allotted  .to  548  Indians,  and  800  seres  reserved  for 
school  and  agency  purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settle- 
ment by  the  President's  proclamation  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol. 
27,  p.  989.  (See  letter  book  222,  p.  169,  and  Ann.  Kept, 
for  1891,  p.  677.)  Trust  period  extended  for  10  years  by 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  27, 1896;  again  by  Executive  order 
of  Aug.  28,  1906;  again  by  Executive  order  of  Aug.  1,  1916, 
with  exception  of  55>llottees. 

1  Surveyed. 


120 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  80,  1918— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Seminole    

Acres. 
122 

Treaties  of  Mar.  21,  1866,  vol.  14.  p.  755.    (See  Creek  agree- 

(Under superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes.  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Seneca 

ment  of  Feb.  14,  1881,  Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  54,  and  defi- 
ciency act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.)    Agreement  of 
Mar.  16,  1889.    (See  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  2,  1889.)    Agreement  recorded  in  the  treaty  book,  vol. 
3,  p.  35;  agreement  made  Dec.  16,  1897,  ratified  bv  the  act 
of  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  567;  agreement  of  Oct.  7,  1899,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  June  2,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  250.    Approximately 
3,127  Indians  have  been  allotted  365,852  acres;   sold,  4,263 
acres;  remaining  unsold,  122  acres. 
Treaties  of  Feb  28  1831  vol  7,  p  348;  of  Dec  29  1832,  vol 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:   Seneca,    Eastern 
Shawnee,  Wyandot,  Pe- 
oria,  etc. 

Shawnee 

7,  p.  411,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.    41,,  813  acres 
allotted  to  435  Indians;   104.22  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment, church,  and  school  purposes.    Agreement  of  Dec.  2, 
1901,  ratified  by  act  of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262;  Execu- 
tive order  Feb.  15,  1916,  extending  trust  period  for  10  years, 
with  exception  of  44  allottees. 
Treaties  of  July  20,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  351;  of  Dec.  29,  .1832,  vol, 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:    Seneca,  absentee 
Shawnee,  Mexican 
Kickapoo. 

Wichita  

7,  p.  411;   of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513,  and  agreement 
with  Modocs,  made  June  23,  1874   (see  Ann.  Kept.,  1882 
p.  271),  confirmed  by  Congress  in  Indian  appropriation  act 
approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.    12,745  acres  allotted 
to  117  Indians;  86  acres  reserved  for  agency  purposes  (letter 
books  208,  p.  266,  and  233,  p.  207);  the  residue,  2,543  acres, 
sold  (agreement  of  Dec.  2,  1901,  ratified  by  act  of  May  27, 
1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262). 
(See  treaty  of  July  4,  1866,  with  Delawares,  art.  4,  vol.  14, 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:  loni.  Caddo,  Co- 
manche,  Delaware,  To- 
wakoni  Waco,  and 
Wichita. 

6794.)    Unratified  agreement,  Oct.  19,  1872.    (See  Ann. 
ept.,  1872,  p.  101.)    Agreement  made  June  4,  1891,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  2,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  895.    152,714  acres 
allotted  to  957  Indians;   4,151  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.    The  residue,  586,468 

Wyandot 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Wyandot. 


Total. 


Grande  Ronde 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Kalapuya.  Clack- 
amas,  Cow  Creek,  Lak- 
miut,  Marys  River,  Mo- 
lala,  Nestucca,  Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Shasta, 
Tumwater,  Umpqua, 
Wapato,  and  Yamhill. 

Klamath 

(Under  Klamath  School.) 
Tribes:  Klamath,  Modoc, 
Paiute,  Pit  River,  Wal- 
pape,  and  Yahooskin 
Band  of  Snake  (Sho- 
shoni). 


15,361 


acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  book  490,  p.  90.)  Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  July  4.  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1975. 

Unoccupied  Chickasaw  and  Choctaw  leased  lands  west  of 
the  North  Fork  of  the  Red  River.  Act  of  May  4,  1896, 
vol.  29,  p.  113.  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  16,  1896, 
vol.  29,  p.  878.  Act  of  June  6, 1900  (31  Stat.,  680.) 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.  20,942  acres  allotted 
to  244  Indians,  16  acres  to  churches,  etc..  leaving  534.72 
acres  unallotted  (letter  book  228,  p.  332).  Unallotted  land 
sold,  act  Mar. 3.  1909  (35 Stat.,  752).  Act  Apr.  28,  1904  (33 
Stat.,  519),  allotments  on  public  domain  to  absentee 
Wyandot. 


Siletz 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Alsea,  Coquille, 
Kusan,  Kwatami, 
Rogue  River,  Skoton, 
Shasta.  Saiustkea,  Siu- 
slaw,  Tututni,  Umpqua, 
and  13  others. 


Treaties  of  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1143,  and  of  Dec.  21,  1855, 
vol.  12,  p.  982;  Executive  order  June  30,  1857.  440  acres 
reserved  for  Government  use  and  32,983  acres  allotted  to 
269  Indians.  (See  letter  book  210,  p.  328.)  Act  of  Apr.  28. 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  567,  amending  and  ratifying  agreement  of 
June  27,  1901  (33  L.  D.,  586).  Executive  order  Apr.  29 
1916,  extending  trust  period  10  years  with  exception  of  66 
allottees. 

i  812, 707  Treaty  of  Oct.  14,  1864,  vol.  16,  p.  707.  Act  June  10,  1896  (29 
Stat.,  321).  Act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.,  260).  208,278 
acres  allotted  to  1,345  Indians;  6,094.77  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  and  church  purposes.  Indian  appropna- 
-  tion  act  approved  Apr.  21,  1904.  vol.  33,  p.  202;  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1905,  vol.  33,  p.  1033,  and  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34 
Stat.,  367).  (See  act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.,  L.  752), 
removal  of  Modocs  in  Oklahoma  to  Klamath  and  allot- 
ments thereto.)  Boundary  dispute  (see  9881-1911.) 
Unratified  treaty,  Aug.  11,  1855;  Executive  orders  Nov.  9, 
1855,  and  Dec.  21, 1865,  and  act  of  Mar.  3, 1875,  vol.  18,  p.  446. 
Agreement  Oct.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  323.  44,459  acres  allotted  to  551  Indians.  Resi- 
due, 177,563.66  acres  (except  5  sections),  ceded  to  United 
States.  (See  letter  book  281,  p.  358.)  President's  proclama- 
tion, May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  866.  Acts  of  Mav  31,  1900, 
vol.  31,  p.  233,  and  Mar.  3,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  1085.  Act  of 
May  13, 1910  (36  Stat..  367).  Executive  order  July  19,  1915. 

1  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


121 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OREGON— continued. 

I 

Umatilla j 

(Under  Umatilla  School.) 
Tribes:  Cayuse,  Umatilla.  i 
and  Waliawalla. 


Warm  springs 

(Under   Warm   Springs 

School.) 

Tribes:  Des  Chutes,  John 
Day,  Paiute,  Teneino, 
Warm  Springs,  and 
Wasco. 


Total. 


Area  (unal 
lotted) 


Acres. 
174,032 


1322,275 


1,209,014 


SOUTH  DAKOTA. 


Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winne- 

bago. 

(Under  Crow  Creek  School.) 
Tribes:  Lower  Yank  tonai, 
Lower  Brule,  Minicon- 
u,    and    Two    Kettle 
ioux. 


Lake  Traverse 

(Under  Sisseton  School.) 
Tribes:  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux. 


jo 
Si 


Cheyenne  River 

(Under     Cheyenne     River 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Mini- 
conjou.  Sans  Arcs,  and 
Two  Kettle  Sioux. 


219,206 


Lower  Brule 

(Under  Lower  Brule  School.' 

Tribes:  Lower  Brule  and 

Lower  Yanktonai  Sioux. 


124,000 


Treaties,  lavs,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Treaty  of  June  9,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  945,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882, 
vol.  22,  p.  297:  Mar.  3,  1885,  vol.  23,  p.  340,  and  sec.  8  of  act 
of  Oct.  17,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  559.  (See  orders  Secretary  of 
Interior,  Dec.  4,  1888,  Ann.  Rept.,  1891.  p.  f>82.)  82,742 
acres  allotted  to  1,118  Indians,  980  acres  reserved  for  school 
and  mission  purposes.  (See  letter  book  255,  p.  132  )  Act 
of  July  1, 1902,  vol.  32,  p.  730;  act  Mar.  2, 1917  (39  Stat.  969-86), 
providing  for  allotments  as  long  as  any  land  is  available. 

Treaty  of  June  25.  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  963.  140,529  acres  allotted 
to  968  Indians  under  the  general  allotment  act  of  February 
8,  1887  (24  Stat.,  338),  as  amended,  and  1,195  acres  reserved 
or  for  church,  school,  and  agency  purposes.  Boundary 
dispute:  Acts  Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  355);  June  6,  1894  (28 
Stat.,  86),  and  Mar.  2,  1917  (39  Stat.,  969-986). 


1,  1863  (see  Ann.  Rept.,  1863,  p. 
318);  treaty  of  Apr.  29.  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive 
order,  Feb.  27, 1885  (see  President's  proclamation  of  Apr.  17, 
1885,  annulling  Executive  order  of  Feb.  27, 1885;  Ann.  Rept., 
1885,  p.  51);  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888;  President's 
proclamations.  Feb.  10,  1890,  vol.  26.  p.  1554.  There  have 
been  allotted  to  1,461  Indians  272,720  acres,  and  reserved 
for  agencv,  school,  and  religious  purposes  1,076.90  acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  19.  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505;  agreement,  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337,  Comp.  In- 
dian Laws.)  Agreement,  Dec.  12,  1889,  ratified  by  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1035-1038.  308,838  acres  allotted 
to  2,006,  Indians,  32,840.25  acres  reserved  for  State  school  pur- 
poses, 1,347.01  acres  for  church  and  agency  purposes;  the 
residue,  574,678.40  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  Apr.  11,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1017.) 
Trust  period  extended  10  years,  Executive  order  of  Apr.  16, 
1914. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876:  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624,  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30.  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    See  (act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10.) 
President's  proclamations  of  Feb.  7,  1903  vol.  32.  p.  2035, 
and  Mar.  30,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.    1,052,320.99  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  3,880  Indians.    (See  L.  B.  828,  p.  321.)    Act 
of  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  460).    Under  President's  procla- 
mation of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.,  2500),  1,158.010  acres  were 
opened  to  settlement,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved 
219,206  acres. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876:  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20. 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.     (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10.) 
Agreement  made  Mar.  1, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899, 
vol.  30,  p.  1362,  ceding  120.000  acres  to  the  United  States. 
202,992  acres  allotted  to  868  Indians,  and  964.06  acres  re- 
served for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes,  leaving 
unallotted  and  unreserved  24,000  acres.    (See  letter  book 
498,  p.  336.)    (See  act  of  Apr.  21,  1906,  34  Stats.,  124  and 
1048,  and  President's  proclamations  of  Aug.  12,  1907,  and 
Sept.  24,  1913.)    (Superintendent's  report  June  11,  1918 
[50,169-18]). 

i  Surveyed. 


122 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonfjin</  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OREGON— continued. 


Pine  Ridge 

(Under  Pine  Ridge  Agency.) 
Tribes   Brnle    Sioux, 
Northern  Cheyenne, 
and  Ogalalla  Sioux. 


Rosebud 

(Under  Rosebud  School.) 
Tribes:  Loafer,  Minicon- 
Jou,  Northern  Oglalla, 
Two  Kettle,  Tipper 
"Rrule,  and  Wazhazhc 
Sioux. 


Yankton 

(Under  Yankton  School.) 
Tribe:  Yankton  Sioux. 


Total 

UTAH. 

Goshute  and  scattering  bands. 

Paiiites 

Cedar  City  and  Indian  Peak 
Bands. 

Panguitch 

Shivwits 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
161,565 


404, 771 


34,500 
7,000 


i  26, 880 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3, 1883,  22  Stats., 
624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act  of 
Apr.  30,  1888  (25  Stats.,  94),  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  29  Stats.,  10.) 
A  tract  of  32.000  acres  in  Nebraska  was  set  apart  by  Execu- 
tive order  01  Jan.  24,  1882,  and  was  restored  to  the  public 
domain  by  Executive  order  of  Jan.  25,  1904;  and  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  640  acres  of  this  land  was  set 
apart  for  Indian  school  purposes  and  is  called  the  Sioux 
additional  tract.    (See  Nebraska.)    Act  of  Mar.  2,   1889 
(25  Stats.,  888),  authority  of  President  of  July  29,  1904. 
2,229,803.81  acres  have  been  allotted  to  8,269  Indians  and 
11,333.68  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school,  and  church 
purposes,  aggregating  866,323.19,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  161,565  acres.    Allotment  under  acts  of  Mar.  2, 
1889  (25  Stat.  L.,  888),  Mar.  1,1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1048),  and 
May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451).    Act  May  27,  1910  (36  Stat., 
440),  40,960  acres  State  school  land;  22,434  acres  timber 
reserved.    President's  proclamation,  June  29, 1911  (40  L.  D., 
164),  opening  169,592  acres  May  1, 1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20, 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.) 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  91,  not  accepted.  Act  of 
Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of 
Feb.  10, 1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  '(See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol. 

29,  p.  10.)    1,853,605  acres  allotted  to  8,495  Sioux  Indians, 
416,000  acres  opened  to  settlement,  29,392.01  reserved  for 
Government  purposes,  churches,  cemeteries,  etc.    Agree- 
ment made  Mar.  10, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899,  vol. 

30,  p.  1364.    Act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  254,  ratifying 
agreement  made  Sept.  14,  1901.    President's  proclamation 
of  May  16, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2354.    Act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat., 
1048);  act  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stat.,  1230);  act  May  29,  1908  (35 
Stat.,  451);  act  May  30,  1910  (36  Stac..  448):   President's 
proclamation,  Aug.  24, 1908  (35  Stat.,  2203),  opening  838,000 
acres  in  Tripp  County.    President's  proclamation,  June 
29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  300,000  acres  in  Mellette 
and  Washabaugh  Counties,  43,520  acres  State  school  land 
Executive  order,  July  6, 1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  19, 1858;  vol.  11,  p.  744.  268,2^3  acres  allotted 
to  2,613  Indians  and  1,252.89  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
church,  and  school  purposes.  (See  letter  book  207,  p.  1.) 
Agreement  Dec.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  314.  The  residue  open  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  865.) 
Executive  order  Apr.  20,  1916,  extending  trust  period  10 
years,  with  exception  of  162  allottees. 


Executive  order,  Mar.  23, 1914. 

Executive  order,  Aug.  2,  1915,  reserving  approximately  7,00t 
acres  for  use  of  Cedar  City  and  Indian  Peak  Bands  of 
Paiutes. 

136.52  acres  in  Garfield  County,  Utah,  purchased  Nov.  1, 1903. 

About  1  township  in  Washington  County,  Utah,  withdrawn 
by  departmental  order  based  on  oil'ce  recommendation  of 
Sept.  28,  1891  (L.  B.,  223,  p.  270).  Rights  of  squatters  in 
withdrawal  purchased  by  United  States.  (See  also  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  26  Stat.,  L.,' 989-1005.)  Executive  order  Apr. 
21,  1916,  withdrawing  26,880  acres  as  Shebit  or  Shivwits 
Reservation. 

1  rn  purveyed. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

UTAH—  continued. 
Skull  Valley..          .   .. 

Acres. 
18,  640 

i  249,  340 

Reserved  bv  Executive  orders  of  Jan.  17,  1912,  Sept,  7,  1917, 
and  Feb.  15,  1918. 
Executive  orders,  Oct.  3,  1861;  act  of  June  18,  1878  (20  Stats. 
165);  acts  of  Mav  5,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  63,  and  Mav  24,  1888, 
vol.  25,  p.  1.57;  joint  resolution  of  Tune  19,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
744;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997:  Indian  appropriation, 
act  approved  Apr.  21,   1904,  vol.  33,  D.  207;   President's 
proclamations  of  July  14,  1905,  setting  aside  1,010,000  acres 
as  a  forest  reserve,  2,100  acres  as  1  own  sites.    1;CC4,285  acres 
opened  to  homestead  entrv,  2,140  acres  in  mining  claims; 
under  act  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  263),  99,407  acres  allotted 
to  1,284  Indians,  and  60,160  acres  under  reclamation,  the 
residue,  179,194.65  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved.    (See 
letter  book  75,  p.  398.)    Executive  order,  Aug.  19,  1912,  re- 
storing lands  of  Fort  Duchesne  Military  Reservation  to  the 
supervision  of  Interior  P-epartment. 
Executive  order,  Jan.  5,  1882.    (See  act  of  June  15,-  1880,  rati- 
fying the  agreement  of  Mar.  6,  1880,  vol.  21,  p.  199.)    12,540 
acres  allotted  to  83  Indians,  remainder  of  reservation  re- 
stored to  public  domain,  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  62. 
(Letter  book  403,  p.  115.)    Joint  resolution  of  June  19,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  744. 

Order  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  July  8,  1864;  Executive 
order,  Oct.  1,  1886.    471  acres  set  aside  for  school  purposes. 
The  residue,  3,753.63  acres,  restored  to  the  public  domain 
for  Indian  homestead  entry.    36  Indians  made  homestead 
selections,  covering  all  the  land.    (See  letter  book  152.  p. 
201,  and  153.  p.  45.) 
Executive  orders   Apr   19   1879   Mar   6   ^880   and  Fob   23 

Uintah  Valley 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 
Agency.) 
Tribes:    Gosiute,  Pavant. 
Uinta,  Yampa,   Grand 
River  Uncompahgre, 
and  White  River  Ute. 

Uncompahgre 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 
Agency.) 
Tribe:  Tabaquache  (Tte. 

Total 

336,360 

•WASHINGTON. 

Chehalis 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Chinook  (Tsinuk), 
Clatsop,  and  Chehalis. 

Columbia  

(Under  Colville  School.) 
Tribe:    Columbia  (Moses 
Band). 

Colville 

11,009,580 

640 
4,629 

1883.    (See  Indian  appropriation  act  of  July  4  1884,  vol.  23, 
?.  79.)    Agreement  made  July  7,  1883,  ratified  bv  act  of 
uly  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79.    Executive  order  May'l,  1886; 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  9,  1894;  department  orders  of 
Apr.  11,  1894,  and  Apr.  20,  1894,  and  Executive  order  of 
Jan.   19,  1895.    26.218  acres  allotted  to  35  Indians  (see 
Executive  order  of  May  21,  1886,  and  act  of  Mar.  8,  1906,  34 
Stats.,  55). 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  9  and  July  2,  1872:  agreement  made 
July  7,  1883,  ratified  by  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79. 
Act  of  July  1,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  62.    (See  acts  of  Feb.  20, 
1896,  vol.  29,  p.  9,  and  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  593.)    51,653 
acres  in  north  half  allotted  to  660  Indians  (see  letter  book 
428,  p.  100);  remainder  of  north  half,  estimated  at  1,449,268 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  Oct.  10,  1900  (see  proclamation 
of  the  President,  dated  Apr.  10,  1900,  31  Stats.,  p.  1963). 
240  acres  have  been  reserved  for  town  sites.    2,750.82  acres 
temporarily  withdrawn  for  town  sites.    287,419  acres  al- 
lotted to  2,'469  Indians.    The  residue,  1,009,  580  acres  (esti- 
mated), unallotted.    Act  of  Feb.  7,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  803. 
Allotments  made  underact  of  Mar.  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  80), 
and  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  863).    President's  procla- 
mation, opening  reservation  dated  Mav  3,  1916  (39  Stat.,  p.58 
of  proclamations),  act  Aug.  31,  1916  (39  Stat.,  672). 
Executive  order,  Sept.  11,  1893. 

Executive  order,  Mar.  23,  1914. 

6  townships  in  Gilliam  County,  Wash.,  set  aside  for  allotment 
selection  bv  about  200  Indians  under  sec.  4,  act  Feb.  8,  1887 
(24  Stat.,  388),  as  amended.    (See  80088-1912.) 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Executive 
order,  Nov.  22,  1873.    Allotted  12,560.94  acres  to  109  Indians; 
school  conducted  on  2-acre  tract  purchased  from  John 
Martin. 

Treaty  of  Neah  Bay.  Jan.  31,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  939;  Executive 
orders,  Oct.  26.  1872,  Jan.  2  and  Oct.  21,  1873.    3,727  acres 
allotted  to  373  Indians.    (See  letter  book  960,  228  and  37679, 
1907.)    .- 
2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 

(Under  Colville  Agency.) 
Tribes:    Coeur    d'Alene, 
Colville,  Kalispel,  Okin- 
agan,     Lake     Methow, 
Nespelim,      Pend      d' 
Oreille,    Sanpoil,    and 
Spokan. 

Hoh  River  

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Hoh.     ' 
Kalispel... 

(Under      Coeur      d'Alene 
Agency,  Idaho.) 
Klickitat  

(Nonreservation;  Warm 
Springs,  Oreg.) 
Lummi  

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:    Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish.  ) 
Makah  

2  19,  312 
•veyed. 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribes:    Makah  and  Qui- 
leute. 

1  Partly  sui 

124 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6.— General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school  tribes 
occupying  or  belonyini  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918— Continued 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

WASHINGTON—  continued  . 
Muckleshoot  

Acres. 

Executive  orders  Jan.  20  1^57  and  \pr  9  1874     44  Indiins 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribe:  Muckleshoot. 
Nisqualli  

have  been  allotted  3,532.72  acres. 
Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek  Dec  26  1854  vol  10  D  1132'F'xec 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualh,  Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Sjtail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 
Ozette  '. 

640 

utive  order,  Jan.  20,  1857.    Land  all  allotted.  '  4*718  acres  to 
30  Indians. 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Ozette. 
Port  Madison.. 

i  65 

Treatv  of  Point  Elliott  Jan  22  1855  vol  12  n  927'  order  oi 

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,    Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Puyallup  

the  'Secretary  of  the'  Interior,  Oct.  21,  1864!    7,219  acres 
allotted  to  51  Indians;  the  residue,  65  acres,  unallotted. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek  Dec  26  1854  vol  10  p  1132'  Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualli,  Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 

Quileute  

2  337 

ecutive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  sW.'  6/1873.    17,463 
acres  allotted  to  167  Indians.    Agreement  made  Nov.  21, 
1876,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  464.    (For 
text  see  annual  report  1893,  p.  518.)    The  residue,  599  acres 
laid  out  as  an  addition  to  the  city  of  Tacoma,  has  been  sold, 
with  the  exception  of  39.79  acres  reserved  for  school,  and 
19.43  acres  for  church  and  cemetarv  purposes,  under  acts  of 
Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stat.,  633,  June  7",  1897;  30  Stats.,  62),  and 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  377). 
Executive  order  Feb  19  1889 

(Under  Neah  3ay  School.) 
Tribe:  Quileute. 
Quinaielt 

i  igS  553 

Treaties  of  Olympia  July  1   1855  and  Jan  25   1856  vol   12 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Quaitso  and  Quin- 
aielt. 

Shoalwater 

i  335 

p.  971;  Executive  order,  Nov.  L  1873.    Under  acts  of  Feb! 
8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388).  and  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794).  690 
Indians  have  been  allotted  54,989.80  acres  and  456.56  have 
been  reserved  for  agency,  lighthouse,  and  other  purposes, 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  168,553  acres.    Act  Mar. 
4,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1545). 
Executive  order  Sept  22  1866  55  535-7  1909 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Shoalwater    and 
Chehalis. 
Skokomish    . 

Treatv  of  Point  No  Point  Jan  26  1855  vol  12  p  933'  Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Clallam,    Skoko- 
mish, and  Twana. 

Snohomish  or  Tulalip  
(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Spokane 

1324 
82  327 

ecutive  order,  Feb.  25,  1874.    Allotted  in  treatv  reserve 
4,990  acres;  residue,  none.    (See  L.  B.,  895,  p.  268.)    Allot- 
ted in  Executive  order  addition,  known  as  the  Fisher  ad- 
dition, 814  acres;  residue,  none.    (L.  B.,  895,  p.  285.)    62 
allotments. 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 
tive order,  Dec.  23,  1873.    22,166  acres  allotted  to  164  In- 
dians. 

Executive  order   Jan    18   1881     Agreement  made  Mar   18, 

(Under  Spokane  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Spokan. 

Squaxon  Island  (Klahchemin) 

1887,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  July 
13,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  139.    (For  text  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1892, 
p.  743.)    Joint  resolution  of  Congress  of  June  19,  1902,  vol. 
§2,  p.  744.    Under  act  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  458), 
approximately  628  Indians  have  been  allotted  65,114  acres, 
and  1,247.30  acres  set  aside  for  church,  school,  agency,  and 
town-site  purposes.    By  proclamation  of  May  22,  1909,  the 
President  opened  the  surplus  lands  to  settlement.    5,781 
acres  classified  as  agricultural  land,  82,647.50  acres  classi- 
fied as  timber  reserved  for  tribal  use. 
Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  land 

'(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Nisqualli,  Puyal- 
lup,    Skwawksnamish, 
Stailakoom,  and  Sothers. 

all^llotted,  1,494.15  acres,  to  23  Indians. 

Surveyed. 


2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


125 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonyinq  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

\rea  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

WASHINGTON—  continued. 
Swinomish  (Perrys  Island)  ... 

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 
tive order,  Sept.  9,  1873.    Allotted,  7,359  acres  to  71  Indians; 
reserved  for  school,  89.80  acres. 

Treaty  of  Walla  Walla,  June  9?  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  951.    Agree- 
ment made  Jan.  13,  1885,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  631.    (For  texts  see 
Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  41,  p.  227;  see  also  Ann.  Rept., 
1893,  pp.  520-521,  and  S.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  21,  49th  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  and  No.  45,  SOtJi  Cong..  1st  sess.)    Executive  order, 
Nov.  28,  1892.    Agreement,  Jan.  8,  1894,  ratified  by  act  of 
Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  320.    296,407  acres  allotted  to  3,137 
Indians,  and  1,020.24  acres  reserved  for  agencv,  church,  and 
school  purposes.    (See  letter  books  354,  p.  419;  416.  p.  263, 
and  879,  p.  243.)    Act  of  Dec.  21,  1904  (33  Stats.,  595),  recog- 
nizing claim  of  Indians  to  293,837  acres  additional  land,  sub- 
ject to  the  right  of  bona  fide  settlers  or  purchasers,  acquired 
prior  to  Mar.  5,  1904.    (See  39848,  1909.)    Act  Mar.  6,  1906 
(34  Stat.,  53),  and  act  May  6,  1910  (36  Stat.,  348),  under 
which  158,102  acres  were  allotted  to  1,369  children.    (See 
9262-14.) 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  lands  withdrawn  by 
General  Land  Office,  Nov.  22,  1860,  Apr.  4.  1865.    (See  re- 
port bv  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  1,  1873.)    Act  of  May 
29,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  190.    68,511  acres  allotted  to  872  Indians. 
Act  of  Feb.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  795.     (See  95927-1915.) 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109,  lands  selected  by 
Indians.    (See  report  of  Supt.  Thompson,  Nov.  14,  1863, 
and  report  to  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  June  22,  1866.    De- 
partment order  of  June  26,  1866.    Act  of  May  29,  1872, 
vol.  17,  p.  190.    45,756  acres  allotted  to  600  Indians;  act  of 
Feb.  3,   1903  (32  Stats.,  795),  leaving  unallotted  24,424 
acres. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.    368.91  acres  patented 
under  art.  10;  195.71  acres  fishing  ground.    115,808  acres  al- 
lotted to  1,608  Indians.    (See  letter  to  General  land  Office, 
Sept.  17,  1859,  and  letter  book  381,  p.  49.)    Acts  of  Feb. 
11,  1901  (31  Stats.,  766),  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stats.,  1217),  and 
Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stats.,  582-605),  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  school  and  swamp  lands,  14,090  acres. 
Act  June  30,  1913  (38   Stats,  77-102),  which  authorized  the 
purchase  of  land  in  Wisconsin  and  Michigan  for  $150,000. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  Executive  order. 
Feb.  21,  1856.    (See  Indian  Office  letters  of  Sept.  3,  1858,  and 
May  25,  1863,  and  General  Land  Office  letter  of  May  27, 
1863.    See  Executive  orders.    See  report  of  Supt.  Thomp- 
son, May  7,  1863.    Lands  withdrawn  by  General  Land 
Office  May  8  and  June  3,  1863.)    2,535.91  acres  allotted 
to  35  Indians  under  treaty;  of  the  residue  11,566.90  acres 
were  allotted  to  169  Indians  under  joint  resolution  of  Feb. 
20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  970,  and  40.10  acres  were  reserved  for 
school  purposes. 
Treaties  of  Oct.  18,  1848,  vol.  9,  p.  952;  of  May  12,  1854,  vol. 
10,  p.  1064,  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679,  and  May  18,  1916 
(39  Stats.,  123-153). 
Treaty  of  Feb.  3,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  566.    65,428.13  acres  allotted 
to  1,502  Indians:  remainder,  84.08  acres,  reserved  for  school 
purposes.    6  double  allotments  canceled   containing  151 
acres  (see  5013-1912).     Trust  period  on  35  allotments  ex- 
tended 19  years;  Executive  order,  May  24,  1918. 
Treaties  of  Nov.  24,  1848,  vol.  9,  p.  136;  Feb.  5,  1856,  vol.  11, 
p.  663,  and  of  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679;  act  of  Feb.  6, 
1871,  vol.  16,  p.  404.    (For  area,  see  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  174.)    167  Indians  allotted  8,920  acres.    Patents  in 
fee,  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  382).    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893 
(27  Stat.,  744). 

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Yakima 

1412,404 

(Under  Yakima  School.) 
Tribes:  Klildtat,  Paloos, 
Topnish,    Wasco,    and 
Yakima. 

Total           

1,  699,  646 

WISCONSIN. 

Lac  Court  Oreille          

2540 
24,424 

14,090 

(Under  Hayward  School.) 
Tribe:    Lac  Court  Oreille 
Band   of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 
Lac  du  Flambeau  

(Under  Lac  du  Flambeau 
School.) 
Tribe:  Lac  du  Flambeau 
Band   of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

(Under  La  Pointe  Agency.) 
Tribe:   La   Pointe   Band 
of   Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

Potawatomi 

(Under  Carter  School.) 
Red  Cliff 

(Under  Red  Cliff  Agency.) 
Tribe:    La   Pointe   Band 
(Buffalo  Chief)  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 

Menominee 

s  231,  680 
151 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribe:  Menominee. 
Oneida  

(Under  Oneida  School.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 

Stockbridge 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribes:   Stockbridge  and 
Munsee. 

Total  

270,885 

Partly  surveyed. 


3  Surveyed. 


3  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


126 


COMMISSIONED  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  ti  ibes 
occupying  or  belon^iny  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


WYOMING. 


Wind  River 

(Under  Shoshone  School.) 
Tribes:  Northern  Aray 
and   Eastern   Band   of 
Shoshoni. 


A  cres. 

i  584, 940 


Total. 


Grand  total. 


584,940 


34,.  441. 168 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relatirg  to 


Treaty  of  July  3, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  acts  of  June  22, 1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  166,  and  Dec.  15, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  291;  Executive  order 
May  21,  1887.  Agreement  made  Apr.  21,  1896,  amended 
and  accepted  by  act  of  June  7,  1896  (vol.  30,  p.  93);  amend- 
ment accepted  by  Indians  July  10,  1897.  (See  Land  Div. 
letter  book  359,  p.  468.)  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1905,  ratifying  and 
amending  agreement  with  Indians  of  Apr.  21,  1904.  (See 
vol.  33,  p.  1016.)  President's  proclamation  June  2,  1906, 
opening  ceded  part  to  settlement.  It  contained  1,472.844.15 
acres.  (See  letter  book  866,  p.  157.)  Reserved  for  Mail 
Camp,  120  acres;  reserved  for  Mail  Camp  Park,  40  acres; 
reserved  for  bridge  purposes,  40  acres.  Subject  to  disposi- 
tion under  President's  proclamation,  1,438,633.66  acres. 
246,822  acres  were  allotted  to  2,401  Indians,  and  1,792.05 
acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  ceme- 
tery purposes,  under  acts  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388). 
as  amended  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  and 
treaty  of  July  3,  1868  (15  Stats.,  673),  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  584,940  acres.  Act  of  Aug.  21, 1914  (39  Sta  t. 
511),  mining,  oil,  and  gas  lands. 


1  Partly  surveyed. 

TABLE  7. — Lands  set  apart  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1918,  for  temporary  use  and 
occupancy  by  mission  organizations. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Organization. 

Act  and  citation. 

Warrant 
for 
action. 

Acreage. 

Arizona: 
Pueblo  Bonito 

Christian  Reformed  Church 

Policy 

80.00 

San  Xavier  (Papa- 

Franciscan  Fathers  of  Arizona  

.do   ... 

.31 

go). 
San  Juan  

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Presby- 

...do   

10.07 

Truxton  Canon  .... 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America. 
Immanuel  Indian  Missionary  Council  .  . 

...do... 

2.00 

Western  Navajo  ... 

Presbytery  of  Northern  Arizona..  . 

• 

do     .. 

160.00 

California: 
Campo  .            .  

Catholic  Church  

..do... 

1.00 

Fort  Bidwell 

American  Missionary  Association  .  . 

do 

5.00 

Fort  Yuma  

Woman's  Home  Missionarv  Society  of 

Aug.  15,  1894  (28 

...do  

1.00 

Minnesota*  Leech  Lake 

the  Methodist  Episcoparchurch. 
Bowstring  Indian  Church 

Stat.  335). 

do 

.50 

Montana: 
Fort  Peck  . 

Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions  .  . 

May    3,    1908.  (35 

.do  

40.00 

General  Conference  of  Mennonites  of 

Stat.  558-560). 

do 

1.00 

North    Dakota*    Fort 

North  America. 
American  Missionary  Association 

June   1,    1910   (36 

do 

3.58 

Berthold. 

Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions 

Stat.  455). 
.do  

.do  

7.24 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River.  . 

Catholic  Indian  Church  

May  28,  1908  (35 

...do  

95.02 

Pine  Ridge 

Domestic    and    Foreign    Missionary 

Stat.  460). 

do     .. 

40.00 

Sociotv  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church   in  the  United   States   of 
America. 
Rosebud  Indian  Cemetery 

do 

5.00 

Standing  Rock  

Domestic  Foreign  Missionary  Society 
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church 
in  the  UnKed  States  of  America. 

Feb.  14,  1913  (37 
Stat.  677). 

...do.... 

80.00 

Total 

531.  72 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


127 


TABLE  8. — Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1918. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Organization. 

Act. 

Citation. 

Acreage. 

Montana:  Blackfeet... 
Nebraska*  Santee 

Board  of  Home  Missions  and 
Church    Extension    of   the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
Domestic  and   Foreign   Mis- 

Mar. 1,  1909;  Mar. 
1,  1907. 

Mar.  3,  1909. 

35  Stat.  781,  814; 
34  '  Stat.    1015, 
1036. 
35  Stat.  814.. 

325.  87 
20.00 

North  Dakota:  Devils 

sionary  Society  of  the  Prot- 
estant Episcopal  Church  in 
.     the  United  States  of  America. 
Mission  of  Sisters  of  Charity 

.do  

do  

^83.43 

Lake. 
South  Dakota: 
Crow  Creek 

for  Montreal. 
Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the 

do......      . 

.do  

160.00 

Rosebud 

Presbyterian  Church  in  the 
United  States  of  America. 
Domestic  and   Foreign   Mis- 

do 

do 

50  00 

sionary  Society  of  the  Prot- 

..do   

do  

480.59 

estant  Episcopal  Church  in 

June  30,  1910  . 

36  Stat.  448 

284.20 

Sisseton 

the  United  States  of  America, 
do 

Mar.  3,  1909  .  . 

35  Stat.  814.. 

40.00 

Standing  Rock 

do 

May  29  1908'  Feb 

35  Stat    460,  461' 

80  39 

Wisconsin*    Menomi- 

Bureau    of   Catholic    Indian 

14,  1913. 
Mar  3  1909 

37  Stat.  675,  676. 
35  Stat  814 

21  00 

nee. 

Missions. 

Total  

1,  545.  48 

TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 

year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Total,  1918  

25  433 

$1  030  369 

1917 

26  657 

1  315*112 

1916  

26*956 

l'  206*  826 

1915 

27  927 

1  177  600 

1914  

22'  968 

l'  194  185 

1913 

24  490 

1  316  298 

1912  

22*  564 

l'  21l'  335 

1911   . 

21  235 

847  456 

1900  

17?'  169 

1890  

131  374 

Arizona  

8  629 

324  163 

Camp  Verde  .  . 

Basket  making.. 

58~ 

648 

Woodcutting 

4 

228 

Total 

62 

876 

Colorado  River  .  .  . 

Basket  making 

20 

500 

Bead  work  

75 

1  500 

Woodcutting  . 

120 

15  000 

Total  

215 

17  000 

Havasupai 

38 

425 

Woodcutting  

12 

144 

Total  

50 

569 

Kaibab  

Basket  making 

20 

150 

Leupu 

365 

20  000 

Others  

100 

4  500 

Totai  

465 

24  500 

Moqui  

Basket  making 

75 

1  200 

Blanket  weaving.  . 

250 

21*  000 

Pottery 

25 

500 

Woodcutting..  . 

30 

792 

Others  . 

2  125 

72  443 

y 

Total  

2  505 

95  935 

128 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIES. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Arizona—  Continued. 
Navajo  *  .      .  . 

'  Blanket  weaving 

250 

$50  000 

Woodcutting  

70 

7*000 

Total. 

320 

57  000 

Pima*  

Basket  making  . 

1 
1  050 

10  500 

Pottery 

200 

350 

Woodcutting  

450 

7  500 

Total 

1  700 

18  350 

Salt  River 

Basket  making 

48 

825 

Pottery  

8 

75 

Woodcutting.. 

120 

7  200 

Total  

176 

8  100 

San  Carlos 

Basket  making 

200 

800 

Beadwork  

50 

150 

Woodcutting 

200 

14  000 

Total. 

450 

14  950 

San  Xavier  

B  asket  making  

750 

15,000 

Woodcutting 

400 

45  000 

Others  

50 

1,500 

Total 

1  200 

61  500 

Truxton  Canon. 

Basket  making.. 

30 

8300 

Woodcutting 

30 

*3  000 

Others            

103 

^,400 

Total  

163 

6,700 

"V^estern  Navajo  

Basket  making  

79 

»263 

Blanket  weaving  

1.050 

8  15,  750 

Woodcutting 

42 

3945 

Others  

132 

a  1,  575 

Total 

1  303 

18  533 

California 

1  094 

57,637 

Bishop  . 

Basket  making  

325 

125 

Woodcutting 

25 

3,000 

Total. 

50 

3,125 

Basket  making 

8 

150 

Fort  Bidwell 

do 

100 

1  250 

Beadwork  

50 

500 

Woodcutting 

150 

14,000 

Others  

30 

900 

Total 

330 

16,  650 

Fort  Yuma 

Beadwork  .....  .  . 

15 

1,000 

. 

Pottery 

6 

1.000 

Woodcutting 

100 

5  000 

Total 

121 

7,000 

Greenville 

Basket  making.. 

20 

200 

Fishing  

12 

300 

Woodcutting  

48 

4,800 

Others 

32 

8,000 

Total  

112 

13,300 

Hoopa  Valley 

Basket  making 

75 

1.000 

Fishing  

100 

500 

Woodcutting.. 

40 

2,000 

Others  

10 

5,000 

Total  

225 

8,500 

1 

1917  report. 


2 1916  report. 


3  Estimated. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


129 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencics. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of: 
products- 

California—  Continued. 
Malki 

Basket  making  

18 

$172 

Woodcutting 

17 

1  248 

Others  

10 

150 

Total 

45 

1  570) 

Pala 

Basket  making 

51 

1  930» 

Lace  making  

22 

'363^ 

Pottery 

3 

30- 

Woodcutting  

12 

450' 

Others 

1 

12* 

Total  

89 

2,785- 

Soboba 

Basket  making 

19 

50O 

Lace  making 

34 

1  620 

Woodcutting 

17 

1  525 

Total  

70 

3  645 

Tule  River  

Basket  making 

24 

192 

Woodcutting  

20 

720 

Total  

44 

912 

Idaho          

256 

29  7501 

Coeur  d'  Alene  

Beadwork 

g 

200 

Woodcutting  

25 

10  000 

Others 

7 

5  100 

Total  

40 

15  300> 

Fort  Hall  

20 

2001 

Beadwork 

45 

600* 

Others  

150 

13  500' 

Total  

215 

14  300* 

Fort  Lapwai  

Woodcutting 

1 

150 

Iowa  

70 

1  750 

Sac  and  Fox  

Beadwork 

25 

250 

Others  

45 

1  500 

Kansas:  Potawatomi  

Others 

2 

3  000 

Michigan  

480 

15  200 

Mackinac1  ... 

35 

300 

Beadwork  

25 

300 

Fishing      

110 

3  000 

Woodcutting 

75 

2  000 

Others        

235 

9*600 

Minnesota  

3  721 

83  266- 

Grand  Portage  *  

Fishing 

20 

6  000 

Woodcutting  

6 

*116 

Others 

78 

4  000 

Total  

104 

10  116 

Leech  Lake.  .  . 

100 

1  800 

Lace  making 

25 

'400 

Fishing  

400 

7.500 

Woodcutting 

50 

3  000 

Others  

1,800 

21,  500' 

Total  

2  375 

34  200 

NettLake... 

Others 

112 

3  85O 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley)    

Others 

5 

2  000' 

86770—18 9 


1 1917  report. 


130 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Red  Lake  

Beadwork           ... 

130 

$1  200 

Fishing 

275 

9*000 

Woodcutting  

60 

4  600 

Total 

465 

14  800 

White  Earth 

50 

100 

Beadwork 

100 

3  000 

Lace  making  

10 

200 

Fishing        

300 

5  000 

Woodcutting 

200 

lo'ooo 

Total  

660 

18  300 

425 

35  045 

Blackfeet            

Woodcutting 

25 

6  000 

Crow        

Others           

2 

1  200 

Flathead 

50 

3  000 

Fishing          

4 

*600 

Woodcutting 

15 

5  000 

Others  

4 

2  250 

Total          .  . 

73 

10  850 

Fort  Belknap  .      .. 

Woodcutting  

30 

2  100 

Others 

20 

1*500 

Total  

50 

3  600 

Fort  Peck  

Beadwork  

35 

375 

Woodcutting  .  . 

45 

1  700 

Others 

65 

lo'ooo 

Total         

145 

12  075 

Tongue  River  .. 

Beadwork      

100 

400 

Woodcutting 

30 

920 

Total      

130 

1  320 

Nebraska  :  Omaha  

Others  

12 

9,080 

Nevada  

395 

10,469 

Fort  McDermitt  

Woodcutting  .... 

25 

1  125 

Others 

31 

365 

Total         <. 

56 

1  490 

Moapa  River  

Woodcutting  

9 

39 

Basket  making 

30 

400 

Beadwork  

30 

250 

Fishing 

50 

2  500 

Others 

4 

i  2  500 

Total 

114 

5  650 

Walker  River  

Basket  making  

100 

1,110 

Beadwork 

50 

105 

Fishing 

50 

1  600 

Woodcutting  

6 

400 

Total 

206 

3  215 

Western  Shoshone 

Basket  making 

10 

75 

New  Mexico  

4,630 

246,290 

Jicarilla 

Basket  making 

50 

750 

Beadwork  

40 

250 

Woodcutting  

g 

400 

Others 

16 

2,100 

Total... 

114 

3.500 

i  Estimated. 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


131 


TA  BLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
Mescalero             

Basket  making  

45 

$1  000 

Bead  work  ... 

35 

500 

Woodcutting 

50 

1  400 

Others  

25 

'l50 

Total 

155 

3  050 

Pueblo  Bonito                                         

Blanket  weaving 

1  1  000 

50  000 

Woodcutting... 

50 

12*000 

Others  

65 

4  360 

Total 

1  115 

66  360 

Pueblo  day  schools 

Basket  making 

4 

125 

Beadwork  

60 

600 

Blanket  weaving 

1 

50 

Potterv  

820 

8  680 

Woodcutting  

22 

1  740 

Others 

84 

6  785 

Total  

991 

17  980 

San  Juan  ,  

Basket  making  

25 

250 

Blanket  weaving 

2  000 

150  000 

Total  

2  025 

150  250 

Zuni  

Beadwork  

50 

400 

Potterv 

150 

750 

Woodcutting  

30 

4  000 

Total 

230 

5  150 

Oklahoma 

374 

10  910 

Cantonment  

Beadwork 

200 

Si 

Kiowa  

Woodcutting 

30 

3  500 

Others  

4 

2*160 

Total  

34 

•     5  ggQ 

Seger  

Beadwork 

140 

5  250 

Oregon  

526 

15  175 

Klamath  3 

Basket  making 

200 

1  000 

Woodcutting 

10 

2  150 

Total  

210 

3  150 

Siletz  .  

Basket  making 

12 

250 

Woodcutting 

4 

300 

Others  

25 

1  800 

Total  

41 

2  350 

Umatllla 

75 

' 

1    87"> 

Woodcutting 

25 

2  100 

Total  

100 

3  975 

Warm  Springs 

Beadwork 

50 

son 

Woodcutting 

50 

4  200 

Others  

75 

1  000 

Total  

175 

5  700 

South  Dakota  

406 

7  678 

Crow  Creek  

Beadwork 

60 

250 

Flandreau  

Beadwork 

5 

150 

Lower  Brule  

Beadwork 

35 

75 

Woodcutting.. 

2 

50 

Total  

37 

125 

Estimated. 


*  Unknown. 


1917  report. 


132 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

South  Dakota—  Continued. 
Pine  Ridge  

Beadwork  

257 

$2  931 

Woodcutting 

44 

2  134 

Total  

301 

5  065 

Yankton 

Others 

3 

2  088 

Utah                                         

139 

3  715 

Goshute 

Basket  making 

82 

i  75 

Beadwork  

32 

1  100 

Total 

64 

175 

Shivwits 

Basket  making 

16 

2  120 

Woodcutting  

26 

*2,720 

Total 

42 

2  840 

Uintah  and  Ouray    

Basket  making  

7 

200 

Beadwork          »     .... 

26 

500 

Total                 

33 

700 

Washington  

1,347 

99,  733 

Colville 

Basket  making       

55 

780 

Beadwork 

72 

804 

Woodcutting  

28 

5,600 

Others 

10 

15  640 

Total                               ... 

165 

22,  824 

Cushman               

Basket  making  

57 

890 

Fishing  

13 

300 

Others 

5 

150 

Total                                   . 

75 

1,340 

Neah  Bay         

Basket  making  

135 

35,070 

Fishing  

61 

32,500 

Others                         

64 

»  4,  375 

Total 

260 

11,945 

Spokane    .        .        .         *... 

Woodcutting.  .  . 

25 

2,400 

Others  

3 

1,200 

Total  

28 

3,600 

Taholah  l  

Basket  making  

74 

2,500 

Fishing 

90 

13,  503 

Woodcutting  

13 

353 

Others        

22 

575 

Total 

199 

16,931 

Tulalip 

Basket  making  

20 

140 

Fishing 

54 

16.  368 

Woodcut  ling 

31 

17  105 

Others           

45 

1,980 

Total  

150 

35,593 

Yakima  

Basket  making  

50 

400 

Beadwork 

300 

1,600 

Fishing  

100 

1,000 

Woodcutting 

20 

4,500 

Total... 

470 

7,500 

1317  report. 


2  Estimated. 


Partially  reported. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


133 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Wisconsin  

2,857 

$73,715 

Grand  Rapids  * 

Basket  making    

25 

650 

Bead  work       " 

10 

40 

Fishing  

10 

650 

Woodcutting 

35 

1  400 

Others  

300 

2,000 

Total  

380 

4,740 

Hay  ward               

Bead  work  

50 

600 

Fishing  

450 

700 

Woodcutting 

25 

1  500 

Others  

480 

2,030 

Total  

1,005 

4,830 

Keshena    

Basket  making  

5 

50 

Beadwork  

10 

200 

Fishing     ... 

200 

1  600 

Woodcutting  

1 

400 

Others  

210 

7  400 

Total 

426 

9  650 

.Lac  du  Flambeau                                             ... 

Basket  making  

150 

1.500 

Beadwork 

300 

5  000 

Fishing  

300 

1  020 

Woodcutting    

25 

5  000 

Others  

250 

8,375 

Total 

825 

20  895 

La  Pointe 

Basket  making 

6 

175 

Beadwork  

12 

400 

Fishing     ... 

5 

7  000 

Woodcutting 

g 

4  800 

Others                

10 

(3)   ' 

Total  

41 

12  375 

Oneida  

Basket  making  

50 

(4) 

Lace  making  " 

75 

3  000 

Others  

3 

'  (*)  ' 

Total 

128 

3  000 

Red  Cliff  

Lace  making 

2 

25 

Fishing          

20 

8  000 

Woodcutting 

10 

10'  ooo 

Others              

20 

'200 

Total. 

52 

18  225 

Wyoming  

70 

3*  793 

Shoshone  

Beadwork 

10 

m 

Woodcutting  

10 

700 

Others  . 

50 

3  093 

RECAPITULATION. 


Total  

Basket  making 

3  971 

$54  240 

Beadwork 

2*717 

36*  655 

Blanket  weaving.  .  . 

4,916 

306*  800 

Fishing...  . 

2  624 

88  641 

Lace  making 

168 

5*608 

Pottery  

1  212 

11  385 

Woodcutting 

3  091 

27l'  154 

Others  

6*734 

255  886 

Grand  total  

25  433 

1  030  369 

1917  report. 


a  Families. 


3  Unknown. 


Not  reported. 


134 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


li 


SJ2S8 


M 

03  cs-a 


:S\ 


.? 


IN  C<  »-i  i-i 


O  >-i 

si* 

•s 


S  C^  ^5  ^H  r?  O  ( 

i  O  O  O  O  CO  — 1  ( 


H 


>  O  *O  iO  O  OO 

>  ^r  <N  co  o  ^t* 
s  co  t^  t^-  oo  a. 


S  CO  <N  <N  *H  i-l  1-1 


)  >O  ro 


O5  t^  r-l  I 


o  r-  o  us  o  us 

O  CC  00>O  C  <O 
t^-  C  t^  OU3  O 


o  co  o  oco 

CO  ^f  CO  C^  *O 


>  «C  h-  < 

:  O:  ^f  ( 
5  N  <M  ( 


)i-i  M  us       CO 


g-t 


—'••>> 

•5  «  :^ 


:> 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 


135 


IT500        <N 
CO  i-i        <O 


00  O>  «5  00 
TJI  r-i  OS  CO 


OO  C^I 

s  r-  co 


S  §  g 


g  gf 


GO  *O 


s  i 


o 
>  t--  oo  e*     2 


!WO£H°;  Jcoo     *•*  !~ 
it^-icooc^ooo     >»P* 


)iC        00  t^  i-l        CO 


T cfs   «"s"«; 


S3 
QQOQ 


•ti  VCOO 
OO  S  C5 


S-'S 


IO  •<*<  i-H        CO 


oic     o  o  i 

OOCO          OO  rH  1 


1C  »C         1C  1C  ^ 


O  O        O5 

«* 


CO  i-H  (N  Tjt        CM  r- 

co,,  ic  ic 


ccic  r~ 

C^        CO 


SS      cSSS      ^ 


10  o 


^ 

rH  CO          OO 

1C       >C 


I" 

s 

a 

• 

I  3 

§  .1 


£§£ggoo 


i-l        CO        C<1 


i>     SI 

S«     :s£ 


1  •  >> 
:  :§ 


i 


136 


COMMISSIONED   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


0  0  ^ 

g  &o 


•I! 


Sil 


SS?  : 


c  p3  < 

1—  i  O 


a 


fl* 


i 
£ 


<M  N  O)  (N  (N  1C 

00  <N  ft  00  OS  <M 

•^  i—  <  t^»  01  1>« 


)  rH  O 
1  CO  04 


10  CD 
tQ  (N 


t^  CO  OS  COO1 

ootot^e* 


O5  O 


* 

So 


ofo}" 


(Mt^ 


s 


*"^ 


»c     t>» 

O        (N 

«*      oo 


O  t^-  <£>  rH  O  CO  O 

Tf<  C^  '"f  T  CO  T—  *  ^ 


TP  CD  fO  Cg  g  Cg  CjJ 


>O  OO  1C  COO> 


* 

•*#  o 

T^CO 


03 

fca 


f^  oo      ir- 

COO         00 


53     g 

r-T        1C 


^t1          "^ 

CO        OJ 


d 
n 


'Hj  Ifc1?^ 

PI 

EgJlScr 

j  !  i  S  iilll 


t3    'o- 

t?    a    cs  sl^Sfl 

^  «  -s  ^£?s-°. 

-H  §  -S  ^irsl 

132  ^^g^-s 


o 

525 


•*»<  iO  00  t>-  ( 
WgW 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

S 


137 


00  OO 

^HO> 

efoT 


3    8 

e^T 


55 


§«o 
i 


8~ 


1C  tO   C^l  00 


25, 
ndi 


io  «i"-*f<  ^" 


§fj5«f»Mg 


I! 

is 

P2 


.    .  \n        •    >t~-  e*  PO  N 


;ss 


if  2 

02 


<M  O5 


IS  ii 


I'    i 


a  Ife^ 

in- 


n*^-  k-   *"33"  C* 

Iff  !||-i  ^1 

i  *a 

^  £ 


.S    o 

C3»      .S 
•SCO        g 


icot^      S     . 

•  00  *H      .     c8 

•  t-  oo     k  -g 

r^i  si 
is 


•&  fi 


:  :  ll 

•  •    c-§ 

s  g  -: 

Piiiii" 

iiiii 


138 


-gig 

cj  C3  C  w  o 
C  ~  03  -g  fl 

0,0        B.2 


£03 


isltff 


COMMISSIONEE  OP  INDIAN  APPAIKS. 

5     £338 


5Srtt*    S5 


I  i 


§2    I 
8"   « 


?:^o     co 

i-H  00  t—         l^ 


1  § 


esi    .....      oo 


in  10 

CO  t^ 

CO  CO 


COI^C5»OO» 


oo  ooo 

"O  <N  i-l  < 


CS^CNCNCNOOCO        g 


1  »O  i-H  CN 


>-ICO 


CN  O  CM  CO  t-         OO 

l^-  O  CO  O-*  ^-H         CO 


PcC*  00*10*10*  lO*1*^      CO** 
|OOCNOiCNCOg        O 


CN  CN  TH  CO        O5 


CO  O  CO 

8 


.     .10 


OO5OOOCO1 
O^^i^OOt^- 
CN  O  OirH  CO 


:  :8 


IOIOOO3OC5O 


sssssssss 


CO  00  O  "O  CO  CO 


>  OOO  'O 


co  CM  r-  i^  co 


it 

a 


fl 

l-a 


<8«!? 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


139 


Cr.  O  »—  •  CO  r~  1  1O 

O5  c5  F-  -^  co  CN)  c 


ill 


-<    \ 


£o 


.2.2 


^ 

10  f;  »H  co 

O  <N  CM  N  ^^^^^^ 

" 


_  CO  CC  IO 


IN  Tio  rt<  « 


1C  CT>00  CO 

£g?S 


s 


cO 


OOOOCOCOi—  ^cOi-H 
Wt^<NiO'-i'-<'O 


1 


t^-  ^O  0-0  lO  iO  O 


8  on  OO  t*-  Oi  t^-  to  O5  iO  CO  O5  CJ5  Oi  i^       03^ 
i-!ouoeqiooo4t^ocot^c^co    -M  ^ 


£ 


T3 

c^ 


?<&'a>'i-?i-*'to'     i-T  ,£;•  g  p, 


>- 

..JCQt^iOCiCSiO 
5  10  1C  CO  0  t-  §  « 


«^ 


l^O^' 


Oi-l  Tf<  o-H  CO  <N  CO 
" 


1C  0  <£)  10  0  0  0 


;£_g  :::::::  :  :§^   so« 
««-S  :     :  :  IbsScg  5^5 


140 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


•d 

1 

0 

9 

s 

3 

I"3    1         II  : 

1 

ScoS    8    2 

OO  Oi  O        ^        CO 

§^ 

I, 

J 

;:?; 

Unallotted. 

1 

a  o£ 

I* 

"*< 

:  :  :  :8  :  :3  :  :  :  :     :  :  : 

00 

Allotted. 

§11 

<o 

1 

j 

1 

JH 

8 

,      §§ 

T 

"iiF 

CO 

iO  iO 

s 

2=1 

s 

"M 

a 

g 

r 

3 

§ 

§ 

1      gg 

S 

ill 

CM 

OiCN 

10 

i-t                    COCO 

ffi 

RS- 

e 

i-ioo 

is 

i 

i 

r-( 

S              coco 

I 

mro  w 

1 

s 

is 

5    £) 

s 

*H 

o 

H 

<N                      rH^I 

I 

il| 

1 

89 

i!I 

1 

COCO^GOO^i-OiO^OOtOCS         OQ  00               00        c5 

I-H  COO       "3       OO 

o  c5  o      >o     OJ 

CO  CM       O 

oo     eo 

ll!| 

co" 

SS££S?£ 

§g^|^S    §S2    £ 

g 

»s  a  8 

CO  OO        O 
t-1i-H        CN 

* 

Cultivated  by  In- 
dians. 

T3 

sf 

_  o 

too" 
N 

£8 

CM 

If 

ggg  :||    3    8    § 

S 

S             1 

T-f  »H  r-(       •  CS 

"o 

|| 

Q      ic  c 

O        CO  C 

SS8 

IM  CO  -*1 

t^.  Oi     *              O  O 

CO  O      •               00  00 

i 

ill 

1 

So       CO 

i-H               r-(  (N         .-H 

"""  !  T 

s 

O5CO  O 

1 
"c 

TJ 
A| 

§«O  1C 
CO(N 

Is 

O  ^ 
:       / 

CO  C^ 

1  11  «  «  1 

1 

ill  1 

i 

oo                          ^-ic*- 

*— 

CO         CO                                        CS 

i-H 

(MCO  C^        CS 

j 

Allotted. 

gl 

1  SS1SI 

II  !    11 

O5 

Sli 

1 

II  k 

CO 

c; 

oo 

,-H  U5     •             ?C  CO 

CO 

t^oo  o 

»OCO  <N 

States  and  reservatioi 

::::::•.;:  ^  .        .  :  .    t 

Idaho  

Coeurd'Alene  
Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lapwai  

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  
Kansas  

Kickapoo  
Potawatomi  

Michigan:  Mackinac  1.  . 

1            in  i 

5                     §     1 

!  § 


3 


1 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

I    1 


141 


" 


- 


S8S  :i 


s 


IS 


S    g 


J       CO 


I 

OQ 

I 
1. 

I 


Og 


I 


. 


i 


; 


i  22 
8  g£ 


142 


COMMISSIONEE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


-31 


Ills   1 


:S§ 


:  :s 


tS'tt 


5S    § 


cor-iocoMt^ 


13 


«s« 

,0.2  g 

gT5'g 

S|* 


M  1C 


O  O 

^O  O  l 


§£§§§ 


i'§®2 

3S23 


N 


eo  <o  as  eo  w  r-i  oo 


^  : 


§§§ 


iO  O  OOCO  O  t^  OC  CO  iO<M  5< 


iSJg 

t-Teo" 


i-<  IM  «O  ^H  00  « 


o      fe 

i 

O    •£•£ 


O  PU  P-i  02  CO  Ol  CO 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


143 


go 


8£ 
S- 


is 

o*3 
Z* 

«a 

o.   o 


Classed  as  grazing  land. 
Unknown. 


go 


" 


O  **  or- 


o  c5  cs 


SO  iO  OOO  O  1C 
»O  OO  kO  ^t»  O  CO 


u 

II 

412 
Si 

~  w> 

ag 

II 


a* 


Not  r 
Inclu 


report. 
des  gr 


-"        of 


c^ToT     cT 


: 


Iliilll 


||  B 

-ii  § 


i 


144 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


5 

<&> 


> 

I 

I 

<N 


Number 
of  allot- 


IN'-iaOTj.^OOS'-ii 


oo  cs  oo  *-<  »o  10 


bssisfassiais 

^  oTo5*'ar(xro>Grci6  IC'IN' 


co  06  co  r~  os  IN  10  - 


g^^,^, 


•*  eo  co  1-1  N  M  cq  IN 


iCO-^OCDt^iOCO 

06  o  N  to  TP  g  jo 

S's  2  S  §5  pj  2" 


C^  t>» 

oco? 


Ills 
3111 


OQcor-r-Hi 

T1  O  ^F  i-H  -*f  * 


I-HOS      t--»o-^2if—  fcscoo 
^(N>^">          of 


;assas9!8« 

iREfsss^iE: 


S    5 


CO  ^  S  SO 


<N  IO  S  CO     •  O> 


258SS 


--(  cD'ac^-t  o 

CO  CO  Oil  CO  CO  IN 


r-t  M  i-(          r-H  IN          CO 


• 


c<f  <M*  co  co  co  <M  os  co 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


145 


rt"       OO*" 


oo  o  o  c^j  co  o  < 

<M  O  Ot>-  O>O  ' 

O  O  to  OO  CO  T^  ( 


£^005 


S:  i 


•» 


.c 


Us 

J^^ct 

sww 


i  IM  T-I 

- 


8iO  Tf       O 


10  10  o      co 


co  §1^-        CO  O 


|f»5? 


-  a 


O5  O>O 


i    IS 


CO  <M  ( 

S2 


in 


II 


. 

£  <3 

a! 


<-•  TO  > 

6           S    2  I 

86770—18 10 


3s-  3 

is  1S1 


146 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 


«5S     oo 

2~^    gf 


S3 
«rs- 


co«*oo 


ooo  -*<  o  10  1^ 

fH   T-l  t>-  O   I-( 


O>  00  Tf  CO  1C  «O 


ng  to 


TABLE  12.—  Use 


S  §2§     § 


CQ  t>" 


s§§s 


rM  (M  ( 

CD  C^ 


(3 


;;;!:; 

•3-3  ': 


«     II 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


147 


'  iO  Tf^  CD  Oi  C^  l>-        t^- 


S" 


11 

IS 

1-s 
12 


588 
828" 


a  s 


i  C^  Ci  00  O  Oi        CO 
00  CS  C^J  t-  CO 


5S83g§    § 


§3gg*    | 


cc  o-o . 


S^2 g"   | 
« 


°"i 


OQOiO 

S8S3 

eo«T 


88  S 

" 


ted. 


S 


11" 


sss 

«0t^( 


S2 


c^Tcf 


Not  reported.  »  As  reported. 
Grazing  permits.  «  Overestimated 


!i 


PH^'' 

»  4*';|    ll- 
lalg  |   t° 

^®S^    Q     ®o 

MSD^  a  og 

B 

O 

OB 


S   88 


ill  ^  s-^^o^ 

<2^-^    •§     ^s®  a 
OOQP    fl    uo£co 


§    M^J^I    | 

I  £ 


148  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superinten- 
dencies. 

Total  employed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
Indian  service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em-      Irregular  em- 
ployees,            ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn-     Num- 
ings.        ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Total,  1918... 

27,032 
24,932 
25,948 
25,681 
23,440 
22,793 
22,424 
11,781 
2,901 

$3,199.850 
2,506,957 
2,378,377 
2,304,339 
2.  127,  403 
2,065,124 
1,940,414 
1,861,630 
953,573 

2,379 
2,137 
2,115 
2,533 
2,319 
2,271 
2,516 
1,995 
2,094 

$1,003,31611,947 
979,78312,321 
922,73614,587 
940,01313,968 
810,95013,218 
762,26412,290 
732,52612,420 
687,039!  6,582 
749,148!    (2) 

$409,636 
363,873 
427,689 
414,422 
505,  492 
414,706 
432,470 
582,919 
(2) 

10,  220 
8,215 
6,992 
6,899 
5,553 
5,585 
5,113 
3,204 
(2) 

$1,620,002 
1,009,935 
882,784 
828,218 
689,517 
778,117 
673,289 
591,672 
177,  169 

2,486 
2,259 
2,254 
2,281 
2,350 
2,647 
2,375 
C1) 
807 

$166,896 
153,366 
145,  168 
121,686 
121,444 
110,037 
102,  129 
0) 
27,256 

1917  
1916 

1915  

1914 

1913  
1912  

1911 

1900  

Arizona  . 

5,943 

680,734 

328 

134,  186 

2,688 

84,  153 

2,304 

411,507 

623 

50,888 

Camp  Verde  

144 
178 
1,001 
33 
76 
135 
217 
76 
292 
266 
769 
91 
499 
780 
1,115 
34 
237 

3,570 

36 
47 
52 
279 
540 
507 
440 
311 
269 
29 
650 
311 
99 

104 

28,980 
81,352 
25,668 
7,464 
5,526 
3,197 
11,751 
11,281 
38,.654 
24,  112 
55,158 
5,226 
36,  171 
58,030 
256,368 
2,301 
29,495 

454,335 

4 
20 
35 
7 
1 
2 
21 
36 
50 
24 
32 
10 
11 
36 
12 
5 
22 

108 

1,560 
13,  510 
14,988 
3,720 
300 
225 
5,552 
10,099 
24,288 
8,909 
17,398 
4,089 
3,660 
14,588 
4,668 
722 
5,910 

36,784 

140 
118 

27,420 
60,  180 

Colorado  River  
Fort  Apache  

40 
966 

7,662 
10,680 



Fort  Mojave  

26 

3,744 

Havasupai  .  . 

20 
101 
125 
40 
381 
100 
<482 
81 
23 
500 
43 
29 
57 

413 

171 
1,265 
3,374 
1,182 
35  080 
847 
*  24,  510 
1,137 
311 
21,847 
3,100 
1,579 
1,408 

33,931 

55 
30 
25 

5,055 
1,407 
250 

Kaibab 

2 
46 

300 
2,575 

Leupp  

Moqui 

Navajo.. 

(2) 

(2) 

3161 

142 
4  135 

«9,286 
14,356 
4  8,  000 

Phoenix  

Pima 

U20 

*5,250 

Rice  Station  

Salt  River 

453 
244 
1,000 

29,200 
21,595 
241,600 

12 

3,000 

San  Carlos  

San  Xavier  . 

60 

7,000 

Truxton  Canon  
Western  Navajo  

California 

119 
2,254 

19,550 
324,824 

39 

795 

2,627 
58,796 

Bishop  . 

6,470 
'   4,475 
1,650 
7,284 
64,060 
129,000 
49,  292 
43,375 
41,580 
2,179 
34,020 
65,553 
5,397 

8,411 

4 
3 

1,245 
1,500 

7 

2,725 

25 

2,500 

Campo 

44 

52 
250 
359 
410 
262 
298 
236 

2,975 
1,650 
4,500 
48,900 
103,550 
24,000 
40,321 
35,028 

Digger  

Fort  Bidwell 

3 
17 
2 
25 
11 
11 
4 
9 
17 
2 

10 

1,452 
4,560 
1,320 
8,949 
3,018 
3,082 
1,584 
4,604 
4,930 
540 

4,080 

26 
144 
25 
128 
2 
16 
25 

1,332 
9,600 
3,130 
13,843 
36 
1,250 
595 

Fort  Yuma  

20 
70 

25 

1,000 
21,000 
2,500 

Greenville 

Hoopa  Valley  . 

Malki... 

Pala 

6 

2,220 

Round  Valley  
Sherman  Institute.  . 
Soboba 

641 

§ 

29,  416 
160 

13 

27 

91 

1,163 
257 

4,181 

273 
70 

3 

59,300 
4,600 

150 

Tule  River  . 

Colorado 

Southern  Ute 

100 
4 

185 
..  371 

7,031 
1,380 

3,300 
44,665 

6 
4 

2,700 
1,380 

91 

4,181 

3 

150 

Ute  Mountain  
Florida*  Seminole 

185 
49 

3,300 
14,000 

Idaho. 

58 

19,550 

264 

11,115 

Coeur  d'Alene 

71 
292 

8 

33 
110 

21,910 
17,875 
4,880 

5,663 
14,512 

18 
32 

8 

10 
20 

7,460 
7,210 
4,880 

5,360 
11,899 

4 
260 

450 
10,  665 

49 

14,000 

Fort  Hall     . 

Fort  Lapwai 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas 

23 

g 

303 

178 

81 

2,435 

Haskell  Institute.... 
Kickapoo 

90 
18 
2 

8,455 
5,457 
600 

g 
9 
2 

6,020 
5,279 
600 

81 

2,435 

9 

178 

Potawatomi... 

1  Included  with  adults  by  private  parties. 

2  No  data  obtainable. 


a  1917  report. 
« 1916  report. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  149 

TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superinten- 
dencies. 

Total  employed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
Indian  service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Michigan 

14 

$6,414 

14 

$6,414 

Mackinac  

1 

13 

1,058 

574 
5,840 

131,514 

il 
13 

168 

1574 
5,840 

67,293 

Mount  Pleasant  
Minnesota 

614 

$23,331 

269 

840,540 

7 

$350 

Ca?s  Lake 

22 
9 
12 
217 
178 
46 
2«0 
25 
269 

1,982 

2,416 
4,500 
1,449 
31,  163 
19,  926 
8,650 
32,609 
6,760 
24,041 

337,084 

6 
9 
13 
33 
8 
10 
46 

3 

184 

2,245 
4,500 
i960 
12,422 
2,110 
5,700 
15,831 
6,460 
17,065 

71,170 

16 

171 

Fond  du  Lac.. 

Grand  Portaee.. 

19 
46 
70 
a 

223 
15 
.     226 

1,424 

1489 
1,541 
1,016 
1,000 
11,838 
300 
6,976 

68,246 

V 

Leech  Lake 

138 
100 
20 
11 

17,200 
16,800 
1,600 
4,940 

Nett  Lake  

Pipestone  
Red  T  ake. 

7 

350 

Vermillion  Lake.   .. 
While  Earth 

Montana 

374 

197,668 

Blackfeet  

196 
407 
207 
564 
110 
74 
424 

84 

113,869 
27,724 
63,501 
33,812 
49,240 
24,856 
24,082 

30,538 

34 
40 
37 
19 
26 

I 

46 

17,728 
16,  751 
5,814 
7,628 
11,600 
231 
11,418 

21,790 

42 
367 
30 
545 
25 
15 
400 

4 

14,861 
10,973 
287 
26,  184 
2,250 
1,027 
12,664 

278 

120 

81,280 

Crow 

Flathead  

140 

57,400 

Fort  BclVnap.  .. 

Fort  Peck  

59 

55 

35,390 
23,598 

Rocky  Boy's  Agency 
Tongue  RiArer  

Nebraska  *  .  . 

34 

8,470 

Genoa 

11 

4 
69 

1,098 

5,590 
1,860 
23,088 

103,311 

11 
4 
«31 

43 

5,590 
1,860 
14,340 

16.415 

Omaha  

Winnebaeo  

4 
412 

278 
8,876 

34 
553 

28,470 
72,320 

Nevada 

90 

5,700 

Carson 

146 
193 
188 
39 
10 
224 
298 

1,836 

12,980 
29,030 
33,628 
4.052 
4.422 
11.  770 
7,429 

195,739 

10 
3 

6 
3 
9 

4 

8 

232 

5,680 
930 
1,127 
552 
3,702 
1,740 
2,684 

73,318 

46 

1,600 

90 

5,700 

Fallen     

190 
165 
36 

28,100 
32,300 
3..  500 

Fort  McDermitt  
Moapa  River    

17 

201 

Nevada  

1 
58 
290 

788 

720 
1.610 
4,  745 

17,789 

Walker  River  

162 

8.420 

Western  Shoshone.  . 
New  Mexico            

539 

93.808 

277 

10.824 

Albuquerque  

145 
425 
280 
15 
346 
250 
186 
189 

29 

357 
1,798 

9,414 
32.935 
15,  102 
5,340 
86,047 
24,662 
10,  442 
11,797 

203 

68,636 
68,295 

12 
57 
28 
15 
37 
56 
16 
11 

5,220 
13.291 

7^160 
5,740 

27 
252 
217 

790 
7,514 
1,850 

106 

3.404 

Jicarilla  

116 
33 

12.  iso 

2,687 

Mescalero      

2 

60 

Pueblo  Bonito 

Pueblo  day  schools.. 
San  Juan 

39 
64 
53 
136 

29 

40 
1.663 

1,145 
2,226 
317 
3,947 

203 

2.576 
14,  616 

248 
100 

71,281 
5.600 

22 
30 
117 

1,395 
3,000 
2,965 

Santa  Fe  

Zuni  

New  York:  New  York 
Agency  

42 

2,110 

North  Carolina:  Chero- 
kee 

IS 

126 

5,760 
53,329 

304 

60,300 

North  Dakota 

9 

350 

Fort  Berthold 

75 
33 
1,560 
117 
13 

10,768        22!          9.318 
10,309         2l!        10,040 
36,930         64'        25,722 
7,369;        15|          5.680 
2,919           4           2,569 

53 
12 
1.496 
102 

1,450 
269 
11.208 
1,689 

Fort  Totten  

Standing  Rock1.  
Turtle  Mountain.... 
Wahpeton     

9 

350 

1 1917  report. 
2  Estimated. 


3  Does  not  include  Santee  now  under  Yankton,  S.  Dak. 
<  Includes  27  in  Armv. 


150  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superinten- 
dencies. 

Total  employed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
Indian  service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Oklahoma 

796 

$203,550 

315 

$190,  431 

388 

$6,  182 

32 

$5,200 

61 

$1,737 

62 

44 
332 

4 
92 
69 
17 
2 
7 
14 
5 
50 
8 
14 

9,180 

9,957 
15,199 

860 
80,600 
26,  128 
14,  140 
1.260 
3,530 
6,820 
3,920 
7,663 
4,080 
7,180 

12 

32 
19 

4 
92 
53 
17 
2 
7 
14 
5 
16 
"8 
14 

4,586 

9,800 
11,160 

860 
80,600 
25,051 
14,  140 
1,260 
3,530 
6,820 
3,920 
5.829 
4,080 
7,180 

21 

12 

252 

594 

157 
2,302 

29 

4,000 

Cheyenne  and  Ara- 

Chilocco 

61 

1,737 

Choctaw-Chicka- 
saw  Sanatorium.  . 
Five  Civilized  Tribes 
Kiowa 

16 

1,077 

Otoe 

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger 

31 

634 

3 

1,200 

Seneca 

Total  

720 
76 

190,517 

295 

178,816 

332 

4,764 

32 

5,200 

61 

•  '    — 

1,737 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 
Schools 

13,033 

20 

11,  615 

56 

1,418 

Armstrong 
Academy  
Bloomffeld 
Academy  
Cherokee  Train- 
ing 

10 
2 
35 

1 

10 
o 

A 

10 

i 

329 

3,497 
701 
1,596 

310 
1,135 

14 
3,417 
540 
1,823 
44.023 

3 
1 
2 

1 
1 

3,312 
576 
879 

310 
900 

7 
1 
33 

185 
125 
717 

Eufaula  Board- 
in? 

Jones  Academy. 
Mekusukey 
Academy  
Nuyaka  Board- 
ing 

9 
2 
4 

235 
14 
142 

6 
1 
5 
89 

3,275 
540 
1,823 
35,995 

Tuskahoma 

Whe  e  1  o  ck 

Oregon 

240 

8,028 

Klamath  ' 

160 
29 
G 
44 
90 

494 
2,865 

11,683 
11,  103 
2,904 
8,203 
10,  130 

39,239 
272,393 

15 
27 
\ 

20 
21 

9 

337 

7,594 
10,  527 
2,904 
5,672 
9,298 

4,519 
136,  485 

145 

£ 

4,089 
576 

Salem 

Siletz 

Umatilla 

24 

69 

9 
1,528 

2,531 
832 

52,558 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle.. 
South  Dakota  

476 
1 

34,  716 
150 

999 

83.200 

Cheyenne  River.  .... 
Crow  Creek 

618 
21] 

K 
.27 
.,097 

731 
31 

30,  474 
17,610 
8.048 
9.503 
2,783 
103.661 
4,307 
74,858 
12.  389 
1,000 
7,760 

87,931 

46         17,988 
27         15,  123 
16           6,991 
J6,804 
2,549 
38,848 
8]          4,  160 
801        23,675 
20         11,  737 
2           1.000 
15           7.  610 

29           9,422 

572 
-184 
14 
67 
19 
335 

31* 
11 

12.486 
2,487 
907 

2'^ 
M.S 

26.883 
652 

1 

150 

1 

500 

Pierre 

Pine  Ridge 

665 

58,400 

Rapid  City 

Rosebud 

333 

24,300 

16 
576 

Y  ankton  2 

1 
199 

150 
6,109 

L'tah 

348 

72,400 

341 

71,811 
3.324 
12  7Qfi 

1 

2 
Qfi 

594 
324 
8  MM 

40 
25 
I'M 

1,217 

600 
4.292 

300 

48 

70,000 
2,400 

Shivwits 

75 
ifin 

i  1917  report. 

8  Includes  Santee,  formerly  listed  in  Nebraska. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  151 

TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superinten- 
dences. 

Total  employed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
Indian  service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn, 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Washington  

1,332 

$146,687 

103 

$43,929 

351 

810,168 

878 

$92,  590 

Colville 

276 
679 
22 
36 
28 
195 
96 

1,498 

42,  758 
54,528 
2,710 
2,428 
2,564 
28,685 
13,014 

191,954 

21 
12 

7 
8 
8 
20 
27 

108 

12,368 
5,070 
2,542 
1,863 
2,244 
8,615 
11,227 

44,843 

229 
1 
15 

28 

5.970 

8 
168 
565 

26 
666 

24,420 
49,450 

Cushman  

Neah  Bay 

Spokane 

Taholah     

20 
166 

320 
18,400 

Tulalip 

9 

229 

1,670 

1,787 

6,436 

Yakima  

Wisconsin.  

1,095 

139,  725 

66 

$950 

Hayward 

464 
79 
141 
32 
513 
14 
232 
23 

570 

30,  480 
13.260 
10,669 
2,970 
63,188 
5,373 
62,945 
3,069 

60,719 

17 
33 
14 
2 

7 
14 
5 
16 

29 

9,480 
11,  767 
7,955 
1,620 
3,036 
5,373 
2,820 
2,792 

10,344 

40 
46 
127 

1,500 
1,493 
2,714 

367 

18,900 

40 

600 

Keshena  

Luc  du  Flambeau... 
Laona  

30 
500 

1,350 
60,000 

La  Pointe  

6 

152 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff    

3 
7 

541 

300 
277 

50,375 

198 

59,475 

26 

350 

Tomah 

Wyoming:  Shoshone.  .  .'. 

152 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


i 


Families  l 
in- 


00  4<1  O  O»  ^  O 


^  O  Tf 

(NrH-<t< 


oooo^wooogoo 


pill 

^  *•-* 


^ 


£3  :    S 


3^co«      «      eg 


rHCO.t-IMO'H(N  IN 


to  i-l  O  -^  OO  >O  O        OSO-^Ot^Q       rH 

rtcoej          ooo      t^**oqo      S      o 


o5CTiO'raco'O'ti'ooooco 


Grand  to 
na 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

ISSSSSS    3 

1          CO  i-H          CO  i™<          l> 


153 


03       (N       00 


^  -^  ,-»         {0         ^t< 

Si8    1    3 


§§  °°  I 


5000 


•*  x  oo  >o  I 

- 


co      t 


t^  CO  CS  I>  ^        >O 

fH  i-H  CO         00 


T 

O  <N  00  1-1  <O 
0  CO  t-  CO  1-1  • 


Ot-(OOOOOO 


° 


^H  ,-H  ^H  IO 

t-  -^  n  to 


o 


II! 


I 


^  s 
ll  m 


3:S«'^2 

^»  ^     X  W     -^ 


|ff 

•go 

Wfc 


•85 

2£ 


JWPH  >>3 

„..„«  !  llnm  I 

pMOJ^PnPH^     -2     PQofmfe^tfH      2 


154 


COMMISSIONEK  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 

lO  CO        "0  O  O         O        *O         0 
t--  ^«        CO  CO  CO        O        *O        0 


SIP 


sss  s 

Jr-l         t^         O 


1 


S 


to        **i 


CO  'O  O  O  i-( 
t-^-  t^  Oi  t^»  to 
<N  IN  r»  00  CM 


;3  3 


8S3 


J-HOjjOO^CO 
3  -^  OO  »—  *  ^  * 


tOOOCOiOi-H 

COOOtOcOC^^H 


o  o     o 

O  •»*        (N 


£S£So 


t^.      to  i-t  t-i-i 


l»l 

fl«- 


1111 


I!! 


1-1       CO 

1-t         00 


r*  -*  0  t^  CO  i 


O5  co  oo  oo  t^  o 


^SSS    2    S 


CM  OO  tOi-H        iO 


>~r    c<Tco~ 


+»'  ;  :  : fl  ? 

111! 


i  II I  i  1  1 
ill  1 1  t  e 


I  !  I 


jtfS 

o  -2 

S   ilg1! 

I  fill  § 

2  Illl  1 
I          1 


ment 
ne  and 


§O  O>  CO  IN  OO  ID  • 
O"O  O  i-H  CO  •"*"  ( 
TH  OS  rH  i-l  CO  TH  TH  1 


So 


JOCO-OIMO 


2I« 


[SSSSSS 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

8338  8  S882888?  Q  323 


123    8 


'^^2    3 


t~  CO  CO  CO 


t-  o  •*  »o  -*t<  01  o  o     oo 

CO^S         C<|Tt<rH»Ol-«-         rH 
i-H  CO  C^  CO  TH 


>  t>-         -T* 

w  s 


iO  lO 


- 


-co, 


si 
rt 


No 
AS  r 
Incl 


lil 


Goshute 
Shivwits 
Uintah  and 


1    1 

Irfl 

ill 


Illl 


155 


156 


COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN"   AFFAIRS. 


jg  fcJD  O 

III 


il-il  * 
11 B18 


"w 

w 


:isisii3 


:S5    S 


'1<*iiO        O 

3  $5    So 


IS 


11 


II 


COMMISSIONS  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


157 


— 

Iff* 

s 


M 


ot 

CN  10  l>  0 


I  1-H          CO        O 


52W 


g 
II 


:$2GPPO02 


M 

III 

111 


•S   w   ft 


!! 

O    02 

0^0 


:a  :  a 


fi 


Us 


ill 

«^§g,i 
•e-eggfe 

£££&$ 


158 


COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


J?3o 

lISss 

i.§§2 

tfrt1"1 


00        Oi 
CO         CO 


^H«O      oo      10      eo       H 


^H^ifl        0 


- 


His 


•fll-*  * 


HIM 


BOSS'S 


ll 


IS   ;« 

=1  i'S 
:  08  ,os 
>.>.  •  >i 


i  -:   1 


S||5 

§  ®  §  "d 
m-^-<H 


Sch 
Age 


1-      I 

P     I 


bag 


i,l 


Do 

ort  M 
oapa 


3    M 


ll  i  1  III 

9 

£ 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

3       t-3'- 


159 


§  g 


§ 


g    | 


160 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


i 


Itii 

&*^ 


<N        03 

r-l        00 


sa  s 


0050000 


!-§-§-§ 


%  ;  ;|n« 

;;  S  Si  i; 


tah: 
ash 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


161 


8822S! 

T-I  (N  10  e<i  o- 

l-T^I-Tr-T^f. 


ll  : 

la  ' 

>5 


Sf2  oo 


icotp-Q 


alue  of 
pplies. 


lue  o 

tions  . 


•=•        P" 


<M  O5  N  O 


?  i- 

•rt*  Cp  CO  CO  CO 
CO  <N  CO  <N  rt< 


5  O  OlO  O 


I    * 

3 


5 


Value  of 

ralions. 


[2^^§?§2 


eivincT 
tions. 


lO  10  CO  1C  >O  S 


•  ic  os  o^  ^o  o 

•  O5CN1         CO^HC 

•  to          <N(M 


r-c^cot-H 


IN'CO"    i-Tr-T     cT     u? 


:  :S  : 


1C  u 

FH  CO  l^  05  1 


.2  «> 


. 
llll  1 


86770—18 11 


162 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


. 
Indians  receiving  miscellaneous  supplies. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

^  H^ 
*cs 

-  A 

"5  5* 

SB6"  : 

« 

CO 

31 

co" 

1  8 

10  1|       3  :g    g. 

iO 

S  IO       '      •  ?4  00 

cf        •'    :      ~* 

gs  j  jsg 

£"2 

0       TH       . 

:   s 

rH  CO       '       •         Tt*       -(M         ^ 

:  :        i00    - 

|| 

<;  3 

*  :  : 

:    sx 

S 

o      -o 

t*» 

•  1^  -H                               •       •          T 

•  rj.cc                    ;     •       10 

^   :    S!g 

;    ; 

j 

In  return  for  labor. 

*Q    C/:                                 O  rH  ^ 

3  &, 

"3  P, 

a 

i  i 

:    S 

00        O  T                 '•     •       b- 

^2          :  :   1 

I-H      •       to      ' 
iO      •       b-      • 
cc     ;      iM     ; 

• 

•  • 

Number. 

"*  IO 

n 

;  ; 

'  •    cs> 

-*    ?5^        :  :    S 

(N      '       OO      ' 

i-l      •        rf       • 

:  :      : 

lO  O5            •  iO  00 

<N"            •     r-T 

1 

6 

Value  of 

supplies. 

oo  10  cc  M< 

WrHtO1 

E 

i 

co" 

SS 

CO* 

3    g 

irT 

Receiving 
supplies. 

ooo  co 

iQ 

8 

S 

0        CO 

lOOO  CO  ^        •«•      '<N        00 

•  ^^           :w    § 

O  b-             •  tO  IO 

OS-*              .0500 

Indians  receiving  rations. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

VTalue  of 
rations. 

S|c2£S| 

CO 

g 

OO" 

•oTco*"     oo" 

to" 

iC  IN  t>  •*       1--  O  to       00 

SP^SR  sgs  a 

3g£83S 

lOOO'r-ioSc 

2  s 

J^    ^3M?J 

&$ 
fil 

.     Sg^?^ 

§ 

§1 

1 

COO5i-l^         b-  5O  tO         •* 

(M      to  ro           t^  Tf       JO 

"*>  o  «oe<  OT  t< 

i—  1  00  -T1  C^l  IO  CO 
(N         rH  fO        <JO 

Able- 
bodied. 

•^       (N 

1 

883 

12 

Ico     i    I         I    '.    !      10 

3  °°  §§ 

Kj:j  If  |  , 

l 
In  return  for  labor. 

Value  of 
rations. 

•       O5"! 

1 

g  §  j    ;  j|  | 

w      :SS 

•ij 

CO* 

C^                          rH  C- 

Number. 

!             <M           '. 

co 

:  : 

CO 

'      S    ;'      ;    j-      § 

O                  00  O5  •*! 
Cg                  -HOCO 

la 
1 

Value  of 
rations. 

8|g§22|    | 

r-  Tr-T                                       00" 

Tpco"     oo" 

8 

GO 

GO  <M  oo  -^      r^  o  o      e^i 

Or-llOO         00  CO  >O         IO 
O>t^TTt^         CMOOOO         t- 

CO  O5  O>  b-  00  to 

to  r~  r*  r-t  05  »-H 

O5  OO  rH  rH  IO  O 

•S    g 

CO       1001-JN 

CO                  rH          {s| 

.|«    \       Sg£2888    | 

(S^      1 

*S  i 

M 

o 

r~  N  os  to      t^  to  to     o 
IM  oo  t^  cc          r^  m      *T 

rH  C-         00 

c^T 

iO  O  CO  O  to  tC 
cs»  3C  10  -^r  to  oo 

A'Ssl^S 
S'-S-grgjFS 

^^d5«a 

0  §  oo  S  S  2  So     co 
3p  ^i  53  35  oS  »o         c3 

o  o      cc      10      ^o 

•^ 

e^     rH~ 

Q  lO  O  U5  rH  CO 
0  CO  10  tj  rr  10 
O3CO  I-  »O 

States  and 
reservations. 

'i  :::::: 

i  •   •'  1 

o  S      '    .S 

21  1  ''i 

6  11  t  1  1 

|   s|   b  .1  i 

-2     '^^     •§     «•  I 

2         s  s  s 

i  i  i  ':.?  i     :           i     i  :|  i 

(  itlii'ornia  —  Continu 
Greenville...... 
Hoopa  Valley.. 
Malki  
Pala  
Round  Valley.. 
Soboba  
Tule  River.  .  . 

^fj  !g  i  d      i  |Jd 

iiiis 

1  linn 

o 

S 

COMMISSIONEE  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


163 


«« 


sss 


o  r*  o»  c<i  »o 

c<»  ec  oo  oi  t^ 


05~oo" 


SI 


CO  IO  O  O  C5  O       O 

eo  f-<  <*  eo  t-H  •*      w 


OO 


£00 


r-t  10  O  O5 
**  O  Tf  TJI 


ill  i 


t-~  5<  i-H  00  iO  U3 


cnao'cQ'c*cfc*c<5'     i-T 


Fallen 
Fort  McDermitt 
Moapa  River 
Nevada 
Walker  River 
Western  Shoshone 
Reno,  Special  Age 


8    3$  oo 

123 
^§§ 

KSf^PH 


:'l     I 

|l    g 

ell  I  * 


5  832    &    ^ 

gs§§  o  e 


I  •« 

fc   ^ 


'II 

ia« 

S|^ 

fe03&-l 


iii 

Jsjs  •* 
s&  « 
«s£  a 


o 
-d 

»s 
II 


164 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


Value 
suppli 


Value 
suppli 


Value  of 
supplies. 


ving 
lies. 


pp 


Value  of 
rations. 


Value  of 
rations. 


i 


:§  :  : 


tate 
serv 


"     o  Oi»CCO 
*  rH  OO  !>•  Tf* 


PL 


COMMISSIONEE  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


165 


IB, 


i  »OO     •     • 

-(MO     •     > 


2 


II 


P  m_Q  s  fcuQ 


t— oo 

i-«N  "3 


i 


a°§« 
III* 


166 


Ssa' 


COMMISSIONEB  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

SS&c^ 


S 


32.2^5 

'SbS  *»  ° 

SI  M 


s  s 


1 


t 


- 

il 

0*0 

j—  i    CO 


I 


^ 


88    - 


•"    S 


lilts  ! 


•*  o     o 
rtdt      <N 


:§§    2    1 


^ 

I 


H3l§ 


l^ 


IP 


^(»O  <N        W 


S§8| 


;SS    S 


00  IN        CO 
O  O        T»< 


fl--: 


>     i     i  o3     •  o     • 

yjiiii 


S3 


Ute 

da: 


•   ;   •  M 

I  if'  9 

3=3  S,  •§ 

^w^  2 


s  ill 


Iow 
Kan 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


167 


S  So  2£  §  §  co  w  8      oo 

CC        CC  i—  1        CO  OQ  ^ 

IN" 


i-KN  05 


00  QO  "*  CC  00  O  O»  CC 
(M  t^  00  O5  CO  <N  "*i  CS 
lOCC^CC^f  !M 


2?5    2 


§  amici 


ccaoosoo          cc 

IM  O  CC  CO  t-  «O 

Tfi  CM  O  •*  ^f  •* 


c^i  O  O  ;c 


•  o 


CC  1-4        .  i-H 


tOO5CO<Nt~O>e 
CJ  N        CC  •*  i-H 


— 


s 


CO         i-l 


kO  lO  • 

cooo 


fi  5 
If 


20  from  Sant 
d. 
Rehoboth  m 


sgs 

CCOSCOCOiC(Nt^      -g'-ScS 
JH  SH  S  I-H  CO  CO  "*      ^^S 


11 
If 


•*  iO  1 
CO  T-H 


t^rf  t^ 


IN  10  1-1  cc  r-  o  t^ 

r-l  (N  IN  Tf  —  1  (N  rfi 


n  Lake  School 
e. 
Fort  Belknap 
tine  mission, 


^^   JEW  gg> 
"Sss*^ 

®6s^ 

>sOco 

llll 

£8S£ 
^£*t< 


;s§g^^ 


lll-lSli 


tion 
i. 


ff  re 
ool, 
vati 


s 


ndi 


s  I 
St. 
s  pu 
ort. 


^          :|3        >JiSj«||    o     :«f|  :^  111 2 

J"i   ^"5l  -§  ^oJ^^J*  s   §j§§§i"i  ^v^r^4 
2      O  !*  Oa       *      feptiSZ^^PH       ^      fn  W  PH  MH  OD  N«5 


168 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


—  g 
' 


• 


a 


a 


•3  i 

>>    ] 


3l 

~Oo 

H  M 


oo  o  S  r2  o 
^H  (M  "C  3C 


*  i 


§?    2 


Ifi 


• 

I 


S  :Si 


il 


Bfl 


£.1 1  lllll  1  383!!!!, 

i         0         C  'S 

K^     ^     ^  O 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


169 


oo      os    e<i    coco 


>ooo      • 


J>     t-     CO  t~  OSW 

3  S3  SSS2 


JO      CO     CN  CO  O5 

oT  of  coco* 


lO     CO     ^  t"~  CO  C^ 

CO     OC     00  <N  00  i-o 


Co" 


™ 


ahoma—  Continue 
Five  Civilized  Tri 


Ill 


S    S  : 


!!§§ 


'2^32    ^ 


00       COCN 


If)        .01 


o    • 

w 


O  O  O  cOi 
O  I-H  O  CC  f 


<N  co          i-i 


r^-oc  CD  a  or: 


O-*  O> 
CO  IO  CO 


•d  fl<§ 

111 


coosociNociocoas 


il-8 


r-i  »—  I        O 


;;  II  Ism 


<3>  CO  (N  b-  U5 


or.  o  « 

5  1C  T-< 


i-iili 


lil 


Gioshute. 
Shivwits..!"// 
Uintah  and  O 

ashingto 


f 
Ifltll.ii  rr: 


170 

1 

1 

CO 

1 

i 

^ 

-S5 

1 

COMMISS 

>IO£ 

rER    OF   INDIAN 

AFFAIRS. 

1 

s 

s 

•5 

h-I 

1 

1 

">. 

i 

1 

I 

! 
1 

p< 

g 
s 

•s 
1 

00" 

13 

X5  0- 

On                         j 

JO 

00  OO       -l^OOi-HrH                1« 
C005       .-*-*T»<^jl>                tO 

.S3  P< 

! 

>o 

•1  Is  i  ss  i    i 

S  bi) 

p 

* 

i  i"  i  r  j  i  "  1  I  !  1  i  i  i  i  i  | 

I 

"S 

0 

o 

i 

I 

'  t^OO     '           •     '10             CM 

8 

:  :S1     ;S  :      1 

1 

oo" 

TABLE  17.—  Indian  and  school  population,  number  eligible  for  school  attendance,  number  in  schools,  etc.,  and 
children  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918  —  Continued. 

§1  «  « 

1 

S«jis*is      I 

d 

I 

o 
ej 

a  . 

H  ; 

1 

oo 

i 

.2 

3 

3 
PH 

1 

?*  r"?s"    s 

Mission  and 
private. 

Q 

to 

;;"!""!     i 

:::::::: 

w'rt 

CO 

|F^    i 

:  :  :  :     :  :  : 

Government. 

I 

oc 
co 

aiSa^B815  i 

r"^""" 

oo 

CO 

1 

0 

:SS  :  :  :  j8  :    S 

Ifta- 

i 

!i«a?23  :  :    55 

iilii 

§ 

agsa-sga*  9 

1"""^^^ 

00 

,   n-6    . 

pi  I       . 

W  .Q'tg  * 

0 

co" 

- 

<N  CO  CM  M  tO  rH  i-(  ^H 

oc 

CO 

"cSjs  ®  § 

1 

^escoS<Ni2'*^    j      ?J 





IIP 

I 

eo* 

1 

8^2 

oc 

CO 

i 

oT 

co  c5  12  1^  co  o  to  10    •      to 

a 

o 

1 

3 

CO 

i 

I  i  il  •  ;  :  :  :    %     :     ::::::       I 

f  j  ifj-U;;i  J  i  j  i  ]  |  !'  j    g 

rt'SosS  :|  ig-g    £      :     :£  :|  :  :    Jo 
a    •§||5«l5§|    w     •      -a  -5s  8  ;    -2 

j                j              efl 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


171 


nrollmen 
cademic  i 


172 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 

ytar  ended  June  30,  1918. 


Superintendences  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Grand  total 

33  828 

33  980 

29  064 

23  822 

Arizona  .        

5  633 

5  388 

4  904 

4  286 

Camp  Verde  superintendency.  .  . 

60 

57 

52 

42 

• 

Camp  Vftrde 

30 

21 

19 

16 

Dav 

Clarksdale 

30 

36 

33 

26 

Do 

Colorado  River  

80 

84 

79 

76 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Apache  superintendency.  .  . 

372 

426 


407 

' 
372 

i 

Fort  Apache 

200 

267 

257 

241 

Do 

Canon  

42 

38 

38 

34 

Day. 

Cibecue 

50 

38 

31 

28 

Do 

East  Fork... 

40 

41 

39 

35 

Do. 

Cibecue                ..  . 

20 

21 

21 

17 

Mission  day;   Evangelical  Lu- 

East Fork  

20 

21 

21 

17 

theran. 
Do. 

Fort  Mohave 

200 

155 

134 

117 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Havasupai  .  . 

35 

34 

29 

26 

Day. 

Kaibab    ... 

22 

22 

18 

14 

Do 

Leupp  superintendency 

183 

112 

109 

104 

Leupp  

163 

103 

100 

95 

Reservation  boarding. 

Tolchaco 

20 

9 

9 

9 

Mission  boarding;  Evangelical 

Moqui  superintendency  

499 

437 

-—          _•-•!        ..       _ 

419 

"-  -     -     -—    .'- 

278 

Lutheran. 

Moqui  i 

125 

Reservation  boarding. 

Chimopo  vy  
Hoteville-Bicabi 

50 
72 

39 
137 

39 
129 

18 

89 

Day. 
Do. 

Oraibi  

80 

71 

70 

49 

Do. 

Polacca    .  . 

100 

124 

115 

74 

Do. 

Second  Mesa           

72 

66 

66 

48 

Do. 

Navajo  superintendency  2 

1  076 

1  086 

971 

886 

Navajo    . 

350 

302 

268 

257 

Reservation  boarding. 

Chin  Lee.  .  .  . 

166 

195 

162 

142 

Do. 

Tohatchi. 

250 

215 

196 

188 

Do. 

Cornfields  

25 

30 

27 

16 

Day. 

Luki  Chuki  . 

60 

27 

22 

13 

Do. 

Ganado 

35 

47 

42 

38 

Mission  day;  Presbyterian. 

Rehoboth  

40 

70 

69 

63 

Mission    boarding;     Christian 

St.  Michael's  

150 

200 

185 

169 

Reformed. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Phoenix  

700 

780 

714 

650 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pima  superintendency 

834 

876 

802 

688 

Pima. 

218 

289 

257 

223 

Reservation  boarding. 

Blackwater 

36 

40 

37 

25 

Day. 

Casa  Blanca 

40 

60 

51 

36 

Do. 

Chiu  Chuischu 

40 

19 

16 

10 

Do. 

Cocklebur 

40 

20 

19 

5 

Do. 

GilaBend  . 

30 

28 

23 

15 

Do. 

Gila  Crossing 

40 

32 

31 

27 

Do. 

Maricopa 

40 

28 

27 

25 

Do. 

Quajote  

40 

16 

16 

9 

Do. 

Santan  

40 

35 

29 

25 

Do. 

St.  Ann's  (Guadalupe)  
St.John's  

35 
235 

19 
290 

16 
280 

10 

278 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Rice  Station  

216 

225 

212 

197 

Reservation  boarding. 

Salt  River  superintendency  

158 

110 

105 

92 

Camp  McDowell  x 

40 

Day. 

Salt  River  .. 

88 

76 

75 

68 

Do. 

Lehi             

30 

34 

30 

24 

Do. 

1  .Not  in  operation. 


2 191 7  report. 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


173 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona—  Continued  . 
San  Carlos  superintendency  

165 

252 

196 

162 

San  Carlos  

100 

117 

95 

88 

Day. 

Bylas 

40 

100 

69 

51 

Do 

,  Rice  

25 

35 

32 

23 

Mission  day;   Evangelical  Lu- 

San Xavier  superintendency  

520 

40T 

349~ 

295~ 

theran. 

San  Xavier 

155 

121 

103 

92 

Day 

Indian  Oasis           

30 

32 

32 

11 

Do 

Santa  Rosa 

30 

45 

27 

18 

Do 

Tucson  

35 

31 

19 

13 

Do 

Vamori 

40 

33 

29 

24 

Do 

Lourdes 

30 

23 

23 

23 

Mission  day  Catholic 

St.  Anthony's      

30 

16 

16 

16 

Do 

San  Miguel 

20 

22 

22 

22 

Do 

San  Salano  

20 

29 

29 

27 

Do 

Tucson    .      . 

130 

49 

49 

49 

Mission   boarding'     Presbyte- 

rian. 

Truxton  Canon 

140 

101 

100 

94 

Reservation  boarding 

Western  Navajo  superintendency. 

373 

230 

208 

193 

Western  Navajo  

308 

161 

142 

130 

Do 

Marsh  Pass 

30 

30 

28 

25 

Do 

Moencopi  

35 

39 

38 

38 

Dav. 

California 

1  948 

2  034 

1  725 

1  321 

Bishop  superintendency 

140 

98 

80 

65 

Bishop 

60 

43 

34 

26 

Do 

Big  Pine 

30 

20 

16 

15 

Do 

Independence  .  . 

20 

15 

13 

11 

Do 

Pine  Creek 

30 

20 

17 

13 

Do 

Campo.          ..  . 

30 

16 

14 

13 

Do 

Fort  Bid  well  superintendency  .  .  . 

118 

110 

98 

82 

FortBidwell... 

98 

96 

90 

76 

Nonreservatiori  boarding 

Likely 

20 

14 

g 

g 

Dav 

Fort  Yuma  superintendency  .... 

220 

168 

167 

159 

Fort  Yuma  

180 

156 

155 

149 

Reservation  boarding 

Cocopah 

40 

12 

12 

10 

Day 

Greenville  

90 

144 

110 

86 

Hoopa  Valley 

165 

187 

138 

114 

MalM  superintendency  :  St.  B  oni- 
face.i 

Pala  superintendency 

100 

98~ 

125 
73 

125 

=rrr=^= 

66 

90 
52 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Pala  

30 

27 

24 

20 

Dav 

Capitan  Grande 

24 

14 

11 

g 

Do 

La'Jolla  

30 

20 

19 

14 

Do 

Rincon  

14 

12 

12 

10 

Do 

Round  Valley  superintendency.  . 

191 

118 

110 

56 

Round  Valley  .  .  . 

80 

50 

49 

24 

Do 

Potter  Valley    . 

16 

10 

9 

g 

Do 

Ukiah    . 

25 

19 

16 

10 

Do 

Yokaia  

40 

16 

16 

g 

Do 

Upper  Lake 

30 

23 

20 

10 

Do 

Sherman  

650  ! 

884 

715 

541 

1 

Soboba  superintendency  

60  I 

32 

30 

26 

Mesa  Grande 

30 

14 

13 

13 

Day 

Volcan  

30 

18 

17 

13 

Do. 

.  

: 

"_       

1917  report. 


174 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Calif  ornia—  Continued  . 
Tule  River  superintendency  

86 

79 

72 

37 

Day. 

Tule  River 

30 

23 

20 

7 

Do 

Auberry  

32 

31 

28 

17 

Do 

Burrough 

24 

25 

24 

13 

Do 

Colorado     

105 

102 

91 

75 

Southern  Ute  superintendency.  . 


80 

—  T 

72~ 

===== 
61 

Southern  Ute 

50 

61 

54 

45 

\llen 

30 

19 

18 

16 

Day 

Ute  Mountain 

25 

22 

19 

14 

Do 

Idaho                  

590 

493 

393 

288 

Coeur  d'Alene  superintendency. 

140 

103 

91 

67 

Kalispel 

30 

22 

21 

11 

Do 

Kootenai    

30 

25 

24 

15 

Do 

De  Smet                .... 

80 

56 

46 

41 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Fort  Hall  superintendency  

270 

205 

164 

119 

Fort  Hall 

200 

155 

115 

88 

Skull  Valley       

-20 

12 

11 

7 

Day 

Good  Shepherd 

30 

22 

22 

16 

Mission  boarding*  Episcopal 

Presbyterian  Mission  

20 

16 

16 

8 

Mission  day*  Presbyterian 

Fort  Lapwai  superintendency... 

180 

185 

138 

102 

Sanatorium  and  school 

80 

123 

89 

70 

Boarding 

St.  Joseph's  

100 

62 

49 

32 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic 

Iowa 

150 

175 

169 

150 

Sac  and  Fox  superintendency.  .  . 

150~ 

175 

169 

150~ 

Sanatorium  and  school  

80 

113 

113 

110 

Boarding. 

Fox 

40 

28 

24 

16 

Dav 

Mesquakle  

30 

34 

32 

24 

Do. 

Kansas 

771 

1  031 

865 

684 

Haskell        >.  ... 

700 

922 

771 

595 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kickapoo 

71 

109 

94 

89 

Reservation  boarding. 

Michigan 

702 

582 

529 

490 

Mackinac  superintendency  .  . 

352 

213 

192 

183 

Baraga  (Holy  Name) 

152 

80 

68 

60 

Mission    boarding    and    day 

Harbor  Springs  (Holy  Child- 
hood). 

200 

133 

124 

123 

Catholic. 
.Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Mount  Pleasant 

350 

369 

337 

307 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Minnesota     

1  423 

1  431 

1  171 

929 

Cass  Lake  

40 

63 

46 

40 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fond  du  Lac  superintendency.  .  . 

74 

39 

31 

17, 

Fond  du  Lac  .  

40 

24 

19 

9 

Day. 

Nonnantown 

34 

15 

12 

8 

Do. 

Grand  Portage  

20 

14 

12 

10 

Do. 

Leech  Lake 

116 

129 

86 

65 

Reservation  boarding. 

Nett  Lake  

60 

49 

43 

31 

Day. 

Pipestone  

212 

195 

164 

145 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Red  Lake  superintendency  

238 

294 

256 

184 

Red  Lake 

75 

107 

89 

69 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cross  Lake 

93 

92 

79 

58 

Do. 

St.  Mary's  

70 

95 

88 

57 

Contract     Mission     boarding; 
Catholic. 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


175 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average  |  Average 
enroll-     attend- 
ment.  1    ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Minnesota  —  Continued  . 
Vermillion  Lake  

110 

128 

118 

415  ! 

~18T 
34 
11 
32 
17 
31 
109 

1,304 

103 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do. 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Contract     mission     boarding; 
Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Do. 
Mission  day;   American   Mis 
sionary  Society. 
Mission  day;  Baptist. 
Mission   day;   American   Mis- 
sionary Society. 
Mission  day;  Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission    boarding    and    day 
Presbyterian. 

Day. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Contract     mission     boarding; 
Catholic. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Mission  boarding;  Dutch  Re- 
formed. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 

White  Earth  superintendency  .  .  . 
White  Earth                      .  .  . 

553 

250~ 
30 
30 
53 
30 
30 
130 

1.833 

520 

261 
40 
12 
39 
22 
32 
114 

1,552 

334 

137 
28 
9 
25 
12 
22 
101 

1,059 

Beaulieu 

Elbow  Lake  
Pine  Point 

Round  Lake      

Twin  Lake 

St  Benedict's 

Montana 

Blackfeet  superintendency     

349 

317 

226 

181 

Blackfeet       

144 
30 
30 
145 

181 
21 
25 
90 

128 
16 
22 

60 

103 
11 
17 
50 

Heart  Butte 

Old  Agency  Day  

Holy  Family  

Crow  superintendency  

442 

315 

291 

248 

Crow     

100 
47 
30 

50 
35 

25 
125 
30 

70 

47 
27 

31 
45 

17 
61 
17 

63 
46 
27 

26 
45 

17 
52 
15 

163 
213~ 

52 
39 
25 

21 
34 

15 
50 
12 

145~ 

Pry  or  Creek     .            

Black  Lodge 

Lodge  Grass* 

Reno  

St  Ann's 

San  Xavier    

Wvola 

Flathead    superintendency:  St. 
Ignatius. 
Fort  Belknap  superintendency... 

Fort  Belknap  .  .  . 

300 

180 

251 

262 

172 

51 
40 
160 

121 

34 
107 

98 
24 
91 

83 
13 
76 

Lodge  Pole 

St.  Paul's       

Fort  Peck  superintendency  .  .  . 

250 

262 

230 

197 

Fort  Peck 

120 
30 
30 
30 
40 

25~ 
216~ 

129 
22 
27 

18 
66 

117 
19 
21 
16 

57 

107 
14 
12 
13 
51 

No.  1  

No.  2 

No.  4  

Wolf  Point 

Rocky  Boy's  1. 

Tongue  River  superintendency.  . 
Tongue  River 

210 

181 

116 

69 
47 
40 
60 

607 

81 
46 
43 
40 

615 

72 

40 
34 
35 

520 

47 
23 
23 
23 

386 

Birney  ... 

Lamedeer 

St.  Labre's      .     . 

Nebraska 

Genoa 

400 

488 

393 

'-—  -     "              .__! 

127 

280 

ioe" 

Winnebago  superintendency  
Winnebago  Mission  

207 

127 

60 

122 
25 

700 

'     60 

49 
18 

741 

60 

49 
18 

604 

57 

37 
12 

496 

St.  Augustine     

All  Saints  

Nevada     

Carson 

336 

408 

337 

267 

Fallen  superintendency 

65 

49 

39 

33 

Fallon  

40 
25 

30 
19 

23 
16 

20 
13 

Lovelocks 

Not  in  operation. 


176 


COMMISSIONED   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Nevada—  Continued  . 
Fort  McDermitt       

80 

59 

42 

35 

Dav 

Moapa  River 

20 

19 

17 

16 

Do 

Nevada 

70 

83 

65 

58 

Reservation  boarding 

Walker  River       

60 

29 

24 

19 

Dav 

Western  Shoshone  superintend- 
ency. 

69 

94 

80 

68 

Western  Shoshone  No.  1  
Western  Shoshone  No.  2  

New  Mexico  

35 

34 

2,967 

40 

54 

3,268 

34 

46 

2,996 

27 
41 

2,609 

Do. 
Do. 

\lbuquerque 

400 

470 

447 

387 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Jicarilla       

108 

97 

92 

89 

Reservation  boarding. 

Mescalero             

100 

114 

113 

110 

Do. 

Pueblo  Bonito  superintendency.. 

.      210 

222 

177 

148 

Pueblo  Bonito 

180 

197 

156 

132 

Do 

Pinedale     

30 

25 

21 

16 

Day. 

Pueblo  day  superintendency  

1,341 

1,365 

1,242 

1,010 

Albuquerque— 

32 

26 

23 

19 

Do 

Encinal          

30 

25 

22 

17 

Do.     ' 

Isleta 

120 

126 

112 

93 

Do. 

Laguna    

34 

53 

47 

40 

Do. 

McCarty's      

38 

34 

27 

20 

Do. 

Mesita 

38 

34 

30 

24 

Do. 

Paguate    

60 

76 

72 

63 

Do. 

Paraje                      .  .. 

20 

39 

35 

29 

Do. 

San  Felipe 

60 

63 

60 

47 

Do 

Seama     

28 

*40 

35 

30 

Do. 

Bernalillo                    -  . 

125 

104 

98 

92 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Santa  Fe-r 
Cochiti  

28 

31 

26 

24 

Day. 

Jemez    

120 

110 

92 

69 

Do. 

Picuris 

24 

22 

22 

21 

Do. 

San  Ildefonso 

40 

19 

18 

15 

Do 

San  Juan     

70 

59 

50 

44 

Do. 

Santa  Clara 

40 

65 

56 

44 

Do. 

Santa  Domingo  
Sia     .   .             

50 
30 

80 
16 

68 
16 

64 
13 

Do. 
Do. 

Taos 

70 

73 

63 

38 

Do. 

34 

-, 

5 

4 

Mission  day. 

St  Catherine's  

250 

265 

265 

200 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

San  Juan  superintendency  

230 

298 

249 

232 

San  Juan 

150 

214 

178 

167 

Reservation  boarding. 

Toadlena 

80 

'     84 

71 

65 

Do. 

Santa  Fe 

350 

410 

386 

351 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Zuni  superintendency  

228 

292 

290 

282 

80 

116 

115 

114 

Reservation  boarding. 

Zuni        

118 

149 

148 

143 

Day. 

Christian  Reformed 

30 

27 

27 

25 

Mission        day;         Christian 

North  Carolina  

310 

377 

319 

236 

Reformed. 

Cherokee  superintendency 

310 

377 

319 

236 

Cherokee    

160 

264 

234 

195 

Reservation  boarding. 

Big  Cove 

40 

30 

20 

9 

Day. 

Birdtown 

40 

40 

29 

14 

Do. 

Little  Snowbird  

30 

22 

17 

8 

Do. 

Snowbird  Gap 

40 

21 

19 

10 

Do. 

North  Dakota  

1,  489 

1,749 

1,353 

1,019 

Bismarck  l 

80 

114 

104 

44 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

1  Closed  temporarily. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


177 


TATBLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 

ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

North  Dakota—  Continued. 
Fort  Bertholdsuperintendency.. 

184 

121 

114 

96 

No  1 

30 

10 

8 

6 

Day 

No  2                    

36 

19 

16 

13 

"Do. 

No  3 

30 

21 

19 

16 

Do 

Fort  Berthold 

75 

43 

43 

36 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Congregational  

13 

28 

28 

25 

Mission    boarding;    Congrega- 
tional. 

Fort  Totten  

323 

536 

346 

282 

Reservation  boarding 

Standing  Rock  superintendency. 

542 

511 

444 

379 

Standing  Rock 

202 

245 

212 

182 

Do 

Martin  Kenel 

100 

84 

78 

70 

Do 

Bullhead    .           

40 

38 

28 

24 

Day 

Cannon  Ball 

40 

33 

26 

15 

Do 

Grand  ^  iver  

30 

15 

14 

12 

Do. 

Little  Oak  Creek     

40 

23 

18 

13 

Do 

Porcupine 

24 

5 

4 

Do 

St  Elizabeth's  

50 

55 

50 

48 

Mission  boarding'    Episcopal 

Standing  Rock  Mission  1  

16 

13 

13 

11 

Mission  boarding. 

Turtle   Mountain    superintend- 
ency 

160 

229 

163 

92 

No  1 

40 

44 

34 

22 

Dav 

No.  2  

30 

49 

33 

17 

bo 

No  3     

30 

59 

41 

20 

Do 

No  4 

30 

51 

37 

22 

Do 

No.  5  

30 

26 

18 

11 

Do 

Wahpeton 

200 

238 

182 

126 

Oklahoma 

4  109 

4  536 

3  877 

3  431 

Cantonment  

90 

111 

100 

87 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

150 

205 

167 

153 

JDo 

Chilocco  

500 

654 

596 

528 

Kiowa  superintendency  

613 

645 

615 

543 

Anadarko 

110 

140 

153 

120 

FortSiU  

160 

181 

172 

163 

Do 

Rainy  Mountain 

155 

163 

142 

126 

Do 

Riverside 

188 

161 

148 

134 

Do 

Osage  supenntendency 

190 

147 

124 
14 

97 

Osage  ...  . 

115 

128 

109 

86 

Do 

St  Louis's 

75 

19 

15 

11 

Catholic. 

Otoe  

80 

90 

83 

79 

Pawnee    

100 

59 

55 

52 

Do 

Ponca 

90 

103 

90 

77 

Do 

Seger  superintendence^ 

144 

112 

110 

99 

Seger.     . 

79 

98 

96 

88 

Do 

Red  Moon 

65 

14 

14 

11 

Seneca  superintendency 

150 

1^3 

162 

148 

Seneca  

100 

139 

120 

110 

Do 

St  Mary's 

50 

44 

42 

oc 

Catholic. 

Shawnee  superintendency  

310 

250 

202 

177 

Shawnee    .... 

110 

138 

111 

91 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Benedict's) 
Sacred  Heart  (St.  Mary's)... 

100 
100 

50 
62 

34 

57 

30 
56 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Total,  Western  Oklahoma. 

2,417 

....-= 

2,559 

2,304 

2,040 

86770— li 


1 1917  report. 


178 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFA1KS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names 
of  schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

O  klaho  ma—  Continued  . 
Five  Civilized  Tribes 

1  692 

1  977 

1  573 

1  391 

Cherokee   Nation:  Cherokee 
Orphan  School. 

160 

174 

148 

131 

Tribal  boarding. 

Creek  Nation      

327 

392 

336 

304 

Euchee  

100 

130 

115 

106 

Do 

Eufaula                  .  .  . 

112 

136 

115 

108 

Do 

Nuyaka 

115 

126 

106 

90 

Do 

Chickasaw  Nation 

115 

160 

114 

95 

Bloomfield          

80 

116 

80 

67 

Do 

El  Meta  Bond  College.  .  . 

35 

44 

34 

28 

Contract;  private  boarding. 

530 

653 

528 

473 

Armstrong  Male  Acad- 
emy. 
Jones  Male  Academy  
Tuskahoma  Academy.  .  . 
Wheelock  Academy  
Old  Goodland  

100 

100 
110 
100 
80 

129 

123 
123 
118 
101 

96 

99 
105 
99 
81 

81 

86 
99 
89 
72 

Tribal  boarding. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Contract     mission     boarding' 

St  Agnes  Mission 

40 

59 

48 

46 

Presbyterian. 

Catholic. 

Chickasaw     and     Choctaw 
Nation. 

460 

433 

327 

291 

Murray  School  of  Agri- 
culture. 
Oklahoma  Presbyterian 
College. 
St  Agnes  Academy  

150 
50 
160 

96 
54 
192 

53 
43 
148 

49 
36 
126 

Contract  private  boarding. 

Contract     mission     boarding; 
Presbyterian. 
Contract     mission     boarding; 

St  Elizabeth's 

70 

68 

62 

60 

Catholic. 
Do 

St  Joseph's                 .... 

30 

23 

21 

20 

Do 

Seminole  Nation:  Mekusukey 

100 
1,275 

165 
1,218 

120 
1,024 

97 

773 

Tribal  boarding. 

Klamath  superintendency 

202 

159 

139 

77 

Klamath                         .  ... 

112 

109 

93 

54 

Reservation  boarding. 

Modoc  Point       

30 

18 

16 

7 

Day. 

No  2                             

30 

13 

12 

6 

Do. 

No.3  

30 

19 

18 

10 

Do. 

•  Salem 

650 

758 

633 

492 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Siletz  

50 

16 

10 

7 

Day. 

Umatilla  superintendency 

243 

160 

129 

106 

Umatilla 

93 

102 

72 

59 

Reservation  boarding. 

St.  Andrew's  (Kate  Drexel). 

150 

58 

57 

47 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Warm  Springs  superintendency.. 

130 

125 

113 

91 

Warm  Springs            .        .  . 

100 

106 

98 

80 

Reservation  boarding. 

30 

19 

15 

11 

Day 

Pennsylvania'  Carlisle 

757 

789 

689 

507 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

South  Dakota 

4  028 

4  128 

3,421 

2  686 

Cheyenne  River  superintendency 

200 

213 

172 

141 

Cheyenne  River    

180 

191 

153 

127 

Reservation  boarding. 

No  8 

20 

22 

19 

14 

Day. 

Crow  Creek  superintendency  

157 

155 

121 

96 

Crow  Creek  

82 

112 

80 

63 

Reservation  boarding. 

Immaculate  Conception  

75 

43 

41 

33 

Contract     mission     boarding; 
Catholic. 

Flandreau                 

360 

406 

333 

238 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Lower  Brule 

100 

105 

79 

70 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pierre 

250 

274 

236 

195 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


179 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendences  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac 
ity. 

Tota 
enroll 
ment 

Averas; 
enroll 
ment. 

Averag 
attend 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South"  Dakota—  Continued. 
Pine  Ridge  superin  tendency... 

1,187 

1,15 

914 

681 

Pine  Ridge 

21( 

32 

24' 

185 

Reservation  boarding 

No.  1  . 

25 

28 

18 

15 

Day. 

No  4 

30 

16 

13 

11 

Do. 

No.5  

30 

38 

35 

26 

Do. 

No  6          

30 

27 

20 

12 

Do. 

No  7 

33 

28 

24 

15 

Do 

No.  9 

30 

29 

22 

15 

Do. 

No  10 

33 

21 

16 

11 

Do 

No  12 

30 

16 

11 

6 

Do 

No  13 

24 

15 

13 

Do. 

No  14 

22 

22 

18 

9 

Do 

No.  15.  . 

24 

25 

17 

Do. 

No  16 

36 

32 

24 

11 

Do 

No.  17  

30 

24 

21 

16 

Do. 

No  18 

33 

21 

17 

13 

Do. 

No.  19  

30 

26 

18 

11 

Do. 

No  20        .          ... 

24 

19 

16 

11 

Do. 

No  21 

30 

23 

18 

12 

Do 

No.  22  .. 

27 

16 

10 

Do. 

No  23 

30 

14 

10 

n 

Do 

No.  24  

33 

25 

19 

12 

Do. 

No  25 

30 

8 

6 

C 

Do 

No.26  

30 

24 

19 

12 

Do. 

No  27 

20 

16 

14 

9 

Do 

No.  28  

23 

15 

13 

i        10 

Do. 

No.  29 

30 

14 

12 

9 

Do 

No.  30  

20 

18 

13 

6 

Do. 

Holy  Rosary. 

240 

269 

228 

206 

Contract     Mission     boarding; 

Rapid  City  

300~ 

344~ 

277~ 

200~ 

Catholic. 
Nonreservation  boarding. 

Rosebud  superintendency  

1,001 

975~ 

864~ 

715 

Rosebud  
Blackpipe  

200 
20 

268 
31 

244 
20 

213 
13 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day 

Corn  Creek 

40 

27 

17 

12 

Do 

Cut  Meat  

24 

22 

17 

13 

Do. 

He-Dog's-Camp  .    ... 

27 

23 

20 

19 

Do 

Ironwood  

24 

12 

11 

9 

Do. 

Little  Crow's  Camp 

26 

14 

14 

12 

Do 

Milk's  Camp 

29 

20 

17 

13 

Do 

Oak  Creek  

26 

22 

20 

15 

Do 

Pine  Creek 

25 

25 

21 

16 

Do 

Red  Leaf  

23 

g 

7 

6 

Do 

Rosebud  . 

25 

9 

8 

7 

Do 

Spring  Creek  

26 

17 

16 

14 

Do 

Upper  Cut  Meat  

21 

10 

9 

8 

Do 

Whirlwind  Soldier 

26 

19 

14 

10 

Do 

WhiteLake  

19 

14 

14 

11 

Do 

Wood 

25 

18 

17 

15 

Do 

St.  Mary's  

70 

56 

53 

46 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

St  Francis's 

325 

360 

325 

263 

Contract     Mission     boarding' 

Sisse  ton's  superintendency  

173 

185 

157 

134 

Sisseton  

133 

165 

140 

121 

Reservation  boarding. 

Sisseton  Day 

40 

20 

17 

13 

Day 

Springfield 

60 

69 

64 

58 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Yank  ton  superintendency  

240 

252 

204 

158 

Yankton  

115 

140 

116 

76 

Reservation  boarding. 

Santee  Normal  Training  
Utah  

125 
137 

112 
123 

88 
103 

82 
66 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 
Congregational. 

Goshute  ! 

30 

Day 

Shivwits  

40 

18 

18 

13 

Do 

Uintah    . 

67 

105 

85 

53 

Reservation  boarding 

Washington  

1  567 

1,573 

1,211 

844 

Col  ville  superintendency  

355 

234 

196 

155 

No.  1  

No  3 

25 
30 

12 
46 

10 
33 

7 
26 

Day. 
Do 

No.  4 

30 

34 

23 

17 

Do 

No  5 

30 

17 

14 

g 

Do 

No.6  

25 

7 

4 

4 

Do 

No  9 

25 

17 

16 

14 

Do 

Sacred  Heart  

90 

39 

39 

22 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Mary's                    .     . 

100 

62 

57 

56 

Do. 

Not  in  operation. 


180 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment,  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools' during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  name  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Washington—  Continued  . 
Cushman  superintendency 

545 

690 

523 

376 

Cushman         

350 

557 

409 

279 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Chehalis  * 

30 

Dav 

30 

18 

14 

13 

'Do 

Port  Gamble      .         .      ... 

25 

19 

13 

10 

Do 

Skokomish 

40 

20 

20 

16 

Do 

St  George's  

70 

76 

67 

58 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Neah  Bay  superintendency 

120 

102 

90 

49 

Neah  Bay                           .  - 

60 

62 

54 

20 

Dav 

Quileute 

60 

40 

36 

29 

"Do 

Spokane  superintendency 

90 

51 

48 

22 

No  1                          

33 

16 

15 

10 

Do 

No  2          

32 

25 

25 

9 

Do. 

No.  8  

25 

10 

8 

3 

Do. 

Taholah  superintendency 

76 

46 

41 

32 

36 

41 

36 

29 

Do 

Queets  River  

40 

5 

5 

3 

Do. 

Tulalip  superintendency 

250 

309 

234 

169~ 

Tulalip                         

180 

262 

195 

145 

Reservation  boarding. 

40 

28 

22 

10 

Dav 

30 

19 

17 

14 

Do. 

Yakima                     

131 

141 

79 

41 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wisconsin  

2,327 

1,710 

1,499 

1,243 

Hayward's  superintendency  

305 

358 

277 

212 

231 

298 

224 

170 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

LaCourte  Oreille            -  ... 

74 

60 

53 

42 

Day 

Keshena  superintendency  

590 

542 

485 

396 

Keshena                

170 

181 

144 

102 

Reservation  boarding. 

Neopit          

80 

21 

15 

11 

Dav. 

220 

253 

239 

215 

Contract     Mission     boarding; 

St  Anthony's 

120 

87 

87 

68 

Catholic. 
Mission  day;  Catholic. 

Lac  du  Flambeau           

160 

168 

150 

131 

Reservation  boarding. 

690 

90 

90 

75 

Odanah  Mission 

490 

65 

65 

50 

Mission  dav;  Catholic. 

St  Mary's          

200 

25 

25 

25 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

190 

188 

181 

170 

140 

154 

147 

136 

Reservation  boarding. 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

18 

18 

18 

Mission  dav;  Adventist. 

Hobart  Mission     

25 

16 

16 

16 

Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Red  Cliff  superintendency 

117 

62 

59 

53 

Red  Cliff                         

52 

29 

26 

20 

Day. 

Bayfleld  (Holy  Family)  

65 

33 

33 

33 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

275 

302 

257 

206 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Wyoming                    

400 

365 

297 

244 

Shoshone  superintendency  

400~ 

sW 

297~ 

244 

Shoshone               

135 

177 

111 

77 

Reservation  boarding. 

25 

21 

21 

15 

Dav. 

St  Stephen's  

120 

77 

75 

66 

Contract     Mission     boarding; 

Shoshone  Mission 

20 

16 

16 

15 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

St  Michael's 

100 

74 

74 

71 

Contract     Mission     boarding; 

Protestant  Episcopal. 

i  Not  in  operation. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


181 


TABLE  19. — School  statistics  for  42  years.1 
INDIAN  SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE   FROM  1877  TO   1918. 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.2 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance  . 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

1877                                  ' 

48 
49 
52 
60 
114 
140 
157 
153 
167 
158 
156 
«170 
»168 
8166 
8160 
»162 
8160 

8161 

102 

119 
107 
109 
86 
106 
125 
154 
145 
227 
227 
242 
230 
233 
228 
238 
234 
223 

150 

168 
159 
169 
200 
246 
282 
307 
312 
385 
383 
412 
398 
399 
388 
400 
394 
384 

3,598 
4,  42 
4,448 
4,651 
8,143 
12,232 
'      18,  188 
21,568 
25,  455 
24,945 
23,  647 
26,281 
25,830 
26,127 
26,128 
425,303 
425,294 
4  23,  822 

1878 

1879 

1880 

1885  

6,201 
9,865 
15,061 
17,  708 
21,812 
20,106 
18,  774 
20,973 
20,607 
20,858 
20,  702 
<20,083 
420,368 
U9,395 

1,942 
2,367 
3,127 
3,860 
3,643 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5  223 
5,269 
5,426 
5,220 
4,925 
4,427 

1890 

1895  

1900    .                             ... 

1905 

1910  

1911 

1912  

1913  .. 

1914 

1915  

1916 

1917  

1918  .. 

1  For  other  years'  see  1913  report. 

2  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 

3 Includes  Five  Tribes,  boarding  schools. 

4  The  decrease  in  attendance  is  due  to  a  different  method  of  computation.  Formerly  the  average  attend- 
ance was  the  average  of  three-quarters  having  the  greatest  attendance.  The  year's  attendance  has  been 
computed  for  10  months,  including  September,  when  the  attendance  is  always  small. 

APPROPRIATIONS  MADE  FOR  SCHOOLS  BY  THE   GOVERNMENT  SINCE  1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Apgropria- 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877... 
1878 

$20,000 
30  000 

""so'oo 

1900  

1901 

2,936,080 
3  080  367 

11.28 
4  91 

1879  

60  '  000 

100  00 

1902 

3'  244  '250 

5  32 

1880  

75.  000 

25.00 

1903 

3.531  250 

8.84 

1881  

1882  

75,000 
135.  000 

"so."  66 

1904  
1905  

3,522,950 
3,880.740 

1.23 
10.15 

1883  

487  200 

260  00 

1906 

3  777  100 

12  67 

1884.  . 

675  200 

38  00 

1907 

3  925  830 

3  93 

1885  

992  800 

47.00 

1908 

4  105*715 

4  58 

1886  

1  100  065 

10  00 

1909 

4  008  825 

i  2  36 

1887  

1.211,415 

10  00 

1910 

3  757  909 

1  6  2d 

1888  

1  179  916 

1  2  60 

1911 

3  685  290 

i  i  93 

1889  

1,348.015 

14.00 

1912 

3  757,495 

1.96 

1890  

1,364  568 

1  00 

1913 

4  015  720 

6  87 

1891  

1  842  770 

35  00 

1914 

2  4  403  355 

9  65 

1892  

2.291  650 

24.30 

1915 

3  4'  678*  627 

6  25 

1893  

2  315  612 

1  04 

1916 

4  4  391  155 

1  6  14 

1894  

2,243.497 

1  3.50 

1917 

2  4?  701  903 

7  08 

1895... 

2  060  695 

1  8  87 

1918 

255  185  290 

10  28 

1896  

2,  056.  515 

1  2.00 

1919  

«  4'  835'  300 

1  6.75 

1897 

2  517  265 

22  45 

1898  

2,'63l!771 

4.54 

Total  since  1876  

108  777  495 

1899. 

2  638  390 

25 

1  Decrease. 

2  Includes  $400,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 
8  Includes  $440,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 
4  Includes  $430,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

6  Includes  $300,000  for  Indian  school  buildings,  Sioux  Reservations,  North  and  South  Dakota. 
6  Includes  $350,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 


182  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  20. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of 
tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wa.es. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

1,532 

1  _      .   .  ._.      "TL  - 

140 

$51,  674 
5,450 

$5,  496 
2,341 

37     $4,832 
11          212 

$9,226 
35~ 

$1,192 
35~ 

7,600 

434 

Arizona 

Kaibab 

90 
50 

3 

450 
5,000 

120 

252 
2,089 

11 

212 

35 

8..  770 

271 

35 
736 

271 

Pima1    

7,600 

434 

California 

Campo                   .      .  . 

3 

120 

271 

271 

Malki2 

Idaho-  Fort  Hall3 

200 

48 

47 
638 

410 
40 
6 

3,270 
1,200 

418 
7,656 

32,800 
400 
360 

Montana-  Blackfeet3 

25 

825 

New   Mexico:    Pueblo   day 
schools 

1 
13 

150 
3,320 

North  Dakota:    Fort   Ber- 
thold  3 

Oklahoma:    Cheyenne    and 
Arapaho  8 

Oregon:  Klamath. 

2,305 

2 
10 

1.000 
150 

150 

150 

Utah-  Shivwits 

Wyoming  :  Shoshone  2  

1  Former  report.  2  Not  reported.  3  Only  items  reported.  <  Agency  tools  used. 

TABLE  21. — Experimentation  j 'arms ,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superin  tendencies. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of 
tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

12 

1 
10 

1 

$1,  575 

50~ 
1,500 

25 

4 

$25 

'_    -r_-^; 

25 

— 

4 

—   ..  -..——. 

=== 

—  = 

=== 

New  Mexico:  San  Juan1  
North    Dakota:    Standing 
Rock* 



(2) 

1  Only  items  reported. 


2  Crop  failure. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


183 


•  C^l  CO  Tfl  t^-  *-H  ( 

>  Oi  C<l  CO  CO  CN  t 

>  *-<  0*  10  Tfi  -O  < 


^H  1-H  I-l  (N  O5 


co"co"co""  cs" 


00~IO  lO  (M  CO  1^  CO  00 


'CO 

^t 


^ 


(NCOIMCOCOi-HCOCO 


•*  O  CP  O  O5  I 


lllllll 


t»        O        00  1^  I-H 


Srggggr? 


22^' 


!pJ!  il 


rs  M   .  T3  I   Srt! 


II 

5  w 


^ 


SiSi 


C5OOOOOOOOOCO 


CO  <N  IN  r-4  r*  ^-1 


232^- 


COi-lCOCO^T»<lOr-l(Ne<l 


o  ^ 


184 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


&  . 

si  ! 

it 

o 


.3 


oo  c  S  r- 


00        O 
•«*       <N 

4<     co 


_jjn 

"5      oo  II  « 


;«e 

I^-H"      «0' 


£<H  I 
^  aJ5 


"oS  S  ® 

gal 

H  -3  > 

-s 


2  ! 


-  m  o/Q 

««  >~'£G 
^T  o  "  •-•  Si  *  o 
_^'3'c?ceW6X^ 
feoc^^gaB 

feS^Mrl; 


H^ 


3    2 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


185 


~-    S83 

rooCTt< 


2    2 

00        00 


S88 


8    g.l 

oT    §•« 


.1 


S 


8^8    2^ 
S^¥  1^ 


t>-  c  o      o 

B§l  s 


>O  IM  1-1 


s  s 


5    •§ 


fc     0 


186 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


ti 


antity 
ntinu 


nd 


nd 


ors  or 
tees. 


3 


s  S 


i 


:1  :  it 


: 


ili 


It  i  i 

0        ^ 


iifi 

ii        i 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


187 


£  e 


OJCSiC 


O  C5  00  CO  C<»  ! 
-  T}I  •*#  iO  Tt<  1C 

s*s£o£lAtf*' 

t-  CO  i-H  00  i-l  ( 


-  CO  O  <M  N  >S  ^ 
«  «  «  «  O 


:HS    32 


fill 

%    2ft 


cooeo 

33S 


80COOCO 
Is-   T^   ^H   I—I 


NrH      .g 


rH  Ci  W  O  *O  * 
COlQrHCOi-H 


sssss; 


,^CO-H 


SS  -2 


co  M  ec     co     10 


i-H  »OOO<N  CO  CO 


188 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


30, 


Mai 
na 


struc- 
on. 


83    35 

i!  £ 


3S5S 


SS 


Tft^C'IOiCOcOQO 

10  1^-  <c  IM  oo  r~  -H 


CO  CO        T-H 


—5  00  CO  <N  00 

co  co  *o  o  •«t( 

(M  IM  COCO  CO 


s  s 

2f   Sf 


ss 


3  1 


s  s 


O  CO  ^ 


Q         (-.  -t-> 


8S8 


I! 


- 


8? 


co  TH          10 


"""*     o*     e* 


superin 
cies. 


:  :-2  :<D 

;  M-p    Ip 

•i  SB*S 

»S  P^CQ       O2 


-e-e" 


1 


ii*l« 

!«^^§ 

'^^>^  W) 

n3  rj  n^  "C  "H  U  fl 

F^H      t_,   ^H      O     O     O      O 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


189 


lO  C^  »H  O  "^  "^ 

1-1  co  <N  10  c<«  co 


lO  l-»  OO    v    *5f 
i-HOiCO        10 


iococo     2      oe*05§»      <o 
10006      •*      t^odoioo      t-: 


^  I 


8  :  :§    S 


228 

cioio 


8       S3 


GO" 


28 


ftfta 


ooco 

CO  IO  i— ( 


8S 


s 


28 


28! 


a  rgss^.-. 


ll  I 

^       o 


lili 


rt  ^ 

1  H« 

J3  |rf 

?.  si 


r  i 


190 


COMMISSIONED  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIES. 


ill! 


t-  O3CO 


i  CO  Tti      >  CN        CN 


CN        O 
i-H          CO 


s%4c<r 


tiffs 


OOt^-i-HO^COOOi^CNIiCOOiC        CN 
CO  --I  CO  i-l  t^  CM  i-H  CO  CO  00  r-  CO  ^H  CN         -f 

CO^CN"  eNToo"oo"~cN'rH'<0  i-T     ic"1 


Value  of 
products. 


po 


O  rfi 


*  § 


O  COO  Q  OCCO  lO 


-Sco^Sk      S 


O  iO  I-H  1O 


ss^sssis&S! 

i-T  cf     T-Ti-T 


t^-coooo 


co  coo  ic  ices  ojoo     ° 

<N  CN1  CO  t^  00  i«  iO  1O  CO        OO 


c^ooic 


O  COgO  OOiC  iC 
00  O5T-H 


CO  •»  CO  CN  r^  O5  CM  1C  CO 


CO        O5 
-»i        -<*i 


OOT-HiCOfLOOOI>Ot 
CN^SSco'Scs'S: 


cN~e£tCr_r_r    r-T     pf 


)p     >     >OOOO»C     -1C 


.^iC 
•COCN 


OCO 


T-I      eo 


CO  OOOCD 
»CO  I-H  CO 


°  .2 


ftsj 


828SS 


»COiC       rfiCiCO 
i-ICOCO        1—  CN  -*f  1C 


S-C35 
-T-I 


CO  CM  i-H        U5 


o     jc 


5 1  !  i  S 


a 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


191 


§ 


1 


IS    3: 


>O  !NOQ< 
j  t>.  CD  CO  C 
)  iO  O  C^l  < 


eSSSco^"5      S£ 


§3 


CN  01  t-eo  •-*          co  -H 


T-lOilCOrH  1C 


•  >.*   CO        »C 

•  into     oo" 


O  -t*  >OI^-        CO 


O  <M  •* 

CO  CO  •* 


t^O  M  •<*<  O 

OOCO  CO  'J*  i-H 


is   § 


GOO      •  j-t 


888 

t^OcD 

co"t>."c<r 


HHi 


(M      .  O        O 
CO     •  O       CO 


-  CDOO  (N  1C        t~- 
^«         CO 


O      ' 


88 


gcTrf    « 


II  1 


Ot^ 

CO  <N 


c^g       .53 


CD  C  CO 


i|:J5 

gS-§a 

SffiPn  § 


fl      ' 


ara 
at 
arm  Springs 

Dakota:  Pine  R 


!!!!!!  |1  IIIII  f  Illlll  i  III 


s    •*, 

O     & 


nl  Hill! 


osh 
iv 
int 


192 


m 

i-SJB 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

8 


>  s^  s> 

•^  M>o^ 


II 

££ 


Po 


fi 


g  <j,^'C  s 


^a§'-3§s 


SI 


g    9 


I3  >-§s  .s 
I  1S£   i 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


193 


TABLE  26. — Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 

1918,  and  made  in  the  field. 


States  and  tribes,  or  reservations. 

Approved  by 
department. 

Made  in  the 
field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Total                                .                            

4,092 

1,121,084 

4,281 

72,830 

Arizona                              

16 

310 

3,580 

34,185 

\kChin 

164 
3 
6 
3,407 

403 
30 
15 
33,737 

Colorado  River                                                        ... 

15 

150 

Pima  (Chiu  Chuischu) 

Pima  (Gila  River)     .                                

Public  domain 

18 

160 
1,391 

California 

277 

1,385 

Malki                                                                   

277 

1,385 

Public  domain 

18 
5 
3,105 

1,391 
360 
1,015,632 

Minnesota'  Fond  du  Lac 

Montana 

33 

3,385 

Blackfeet 

2,649 
1 
438 
17 

886,979 
160 
126,054 
2,439 

104 

Crow 

Fort  Peck                     .... 

Public  domain  (Turtle  Mountain) 

33 
2 

3,385 
90 

Nevada 

Paiute 

1 
1 

6 

10 

80 

960 

Public  domain  

2 

5 
7 

104 
799 
1,040 

New  Mexico:  Public  domain  

North  Dakota'  Public  domain  (Turtle  Mountain) 

Oregon 

383 

32,825 

Klamath  .            

33 
350 

4,636 
28,189 

Umatilla  

South  Dakota 

388 

69,431 

Cheyenne  River 

193 
•  195 

1 

545 

30,996 
38,435 

80 
31,937 

Pine  Ridge  

Washington'  Public  domain 

Wisconsin:  La  Pointe 

Total  reservations  .                   .      . 

4,041 
51 

1,115,071 
6,013 

4,241 
40 

68,405 
4,425 

Total  public  domain  

86770—18 13 


194  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  27. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales.1 

Inherited-land  sales.2 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Nurh- 
berof       Acreage, 
tracts,  i 

Proceeds. 

Grand  total-  .. 

4,657 

514,963.92 

$8,717,748.14 

9,438     1,159,582.14 

$18,601,359.34 

Total.  1918  .  . 

662 
588 
583 
422 
529 
208 
324 
494 
520 
235 
92 

74,126.00 
69,849.00 
54,958.62 
34,  429.  09 
45,526  31 
20,778.80 
34,391.11 
56,  197-  98 
82.655.80 
34,060-33 
7,990.88 

1,541,178.00 
1,040,202.00 
969,611-24 
584,  724.  56 
779,526.14 
407,315.56 
568,880.75 
978,  588.  27 
1,  245,  639-  96 
442,762.85 
159,318.81 

438 
655 
324 
393 
418 
109 
392 
638 
873 
753 
768 
820 
643 
978 
1,236 
(5) 

49,216.00 
75,892.00 
35,762.25 
68,245.45 
45,241.99 
10,797.94 
43.652.27 
79,665.66 
129,359.61 
102,708.00 
91.302.57 
106i359.25 
64,447.67 
90,214.97 
122,222.52 
44,493.99 

1,174,855.00 
1,546,565.08 
694,241.40 
715,568.52 
773,309.16 
285,097.72 
889,285.02 
1,503,  960.  3S 
1,956.315.92 
1,321,258.72 
1,302,508.94 
1,248,793.34 
981,430.87 
1,393,131.52 
2,057,464.50 
757,173.25 

1917.. 

1916 

1915  .  . 

1914 

1913  .  . 

1912   ... 

1911  3. 

1910  3 

1909^... 

1908  

1907 

1906.. 

1905-  - 

1904 

1903-- 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute  
Idaho...... 

4 
17 

124 
1,464 

890 
50,212 

5 
26 

840 
2,145 

5;600 
83,377 

Coeur  d'Alene    . 

5 
12 

12 
27 

559 
905 

660 
1,430 

10,317 
39,895 

29,248 
24,820 

4 

22 

2 
11 

481 
1,664 

158 
562 

8,798 
71,  579 

6,812 
9,265 

Fort  Lapwai 

Kansas:  Potawatomi 

Minnesota    

Fond  du  Lac 

4 
15 

8 

42 

160 
630 
640 

5,606 

2,377 
7,733 
14,  710 

76,  770 

Leech  Lake 

11 

562 

9,265 

White  Earth 

Montana 

91 

11,242  1                166,182 

Crow 

17 
12 
13 

54 

1,111 
910 
3,585 

2,959 

21,600 
21,  236 
33,934 

262,  566 

47 
39 
5 

38 

7,331 
3.393 
518 

1,908 

65,896 
81,070 
19,216 

166,381 

Flathead    .  . 

Fort  Peck 

Nebraska    

Omaha 

27 
27 

73 

1,586 
1,373 

9,199 

145,  024 
117,  542 

127,  215 

9 
29 

16 

600 
1,308 

1,579 

51,411 
114,970 

22,  173 

Winnebago  

North  Dakota. 

Fort  Berthold 

3 

11 
18 
41 

172 

320 
675 
3,683 
4,521 

18,926 

29,  450 
11,041 
29,363 
57,  361 

408,766 

Fort  Totten  . 

11 
3 

98 

859 
320 
400 

11,668 

14,602 
1,465 
6,106 

352,837 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain  

Oklahoma     „ 

Cantonment  

32 
53 
33 
13 
2 
16 
13 
2 
5 
2 
1 

4,300 
6,615 
3,722 
1,664 
2 
1,097 
640 
240 
326 
280 
40 

72,  556 
140,528 
107,672 
11,474 
130 
32,336 
25,635 
5,161 
6,436 
5,338 
1,500 

15 
27 
3 
3 

2,164 
3,757 
202 
750 

36,  193 
89,  433 
544 
3,873 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  .  .  . 
Kiowa  

Osage  . 

Otoe 

Pawnee  . 

23 
5 
2 

2,256 
474 
164 

71,860 
14,965 
3,566 

Ponca 

Sac  and  Fox... 

Seeer 

Seneca 

15 

5 

1,460 
441 

108,098 
24,305 

Shawnee  .  .  . 

1  Under  act  of  March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1018),  modified  by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444), 
June  25.  1910  (36  Stat  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

2  Under  act  of  May  27. 1902  (32  Stat.  L..  245-275),  modified  by  acts  of  May  8, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  May  29, 
1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L    855-856).  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

» Includes  sales  of  lands  of  Kaw.  Osage,  and  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
*  Includes  sales  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
'  Unknown. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


195 


TABLE  27. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918 — 

Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales. 

Inherited-land  sales. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Oregon 

41 

5,418 

96,495 

28 

3,676 

81,362 

Klamath 

18 
18 
5 

162 

2,406 
2.504 
508 

25,326 

25,612 
23,  123 
47,  760 

392,  143 

20 
2 
6 

63 

2,962 
274 
440 

11,335 

30,697 
3,250 
47,415 

168,587 

Roseburg 

Umatilla 

South  Dakota 

Chevenne  River  

6 
14 
20 
62 
12 
48 

20 
21 

1,514 
2,235 
5,563 
12,360 
791 
2,863 

1,118 

876 

7,760 
20,  784 
37,921 
170,  276 
26,667 
12S,  735 

16,700 
37,634 

9 
1 
7 
14 
17 
15 

16 
27 

3,151 
640 
2,260 
2,602 
1,738 
944 

1,037 
1,973 

21',  364 
4,229 
10,967 
33,892 
49,375 
48,760 

15,407 
72,814 

Lower  B  rule  

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud  .  . 

Sisseton 

Yankton 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray.  .  .     . 

Washington 

Colville  

6 
2 
2 
11 

2 

199 
40 
58 
579 

69 

3,620 
1,948 
5,931 
26,  135 

1,555 

Cushman  

3 
3 
21 

6 

165 
120 

1,688 

293 

4,890 
3,150 
64,774 

9,150 

Tulalip. 

Yakima. 

Wisconsin 

Oneida    . 

2 

69 

1,555 

5 
1 

11 

! 

173 
120 

800 

7,200 
1,950 

14,908 

Hayward 

Wyoming:  Shoshone.  . 

15 

951 

16,  164 

TABLE  28.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855). 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1918. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1918. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Total 

17,959 

2,  139,  590.  44 

2,849 

312,357.50 

4,723 

344 

4,379 

704,269 

Arizona:  San  Xavier  
California     .... 

1 

28 

40.00 
1.752.48 

1 
3 

12.40 
106.52 

12 

4 

8 

461 

Bishop  

2 
1 
19 

6 

349 

280.00 
.80.00 
1,  227.  48 
165.00 

46.  806.  86 

Greenville 

Hoopa  Valley  

2 
1 

64 

96.52 
10.00 

4,232.18 

7 
5 

145 

2 
2 

14 

5 
3 

131 

361 
100 

16,338 

Round  Valley 

Idaho  

Coeur  d'Alene  

172 
69 
108 

282 

27,  252.  97 
11,403.94 
8,  149.  95 

20,  830.  53 

6 

947.  65 

56 
17 
72 

144 

5 
2 

7 

20 

51 
15 
65 

124 

8,482 
2,628 
5,228 

10,036 

Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lap  wai  

58 
94 

3.284.53 
7,815.79 

Kansas 

Kickapoo        

150 
132 

'     29 

9,441.14 
11,  389.  39 

1,903.28 

52 
42 

4 

4,  492.  30 
3,323.49 

202.24 

68 
76 

12 

12 

8 

56 
68 

12 

3,785 
6,251 

620 

Potawatomi  

Michigan:  Mackinac  and 
Mount  Pleasant  .  . 

196 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  28.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182},  as  modi- 
fied by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (85  Stat.  L.,  444},  and  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}— 
Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8.  1907,  to 
June  30,  1918. 

Applications  far  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  Zune  30, 
1918. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Minnesota  

3,827 

305,882.23 

34 

2.382.50 

161 

2 

159 

12,  191 

F*ond  du  Lac 

41 

24 
168 
21 
i  3,  573 

1,411 

2,  737.  50 
1,989.32 
13,  538.  52 
1,776.89 
285.  840.  00 

293,407.83 

7 
3 
15 
9 

360.00 
240.00 
1,076.00 
706.  50 

21 
1 
125 
14 

21 
1 
123 
14 

1,229 
60 
9,800 
1,102 

Grand  Portage  

"'2' 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake 

White  Earth  
Montana            

358 

46.  715.  28 

838 

37 

801 

195.227 

Black  feet 

438 
106 
550 
317 

1,162 

135.  878.  35 
19,994.30 
48,312.63 
89.222.55 

78,366.22 

2 
211 

56 
89 

527 

254.  62 
25,  875.  37 
4,  465.  29 
16,  120.  00 

47,  608.  84 

436 
36 
182 

184 

167 

436 
33 
155 
177 

121 

135,212 
5,531 
12.980 
41,504 

7.324 

Crow 

3 

27 

7 

46 

Flathead 

Fort  Peck         

Nebraska     

Omaha 

626 
26 
302 
208 

3 
1,556 

40,049.94 
3.365.06 
23,353.80 
11.597.42 

360.00 
302,080.00 

191 

24,811.00 

67 

13 

54 

3,  053 

Santee 

268 

68 

18.  708.  00 
4.089.84 

28 
72 

'i 

22 
45 

2.124 
2,147 

Winnebago  

North  Dakota 

203 

32.640.47 

417 

39 

378 

88,285 

FortBerthold  
Fort  Totten 

69 

84 
482 
921 

3,373 

17,  565.  90 
7.  672.  80 
151,838.85 
125,002.45 

297,050.94 

8 
40 
53 
102 

464 

844.00 
3,190.67 
10,  182.  21 
18.423.59 

49,046.50 

41 

28 
187 
161 

944 

41 
2 

187 
148 

884 

10.997 
80 
57.940 
19,268 

83,196 

26 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  
Oklahoma  

13 
60 

Cant  onment 

56 

500 
220 
148 
160 
262 
200 
43 
1,  130 
654 

490 

8,050.88 

57,930.98 
29,564.14 
12,  784.  38 
18,  297.  31 
22,  166.  01 
22,  153.  93 
4,357.77 
66,  810.  08 
54,935.46 

46,094.75 

29 

27 
24 
20 
58 
38 
42 
2 
189 
35 

94 

4,  412.  66 

4,066.49 
3.  837.  86 
2,738.15 
5,641.58 
4.443.36 
5,246.00 
560.00 
12,  429.  46 
5,  670.  94 

8,741.62 

5 

176 
69 
61 
123 
193 
18 
1 
273 
25 

168 

1 

5 
3 

& 

1 

2" 
16 

4 

171 
66 
56 
110 
166 
15 

795 

25.206 
9,949 
2,393 
12.664 
14,  145 
1,640 

Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho 

Kiowa  

Otoe 

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger 

Seneca 

273 
23 

152 

14,671 
1,733 

20,044 

Shawnee 

Oregon      ... 

Klamath  

108 
19 
28 
330 
5 

3,204 

18,  245.  27 
2,754.09 
2.  182.  78 
22.  232.  61 
680.00 

608,004.76 

5 
10 
18 
56 
5 

410 

802.  72 
1,511.29 
1,620.72 
4.046.89 
760.00 

73,  214.  60 

71 
4 
15 

78 

2 

...... 

8 

69 
4 
9 
70 

12,333 
607 
904 
6,200 

Roseburg  

Siletz  • 

Umatilla  

South  Dakota    

988 

92. 

896 

212,292 

Cheyenne  River.  
Crow  Creek  

408 
116 
113 
891 
631 
218 
827 

6 
ictions  re 

120,904.84 
17,  794.  91 
27,  399.  23 
203.722.52 
131,392.25 
22,301.72 
84,  489.  29 

448.00 
moved  under 

46 
76 
7 
164 
77 
11 
29 

9,261.86 
12,  881.  82 
1,  069.  92 
32,972.29 
13,  474.  54 
1.  124.  14 
2,  430.  03 

164 
70 
20. 
356 
306 
35 
37 

2 
5tat.  L., 

16 
25 
1 

10 
18 
18 
4 

148 
45 
19 
346 
288 
17 
33 

2 

44.567 
6,747 
3.120 
99.326 
53,948 
1.720 
2,864 

208 

Lower  Brule      

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud 

Sisseton       

Yankton            .  ... 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray 
i  Restr 

act  June  21,  1906  (34  £ 

353). 

COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


197 


TABLE  28.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  as  modi- 
fied by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855).— 
Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies  . 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1918. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  vear  ended  June  30, 
1918. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Washington 

613 

55,  149.  09 

312 

24,  185.  51 

404 

10 

394 

37,367 

Colville 

225 
7 
94 
44 
19 
224 

1,  477 

23.194.30 
730.00 
9,390.50 
3,370.00 
2.135.36 
16,328.93 

66.435.49 

4 
3 

""a" 

i 

302 
245 

320.00 
153.  90 

i66."66" 
163.  85 
23,387.76 

13.211.40 

159 
1 
51 

47 
6 
140 

244 

159 

48 
45 
5 
136 

243 

17.820 
160 
5,324 
3.450 
321 
10,292 

13.  610 

Cushman 

Spokane       

3 
2 
1 
4 

Taholah 

Tulalip  

Yakima 

Wisconsin  

Hayward 

80 
14 
131 
1,206 
46 

138 
10 

6.  135.  04 
1.034.14 
10.053.98 
46^  492.  03 
2.  720.  30 

14,077.98 
900.00 

65 
2 
40 

129 

8 

67 
10 

1 

64 
2 
40 
129 

8 

64 
10 

4,974 
160 
2,886 
5,229 
361 

6,170 
900 

Lac  du  Flambeau.  .  .  . 
La  Pointe 

7 
27 
210 
1 

36 

538.  10 
2,364.09 
10.  229.  21 
80.00 

2.241.65 

Oneida  

Red  Cliff 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  
Public  domain 

3 

SUMMARY  OF  PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8,  1906. 


Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907 

889 

92  132  50 

1908  ..\. 

1  987 

153  991  78 

1909 

1  166 

133  331  79 

1910  

955 

99*339  10 

1911  

1  Oil 

115  575  37 

1912 

344 

45  529  49 

1913  

520 

67  477  49 

1914 

1  148 

152  405  44 

1915  

?940 

124  114  86 

1916  - 

934 

130  980  43 

1917  

2  203 

265?440  00 

1918  ... 

4  379 

704  269  00 

Total   

16  476 

2  084  587  25 

198 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  29. — Removals  of  restrictions. 


Fiscal  year. 

Quapaw  (Seneca), 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.* 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate 

544 

27,686.40 

11,455 

801,262.04 

1918... 

24 
20 
30 
25 
72 
37 
53 
68 
215 

960.00 
916.88 
1,401.45 
1,095.28 
3,889.35 
1,930.00 
3,218.28 
4,  104.  91 
10,  170.  25 

1,532 
1,438 
697 
786 
1,106 
956 
652 
953 
1,470 
1,865 

141,524.30 
155,403.17 
42,103.60 
50,077.33 
81,034.72 
60,  532.  64 
45,075.51 
84,679.34 
88,070.34 
52,761.09 

1917  

1916 

1915  

1914 

1913 

1912  

1911 

1910  

1909  

1  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

2  Act  of  May  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

NOTE.— Act  of  Congress  dated  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312),  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  inter- 
married whites,  freedmen,  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands  except  homesteads 
of  Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove 
restrictions  from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 


TABLE  30. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate  

433 

37  899 

1918 

90 

7  523 

1917  

65 

4  440 

1916. 

90 

9  042 

1915 

65 

5  616 

1914  

33 

3'  951 

1913  .. 

23 

1  600 

1912 

25 

1  917 

1911  

42 

3'  810 

Fort  Hall,  Idaho  

15 

2,628 

Mount  Pleasant  Mich       

12 

620 

Fond  du  Lac  Minn 

21 

1  229 

Lac  du  Flambeau  Wis 

2 

160 

La  Pointe  Wis                       .  .        .  .           

40 

2,886 

TABLE  31. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


Fiscal  year. 

Kaw.i 

Osage.2 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate       .                 .  .        

69 

19,504 

499 

245,345 

1918 

10 

7 

1,600 
1,120 

17 
21 
4 
12 
4 
23 
22 
84 
293 
19 

8,330 
10,395 
1,960 
5,880 
1,960 
10,890 
10,890 
41,160 
143,  570 
9,310 

1917 

1916 

1915 

5 
12 
1 

800 
1,904 
400 
480 

1914 

1913 

1912                                                                                                   

1911 

1910 

1909 

20 
6 
6 
1 

8,000 
2,400 
2,400 
400 

1908 

1907 

1906 

i  Act  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  636). 


2  Act  June  28,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539). 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


199 


200 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  33. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


State  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total  

$400  435  l(t 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache     

Bovs'  lavatnrv  airnav 

2  630  00 

Do 

Completin^  dormitory 

1  000  00 

•     Do... 

Forester's  cottage        .  . 

'  700*  00 

Do... 

Improvements  to  sewer 

500  00 

Salt  River 

Cottage  barn  shed  an1  tank 

3  170  00 

Do  

Repairin17  farmers'  quarters 

1  261  20 

:  San  Xavier  (Iniian  Oas's)  .  . 

Main  buildings,  lighting,  water,  and  sewer  systems  

26  101  69 

Do... 

Barn  

1  620  00 

Do.. 

Shop      .  . 

800  00 

Do... 

Repairs  to  buildings  

488  53 

Pima... 

Office  

3  159  65 

Do 

Warehouse 

g,JE!8  97 

Do... 

Superintendent's  cottage  

3  105  76 

Do 

EuiDloyocs'  cottage 

2  504  22 

:         Do 

Fi^ld  matron's  cottage 

1,333  14 

Do... 

(  otton  fin  

1  270  0() 

Do 

Alterations  to  school  buildin0 

785  5'} 

Do... 

Emplovees'  quarters  

1  109  00 

Do..     . 

Three  cottages 

1  974  00 

Navajo 

Completing  a  dormitory 

690  00 

Leupp  

Window  bridge  

15  824  40 

Colorado  River 

Ice  plant  . 

9  750  00 

Rice  Station  

Reservoir  

1   <!00.00 

San  Carlos 

Piping  for  water  mains         .                  

1  405  20 

Do 

Repairs  to  Black  River  bridge 

847  00 

California: 
Rouni  Valley 

One  day  school       ...      .                       

1  085  00 

G  reen  ville 

Gymnasium 

1  075  00 

Do  

Concreting  reservoir  

1  115.00 

Fort  Bid  well 

Garage         .                                                       .        

500  00 

Do 

Lavatory  annex 

2  084  50 

Campo  

Two  frame  buildings      

650.  00 

Fort  Yuma 

Horse  barn  and  corral 

1  305  34 

Do 

Dairy  barn 

1  157  77 

Sherman 

Emplovees'  cottage                              

801.62 

Do 

Forge  and  shop 

687  52 

Do  

Addition  and  screen  porches  to  Minnshaha  Lodge  

3,024.98 

Colorado: 
Southern  Ute 

Pump  house 

2  310  66 

Do 

1  250  00 

Do 

Commissary                                               

2  100.00 

Do 

Barn 

1  500  00 

Do 

Granary             ..                        

381.50 

Idaho: 
Fort  Lapwai 

Heat/in"1  system  office 

1  075  00 

Emplovees'  cottage           .                

4.  199.  55 

Do 

Dairy  barn                                                          .          

2  200.00 

Silo 

838  05 

Do 

Repairs  to  cottage  and  office                   

1,726.81 

Kansas: 
HaskPll 

490  00 

Do 

Chicken  house                              

550.  00 

Do 

Barn                                                                           

3  907.00 

Michigan: 
Mount  Pleasant 

Dairvman's  cottage 

1,400.00 

Do 

Hennery                                                           

1,  200.  00 

Minnesota: 
Red  Lake  (f  ross  Lake) 

6  971  97 

Do 

Heating  plants                                    

2.761.58 

2  600.00 

Nett  Lake  School 

5  000  00 

Do 

Garage                                                         

250.  00 

Ditch  work 

1,900.00 

Do 

Repairs  to  dining  hall    

609.  50 

Do 

Septic  tank  and  sewer                              

5,  500.  00 

Do... 

Heating  system  

16,000.00 

White  Earth 

Dairy  barn                

2,000.00 

Do 

5,511.62 

Do 

Heiting  installation  dormitorv 

599.  81 

657.  00 

Nebraska: 
Genoa 

Boiler  water  ani  sewer  systems          

3,580.00 

Do 

\ddition  to  hospital 

2,  500.  00 

Santee 

6,  500.  00 

Nevada: 
Fort  McDermitt 

Sewer  system                                             .        

1,481.24 

1,700.00 

Fallen 

Guest  room  addition  to  emplovees'  quarters  ! 

850.00 

Moapa  River 

Schoolhouse                                  

1,807.00 

5.000.00 

Do 

1,899.17 

Do 

2,  890.  OS 

Walker  River... 

Flour  mill... 

2,  H45.  15 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


201 


TABLE  33.— Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918— Con. 


State  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

New  Mexico: 

Coal  sfaed                                                                        

$250.  00 

2  500.00 

Hav  barn                                                •          

'  600.  00 

Do 

300.00 

Do 

Cottage  No  9                                   

2,  000.  00 

7  550  00 

Tohatchi 

Addition  to  schoolhouse                                      

30',  225.  00 

1  173.  BO 

Ice  plant                                              .                

1.  377.  00 

Do 

3  510.76 

North  Dakota: 

Cisterns  1   2  and  3 

1  200.00 

Fort  Berthold 

Machine  shed                              

1,  215.  22 

Fort  Totten 

Drillincr  well 

2,  125.  17 

Oklahoma: 
Cherokee  O  T  School 

'  Tahlequah  road                                                      .  . 

10,  000.  00 

Do 

Heating  plant,  main  building  and  schoolhouse  

6,000.00 

Physician's  cottage                                  .  .           

3.  249.  50 

Do 

3  249.  50 

Do 

Principal's  cottage                           .        .  .           

2,  649.  07 

Kiowa  (For*  Sill) 

Sleepin^  porches  for  dormitories 

2  200  00 

Kiowa  (Riverside/ 

Heating  svstem  principal's  cottage       

807.00 

Repairing  bovs'  building 

560.00 

Kuchee  boarding  school 

Dairy  barn    "                                    

2,  000.  00 

Do 

Cellar 

300.00 

Do 

Blacksmith  shop                     .      

200.00 

Mekusukey 

Septic  tank 

482  00 

Eufaula 

~R  mployees'  Lodge     .          

7,  016.  00 

Nuyaka 

Manual-training  shop 

3  348.03 

Pawnee                       : 

Barn  and  implement  shed         

1,  025.  00 

Ponca 

Warehouse 

584.  14 

Bloomneld 

Water  mains                  

1,  700.  00 

Do 

Sewer  connection  with  city  of  Ardmore 

2,  500.  00 

Do..     . 

Gas  piping                  .            

1,999.80 

Cantonment 

Improvements  to  water  system 

2,  849.  96 

Seger       

Cottage                          

1,  565.  28 

Oregon: 
Umatilla  

Two  ste^l  bridges  (Mission  and  Thorn  Hollow)  

26,  000.  00 

Do 

Wagon  house 

508.25 

Do  

Garage                    

292.05 

Salem 

Onion  house 

1,  000.  00 

Do... 

Remodeling  sewer    

4,  700.  00 

Do 

Boiler  installation 

2,  075.  00 

Klamath  

Garage  .         

644.  23 

Pennsylvania: 
Carlisle 

Refrigerator 

600  00 

South  Dakota: 
Lower  Brule 

Barn 

2  000.00 

Do... 

Garage                           

665.  00 

Do.     . 

Repairs  to  water  pipes 

975.00 

Pierre.  .  . 

Dairy  barn    

3,  958.  03 

Do  

Boiler  installation 

4  000.00 

Springfield  

Superintendent  's  cottage  

4,  095.  00 

Flandreau  

Coal  shed 

412.  45 

Do 

Chicken  house 

457  15 

Do  

Horse  barn 

2  267.30 

Rosebud 

Physician's  cottage 

4  684  10 

Do  

Council  hall 

500.  00 

Yankton    . 

Completing  water  system 

2  385  55 

Canton  Asvlum  

Two  cisterns 

1,094.50 

Cheyenne  River 

Farmers'  cottage 

2  447  42 

Do  

Barn    

800.00 

Do... 

Repairing  bridge,  Whitehorse 

485.00 

Utah: 
Uintah  

Heating  plant  hospital 

3  750.00 

Shivwits     

Granary 

435  00 

Goshute  

Cottage                                     

600.00 

Washington: 
Spokane  

....do           

672.00 

Tulalip  

Chicken  house 

191  46 

DO  : 

Sewer  

485.00 

Do  

Gutters  on  dormitories 

1  199  00 

Do  

Painting  schoolhouses 

2  511  00 

Cushman  (Chehalis)  

Schoolhouse      

1,430.00 

Cushman  (Jamestown)  .  . 

Water  and  sewer  systems 

1  033  00 

Wisconsin: 
Tomah  

Ice  house 

1  165.00 

Keshena  

Cattle  shed 

365  00 

Do  

Pump  house        

615.  00 

Do  

Horse  barn 

4  600  00 

Hay  ward 

Dairy  barn 

3  200  00 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone  

Heating  plant 

1  000  00 

Do  

Coal  sheds         

490.00 

Do  

Steel  bridge 

3  750  00 

202 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  34. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  or  contract  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1918. 


State  and  superintend  encies. 

Improvement. 

Amount  of 
authority 
granted  up 
to  July  1, 
1918. 

Total  

$406,  104.  41 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache  

Boys'  dormitory  

32.  903.  81 

Camp  Verde  .... 

Water  and  sewer  systems  ... 

3  500  00 

San   Xavier   (Vamori   and 

Outhouses 

S05  99 

Santa  Rosa). 
Do 

Repairs  to  buildings 

1  5i;>6  40 

Colorado  River 

Employees'  quarters 

5  674  26 

Navajo  

Addition  to  water  system  

16.000.00 

California:  Fort  Yuma  . 

Water  system 

1  463.34 

Colorado: 
Southern  Ute... 

Electric  lighting  plant  

4,  395.  00 

Do 

Employees'  cottage 

5  000.00 

Do  

Addition  to  power  house  

2,  260.  66 

Ute  Mountain... 

Two  cottages             

Do 

Two  dormitories 

Do... 

Schoolhouse... 

Do... 

Mess  hall                             ...          ..... 

49,  S33.  78 

Do 

Power  house  and  laundry 

Do 

Water  and  sewer  systems 

Do  

Timber  truss  bridge 

10,000.00 

Idaho: 
Fort  Lapwai  

E  mployees'  cottage  

3.566.00 

Do         ... 

Heating  plant  for  cottage 

'  633.  55 

Minnesota: 
Leech  Lake  

Repairing  cottages  

1,397.58 

Red  Lake  (Cross  Lake)  

Laundry                                       .  .      ..... 

5,311.54 

Michigan*  Mount  Pleasant 

Barn  dairy 

8,  000.  00 

Montana: 
Fort  Belknap 

Flour  mill                                  ...                            . 

3,  036.  55 

Do 

Repairing  dairy  barn 

1,400.00 

Fort  Belknap  (Lodgepole)... 

Schoolhouse  arid  cottage  

3,  816.  00 

Tongue  River 

Dairy  barn                                             

2,  800.  00 

Nebraska'  Genoa 

Two  employees'  C9ttaaes 

5,251.40 

Nevada:  Western  Shoshone  

Day  schools  1  and  2  

4.000.00 

New  Mexico: 
San  Juan 

Repairs  to  hospital 

600.00 

Do                  

One  steel  bridge  

25,172.00 

Navajo  (Tohatchi) 

Frame  dormitory                                     

46,  600.  00 

Do 

Remodeling  old  'dormitory 

5,119.39 

Do                 .       . 

Repairs  to  school  buildings  

5,  490.  00 

Pueblo  Bonito 

Addition  to  power  house  and  boiler  setting  

2,817.00 

Zuni 

Flour  mill 

2,  960.  00 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

Assembly  hall  and  gymnasium  

4,  000.  00 

North  Dakota: 
Turtle  Mountain 

Improvements  to  heating  plant 

442.  09 

Wahpeton  .  .  . 

Two  cottages              

4,  863.  70 

Do 

Industrial  cottage                             

1,200.00 

Oklahoma: 
Kiowa 

2",  200.  00 

Bloomfield 

Laundry  and  heating  plant  

19,938.00 

Tishomingo 

Two  dormitories 

54,  800.  00 

Ponca 

Salt  Fork  Bridge 

5,  986.  67 

Shawnee 

Heating  plant                        

2,072.00 

Cherokee  O  T  School 

Lavatory  annex  girls'  dormitory  

4,  403.  99 

Euchee 

1,365.00 

Oregon: 
Salem 

A  ddition  to  hospital                       

3,  728.  71 

Klamath 

Office  building 

4,319.89 

Umatilla  (Tutuilla) 

4,381.30 

South  Dakota: 
Flandreau 

Water  tank 

1,313.17 

Do 

1,091.35 

Pierre 

S'iO 

1,020.60 

Rosebud 

Repairs  to  day  schools                  

1,398.49 

Do 

Office                                                                          

750.  59 

Do 

4,727.84 

Pine  Ridge 

Remodeling  schoolhouse  

2,  700.  00 

Wisconsin: 
Lac  du  Flambeau 

Employees'  quarters  No.  11''                                    

9,780.00 

Do 

Cottage  No  113 

2,529.52 

Hospital 

'>,  757.  25 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


203 


Jg 

CO*" 


1  <N  O  CO  •*  "*  < 
)  T— I  t^-  CO  C^  t>-  C 

>  10  i-n-~o>r-  ( 


$2  s  §  §  r~  i 


32S8SSS 

•5  CO  O  O  CO  05  £• 


x5rHoio5t- 

O  i-H  1C  l^-  1C 


111 


s*g- 


ss^cus 


00~ 


.1 


Z& 


^S 

IS 


§S3^ 


lif-sl 


£5 


o>o=c»-*05    •    • 

SSSSSg  :  : 


:8:  ! 


,-1  lO  t^.  lOl^ 


2S^t2! 


?£g 


§1§1§ 


i-H  C<l  <N  CO  CO 


Ol  I     rr,  I         OO  CD  IO  1C  Tf 

l-jb^l  ^ISJH^ 


C3  « 

2| 


w  S  i-i  - 

0<s  » 


•  i  •:  i 


i  OO  »-H  t^  t^»  O  Oi 

FH     OOO    1C    T^    >C 

>  05  05  «  rH  t-  t>- 


!2I°- 
•  <NI 


SKSSfeojoo^K. 

'  Tf  1C  O  05  t>- t^  <N  1C  C 


t^o  to  to  • 


)  ^  OO  O> 

)  O5  1C  CO  ^^^^.^^^^^ 

•tfste"fc«*' 


1  OO  O  C&  C^l  rH  ( 
)  t>-  CD  C5  i-l  f-H  C 


•aS'SS 


i^HOOOOOScoSfcS 
I  (N  (N  i-4  r-H  .-(  <M  IM  (M  i-t 
)<N  (M  CO  C^^ 

3  r>.  oo  cc  t^»  ic 
ric'ic'cTo'^1^^'^'^ 


g^^SSS 

COOCOCOO  1C, 


I        «*  «5  •*  CO  1C  00  -H  C  CO  CO 


i  :  i  i  :1  i  !-  :  iS  i  i  \  \  \  IS 


S8St2S! 


.-H  IM  co  »c         r-ieqoo          c» 


IE 

gs 
SI 


|3t 

III 
111 

s«^ 


8^§ 


1585 


!§*     ^^ 


N  e^^M 


,^,> 


Sill 


<M-*0(M 


SsS^s 


O  O  CO  C 

%Z1&\ 


OOt^!DlCTt<COlM^HC 

SSosSSSSSc 


1 


ill  i 


$ 

^ 

"Stt 


"*"*  t> 

•3^ 
,0  5 

s» 


«I5 


204 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


Is 

-S 


S" 


m 


§ 


•*  >O        CO 


nc-ai 


18  :  :S    S 


S    S 


S      : 


Oi 


« 
i* 

o  § 
^"s 

*« 


•3 


00*0?     t-T<Nvc«r»o>cx^co>^ 


ss 


:8 


0<N 

2S 


8SSS| 


Tt*  Oi  CO  O  O 

CS005O^ 


illil  i  ;>1  il 


<fl  3^ 


g 


S«1 11111  II  1  Is     I 

Qfe^OWSflH«     KEH      2     £D         S 


1  !  Ml 

lilll 

BP*I 

ss  s« 

C'-    fe  M 


&g 
II 


5    W 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


205 


g? 


:  S 


§  !H 

S  :3« 


§  : 


§si 

TjT     eo" 


«c  i     •    -coe^ 


S3 


8  :  :  S 


S?  :  : 


off 


2S   S:8SS 


IT 

»     5f 


I  !§2: 


1-H       •          i-H  »O 


£  \ 


1~T 


*5 


s  a  -«*'•' 


ssss 

S  :g 


|oo^ 


SS    :,   :     g     :  :  :  :Sgs  : 


O      •      •  00  *O     •  O 

co-  :  :§§S5  :g 


IM      .      .  C<\  -en 


:  :3 


til 


!  O  t>   O 

10000 


SO  ScN  > 


s  & 


I 

^5   . 


"§S 


II 


1 

2 
I* 

co® 


M^ 


B 

§~~: 


-i    tj"  I  *>-#m<Ruz 


|   S3 


^53 


s~§ 

s~s" 


o  ~" 


CN  (M  CN        CO  I-H 

?aggjg~  N  !^ 


88  ^ 


S°    SS^c?  :'«> 


O  ^**  < 

§S! 


gSSiSSS 

•*  rH  »O  OOO  O 

t~"      i-T     c>»'e>f»oxio' 


S:S 


111 


o      co      ^ 


1L 

•O'P 


^28S§ 


^  y~'eo  to  oc 


fell" 
oT  jcxT 


83g 

es"     i-T 


S    S§  2 


Tt<       O  OO  O  O  C^I  -^ 

-f(         i— <  OO  rH  O  -^  -^ 

tH       0«M^!NiSS 


§  a 


rt|SoC"-oSoSlMO     »       CNO 
O    I  CD  <N  O  O  CO  00       iO     1C      OCN 


t 

£•  to  cs    to 

s"s  " 


Oi  O  O  i— I  CO 

°°£^S 


§ls||»§3« 

^oT  ^    rt"  Co" 


[s  §  Is; 

roo"  -^r  ^r( 


15  « 

S» 


*l<+ 


:  :§ 


1-g-li 


>io    .  -coo 

>^    i  ,,-< o 

1 10     •  .  <K<  O 

•  '  oo'co' 


•    •  o 

=  11 


206 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


'.SB 


:    8 


£   S 


,      .  io  O 

;    ;«g§ 


iO  »O  C 


'Oo     oo 
!2os     o 


m 


i 


I 


S  i 


<M      •  O  O  OO        t~- 


<M      •  O  O 
rt      .(N  CO 


:.g  $  § 

,  CO          O          CO 

CM"  I  J-H" 

s 


•  O  Th  ^ 


-d  SB 


•*  <N  •*  CO 

?u  i-  eo  ce 


CM  O  CM      • 

O  Gi  OT,       • 
OCM  CM      • 


CM 


"O        00 

Jo      gg 


lOCOO'O'OCxi^t'O'-HOCO        CO 


olin 
ota 


North  C 
North  D 


el 

1§S 

3§§§|gJ     §    §    ~2g 

O  PU  Pn  CC  02  02  02         fc£      rt       02H--1- 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


207 


00* 


•tr     •  10  O  < 
•f     -O  cc< 


II 

ft  8 


s  § 


>'«a  fe  rn 

CC    I  00 


£  :  :  : 


§§  I 


l~        CO        CO  00 


IS 


iO        CO 

n      to 


1    8    S' 


rH       •          CO  CO 


o  o      o 
coco      ,c 


•s 


>  >O  O  O  '— <  f-n 

Ml 


'C005          1  <M 


rr  i-i  '-c  >o  o    •  c  »  cc 

I-lMCO'J'Tr       >  35  Q  <H 


>O  rH 

»HO 


•<M  (M  if        -rH  < 


<£>  T-l  -^ 


>O  C  CO 
CM  iO  CO  « 

fOrH^H 


£™  § 


s  - 


<N  O5  t^  Q  CO  : 
CC  C  00  O  r-  < 
»O  T-H  CO  00  iC  < 


§§   I 


CO  CO  •«<  CO  O  <>t  -^  ' 
CO  (M  CT>  CO  3  Tf  O  < 

(N~<N""CO""     r-Too^co"" 


•COCDIC  r-t 


C  1C 


r"iaj-r.Aa' 

O      oSj      PH      PH      JB 


•§•§ 


«42^    «     ^flfft'Jfi    a,1        tf'S^S  :€  :w     : 

ill  I  i  i 


208  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations  June  30,  1918. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

! 
Farm- 
ing. 

Fores- 
try. 

School. 

Grand  total.... 
Arizona  

$40,160,810 

$3,357,364 

$1,532,46S 

S3S,  887 

$17,334,984 

$1,739,737 

$1,120,67? 

$15,036,690 

3,039,075 

313,316 

235,459 

22,675 

19,565 

181,982 

34,02C 

2,232,058 

Camp  Verde  
Colorado  River... 
Fort  Apache  
FortMojave  

52,270 
107,767 
376,911 
115,  154 
7,610 
6,840 
110,366 
175,900 
474,610 
737,  234 
243,  066 
119,623 

37,  120 
10,849 
68,  757 
1,050 
2,755 
1,882 
15,  160 
24,000 
42,075 

325 
2,759 
11,870 
6,847 
240 
70 
7,440 
29,000 
48,000 
81,612 

14,825 
81,752 
276,  735 
95,  173 
3,055 
4,888 
80,190 
117,000 
373,414 
655,  622 
115,767 
114,  798 

12,407 

""i9,"54S 

12,084 
1,560 

Kaibab 

1,465 

6,111 

5,900 

8,500 

2,621 

Pima  ! 

3,437 

19,075 
4,825 
635 
5,350 
3,377 
7,894 
6,140 

48,825 

350 

12,555 

91,882 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River       

41,835 
146,012 
53,798 
122,288 
2  147,  791 

1,051,261 

18,848 
77,730 
4,473 

22,352 
28,757 
34,080 
108,849 
104,801 

831,217 

San  Carlos 

22,325 

11,850 

San  Xavier     

.     11,868 

Truxton  Canon  .  . 
Western  Navajo.. 

California 

5,545 

5,180 
43,945 

31,670 

125 

42,561 

79,180 

5,408 

Bishop            .... 

32,439 
11,968 
10,785 

760 

2,285 

100 
200 

5 

440 
1,200 

31,014 
8,283 
10,  785 
81  164 
105,544 
73  838 
60,664 
2,120 
10.578 
80,372 

316,252 
37,146 
13,457 

58,302 

Digger        

FortBidwell  
Fort  Yuma 

81,814 
107,944 
78,943 

650 
2,400 

Greenville       .... 

5,  io5  -  -  - 

Hoopa  Valley  — 
Malki    

90,514 
16,  189 
70,804 
88,177 

404,049 
41,969 
15,666 

110,512 

5,025 
12,959 
12,860 
3,850 

16,475 
110 
1,620 
550 

24,365 

6,075 

2,275 

1,000 

Pala 

41,486 

4,260 
500 

63,432 

"2,"  905 

Round  Valley  — 
Sherman  Insti- 
tute 

Soboba  

1,250 
1,906 

35,141 

3,273 

Tule  River    . 

75 
2,140 

228 

\ 
Colorado      

1,139 

13,790 

Southern  Ute  
Ute  Mountain1.. 

Idaho    

74,690 
35,822 

481,559 

21,455 
13,686 

93,903 

2,140 

51,095 
7,207 

225,501 

1,139 
99,618 

13,790 
34,853 

25,590 

2,094 

Coeur  d'Alene  
Fort  Hall     .  .  . 

65,014 
281,453 
135,092 

50,832 
43,071 

1,620 
12,001 
85,997 

83,840 
25,315 

980 
26,887 
6,986 

1,094 

10,488 
173,904 
41,109 

6,328 
457,967 

25,590 

Fort  Lapwai 

1,000 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

90,  168 

Kansas  

630,943 

9,550 

138,  111 

Haskell  Institute. 
Kickapoo  

532,043 
84,478 
14,422 

240,597 

25,038 
277 

130,675 
7^436 

376,330 
76,765 
4,872 

228,772 

Potawatomi 

9,550 
310 

Michigan 

11,515 

Mackinac  * 

2,385 
238  212 

310 

2,075 
226,697 

595,657 

Mount  Pleasant 

11  515 

Minnesota 

861,030 

134,257 

89,844 

8,016 

33,256 

Cass  Lake 

15  660 

15,660 
4,310 

Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage  i.J 
Leech  Lake  
Nett  Lake 

37,039 
9,482 
118,648 
38,758 
169,080 

7,525 
9,132 

4^,276 
4,200 

25,124 

80 

350 

6,732 
275 
6,040 

69,640 
34,012 
163,040 
104,065 
57,470 
147,460 

271 

Pipestone  

Red  Lake 

169,  369 
81,470 
221.524 

23,704 

25,029 

1 

7,936 

8,635 
24,000 

Vermillion  Lake. 
White  Earth... 

47.420 

26.644 

|  

1917  report. 


2  Decreased  valuation. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  209 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations  June  30, 1918 — Continued. 


States  and 
super  intend  encies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Fores- 
try. 

School. 

Montana  

$1,445,143 

1369,722 

$67,  168 

3740 

$248,255 

£138,360 

$18,900 

5601,998 

Blackfeet 

180,432 
278,  128 
351,321 
344,  142 
155,  153 

9,722 
126,  245 

538,403 

39,994 
100,316 
83,978 
65,045 
50,840 

5,305 
24,244 

74,920 

23,416 
20,850 
1,480 
3,300 
15,310 

112 
2,700 

36,248 

6,555 
45,700 
6,509 
42,700 
12,  985 

110,467 
110.  787 
574 
230,097 
75,278 

1,300 
73,495 

395,305 

475 
12,025 
3,000 

Flathead  l       

246,755 

Fort  Belknap.... 
Fort  Peck  

740 

Rocky  Boy's 
Agency  
Tongue  River  

Nebraska 

3,005 

1,500 

20,906 
31,  930 

3,400 

Genoa 

394,180 
38,480 

10,875 
6,550 

383,305 

Omaha..  

31,930 

Santee  2  

Winnebago  

105,743 
417,537 

57,495 
87,419 

36,248 
44,164 

12,000 
215,233 

Nevada 

25 

4,310 

66,386 

Carson 

140,626 

1,796 

21,297 

37,363 

80,170 
17,098 
9,099 
6,154 
73,460 
7,047 
22,182 

23 
1,332,314 

Fallen 

Fort  McDermitt  . 
Moapa  River  

17,342 
7,574 
82,160 
26,954 
97,634 

28,149 
1,657,159 

3,835 
1,210 
8,700 
6,875 
36,953 

28,050 
80,524 

850 
100 

25 

3,533 

110 

Walker  River.... 
Western  Shoshone 
Reno,  special 
agent 

1,565 
20,276 

76 
111,878 

4,200 

7,267 
18,223 

N^w  Mexico     .  . 

250 

11,475 

95,548 

25,  170 

Albuquerque  
jieariiia 

347,  661 
168,  863 
161,903 
145,967 

139,554 
304,345 
237,283 
151,583 

710 
145,  377 

9,631 
35,  295 
24,998 

12,044 
21.  974 
21,700 
1,300 

16,  274 
26,  190. 
3,108 
9,288 

575 

325,986 
80,429 
93,405 
135,377 

109,512 
249,135 
234,175 
104,295 

20,095 
U,150 
9,040 

11,070 
10,650 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito... 
Pueblo  day 
schools 

250 

1,600 
8,750 

12,  168 
16,970 

3,300 

Santa  Fe 

Zuni 

250 
135 

U,  475 

26,125 

150 

New  York:  New  York 
Agency 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  

4,000 

141,377 
728,  620 

North  Dakota 

1,094,592 

177,  155 

77,470 

313 

111,034 

Bismarck  3  

84,361 

84,361 
7,945 
211,561 
192,954 
30,637 
201,  162 

2,839,517 

Fort  Berthold  
Fort  Totten 

118,378 
229,911 
342,  139 
92,653 
227,  150 

3,440,734 

54,  695 
7,729 
69,302 
39,  556 
5,873 

192,719 

2,125 
6,611 
31,  775 
16,844 
20,  115 

167,685 

313 

53,300 
4,010 

Standing  Rock  »  . 
Turtle  Mountain. 
Wahpeton 

48,  108 
5,616 

Oklahoma    . 

1,005 

239,  808 

Cantonment  

140,649 

413,297 
860,745 

73,554 
603,344 
221,833 
63,808 

6,000 
23,439 

2 

20,803 

75 

59,200 

74,634 

281,071 
860,745 

Cheyenne      and 
Arapaho  

87,984 

Chilocco  

Choctaw  -  Chicka- 
saw  Sanatorium 
Kiowa  . 

73,554 
60,825 
1,240 

42,  950 
40,740 

77,324 
1,200 

422,245 
178,653 
63,808 
102,901 
60,963 
40,811 
151,497 
23,245 
107,388 

Osage  1 

Otoe  

Pawnee  
Ponca  

126,940 
83,109 
54,743 
174.731 
23,245 
113,698 

23,323 
21,896 
12,762 
15,299 

716 
250 
1,170 
7,005 

Sac  and  Fox  
Seger  

930 

Seneca  

Shawnee  

6,3i6  

Total  

2,953,696,      192,719J      166,303,    1,005 
I.                 2  Santee  included  under  Yan 
14 

225.708 

2,367,961 

1  As  reportec 
86770—18- 

kton,  S.  Dak.           »  1917  report 

210  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIES. 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations  June  30, 1918 — Continued. 


States  and 
s  uperintendenc  ies  . 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Fores- 
try. 

School. 

Oklahoma  —  Contd. 
Five      Civilized 
Tribes  schools.. 

$487,038 

$1,382 

$14,100 

$471,556 

A  r  m  s  t  rong 

55  617 

55  617 

Bloomf  i  e  1  d 

•    45  435 

45  435 

Cherokee  Or- 
phan School 

68  633 

68  633 

E  u  c  h  e  e 
Boarding 
School 

52  025 

10  600 

41  425 

E  u  f  aul  a 
Boarding 
School 

49  135 

968 

3  500 

44  667 

Jones   Male 
Academy 

33  874 

33,874 

Mekusnkey 

61  414 

350 

61  064 

N  u  y  a  k  a 
Boarding 
School 

42,  940 

64 

42,876 

Tuskahoma 

39  855 

39  855 

Wheelock 
Academy 

38,  110 

38  110 

821,525 

$23,978 

7  048 

$30 

$12,  707 

101,274 

$38,  240 

638,  248 

Klamath1  ... 

163,  240 

6,775 

2,440 

9,319 

11,735 

25,260 

107,711 

Roseburg  ^ 

2,280 

2,200 

30 

50 

391,810 

391,810 

Siletz 

18  956 

7  883 

1  888 

500 

8  685 

Umatilla 

146,  254 

3,145 

3,388 

86  539 

580 

52,602 

Warm  Springs 

98  985 

3,975 

i2  720 

3  000 

11  850 

77,  440 

Pennsylvania:  Car- 
lisle 

559  767 

27  525 

91  592 

440,650 

South  Dakota 

3,  068,  915 

674,372 

297  181 

5,053 

27,440 

310,  046 

189,  132 

1,565,691 

139  974 

139  °74 

Cheyenne  River 

454,284 

228,332 

44*378 

4,398 

48,309 

128,917 

Crow  Creek 

130  297 

30  946 

17  571 

225 

18  000 

63,555 

Flandreau 

306,710 

7,750 

4,625 

56,164 

238,  171 

Lower  Brule 

119,004 

52,  212 

6  017 

8  850 

51,925 

290  973 

6  902 

26,500 

55  563 

202,008 

Pine  Ridge 

703  537 

196  800 

21  547 

430 

30  660 

2  189  057 

265,043 

Rapid  City 

263,575 

4,390 

5*145 

66,  195 

187,845 

Rosebud  

444,868 

99,933 

48,100 

940 

24,860 

75 

270,960 

81  272 

19  361 

450 

61,461 

Springfield 

36,  991 

36,991 

Yankton 

97  430 

34  648 

2  522 

1,445 

58,815 

Utah 

218,  758 

123,484 

6  710 

47,967 

4,360 

36,237 

7  260 

7,260 

Shivwits 

12  770 

48° 

200 

/ 

12,085 

Uintah          and 
Ourav  3  . 

198,728 

122,  99J 

6,51C 

47,967 

4,360 

16,892 

1  492  50 

653,951 

60  17C 

67,24S 

51,909 

659,229 

Colville 

189  29 

70  75^ 

5  193 

58  638 

34,33 

20,372 

364*95 

IK 

n'ooc 

353,846 

Neah  Bay  

12*.  25 

7,551 

4,700 

578  92 

4  so}  83; 

33  554 

6,85 

16,685 

Taholah 

20  81 

80 

80( 

72 

18,485 

Tulalip 

210*  954 

27  3ft 

ll          6,60( 

>  ...     . 

1,9P 

175,055 

Yakima... 

115,32 

25,60< 

)          3.02C 

(  

8.6U 

8,005 

70,086 

i 1917  report. 

2  Includes  forest  reserve. 

» Increase  last  year  due  to  supplies  on  hand. 

*  Includes  value  land  and  old  Spokane  Sanatorium. 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN"  AFFAIRS.  211 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  oj  Government  property  valuations  June  30, 1918 — Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
i  tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Fores- 
try. 

School. 

Wisconsin  .... 

$1,410,351 

$47,646 

$26,227 

$600 

$24,928 

$695,690 

$615,260 

Hayward 

164,289 
873,834 
91,464 
1,075 
9,553 
72,671 
3,670 
193  795 

2,221 
35,062 
805 
715 
8,403 

5,640 
11,717 
1,370 
360 
350 
1,460 
520 
4,810 

18,550 
4,138 

50 
695,290 

137,828 
127,627 
89,289 

Keshena 

Lao  du  Flambeau 
Laona  

La  Pointe  . 

600 

150 

50 

Oneida 

71,211 
320 
188,985 

191,209 
15,036,690 

Red  Cliff 

440 

2,090 

300 

Tomah    . 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  . 
State  totals  
Miscellaneous 

428,  155 
23,244,779 

154,  153 

3,290,600 
66,764 

6,865 
1,532,469 

-  '—  —  •  -^—  -?—  ^ 

51,778 
494,701 

5,650 
1,739,737 

18,500 
1,120,679 

$29,903 

16,916,031 

8,984 

16,840,283 

Warehouses 

12,884 

1650 
18,984 

16,840,283 
63,230 

12,884 
1650 

Liquor  suppres- 
sion   

Allotting  service.  . 
Irrigation  service 
(cost)  



18,984 

16,840,283 

Indian  office  

63,230 

1 1917  report. 


212 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


ort    . 


i! 


ill. 


CO  *— <  CO 
i  C^  r-H  f— * 


pSIll; 


tcoi&t 


>  »O  W 


^H  O  C^  iO  O  Oi  CO 
>  O  r-H  !N  CS  (N  O  t^ 


i£222322 


®  ^; 

3   t>   S 

•55^2 


r—  O  ^t<  t-~  CO  O  O  l"- 

rH  O  03  O  00  (M  ^  O 


)  OTf 

,00  ^ 


g 


CO«OrH(NrHTt<rtlCO< 
O  CS          r-t  OC  OO  rH  O>  ' 

io"oT  r-TcsTco^ 


O  r-(  rH  N  tf  ^-1  • 


1  i  i  i 


COC^O(Nt^(NC^Ocg( 

coW 


» 1C  O  O  O  O  *— *  ^O 
'  50  CO  CO  O  S  S  CO 


III! 


if 


>  to  r-  c^  o^  os  ic  T*< 

i  10  IM  CO  50  CO  <N  CO 


Iflf 

•3 -3  If  S. 


O  O  O  CO  CO  O  C}  > 
f-  CO  "*  •*  O  !N  O  ( 


00  O<  •*  iH 


t^  Oat  ^  iiooc  8 ' 
SO  OS  C3  CO  CO  t^-  "^  C 


'SgSSgfgSS; 

r-T<N%"2S'ONr-rcO^'*"Ni-ri 


iS^BSSSI 


oo  r- «c  10  ^  co  es  rH 


IglsIIIillll^^  I 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


213 


cO  O        © 

£8    1 


ill  1 


III 


«000  rH         rH 


•I  i  i 


•»O         r-t         CO 


§3  8  S 


-  g 


J2    § 


10  CO        CO         IM 


21 


5  CO  C5         O 

;ss  ss 


ISS  1  1 


C^NS        ^       to 

coo:  t^  d> 

e<fco-»o'  TiT 


§  i 


1  S 


i  1 


S     53 

1C        rf 


88  3  S 


t^co      N      co 

I  i-H  *-H          CO          O> 

HO  CO        CO        <O 


:8     :    *S    S 

•  O          •       »O  CO       CO 


i§ 


>  CN  Cft  CO       <N  CO       O5 

co-co      5-- 


§•80888      § 
•iO  <NCO  O  O        •* 


§ii§     1  1 


OO  OO  »— *  GO  C^  GO  i-H 

SI--  O5  t>-  «7l  i-(  *£ 
t-^Oi-^cO-* 


^T     eC^     co'  oT 


sill 


SBK 


II 


°  1 


g  I 

2    -2 

•s  .1 


•*f  O  OO  t>-  1C  O  CN 

Tf  O  O  O  1C  CO  CN 
(M  .-<  00  CD  10  CO  <N 


cor^co  co          eo 


SSS£88£         g 

cc  co  co  t~  -f  co  10  ~< 


sis 


»O  t^       N                              m*  43 

Sc?S      S                        |  £ 

3  § 

I  I 

r^r^r^ToocsTtC        w>  S 

•"OCOOiOCqTH                     fl  ^ 

)cOCOTt<M        CO                 -g  *» 


^cO^HCftCO  g       g 


^-Tcfcft^iC     co 


III 

P        -H  „ 


:    S 


ll 


II 


214 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


l! 


11 


s 

^   DOlO 


o      ^ 

1C        •* 


ooo" 


3!!§§£ 

~4<3?inc**#in 


3  3 


t 


SS    g 

CCO        05 


O5  O  r-t  *&  OO 


§§§ 


OO         CO 


t-T'o'c 

CO  <N  CO  t^ 


icooo     o     ^  £2     ooo 
^S§8     *     §o     888 


. 

n 


do* 

^ 


oToo'oi  10"     oo     i-Tco1 

L_ 


§W 
oo 

PoT     o 


OOGO^OICO      co      coo 


1  i 


coo 

5COO 


111 

83^ 


OOOi 

UT5  t--  IO  • 


•  1:1! 


S     1 


CO     •  O     • 

S§  :8  : 


•       O 

:    3 


i-H  T-IOOCO 


S 


iOiO«O 


g§  S 


t-  -tjT     co" 


*S  fl 

11 


p  :^I3 


old 
n  ..... 

ock  » 
ntain 


ta 

rth 
tte 


s 


«^<          .»          -3  TH  -5    b£»rj 

••        "3         S  ^r°cS 

•B/  I    3  WEH;3.2 

'3      o     o     p  •£"S§'^ 

^55  ^fS^H 
1    I    I 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


215 


CO  OO        Ti 

CO 


.       »  Tf<       •      «5O      ••*       •      •  5OO5          C 

:  :s  :  :     :     :  :    S    S 


>  »  CO  CN  O  CO  CO  •<*•  CO  5O  CO  CO         5 
;  O  «5  OO5  Tji  CN  O5  CO  CO  00  O        OO 


"lllillsl  ^s  I 


sns?:gs3 


§  III  8 


IIS  § 


'ggs  S 


!§§§ll    I    II  ill   I 


iS  1 


-H  -*<  00  CO  M  ^H  CO  M  I-l  <N  •*  ^H  IN 


II  ill  g 


)  <£>  CO  IN  CN 

i  Tn  CO  O5  O 
>  •<*<  O  CO  i-l 


OO       to  ^  iO  O5  t-~       OO 

•*TH  OCM&&          05 


§•     •QO  O  O     •     •        "3 
•     •  to  *O  O     •     •        l>- 
-I      •     .OOiOlN      •     •        00 


l :  ;§§  ; ; :  I 


r-l  CN  CN 


§g  O  O  O  »C  g 
S  S  S«O  CO  >O 

rio^cTo^to^os  to »— i 

>  i-l  ?5  S5  CN  O5  •*  iO 


5 

.  10 --H  so  es  t^ 


co  Tt<      rt<  co  o  e^i  i 
•^  -^      t>.  t^.  -^  i— t  ( 


I  i    i    ill    i 


!  00  8  i 
I  O5  1O  ( 


O>  CO  CO  -* 
CO  O  O5  C<1 
^^HOO  CO 


CO  i«  1-1  >C  10 


COIN        -HCNOitOCO 


111 


88S      2 

o  o  co        3 


•H     - 


III 


«?  s 


oo 


g 


216 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


217 


TABLE  38  — Employees  in  Indian  school  and  agency  service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1918. 


Position. 

Total. 

School  service. 

Agency  service. 

Range  of 
salaries.^ 

Num 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num 
ber. 

Salary. 

Total                  

5,313 

53,609,184 

2,758 

$1,867,777 

2,555 

$1,741,407 

Supervision  of  Indians: 
Superintendents  and  assistants 
Cashiers  and  storekeepers.  .  . 
Clerks 

142 
2 

620 
40 
95 
65 
86 
548 
3 

573 
21 
53 

46 
131 
155 
26 
24 

21 
193 
116 
152 
203 

259. 

"195 
101 

87 
4 

68 
321 
27 
72 

7 
73 

7 
31 

179 

407 
22 
53 

8 
77 

253,  525 
3,850 
613,640 
39,000 
99,  155 
47,080 
7,104 
161,588 
2,520 

395,592 
13,640 
40,180 

35,720 
103,  260 
113,300 
16,340 
19,790 

13,  560 

67,  220 
72,655 
76,785 
102,  140 

124,735 

189,404 
68,030 

56,010 
2,460 

62,776 
253,  797 
16,260 
41,330 

10,600 
58,910 
6,180 
32,660 

56,600 
204,935 
9,840 
29,820 
6,240 
80,953 

139 
1 
119 

95 
65 
..... 

572 
21 
52 

14 
99 
66 
22 
13 

21 

188 
111 
152 
178 

245 

65 
61 

4 
3 

8 
60 

246,375 
1,000 
101,460 
720 
99,  155 
47,  080 

3 
1 
501 
39 

7,150 
2,850 
512,  180 
38,280 

$1,000  to  $2,750 
1,000  to    2,850 
600  to    1,600 
660  to    1,080 
720  to    1,400 
600  to    1,200 
84 
240  to       420 
540  to       780 

600  to        900 
600  to        750 
600  to    1,000 

360  to    1,200 
600  to    1,000 
480  to        900 
,540  to        780 
300  to    1,000 

540  to        840 
•  300  to        600 
540  to        840 
300  to        660 
300  to        600 

300  to        600 

360  to    1,800 
600  to        780 

300  to        900 
600  to        780 

715  to    1,300 
600  to    1,  100 
360  to        720 
450  to    1,000 

1,300  to    1,600 
•   450  to        900 
500  to    1,200 
440  to    1,  100 

120  to        COO 
300  to        720 
360  to        600 
240  to       600 
680  to        840 
120  to    1,000 

Stenographers  

Principals  and  assistants 

Judges 

86 
547 
3 

1 
..... 

32 
32 
89 
4 
11 

..... 
5 

7,104 
161,348 
2,520 

585 

Police,  privates  

240 

Constables                 .... 

Education: 
Academic  — 
Teachers  

395.007 
13,640 
39,640 

12,040 
77,340 
49,  060 
13,760 
10,890 

13,  560 
64,620 
70,015 

76,  785 
89,860 

118,955 

52,080 
41,390 

2,220 
1,740 

8,400 
46,930 

Kindergartners 

Industrial  teachers 

540 

23,680 
25,920 
64,  240 
2,580 
8,900 

"~2,"6()6" 
2,640 

Mechanical- 
General  mechanics 

Engineers  and  assistants    . 
Blacksmiths  and  carpenters 
Shoe  and  harness  makers 
Others.. 

Domestic  science  — 
Teachers 

Housekeepers  

Matrons  

Assistant  matrons  

Cooks  and  bakers 

25 

14 

130 
40 

83 
1 

60 
261 
27 

57 

7 
73 
7 
31 

32 
209 
19 
53 

12,280 
5,780 

137,324 
26,640 

53,790 
720 

54,376 
206,867 
16,260 
29,990 

10,600 
58,910 
6,180 
32,660 

11,780 
101,280 
8,700 
29,820 

Seamstresses     and    laun- 
dresses   

Health:  2 
Physicians.  . 

Nurses. 

Matrons- 
Field  

Hospital 

Agriculture  and  stock: 
Superintendents  of  live  stock" 
and  stockmen 

Farmers  and  assistants 

Line  riders  

Others.,  

15 

11,340 

Forestry: 
Deputy  supervisors  

Forest  guards  

Sawyers  

Others  

Miscellaneous: 
Assistants  

147 
198 
3 

44,  820 
103,  655 
1,140 

Laborers  

Teamsters  

Interpreters  

Painters  

8 
11 

6,240 
6,620 

Others  

66 

74,333 

1  Occasionally  extremely  high  and  low  salaries  are  not  embraced  herein. 

2  Does  not  include  139  positions  at  $69,360,  carried  under  various  activities. 

3  Includes  74  contract  physicians,  whose  time  is  only  partly  employed  in  the  Indian  Service. 


218 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


TABLE  39. — Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  SO,  1918. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force, 
Total  

121 

7~ 
13 
24 
8 
24 
8 

1 
3 
1 

10 
12 
4 
1 
1 
4 

290 

1 

8 

5 

$195,060 

17,000 
25,800 
32,190 
14,500 
33,420 
17,600 

3,600 
3,700 
0) 

18,250 
12,980 
5,320 
2,000 
1,500 
7,200 

256,655 

4,000 
18,500 

4,500 

15 
1 

$31,400 
3,500 

106 

6~ 
13 
23 

8 
24 
7 

S163,660 

13,500 
25,800 
30,  190 
14,500 
33,420 
14,600 

Inspection 

Special  supervisors 

Liquor  . 

1 

2,000 

Construction 

Health 

Schools          

1 

1 
1 
4 

14 

3,000 

3,600 
2,000 
0) 

3,000 
1,600 
2,000 
2,000 
1,500 
7,200 

28,000 

4,000 
2,500 

2,700 

Industries: 
Farming 

E  mploy  ment 

2 

1,700 

Live  stock 

Forestry: 
Field  supervising  officers 

9 
11 
3 

15,250 
11,380 
3,320 

Menominee  

Special  agents  

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  Indians  .  .  . 
Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians 

Traveling  auditors        

Field  irrigation  service. 
Total  

186 

228,  655 

Chief  inspector 

1 

1 

2 

Superintendents  of  irrigation                      .    ... 

7 
3 

16,000 
1,800 

Arizona  

Pima 

4 
1 

33 
13 
26 

3,300 
1,200 

45,860 
13,060 
28,525 

1 
1 

2 

1 
2 

1,500 
1,200 

4,000 
1,600 
3,300 

3 

1,800 

Salt  River                                                     ' 

California:  Miscellaneous  work  

31 
12 

24 

41,860 
11,460 
25,225 

Idaho*  Fort  Hall 

Montana  

Billings 

10 
14 

15 
29 

1,600 
12,450 
14,  175 
300 

20,780 
37,150 

1 
9 
13 
1 

14 
27 

1,600 
10,650 
12,675 
300 

18,780 
33,350 

Crow               .            

1 
1 

1,800 
1,500 

Fort  Belknap 

New  Mexico*  Albuquerque 

1 
2 

2,000 
3,800 

Utah  

Salt  Lake      

11 

18 

53 
17 

24 
1 
3 

15,400 
21,750 

66,680 
17,600 

22,925 

1 
1 

1 
1 

4 
1 

1,800 
2,000 

2,100 
2,000 

3,780 

10 
17 

52 
16 

20 

13,600 
19,750 

64,580 
15,600 

19,  145 

Uintah                     

Wyomin0''  Shoshone 

Field  allotment  service. 
Total  ,.. 

0) 
2,820 

0) 

Arizona  i  

3 

2.820 

Leupp 

1 

«2 

4 

720 
2,100 

2,665 

1 

2 

3 

720 
2,100 

2,125 

Pima 

Montana  

1 

540 

Blackfeet 

2 
1 
1 

1 
3 
9 

765 
500 
1,400 

900 
2,860 
10,500 

1 

540 

1 
1 

3 

8 

225 
500 
1,400 

900 
2,860 
8,340 

Crow 

Fort  Peck                                

North  Dakota'  Turtle  Mountain 

Oregon*  Umatilla                              

South  Dakota  

1 

2,160 

Pine  Ridge                            

2 

7 

3 

2,100 
8,400 

3,180 

2 

6 

2 

2,100 
6,240 

2,100 

Rosebud 

1 
1 

2,160 
1,080 

Wisconsin:  La  Pointe.  .  . 

$10  a  day  when  actually  employed. 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  219 

TABLE  39.— Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  30,  1918— Continued. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Heir  ship  work. 

,    55 
20 
35 

$60,  260 
50,000 
36,290 

18 
20 
3 

$32,600 
50,000 
6,200 

37 

$27,660 

Probate  work. 

Warehouses. 
Total                                       

32 

30,090 

Chicago                 

21 

6 

8 

21,650 
6,620 
8,020 

1 

1 
1 

2,200 
2,000 
2,000 

20 
5 
7 

19,450 
4,620 
6,020 

San  Francisco                                      

St  Louis 

TABLE  40. — Recapitulation  of  all  Indian  Service  employees. 


ation. 

Number. 

Salaries. 

6,028 

$4,  567,  074 

i  2,  758 

1,867,777 

12  555 

1,741,407 

121 

195,  060 

200 

256,  655 

24 

22,  925 

55 

60  260 

20 

50,000 

35 

36,  290 

imissioner  and  assistant  commissioner  .  . 

260 

336,700 

Total . 


School 

A  gene  y 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force 

Irrigation  service 

Allotment  service 

Heirship  work 

Probate  work 

Warehouses... 


i  School  and  agency  includes  2,379  Indians  earning  $1,003,316. 
TABLE  41. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  80,  1918. 

[Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner,  are  received 
in  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guaranties  for  right  of  way  across  Indien 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.  For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
as  required  by  sec.  3622,  Hev.  Stats.] 

On  hand  July  1, 1917 $154,446.66 

Received: 

July,  1917 $9,384.36 

August,  1917 44,141.35 

September,  1917 2,073.67 

October,  1917 .....: 1, 063. 86 

November,  1917 25, 262. 55 

December,  1917 20, 578. 82 

January,  1918 36, 571. 41 

February,  1918 15, 609. 37 

March,  1918 1,345.23 

April,  1918 4.724.64 

May,  1918 22, 740. 43 

June,  1918 6, 961. 21 

190,456.90 


Total  on  hand  and  received 344, 903. 56 

Disbursed  and  deposited: 

July,  1917 $251.43 

August,  1917 20,810.51 

September,  1917 1,396.06 

October,  1917 317.04 

November,  1917 182, 090. 50 

December,  1917 26,890.25 

January,  1918 25, 001. 00 

February,  1918 15, 611. 83 

March,  1918 5,950.72 

April,  1918 5, 974. 94 

May,  1918 32,059.83 

June,  1918 6, 879. 17 

323,233.28 


Balance  on  hand  June  30, 1918 21,670.28 


220 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


cj  Q  ce  to  oo-^o-*  o  w-i   15     co     os   c*i-     OOJVOOOOCO<N   ;©   co-<-<oo< 

CO  Ol  -Hi  CO  OOt>"-l  -<Jt  r-ITjt      Irt        00         i-H      ICO         CO  OO  •*  t»  CO  OS     OO     CO  i-l  O5  ^H  ( 

c^T  *v?  oT  "jT  oTi*s*soo"'c<r  ^j^  oo^f 

JH  rH  5»  00  03JHCOOJ  JH  Cq  I 


S    S    S      S 


3  g2S    SSSSSS 


8    §     S  22^2     fe     R&'3  '8 

'  '          ' 


OS' 


r  »  «     «  ^S^     8     88  «   »   fi  ^^ 


3 


If 

^ 


» 

iOO5O5TrTjii 


^t*  o  oc  o  r—  oo 
l0 


^scTs" 


we^c^wS^^S 
"C 


i ! 


f-l    fe  *-*3    rft 


lifi 


•«  a 


E3  § 

ill  I 


•M 

I  s  « 

>    §    sp 


(S^" 

!Sfli 


« i  pin 

Bi«i 

C5  O  O.  S  3 
03 


lSW    P3 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


221 


g  {2  ££      8    8 


*    13 


8     8    S8 

w  £ 

*       I 


B    8 


8  §  as?    a 

8  ff  83    .    S 


od      06 

f-H          OO 

10        l> 


"^        iO        iO 


§  I 

i-i      eo" 


ocooc 


cDcoco 


lalil^   »  a 

1 1  ifll  1 1 

1  |  |l§  I    I   | 
g  I  |l i  £   ^    " 


§   I 

M  fl 


IP 

fl  C  r? 


O  05 
^-§2 


222 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


223 


:o 


II 


1 

<5 


I'S     : 


«*W 

id 


224 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  44. — Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1918. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average 
pro  rata 
share. 

Amount 
paid. 

Total  

4,061 

$1,277,984.90 

Idaho:  Coeur  d'Alene    

Coeur  d'Alene  

282 

343  56 

96  885  18 

Iowa'  Sac  and  Fox  

Sac  and  Fox  

6 

1  079  57 

6  477  42 

21 

8  596  04 

Kickapoo                         .  .  . 

Kickapoo      .... 

12 

577  37 

6  928  44 

Potawatomi 

9 

185  26 

l'  667  60 

Montana*/  Flathead 

Confederated  Flathead 

1  002 

110  43 

110  6*i5  54 

Nebraska*  Santee      

Ponca  

9 

65  68 

591  12 

New  York:  New  York  

Tonawanda  (  Seneca)  

12 

154  75 

1  857  00 

North  Dakota*  Standing  Rock 

Sioux 

233 

149  17 

34  757  10 

Oklahoma 

1  199 

M 

789  717  81 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

25 

301  24 

7  531  00 

<lo  .'.  

11 

301.24 

3,  313  64 

Kiowa1  

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Comanche.. 

425 

315  00 

133  878  10 

do   

198 

709  72 

140  525  55 

Osage 

Osage               

77 

3  819  76 

196  145  37 

Otoe             

Otoand  Missouri  

383 

'673  66 

258,011  78 

Pawnee 

Pawnee  

138 

455  25 

17  299  68 

Ponca 

Ponca           

19 

47  83 

430  47 

Sac  and  Fox 

33 

987  34 

32  582  22 

72 

14,496  84 

Klamath 

Klamath    

55 

196  06 

10  783  36 

U  mat  ilia 

Umatilla 

17 

218  44 

3*  713  48 

South  Dakota    

1,200 

211,  274.  82 

Cheyenne  River  l  ,  
Do.3       

Sioux  
...do  

37 

129 

111.28 
248  14 

4,117.3& 
32  010  0& 

Crow  Creek          

....do  

53 

166  02 

8  799  0& 

Lower  Brule 

.  do   

g 

138  81 

1  110  48 

Pine  Ridge     

...do  

215 

113  37 

24  375  13 

...  do  

434 

122  37 

53  108  58 

Sisseton  and  Wahpeton  . 

239 

292  35 

69  871  65 

Yankton 

Sioux            . 

85 

210  50 

17  892  50 

Wisconsin*  Keshena 

Menominee  

25 

.  107  04 

2  676  03 

1 5  per  cent. 


2  4  per  cent. 


*  3  per  cent. 


TABLE  45. — Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  National  banks  of 

Oklahoma.1 


Tribes. 

On  deposit  June  30,  1918. 

Interest. 

Total. 

Principal. 

Interest. 

Paid  in  the 
United  States 
Treasury. 

Total  paid 
and  due. 

Total    

$3,858,322.60 

$3,669,347.75 

$188,974.91 

$1,088,759.78 

$1,277,734.69 

Choctaw   

2,  137,  619.  96 
766,211.89 

2,037,120.26 
730,635.95 

100,  499.  70 
35,575.94 

628,215.69 
207,021.57 
31,  892.  28 
214,477.56 
7,  152.  68 

728,715.39 
242,597.51 
31,  892.  28 
265,932  06 
8,597.45 

Chickasaw     

Cherokee 

Creek    

929,496.04 
24,9  4.77 

878,041.54 
23,550.00 

51,  454.  50 
1,  444.  77 

Seminole        

1  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  223  banks.    The  rates  of 
interest  are  from  4  to  5£  per  cent. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


225 


TABLE  46. — Analysis  of  disbursement  of  funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  fiscal  year  ended 

June  30,  1918. 


Choctaw. 

Chickasaw. 

Cherokee. 

Creek. 

Seminole. 

Total. 

Salaries  and  expenses  of  tribal 
school  employees 

$1,841.23 

$1,  796.  13 

$407.  19 

$407.  17 

$857.  18 

$5,  308.  90 

Expenses  of  per  capita  and 

10  559  58 

4  288  40 

3  038  73 

1  795.09 

19,  681.  80 

Insurance  and  repairs  to  tribal 

731  41 

243  84 

975.  25 

Expenses  account  sole  of  tri- 
bal lands  and  collection  of 

23  403  47 

7  goi  26 

252.  61 

31,  457.  34 

Refunds  account  tribal  land 
sale 

1  512  96 

504  37 

2,017.33 

Tribal  officers  and  expenses 

5,  726.  10 

8,  486.  61 

75.00 

7,543.89 

21,831.60 

Tribal    attorneys    and    ex- 
penses   

6,056.92 

10,  668.  99 

16,725.91 

Payments  in  lieu  of  allot- 
ments   

4,661.43 

300.  00 

4,  046.  02 

14,  080.  66 

226.  91 

23,315.02 

Per  capita  payments 

2,  221,  407.  15 

605,  619.  15 

2,437.61 

162,  839.  90 

2,  992,  303.  81 

Payments,  funds  transferred 
to  individual  accounts  
Legal   expenses   account   of 
town  lot  suits 

184,  538.  46 

9,  648.  46 

286.  53 

13,  176.  27 
201.  35 

7,908.92 

215,558.64 
-           201.  35 

Total 

2  454  381.79 

644  745.  14 

7  252  35 

49  369.67 

173  628.00 

3,  329,  376.  95 

TABLE  47. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


Warehouses. 

Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago  ... 

134,469 
53,437 
29,  579 

Pounds. 
115,060,802 
7,375,064 
13,093,450 

$1,107,810.03 
414,  894.  84 
415,437.45 

436 
37 
24 

Pounds. 
10,411 
989 
1,054 

$6,  524.  67 
358.  30 
471.17 

San  Francisco 

St.  Louis  

Total  

217,485 

25,529,316 

1,938,142.32 

497 

12,454 

7,354.14 

Packages  mailed. 

Percentage    of    increase    of 
totals  over  previous  year. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago 

3,496 
193 

2,402 

Pounds. 
17,293 
672 
5,978 

$12,674.85 
532.  51 
5,976.55 

Per  cent. 
217.9 
1.7 
220.4 

Per  cent. 
2  68.  0 
24.9 
291.6 

Per  cent. 
217.6 
42.6 
26.0 

San  Francisco  

St.  Louis 

Total  

6,091 

23,  943 

19,  183.  91 

214.3 

271.6 

21.5 

1  Exclusive  of  coal  which  was  not  handled  through  the  warehouses. 

2  Decrease. 

Total  number  of  shipments  (packages) 224  073 

Total  weight 25,565,713 

Total  value $1,964,680.37 

86770—18 15 


226  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  48. — Expense  at  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


Warehouses. 

Rent. 

Light 
aad 
fuel. 

Employees 
and  in- 
spection of 
supplies.* 

Miscella- 
neous. 

Cost  of  maintenance 

Total. 

Per 

cent.2 

Per 
cent, 
1917. 

Chicago  

$4.  800.  00 
2,400.00 
1,800.00 

$384.  69 
13.50 
309.  10 

$17,665.61 
6,971.50 
12,  319.  24 

$3,974.73 
1,  174.  70 
1,  024.  54 

$26  825.03 

2.38 
2.54 
3.66 

2.14 
3.81 
4.55 

San  Francisco 

10,  559.  70 
15,452.88 

St.  Louis  

Total  

9,000.00 

707.29 

36,956.35 

6,173.97 

52,  837.  61 
55,666.20 

2.08 
2.74 

2.74 

Total,  1917  

Saving  over  1918 

2,828.59 

1  Includes  cost  of  letting  annual  contracts  for  supplies. 

2  Shows  the  relation  of  the  total  maintenance  cost  to  the  value  of  goods  handled  as  set  out  in  the  preceding 
table. 


INDEX  TO  STATISTICAL  TABLES. 


A.  Page. 

Able-bodied  male  adults  .....................  139 

Account,  commissioner's,  1918  ...............  219 

Agricultural  lands  ____  .'  ......................  139 

acreage  .........................  '.  ........  139 

cultivated  by  Indians  ...............  139 

irrigation  ............................  190 

Allotments: 

acreage  allotted  ..........................  104 

acreage  unallotted  .......................  104 

approved  ................................  193 

Indians  without  .........................  96 

irrigation  ................................  190 

leased  .................................  139,  144 

number  .................................  104 

number  made  ...........................  193 

patents  in  fee  issued  .....................  195 

removal  of  restrictions  on  sale  lands  ......  198 

timber  on  ...............................  184 

under  ditch  ..............................  190 

used  for  grazing  .......................  144 

Allottees: 

living  on  reservations  ....................  96 

lands  cultivated  by  ......................  139 

sale  of  inherited  lands  by  ................  194 

Area  of  Indian  lands  .......................  104,  107 

B. 

Basketry  .................................  '.  .  .  127 

Beadwork  ..............  .  ....................  127 

Births  .......................................  152 

Blanket  weaving  ............................  127 

Buildings: 

erected  ..................................  200 

under  construction  ......................  202 


C. 

Cattle.    See  Stock. 

Churches  among  Indians 

Church-going  Indians 

Citizen  Indians 

Clothing,  citizen  Indians  who  wear 


99 
99 
99 
99 
Commissioner's  account,  1918  ................      219 

Competency  certificates  issued  ...............      198 

Crimes  by  Indians  and  whites  ...............        99 

Crops  ......................................  134,190 

See  also  Products. 

D. 
Deaths  ......................................      152 

Disbursements  ............................  220,225 

Disease  ......................................      152 

Indians  examined  for  ....................      152 

Dress,  citizen  Indians  who  wear  .............       99 

E. 

Emplbj^ees  in  Indian  Service: 

miscellaneous  field  .................  .'  .....      218 

Office  of  Indian  Affairs  .................  87,  219 

recapitulation  ...........................      219 

school  and  agency  .......................      217 

Employment  of  Indians  wages  earned  .....  134,  148 


F.  Page. 

Farming  by  Indians 139 

crops  raised 134, 190 

See  also  Agricultural. 

Farms: 

demonstration 182 

experimentation 182 

Federal  supervision,  Indians  under 96 

Fishing 127 

Five  Civilized  Tribes: 

disbursements 225 

incomes 134 

population 87, 96 

production,  minerals  and  royalty 199 

removal  restrictions  and  disposal  lands . .  198 

tribal  funds  in  Oklahoma  banks 224 

Forestry.    See  Timber. 

Freedmen 87, 93, 198 

Full  blood,  populations 88 

Funds: 

in  bank,  individual 212 

in  treasury,  tribal 212 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  in  banks ....'. 224 

treaty  liabilities,  United  States  to  Indian 

tribes 222 

trust,  interest  on 134 

payments  made 134 

tribal,  pro  rata  shares  paid 224 

See  also  Moneys. 

G. 

Grazing 144 

acreage  used  by  Indians 144 

lands,  area 144 

leased 144 

H. 

Hospitals 157 

capacity 157 

patients  treated 157 

Housing  of  Indians 152 

families  living  in  houses 152 

families  living  in  tents,  tepees 152 

I. 

Implements  belonging  to  Indians,  value 212 

Incomes  of  Indian  tribes 134 

Industries,  native 127, 134 

Inherited  land: 

patents  issued 195 

sale 194 

Irrigated  lands: 

cultivated  by  Indians 190 

cultivated  by  whites 190 

leased '. -  190 

Irrigation: 

areas  irrigable 187 

expenditures 187 

lands  cultivated 190 

miles  of  ditches  on  reservation 190 

projects,  area  under > 187 

Issues  to  Indians: 

miscellaneous  supplies 134, 161 

rations 134,161 

227 


228 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


L.  Page: 

Labor,  Indian  moneys,  proceeds  from 134 

Lace  making 127 

Lands: 

agricultural 139 

area 104 

assigned  to  mission  organizations  tem- 
porarily   126 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 212 

cultivated 139 

grazing 144 

patented  to  missionary  organizations 127 

proceeds  of  sales 134, 220 

receipts  and  disbursements,  1918 220 

removal  of  restnctions 198 

sales 194 

See  also  Gracing,  Inherited,  Irrigation, 
Leases,  Mineral,  Reservations,  Timber. 


allotted  lands 139, 144 

income  from 134, 139, 144 

irrigated  lands 190 

mining 199 

triballands 139,144 

Liabilities,  treaty,  of  United  States  to  Indian          « 
tribes ". 134,222 

Liquor: 

sale  to  .Indians;    convictions  and  sen- 
tences        183 

seizures  made 183 

suppression 183 

Livestock.    See  Stock. 

Logging.    See  Timber. 

M. 

Marriages: 

legal 99 

plural 99 

tribal  custom 99 

Mineral  lands: 

leased 199 

production  and  royalty 199 

Missionaries  among  Indians,  number 99 

Missionary  organizations: 

lands  assigned  for  temporary  use 126 

lands  patented  to 127 

Moneys,  indi  idual  Indians 212 

See  also  Funds. 

N. 

Noncompetents,  sale  of  lands  of 194 

O. 

Office  Indian  Affairs: 

employees 87,219 

work  and  force  since  1899  compared 87 

Oil,  production 199 

P. 
Patents  in  fee 195 

applications  for 

Indians  under  Federal  jurisdiction  hold- 
ing         96 

issued  missionary  organizations 127 

issued  to  Indians 195 

Population 87 

Pottery 127 

Poultry.    See  Stock. 
Products.    See  Crops. 


Property:  Page. 

individual 212 

tribal 212 

Government,  valuation 208 

Q. 

Quapaw,  removal  restrictions  from  disposal 

lands 198 

Rations:  R- 

Indians  receiving 361 

value  of  those  issued 161 

Reservations: 

areas  unallotted 104, 107 

authority  for  establishing 107 

See  also  Lands. 

Restrict  ions  on  sale  lands,  removal 198 

Sales  of  land: 

noncompetent  sales 194 

inherited-land  sales 194 

Sanal  oria 157 

Sawmills 184 

Schools: 

appropriations  for,  since  1876 181 

attendance,  1918 172 

attendance,  1877  to  1918 181 

capacity  and  enrollment 172 

children  eligible  to  attend 165 

children  ineligible  to  attend 165 

children  enrolled  in  school 165 

Indians  of  school  age 165 

population 165 

recapitulation 161 

Sheep  raising 203 

Stock: 

belonging  to  Indians 203 

milch  cows,  number  of  families  using  —  152 

purchased 203 

slaughtered 203 

sold  134, 203 

tribal  (foot  note  2) 203 

Stock-raising  industry 144 

T. 

Timber: 

acreage 184 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 184, 212 

cut,  value 134 , 184 

cut,  quantity  and  value 184 

on  allotments 184 

on  unallotted  lands 184 

quantity  and  stumpage  value 184 

Tents,  tepees.    See  Housing. 

Trachoma 152 

Treaties,  obligations  arising  from 134,222 

Trust  fund.    See  Funds. 

Tuberculosis 152 

V. 
Valuation  of  property.    See  Property. 

Vital  statist  ics 152 

Voting  Indians 99 

W. 

Wages.    See  Employment. 

Wagons  belonging  to  Indians,  value 212 

Warehouses,  Indians: 

volume  of  business 225 

expense 226 


