(Etty 
f  ublfr  ICtbrarg 


This  Volume  is  for 
REFERENCE  USE  ONLY 


From  the  collection  of  the 


7 

z_    m 

Prelinger 

v    Jjibrary 
p 


San  Francisco,  California 
2006 


REPORT 


OP  THE 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 


TO  THE 


SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


FOR  THE  FISCAL  YEAR 

ENDED  JUNE  30 

1913 


WASHINGTON  :  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  :  1914 


U.  S.  OKI. 

- 


CONTENTS. 

Page. 

General  statement •. 1 

Agricultural  work 7 

Stock  raising 8 

Cooperation  of  Department  of  Agriculture  and  others 8 

Reimbursable  funds  for  promoting  agriculture 9 

Agricultural  fairs  and  associations 10 

Farming  and  grazing  leases 10 

On  the  Uintah  and  Ouray  Reservation 10 

On  the  Wind  River  Reservation 11 

Grazing  on  tribal  lands 11 

Grazing  on  open  lands 11 

Road  building 11 

Suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic 12 

General  operations 12 

Difficulties  of  the  liquor  service 13 

Use  of  liquor  among  employees 13 

Wines  for  sacramental  purposes 14 

Denver  conference 14 

Peyote 14 

forestry 14 

Menominee  Indian  mills 16 

Irrigation 17 

Health 18 

Indian  schools 20 

Vocational  training 21 

Academic  training ; 21 

Visual  instruction 22 

Physical  training 22 

Public  schools 22 

Aid  of  common  schools  in  eastern  Oklahoma 23 

Efficiency  of  employees 23 

Conferences 24 

Marriage  and  divorce 24 

Murderers  of  Supt.  Stanley 25 

Employment  of  Indians 25 

Purchase  of  supplies 26 

Enrollment  with  Indian  tribes 26 

Finance 27 

Individual  Indian  moneys 27 

Depositories  for  Indian  moneys 27 

Sale  of  Indian  lands 28 

Mining  on  Indian  lands 28 

Oil  and  gas  leases  on  Osage  Reservation 29 

Inheritance  cases 30 

The  Florida  Seminoles 31 

in 


IV  CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Trust  plan  for  Pueblos 32 

Opposition  of  Pueblos  to  education 33 

Release  of  Apache  prisoners  of  war 34 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 34 

Legislation 35 

Traders'  claims  against  Indians 37 

Indian  art 38 

Increase  in  office  work 38 

Cooperation  with  Bureau  of  Mines 3d 

Rights  of  way 39 

Patents  in  fee ..  40 

Allotments 41 

Conclusion ' 42 

Statistical  tables 43 

Statistical  tables  (for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913,  unless  otherwise  noted) : 

Table    1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 44 

2.  Indian  population  of  United  States,  1759  to  1913,  by  states  and 

tribes 44 

3.  Indian  population  of  United  States,  1913 45 

4.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted....  60 

5.  Marriages,  missionaries,  churches,  language,  dress,  citizenship..  63 

6.  Crimes,  misdemeanors,  and  arrests  for  drunkenness 68 

7.  Reservations,  authority  for  establishing,  and  areas  not  allotted  or 

specially  reserved 70 

8.  Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 88 

9.  Use  of  agency  and  school  lands,  value  of  products  raised 92 

10.  Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations 98 

11.  Land  set  aside  temporarily  for  mission  organizations 98 

12.  Lands  opened  for  settlement  since  1898 : 99 

13.  Valuation  of  Indian  property  and  incomes 103 

14.  Farming 110 

15.  Crops  raised 115 

16.  Stock  raising 120 

17.  Industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising 123 

18.  Employment  of  Indians 130 

19.  Vital  statistics,  deaths  from  tuberculosis,  dwellings 136 

20.  Tuberculosis  and  trachoma 142 

21.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria. . 145 

22.  Indians  self-supporting  and  those  receiving  rations 147 

23.  Miscellaneous  supplies  issued 151 

24.  School  population  and  attendance 154 

25.  Capacity  of  schools;  children  unprovided  for 161 

26.  Schools,  location,  employees,  attendance 167 

27.  School  libraries 178 

28.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876 181 

29.  Industrial  instruction  and  value  of  articles  made 182 

30.  Demonstration  farms 184 

31.  Experimentation  farms 184 

32.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 185 

33.  Timber  on  reservations 187 

34.  Sawmills  on  reservations  and  timber  cut 190 

35.  Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber 193 


CONTENTS.  V 

Statistical  tables — Continued.  Page. 
Table  36.  Irrigating  ditches  on  reservations,  areas  irrigable   and  under 

projects 195 

37.  Expenditures  for  irrigation 198 

38.  Areas  irrigable  under  and  not  under  projects  and  irrigated  land 
cultivated 201 

39.  Use  of  irrigated  areas 204 

40.  Allotments  approved  and  made 206 

41.  Sales  of  allotted  lands 207 

42.  Patents  in  fee  issued 210 

43.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land 212 

44.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25,  1910 212 

45.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians 212 

46.  Lands  leased  for  mining 213 

47.  Production  of  minerals  and  royalty 213 

48.  Leases  of  tribal  lands 214 

49.  Leases  of  allotted  lands 216 

50.  Buildings  erected 219 

51.  Buildings  under  construction 220 

52.  Building  plans  prepared •. 220 

53.  Live  stock  belonging  to  tribes  and  individuals 221 

54.  Stock  belonging  to  Indians  sold  and  slaughtered 226 

55.  Government  property  valuations 230 

56.  Government  property  valuations  classified 253 

57.  Property  of  individual  Indians,  value 257 

58.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 262 

59.  Employees,  school  and  agency 265 

60.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field 274 

61 .  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 275 

62 .  Appropriations  and  disbursements  for  Indian  Service 276 

63.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 279 

64.  Receipts  and  disbursements  of  Indian  Service 279 

65.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements 280 

66.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians 282 

67.  Interest-bearing  tribal  funds  held  in  trust  by  Government 284 

68.  Incomes  of  Indian  tribes 287 

69.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled 290 

70.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks 290 

71.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 291 


ANNUAL  REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN 

AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  or  THE  INTERIOR, 
OFFICE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 

December  8,  191S. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  the  Eighty-second 
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs,  covering  the  period 
from  July  1,  1912,  to  June  30,  1913. 

GENERAL,   STATEMENT. 

During  the  last  fiscal  year  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  was  under 
the  direction  of  Hon.  R.  G.  Valentine,  Commissioner  of  Indian 
Affairs,  up  to  the  time  of  his  resignation,  September  12,  1912.  There- 
after, Hon.  F.  H.  Abbott,  Assistant  Commissioner,  was  in  charge  as 
Acting  Commissioner  until  June  4,  1913,  on  which  date  I  took  the 
the  oath  of  office  as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs. 

Before  giving  a  resume"  of  the  activities  of  the  Indian  Bureau  for 
the  last  fiscal  year,  I  deem  it  appropriate  to  invite  attention  to  a  few 
of  the  larger  questions  which  now  confront  this  office  for  solution  in 
the  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  Indians. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  note  that  the  Indian  country,  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  this  office,  covers  an  area  almost  as  large  as  that  of 
all  the  New  England  States  and  the  State  of  New  York  combined. 

There  are  about  6,000  employees  in  the  Indian  Service,  who 
supervise  the  affairs  of  about  300,000  Indians,  whose  combined 
property  is  estimated  to  be  worth  nearly  $900,000,000. 

There  have  been  appropriated  by  Congress  for  the  Indian  Service 
and  for  fulfilling  treaty  stipulations  with  the  various  Indian  tribes 
since  the  fiscal  year  1881  the  folio  whig  amounts: 

Appropriations  since  1881. 

1881  to  1890 $53,  797,  649. 09 

1891  to  1900 78,  883,  746. 47 

1901  to  1910 93,  337,  617. 42 

1911 10, 129, 357.  29 

1912 8,957,199.64 

1913 9,  055,  614. 43 

1914 9, 461,  819.  67 


Total 263,  623,  004.  01 

21716—14 1  1 


2  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    IN.DIAN    AFFAIRS. 

The  Government  is  the  guardian  of  this  vast  Indian  estate.  How 
this  property  shall  be  conserved  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indians  and 
how  they  shall  be  taught  to  make  the  best  possible  use  thereof  so 
that  they  may  ultimately  take  their  rightful  place  as  self-supporting 
citizens  of  the  Republic  are  the  great  problems  confronting  this 
bureau. 

A  few  of  the  administrative  details  yet  to  be  worked  out  or  com- 
pleted may  be  mentioned  as  follows: 

1.  It  is  estimated  that  under  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L., 
855)  there  are  now  pending  at  the  various  agencies  throughout  the 
Indian  country,  awaiting  the  determination  of  the  heirs,  about  40,000 
heirship  cases,  which  represent  inherited  lands  valued  at  approxi- 
mately $60,000,000.     There  are  pending  in  this  office  about  1,500 
heirship  cases  on  which  final  action  has  not  been  taken. 

A  large  appropriation  is  needed  in  order  to  enable  the  office  to 
bring  this  work  up  to  date.  When  the  heirs  are  determined  the 
inherited  lands  will  be  available  for  sale  and  the  proceeds  can  be 
used  to  improve  the  allotments  of  the  heirs.  Expediting  the  work 
of  determining  ths  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees  is  one  of  the 
urgent  necessities  of  the  Indian  Service. 

2.  The  allotting  of  lands  to  individual  Indians  has  been  continued 
ever  since  the  enactment  of  the  general  allotment  act  of  February  8, 
1887    (24   Stat.   L.,   388).     It  is   estimated  that  there  have   been 
allotted  to  180,000  Indians  about  34,000,000  acres  and  there  remain 
to  be  allotted  abont  39,000,000  acres.     There  are  nearly  120,000 
unallotted  Indians.     There  has  been  expended  for  allotment  work 
heretofore  completed  about  $4,500,000,  and  it  is  believed  that  it  will 
require  at  least  $3,000,000  to  complete  the  allotment  work. 

I  find  that  there  are  a  large  number  of  the  reservations  which  not 
only  have  not  yet  been  allotted  but  which  have  not  been  surveyed. 
The  earliest  possible  completion  of  the  allotment  work  is  desirable, 
as  it  is  the  main  chance  of  perhaps  70  per  cent  of  the  Indians  to  become 
self-supporting,  and  this  work  is  also  preliminary  to  the  opening  of 
reservations.  The  settlement  of  white  people  in  the  Indian  country 
will  result  in  very  materially  increasing  the  value  of  the  lands  retained 
by  the  Indians  as  their  allotments,  for  it  will  be  the  means  of  locating 
therein  free  schools,  churches,  good  roads,  and  other  agencies  of  a 
modern  and  progressive  community. 

3.  The  timber  holdings  of  the  Indians  have  stumpage  value  of 
more  than  $80,000,000.     Approximately  one-seventh  of  this  value 
is  in  timber  upon  allotted  lands.     The  greater  part  of  the  unallotted 
timber  is  upon  nonagricultural  lands  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  and 
Pacific  States.     The  timber  cover  on  these  tribal  lands  bears  a  very 
direct  relation  to  the  regulation  of  a  water  supply  for  lands  both 
within  and  outside  of  Indian  reservations.     Even  where  it  is  not 


KEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  6 

essential  that  the  forest  cover  be  maintained  on  tribal  lands  for  water 
conservation  purposes,  it  is  frequently  advisable  that  the  forest  be 
perpetuated  as  a  source  of  fuel  and  lumber  supply. 

One  of  the  difficult  problems  which  confront  the  Indian  Service  is 
the  administration  of  these  timber  lands  so  as  to  derive  a  sustained 
revenue  adequate  to  provide  for  the  needs  of  the  Indians  as  agri- 
cultural development  takes  place  within  the  Indian  reservations  and 
yet  not  affect  unfavorably  the  future  needs  both  as  regard  the  timber 
and  water  supply.  The  solution  of  this  problem  will  require  sound 
business  foresight,  enlightened  oy  the  scientific  principles  which 
form  the  basis  of  the  practice  of  both  forestry  and  irrigation. 

Practically  nothing  has  yet  been  done  in  the  line  of  valuation 
surveys  and  the  preparation  of  working  plans.  The  timber  upon 
tribal  lands  in  the  Western  States  has  heretofore  been  inaccessible, 
but  railroads  recently  constructed  or  now  projected  will  afford  an 
outlet  for  a  large  amount  of  such  timber.  The  valuable  timber  of  the 
Indians  should  be  made  a  very  potent  agency  in  promoting  their 
progress. 

4.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Government  has  provided 
since  1876  approximately  $80,000,000  for  schools  among  the  Indians, 
there  are  to-day  about  10,000  Indian  children  without  any  school 
facilities  whatever,  principally  in  the  Southwest  and  more  particu- 
larly among  the  Navajo  and  Papago  Indians.     There  are  also  about 
7,500  defective  Indian  children,  either  physically  or  mentally,  for 
whom  no  adequate  facilities  are  available  for  their  care  and  training. 

The  present  available  appropriations  for  Indian  schools  provide 
for  223  Indian  day  schools  situated  on  Indian  reservations  near  the 
Indian  homes,  76  boarding  schools  located  on  the  reservations,  and 
35  boarding  schools  located  off  the  reservations  and  known  as  non- 
reservation  schools.  Of  the  65,000  Indian  children  of  school  age, 
these  schools  care  for  approximately  25,000.  There  are  enrolled  hi 
mission  and  public  schools  22,500  Indian  children,  leaving  17,500 
normal  and  defective  Indian  children  unprovided  for.  Efforts  will 
be  made  to  procure  increased  appropriations  for  Indian  school  work 
so  that  all  Indian  children  may  be  provided  with  school  facilities. 
All  Government  schools  for  Indians  are  largely  industrial. 

5.  I  find  that  the  health  conditions  among  the  Indians  are  deplor- 
able.    Under  the  jurisdiction  of  this  bureau  there  are  approximately 
25,000  Indians  suffering  from  tuberculosis.     Available  Indian  hospital 
facilities  for  all  these  patients,  adults  and  children,  will  not  exceed  300 
beds.     During  the  last  fiscal   year  1,905  Indians  were  reported  as 
having  died  from  tuberculosis.     This  is  probably  not  more  than  75 
per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  Indians  who  have  died  from  this 
disease   during   the  fiscal  year.     Of   the  whole  number  of  deaths 
reported  from  the  various  Indian  reservations,  32  per  cent  were  due 


4  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

to  pulmonary  tuberculosis,  as  against  11.2  per  cent  due  to  the  same 
disease  occurring  in- the  registration  area  of  the  United  States.  The 
death  rate  among  Indians  is  32.24  per  thousand,  while  the  Census 
Bureau  g^ves  16  per  thousand  in  the  registration  area  of  the  United 
States. 

It  is  also  estimated  that  there  are  more  than  60,000  Indians  in  the 
United  States  who  are  suffering  from  trachoma.  This  eye  disease  is 
considered  so  serious  as  to  cause  the  exclusion  from  this  country  of  all 
.  immigrants  who  are  thus  afflicted.  %It  will  be  remembered  that  the 
Indians  are  living  among  a  very  large  white  population,  which  is  an 
added  reason  for  taking  every  precaution  to  check  and  control  this 
disease.  Additional  appropriations  are  needed  to  construct  and 
equip  hospitals  to  be  located  on  Indian  reservations  and  to  check  and 
control  disease  among  Indians  and  to  improve  their  health  conditions 
generally. 

6.  The  housing  conditions  of  the  Indians  throughout  the  country 
is  one  of  the  important  subjects  which  demand  immediate  considera- 
tion.    It  is   estimated  that   there   are  approximately  8,000  Indian 
families  without  homes,  who  live  in  mud  lodges,  tepees,  or  wickiups — 
a  large  number  of  them  on  dirt  floors  and  under  the  most  revolting, 
insanitary  conditions.     There  are  thousands  of  other  Indian  families 
who  live  in  one  and  two  room  shacks  or  cabins,  under  sanitary  condi- 
tions that  must  of  necessity  cause  the  propagation  and  transmission 
of  the  most  dangerous  diseases,  such  as  tuberculosis  and  trachoma. 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  a  large  number  of  the  Indians  have 
been  allotted  valuable  lands,  ranging  from  80  to  320  acres  to  each 
Indian,  these  deplorable  housing  conditions  continue  to  exist.  An 
Indian  family  owning  from  400  to  1,000  acres  of  valuable  land  cer- 
tainly should  not  be  permitted  much  longer  to  live- under  sanitary 
conditions  that  are  a  serious  reflection  on  Indian  administration. 

The  Indians  own  tribal  and  individual  timber  valued  at  more  than 
$80,000,000,  and  as  the  Government  has  provided  a  large  number  of 
sawmills  located  on  different  reservations  throughout  the  Indian 
country,  it  is  my  purpose  to  enter  into  a  vigorous  campaign  to  improve 
the  housing  conditions  of  Indians  wherever  practicable. 

7.  The  Indian  water-right  situation  on  a  large  number  of  reserva- 
tions is  such  as  to  demand   most   serious   consideration.     Unfortu- 
nately, legislation  has  been  enacted  by  Congress  which  makes  beneficial 
use  of  water  on  Indian  lands  within  certain  reservations  necessary, 
if  the  water  rights  are  to  be  held  by  the  Indians.     Congress  has  pro- 
vided appropriations  for  constructing  expensive  irrigation  projects  on 
several  reservations,  reimbursable  out  of  Indian  funds,  and  the  Indians 
are  required  to  make  beneficial  use  of  the  water  on  said  reservations 
within  a  limited  time.     If  this  is  not  done  they  will  be  in  danger  of 
losing  their  water  rights  and  forfeiting  the  same  to  subsequent  appro- 
priators  of  the  water.     On  a  large  number  of  the  reservations  agri- 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  5 

cultural  lands  are  practically  valueless  without  water.  The  Govern- 
ment holds  the  allotted  lands  in  trust  for  the  benefit  of  Indians  for  a 
period  of  25  years,  because  of  the  fact  that  they  are  deemed  incompe- 
tent to  protect  their  proporty  rights.  It  seems  equally  important  to 
conserve  the  water  rights  of  the  Indians,  at  the  same  time  encouraging 
them  to  make  beneficial  use  of  the  water  by  farming  their  allotments. 
In  this  connection  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  Indians,  in  a 
large  number  of  cases,  live  far  removed  from  railroad  facilities,  that 
they  are  handicapped  by  lack  of  adequate  live  stock  and  farming 
implements,  and  that  they  are  living  and  working  under  conditions 
which  would  discourage  even  the  most  progressive  white  farmers  who 
are  well  trained  and  accustomed  to  hard  work  on  their  farms.  Legis- 
lation will  probably  be  necessary  in  a  number  of  cases  to  protect  fully 
the  water  rights  of  the  Indians. 

I  find  also  that  Indian  tribal  funds  have  been  used  in  construction 
and  maintenance  of  irrigation  projects,  and  that  only  a  certain  portion 
of  the  Indians  have  received  any  benefit  from  the  irrigation  systems. 
This  is  a  question  that  will  necessarily  have  to  be  worked  out  with 
great  care,  in  order  that  the  Indians  who  receive  the  benefits  from 
irrigation  projects  shall  be  required  to  pay  the  cost  of  the  same. 

It  is  proposed  to  give  the  question  of  water  rights  of  Indians  very 
thorough  and  careful  consideration,  with  the  hope  of  fully  protecting 
the  rights  of  the  wards  of  the  Government. 

8.  I  find  the  work  of  this  bureau  is  very  materially  in  arrears  and 
that  it  is  practically  impossible  with  the  present  force  to  bring  the 
work  of  the  office  up  to  date  and  keep  it  current. 

The  employees  of  this  office,  as  a  rule,  are  diligent,  intelligent,  and 
faithful.  The  records  show  that  they  did  1,522  days  voluntary  over- 
time during  the  last  fiscal  year  in  an  effort  to  keep  the  work  of  the 
bureau  as  nearly  current  as  possible. 

Because  of  the  breaking  up  of  tribal  relations  and  the  making  of 
individual  allotments,  the  necessary  work  of  the  Indian  Office  has 
been  very  much  increased  during  recent  years  without  a  corresponding 
increase  in  the  number  of  employees.  For  example,  the  increase  of 
work  for  1913  over  1899  was  361.34  per  cent,  while  the  increase  in 
employees  in  the  Indian  Office  for  1913  over  1899  was  only  134.65 
per  cent.  The  number  of  letters  received  in  the  Indian  Office  during 
the  year  1899  was  only  59,707,  while  the  number  of  letters  received 
during  the  fiscal  year  1913  was  275,452.  This  was  an  increase  of 
23.97  per  cent  over  the  preceding  year. 

It  is  apparent  that  the  policy  of  individualizing  Indian  property 
and  the  removing  of  restrictions  from  the  Indian  as  fast  as  he  demon- 
strates competency,  together  with  the  proper  protection  of  incompe- 
tents and  minors,  will  greatly  increase  the  work  of  this  office  for  sev- 
eral years,  and  that  the  faster  these  things  are  accomplished  the 


6  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

greater  will  be  the  office  force  required  to  handle  allotments,  sales  of 
tribal  property  and  allotted  timber  and  agricultural  lands,  the  deter- 
mining of  heirs,  the  granting  of  patents  in  fee,  the  handling  of  segre- 
gated trust  funds,  and  the  numerous  other  duties  devolving  upon  this 
office. 

I  wish  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  work  of  the  Indian  Bureau, 
handling  a  trust  estate  valued  at  approximately  $900,000,000  belong- 
ing to  300,000  wards  of  the  Government,  should  not  be  crippled 
further  because  of  the  failure  to  procure  an  additional  appropriation 
of  approximately  $50,000  for  employees  whose  services  are  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  keep  the  work  of  this  bureau  current.  I  shall 
include  in  the  estimates  for  employees  for  this  bureau  a  request  for 
the  additional  help  absolutely  required. 

9.  The  conditions  existing  in  eastern  Oklahoma  among  the  Five 
Civilized  Tribes  in  connection  with  the  probating  and  handling  of  the 
estates  of  minor  Indians  in  the  local  State  courts  are  such  as  to 
require  prompt  consideration.     I  consider  it  very  important  that  an 
appropriation  of  at  least  $75,000  be  procured  in  the  next  Indian 
appropriation  act,  so  as  to  enable  this  office  to  employ  probate  attor- 
neys to  look  after  the  interests  of  minor  Indians  in  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes,  and  to  meet  properly  the  probate  situation  now  existing  in 
eastern  Oklahoma. 

If  proper  action  is  not  promptly  taken,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time 
until  a  very  large  number  of  the  Indians  in  eastern  Oklahoma  will  be 
deprived  of  their  property,  with  the  result  that  they  will  become 
charges  on  the  local  community. 

10.  There  is  undoubtedly  a  larger  field  for  the  improvement  of 
existing  industrial  conditions  of  the  Indians  than  any  other  activity 
of  the  Indian  Service. 

I  find  that  the  Indians  have  more  than  600,000  acres  of  irrigable 
land,  approximately  9,000,000  acres  of  other  agricultural  lands,  more 
than  50,000,000  acres  of  grazing  lands,  and  that  the  Government 
has  expended  approximately  $10,000,000  in  connection  with  Indian 
irrigation  projects. 

Many  able-bodied  Indians  who  have  valuable  lands  are  wholly  or 
partially  without  seeds,  teams,  implements,  and  other  equipment 
to  utilize  properly  such  lands.  This  is  particularly  true  in  several 
reservations  where  large  sums  of  public  or  tribal  funds  have  been  used 
in  constructing  irrigation  systems,  and  is  in  part  the  reason  why  such 
large  areas  of  irrigable  and  other  agricultural  lands  are  not  under 
cultivation. 

The  valuable  grazing  lands  of  the  Indians  offer  unusual  opportuni- 
ties for  increasing  the  meat  supply  of  the  country,  at  the  same  time 
furnishing  a  profitable  employment  fcr  the  Indians  as  well  as  utiliz- 
ing their  valuable  grazing  lands.  During  the  last  year  the  Indians 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  7 

cultivated  less  than  600,000  acres  of  their  vast  area  of  agricultural 
lands. 

It  shall  be  my  purpose  to  attempt  to  procure  reimbursable  appro- 
priations so  as  to  advance  to  the  Indians  needed  agricultural  equip- 
ment in  order  that  they  may  make  beneficial  use  of  their  resources 
and  become  self-supporting  and  progressive  citizens.  These  reim- 
bursable appropriations,  if  procured  and  properly  used,  will  result  in 
ultimately  decreasing  the  gratuity  appropriations  for  Indians. 

I  find  that  there  is  need  for  additional  legislation  by  Congress  to 
meet  the  problems  arising,  such  as  legislation  authorizing  the  mining 
on  Executive-order  reservations,  legislation  segregating  tribal  and 
trust  funds  in  the  United  States  Treasury,  legislation  authorizing  the 
submission  of  claims  of  Indian  tribes  to  the  Court  of  Claims,  and  other 
additional  legislation  which  will  be  prepared  and  ready  for  submission 
to  the  Congress  at  its  regular  session  in  December. 

The  foregoing  are  a  few  of  the  many  important  problems  confront- 
ing this  bureau.  The  following  contains  a  re"sum6  of  the  work  of  the 
bureau  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913: 

AGRICULTURAL  WORK. 

Agriculture  has  been  given  the  first  place  in  this  report  because  it 
has  received  greater  emphasis  than  any  other  activity  of  the  Indian 
Bureau  during  the  last  fiscal  year.  The  results  of  the  stress  placed 
upon  this  subject  are  shown  in  a  general  awakening  to  the  recognition 
of  agriculture  and  stockraising  as  the  main  road  for  the  Indians' 
advancement  toward  civilization. 

Realizing  that  each  Indian  is  a  problem,  and  the  only  hope^of 
success  is  to  go  to  each  one  and  see  what  he  has,  what  he  needs,  and 
show  him  how  to  make  the  best  use  of  his  resources,  special  efforts 
have  been  made  during  the  year  to  bring  the  workers  in  the  Indian 
Service  into  closer  touch  with  the  Indian's  life  and  his  everyday 
problems. 

Reservations,  in  the  sense  in  which  they  were  formerly  known, 
are  gradually  disappearing,  and  the  Indians  are  taking  their  places 
on  homesteads  and  allotments,  and  are  finding  themselves  face  to 
face  with  the  all-important  and  serious  problem  of  gaining  a  liveli- 
hood for  themselves  and  families,  some  from  the  soil  and  others 
from  live  stock. 

The  reservations  are  now  largely  divided  into  farm  or  stock  dis- 
tricts, and  a  farmer  or  stockman  is  stationed  in  each.  Approxi- 
mately 249  farmers  and  13  assistants  were  employed  at  the  various 
reservations  during  the  year.  They  make  their  homes,  to  a  large 
extent,  in  such  districts,  thereby  keeping  in  the  closest  possible 
touch  with  the  activities  of  the  individual  Indians,  and  advising  and 
directing  them  in  their  operations. 


8  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Books  dealing  with  various  industrial  topics  have  been  purchased 
and  sent  to  a  number  of  schools  for  the  use  of  the  school  and  reserva- 
tion employees. 

Experimentation  in  agriculture  is  being  carried  on  at  Pima,  San 
Juan,  Shoshone,  Pala,  Colville,  Kaibab,  San  Xavier,  Shivwits,  and 
Leupp,  while  efforts  are  being  made  to  utilize  all  the  reservation 
Indian  school  farms  to  demonstrate  to  the  older  Indians  the  possi- 
bilities of  the  soil,  at  the  same  time  producing  the  maximum  income 
to  be  used  in  the  support  of  the  school  plant. 

STOCK  RAISING. 

In  addition  to  the  farmers,  37  stockmen  were  employed  to  give 
special  attention  to  this  important  industry.  The  plan,  begun  about 
a  year  ago,  of  rounding  up  and  disposing  of  worthless  pony  stallions 
and  other  breeding  stock  was  continued  during  the  year.  Stallions 
of  the  draft  type  and  a  good  grade  of  bulls,  cows,  and  heifers  were 
purchased  for  a  number  of  reservations. 

Good  results  are  being  accomplished  by  breeding  the  pony  mares 
with  stallions  of  the  draft  type  weighing  1,400  to  1,600  pounds. 
One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  to  be  met  in  encouraging  the  Indians 
to  farm  more  of  their  lands  is  the  poor  condition  of  their  stock. 
The  introduction  of  the  larger  stallions  among  their  herds  is  gradually 
overcoming  this  obstacle,  and  the  Indians  are  cooperating  in  the 
plan  of  upbreeding  their  stock. 

COOPERATION  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  AGRICULTURE  AND 

OTHERS. 

The  Department  of  Agriculture  and  its  various  bureaus  and  also  a 
number  of  the  State  authorities  have  continued  to  give  our  service 
much  valuable  advice  and  aid  in  the  inspection  of  livestock,  eradi- 
cation of  diseases  of  animals  and  plants,  the  protection  of  orchards, 
the  improvement  of  seeds,  and  the  promotion  of  improved  farming 
methods. 

The  Bureau  of  Plant  Industry  has  sent  to  Government  farmers  as 
well  as  to  Indian  farmers,  bulletins  on  various  phases  of  agricultural 
industry,  and  pamphlets  on  home  topics  for  the  women.  Drought- 
resisting  seeds  were  sent  to  Indian  schools  in  arid  and  semiarid 
sections  of  the  country,  and  a  supply  was  also  sent  to  1,000  progres- 
sive Indians. 

The  Bureau  of  Entomology  cooperated  in  the  work  of  eradicating 
grasshoppers  and  potato  bugs,  and  in  the  inspection  of  orchards  on 
several  reservations.  Local  State  authorities  also  gave  advice  and 
aid  in  this  work. 

The  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry  has  been  very  generous  in  fur- 
nishing experts  to  assist  in  the  purchase  and  inspection  of  breeding 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  9 

stock  bought  for  the  Indians,  and  in  the  eradication  of  dourine, 
glanders,  mange,  ticks,  and  other  diseases  of  live  stock. 

The  dairy  being  an  important  adjunct  of  practically  all  the  Indian 
schools,  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry  has  continued  its  work  of 
sending  experts  to  the  schools  for  the  purpose  of  making  tuberculin 
tests  of  the  dairy  herds  and  inspecting  methods  of  dairying. 

The  farmers  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  continued  their 
cooperative  work  with  the  various  organizations  in  the  State,  both 
national  and  local.  The  business  men,  railway  companies,  and  com- 
mercial clubs  of  eastern  Oklahoma  are  all  aiding  Indian  Service 
farmers  in  the  campaign  for  general  improvement  among  the  Indians 
of  this  section. 

REIMBURSABLE  FUNDS  FOR  PROMOTING  AGRICULTURE. 

The  office  has  during  the  year  continued  to  utilize  tribal  funds 
and  funds  appropriated  by  Congress  as  revolving,  reimbursable  funds 
to  purchase  needed  live  stock  and  farming  equipment  for  those 
Indians  who  have  neither  the  cash  nor  the  credit  to  purchase  the 
equipment  necessary  to  make  their  lands  productive.  These  funds 
are  repaid  by  the  Indians  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  definite 
written  agreements. 

Appropriations  for  the  purchase  of  agricultural  implements,  wag- 
ons, and  other  supplies  and  live  stock  to  be  sold  to  the  Indians  under 
the  reimbursable  plan  are  being  used  at  the  following  reservations: 
Fort  Belknap,  Tongue  River,  Flathead,  Pueblo  (Albuquerque,  Santa 
Fe),  Fort  Mojave,  Martinez,  Pala,  Pechanga,  Soboba,  San  Xavier, 
Walker  River,  Shawnee,  Malki,  Fort  McDermitt,  and  Salt  River. 

The  practice  heretofore  in  vogue  of  issuing  implements,  wagons, 
harness,  stock,  etc.,  to  Indians  in  return  for  labor  is  being  gradually 
discontinued  on  several  reservations,  the  Indians  being  given  the 
privilege  either  of  paying  cash  for  what  they  get,  or  in  the  case  of 
seed,  returning  to  the  superintendent  an  equal  value  in  kind.  This 
seed  is  then  stored  at  the  agency  and  the  next  year  it  is  reissued  upon 
the  same  conditions  to  other  Indians  who  need  assistance  of  this 
character. 

While  the  precise  number  of  Indians  benefited  through  these 
reimbursable  appropriations  and  funds  can  not  be  stated  in  exact 
numbers,  the  number  runs  well  up  into  the  hundreds,  and  superin- 
tendents are  unanimous  in  their  testimony  as  to  the  good  which  has 
been  accomplished.  The  money  has  been  expended  for  the  benefit 
of  able-bodied  Indians  in  amounts  not  exceeding  $600,  under  regu- 
lations approved  by  the  department  on  November  4,  1911,  which 
provide  for  the  proper  use  and  repayment  of  the  money.  The 
Indians  for  the  most  part  are  meeting  their  payments  when  due  and 
with  surprising  promptness. 


10  REPOKT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

AGRICULTURAL  FAIRS  AND  ASSOCIATIONS. 

Fairs  were  held  at  Crow,  Crow  Creek,  Fort  Belknap,  Fort  Peck, 
Fort  Totten,  Lower  Brule",  Nevada,  Pirna,  Pine  Ridge,  Pala,  Rose- 
bud, Standing  Rock,  San  Carlos,  Soboba,  Sac  and  Fox,  Iowa,  Santee, 
Sisseton,  San  Juan,  Tongue  River,  Cheyenne  River,  and  Uintah  and 
Our  ay  hi  the  fall  of  1912.  A  joint  fair  for  the  four  Cheyenne  and 
Arapaho  superintendences  in  Oklahoma  was  held,  and  about  2,500 
Indians  visited  the  fair,  where  one  of  the  special  features  was  a  health 
exhibit,  with  posters  giving  sanitary  maxims,  diagrams,  etc. 

The  Indians  at  Camp  Verde,  Fallen,  Fort  Lapwai,  Western  Navajo, 
Kiowa,  Malki,  Oneida,  Pawnee,  Rapid  City,  Red  Lake,  Sac  and  Fox, 
Iowa,  Salt  River,  Siletz,  San  Xavier,  Union,  Uintah  and  Ouray,  and 
White  Earth  had  exhibits  at  the  county  and  State  fairs. 

Farmers'  clubs  have  been  organized  at  Malki,  Sisseton,  Union, 
Fond  du  Lac,  Oto,  Potawatomi,  Ponca,  Standing  Rock,  Tongue 
River,  Winnebago,  and  Yankton.  A  boys'  corn  club  was  started  at 
Red  Moon.  An  industrial  workers'  association  was  organized  at  Red 
Cliff.  Farmers'  institutes  for  the  discussion  of  agricultural  and  other 
topics  of  interest  to  the  Indians  were  held  at  a  number  of  places, 
principally  at  Potawa^omi,  Union,  and  Sisseton. 

Many  of  the  fairs  are  self-supporting,  and  a  very  gratifying  feature 
has  been  the  increased  number  of  Indians  taking  part  in  county  and 
State  fairs. 

FARMING  AND   GRAZING  LEASES. 

Under  the  act  of  Congress,  dated  June  25,  tt)10  (36  Stat.  L.,  855), 
the  allottees  of  lands  held  under  trust  patents  are  authorized  to  lease 
their  allotments  for  a  period  not  to  exceed  five  years,  under  regula- 
tions prescribed  by  the  department.  Under  these  regulations  allot- 
tees at  various  agencies  have  been  classified  as  competent  and  non- 
competent,  the  competent  Indians  being  permitted  to  transact  the 
business  incidental  to  making  their  own  leases  and  collecting  their 
own  rentals.  In  the  case  of  incompetent  Indians,  leases  of  lands  are 
negotiated  in  the  agency  office  and  the  rentals  paid  through  the  super- 
intendent. All  leases  made  by  Indians  classified  as  competent  are 
subject  only  to  the  approval  of  the  superintendent.  During  the  past 
year  the  privilege  of  negotiating  their  own  leases  was  given  to  1,198 
Indians. 

LEASING  ON  THE  UINTAH  AND  OURAY  RESERVATION. 

Under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Utah,  in  order  to  preserve  the  water 
rights,  beneficial  use  must  be  made  before  the  summer  of  1919  of 
water  to  irrigate  78,000  acres  of  excellent  agricultural  land  now  under 
ditch  on  the  Uintah  and  Ouray  Reservation.  In  order  to  reclaim  as 
much  as  possible  of  this  land  before  the  expiration  of  this  time  limit, 


BEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  11 

a  vigorous  advertising  campaign  has  been  inaugurated  offering  to 
lessees  very  favorable  terms  for  leasing  land  within  the  next  two  years. 
In  some  cases  it  is  only  required  that  the  lessee  clear  the  land  of  sage 
brush,  level  it,  and  leave  buildings  on  the  leased  premises  to  the  value 
of  about  $500  at  the  expiration  of  the  lease. 

LEASING  ON  THE  WIND  RIVER  RESERVATION. 

Lands  on  the  Shoshone  Indian  Reservation  have  been  advertised 
for  lease  and  sale  on  very  liberal  terms.  The  immediate  reclamation 
of  irrigable  lands  on  this  reservation  was  necessary  not  only  to  pro- 
vide income  for  the  Indians,  but  chiefly  to  comply  with  the  State  law 
requiring  beneficial  use  of  the  water  before  the  year  1916.  Thirty- 
two  tracts  out  of  over  87  advertised  during  the  last  fiscal  year  were 
sold.  The  total  irrigable  area  on  this  reservation  to  be  reclaimed  is 
65,674  acres,  35,000  acres  of  which  are  already  subject  to  irrigation, 
$607,637  of  Indian  money  having  been  expended  on  this  project. 

GRAZING  ON  TRIBAL  LANDS. 

During  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913,  there  was  received  for 
grazing  privileges  on  tribal  lands  (exclusive  of  ceded  lands)  approxi- 
mately $435,000. 

GRAZING  ON  OPEN  LANDS. 

One  of  the  most  important  developments  in  the  leasing  policy 
during  the  last  fiscal  year  was  a  decision  of  the  department  per- 
mitting the  leasing  of  so-called  ceded  Indian  lands,  which  thereto- 
fore had  been  grazed  free  of  charge  by  stockmen.  Regulations  gov- 
erning the  use  for  grazing  purposes  of  these  vacant  Indian  lands 
turned  over  to  the  Government  to  be  sold,  promulgated  on  July  25, 
1912,  have  been  put  into  operation  on  seven  reservations.  During 
the  year  permits  to  use  such  lands  for  grazing  have  been  issued, 
rentals  therefrom  aggregating  about  $75,000. 

ROAD   BUILDING. 

A  systematic  plan  of  road  building  and  improvement  is  being 
gradually  worked  out  under  which  each  able-bodied  Indian  is  re- 
quired to  donate  a  certain  number  of  days'  labor  each  year.  At 
Shoshone  Reservation  a  very  comprehensive  system  of  roads  has 
been  planned,  which  is  a  part  of  the  national  system  of  highways. 
At  San  Carlos,  in  Arizona,  much  road  work  has  been  done,  and  a 
new  bridge  has  been  constructed  across  the  Black  River,  which 
divides  the  San  Carlos  from  the  Fort  Apache  Reservation.  This 
road  and  bridge  will  enable  the  Fort  Apache  superintend ency  to 
receive  its  supplies  from  the  south  over  a  distance  which  is  consider- 
ably less  than  that  from  the  present  railroad  station  to  the  north. 


12  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

SUPPRESSION   OF  THE  LIQUOR  TRAFFIC. 

The  use  of  intoxicating  liquor  is  an  insurmountable  bar  between 
the  Indian  and  progress.  Education,  health  campaigns,  appropri- 
ations to  encourage  industry,  all  fail  so  long  as  he  uses  intoxicants. 
Realizing  this,  the  bureau  has  continued  during  the  year  with  vigor 
the  campaign  against  illegal  sales  of  intoxicating  liquor  to  Indians 
and  its  introduction  into  what  is  termed  the  "Indian  country. " 

GENERAL  OPERATIONS. 

While  special  emphasis  was  laid  upon  the  separation  of  Indians 
from  whisky  and  not  the  multiplication  of  individual  cases,  there 
was  a  total  of  1,054  cases  instituted,  and  convictions  were  secured 
in  553  cases,  while  114  were  dismissed. 

As  three-fourths  of  the  Indians  in  Minnesota  are  citizens,  the  Fed- 
eral officers  have  curtailed  their  operations  in  that  State,  as  the  sale 
of  liquor  to  them  must  be  prosecuted  under  the  State  laws. 

Operations  in  New  Mexico,  among  the  Pueblos,  were  restricted  by 
the  decision  of  the  United  States  district  court  in  the  case  of  United 
States  v.  Sandoval  (198  Fed.  Rep.,  539),  which  held  that  the  portion 
of  enabling  act  declaring  the  lands  of  the  Pueblo  Indians  to  be  Indian 
country  was  unconstitutional.  This  case  is  now  before  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States. 

An  important  decision  affecting  the  use  of  tulapai  or  tiswin  was 
handed  down  during  the  year.  The  Indians  of  the  Southwest  brew 
this  beverage,  which  is  a  fermented  product  made  from  corn  and 
various  roots.  Recently  the  superintendent  of  the  Salt  River  Reser- 
vation instituted  proceedings  and  obtained  a  conviction  against  an 
Indian  who  had  supplied  other  Indians  with  tiswin,  on  the  charge  of 
furnishing  intoxicating  liquor  to  Indians  in  violation  of  the  pro- 
visions of  the  act  of  January  30,  1897. 

An  active  campaign  against  the  liquor  traffic  among  Indians  is 
being  waged  in  Oklahoma.  In  that  State  during  the  year  179 
arrests  were  made,  52  convictions  secured,  and  24,865  pints  of  liquor 
seized  and  destroyed.  Every  step  has  been  contested  in  the  courts, 
resulting  in  two  Supreme  Court  decisions,  three  decisions  of  the  cir- 
cuit court  of  appeals,  and  six  decisions  of  the  district  courts,  besides 
the  various  cases  taken  into  the  State  courts.  One- third  of  the 
Indian  population  of  the  United  States  resides  within  the  State  of 
Oklahoma,  which,  owing  to  the  great  agricultural  and  mineral 
wealth  of  this  Indian  population,  offers  an  attractive  field  for  the 
bootlegger. 

On  September  19,  1912,  Deputy  Special  Officer  R.  L.  Bowman  was 
killed,  and  Posseman  W.  R.  Mayfield  was  wounded  while  in  the  per- 
formance of  duty.  Considerable  liquor  was  being  introduced  into 
Oklahoma  from  Kansas,  and,  upon  receiving  information  that  a 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  13 

shipment  was  being  made,  these  officers  set  out  to  intercept,  seize, 
and  destroy  it  after  it  crossed  the  State  line.  The  drivers  were 
arrested,  searched,  and  three  loaded  revolvers  taken  from  them. 
Two  loads  of  liquor  had  been  destroyed  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
third,  when  Officer  Mayfield  went  over  to  the  fourth  and  commenced 
destroying  its  contents.  An  automobile  came  from  the  direction  of 
the  Kansas  line  at  a  rapid  rate  of  speed,  set  the  emergency  brakes 
directly  opposite  the  wagon  upon  which  Mr.  Bowman  was  standing, 
and  one  of  the  occupants  opened  fire  with  a  shotgun.  Mr.  Bowman 
was  killed,  Officer  Mayfield  received  three  slight  wounds,  and  an 
onlooker  was  shot  in  the  right  breast.  The  State  authorities  of 
Kansas  and  Oklahoma  were  asked  to  take  immediate  action,  and  the 
United  States  attorney  at  Muskogee  immediately  brought  action 
against  these  parties.  Two  of  them  have  been  found  guilty  in  the 
Federal  court  on  the  charge  of  conspiracy  to  deprive  an  officer  of  the 
rights  guaranteed  him  by  the  Constitution. 

DIFFICULTIES  OF  THE  LIQUOR  SERVICE. 

The  officers  engaged  in  the  work  of  suppressing  the  liquor  traffic 
among  the  Indians  are  called  upon  to  face  situations  which  require 
the  special  exercise  of  tact  and  judgment;  they  must  handle  the 
bootlegger  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Indian  and  the  witnesses  on  the 
other;  they  must  conduct  their  operations  so  as  to  get  results  arid  yet 
endeavor  not  unnecessarily  to  antagonize  the  best  men  of  the  local 
community  or  create  a  sentiment  against  their  work.  The  Oklahoma 
situation  is  a  striking  example  of  the  risks  that  the  officers  must  take, 
and  it  is  therefore  essential  that  these  men  should  be  encouraged  and 
afforded  every  possible  personal  safeguard.  Congress  (37  Stat.  L., 
519)  extended  to  these  officers  the  powers  conferred  by  section  788 
of  the  Revised  Statutes  upon  marshals  and  their  deputies.  This  also 
applies  to  all  persons  working  under  the  supervision  of  the  chief 
special  officer  "  whose  appointments  are  made  or  affirmed  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  'or  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior." 

USE  OF  LIQUOR  AMONG  EMPLOYEES. 

It  has  been  found  in  some  instances  that  white  employees  of  the 
Indian  Service  have  introduced  liquor  upon  reservations  under 
physicians'  prescriptions,  and  although  possibly  none  of  this  liquor 
found  its  way  to  Indians  it  was  a  direct  violation  of  the  law  and 
guilty  persons  have  been  prosecuted.  To  stop  absolutely  this  prac- 
tice an  order  was  issued  to  employees  strictly  forbidding  the  use  by 
them  of  intoxicants  even  under  physicians'  prescriptions,  and  regula- 
tions were  issued,  after  securing  permission  from  the  War  Depart- 
ment, to  govern  Indian  Service  physicians  in  the  use  of  ethyl  alcohol 
for  medicinal  and  scientific  purposes  among  the  Indians  and  employees 
of  the  Government. 


14  KEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

WINES  FOB  SACRAMENTAL  PURPOSES. 

In  order  to  overcome  a  hardship  affecting  the  various  churches  on 
the  reservations,  Congress  (37  Stat.  L.,  519)  has  provided  that  wines 
used  solely  for  sacramental  purposes  under  church  authority  could 
be  introduced  at  any  place  within  the  Indian  country,  or  any  Indian 
reservation,  including  the  Pueblo  reservations  in  New  Mexico. 

DENVER  CONFERENCE. 

On  December  30  and  31,  1912,  and  January  1,  1913,  a  conference 
of  all  the  special  officers  and  a  representative  of  the  office  was  held 
at  Denver  for  the  purpose  of  arriving  at  a  better  understanding  as  to 
the  needs  of  the  service  and  the  manner  of  operating  and  conducting 
the  work.  The  conference  was  a  profitable  one,  resulting  in  a  better 
understanding  of  the  work  and  a  closer  cooperation  of  the  officers  of 
this  special  service  and  other  field  employees  of  this  bureau. 

PEYOTE. 

Very  careful  consideration  is  being  given  to  the  question  of  the 
use  of  peyote.  Much  information  has  been  submitted  both  by 
Indians  who  were  members  of  so-called  mescal  organizations  and 
who  have  pressed  their  petitions  for  permission  to  use  it,  and  by 
missionaries,  physicians  in  the  Government  service,  and  others  inter- 
ested in  both  sides  of  the  question.  The  bureau  has  taken  a  firm 
stand  against  the  introduction  and  use  of  peyote  in  the  Indian 
country,  and  directed  its  liquor  officers  to  obtain  evidence  of  the  use 
of  this  drug  with  a  view  to  prosecution,  on  the  ground  that  the  data 
hi  the  files  of  the  bureau  fully  warrant  the  classification  of  peyote 
as  an  intoxicant.  A  full  discussion  of  peyote  was  incorporated  in  the 
annual  report  of  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  for  1911. 

FORESTRY. 

The  systematic  attempt  to  ascertain  the  amount  and  value  of  the 
timber  on  Indian  lands,  begun  in  1910,  has  been  continued.  When 
consideration  is  given  to  the  extent  of  the  areas  embraced,  to  the  unde- 
veloped condition  of  these  areas,  and  to  the  very  large  part  of  these 
lands  still  unsurveyed,  the  magnitude  of  the  undertaking  will  be  readily 
appreciated.  The  timber  growth  varies  from  the  scrubby  mesquite 
and  pinon  on  the  arid  plateaus  of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico  to  the 
giant  redwood  of  the  Hoopa  Valley  region  in  California,  and  from 
the  scattered  red  cedar  and  cottonwood  of  the  subhumid  plains  and 
their  water  courses  to  the  dense  virgin  stands  of  spruce,  fir,  and 
cedar  in  the  Puget  Sound  region. 

The  best  information  available  places  the  total  amount  of  timber 
on  both  tribal  lands  and  allotments  at  approximately  40,000,000,000 
feet,  with  a  value  of  about  $84,000,000. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  15 

The  building  of  telephone  lines,  roads,  and  trails  for  the  protection 
of  timber  has  been  continued,  and  the  advantage  of  such  means  of 
communication  has  been  demonstrated.  A  total  of  the  forest  and 
prairie  fires  reported  from  all  reservations  during  the  calendar  year 
ended  December  31,  1912,  showed  that  the  great  majority  were 
extinguished  before  any  great  damage  was  done.  Approximately 
900,000  feet  of  timber  were  injured,  about  50,000  acres  were  burned 
over,  and  the  total  damage  done  by  all  fires  was  estimated  at  only 
$10,000.  A  large  part  of  this  is  estimated  damage  to  forage  and 
young  growth. 

Logging  operations  on  the  Bad  River,  Lac  du  Flambeau,  Lac 
Courte  OreiUe,  and  Fond  du  Lac  Reservations  have  been  continued 
by  the  regular  contractors.  The  total  amount  cut  on  each  of  these 
reservations  was  as  follows:  Bad  River,  57,183,770  feet;  Lac  du 
Flambeau,  23,049,110;  Lac  Courte  Oreille,  4,268,050  feet;  Fond  du 
Lac,  13,128,775  feet.  All  of  this  timber  was  cut  on  allotments 
except  12,068,620  feet  cut  from  unpatented  lands  of  the  Lac  du 
Flambeau  Reservation,  claimed  by  the  State  of  Wisconsin  as  swamp 
lands,  and  56,955  feet  cut  from  tribal  lands  of  the  Bad  River 
Reservation. 

In  the  summer  of  1910  the  pine  timber  on  the  Red  Lake  Indian 
Reservation  was  injured  by  fire.  An  attempt  to  dispose  of  this 
timber  in  1911  at  minimum  prices  of  $8  for  white  pine  and  $6  for 
Norway  was  unsuccessful.  The  timber  was  considerably  damaged 
by  standing  after  burning.  In  the  autumn  of  1912  it  was  again 
advertised  at  a  lower,  price.  During  the  logging  season  of  1912-13 
there  were  removed  9,411,920  feet  of  white  pine  and  4,426,620  feet 
of  Norway,  for  which  $71,167.80  has  been  received.  About  1,000,000 
feet  still  remain  upon  one  of  these  tracts.  This  will  be  cut  during  the 
season  of  1913-14. 

Timber  on  allotments  under  the  Red  Cliff  Indian  Reservation  was 
advertised  for  sale  during  the  fiscal  year  1913,  but  no  bids  were 
received. 

On  December  17,  1912,  the  department  approved  the  recommenda- 
tion of  this  office  that  all  existing  contracts  between  Mr.  A.  V.  Johnson 
and  allottees  of  the  Grand  Portage  Reservation  be  canceled,  and  that 
no  further  contracts  be  made  under  the  authority  granted  to  Mr. 
Johnson  on  November  4,  1907.  Very  many  of  the  original  allottees 
of  Grand  Portage  are  deceased,  and  the  heirs  have  not  been  deter- 
mined in  most  instances.  As  soon  as  such  determinations  are  made 
an  attempt  can  be  made  to  dispose  of  the  remaining  timber. 

About  20,000,000  feet  of  timber  standing  on  allotments  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  superintendent  of  the  Leech  Lake  Indian  School 
were  sold  under  sealed  bids  opened  on  March  28,  1912. 


16  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

The  tie  industry  on  the  Jicarilla  Reservation  has  been  continued 
with  success;  but  the  destruction  by  fire  of  the  agency  sawmill  on 
May  30,  1913,  interrupted  the  work,  which  had  just  begun  to  show 
results.  Steps  toward  the  rebuilding  of  the  mill  were  taken  imme- 
diately. No  timber  was  cut  on  this  reservation  during  the  year  under 
the  contract  with  the  Navajo  Lumber  &  Supply  Co.  for  130,000,000 
feet,  consummated  in  1912. 

Sales  of  1,500,000  feet,  at  $3.25  per  thousand,  and  10,000,000  feet, 
at  $3.51  per  thousand,  were  made  from  tribal  lands  of  the  Klamath 
Indian  Reservation. 

The  16  sections  of  pine  lands  in  the  Choctaw  Nation  segregated 
under  authority  of  section  7  of  the  act  of  April  26,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.; 
137),  were  offered  for  sale  for  cash,  as  required  by  the  act,  at  four 
different  times,  and  wide  notice  was  given  in  each  offering.  The  only 
bids  received  were  rejected  as  not  representing  the  value  of  land  and 
timber.  Realizing  the  impracticability  of  selling  this  land  and  timber 
for  its  market  value  at  a  cash  sale,  upon  recommendation  of  the 
department,  legislation  was  enacted  as  a  part  of  the  Indian  appro- 
priation act  for  1913,  which  provided  for  sale  under  deferred  pay- 
ments. On  August  30,  1912,  the  timber  and  land  were  reoffered  on 
terms  of  a  payment  of  25  per  cent  of  the  purchase  price  within  60 
days  from  acceptance  of  bid,  25  per  cent  additional  within  12  months, 
and  the  remainder  within  two  years,  all  deferred  payments  to  draw 
interest  at  6  per  cent  per  annum  from  the  time  of  the  acceptance  of 
the  bid.  There  was  a  ready  response  to  the  more  liberal  terms  of  this 
advertisement,  and  after  brisk  bidding  at  public  auction  the  land  and 
timber  were  sold  for  $287,000.  These  timber  lands  had  been  appraised 
by  several  different  parties.  The  price  received  was  more  than 
$40,000  above  the  highest  appraisal  ever  placed  upon  them  and 
$120,000  above  the  highest  offer  received  under  any  one  of  the  earlier 
offerings. 

MENOMINEE  INDIAN  MILLS. 

The  Menominee  Indian  mill,  at  Neopit,  Wis.,  established  in  the 
spring  of  1908,  by  the  act  of  March  28,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  51),  to  man- 
ufacture into  lumber  the  timber  on  the  Menominee  Indian  Reserva- 
tion, reports  progress.  The  town  of  Neopit  numbers  over  900  people, 
composed  largely  of  white  and  Indian  laborers  in  the  lumber  indus- 
try, and  contains  churches,  schools,  stores,  a  music  hall,  and  hotel. 
The  mill  has  a  capacity  ol  150,000  feet  of  lumber  daily,  beside  lath, 
shingles,  crating,  and  other  miscellaneous  products.  The  project 
owns  and  operates  its  own  logging  railway,  about  35  miles  in  total 
length.  The  planing  mill  has  recently  been  enlarged  to  double  its 
former  capacity,  a  new  engine  and  new  machines  for  finishing  lumber 
having  been  installed  within  the  last  year.  The  total  investment  in 
the  plant  is  over  $1,000,000. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  17 

The  timber  on  the  reservation  consists  of  about  1,750,000,000  feet 
of  pine,  hemlock,  and  hardwoods,  of  which  approximately  40,000,000 
feet  are  cut  annually,  a  basis  which  is  calculated  to  insure  a  perpet- 
ual source  of  income  for  the  Indians  employed.  In  and  about  the 
mills,  yards,  camps,  and  railway  are  many  Indians,  some  in  skilled 
positions — the  greater  part  in  unskilled— all  learning  the  value  of 
daily  employment  and  making  social  and  economic  progress.  During 
the  fiscal  year  just  passed,  an  average  of  322  Indians  have  been 
employed  at"  an  average  wage  of  $29.70  per  month.  Of  this  number, 
271  were  Menominees,  an  increase  of  23  per  cent  over  the  number  of 
Menominee  Indians  employed  during  the  previous  fiscal  year.  The 
able-bodied  males  of  18  years  of  age  and  over  of  the  Menominee  tribe 
number  408. 

The  deputy  supervisor  of  forests  who  was  recently  assigned  to  this 
project  has  experimented  in  the  renewal  of  forests  by  reforesting 
burned-over  districts  and  establishing  a  nursery.  Forest  damage  on 
this  reservation  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum  through  careful 
patrol  of  the  forest  and  the  installation  of  a  telephone  system  and  the 
erection  of  lookout  towers. 

IRRIGATION. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  1913  the  office  of  the  chief 
engineer  was  removed  from  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  to  Washington,  D.  C. 
The  irrigation  force  consists  of  the  chief  inspector  of  irrigation,  an 
assistant  inspector  of  irrigation,  who  reports  directly  to  the  chief 
engineer,  and  six  superintendents  of  irrigation  at  the  head  of  as  many 
districts,  whose  offices  are  convenient  to  the  principal  irrigation 
projects  now  under  construction. 

The  legal  right  to  the  use  of  water  is  of  primary  importance  in  the 
work  of  the  irrigation  branch  of  the  Indian  Service.  The  water  right 
for  Indian  lands  rests  upon  common-law  riparian  rights  in  some  cases, 
and  in  others  it  would  appear  that  beneficial  use  of  water  must  be 
made  before  title  can  be  acquired.  The  United  States  Supreme 
Court  has  decided  in  the  case  of  Winters  v.  The  United  States  (207 
U.  S.,  564)  that  prior  appropriation  by  the  United  States  and  bene- 
ficial use  by  the  Indians  is  not  necessary,  because  of  an  implied  reser- 
vation of  water  with  and  at  the  time  of  the  reservation  ot  the  land 
sufficient  for  the  irrigation  thereof.  However,  the  land  in  question 
had  not  been  allotted,  arid  the  case  did  not  involve  the  rights  of  any 
individual  Indian  but  settled  the  right  of  the  United  States  on  behalf 
of  unallotted  Indians. 

There  is  urgent  necessity  for  looking  thoroughly  into  all  conditions 
pertaining  to  water  rights  on  the  various  reservations  and  to  protect 
the  Indians  against  the  loss  of  such  rights. 
21716—14 2 


18  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

There  is  at  present  no  general  method  of  procuring  reimbursement 
for  maintenance  and  operation  expenses  of  the  irrigation  systems  on 
the  various  reservations.  On  a  majority  of  the  reservations  no  pro- 
vision is  made  for  the  reimbursement  of  this  expense.  Conditions  on 
many  reservations  at  the  present  time  are  such  that  it  is  not  advisable 
to  require  that  individuals  pay  the  maintenance  and  operation  ex- 
penses; but  the  time  is  not  far  distant  when  this  method  must  change, 
and  the  owners  benefited  must  bear  this  expense  rather  than  allow 
it  to  be  borne  by  the  entire  tribe  or  by  the  Government. 

The  total  sum  of  $624,066.54  was  expended  during  the  year  in  the 
irrigation  by  the  Indian  Service  of  Indian  lands,  of  which  the  follow- 
ing amounts  were  expended  on  nine  of  the.  largest  projects:  Yakima, 
$65,476.02;  Fort  Hall,  $26,146.80;  Uintah,  $35,031.06;  Fort  Bel- 
knap,  $20,313.58;  Wind  River,  $31,236.65;  Colorado  River, 
$34,561.33;  Fort  Mojave,  $34,978.47;  Navajo  and  Moqui,  $83,943.64, 
and  Ganado,  $13,420.86. 

HEALTH. 

In  accordance  with  directions  contained  in  the  Indian  appropria- 
tion act  approved  August  24,  1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  519),  the  Surgeon 
General  of  the  Public  Health  Service  detailed  13  officers  of  that 
service  to  make  an  investigation  as  to  the  prevalence  of  tuberculosis, 
trachoma,  smallpox,  and  other  contagious  and  infectious  diseases 
among  the  Indians  of  the  United  States,  assigning  each  to  a  separate 
school  or  reservation.  This  investigation  began  September  28,  1912, 
and  was  concluded  December  30,  1912,  covering  the  tribes  of  Indians 
in  25  States  and  involving  the  personal  inspection  of  39,231  Indians. 
Senate  Document  No.  1038,  Sixty-second  Congress,  contains  a  com- 
plete report  of  the  investigation  as  transmitted  to  Congress  by  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

Comparative  studies  plainly  show  that  the  prevalence  of  tubercu- 
losis among  Indians  is  greatly  in  excess  of  that  among  the  white  race, 
and  the  prevention  of  the  ravages  of  this  disease  is  the  most  important 
medical  problem  of  the  bureau. 

Repeated  examinations  with  the  Von  Pirquet  tuberculosis  test 
have  demonstrated  that  on  many  reservations  tuberculosis  infec- 
tion exists  in  as  many  as  90  per  cent  of  the  school  children,  and 
while  this  of  course  does  not  mean  active  cases,  it  does  indicate  the 
excessive  incidence  of  the  disease,  much  of  which  under  favorable 
conditions  may  at  some  time  become  active.  On  account  of  the 
high  incidence  of  tuberculosis  in  pupils  of  Indian  schools  the  matter 
of  health  is  one  of  paramount  importance. 

The  service  sanatoria  at  Fort  Lapwai,  Idaho,  Phoenix,  Ariz.,  and 
Laguna,  N.  Mex.,  have  each  completed  a  successful  year.  Their 
success  has  stimulated  the  office  to  add  to  their  number,  and  accord- 


KEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  19 

ingly  there  has  been  established  at  Toledo,  Iowa,  an  additional  sana- 
torium with  a  capacity  of  65  patients,  which  by  reason  of  its  location 
will  be  admirably  adapted  for  the  treatment  of  children  with  incipi- 
ent tuberculosis  from  the  northernmost  reservations.  Besides  offer- 
ing them  the  advantages  of  sanatorium  treatment,  it  will  give  them 
the  benefit  of  a  change  of  climate  without  taking  them  too  far  from 
home.  As  at  the  other  sanatoria,  a  school  will  be  provided  for  chil- 
dren able  to  take  advantage  of  it. 

The  force  of  ophthalmologists  has  been  increased  to  six,  each  of 
whom  has  been  assigned  to  a  separate  district  in  which  he  will  have 
supervision  of  the  eye  work,  it  being  the  plan  to  have  a  qualified 
operator  within  reach  of  each  agency  physician.  These  surgeons 
will  be  important  factors  in  controlling  the  spread  of  trachoma. 

Trachoma  with  an  incidence  approaching  70  per  cent  was  reported 
among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  presenting  such  an  alarming  situ- 
ation that  an  assistant  medical  supervisor  was  directed,  during  the 
fiscal  year  1913,  to  make  a  survey  of  the  whole  Five  Tribes  country 
with  a  view  of  determining  the  medical  and  sanitary  needs  of  the 
Indians. 

During  the  year  epidemics  of  certain  of  the  more  common  infec- 
tious diseases  occurred  on  many  reservations — diphtheria,  smallpox, 
scarlet  fever,  and  measles  occurring  most  frequently.  Diphtheria 
visited  seven  reservations  during  the  year,  with  but  one  death  in  54 
cases.  This  unusually  low  death  rate  is  due  to  the  close  observa- 
tion under  which  the  school  children  are  kept  by  the  physicians,  the 
immediate  use  of  diphtheria  antitoxin,  and  the  mild  form  in  which 
the  disease  appeared. 

Smallpox  occurred  in  a  mild  form  excepting  in  the  Five  Tribes, 
where  it  appeared  in  a  most  virulent  type.  Indians  generally  sub- 
mitted cheerfully  to  vaccination  by  and  followed  the  instructions  of 
service  physicians. 

Typhoid  fever,  a  disease  formerly  so  rare  among  Indians  that 
many  service  physicians  believed  that  there  existed  a  racial  immu- 
nity, is  occurring  with  greater  frequency,  due  in  all  probability  to 
the  closer  contact  of  the  Indians  with  the  white  race.  Sufficient 
cases  have  already  occurred  and  these  have  been  so  widely  dis- 
tributed among  the  tribes  that  it  can  be  safely  said  that  the  Indian 
is  not  naturally  immune  to  this  disease. 

By  especially  prepared  lectures  illustrated  by  stereopticon  slides 
and  motion  pictures,  delivered  to  Indians  on  the  reservations  during 
the  past  few  years,  appeal  has  been  made  direct  to  them  to  improve 
their  living  conditions,  and  they  have  been  taught  by  this  means 
how  to  guard  against  disease.  These  lectures  have  been  well  at- 
tended, and  their  influence  for  good  has  been  great. 


20  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

INDIAN   SCHOOLS. 

There  were  maintained  217  Indian  day  schools  situated  on  the 
reservations  near  the  Indian  homes,  for  pupils  from  the  first  to  the 
fifth  grades.  The  boys  were  also  instructed  in  gardening  and  ele- 
mentary carpentry  and  the  girls  in  sewing  and  housekeeping.  A  noon- 
day lunch  is  served  at  many  of  these  schools. 

The  typical  Indian  day  school  consists  of  a  school  building  with  a 
capacity  of  25  to  40  pupils,  a  room  'for  the  serving  of  the  noonday 
lunch,  or  for  industrial  training,  and  quarters  for  the  employees, 
who  are  usually  a  teacher  and  his  wife,  the  latter  acting  as  house- 
keeper. There  is  always  a  garden  at  each  school  and  frequently 
from  40  to  160  acres  of  land,  which  is  used  for  grazing  purposes. 

Seventy-six  reservation  boarding  schools  were  maintained.  They 
enrolled  pupils  for  the  entire  year  in  grades  from  the  first  to  the 
seventh,  inclusive.  These  schools  are  better  equipped  than  the  day 
schools  to  give  training  along  industrial  lines  to  both  the  boys  and 
the  girls.  The  pupils  are  housed,  clothed,  and  fed  and  allowed  to 
return  to  their  parents  during  the  summer  vacation.  Ordinarily  these 
schools  have  a  capacity  of  from  75  to  400  pupils,  the  plant  consisting 
of  school  buildings  with  classrooms  and  assembly  halls,  dormitories 
for  girls  and  boys,  and  such  accessory  buildings  as  laundry,  ware- 
house, shop  buildings,  and  employees'  quarters. 

There  were  35  nonreservation  boarding  schools,  situated  off  the 
reservations,  some  of  them  at  a  considerable  distance  from  Indian 
communities.  Pupils  are  brought  to  these  schools  at  Government 
expense  for  periods  of  3  to  5  years.  These  schools  have  more 
buildings  and  are  usually  better  equipped  than  the  reservation 
schools.  There  are  several  dormitories,  large  shops,  increased  facili- 
ties for  the  housing  of  employees,  domestic  science  cottages,  and  also 
buildings  for  the  electric  power  and  heating  plants.  Their  capacities 
range  from  75  to  750  pupils.  Nonreservation  schools  represent  the 
highest  class  maintained  for  Indian  pupils  and  furnish  academic 
training  through  the  eighth  grade,  a  few  doing  work  comparable  with 
that  given  in  the  first  year  of  public  high  schools. 

Indian  children  were  also  enrolled  in  45  public  schools  in  which  a 
tuition  was  paid  and  in  several  hundred  public  schools  in  which  no 
tuition  was  paid,  not  including  the  325  public  schools  in  eastern 
Oklahoma  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  where  the  schools  are  in 
Indian  communities  but  under  the  control  of  the  State.  Sixteen 
mission  schools  under  contract  and  53  not  under  contract  enrolled 
Indian  pupils.  There  is  no  record  of  the  number  of  Indians  enrolled 
in  private  schools. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  21 

VOCATIONAL  TRAINING. 

For  aU  pupils  in  and  above  the  third  grade  industrial  training 
occupies  at  least  one-half  their  time.  Superintendents  are  giving 
careful  attention  to  the  selection  of  the  kind  of  training  taken  up  by 
the  different  pupils.  If  a  boy  has  an  allotment,  he  is  advised  not  to 
take  a  regular  trade  course,  but  to  take  such  training  in  carpentry, 
simple  blacksmithing,  etc.,  as  would  be  of  value  to  a  farmer,  for  it  is 
expected  that  he  will  return  to  his  allotment.  If  a  boy  has  no  land, 
then  he  is  encouraged  to  take  up  one  of  the  trades. 

The  vocational  training  for  boys  includes  carpentry,  blacksmithing, 
masonry,  harness  making,  tailoring,  plumbing,  tinning,  steam  and 
electrical  engineering,  printing,  and  agriculture,  and  for  girls  house- 
hold economy. 

Many  Indian  pupils  are  the  possessors  of  considerable  land,  and 
the  boys,  unless  they  have  no  land,  are  taught  the  wholesomeness 
and  value  of  agricultural  pursuits.  Each  girl  is  given  the  actual 
care  of  a  group  of  rooms  comparable  with  what  she  might  have  in 
her  own  home  and  taught  how  to  care  for  them;  she  prepares  and 
serves  meals,  preserves  foods,  and  cares  for  poultry;  also  the  proper 
care  of  the  household  from  a  sanitary  point  of  view  is  taught. 

ACADEMIC  TRAINING. 

Pupils  are  given  such  training  as  will  enable  them  to  acquire  a 
ready  use  of  conversational  English.  Many  pupils  come  from  Indian 
homes  in  which  no  English  is  spoken,  and  great  care  must  be  given 
to  the  first  year's  training  in  English.  A  satisfactory  standard  of 
acquirements  has  been  set  in  many  schools  where  pupils  of  this  kind 
have  learned  to  use,  actually,  at  least  280  English  words  in  one  year. 
Two  new  words  can  be  mastered  each  school  day  during  the  first  two 
years  by  the  average  Indian  pupil.  This  is  the  time  when  he  can 
acquire  more  readily  than  at  any  other  a  knowledge  of  a  new  lan- 
guage; and  every  effort  is  being  made  to  develop  the  pupils  during 
this  period. 

Better  textbooks  and  supplemental  reading  matter,  more  black- 
boards for  the  classrooms,  and  primary  equipment  suitable  for  use 
in  the  pr unary  grades  have  been  in  use.  To  prevent  the  spread  of 
any  contagious  diseases  from  the  handling  of  books,  superintendents 
have  been  directed  to  reissue  no  soiled  book  or  any  book  which  has 
ever  been  in  the  hands  of  a  pupil  who  might  have  such  a  disease. 
The  courses  of  instruction  followed  in  most  Indian  schools  have  con- 
formed quite  closely  to  those  used  in  the  public  schools  of  the  State 
in  which  the  school  is  situated. 


22  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

VISUAL  INSTRUCTION. 

One  feature  of  the  work  which  bears  upon  every  phase  of  Indian 
education  is  that  of  visual  instruction.  Stereopticons  are  now  in  use 
at  most  of  the  schools  and  careful  attention  was  given  to  the  selec- 
tion of  a  complete  list  of  topics  suitable  for  use  in  the  instruction  of 
pupils  in  geography,  history,  industrial  activities,  manufacturing 
processes  in  connection  with  the  production  of  machinery,  etc.  A 
series  of  lectures  along  moral  lines  was  given  by  Dr.  Milton  Fairchild 
in  a  number  of  schools,  his  talks  being  illustrated  by  selected  pictures. 

This  plan  was  used  particularly  in  connection  with  the  study  of 
"Home  building,"  which  was  the  subject  of  essays  written  by  the 
pupils  of  those  schools  maintaining  grades  above  the  second.  The 
improvement  of  home  conditions  among  Indians  is  of  vital  impor- 
tance to  the  future  health,  happiness  and  usefulness  of  the  Indian. 
About  700  prizes  were  awarded  to  those  pupils  preparing  the  best 
essay  on  the  subject  of  "Home  building."  The  results  obtained 
were  excellent.  The  Indian  children  took  great  interest  in  the  study 
and  no  doubt  gained  a  large  fund  of  practical  and  useful  knowledge 
relative  thereto.  Many  pupils  prepared  creditable  house  plans, 
wrote  descriptions  of  their  ideal  houses  and  their  equipment,  and 
drew  word  pictures  of  their  ideal  future  homes. 

PHYSICAL  TRAINING. 

Outdoor  life  being  essential  to  the  health  of  Indian  pupils,  play- 
grounds are  available  at  all  schools?  and  where  homemade  apparatus 
has  not  been  provided,  the  office  has  authorized  the  purchase  of 
ample  equipment  for  both  boys  and  girls.  Baseball,  basket  ball, 
and  other  forms  of  athletics  are  enjoyed  at  all  the  larger  schools. 
The  boys  are  organized  into  military  companies,  and  in  order  to  effect 
a  uniform  system  of  drilling  a  pamphlet  has  been  published  for  the 
use  of  employees  reproducing  a  portion  of  the  Manual  for  Infantry 
Drills  now  used  by  the  United  States  Army. 

PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 

A  large  number  of  Indian  pupils  have  been  enrolled  in  the  public 
schools,  and  the  relationship  between  the  public-school  authorities 
and  the  Indians  has  been  very  satisfactory.  In  most  communities 
there  is  but  little  opposition  to  the  enrollment  of  healthy  Indian 
children  in  these  schools. 

Where  public-school  facilities  are  available  and  Indian  parents  are 
owners  of  taxable  property  but  have  actually  paid  little  or  no  taxes, 
the  public-school  authorities  have  maintained,  when  the  district  is 
poor  financially,  that  children  of  such  parents  should  pay  for  tuition 
in  the  public  schools,  the  tuition  to  be  paid  for  by  the  General  Gov- 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  23 

eminent .  The  office  has  taken  the  position  that  whenever  one  or  the 
other  of  the  parents  of  Indian  children  is  an  owner  of  taxable  prop- 
erty in  the  district,  tuition  for  such  children  in  the  public  schools 
should  not  be  paid.  Where  they  are  not  taxpayers,  however,  the 
Indian  Office  has  paid  for  tuition  of  Indian  children  in  the  public 
schools  an  amount  approximating  that  necessary  to  furnish  school 
facilities  for  white  children  in  the  'same  community.  Indian  children 
are  frequently  admitted  to  these  schools  without  the  payment  of 
tuition,  even  though  their  parents  pay  no  taxes. 

AID  OF  COMMON  SCHOOLS  IN  EASTERN  OKLAHOMA. 

For  the  fiscal  year  1913  there  was  appropriated  by  Congress  the 
sum  of  $300,000  "To  be  expended,  in  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior  under  rules  and  regulations  to  be  prescribed  by  htm, 
in  aid  of  the  common  schools  in  the  Cherokee,  Creek,  Choctaw, 
Chickasaw,  and  Seminole  Nations  in  Oklahoma."  The  purpose  of 
this  appropriation  was  to  aid  the  public  schools  attended  by  Indian 
children  whose  parents  do  not  assist  in  the  support  of  the  schools 
by  the  payment  of  taxes  on  their  real  estate.  This  appropriation 
resulted  from  a  recent  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  which  relieved 
a  large  amount  of  unrestricted  Indian  lands  in  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes'  country  from  taxation. 

Pursuant  to  regulations  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 
this  money  has  been  distributed  to  the  Oklahoma  public  schools, 
payments  to  each  district  being  based  in  part  on  the  number  of  Indian 
children  in  attendance,  and  in  part  proportioned  to  the  needs  of  the 
districts,  their  revenues  available  for  school  purposes  differing 
because  of  the  varying  amounts  of  nontaxable  Indian  lands  in  differ- 
ent districts. 

EFFICIENCY  OF  EMPLOYEES. 

In  order  to  strengthen  the  work  now  being  done  for  Indian  educa- 
tion, careful  attention  has  been  given  to  the  improvement  of  the  per- 
sonnel of  the  service.  To  induce  teachers  to  continue  work  along 
professional  lines,  a  reading  circle  is  maintained  and  books  bearing 
upon  the  profession  of  teaching  are  selected  for  study  and  discussion. 
To  add  emphasis  to  this  work,  teachers  are  asked  to  prepare  theses 
on  subjects  designated  by  the  office  and  closely  related  to  those 
treated  in  the  texts  discussed  in  the  reading  circle.  The  theses  are 
submitted  to  the  Indian  Office,  given  a  rating,  and  placed  with  the 
status  files  of  the  individual  teachers.  This  has  induced  them  to  do 
more  professional  reading,  and  the  service  has  been  directly  benefited 
thereby. 

As  a  further  encouragement  the  teachers  were  told  that  those  who 
made  a  record  of  "excellent"  in  their  efficiency  report  would  be  given 


24  EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

a  promotion  of  not  less  than  $2.50  per  month.  As  a  further  induce- 
ment to  teachers  to  enter  the  Indian  service,  legislation  was  secured 
providing  that  teachers  may  have,  in  addition  to  their  annual  leave 
of  30  days,  15  days  educational  leave  with  pay,  this  15  days  to  be 
spent  in  attending  summer  schools,  teachers'  institutes,  or  other  insti- 
tutions that  afford  training  which  will  directly  increase  their  efficiency 
as  instructors. 

Another  matter  which  will  result  hi  the  increase  in  the  compensa- 
tion now  received  by  employees  is  the  provision  in  the  current  appro- 
priation act  authorizing  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  to  fur- 
nish necessary  heat  and  light  without  charge  to  employees  who  are 
furnished  quarters ;  such  heat  and  light  to  be  paid  for  out  of  the  fund 
for  heating  and  lighting  other  buildings  at  the  same  place.  This 
amounts  to  a  virtual  increase  in  salary  for  many  employees. 

It  has  been  difficult  heretofore  to  retain  in  the  service  valuable  em- 
ployees in  such  positions  as  matron,  industrial  teachers,  disciplina- 
rian teachers  and  others  who,  of  necessity,  are  considered  as  being  on 
duty  at  all  hours  of  the  day  and  night.  In  order  to  relieve  this  class 
of  employees  from  the  long  hours  incident  to  their  service,  superin- 
tendents have  been  authorized  to  allow  them  one-half  day  off  duty 
each  week.  This  relief,  with  such  other  annual  and  educational  leave 
as  they  may  be  entitled  to,  renders  service  in  these  positions  much 
more  attractive  than  heretofore. 

CONFERENCES. 

A  conference  of  supervisors  and  other  employees  of  the  service 
was  held  at  Haskell  Institute  September  4  to  11,  1912;  also  one  of 
employees  among  the  Sioux  Indians  at  Flandreau,  S.  Dak.,  Novem- 
ber 12  to  15,  1913.  These  conferences  have  strengthened  the  super- 
vision of  schools  and  unified  the  activities  and  aims  of  employees  in 
reference  to  the  welfare  of  Indians. 

MARRIAGE  AND   DIVORCE. 

The  constant  efforts  of  this  bureau  for  several  years  to  overcome 
Indian  customs  as  to  marriage  and  divorce  and  to  substitute  therefor 
the  practices  recognized  by  law  have  met  with  considerable  success, 
but  there  are  certain  deficiencies  in  the  law  which  are  embarrassing. 
Where  Indians  desire  to  be  married  according  to  law,  they  have  no 
trouble  in  procuring  a  license  and  having  the  ceremony  performed  by 
an  authorized  person.  However,  complications  are  likely  to  arise 
when  a  divorce  is  sought,  a  number  of  State  courts  holding  that  they 
do  not  have  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  application  of  noncitizen  Indians 
residing  on  Indian  reservations,  and  there  is  no  law  under  which 
divorce  suits  may  be  taken  into  Federal  courts.  In  such  cases  the 
Indians  often,  and  naturally,  follow  their  native  custom,  which  is 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  25 

simply  the  abandonment  of  the  spouse  and  perhaps  the  immediate 
marrying  by  Indian  custom  of  another.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the 
office  finds  its  hands  tied ;  it  can  not  consistently  punish  the  Indians 
for  following  their  own  customs  when  it  has  no  legal  and  no  better 
plan  to  offer  as  a  substitute.  A  number  of  crimes  were  committed 
during  the  year  against  Indian  women  and  girls,  and  in  every  instance 
the  office  endeavored  to  bring  about  the  prosecution  of  the  offender. 
In  some  of  the  cases  the  crimes  were  committed  off  the  reservations 
and  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  States,  but  in  others  the  offenses 
were  committed  on  the  reservations,  and  because  of  the  inadequacy  of 
Federal  statutes  the  offenders  have  remained  unpunished.  The 
necessity  of  further  legislation  regarding  this  important  subject  is 
apparent  and  urgent. 

MURDERERS    OF   SUPERINTENDENT   STANLEY. 

A  brief  statement  was  made  in  last  year's  report  of  the  death  of 
Mr.  Will  H.  Stanley,  formerly  superintendent  of  the  Soboba  Reserva- 
tion, at  the  hands  of  the  Indians  under  his  jurisdiction.  Ambrosio 
Apapas,  Francisco  Lugo,  Cornelio  Lubo,  Pio  Lubo,  Pablino  Lubo, 
and  Leonicio  Lugo  were  convicted  of  this  murder  in  the  United  States 
District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  California,  and  were 
sentenced  on  March  27,  1913,  to  10  years'  imprisonment  at  McNeil 
Island  penitentiary.  This  unfortunate  tragedy  was  the  culmination 
of  a  long  series  of  events  running  through  a  number  of  years  in  which 
Leonicio  Lugo  was  the  principal.  For  years  he  had  been  a  disturbing 
element  and  was  continually  inciting  the  Indians  to  opposition  to 
constituted  authority.  The  conviction  of  this  ringleader  and  his 
coconspirators  will  undoubtedly  have  a  salutary  effect  on  the  Indians 
and  remove  from  an  otherwise  peaceable  band  criminal  elements  of 
danger  and  discord. 

EMPLOYMENT   OF  INDIANS. 

Procuring  employment  for  Indians  is  an  integral  part  of  the  work  of 
Indian  civilization,  and  its  immediate  direction  is  controlled  by  a 
Supervisor  of  Indian  Employment.  The  purpose  of  this  branch  of 
work  is,  briefly,  to  bring  the  Indians  and  the  work  together.  Family 
ties  and  home  interests,  health',  climate,  and  environment  have  to 
be  considered. 

The  contractors  for  the  construction  of  the  North  Platte  irrigation 
work  in  Nebraska  have  recently  made  arrangements  for  the  employ- 
ment of  a  number  of  Indians  for  that  project.  The  development  of 
western  beet  fields  gives  opportunities  for  the  employment  of  Indians, 
and  the  sugar  companies  each  year  grant  more  liberal  concessions  in 
the  way  of  railroad  rates  and  care  of  young  Indian  boys  in  times  of 


26  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

illness,  in  order  to  secure  them  as  helpers  in  cultivating  and  harvest- 
ing this  crop.  These  boys  live  in  tents  in  small  communities  in  charge 
of  a  Government  employee,  who  sees  that  hygienic,  moral,  and  social 
conditions  are  carefully  looked  after. 

Through  hearty  cooperation  between  Indian-school  superintendents 
and  those  in  charge  of  reclamation  and  other  projects,  Indians  are 
being  given  splendid  opportunities,  for  employment,  of  which  they 
are  availing  themselves.  Agreements  are  made  with  fruit  growers 
and  fruit  companies  for  the  harvesting  of  crops,  and  where  cotton  is 
grown  Indians  are  employed  for  picking  this  staple.  In  fact,  many 
fields  of  domestic  and  industrial  activity  are  being  opened  for  Indians 
under  conditions  which  promote  their  general  welfare. 

PURCHASE  OF  SUPPLIES. 

The  importance  and  necessity  of  exercising  economy  in  expendi- 
tures is  receiving  the  greatest  consideration,  and  the  practice  of  invit- 
ing proposals  through  warehouses  and  locally  in  advance  of  making 
purchases  has  been  followed  closely.  Thus  the  bids  obtained  in  large 
distributing  centers  and  at  factories,  plus  freight  charges  to  points  of 
consumption,  are  compared  with  local  bids.  This  results  in  lower 
prices,  due  to  increased  competition,  and  opportunity  is  afforded  to 
utilize  as  far  as  practicable  the  low  freight  rates  which  apply  on 
Government  shipments  over  land-grant  railroads. 

The  plan  to  have  the  disbursing  officer  of  the  Interior  Department 
pay  claims  covering  supplies  purchased  through  the  warehouses  in 
lieu  of  their  settlement  through  the  Treasury  Department,  after  such 
claims  have  received  administrative  examination  in  the  Indian 
Office,  has  effected  a  saving  of  time  in  the  settlement  of  claims. 

During  the  fiscal  year  there  were  purchased  for  the  Indian  Service 
approximately  $3,160,000  worth  of  goods  and  supplies. 

ENROLLMENT  WITH  INDIAN   TRIBES. 

Applicants  for  enrollment  with  Indian  tribes  are  required  to  fur- 
nish about  the  same  kind  of  evidence  as  would  be  necessary  to  prove 
an  inheritance  before  a  court.  The  various  Indian  reservations  have 
been  established  by  Executive  orders,  laws,  treaties,  or  agreements 
with  Indian  tribes,  and  in  many  instances  enrollment  for  participa- 
tion in  land  or  other  tribal  benefits  is  limited  by  treaty  stipulation, 
agreement,  or  special  legislation,  and  varies  accordingly. 

During  the  past  fiscal  year  128  persons  have  been  enrolled  at  agen- 
cies or  reservations  throughout  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes,  and  441  persons  denied  enrollment. 

In  some  instances  tribal  authorities  and  Indian  Service  officials 
have  challenged  the  enrollment  of  persons,  and  these  cases  are  now 
being  investigated,  either  in  the  field  or  before  the  department.  There 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  27 

arc  about  260  such  contested  cases  at  the  Cherokee  School,  North 
Carolina,  to  be  passed  upon  before  the  reservation  can  be  allotted. 

At  White  Earth,  86  persons  of  mixed  Chippewa  blood  enrolled  with 
the  tribe  were  challenged.  Their  rights  have  been  carefully  inves- 
tigated by  a  special  attorney  of  the  department,  and  the  record, 
including  voluminous  testimony,  has  been  referred  to  the  Court  of 
Olaims  for  findings  of  fact. 

FINANCE. 

The  system  of  accounting  maintained  in  the  Indian  Service  is, 
necessarily,  more  complex  and  difficult  than  that  of  any  other  branch 
of  the  Government  service,  because  of  the  number  and  variety  of 
appropriations,  as  well  as  the  large  amount  of  tribal  and  individual 
Indian  money  handled.  Appreciating  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from 
personal  instruction  of  the  field  force  in  accounting  methods  as  well 
as  the  necessity  for  more  frequent  and  systematic  investigation  of 
the  fiscal  affairs  of  disbursing  officers,  special  agents,  qualified  as 
•expert  accountants  for  that  particular  work,  have  been  employed. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

The  principal  sources  from  which  individual  Indian  moneys  are 
derived  are:  (1)  Sale  of  allotted  and  inherited  lands;  (2)  lease 
accruals;  (3)  sale  of  timber;  (4)  oil  and  gas  royalties;  (5)  earnings  of 
outing  pupils. 

The  total  amount  of  deposits  of  moneys  of  this  class  in  depositaries 
on  June  30,  1913,  was  approximately  $10,500,000.  The  Federal  law, 
as  respects  individual  Indian  moneys,  is  broad  and  comprehensive 
and  permits  a  wide  discretionary  authority  in  the  administration  of 
the  trust  moneys  belonging  to  individual  Indians.  For  administra- 
tive and  accounting  purposes,  requests  for  authority  to  approve  the 
disbursement  of  an  Indian  depositor's  funds  are  submitted  to  this 
office  by  the  local  superintendent.  The  superintendent  justifies  his 
requests  by  submitting  a  report  of  the  circumstances  in  each  par- 
ticular case. 

Indian  allottees  are  encouraged  to  use  as  much  of  their  funds  as 
necessary  in  building  modern  and  sanitary  homes  on  their  lands. 

On  the  theory  that  lease  money  represents  income  rather  than 
principal,  the  greatest  possible  liberality  has  been  exercised  toward 
the  lessor  in  the  handling  of  his  own  rentals. 

DEPOSITORIES  FOB  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

On  March  17, 1913,  the  department  approved  a  regulation,  effective 
July  1,  1913,  which  provides  for  the  payment  of  interest  on  all  indi- 
vidual Indian  funds  held  to  the  official  credit  of  superintendents  at 
the  same  rate  as  that  paid  by  banks  on  open  accounts  of  individual 


28  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

Indians.  At  the  same  time  a  new  system  for  keeping  in  touch  with 
holding  banks  was  installed.  This  system  requires  a  report  to  this 
office  on  a  specified  form,  by  national  banks  when  a  call  is  made  by  the 
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  and  by  State  banks  when  a  call  is  made 
by  the  State  banking  departments. 

Deposits  of  tribal  and  individual  Indian  moneys  at  the  close  of  the 
fiscal  year  1913  amounted  to  approximately  $15,000,000,  held  in  450 
depositories  under  surety  bond.  Two  failures  occurred  among  hold- 
ing banks,  but  in  each  case  the  surety  promptly  paid  to  the  Govern- 
ment the  amount  of  the  deposit  with  interest  to  and  including  the 
.date  of  payment. 

SALE  OF  INDIAN  LANDS. 

The  acts  of  Congress  approved  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245), 
March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015),  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444), 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  and  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L., 
678),  provide  for  the  sale  of  allotted  and  inherited  Indian  lands. 
During  the  fiscal  year  317  sales  have  been  made,  involving  31,576.74 
acres,  consideration  $692,413.28. 

Some  criticism  has  been  made  by  purchasers  of  Indian  land  on 
account  of  delay  in  the  approval  of  sales.  The  chief  cause  of  delay 
is  the  complications  which  arise  over  the  heirs  of  the  deceased  allottee. 
In  many  cases  the  determination  of  the  heirs  is  a  difficult  and  com- 
plex question.  Recently  changes  have  been  made  in  the  depart- 
mental practice  in  sales  cases,  which  will  permit  of  sales  being  ap- 
proved more  expeditiously  than  formerly.  It  is  believed  that  this 
will  have  a  tendency  to  increase  prices  and  to  popularize  sales  of 
Indian  lands. 

MINING  ON  INDIAN   LANDS. 

Oil  and  gas  mining  operations  on  Indian  lands  in  Oklahoma  have 
been  increasingly  active  during  the  year.  A  productive  oil  pool 
discovered  near  Gushing,  Okla.,  stimulated  leasing  in  the  Five  Civil- 
ized Tribes  to  approximately  50  per  cent  over  last  year.  Many 
leases  of  allotted  lands  under  the  Sac  and  Fox,  Ponca,  Pawnee,  and 
Kiowa  Agencies  have  been  taken,  and  some  development  work  has 
been  done.  The  price  of  crude  oil  advanced  from  70  cents  per  barrel 
on  July  16,  1912,  to  a  maximum  of  88  cents  per  barrel  on  June  30, 
1913. 

Discovery  of  oil  in  the  State  of  Washington  has  resulted  in  the 
filing  of  many  applications  for  permission  to  negotiate  leases  of  lands 
on  the  Quinaielt  Reservation.  A  thorough  investigation  in  connec- 
tion with  the  acquiring  of  leases  in  this  field  was  begun,  pending  which 
the  approval  of  leases  was  suspended.  At  the  present  stage  of 
development,  prospects  for  finding  oil  in  paying  quantities  on  this 
reservation  can  only  be  conjectured. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  29 

Lands  on  the  Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming  have  been  leased 
for  oil  and  gas  purposes  for  several  years,  and  some  wells  have  been 
brought  in.  Development  has  been  slow  and  small  returns  derived 
from  this  source,  owing  largely  to  the  lack  of  proper  transportation 
facilities. 

The  production  of  oil  and  gas  in  the  territory  of  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  is  referred  to  under  that  head. 

OIL  AND   GAS  MINING   LEASES   ON  OS  AGE  RESERVATION. 

During  the  year  there  were  leased  24,561  acres  of  the  so-called  un- 
leased  portion  of  the  Osage  Reservation  (consisting  of  approximately 
800,000  acres)  for  oil  and  gas  mining  purposes  under  regulations 
raising  the  rate  of  royalty  for  the  Indians  from  one-eighth  to  one- 
sixth,  and  providing  for  competitive  bidding  for  Indian  oil  and  gas 
leases.  By  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June  28,  1906  (34  Stat.  L., 
539),  all  the  minerals  under  the  lands  within  the  Osage  Reservation 
were  reserved  to  the  tribe  for  a  period  of  25  years  from  April  8,  1906. 

In  the  early  part  of  1912  the  Osage  tribal  council  authorized  the 
principal  chief  to  execute  four  leases  of  about  200,000  acres  each, 
covering  the  entire  unleased  part  of  the  reservation.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  absence  of  departmental  regulations  on  the  subject,  as  re- 
quired by  law,  the  four  leases  were  presented  to  the  department  in 
the  spring  of  1912  by  the  Osage  tribal  council,  with  the  request  that 
they  be  approved.  They  were  promptly  disapproved  by  the  Secre- 
tary on  June  14,  1912,  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  in  accord 
with  the  best  interests  of  the  Indians  and  contained  some  provisions 
which  were  thought  to  be  illegal. 

The  department  on  July  3,  1912,  prescribed  regulations  as  required 
by  the  act  of  June  28,  1906.  These  regulations  provided  for  offering 
the  lands  to  the  highest  bidder  under  sealed  bids.  Approximately 
107,000  acres  were  advertised  for  lease  and  the  bids  opened  on 
November  11,  1912.  The  bids  covered  42,210  acres,  the  bonus 
offered  aggregating  $143,438.65,  an  average  of  about  $3  per  acre. 
While  the  lands  were  under  advertisement,  the  Uncle  Sam  Oil  Co. 
continued  its  efforts  to  have  the  lease  executed  in  its  favor  approved 
in  spite  of  the  previous  definite  disapproval  by  the  department.  The 
Osage  council  passed  a  resolution  rejecting  all  the  bids  received  by  it 
under  the  advertisement  made  in  accordance  with  the  approved 
regulations  of  July  3,  1912,  and  refused  to  reconsider  its  action, 
despite  a  petition  signed  by  a  majority  of  the  male  adults  in  which 
the  council  was  asked  to  accept  the  highest  bids. 

The  action  of  the  council  and  the  circumstances  surrounding  the 
execution  of  the  four  leases  were  such  that  the  department  ordered  a 
special  investigation  of  the  entire  matter,  and  on  receiving  the  report, 
the  department  issued  an  order  removing  the  entire  Osage  tribal 


30  REPORT    OP    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

council.  A  suit  was  instituted  against  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior 
by  one  of  the  deposed  councilmen  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Dis- 
trict of  Columbia,  questioning  the  right  of  the  Secretary  to  remove 
him.  The  court  rendered  a  decision  in  which  the  action  of  the  Secre- 
tary was  upheld,  and  that  decision  was  affirmed  on  appeal  to  the 
court  of  appeals.  After  the  dismissal  of  the  tribal  council,  a  special 
election  was  held  on  January  22,  1913,  which  resulted  in  practically 
the  unanimous  election  of  new  tribal  officials.  The  bids  rejected  by 
the  old  council  were  reconsidered  by  the  new  council,  the  highest 
accepted,  and  the  principal  chief  authorized  to  execute  leases  to  the 
successful  bidders. 

The  regulations  of  July  3,  1912,  prohibited  pipe-line  companies 
from  bidding.  Some  of  the  best  bids  received  on  November  11,  1912, 
were  made  by  the  Gypsy  Oil  Co.  On  account  of  its  close  affiliation 
with  the  Gulf  Pipe  Line  Co.,  the  department  held  that  the  Gypsy  Oil 
Co.  was  not  eligible  and  refused  to  approve  leases  executed  in  its 
favor  by  the  principal  chief  of  the  Osage  Tribe.  Eight  leases  in  favor 
of  parties  shown  conclusively  not  to  be  interested  in  pipe-line  trans- 
portation, covering  24,561  acres,  were  approved  by  the  department 
in  the  early  part  of  March,  1913. 

On  January  9,  1913,  the  regulations  were  amended  so  as  to  permit 
leases  and  assignments  to  be  approved  to  pipe-line  companies  pro- 
vided that  no  right,  claims,  or  equities  as  against  future  action  by  or 
under  authority  of  Congress  respecting  oil  or  gas  pipe  line  companies 
should  be  predicated  upon  such  approval. 

INHERITANCE   CASES. 

The  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855,  856),  devolved  upon  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior  the  duty  of  determining  the  heirs  of  deceased 
Indians,  but  failed  to  make  an  appropriation  to  carry  out  this  work. 
As  already  said,  there  are  approximately  40,000  Indian  heirship  cases 
pending  at  the  various  agencies,  representing  inherited  property,  valued 
at  more  than  $60,000,000,  which  can  not  be  sold  or  otherwise  disposed  of 
until  the  heirs  are  determined.  The  adjudication  of  these  cases  is  one 
of  the  most  important  duties  confronting  the  Indian  Service.  This 
work  has  been  greatly  handicapped  by  the  lack  of  appropriation  and, 
consequently,  by  lack  of  a  sufficient  number  of  employees  to  handle 
it.  The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1914  has  partially 
removed  this  impediment  by  an  appropriation  of  $50,000. 

There  is  a  provision  that  upon  the  determination  by  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior  of  the  heirs  of  a  deceased  Indian,  the  sum  of  $15 
from  the  proceeds  of  the  estate  shall  be  paid  into  the  Treasury,  to 
cover  the  cost  of  determining  the  heirs. 

During  the  year  over  10,000  cases  have  been  received  pertain- 
ing to  heirship  matters.  This  includes  not  only  cases  where  the 


KEPOET    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES.  31 

determination  of  heirs  is  the  sole  object,  but  also  includes  wills  and 
petitions  for  sales  and  all  miscellaneous  correspondence  in  connection 
therewith. 

Special  attention  was  given  the  determination  of  heirs  at  the 
Shoshone  and  the  Uintah  and  Ouray  Reservations  in  order  to  safe- 
guard the  water  rights  of  the  Indians.  Each  of  28  agencies  reports 
from  100  to  1,200  undertermined  inheritance  cases.  An  adequate 
appropriation  available  for  both  field  and  office  work  should  be  pro- 
vided by  Congress  so  that  the  Indian  Bureau  can  be  able  to  clear  up, 
at  the  earliest  possible  date,  the  tangled  condition  of  the  estates  of 
deceased  Indians,  in  order  that  the  lands  not  needed  by  the  Indians 
may  be  leased  or  sold  and  the  proceeds  used  to  improve  and  farm  the 
allotments  of  the  heirs. 

THE  FLORIDA   SEMINOLES. 

For  hundreds  of  years  the  Seminoles-  of  Florida  have  made  their 
homes  in  the  Everglades,  and  have  obtained  a  living  by  hunting, 
trapping,  and  fishing. 

On  account  of  the  various  drainage  projects  now  being  constructed 
for  the  reclamation  of  the  Everglades,  and  the  diminishing  swamp 
area  which  has  been  their  home  and  hunting  ground  these  Indians 
are  rapidly  being  deprived  of  the  game  upon  which  they  have  hereto- 
fore subsisted.  They  are  in  no  sense  agriculturists  but  are  natural 
hunters  and  trappers,  making  fully  75  per  cent  of  their  expenses  of 
living  from  alligator  skins.  In  addition  to  the  restriction  of  their 
hunting  grounds,  during  the  past  year  the  tanneries  have  discon- 
tinued the  purchase  of  alligator  skins,  the  main  source  of  their  income. 

An  appropriation  of  $10,000  for  their  relief  was  reappropriated  and 
made  available  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  current  year 
(37  Stat.  L.,  518),  and  on  March  1,  1913,  Mr.  Lucius  A.  Spencer,  of 
Florida,  was  commissioned  as  a  special  commissioner  to  these  Indians. 
It  was  not  deemed  advisable,  taking  into  consideration  the  traditions 
and  history  of  this  remnant  of  Osceola's  band,  to  place  a  Government 
official  in  charge  of  them  as  the  term  is  usually  applied  to  Western 
reservations,  as  they  are  extremely  suspicious  of  the  good  intentions 
of  any  representative  of  the  Government;  but  their  condition  required 
some  action  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  the  inevitable  change  which 
must  in  a  few  years  come  to  them. 

There  are  about  400  of  these  Indians  who  live  in  camps  surrounded 
by  vast  tracts  of  uninhabited  swamps  and  morasses.  They  are 
splendid  types  of  the  physical  man  and  are  nearer  the  aboriginal 
Indian  in  habits  and  customs  than  almost  any  other  band. 

The  Florida  State  Legislature  in  1889  set  aside  36  townships  as  a 
Seminole  Reservation,  but  while  the  law  apparently  has  not  been 
repealed,  nearly  all  the  land  has  been  obtained  by  private  persons. 


32  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

A  bill  to  set  aside  15  townships  in  Monroe  County,  Fla.,  was  intro- 
duced in  the  legislature  of  that  State  in  1911,  but  failed  to  become  law. 

During  the  period  from  1895  to  1900,  from  funds  provided  by  Con- 
gress, 23,061.72  acres  lying  in  Ts.  47  and  48  S.,  Rs.  32,  33,  and  34  E., 
were  purchased  for  the  Seminole  Indians.  On  November  22,  1897, 
there  were  withdrawn  for  them  approximately  480  acres  lying  in 
Ts.  50  and  51  S.,  Rs.  40  and  41  E. 

All  efforts  for  their  education  on  the  part  of  the  State  and  Federal 
Governments  and  missions  have  been  unsuccessful,  because  of  the 
severe  penalty  inflicted  by  the  tribal  laws  on  any  Seminole  who 
learns  to  read  and  write. 

TRUST  PLAN  FOR   PUEBLOS. 

It  has  been  proposed  that  the  lands  of  the  Pueblo  Indians  shall  be 
deeded  by  them  to  ihe  Government  to  be  held  in  trust  for  their 
benefit  for  a  period  of  25  years. 

There  are  20  Pueblos  in  New  Mexico,  with  a  total  population  of 
about  6,000  Indians,  Laguna,  with  about  1,600,  being  the  largest. 

The  land  grants  to  these  Indians  were  in  most  cases  made  by  the 
King  of  Spain  in  1691,  or  later,  and  these  titles  have  been  confirmed 
to  them  by  Congress  or  by  the  Court  of  Private  Land  Claims  and 
patented  since  the  American  occupation  after  the  Mexican  War. 
These  Indians  have  lost  considerable  land  through  their  own  improv- 
idence, the  encroachments  of  white  settlers,  and  the  adverse  deci- 
sions of  the  courts,  and  there  are  now  pending  before  the  courts  suits 
involving  the  title  to  much  of  it. 

Owing  to  the  gradual  loss  of  land,  and  the  difficulty  of  maintain- 
ing schools  and  otherwise  administering  the  affairs  of  these  Indians 
because  of  the  lack  of  jurisdiction  over  their  lands,  the  department, 
in  1911,  recommended  to  Congress  the  enactment  of  legislation  which 
would  permit  the  Secretary  to  accept,  on  behalf  of  the  United  States, 
as  trustee,  all  such  lands  as  might  be  conveyed  by  any  of  the  com- 
munities of  Pueblo  Indians.  The  bills  making  this  provision  were 
introduced  in  the  Sixty-second  Congress  as  H.  R.  22528  and  S.  6085. 

Representatives  of  11  of  the  Pueblos  made  a  trip  to  Washington 
last  February,  accompanied  by  their  special  attorney,  to  urge  upon 
the  department  the  acceptance  of  trust  deeds  and  to  petition  Congress 
to  enact  legislation  authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  accept 
the  trust.  These  Indians  appeared  before  the  Senate  Comniittee  on 
Indian  Affairs  in  connection  with  the  hearing  on  Senate  bill  6085, 
where  they  argued  that  if  their  property  is  to  be  conserved  it  will  be 
necessary  for  the  United  States  to  hold  it  in  trust  for  the  next  25 
or  more  years,  and  until  the  coming  generation  may  have  an  oppor- 
tunity to  become  educated. 


EEPOET    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  33 

Although  by  the  Territorial  law  the  Pueblo  lands  were  exempted 
from  taxation,  and  this  same  exemption  is  provided  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  New  Mexico,  the  decision  of  Judge  Pope  on  July  22,  1912  (198 
Fed.  Rep.,  539),  holds  that  the  separate  provisions  of  the  State  con- 
stitution which  contain  the  compact  with  the  United  States  that 
the  Pueblo  lands  are  Indian  country  is  unconstitutional,  and  there- 
fore the  lands  are  subject  to  taxation  and  to  sale  for  nonpayment  of 
taxes,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  State  law. 

OPPOSITION  OF  PUEBLOS  TO  EDUCATION. 

The  Federal  Government  has  made  appropriations  from  time  to 
time  to  maintain  schools  among  the  Pueblo  Indians;  nevertheless,  the 
Indians  have  refused  to  lease  buildings  for  school  purposes  in  their 
villages,  in  some  instances  making  it  necessary  for  the  Government 
to  institute  condemnation  proceedings  to  procure  land  on  which  to 
erect  permanent  day-school  plants.  Out  of  18  pueblos  under  Albu- 
querque and  Santa  Fe  schools,  13  sites  have  been  procured  in  this 
manner. 

There  was  also  opposition  to  the  erecting  of  school  buildings  among 
the  Pueblo  Indians.  At  San  Domingo  the  Indians  at  one  time  showed 
some  actual  resistance  to  employees  undertaking  to  build  a  school- 
house.  This  resistance,  however,  was  insignificant  and  the  construc- 
tion work  has  proceeded  without  any  interruption,  although  the  In- 
dians showed  considerable  resentment.  If  handled  discreetly  and 
tactfully,  it  is  believed  the  opposition  will  soon  disappear  and  the 
advantages  of  having  in  their  midst  a  trained  teacher  and  a  well- 
equipped  day-school  plant  will  be  recognized  by  the  Indians. 

The  threatened  taxation  of  their  lands  and  their  utter  inability  to 
meet  such  payments  have  awakened  the  Pueblo  Indians  to  the  need 
of  an  adjustment  to  the  conditions  which  surround  them,  and  many 
of  them  are  now  willing  and  anxious  to  receive  the  aid  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, so  that  their  children  may  have  opportunity  to  adopt  the 
customs  of  white  communities  which  they  have  refused  for  them- 


The  Indians  are  generally  favorable  to  education  and  anxious  to 
enroll  their  children  in  school.  Some  of  the  Hopis,  however,  refused 
to  enroll  their  children.  They  were  put  into  school,  against  the  wish 
of  the  parents,  and  the  superintendent  was  authorized  to  retain 
them  in  his  boarding  school  during  the  summer  vacation  unless  the 
parents  would  agree  to  return  them  to  school  at  the  opening  in  Sep- 
tember, 1913. 

21716—14- — 3 


34  REPORT    OP    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

RELEASE  OF  APACHE  PRISONERS   OF  WAR. 

The  survivors  of  Geronimo's  band  of  Apaches  and  their  descend- 
ants, who  for  many  years  have  been  living  at  Fort  Sill,  Okla.,  as 
prisoners  of  war,  have  been  released,  some  going  to  the  Mescalero 
Apache  Reservation  in  New  Mexico,  and  others  remaining  in  Okla- 
homa. On  April  2,  1913,  183  of  these  Indians  in  charge  of  Maj. 
Geo.  W.  Goode,  United  States  Army,  went  to  Mescalero,  where  they 
are  now  living  with  this  branch  of  their  kindred,  under  the  super- 
vision of  the  superintendent  of  the  Mescalero  Reservation.  The 
transfer  of  these  Indians  was  made  with  their  consent  and  under  the 
terms  of  the  act  of  Congress  passed  at  the  last  session  making  the 
necessary  appropriations  for  the  purpose.  There  were  78  of  the 
band  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma,  where  they  will  be  per- 
manently located  on  allotments  provided  for  them. 

FIVE   CIVILIZED   TRIBES. 

The  tribal  work  pertaining  to  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  is  per- 
formed under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Commissioner  to  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  acting  under  instructions  from  the  depart- 
ment, through  this  office.  The  details  of  the  work  performed  by 
him  during  the  past  year  are  set  forth  in  his  annual  report  to  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior. 

The  affairs  of  individual  Indians  after  allotments  are  made,  espe- 
cially of  the  restricted  class  remaining  under  the  supervision  of  the 
department,  are  handled  through  the  office  of  the  superintendent  of 
the  Union  Agency  under  direction  of  this  office. 

There  are  101,216  persons  enrolled  as  members  of  the  Five  Tribes, 
of  which  number  32,939  are  what  is  known  as  " restricted"  Indians, 
which  means  that  they  are  still  wholly  or  partially  under  the  super- 
vision of  the  Government.  The  citizenship  rolls  were  closed  by  opera- 
tion of  law  on  March  4,  1907.  There  were  1,238  applications  for  the 
removal  of  restrictions  made  during  the  year  ended  June  30,  1913, 
making  a  total  to  that  date  of  9,594. 

The  work  of  allotment  is  practically  completed,  although  there 
remains  considerable  work  in  connection  with  the  closing  of  final 
records  and  other  details  and  the  disposition  of  the  remaining  tribal 
property. 

The  work  at  the  Union  Agency,  in  connection  with  the  Indians 
after  allotment,  includes  the  making  of  oil  and  gas  and  other  leases 
by  Indians  under  supervision  of  the  department,  the  collection, 
supervision,  and  disbursement  of  royalties,  removal  of  restrictions, 
leasing  of  land,  and  the  handling  of  money  derived  from  sales  of  land, 
all  of  which  required  the  handling  of  $8,215,989.71  by  the  agency 
during  the  year  ended  June  30,  1913.  During  that  time  there  were 
filed  at  the  Union  Agency  28,526  leases  of  which  26,846  were  for  oil  and 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  35 

gas;  3,522  oil  and  gas  leases  were  approved;  49,176,000  barrels  of 
oil  were  sold.  There  were  collected  during  the  year  for  individual 
Indians  from  oil  and  gas  leases  $1,301,326.99,  and  for  the  Choctaw 
and  Chickasaw  tribes  as  royalty  from  coal  and  asphalt  leases  $217,- 
226.61.  The  proceeds  of  lands  sold  for  Indians  under  the  super- 
vision of  the  agency  aggregated  $502,406.36. 

Under  existing  law  the  probate  courts  of  the  State  have  jurisdic- 
tion in  probate  matters  affecting  minor  Indians,  and  during  the  year 
reports  have  demonstrated  that  such  matters  are  not  in  a  satisfactory 
condition,  principally  because  of  the  vast  amount  of  business  handled 
by  such  courts  and  the  inadequate  statutes  affecting  probate  pro- 
cedure. A  bill  seeking  to  remedy  existing  evils  was  introduced  in 
the  last  Legislature  of  the  State  of  Oklahoma,  and  although  its 
passage  was  urged  by  the  Government  and  the  entire  Oklahoma  dele- 
gation in  Congress  it  failed  of  enactment. 

LEGISLATION. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1913  was  not 
approved  until  August  24,  1912.  It  therefore  became  necessary  for 
the  appropriation  act  of  the  previous  year  to  be  extended,  which  was 
done  by  joint  resolutions  of  July  1  and  August  1,  1912. 

For  the  fiscal  year  1910  the  Indian  appropriation  act  carried  about 
$11,800,000.  The  act  for  1911  carried  about  $9,200,000,  for  1912 
$8,800,000,  and  for  1913  $8,900,000.  The  estimates  for  the  Indian 
Service  for  the  fiscal  year  1914  amounted  to  $11,303,316.53.  The 
Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1914,  which  failed  of 
passage  at  the  regular  session  of  the  last  Congress,  but  was  enacted  at 
the  special  session  of  the  present  Congress  and  approved  by  the 
President  June  30,  1913,  after  very  extensive  hearings  by  the  Senate 
and  the  House  Committees  on  Indian  Affairs,  carries  an  appropriation 
of  $9,461,819.67. 

In  addition  to  the  usual  items  and  appropriations,  the  act  of  June 
30,  1913,  carries  an  appropriation  of  $50,000  for  the  purpose  of  deter- 
mining the  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees,  pursuant  to  the  act  of 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855);  an  appropriation  of  $100,000  (reim- 
bursable) for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  industry  among  the  Indians 
and  to  aid  them  in  the  culture  of  crops;  and  an  appropriation  of 
$25,000  for  a  joint  commission  of  three  members  of  the  Senate  and 
three  members  of  the  House  of  Representatives  for  the  purpose  of 
making  inquiry  into  the  conduct  and  management  of  the  Bureau  of 
Indian  Affairs.  This  act  for  1914  also  ratified  an  agreement  dated 
May  10,  1911,  with  the  Wiminuche  Band  of  Southern  Ute  Indians, 
which  agreement  relates  to  the  exchange  of  certain  lands ;  an  appro- 
priation of  $100,000  was  made  to  provide  school  facilities  for  the 
children  of  the  Navajo  Indians;  and  provision  was  also  made 


36  REPORT   OP   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

for  the  appointment  of  a  commission  consisting  of  two  persons  to 
make  a  roll  of  the  Chippewa  Indians  allotted  within  the  White  Earth 
Reservation  in  the  State  of  Minnesota. 

This  act  also  provides  for  a  commission  consisting  of  two  members 
of  the  Senate  and  two  members  of  the  House  of  Representatives  for 
the  purpose  of  investigating  the  necessity  and  feasibility  of  estab- 
lishing, equipping,  and  maintaining  a  tuberculosis  sanatorium  in  New 
Mexico  for  the  treatment  of  tuberculous  Indians;  also  to  investigate 
the  necessity  and  feasibility  of  procuring  impounded  waters  for  the 
Yakima  Reservation,  or  the  construction  of  an  irrigation  system  upon 
3aid  reservation,  to  impound  the  waters  of  the  Yakima  River  for  the 
reclamation  of  the  lands  within  the  reservation. 

There  was  also  appropriated  $150,000  for  the  purchase  of  allot- 
ments for  the  individual  members  of  that  portion  of  the  Wisconsin 
band  of  Pottawatomie  Indians  now  residing  in  the  States  of  Wiscon- 
sin and  Michigan. 

Section  26  of  the  act  provides  for  the  installation  of  a  system  of 
bookkeeping  in  the  Bureau  of  Indian  affairs  which  will  afford  a  ready 
analysis  of  expenditures  by  appropriations  and  allotments  and  by 
units  of  the  service,  showing  for  each  class  of  work  or  activity  carried 
on,  the  expenditures  for  the  operation  of  the  service,  for  purchase  and 
construction  of  additional  property,  for  repair  and  preservation  of 
property,  salaries  and  wages  of  employees,  and  for  other  expenditures 
and  purposes ;  but  it  carries  no  appropriation  to  make  the  provision 
effective. 

The  most  important  general  legislation  passed  during  the  fiscal 
year,  other  than  that  contained  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act,  is  as 
follows : 

By  the  act  of  July  1,  1912,  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  is  author- 
ized, when  the  amount  of  tribal  funds  due  the  Winnebagoes  in  Wis- 
consin shall  have  been  ascertained  in  accordance  with  the  enrollment 
as  provided  by  law,  to  expend  the  funds  for  their  benefit  in  such 
manner,  including  the  purchase  of  lands  for  said  Indians,  as  he  may 
deem  proper,  or,  in  his  discretion,  to  distribute  the  funds,  or  any  part 
thereof,  per  capita  among  the  Winnebago  Indians  in  Wisconsin. 

The  act  of  July  19,  1912,  authorized  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 
in  his  discretion,  to  approve  maps  showing  right  of  way  and  definite 
location  of  proposed  drainage  districts  and  assessments,  made  under 
the  laws  of  Oklahoma,  upon  the  allotments  of  certain  Absentee 
Shawnee  and  Citizen  Potawatomi  allottees  in  the  Little  River 
drainage  district  in  Pottawatomie  County,  Okla.,  and  upon  the  allot- 
ments of  certain  Sac  and  Fox  allottees  in  Deep  Fork  drainage  district 
in  Lincoln  County,  Okla. 

By  the  act  of  March  4,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  1007),  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior  is  authorized,  in  his  discretion,  to  request  of  the  present 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  37 

claimant  under  any  railroad  land  grant  a  relinquishment  or  recon- 
veyance of  any  lands  situated  within  the  States  of  Arizona,  New 
Mexico,  or  California,  passing  under  the  grant,  which  are  shown  to 
have  been  occupied  for  five  years  or  more  by  an  Indian  entitled  to 
receive  the  tract  in  allotment  under  existing  law,  but  for  the  grant 
to  the  railroad;  and,  upon  the  execution  and  filing  of  such  relinquish- 
inent  or  reconveyance,  the  land  shall  thereupon  become  available 
for  allotment  and  the  company  relinquishing  or  reconveying  shall 
be  entitled  to  select,  within  the  period  of  three  years  after  the  approval 
of  the  act,  and  have  patented  to  it,  other  vacant,  nonmineral,  non- 
timbered  surveyed  public  lands  of  equal  area  and  value,  situated  in 
the  same  State,  as  may  be  agreed  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  under  the  terms  of  the  act. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Interior  is  authorized  by  the  act  of  March  4, 
1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  1007),  under  rules  and  regulations  to  be  prescribed 
by  him,  to  grant  to  the  operator  of  any  coal  mine  in  the  State  of 
Oklahoma,  the  right  to  lease  additional  acreage  from  the  unleased 
segregated  coal  lands  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations  in 
Oklahoma,  not  to  exceed  in  any  case  640  acres  of  land,  under  certain 
conditions  named  in  the  act. 

The  act  of  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678),  very  materially 
broadens  the  scope  of  section  2  of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat. 
L.,  855),  relating  to  the  disposition  of  trust  property  of  Indians  by 
will.  Under  the  original  law  only  allotments  held  in  trust  could  be 
disposed  of  by  will  by  the  allottee  with  the  approval  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior.  The  act  of  February  14,  1913,  authorizes  any 
Indian  2 1  years  of  age  to  dispose  of  any  right,  title,  or  interest  in  any 
allotment  held  under  trust  or  other  patent  containing  restrictions  on 
alienation,  or  individual  Indian  moneys  or  other  property  held  in 
trust  by  the  United  States,  with  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior  and  under  such  regulations  as  he  may  prescribe. 

The  act  of  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675),  authorizes  the 
sale  and  disposition  of  the  surplus  unallotted  lands  in  the  Standing 
Rock  Indian  Reservation  hi  the  States  of  North  Dakota  and  South 

Dakota. 

TRADERS'   CLAIMS  AGAINST  INDIANS. 

Superintendents  were  directed  on  December  28,  1910,  to  forward 
to  the  Indian  Office  all  claims  for  goods  furnished  and  services 
rendered  to  individual  Indians  prior  to  December  17,  1900.  Claims 
amounting  to  $1,706,196.82  were  submitted.  The  greater  part  of 
these  claims  were  against  Indians  in  Oklahoma,  South  Dakota, 
Montana,  Wisconsin,  and  Nebraska.  After  compiling  records  in 
this  office  of  the  claims  submitted,  they  were  returned  to  the  superin- 
tendents with  a  circular  letter  under  date  of  October  12,  1912,  in- 
structing them  to  audit  each  claim  with  the  view  to  determining  the 


38  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

reasonableness  of  the  charges,  and  then  to  call  in  the  debtors  and 
creditors  and  endeavor  to  liquidate  the  indebtedness  in  so  far  as 
the  funds  of  the  Indian  debtor  might  permit  without  depriving  the 
Indians  and  their  families  of  a  means  of  support .  Sixty-two  reserva- 
tions and  about  2,500  traders  are  involved  in  the  outstanding  in- 
debtedness. 

During  the  year  authorities  for  the  settlement  of  206  claims  were 
granted,  and  the  Indian  traders  themselves  adjusted  57  of  their 

accounts. 

INDIAN  ART. 

The  blanket  industry  among  the  Navajo  Indians  of  Arizona  and 
New  Mexico  is  perhaps  the  most  profitable  of  the  native  industries. 
The  actual  number  of  Indians  engaged  in  this  industry  is  unknown, 
but  it  is  estimated  that  between  $600,000  and  $700,000  worth  of 
blankets  were  produced  during  the  year.  The  women  usually  do 
the  weaving.  Plans  have  been  formulated  to  award  prizes  ranging 
from  $50  to  $100  at  Indian  fairs  and  exhibitions  this  coining  fall, 
for  the  best  blankets  made  in  sizes  of  not  less  than  4i  by  6J  feet  from 
wool  clipped  from  native  sheep.  The  whole  purpose  of  these  plans 
is  to  discourage  inferior  work  and  the  making  of  the  smaller  sizes. 

Many  of  the  tribes  are  still  more  or  less  extensively  engaged  in  the 
making  of  baskets,  beadwork,  and  pottery.  At  Pima  about  1,200 
Indians  made  baskets  during  the  year.  About  9,000  baskets  were 
made,  valued  at  $14,500.  The  Indians  at  this  reservation  also  made 
about  16,500  pieces  of  pottery,  valued  at  $4,300.  At  Moqui  about 
100  baskets,  valued  at  $1,000,  and  100  pieces  of  pottery  at  approx- 
imately the  same  value  were  made.  At  Camp  Verde  the  Indian 
women  wove  some  excellent  willow  baskets  ranging  in  value  from 
$1  to  $30  apiece. 

At  Red  Moon,  Okla.,  about  $220  worth  of  bead  work  was  done  for 
the  Mohonk  Lodge,  and  about  $200  worth  was  sold  to  the  Indian 
traders. 

At  La  Jolla,  Cal.,  the  Sybil  Carter  Lace  Association  has  a  lace 
teacher  who  brings  supplies  to  the  Indian  women  and  buys  from 
them  the  lace  manufactured.  At  Rincon,  Cal.,  11  Indian  women  are 
receiving  instructions  in  lace  making  from  a  teacher  under  the  aus- 
pices of  the  Redlands  Indian  Association. 

INCREASE  IN   OFFICE  WORK. 

The  policy  of  individualization  in  Indian  affairs  and  of  individual 
allotment  of  reservation  lands  has  greatly  increased  the  work  of  the 
bureau  during  the  last  few  years,  and  will  continue  to  increase  it 
for  several  years  to  come. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  39 

Each  allotment  made  may  also  involve  any  or  all  of  the  follow- 
ing questions:  The  sale  of  timber,  a  patent  in  fee,  a  hearing  to  de- 
termine the  heirs  of  the  deceased  allottee,  the  opening  of  a  bank 
account  for  the  handling  of  the  segregated  trust  funds,  and  the  erec- 
tion of  improvements  upon  the  restricted  land. 

As  already  said,  the  single  item  of  the  determination  of  heirs  of 
deceased  allottees  has  very  greatly  increased  the  work  of  the  office 
since  the  passage  of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910,  and  the  need  of  increased 
office  help  for  this  class  of  work  is  pressing.  The  increased  effort  put 
forth  to  get  each  able-bodied  Indian  settled  upon  and  started  in 
farming  his  own  allotment,  or  equipped  for  some  other  occupation  in 
which  he  may  become  self-supporting,  has  largely  increased  the  labor 
of  handling  individual  Indian  money,  with  a  corresponding  increase 
in  the  number  of  requests  for  authority  to  approve  checks  against 
Indian  bank  accounts. 

During  the  fiscal  year  1912  a  total  of  222,187  communications  was 
received  in  this  office;  in  the  year  1913,  as  before  noted,  the  number 
was  275,452 — an  increase  of  23.9  per  cent.  In  the  fiscal  year  1912, 
the  total  number  of  letters  written  and  transmitted  was  201,271,  and 
in  1913  was  255,261 — an  increase  of  26.4  per  cent. 

COOPERATION  WITH  BUREAU  OF  MINES. 

In  February  of  this  year  the  department  placed  upon  the  Bureau 
of  Mines  the  duty  of  inspecting  the  physical  operations  under  leases 
for  mining  purposes  which  covered  Indian  lands.  Prior  to  that  time 
complaints  had  been  filed  to  the  effect  that  much  gas  and  oil  was 
being  wasted,  particularly  in  the  State  of  Oklahoma,  by  reason  of  the 
lack  of  scientific  methods  in  drilling.  Representatives  of  the  Bureau 
of  Mines  were  detailed  to  Oklahoma  and  their  efforts  to  instruct 
operators  and  drillers  as  to  the  proper  manner  in  which  to  drill  so  as 
to  conserve  the  oil  and  gas  during  the  drilling  operations  have  met 
with  gratifying  success,  have  been  appreciated  by  the  operators, 
and  have  resulted  in  the  saving  of  many  thousands  of  dollars'  worth 
of  gas  heretofore  wasted.  The  enormity  of  the  waste  which  has 
been  going  on  year  after  year  can  best  be  understood  from  a  report 
of  the  Bureau  of  Mines  which  indicates  that  there  was  a  daily  waste 
in  a  single  oil  field  of  about  300,000,000  cubic  feet  of  gas,  or  about 
$75,000  a  day. 

RIGHTS   OF  WAY. 

Railway  construction. — Railway  construction  on  Indian  lands  during 
the  past  year  has  not  been  as  active  as  it  has  in  former  years.  The 
Minneapolis,  St.  Paul  &  Sault  Ste.  Marie  Railway  Co.,  and  the  Great 
Northern  Raiiwav  Co.  have  been  authorized  to  construct  lines  across 


40  REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

the  Fort  Berthold  Reservation.  These  new  lines  will  materially 
enhance  the  value  of  the  lands  in  that  vicinity,  and  give  new  incentive 
to  industry  on  the  part  of  these  Indians,  who,  heretofore,  because  of 
the  lack  of  railway  facilities,  have  been  out  of  reach  of  a  market  for 
their  farm  products. 

The  Great  Northern  Railway  Co.  has  agreed  to  complete  and  put 
into  operation  by  December  31,  1913,  its  entire  line  from  Wenatchee 
to  Oroviile,  along  the  Okanogan  and  Columbia  Rivers,  hi  the  State 
of  Washington,  for  which  right  of  way  was  acquired  almost  three 
years  ago.  This  line  will  undoubtedly  stimulate  the  development  of 
lands  under  the  Okanogan  reclamation  project,  heretofore  without 
convenient  transportation  facilities. 

Pipe  lines.— To  furnish  an  outlet  for  the  great  production  of  oil 
from  the  new  Gushing  field,  located  within  the  Creek  Reservation  in 
Oklahoma,  about  8  or  9  miles  east  of  the  town  of  Gushing,  the  follow- 
ing companies  have  been  granted  pipe-line  rights  of  way  across  Sac 
and  Fox  and  Creek  lands :  Creek  County  Oil  &  Gas  Co.,  Jane  Oil  &  Gas 
Co.,  Chanute  Refining  Co.,  Charles  B.  Shaffer,  Gulf  Pipe  Line  Co.,  the 
Texas  Co.,  and  the  Prairie  Oil  &  Gas  Co. 

PATENTS  IN  FEE. 

The  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  provides  for  the  issuance 
of  patents  in  fee  to  Indian  allottees  who  are  shown  to  be  competent. 

In  1907  and  1908,  when  the  issuance  of  fee  patents  under  this  act 
was  in  the  experimental  stage,  a  very  large  percentage  of  Indians  who 
received  patents  in  fee  sold  their  lands  and  now  have  nothing  to  show 
for  the  proceeds  of  sale. 

The  Indians  receiving  patents  in  fee  during  the  later  years  have 
been  more  successful  in  the  care  of  their  property,  the  superintend- 
ents in  the  field  having  learned,  through  experience,  how  to  judge 
more  accurately  the  competency  of  the  Indian  applicant. 

During  the  past  year  90  per  cent  of  the  fee  patents  which  have 
issued  cover  land  allotted  to  Indians  of  one-half  blood  and  less. 
While  it  is  true  that  the  fact  of  being  a  mixed  blood  does  not  of 
itself  constitute  or  prove  competency,  yet  it  is  undoubtedly  true 
that  the  mixed  blood,  both  by  reason  of  his  inherited  capacities, 
and  because  of  his  somewhat  more  advanced  home  environment,  is, 
as  a  rule,  better  able  to  care  for  his  property  without  supervision 
than  is  the  full  blood. 

During  the  fiscal  year  779  applications  for  fee  patents  were  received, 
259  of  which  were  denied,  and  520  approved.  The  area  patented 
embraced  67,477.49  acres. 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  41 

ALLOTMENTS. 

During  the  year  allotments  to  4,262  Indians,  covering  1,159,585 
acres,  were  approved,  and  within  the  same  period  5,141  allotments 
were  made  in  the  field  but  not  approved,  embracing  an  aggregate 
area  of  591,772  acres.  These  allotments  were  made  on  the  various 
reservations,  as  follows : 

Colorado  River,  Ariz. — Allotments  of  10  acres  each  of  irrigable 
land  to  510  Indians,  under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  3, 1911, 
There  is  no  authority  for  the  disposal  of  any  of  the  surplus  lands 
within  this  leservation,  but  bills  have  been  pending  under  which 
the  surplus  irrigable  land  there,  approximately  100,000  acres,  would 
be  turned  over  to  the  State  for  disposal  under  the  Carey  acts. 

Colville,  Wash. — Approximately  79,018  acres  were  allotted  to 
601  Indians.  This  work,  it  is  expected,  will  be  completed  in  the 
near  future  and  the  surplus  lands  classified  and  appraised  prior  to 
disposal  in  accordance  with  the  piovisions  of  the  act  of  March  22, 
1906  (34Stat.  L.,  80). 

Fort  Berthold,  N.  Dak. — The  allotment  work  on  this  reservation, 
under  the  act  of  June  1,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  455),  is  being  brought  to 
a  close  by  the  superintendent  in  charge.  During  the  fiscal  year 
just  ended  there  were  allotted  17,280  acres  to  61  Indians.  The 
surplus  lands,  other  than  those  classified  as  coal,  lying  north  and 
east  of  the  Missouri  River  have  heretofore  been  opened  in  accord- 
ance with  the  act  mentioned. 

Fort  Hall,  Idaho. — During  the  year  some  76,760  acres  were  allotted 
to  441  Indians.  Of  this,  72,160  acres  were  grazing  lands  and  4,600 
acres  irrigable  lands.  This  completes  the  work  on  this  reservation, 
1,859  Indians  having  been  allotted  39,280  acres  of  irrigable  and 
305,040  acres  of  grazing  land.  There  is  no  authority  under  existing 
law  for  the  disposal  of  the  surplus  lands — some  100,000  acres,  mostly 
mountainous  or  arid. 

Lummi,  Wash. — Allotments  to  28  Indians,  under  the  treaty  of 
January  22,  1855  (12  Stat.  L.,  927),  covering  974  acres,  were  made 
during  the  year,  which  exhausts  the  available  land  within  this 
reservation. 

Pine  Ridge,  S.  Dale.—  Under  the  act  of  March  2,  1889  (25  StatL., 
888),  and  supplemental  acts,  152,341  acres  were  allotted  to  640  Indians. 
Owing  to  the  large  number  of  Indians  within  this  reservation,  at  least 
12  months  longer  will  be  required  within  which  to  complete  the 
allotment  work.  A  part  of  this  reservation  was  opened  by  the  act 
of  May  27,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  440),  but  there  is  no  authoiity  for  the 
disposal  of  the  remainder  other  than  by  allotment. 

Truckee-  Carson,  Nev. — Allotments  of  10  acres  each  were  made  to 
four  Indians  within  the  seven  and  one-quarter  sections  heretofore 


42  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

withdrawn  for  allotment  purposes  under  the  Truckee-C  arson  irriga- 
tion project,  making  a  total  of  3,640  acres  allotted  to  360  Indians. 

Quinaielt,  Wash. — Approximately  14,400  acres  of  agricultural  and 
grazing  land  within  this  reservation  were  allotted  during  the  year  to 
180  Indians.  A  large  part  of  this  reservation  is  heavily  timbered  and 
should  be  administered  for  the  benefit  of  the  tribe  at  large.  There 
is  no  authority  for  the  disposal  of  any  of  the  lands  within  this  reser- 
vation except  by  allotment.  Every  available  acre  will  probably  be 
required  for  allotment  purposes. 

Standing  Rock,  N.  and  S.  Dak.— During  the  year  193  Indians  were 
allotted  65,401.89  acres.  The  act  of  February  14,  1913  (Public,  380), 
provides  for  the  disposal  of  the  remaining  lands  within  this  reservation. 

White  Earth,  Minn. — Allotments  on  this  reservation  are  being 
made  by  the  superintendent  in  charge  and  8,326  acres  were  allotted 
to  112  Indians  during  the  fiscal  year  just  ended.  Desirable  lands 
for  allotment  purposes  within  this  reservation  are  becoming  very 
scarce  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  sufficient  land  will  be  found  to 
provide  for  all  Indians  entitled. 

Wind  River,  Wyo. — A  number  of  the  Indians  within  this  reserva- 
tion were  allotted  during  1905-6.  In  the  early  spring  of  1913  a 
Special  allotting  agent  was  directed  to  continue  the  work  there. 
Prior  to  June  30,  he  made  allotments  in  the  field  covering  12,650 
acres  to  148  Indians.  Owing  to  the  quantity  of  work  on  hand,  at 
least  12  months  will  be  required  to  finish  it. 

Yakima,  Wash— On  June  30,  1913,  allotments  in  the  field  to  241 
Indians,  embracing  37,240  acres,  had  been  made.  This  work  will 
be  completed  during  the  present  fiscal  year  and  possibly  the  surplus 
lands  placed  on  the  market  as  authorized  by  the  act  of  December  21, 
1904.  (33  Stat.  L.,  595.) 

On  the  public  domain  32  allotments  were  approved  during  the 
year,  covering  4,709.41  acres,  and  982  applications,  covering  122,240 
acres,  were  filed  at  various  local  land  offices  in  the  States  of  Arizona, 
New  Mexico,  Montana,  North  Dakota,  Washington,  and  California. 
The  Indian  appropriation  act  of  June  30  prohibits  the  use  in  Arizona 
or  New  Mexico  of  any  part  of  the  sum  available  for  survey  and  allot- 
ment work.  This  necessitated  the  practical  suspension  of  field 
operations  in  these  States  and  will  prevent  any  further  active  field 
work  there  with  a  view  to  aiding  Indians  to  obtain  allotments  on  the 
public  domain  during  the  present  fiscal  year. 

CONCLUSION. 

In  conclusion  I  wish  to  say  that  I  am  emphasizing  in  every  possible 
way  the  industrial  education  of  Indian  pupils  and  the  industrial 
development  of  the  Indian  population  generally,  and  every  effort 
is  being  made  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  employees  of  the 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES.  43 

Indian  Service  in  order  to  accomplish  more  successfully  the  work  along 
these  lines. 

I  am  also  emphasizing  the  need  of  and  doing  everything  possible  to 
obtain  for  the  Indians  more  sanitary  homes,  more  adequate  school 
facilities  for  Indian  children,  supplying  sick  Indians  with  medical 
attention  and  taking  precautionary  methods  to  prevent  disease, 
adjusting  more  equitably  the  cost  of  irrigation  projects  constructed 
out  of  reimbursable  funds,  making  larger  use  of  the  timber  resources 
of  the  Indians  for  their  industrial  and  social  advancement,  taking 
advantage  of  the  valuable  grazing  lands  of  the  Indians  to  build  up 
tribal  herds  as  well  as  promoting  among  individual  Indians  a  larger 
and  more  profitable  cattle,  sheep,  and  horse  industry,  and  utilizing 
in  every  practicable  way  the  resources  of  the  Indians,  both  tribal 
and  individual,  in  promoting  their  more  complete  civilization  and 
(economic  independence. 

It  is  my  fixed  purpose  to  bring  about  the  speedy  individualizing 
of  the  Indians,  and  to  this  end  I  shall  continue  to  devote  my  best 
efforts. 

Very  truly  yours, 

CATO  SELLS, 
Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


44 


BEPOBT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES. 

TABLE  1. — Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  Affairs  since  1899. 


Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received. 

Increase 
over  pre- 
ceding 
year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(  +  )  or 
decrease 
(  —  )  over 
preced- 
ing year  . 

1899... 

59,  707 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 

Per  cent. 

""+i3."86 
+  3.48 
+10.92 
-    .76 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
-  2.68 
+10.34 
+11.87 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+11.82 
-  1.32 
+  5.80 

1900.. 

62,601 
67,376 
79,237 
79,415 
86,588 
98,322 
106,533 
117,556 
152,995 
176,  765 
194,241 
197,637 
222,  187 
275,452 

4.84 
7.62 
17.60 
.22 
9.03 
13.55 
8.35 
10.34 
30.14 
15.53 
9.88 
1.74 
12.37 
23.97 

1901 

1902  

1903 

1904  

1905 

1906  

1907 

1908  

1909 

1910  

1911 

1912  

1913 

Per  cent. 

Increase  in  work,  1913  over  1899 361.34 

Increase  in  force,  1913  over  1899 134.65 

TABLE  2.— Indian  population  of  the  United  States  from  1759 1  to  1913. 


Year. 

Authority. 

Number. 

Year. 

Authority. 

Number. 

'  1759 
1764 

Estimate  of  George  Crogan  
Estimate  of  Col.  Bouquet.  ... 

19,500 
54,960 

1882 
1883 

Report  of  Indian  Office  
do  . 

326,039 
331,  972 

1768 

Estimate  of  Capt.  Hutchins  

35,830 

1884 

do  

330,776 

1779 

Estimate  of  Jofin  Dodge  ..... 

11,050 

1885 

do     . 

344,064 

1789 

Estimate  of  the  Secretary  of 

1886 

...do... 

334,735 

War  

76,  000 

1887 

.do.. 

243,299 

1790 

Estimate  of  Gilbert  Inbay  

60,000 

1888 

...do... 

246,036 

1820 

Report  of  Morse  on  Indian  Af- 

1889 

.do  

250,483 

fairs 

471,  036 

1890 

Report  of  United  States  Census 

248,253 

1825 

Report  of  Secretary  of  War  

129,  366 

1891 

Report  of  Indian  Office  

246,834 

1829 

do 

312,  930 

1892 

do 

248,340 

1832 

Estimate  of  Samuel  J.  Drake.  .  . 

293,  933 

1893 

do  

249,  366 

1834 

Report  of  Secretary  of  War 

312,  610 

1894 

do. 

251,907 

1836 

Report  of  Superintendent  of 

1895 

do 

248  340 

Indian  Affairs 

253,464 

1896 

.do.. 

248,354 

1837 

do 

302,  498 

1897 

do  

248  813 

1850 

Report  of  H.  R.  Schoolcraft... 

388,229 

1898 

.do  

262,965 

1853 

Report  of  United  States  Census 

1899 

do  . 

267,  905 

1850    ....                      

400,764 

1900 

...do... 

270,544 

'   1855 

Report  of  Indian  Office 

314  622 

1901 

.do.. 

269,388 

1857 

Report  of  H  R  Schoolcraft 

379,  264 

1902 

do 

270  238 

1860 

Report  of  Indian  Office.  . 

254,  300 

1903 

..do... 

263,238 

1865 

do 

294.574 

1904 

do  . 

274,206 

1870 

Report  of  United  States  Census 

313,712 

1905 

....do  

284,079 

1870 

Report  of  Indian  Office 

313,371 

1906 

do.  .  . 

291,581 

1875 

do.  . 

305,068 

1907 

...do... 

298,472 

1876 

do 

291,882 

1908 

.do...  . 

300,  412 

1877 

.do... 

276,540 

1909 

...do  

300,545 

1878 

do. 

276,  595 

1910 

do  

304,950 

1879 

do 

278,628 

1911 

do... 

322,  715 

1880 

Report  of  United  States  Census 

322  534 

1912 

do 

327  425 

1880 

Report  of  Indian  Office 

256,  127 

1913 

.      .do  

330,  639 

1881 

.do  ,             .... 

328,  258 

Figures  from  1759  to  1900  as  given  in  report  of  Indian  Office  for  1900. 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


45 


TABLE  3. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  191S. 

[Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 
census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  represen '   ' 


Grand  total 330, 639 


Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  whites 101, 216 

By  blood 75,253 

By  intermarriage 2,  582 

Freedmen 23, 381 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes 229, 423 


INDIAN   POPULATION    BY   STATES   AND   TERRITORIES. 


Alabama 

Arizona 41,  505 

Arkansas 460 

California 16,513 


Colorado. 

Connecticut 

Delaware 

District  of  Columbia. 

Florida 

Georgia. 


870 
152 
5 

68 
600 
95 
Idaho 4,089 


Illinois. 
Indiana. 
Iowa... 


188 
279 
365 

Kansas 1, 345 

Kentucky 234 

Louisiana 780 

Maine 892 

Maryland 55 

Massachusetts 688 

Michigan 7, 512 

Minnesota 11,  338 

Mississippi 1,  253 

Missouri. .  313 


Montana 11, 331 

Nebraska 3, 890 

Nevada 7, 756 

New  Hampshire 34 

New  Jersey .      168 

New  Mexico 21, 725 

New  York 6, 029 

North  Carolina 7,945 

North  Dakota 8,538 

Ohio 127 

Oklahoma 1 117, 274 

Oregon 6, 414 

Rhode  Island 284 

South  Carolina 331 

South  Dakota 20,555 

Tennessee 216 

Texas 702 

Utah 3,231 

Vermont 26 

Virginia 539 

Washington 11, 335 

West  Virginia 36 

Wisconsin 9, 930 

Wyoming 1,  715 


Includes  23,381  freedmen  and  2,582  intermarried  whites. 


46 


BEPOET    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


= 
I 


si 


ii', 


co  oo 


800     CO  II          COI~- 

t^.     i-t  «5  CD 

^          •<»<     CO  .-ICO 

<N~ 


CQ  4O     Ol    II        t^- 

•  '51  ' 


ef 


i    89 


si 


5SS 


S     g  8 

»-i         HI   9. 


S    SK 


- 


§1 


SI 


§1 


w  p,'g       !">' 

Ill  i|||l  l||  |- 

•  ell  H1§|^  all  ^ 

ji3^   isSfe  isa 

O  Q         fe     PH 


To 

ajo  S 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


N  O* 


SIS 


^1J — FT5oaT 
8          ~23 


JJ 

* 


<NO 

O  r-< 


888 

cot-f- 


IO  00»-H 
10        rn» 


-       -T 


S'SS 


iai 


oT~n eouso< 

il  5^3: 


oBoe 


SSS 


I 


sss 


|      '    :pn"o 

o  :  \w 

o  «  .  a 

IfJll 


>ll 


pL, 
I    I    -i 

ill  l& 

£^s    s-g£s   £K 


31 


^Ifl  9<i 

111 


II! 


48 


I 

I  1 

I  -I 


8. 


BEPOET   OF    THE    COMMISSIONEE   OF 

£3 


alf 


Less 


a 


iff 


"iC  C<1  CO 


|g 


OS  t-H 


INDIAN    AFFAIRS 

S8S 


iiSIS 


OJIN 


SIS 


2       8 

CO  10 


i 


)  Sc 
hu 


A    ^.S 

•§«>£ 


tocot^ 


OO  CD  Oi  rt  rH  00 


'S^S' 


J  !  jj  i- 

•S  a  ST:  P 


>•      *jqj!  »      Is          •SbOcG      "SflSm'-Ij' 

is  ^!|1  U1B  §lil  21  III 


,  Ml^iiw 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  49 


•^oT 


11 


1*1    S5S 


38< 


SSI     £8 

10  (M  1-HTJ< 


10^ 


SocoSS 


Sis  11 


M^H^HJv 
coco« 


IS  II  I 


00  C0< 

t^  CT>C 


<N  t^    II        Ot-H 

S5"5          Sc^ 


^3 


to  co  co  oo 


r-ll^-<J< 

eo      <-H 


2S 


III 


Val 
w 
an 


§     50^ 

£  « 


oo 
Indi 


ia 
Cahuilla 
Santa  Rosa 
Santa  Ynez 
Soboba 


iJl  ill 

^3  h- 1   2 


M      ^> 


ta 


oy 
Gr 
n 


1    "5-3    Ssa«c«3i 

^  «|| 

E-  > 


21716—1^ 


50 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


I   § 


•+J 

5-5 


^H  O5 


O        CCO      • 


CO  ^ 


ooB 


:  :  li 


s 


:::   :| 


S      3 

^  02 


£9*«i 


ill 


o  °  82  £  °      •• 

T3  'c?5  "S  «  "c  =3  .2 

2>32^-eS^ 


;1 


Flll 

C3  fl 


•S" 


T-H  OD  Oi 


il 

:o 


•hi 


1 1 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  51 


a  i 


1  i  :  i  !  i  2   I 


S2g 


Ise 


£g 


OC  O) 

8s 


gg 


1      § 


g§ 


HI  $3 


:| 

^a 


::::::     :g«  :  : 


iie 

:.J2  a 

!«1 


a       ;.»ce        ^ 


::::::     :|«  :  j 

;;;!;!   !|9    : 


:-3^^- 

•  C   rj    .      rH 

IPS®  §j 

:|°1° 

:^^!^^ 


list 

•g.sjg 


^s-§5a    i-pssa, 
«*<2¥l     :•!?£§  = 


l«  *| 


f!l|-|sl°lll  30> 

S  S  ^  S 


52 


KEPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


j 

s 


A 


1 


s 


11 


M 


S3 


t^.  v_f 


CO  rH 


§88 

Its 


S3 


sss 


8S 


S§ 


ssg  je 


Id  O5t^ 


SIS 


IS 


"1 


3* 


QOO       O5  C 

^ 


in  oo      co  coi-i 


8§    SS 

coco      c5^-i 


Tf  O        "^  CO  i—  I 


»O       O5  ^  O 


si  ss» 


: 
eet  S 


Mon 
Bl 


l  —  Cro 
hool— 


Fort  Peck  S 
ol—  Norther 


Chippe 
Piegan 


Total 
School 
ead  Sc 


w 
t 


&g£ 
ill    | 
«11    ^ 
ill 


:i«    ? 
il^    i    i 


Sc 


II  si  fu 

el 


Santee 
Ponc 
Sant 


ol—  Paiute 
mitt  School—  Paiut  ..... 
r  School—  Moapa  Paiute 


II  III 

PI?  I 

Olla 

!z 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  53 


8  :  : 


11 


SI 


11 


28 
ri 


-Sill 


CO  CO  CO  CO 

ci          ^ 


1  1 


31 

ef 


lOOOio  co  r- 

T-H  W  CO 


s 


I    1 


I 


a  S 
R 


Nevad 
Walker 
Paiute 
Under 


estern 
Hopi 
Paiute 
Shosho 


Cali 


-         •     M  -H 

3  :.S 


n  i 
II  I 

l&K    S?, 


la- 
ale 
N 


aj 


SIB 

•32o8£f 


oo 
ho 
ito 


eno,  s 
Digge 
Paiut 
Shosh 
Wash 
Scatte 


^  I- 


Sch 
Pu 
ol 


ero 
Bo 
an 
Fe- 


=!•(.'«     ^.Ilig^gS 


||IS    I^Tf  S^ 

J?"  Jz; 


tHjfiil 

OOOoQaaa2E-<i 


age 
Un 


54  REPORT 'OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 

^3 

g 

aa« 

-     :|    8 

3 

S    S 

-§ 

1 

*i 

S 

aooo  c<» 

2      ;g    5 

co 

I00 

1 

1 

i 

5 

rH  ^ 

N          ;3       S 

35 

' 

0 

o 

Is 

^3 

1 

^gl 

S     jl 

T-.CN 

CO        2 
IN 

8 

t» 
ft 

M 

*i 

8 

^5S^ 

S     :8 

•CO 

™ 

2    o 

•  <M 

1 

p 

i 

a 

.co. 

s    ;a 

-1 

2    § 

N  !>• 
i 

s 

p 

§3 

s 

H8 

I  if  S 

sS 

8  1 

58 

53 

l| 

z 

sss 

S  II  » 

ss 

^  SB 

s| 

1 

O) 

I 

s 

s- 

1  IS  s 

§§ 

9    9 

g§ 

d 
.2 

1 

3- 

10" 

^^^ 

-H"         eo"     c^- 

§§ 

R  a 

s§ 

*1 

S 

liS 

g  IS  2 

33 

I  i 

o^. 

1 

1 

S 

sss 

1  II  § 

sa 

3    S 

s^ 

^3 

i 

2S5^ 

i  11  S 

si 

1    I 

sg 

1 

*l 

s 

^§ 

s  il  i 

ss 

5    S 

C^         CO 

s§ 

1 

§ 

8SS 

1  il  1 

as 

1  i 

*1 

to 

^ 

m 

1  IS  g 

r-T        r-T 

33 

§  i 

S8 

1 

iflSI 

1 

22- 

1  Si  1 

"303 

3  S 

•J 

Ulli 

s 

^S°° 

s  ss  s 

2g 

8  8 

*i 

11 

«]i 

s 

§5S 

IO        »O  CO        CO 
CO         Tt<  CO         CO 

CO       <NOO       0 

OCO 

Oi       t** 

S| 

=  ^  -I 

s 

;    ; 

i 

s 

1!| 

Of/}      ,  P 

o 
5 

j    j 

--  . 

cs 

1        1 

OQ 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  School—  Eastern  Cherol? 

Not  under  agent  

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  School— 
Arikara  
Grosventre  
Mandan  

Total  

Fort  Totten  School—  Sisseton,  vv'i 
head  Sioux  (known  as  Devils  L 
Standing  Rock  School—  Sioux.  .  . 
Turtle  Mountain  School—  Turtle 
pewa  
Ohio:  Not  under  agent  

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  School— 
Arapaho  
Cheyenne  

Total  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School- 
enne  

Kiowa  School- 
Apache  
omanche  

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


55 


8SS 


•*  I-H  CO  i-l  ^  l-H 


33 


23 


O  O3 


coe^ 


•*  ^H  " 


«  O  •*  c 


Is 


§11 


IIS 


* 


CN  §CN  CO 


83S8 


FTFTcoKr 

2SS2 


8S8S22 


31 


£ 


Kiowa 
Wichita 


ffi- 

a  PO- 


:1    1 

:&    OQ 


£si«  sjii-ll 

a  *  g  s  I  g  g    2 

85  5    gMpH^       "§ 

OOPM     Pu  tf 


!  i 
i  i 


1      ;  0  :  : 


4  ill 

0,3  aS 

r^co-gM 

1  S|Ss 

^   fl.1'8 

2<ioS 


56 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


i 

^3 

[ 

! 

^ 

f 

$ 

§ 

a 

1 

c 
c 

c 

2 

o 

Cf 

J 

c 

5 

H 

iT 

$       ff  : 

r>-          co 

o>         eo 

il 

9 

il    i 

2 

i 

I 

i 

fi 

& 

c 

r 

^ 

\ 

1 

r 

•«*" 

i 

! 

? 

; 

* 
4 

| 

< 

r  .• 

10    ||         00 

*s 

1 

II 

4 

I  i 

! 

1 

| 

i 

i 

1 

i 

. 

^3 

1 

v 

:- 
? 

1 

•] 

5 

,1 

i 

H 

:> 
— 
CM 

D 

H 

r 

00    II         CO 

oo  1      to 

0 

«o 

•*-< 

0* 

>H 

1 

3 

1  i 

£ 
S 

_ 

i 

j 

•  — 

-^1 

^ 

> 

^    .> 

II  I 

1 

Jf 

I 

i 

§ 

9 

a 

o1 

il 
I 

,2 

^ 

g 

ir 

:5 
r 

if 

" 

i 

r 

i 

c 

i 

\ 

I 
f* 

?£ 

isl 

3        SS 
8        3"» 

I 

od 

J 
^ 

ft 

J 

il 

Jl 

I 

a> 

i 

il 

1     1 

£3 

i 

il 

f&3 
CQ 

1 

*i 

i 

i 

N 

i 

i 

il 

1  & 

la 

1 

% 
•& 

I 

i||g| 

1 

•Is  Sl? 

:g 

*S-fls« 

I 

it 

_!«• 

V 

s 

c 
? 

-1 

ill    i 

*°  1      ' 

S| 

Hi 

1 

CO 

3 

3 

n 
7 

1 

1 
i 

; 

• 

•     : 

1 

I 

1 

' 

| 

1  ,  .  . 

Wi 

I 

i 

a 

i  • 

§ 

_c; 

1 

1 

.     1 

j 

.i 

; 

? 

a 

a 

Oklahoma—  Cont 
Five  Civilized  r 
Cherokee  Nat 
Bv  blood.. 

.5 
£ 

P 

Freedmen. 

1 

Chickasaw  N 
Bv  blood.. 

1 

> 

m 

! 

1 

Choctaw  Nat 
Bv  blood.. 

By  interma 

Mississippi 
Freedmen. 

Total.... 

Creek  Nation 
By  blood... 
Freedmen.. 

"o 

KEPOKT   OF   THE    COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


57 


O5         OS 

8    IS 


o     o     o 

co     oo      o 

rH        O         »O 


1C         HO  i-H         CO 


-^C^ 

T-l  COC 


-11 


n      o          a? 

5    §       S 


2  8  I 


a  s     |  s  f; 

^H      o          ^P     ipf     **< 


S       2SSS^S§8SS 


I  I  2  13 


iniiin 


m 


^  S  i>  co 


8 


^§a 
ss-g 


.few 


o-S 
1  .2: 


U  I  f  ; 


a    • 


5;lll§l 


.   .  a 

;  is, 


[If   if  HIM  | 

^-§2    l^jJrro'lf^ 


o 

:-ll- 


'  fl 
••H. 


^•^^oj,  |^S 

g-s  iiilfliiil 
!lIli:|-|liPHi 

^log^S^^gpqS-gpjg^ 


Ii5 


t>8 


!* 


If 


58 


sive 
inued. 


1 

.3    >^ 

J    « 


po 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS 

CS)  00  t^      •  '  O  t-  ca      -I 


ixed,  bu 
alf  or  m 


882 


t 


13 


IS§§( 


I—  t^.  TH  t>.  CO  00        O 

_  —  _  _  :-:  _^      m 


S    | 


*H  •**<  CO  Ci  *H 

CO  i-H  ^  CO  M        ^ 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


59 


8*8 


8  i 


I  g 


O        00 

5    SS 


1 


COrH 


•O  00  O  00  iO 
>»  OS  O  CO  O 
LQ  <N<N<M^ 


CD  •**<  O 

n 


i-H  O        t^  CO  CO 
iO  CO        O  •*  •* 


Sl>.        ^H  1 
(N^i-Ht 


)  t*       CO  ^f  O 

)  TJH  CO  COP- 

!  rH  £^10  .-H  <N 


'all     585 


III 

^•§1  Ya 


Slf 

||I|J, 

illii 


00? 


ill!! 


11 


21 


JJOtfEH 


60 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  4. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 

patents,  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Unallotted. 

Allotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Holding 

trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
their  al- 
lotment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde             

419 

41& 

486 
2,397 
820 
171 
93 
1,400 
4,108 
10,000 
6,096 
1.214 
2,362 
4,907 
482 
6,550 

Colorado  River 

486 

486 

Fort  Apache  

2,397 

Fort  Mojave 

820 

820 

Havasupai               

171 
93 

1.400 
4,108 
10.000 
6,096 
508 
2,362 
2.085 
482 
6,550 

Kaibab 

Leupp                      

Navajo                      

Pima                                                .  . 

Salt  River                

706 

706 

San  Xavier     .         

2,822 

2,822 

Truxton  Canyon 

Total 

36,671 

4,834 

4,834 

41,505 

California: 
Bishop                          .        

1,180 
217 
45 
443 
20 
850 
656 
613 
401 
162 
968 
412 
2,051 
693 

173 

2 

175 

1,355 
217 
45 
651 
794 
1,000 
1,251 
613 
640 
213 
1,528 
412 
2,051 
693 

Digger                                

Fort  Bidwell 

208 
774 
150 
584 

208 
774 
150 
595 

Fort  Yuma                      

Hoopa  Valley                 

11 

Malki 

Pala                              

239 
51 
558 

239 
51 
560 

Round  Valley               

2 

Soboba 

Tule  River                         

Total 

8,711 

2,737 

2 

13 

2,752 

11,463 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  

510 
150 

510 

360 

Southern  Ute 

210 

210 

Total                                  

660 
600 

210 

210 

870 
600 

Florida:  Seminole  

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene    

259 
11 
466 

570 

1,808 
868 

28 

598 
1,808 
947 

857 
1,819 
1,413 

Fort  Hall 

Fort  Lapwai      

12 

67 

Total  

736 
365 

275 
244 

3,246 

12 

95 

3,353 

4,089 
365 

590 
755 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo                        

270 

465 

8 
4 

37 
42 

315 
511 

Potawatomi 

Total 

519 

735 

12 

79 

826 

1,346 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 

248 
67 

248 
73 

248 
1,097 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior     

1,024 

6 

Total 

1,024 

315 

6 

321 

1,345 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac 

693 
122 

656 
352 
1,456 

270 
183 
1,065 
320 

15 
4 
14 
3 

285 

187 
1,079 
323 

978 
309 
1,735 
675 
1,456 
5,886 
300 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake 

Red  Lake  

White  Earth 

2,362 
211 

3,523 

3,523 
89 

Birch  Cooley 

89 

Total 

5,852 

1,927 

3,559 

5,486 

11,338 

EEPOET   OF   THE    COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


61 


TABLE  4. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Unallotted. 

Allotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Holding 

trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
their  al- 
lotment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet 

128 
288 
321 
1.195 
67 
1,433 

2,714 
1,371 
1,790 

2,714 
1,405 
1,990 

2,842 
1,693 
2,311 
1,195 
1,857 
1,433 

Crow  

1 
17 

33 
183 

Flathead 

Fort  Belknap     

Fort  Peck 

1,790 

1,790 

Tongue  River 

Total 

3,432 

7,665 

18 

216 

7,899 

11,331 

Nebraska: 
Omaha  

649 
1,011 
692 

338 
213 
284 

20 
24 
3 

305 
231 
120 

663 
468 
407 

1,312 

1,479 
1,099 

Santee 

Winnebago  

Total 

2,352 

835 

47 

656 

1,538 

3,890 

Nevada: 
Fallen        

106 
244 
113 
609 
155 
579 
4,500 

309 
93 

309 
93 

415 
337 
113 
609 
503 
579 
5,000 

Fort  McDermitt 

Moapa  River  

Nevada 

Walker  River  

348 

348 

Western  Snoshone 

Reno,  special  agent    

500 

500 

Total  

6,306 

1,250 

1,250 

7,556 

4,653 
669 
629 

<U 

8,000 
3,473 
1,616 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos  

3,196 
95 
629 

(1)3I5 

8,000 
3,473 
1  616 

1,457 
574 

1,457 
574 

Jicarilla 

Mescalero        

Navajo 

&0 

C1) 

0) 

ft» 

Pueblo  Bonito      

San  Juan 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos    

Zuni 

Total 

17,324 

4,401 

4,401 

21,725 

New  York:  New  York  Agency  
North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

5,419 
2,109 

5,419 
2,109 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold 

111 

460 

1,052 
466 
3,267 
2,508 

5 

62 
84 
30 

1,057 
539 
3,415 
2,615 

1,168 
999 
3,415 
2,956 

Fort  Totten  

11 

64 

77 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  

341 

Total  . 

912 

7,293 

181 

152 

7,626 

8,538 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

351 

564 
939 
133 

384 
607 
3,110 
1,905 
415 
316 
470 
151 
194 
299 

3 
19 
55 

36 
57 
110 

423 
683 
3,275 
1,905 
449 
336 
514 
151 
274 
326 
933 
746 

774 
1,247 
4,214 
2,038 
449 
660 
812 
151 
657 
578 
1,930 
2,470 
78 
101,216 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho-  . 

Kiowa                    ^ 

Osage 

Otoe  

25 
4 
41 

9 
16 
3 

Pawnee 

324 

298 

Ponca  

Red  Moon  .  . 

Sac  and  Fox 

383 
252 
997 
1,724 
78 

47 
10 

33 
17 
933 
105 

Seger 

Seneca 

Shawnee 

572 

69 

Under  War  Department,  Fort  Sill.  .  . 
Five  Civilized  Tribes 

2101,216 

101,216 

Total 

6,043 

8,423 

273 

102,535 

111,231 

117,274 

i  See  Arizona. 


8  32,939  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation. 


62 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  4. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  super  in  tendencies. 

Unallotted. 

Allotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Holding 
trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
their  al- 
lotment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

326 
6.000 
214 
551 
318 

781 
1,989 
112 
392 
429 

5 

786 
2,000 
215 
573 
431 

1,112 

18,000 
429 
1,124 
749 

Roseburg 

11 

93 

160 
2 

Siletz.  . 

10 
21 

Umatilla  

Warm  Springs  .  . 

Total 

7,409 

3,703 

36 

266 

4,005 

11,414 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

246 

2,339 
941 

12 

1 

21 

36 

2,372 

978 

2,618 
978 
282 
472 
6,940 
5,391 
2,083 
1,791 

Crow  Creek 

Flandreau  .  - 

282 
8 
1,795 

Lower  Brule  

425 

4,888 
5,153 
788 
686 

8 
.    220 
27 
309 
134 

31 
37 
211 
20 
79 

464 
5,145 
5,391 
1,117 

899 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud  

Sisseton 

966 

892 

Yankton  

Total 

4,189 

15,220 

711 

435 

16,366 

20,555 

Utah: 
Shivwits 

130 
222 
500 

130 

1,185 
500 

Uintah  

960 

1 

2 

963 

Total  

852 

960 

1 

2 

963 

1,815 

Washington: 
Colville.  . 

766 
1,956 
376 

1,501 
734 
327 
631 
213 
2,681 

18 

ssr 

1,519 
1,115 
327 
637 
214 
2,770 

2,285 
3,071 
703 
637 
1,494 
3,052 

Cushman 

Neah  Bay 

Spokane.  . 

3 

3 
1 

69 

Tulalip  .  . 

1.280 

282 

Yakima. 

20 

Total 

4,660 

6,087 

23 

472 

6,582 

11,242 

Wisconsin: 
Carter 

291 
535 
1,692 
341 

(2) 
1,464 
374 
(2) 

291 

1,252 
2,298 
706 
1,192 
2,422 
501 
1,268 

Hayward 

717 

717 
606 
365 
2 
958 
127 
(2) 

Keshena.  .  . 

606 
361 

(2) 
164 
126 
(2) 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

4 

2 
690 
1 

(2) 

La  Pointe 

(2\04 

Oneida.  .  . 

Red  Cliff 

Tomah  

(2) 

Total  

4,697 

1,257 

104 

1,414 

2,775 

9,930 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

391 

1,313 

11 

1,324 

1,715 

Grand  total 

121,233 

72,  411 

1,420 

109,911 

183,  742 

307,433 

COMPARISON. 

Total,  1912 

120,876 
120,780 

103,417 

88,182 

1,926 

70,904 
376,033 

177,626 
164,215 
64,853 
15,  166 

300,930 
296,320 
247,  522 
230,437 

Total  1911 

Total  1901  * 

Total'  1890  4 

1  5,000  of  these  Indians  in  California. 

2  Unknown. 


s  Includes  fee  patents  for  part  of  their  allotment. 
<  Only  items  reported. 


EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


jo  su9zi?p  ejy 


•Smq-jop 
(s  u  a  z  i  }  i  o 


o  o  o  o 

*  T-H  iO  C>  CO 


••tlCOr-HtOOOOOOlO 


-cud 


S  o 


9S9U.:).  ?uoure 


eoice 


•sueipui  asaiu  Suouit? 


mar- 
s. 


•£161  JB9.£  Suunp 


'8T6T  '08 


•CO 


-OO  ^H  rH  O 


00  »O  O»O  TH 

.-HCC.-H 


O  rH  1C  •*  rH  CO 


•rao^sno 


•taoijsno 


l  :      :  :    ^'w'® 

rtc3oc>oc3i»c>cs,cj.i5^gJ3g 


'' 


amoftpethoina&iM 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Number  Indians  who  — 

'SO'JBJS  p9!^JUfl 

9q^.  jo  suazjip  9jy 

£ 

1 

1 

§ 

""°5 

! 

is 

I 

II 

i 

,8  U  a  Z  t  ')  I  0    JB9^ 

Sfix-s 

I 

oo" 

C 
? 

CO 

I 

il| 

ss 

O  iO 

! 

11 

r-T 

;SWSS 

81 

0 

8 

a- 

1    I 

CO  1C 

31 

i 

s§s 

i-T 

-UBI  qsn.3ua  >iB9ds 

§1 

!- 

a 

|8 

IO         >O 

11 

11 

i 

F 

1IJ 

! 

-ojd   9ABq   bqAV    jgqumjq; 

1 

co" 

f 

CO  C<l 

13 

iO  O 

I 

*ii 

! 

•euBip 
-ui  989q^  SUOUIB  sgqojnqo 

^ 

00 

» 

00 

CO     • 

rHC<IOO 

Z-* 

COIN 

0 

INt- 

05 

•suBipui  989q^  SUOUIB 

SU15[JOM.    S91JBUOISSIK 

** 

*"- 

S 

H 

H« 

Ot^^ 

r 

(MIN 

-t< 

05 

S 

jl 

'8161  JB9A*  3uionp 

c* 

i 

,     , 

. 

'8161  '08 
9unf  Sm^sixg  IB^OJ, 

0 

•*" 

^HIM 

(M 

IM 

1 

« 

™ 

<NOO 

S 

^ 

S- 

-S 

c?"5 

IMOO 

o 

C^ 

" 

•9on 
-p9Doad 
^B39i    Xg 

1-H  •* 

S 

i-l  •* 

"5 

-8 

S? 

IMOO 

0 

O 

" 

,*STa 

^^ 

£5 

O 

050 

i  i 

i"5 

i  j 

i 

Between  Indians. 

•Wox 

e^oo 

g 

i-H  ^ 

12  ^ 

coco 

S10 

IMOO 

S 

C^ 

IN 

-pgooid 

^^ 

S 

I-H  T 

10 

cooo 

S 

IMOO 

o 

Cv 

" 

•uiajsno 

^* 

£ 

0 

00 

;  ; 

i"5 

1 

Between  Indians 
and  whites. 

•WOX 

<N 

^oo 

2 

-pggooad 
1B39I    Ig 

« 

•*  oo 

2 

•uicxjsno 

« 

1 

States  and  .Superintendences. 

ll 

i1* 

,   £ 

li 

Volcani  

I 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs... 
Southern  Ute  

Total.  .  . 

•1 

.S 
1 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  
Fort  Hall  
FortLapwai  

3 
1 

t3 

CO 
03 

Kansas: 
"K"if>kar>oo 

Potawatomi  

1 

Michigan: 
BavMiUs... 

Chippewa,  Lake  Si 
Mount  Pleasant... 

Total  

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER.    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


65 


ll|i 

!    sa  * 

1 

sli 

1 

S5i  ill 

§ 

i  : 

r-3      ! 

11 

(«f,-4,H 

CO 

I~l 

**  ; 

co     • 

oo  e* 

00  g  10  10  0  CD         Tg 

g 

ff        rfrJrJ 

oc~ 

!§! 

1    §SSI1§| 

§ 

pi 

!! 

1 

lISl«iS| 

i 

~ 

1 

§gi 

I 

oioiS  »o  «j  »o  o 

i 

! 

31*1 

c« 

eo'^T 

111 

co" 

i 

lllili 

1  ill 

1  1 

co" 

! 

sm 

13 

CO  Oi 

iliSllSl 

i  §§ii«i 

1 

Si* 

n  1  «      §    ^s 

§ 

I1 

co"   j 

08 

ofr-T 

iO  i-H  00     «<NCO      -O 

s 

•*  CO  •*  CO  O>  -^ 

8| 

,  .    -r 

• 

^   N 

^!^ 

S2 

a 

T+  O  •*  T}<  CO  <-t  00 

9 

1      ^jooco^ 

3 

r-l  •*  CO 

||     ::: 

a 

IN 

•-1 

% 

IO       •         CO      "i-l 

i  II      i  i  i 

||  r  i-  i-  1 

0 

i 

^ 

rf 

$ 

* 

s-«a 

^ 

fc 

8^S^ 

3 

238 

23 

rH  i-l  TJI  1C  •*  C^l  Q^ 

'O 

86 

CO 

§sa 

Is 

-  1C 

2     ^12 

^ 

CD 

8333S* 

O               CO  CO  00 

r>» 

-H(NU3M<NO 

R 

S3 

CO 

COgCO 

3« 

IO  r-l       . 

-] 

CO     1                       •     •  IM      '• 

•    •  —  1 

s  1  -  >  p  js 

« 

53 

2  |S 

s  i 

MS 

s-^ 

a 

*|        ta^ 

00      1          M  10  t^ 

3|._s 

S 

^ 

CO 

ssa 

8« 

•     IQ 

01 

C^l  ir 

« 

^ 

§ 

2S5^SSS 

CO                CM  1O  CD 

1 

i-H  C<1  ^  CO  <N  O 

M 

CO 

CO  CO  CO 

S8 

3*" 

S 

rtp 

"  |  i  ia 

3  1" 

<N        .^H 

s 

3 

- 

g  s 

3  i 

w 

«• 

(NCNCO        »0<N 

•*          rt  I-H  e^ 

* 

|j 

rH 

-1 

• 

•- 

CO 

cs 

U» 

CSC.CO        « 

eq 

S|   ^ 

1 

^H 

H 

CO 
CO 

•• 

|| 

!| 

" 

1 

jj 

Ij 

\- 

& 

j 

^ 
1 

|. 

'J 

J 

^ 

3 
* 

a: 
jkfeet  
v  
head  
,  B  elknap  
.  PP/>V 

\ 

1 

L 

«lil 

'I 

i 

Illil 

o,  special  agent  

3 

:  O 

PW 

1 
•sH 

1 

lJ 

S3" 

1 

O                     o3 

1     ? 
1    11 

«       ^2 

S                   c3 

) 

4 

*« 

a 

g 
1 

• 

fi 
i 

PL 

a 

5  O  t-i  ®  <" ."  cu 

JfHO^^^tf 


fSli      aitlKi      iill     ..|2|fl|f  H!t!!!^~  Hl 
.&^fe^       illlaSi       |al-s      ^l^^g      lll^sssg     ° 

Pktf>^         -gwoS^Se          2o$£        l^^a^^^tf        5^i|j5<5ilN       5 


21716—14 5 


66 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


-s 


•sews  pa«un 
9U3  jo  SU9ZJ1P  ejy 


•Suiqiop 


pUB      pB9H 


*—  (  t^  OO  O  O 
10  10  t^  CO  l>- 

i-iooo^ 
of  of 


^t**Cl^OiC^ 


oo  o 


-oad   9ABt[   ottAV   aeqranjsi 


•BUBtp 

-ui  9S9in  SUOUIB  saqoanqo 


2 


•suBtpui   S9q:j.  SUOUIB 


COCOI--        (N 


Plu 
r 


'£161  JeaA  Suunp 


•2161  '08 


tween  I 
and  wh 


•9an 
-p90oad 


3      °°5S?g^S 


CO  T-I  O5  O3 


•8JTI 

-pgoojd 
IB391     A" 


t^-  ^H  CO  t^  O 


rao}sno 

A-a 


-pgoojd 


i-l  O5     -IM  >C 


•rao^sno 


S  ill 
^  a  3  2- 

SfSSls 

iiili  1 1. 

^  I 

S  3 

55  o 


le 


T 
y 


EEPOB 

T 

1 

oo" 

OF    TE 

LE 

S 

COMMISSI 

OS 

ER    OF    INDIA 

l>        l^*  CO  ^  O4  CS 
Of        i-H* 

N   A 

r 

.FF 

AIB 

s. 

g 

6V 

000 

00~ 

§11 

1C 
CO 

8SIS31 

1 

ililsisl 

iS 

3 

|| 

p 

2 
•j 

&* 

0*-H 

O1  CO                rH  CO 

a 

rt^H        rHO<        rH 

OSl-H 

Ofofr-T 

§ 

oT 

REg 

1 

CO  CO  "^  CO  <OO 

of 

g 

-1111111 

co" 

1 

! 

1 

§lliilllll 

g 

IM  CO 

a 

10 

rH  COCO  <N  ?5  U5 

o 

s 

s§siiiii 

Oi  CO 

to 

i 

i 

c* 

>» 

of                oV 

O5OO 

^s 

<o 

8SS 

1 

mm 

co" 

K8S8||8 

gl 

CO 

B 

I 

a 
o 

CO                                 •*  •*!-! 

s 

rHO*       j 

CO 

cooo^oq^o 

* 

•«»<  CO  CO  CO  »0  if  N 

S05 

3 

CO  OO  00  CO 

i 

<£> 

^ 

•*  Tt< 

0 

II 

g 

S 

9 

to     'K     ' 

y 



1 

O 

§ 

t» 

"  1 
"2 

^ 

M'r 

8 

a- 

a 

'CONOCO  0,00 

9 

^t- 

of 

1 

_? 

§ 

-2 

3~ 

SSg" 

1 

<N 

cot^oscocqoo 

2 

0,00^0^000 

8" 

! 

3 

O 

0^     ; 

COMPARI 

rHt~<NO> 

5SS» 

§ 

a- 

a 

00  t£>  O5  CO  rH  OO 

S 

oooocq^g^^^ 

S^ 

! 

s 

CO 

£Sg» 

1 

<M 

OO  CO  O5  CO  rH  OO 

S 

o>  oo  01  so  o  r~  t^ 

1C      •' 

!- 

1 

rH 
«3 

1912  Repor 

: 

:  :     :  :  : 

M 

COO* 

» 

OrH 

2 

ICrH                rH 

«* 

CO        ^OOrH 

OK 

i 

K 

CO 

O  rH 

2 

CO        ^COrH 

00< 

i 

I 

Tribes. 

;  n 

j 

o 

22 
o  ^ 

^ 

H 

i  Exclusive  Five  Civilized 

pll» 

Utah: 
Shivwits  

Uintah  and  Ouray  . 
Salt  Lake,  special  aj 

Total 

$ 

iillil|8|  i» 

S-S^gg^'g^S    g.S 

68 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — Crimes  and  misdemeanors  committed  (not  to  include  cases  of  drunkenness] 
and  arrests  for  drunkenness  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Crimes. 

Misdemeanors. 

Arrests  for  drunken- 
ness. 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 

whites. 

Total. 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 

whites. 

Total. 

Indi- 
ans. 

Whites. 

Total. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

3 
1 
3 

3 
1 
3 

36 
1 

15 

51 
1 

10 

10 

Colorado  River  

Fort  Apache 

Fort  Mojave 

22 

22 

Havasupai 

2 
18 
12 

2 
18 
12 

Leupp 

1 

1 

23 

23 

Moqui 

Navajo 

35 
12 
10 
6 
10 
86 
11 

35 
12 
10 
ti 
10 
80 
11 

Phoenir 

Pima 

11 

6 
1 

11 
6 
1 
76 
1 
1 

Salt  III  ver 

San  Ca  clos 

153 
14 
9 
3 

153 
14 
9 
3 

San  Xiivior. 

10 
1 

66 

Truxton  Canyon 

Western  Navajo 

1 

Total                   ... 

38 

= 

66 

104 

248 

15 

263 

225 

5 
2 
12 
55 
8 
13 
1 

225 

5 
2 
23 
56 
9 
15 
1 

California: 
Bisli  op 

Digger     

Fort  Bid  well 

11 
5 
1 
2 

11 
6 

7 
2 

10 
1 
17 

10 

6 
19 

11 
1 
1 

2 

Fort  Yuma 

1 

6 

5 
2 

Hoopa  Valley... 

Malki 

Pala 

Round  Valley 

4 

1 

1 

5 
1 

Soboba 

19 

7 

1 

20 

7 

Tule  River 

Volcan1 

2 

1 

3 

Total  



12 

—  ^       ....-"— 

1 

20 
1 

32 
2 

30 

8 

38 

122             16 

138 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs 

Southern  Ute 

1 

1 

2 

Total 

1 

7 
3 

1 
13 

2 

1 

1 

2 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene 

19 
2 

20 
3 

13 
16 

13 
16 

19 
2 

Fort  Hall 

Total 

10 

13 

23 

29 
3 

29 
5 

21 

21 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

2 

Kansas*  Kickapoo 

1 

1 
10 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac 

== 

______ 

=== 

2 



2 

10 

Grand  Portage 

2 
3 

1 
5 

3 

8 

Leech  Lake 

4 

7 

11 

21 
1 
5 
60 
17 
95 

6 

27 
1 
5 
60 
18 
96 

Nett  Lake 

Pipestone 

2 

2 

4 

8 

4 

8 
8 

Red  Lake 

Vermillion  Lake 

1 

White  Earth  

24 

1 

25 

2 

4 

6 

Total 

31 

--    "  " 

10 
6 
23 
5 

7 

38 

20 

9 
12 
24 
5 
23 

15 

35 

209 

8 

217 

Montana: 
Blackfeet 

6 
6 
35 
1 

16 
12 
58 
6 

9 
12 
24 
6 
23 

50 
22 
18 
14 

4 
5 

54 
27 
18 
14 

Crow 

Flathead 

Fort  Peck 

1 

Tongue  River 

Total 

44 

48 

92 

73 

1 

74 

104 

9 

113 

Nebraska: 
Santee 

10 
34 

10 
36 

Winnebago 

2 

Total  

44 

2 

46 

1 1912  report. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


69 


TABLE  6. — Crimes  and  misdemeanors  committed  (not  to  include  cases  of  drunkenness) 
and  arrests  for  drunkenness  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  super  intendencies. 

Crimes. 

Misdemeanors.             Arrests  £rssdrunken- 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 

whites. 

Total. 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 

whites. 

Total. 

Indi- 
ans. 

Whites.!  Total. 

Nevada: 
Fallen  

1 

1 

1 

1 

36 
15 
4 
2 
4 
11 
100 

36 
17 
4 
2 
5 
11 
100 

Fort  McDermitt 

2 
..... 

Moapa  River 

1 



1 

Nevada 

Walker  River 

Western  Shoshone 

Reno  special  agent 

Total 

2 

2 

10 
1 
2 
13 

1 

—     

11 
2 
2 
13 

172 

~  •••-•-        '_ 

2 

18 
3 
25 
1 

3 

175 

2 
18 
3 
25 
1 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos 

=== 

1 

1 

Jicarilla 

1 

1 

Mescalero    

-------- 

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Juan  .   .  . 

3 

4 

3 

4 

Santa  Fe 

Zuni      .  . 

2 

2 

1 

1 

Total  

North  Carolina'  Cherokee 

l 

8 

8 

28 

2 

30 

50 
13 

50 
13 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  

Fort  Totten 

-- 

1 

= 

1 

1 
8 
51 
11 

== 

== 

1 
9 
54 
11 

3 

4 
7 
52 

4 
10 

52 

Standing  Rock  

1 
11 

1 
11 

3 

Turtle  Mountain  . 



Total  

13 

13 

71 

4 

75 

63 

3 

66 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

4 
150 
130 
4 



4 
150 
225 
4 
32 

Kiowa  

47 

7 

47 
80 

Osage  

73 

20 

285 

305 

95 

Otoe 

Pawnee  

32 

Sac  and  Fox~ 

3 

3 

32 

Shawnee  

7 

7 

32 

56 

56 

Total  

61 

"  '  '  "          r^=1 

1 

8 

73 

134 

1 

8 

52 
4 

288 
8 

340 

"      '              

12 

376 
10 

95 

====== 

471 
10 

Oregon: 
Itlamath  

Roseburg 

Siletz  

2 
22 
13 

2 
22 
13 

2 
18 
27 

2 

18 
27 

Umatilla  . 

2 

1 

3 

Warm  Springs  

Total 

11 

1 

12 

41 

8 

49 

57 
3 

57 
3 

57 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

3 

1 

4 

56 
1 



.56 
1 

57 

Crow  Creek 

Lower  Brule 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

Pierre 

2 

Pine  Ridge  

8 
4 
6 

3 

11 
4 

6 

61 
5 

ci 

5 

Rosebud  l  . 



10 

10 

Sisseton 

Yankton  .  .  . 

6 

6            12 

12 

Total  

22 
4 

4 

4 

1 

129 

129 

81 
3 

2 

1 

83 
4 

115 
23 
8 
3 
38 
110 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington: 
Colville 



11 

3 

14 

33 

1 

34 

115 
23 
4 
3 
38 
110 

Cushman  

Neah  Bay 

13 

4 
25 

13 

5 
25 

4 

Spokane.  .  . 

2 

2 

1 

Tulalip... 

Yakima 



Total.. 

13 

3 

16 

75 

2 

77 

-^r~ 

293 

4 

—  ...      ..-.    _^ 

297 

1912  report. 


70 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  0. — Crimes  and  misdemeanors  committed  (not  to  include  cases  of  drunkenness) 
and  arrests  for  drunkenness  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Crimes. 

Misdemeanors. 

Arrests  for  drunken- 
ness. 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 

whites. 

Total. 

By  In- 
dians. 

By 
whites. 

Total. 

Indi- 
ans. 

Whites. 

Total. 

Wisconsin: 
Carter  

4 

4 
5 

Hayward 

14 
3 

1 

14 
3 
1 

2 

9 

2 
10 

5 

Keshena    

1 

Lac  du  Flambeau  . 

36 

21 
41 

36 
30 

42 

La  Pointe 

9 
1 

Red  Cliff  

3 

3 

10 

1 

11 

Total  

21 
1 

21 
5 

21 

2 

23 

107 
16 

10 

117 
16 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  .  . 

4 

Grand  total       

292 

244 

536 

822 

348 

1,170 

1,960 

153 

2,113 

COMPARISON. 


Total  1912 

266 

207 

473 

1,264 

327 

1,591 

2,057 

165 

2.222 

Total  1911 

i  507 

Total,  1900  

21,511 

Total  1890 

2  1  243 

1  Only  item  reported. 


2  Includes  misdemeanors;  only  item  reported. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

ARIZONA. 

Camp  McDowell  

Acres. 
24,  971 

Executive  order,  Sept.  15,  1903;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribe:  Mohave  Apache. 
Colorado  River  1 

2  3  240  640 

p.  211.    (See  Ami.  Rept.  1905,  p.  98.) 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1865,  vol.  13,  p.  559;  Executive  orders,  Nov.  22, 

(Under      Colorado      River 
School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Ka- 
wia,  Cocopa,4  Mohave. 
Fort  Apache  

2  1,681,  920 

1873,  Nov.  16,  1874,  and  May  15,  1876.    (See  sec.  25,  Indian 
appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  224.) 
ActApr.  30,1908(35Stat.,77);  act  Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat.,273); 
act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36Stat.,  1063);actAug.24,1912(37Stat.,523). 
Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  July  21,  1874,  Apr.  27,  1876, 

(Under  Fort  Apache 
School.) 
Tribes:    Chilion,  Chirica- 
hua,    Coyotero,     Mim- 
brefio,     and     Mogolon 
Apache. 
Fort  Mojave  

31,328 

Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31,  1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p. 
469;  agreement  made  Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  bv  act  of  June 
10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p.  358.    (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.64.) 

Executive  orders,  Dec.  1,  1910  and  Feb.  2,  1911.    Sec  11,  act 

(Under  Fort  Mojave  School.) 
Tribe:  Apache. 

GilaBend... 

3  10,  231 

June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  855-858).    Lands  now  being  allotted. 
See  18579-1910.    Area  original  military  reservation,  14,000 
acres. 
Executive  orders,  Dec.  12,  1882,  and  Jan.  17,  1909.    (See  4106, 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 
Gila  River..  . 

366,  309 

1909.) 
Act  of  Feb.  28,  1859,  vol.  11,  p.  401;  Executive  orders,  Aug.  31, 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribes:  Maricopa  and 
Pima. 
Havasupai  (Supai)  

2  518 

1876,  Jan.  10,  1879,  June  14,  1879,  May  5,  1882,  and  Nov.  15, 
1883;  Mar.  22,  May  8,  July  31,  1911;  Dec.  16,  1911;  and  June  2, 
1913. 
Executive  orders,  June  8  and  Nov.  23,  1880,  and  Mar.  31,  1882. 

(Under  Havasupai  School.) 
Tribe:  Havasupai. 
Hopi  (Moqui)  
(Under  Moqui  School.) 
Tribe:  Hopi  (Moqui)  and 
Navajo. 
Kaibab  

2,  472,  320 
138,  240 

Executive  order,  Dec.  16,  1882.    Act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat, 
.  L.,  1021).    See  45096-1910. 

Secretary's  withdrawal,    Oct.   15,   1907.    (See  73684-1907.) 

(Under  Kaibab  School.) 
Tribes:  Kaibab  and  San 
Juan  Paiute. 

Executive  order,  June  11,  1913. 

Partly  in  California.         2  Outboundaries  surveyed.         »  Surveyed.         *  Not  on  reservation. 


REPOKT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


71 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


ARIZONA— continued . 


Navajo 1 : 

(Under     Leupp,     Navajo, 
Western    Navajo,    San 
Juan  and  Pueblo  Bonito 
Schools.) 
Tribe:  Navajo. 


Acres. 
11, 887, 793 


Papago 

(Under  San  Xavier  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 


Salt  River 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 

Tribes:  Maricopa  and 
Pima. 


San  Carlos 

(Under  San  Carlos  School.) 
Tribes:  Arivaipa.  Chilion, 
Chiricahua,  Coyotero, 
Mimbreno,  Mogollon, 
Mohave,  Final,  San  Car- 
los, Tonto,  and  Yuma 
Apache. 

Walapai 

(Under     Truxton     Canon 

School.) 
Tribe:  Walapai. 


2114,348 


22,317 


<  1, 834, 240 


730, 940 


Total 

CALIFORNIA. 


Hoopa  Valley 

(Under  Hoopa  Valley 

School.) 

Tribes:  Hunsatung,  Hu- 
pa,  K 1  a  m  a  t  h  River, 
Miskut,  Redwood. 
Saiaz,  Sermalton,  and 
Tishtanatan. 

Mission  (28  reserves) 

(Under  Martinez,  Soboba, 
Pechanga,  Malki, 
Campo  and  Volcan 
Schools.) 

Tribes:  Diegueno,  Kawia, 
San  Luis  Rey,  Serranos, 
and  Temecula. 


19,417,875 


Treaty  of  June  1, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  667,  and  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  29, 1878,  Jan.  6, 1880,  two  of  May  17, 1884,  and  Nov.  19, 
1892.  1,769,600  acres  in  Arizona  and  967,680  acres  in  Utah 
were  added  to  this  reservation  by  Executive  order  of  May 
17, 1884,  and  46,080  acres  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  public 
domain,  but  again  reserved  by  Executive  orders,  Apr.  24, 
1886,  Jan.  8,  1900,  and  Nov.  14, 1901.  Executive  orders  of 
Mar.  10,  and  May  15, 1905, 61,523  acres  added  to  reservation, 
and  by  Executive  order  of  Nov.  9, 1907,  as  amended  by  Ex- 
ecutive order  of  Jan.  28,  1908,  2,972,160  acres  were  added. 
2,064  Indians  have  been  allotted  328,963  acres  under  the  act 
of  Feb.  8, 1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  as  amended.  By  Executive 
orders  of  Dec.  30, 1908,  and  Jan.  16, 1911,  the  surplus  lands, 
approximately  1,641,180  acres,  in  that  part  of  the  extension 
in  New  Mexico  restored  to  the  public  domain  (see  35  Stat. 
L.,  457  and  787).  (See  1277-9.).  Act  of  May  27, 1902  (32  Stat., 
264.)  Executive  order  May  24, 1911,  Feb.  17, 1912  (2),  Feb. 
10,  1913  (2),  and  May  6, 1913. 

Executive  order,  July  1, 1874,  and  act  of  Aug.  5, 1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  291.  41,606  acres  allotted  to  291  Indians,  and  14  acres 
reserved  for  school  site,  the  residue,  27,583  acres,  unallotted. 
(See  letter  book  208,  p.  408.)  Executive  order  June  16, 1911, 
and  May  28,  1912. 

Executive  orders,  June  14, 1879,  and  Oct.  20, 1910;  Sept.  28  and 
Oct.  23,  1911.  See  26731-1910.  (See  Senate  Doc.  90,  58th 
Cong.,  2d  sess.)  804  Indians  allotted  24,403  acres  under 
general  allotment  act. 

Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  Dec.  14,  1872,  Aug.  5.  1873, 
July  21, 1874,  Apr.  27,  and  Oct.  30, 1876,  Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31, 
1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27.  p.  469;  agreement  made 
Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p. 
358.  (For  fuller  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doc.,  vol.  39,p.35910.) 
(See  act  of  June  7.  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  64;  act  of  Mar.  2,  1901, 
vol.  31,  p.  952.)  Executive  order  of  Dec.  22, 1902. 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  4,  1883.  Dec.  22,  1898,  May  14,  1900, 
June  2, 1911,  May  29, 1912,  and  July  18, 1913. 


Digger 370     Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stats. ,  612),  provides  for  purchase  of 

(Under  a  farmer.)  330  acres;  not  allotted.    40  acres  were  reserved  by  order 

Tribe:  Digger.  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  28,  1908,  for  Digger 

Indians.  (See  "46597-1907,  71861-1908,  39245-1909.) 
3,051  Act  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39;  Executive  orders,  June  23, 
1876,  and  Oct.  16,  1891.  There  have  been  allotted  to  639 
Indians  29,143.38  acres,  reserved  to  3  villages  68.74  acres, 
and  opened  to  settlement  under  act  of  June  17,  1892  (27 
Stats.,  p.  52),  15,096.11  acres  of  land  (formerly  Klamath 
River  Reservation).  (Letter  book  263,  p.  96;  382,  p.  480; 
383,  p.  170.) 

181,524  Executive  orders,  Jan.  31,  1870,  Dec.  27,  1875,  May  15,  1876, 
May  3,  Aug.  25.  Sept.  29, 1877,  Jan.  17, 1880,  Mar.  2,  Mar.  9, 
1881,  June  27,  July  24.  1882,  Feb.  5,  June  19,  1883,  Jan.  25, 
Mar.  22, 1886,  Jan.  29,  Mar.  14, 1887.  and  May  6, 1889.  270.24 
acres  allotted  to  17  Indians  and  for  church  and  cemetery 
purposes  on  Syquan  Reserve  (letter  book  303,  p.  297),  and 
119  99  acres  allotted  to  15  Indians  on  Pala  Reserve  (letter 
book  303,  p.  57),  1,299.47  acres  allotted  to  85  Temecula 
Indians,  2.70  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes  (letter  book 
351,  p.  312).  Proclamations  of  President  of  Apr.  16,  1901, 
vol.  32,  p.  1970,  and  May  29, 1902,  vol.  32.  p.  2005;  act  of  Feb. 
11  1903  vol.  32,  p.  822.  Warner's  ranch  of  3,353  acres  pur- 
chased. (See  authority  7971;  also  letter  book  580,  p.  113. 
Deed  recorded  in  misc.  record  book  No.  5,  p.  193.)  1,276.28 
acres  aUotted  to  162  Pala  Indians.  6,587.81  acres  have  been 
purchased  under  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  325-333). 
and  act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stats.,  1015-1022).  Deeds  recorded 
misc.  record  book  No.  6.  Area  subject  to  change  by  addi- 
tions under  above  acts.  174,936.73  acres  patented  by  the 
Government  to  various  bands  under  acts  of  Jan.  12, 1891  (26 
Stat.  L.,  712),  and  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1022). 
See  misc.  tract  book  36. 

'^Partly  in  New  Mexico.  (See  Table  8.)    2  Surveyed.    *  Partly  surveyed.    «  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


72 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  $,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


CALIFORNIA— continued. 


Paiute. 


Round  Valley 

(Under  Round  Valley 

School.) 

Tribes:  Clear  Lake,  Con- 
cow,  Little  Lake,  No- 
melaki,  Pit  River,  Pot- 
ter Valley,  Redwood 
Wailaki,  and  Yuki. 


Tule  River 

(Under  Tule  River  School.) 
Tribes:     Kawia,3     Kings 
River,  Moache,  Tehon, 
Tule,  and  Wichumni.3 

Yuma 

(Under  Fort  Yuma  School.) 
Tribe:  Yuma- Apache. 


Total. 


COLORADO. 


ute*...*: 

(Under  Navajo  Springs 
and  Southern  Ute 
Schools.) 

Tribes:   Capote.  Moache, 
and  Wiminuche  Ute. 


Total. 


Seminole 

(Under  special  agent. ) 


Total. 


IDAHO. 


Coeur  d'Alene 

(Under  Coeur  d'Alene 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Coeur  d'Alene 
K  u  t  e  n  a  i,3  Pend 
d'Oreille,3  andSpokan. 


Acres. 
1  75, 746 


M8,551 


436,211 


375,960 


375,960 


5  26, 741 


Executive  orders,  Mar.  11,  1912;  May  9,  1912;  Sept.  7,  1912; 
Sept.  16,  1912,  and  Feb.  14,  1913. 


1  Partly  in  Nevada. 

2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 

3  Not  on  reservation. 


Acts  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39,  and  Mar.  3,  1873,  vol.  17, 
p.  634;  Executive  orders,  Mar.  30,  1870,  Apr.  8,  1873,  May 
18,  1875,  and  July  26,  1876;  act  of  Oct.  1,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  658. 
42,105.56  acres  allotted  to  1,034  Indians,  1,110  acres  reserved 
for  school  and  agency  purposes  (72088-1907,  letter  books 
298,  p.  17,  and  395,  p.  260).  (See  act  of  Feb.  8,  1905,  pro- 
viding for  a  reduction  of  area  of  reservation,  vol.  33,  p.  706.) 
36,692.23  acres  additional  allotments  made  to  619  Indians 
and  740  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes. 

Executive  orders  Jan.  9  and  Oct.  3,  1873,  and  Aug.  3,  1878. 


Executive  order,  Jan.  9,  1884;  agreement,  Dec.  4,  1893,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Aug.  15, 1894,  vol.  28.  p.  332.    (See  sec.  25,  In- 
dian appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904.  vol.  33, 
?.  224.)    7,756.54  acres  irrigable  land  opened  under  act  of 
one  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  act  Mar.  3,  1911,  (36  Stats., 
1063) .    8,000  acres  allotted  to  809  Indians. 


Treaties  of  Oct.  7,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  673,  and  Mar.  2, 1868,  vol. 
15,  p.  619,  act  of  Apr.  29,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  36;  Executive  or- 
ders, Nov.  22,  1875,  Aug.  17,  1876,  Feb.  7,  1879,  and  Aug.  4, 
1882,  and  act  of  Congress  approved  June  15,  1880,  vol.  21, 
p.  199,  and  July  28,  1882,  vol.  22, p.  178,  May  14, 1884,  vol. 23, 
p.  22,  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  337,  Feb.  20, 1895,  vol.  28,  p. 
677.  72,651  acres  allotted  to  371  Indians  and  360  acres  re- 
served for  use  of  Government  (letter  book  321,  p.  86);  also 
7,360.32  acres  allotted  to  39  Indians  (letter  book  331,  p.  395). 
523,079  acres  opened  to  settlement  by  President's  proclama- 
tion dated  Apr.  13,  1899  (31  Stats.,  1947).  The  residue, 
375,960  acres,  retained  as  a  reservation  for  the  Wiminuche 
Utes,  act  June  30, 1913  (Public,  No.  4). 


Acts  Aug.  15,  1894  (28  Stats.,  303),  Mar. 2, 1895  (28  Stat.,  892 
June  10,  1896  (29  Stat.,  337),  June  7,  1897  (30  Stat.,  78 
Mar.  1,  1899  (30  Stat.,  938),  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  302  , 
Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat.,  274).    23,061.72  acres  purchased  for 
Seminole  Indians  in  Florida  under  acts  mentioned  (see 
Annual  Report  for  1900,  p.  101).    3,680  acres  reserved  by 
Executive  order  of  June  28,  1911.    (See  20817-1909.) 


Executive  orders,  June  14,  1867,  and  Nov.  8,  1873;  agree- 
ments made  Mar.  26, 1887,  and  Sept.  9, 1889,  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol. 
26,  pp.  1026,  1029.  Agreement,  Feb.  7,  1894,  ratified  by 
act  of  Aug.  15, 1894,  vol.  28,  p.  322.  638  Indians  have  been 
allotted  104,077  acres  and  1,906.99  acres  have  been  re- 
served for  agency,  school,  and  church  purposes  and  for 
mill  sites.  (See  86950-1908,  and  acts  of  June  21,  1906  (34 
Stat.  L.,  325-355),  Mar.  3,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  1026-1029), 
Aug.  15,  1894  (28  Stat.  L.,  322),  Mar.  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L., 
56),  Apr.  30,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  78).)  President's  proclama- 
tion issued  May  22,  1909,  opening  224,210  acres  surplus 
lands  to  settlement.  (37  L.  D.,  698.) 

4  Partly  in  New  Mexico. 

5  Surveyed. 


KEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


73 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  8,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


ID  AHO— continued . 


Fort  Hall 

(Under  Fort  Hall  School.) 
Tribes:  Bannock  and 
Shoshoni. 


Acres. 
1447,940 


Lapwai 

(Under  Fort  Lapwai 

School.) 
Tribe:  Nez  Perce. 


34,190 


Lemhi. 


Total. 


482, 130 


IOWA. 


Sauk  and  Fox 

(Under   Sac  and   Fox 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Potawatomi, 
Sauk  and  Fox  of  the 
Mississippi  and  Winne- 
bago. 

Total 

KANSAS. 

Chippewa  and  Mtmsee 

(Under  Potawatomi 

School.) 

Tribes:  Chippewa  and 
Munsee. 


3,479.94 


\,  479. 94 


Iowa* 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Iowa. 


Kickapoo 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Kickapoo. 


Potawatomi 

(Under  Potawatomi 

School.) 

Tribe:    Prairie    Band    of 
Potawatomi. 


Sauk  and  Fox  2 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Sauk  and  Fox  of 
the  Missouri. 


Total. 


24 


1  Surveved. 


Treaty  of  July  3, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  Executive  orders,  June 
14,  1867,  and  July  30,  1869;  agreement  with  Indians  made 
July  18,  1881,  and  approved  by  Congress  July  3,  1882,  vol. 
22,  p.  148;  acts  of  Sept.  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  452,  Feb.  23, 
1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687,  and  Mar.  3, 1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1011.  Agree- 
ment made  Feb.  5, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  June  6, 1900,  vol. 
31,  p.  672,  ceding  416,000  acres,  of  which  6,298.72  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  79  Indians  (see  letter  book  527,  p.  478);  re- 
mainder of  ceded  tract  opened  to  settlement  June  17,  1902 
(President's  proclamation  of  May  7,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  1997), 
act  of  Mar.  30,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  153,  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (3& 
Stat.,  1064). 

Treaty  of  June  9,  1863,  vol.  14,  p.  647;  agreement  of  May  27, 
1887,  ratified  by  act  of  Sept.  1,  1888.  vol.  25,  p.  452;  agree- 
ment, May  1, 1893,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15. 1894,  vol.  28, 
p.  326.  178,812  acres  allotted  to  1,876  Indians,  2,170.47 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  school,  mission,  and  cemetery 

Surposes,  and  32,020  acres  of  timberland  reserved  for  the 
ribe;  the  remainder  restored  to  public  settlement.    (Pres- 
ident's proclamation,  Nov.  8, 1895,  29  Stats.,  873.) 
Unratified  treaty  of  Sept.  24, 1868,  and  Executive  order,  Feb. 
12, 1875;  agreement  of  May  14, 1880,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb. 
23, 1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687.    (See  34  Stat.  L.,  335,  and  agreement 
executed  Dec.  28, 1905,  approved  by  President  Jan.  27, 1906.) 
Act  of  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat.,  334),  about  64,000  acres  opened 
in  1909.     (See  36809-1909.) 


By  purchase.  (See  act  of  Mar.  2, 1867,  vol.  14,  p.  507.)  Deeds 
1857,  1865,  1867,  1868,  1869,  1876,  1880,  1882,  1883,  1888,  June 
July,  and  Oct.  1892-1896  (see  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891.  vol.  26, 
p.  749).  (See  Ann.  Repts.,  1891,  p.  681;  1898,  p.  81.)  Deeds 
recorded,  vol.  6.  (See  95856-1907.) 


Treaty  of  July  16,  1859,  vol.  12,  p.  1105.  4,195.31  acres  allot- 
ted to  100  Indians;  the  residue,  200  acres,  allotted  for  mis- 
sionary and  school  purposes.  Patents  issued,  to  allottees; 
balance  of  allotments  sold  and  proceeds  paid  to  heirs. 
(See  ninth  section.)  (Act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  92; 
L.  B.,  332.  p.  63.) 

Treaties  of  May  17,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1069,  and  of  Mar.  6,  1861, 
vol.  12,  p.  1171.  11,768.77  acres  of  land  allotted  to  14$ 
Indians;  162  acres  reserved  for  school  and  cemetery  pur- 
poses. (Letter  book  266,  p.  86.)  Acts  Mar.  3,  1885  (23  Stat., 
352),  and  Jan.  26,  1887  (24  Stat.,  367.) 

Treaty  of  June  28,  1862,  vol.  13,  p.  623.  27,531  .27  acres  allotted 
to  3'50  Indians;  245  acres  reserved  for  church  and  school; 
the  residue,  398.87  acres,  unallotted  (letter  books  304,  p. 
480,  and  772,  p.  54).  (Acts  of  Feb.  28,  1899,  vol.  30,  p.  909, 
and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1007.) 

Treaties  of  June  5,  1846,  vol.  9,  p.  853;  of  Nov.  15,  1861,  vol.  12, 
p.  1191;  treaty  of  relinquishment,  Feb.  27,  1867,  vol.  15, 
p.  531.  220,785  acres  allotted  to  2,363  Indians;  319  acres 
reserved  for  school  and  agency,  and  1  acre  for  church;  the 
residue,  500.62  acres,  unallotted  (letter  books  238,  p.  328; 
259,  p.  437;  303,  p.  301;  685,  p.  202;  and  825,  p.  167).  (Acts  of 
Feb.  28,  1899,  vol.  30.  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1007.) 
980  acres  surplus  tribal  land  sold  under  act  Feb.  28,  1899. 


ug.  ,  .  vo.  ,  p.  .  ,.  acres  in  ansas, 
4,194.33  acres  in  Nebraska,  aggregating  7,038.30  acres,  allot- 
ted to  84  Indians,  and  under  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats., 
324-349),  960.91  acres  were  allotted  to  37  Indians,  leaving 
24.03  acres  unallotted.  (Letter  books  233,  p.  361;  383,  p. 
37;  and  512,  p:  110.) 


2  In  Kansas  and  Nebraska. 


74 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allottted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continjued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

MICHIGAN. 

Isabella1... 

Acres. 
191 

Executive  order,  May  14,  1855*  treaties  of  Aug  2  1855  vol 

Tribe:  Chippewa  of  Sagi- 
naw,  Swan  Creek,  and 
Black  River. 
L'Anse  

2732 

11,  p.  633,  and  of  Oct.  18,  1864,  vol.  14,  p.  657.    98,395  acres 
allotted  to  1,943  Indians. 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.    52,041  acres  allotted 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:  L'Anse  and  Vieux 
Desert  Bands  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 

Ontonagon.  .                         .  . 

to  666  Indians.    Payment  for  lands  in  sec.  16,  see  93879- 
1907. 

Sixth  clause,  second  article,  treaty  of  Sept  30  1854,  vol  10, 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:    Ontonagon   Band 
of   Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 
Ottawa  and  Chippewa  .  . 

p.  1109;  Executive  order,  Sept.  25,   1855.    2,561.35  acres 
allotted  to  35  Indians. 

Treaty  July  31,  1855.    (11  Stat  ,  621  )    120  470  acres  allotted 

to  1,818  Indians. 

Total  

923 

MINNESOTA. 

Bois  Fort  

Treaty  of  Apr.  7,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  765;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol. 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort    Chip- 
pewa. 

Deer  Creek  

25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess., 
p.  63.)    54,524  acres  allotted  to  684  Indians  and.434.63  acres 
reserved  for  agency,  etc.,  purposes.    (L.  B.  359,382);  resi- 
due, 51,863  acres  to  be  opened  to  public  settlement. 
Executive  order,  June  30,  1883;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort    Chip- 
pewa. 

Fond  du  Lac  

642.    (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
63.)    295.55  acres  allotted  to  4  Indians;  residue,  22,744  acres, 
opened  to  public  settlement.    (Executive  order  of  Dec.  21, 
1858.) 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  act  of  May  26,1872, 

(Under  Fond  du  Lac  School.) 
Tribe:  Fond  du  Lac  Band 
of   Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

<3rand  Portage  (Pigeon 

vol.  17,  p.  190.    27,637  acres  allotted  to  408  Indians;  act  of 
Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.     (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p.  60.)    The  residue,  76,837  acres,  re- 
stored to  settlement.    Agreement  of  Nov.  21,  1889.    (See 
act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.)    Act  June  30,  1913  (Pub- 
lic No.  4). 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  act  of  Jan.  14,1889, 

River).2 
(Under  Grand   Portage 
Agency.) 
Tribe:  Grand  Portage 
Band  of  Chippewa   of 
Lake  Superior. 
Leech  Lake  2 

vol.  25,  p.  642.     (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  p.  59.)    24,191.31  acres  allotted  to  304  Indians;  208.24 
acres  reserved  for  agency  and  wood  purposes;  residue, 
16,041.97  acres,  to  be  opened  to  public  settlement. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  22.  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165;  Executive  orders, 

(Under  Leech  Lake  Agency.) 
Tribes:    Cass  Lake,     Pil- 
lager, and  Lake  Wini- 
bigoshish  bands  of  Chip- 
pewa. 

Mdewakanton 

Nov.  4,  1873,  and  May  26,  1874;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.    (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess., 
p.  49.)    47,513  acres  allotted  to  619  Indians  and  321.60  acres 
reserved  for  agency  and  school  purposes.    (Act  of  June  27, 
1902-,  vol.  32.  p.  402.)    Minnesota  National  Forest  act,  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.,  268). 
By  purchase     (See  acts  of  July  4,  1S84,  Mar.  3,  1885,  May  15 

(Under  Birch  Cooley  School.) 
Tribe:  Mdewakanton 
Sioux. 

Mille  Lac 

1886,  June  29,  1888  (25  Stat.,  228);  Mar.  2,  1889(25  Stat.,  992), 
and  Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  349).    339.70  acres  deeded  to  47 
Indians;  12,242.76  acres  allotted  to  88  Indians  and  held  in 
trust  by  the  United  States,  8.90  acres  reserved  for  school. 
(See  Ann.  Rpt.,  1891,  pp.  Ill  and  179,  and  schedule  ap- 
proved Nov.  21,  1904.) 
Treaties  of  Feb  22,  1855,  vol  10,  p  1165,  and  article  12  of  May 

(Under    White  Earth 
School.) 
Tribe:     Mille     Lac     and 
Snake  River  bands  of 
Chippewa. 
Red  Lake  

543,  528 

7,  1864,  vol.  13,  pp.  693,  695;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 
642.    (See  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
45.)    Joint  resolution  (No.  5),  Dec.  19,  1893,  vol.  28,  p.  576, 
and  joint  resolution  (No.  40)  approved  May  17,  1898,  vol. 
30,  p.  745.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1890,  pp.  38-43.) 
Treaty  of  Oct.  2,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  667;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1899,  vol. 

(Under  Red  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Red    Lake    and 
Pembina  Chippewa. 

25,  p.  642.    (See  agreement  July  8,  1889,  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No. 
.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  27  and  32),  and  Executive 
order,  Nov.  21,  1892.    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1009, 
and  act  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  ratifying  agreement  made  Mar.  10, 
1902,  vol.  33,  p.  46,  for  sale  of  256,152  acres.    Act  of  Feb.  8, 
.    1905,  vol.  33,  p.  708,  granting  320  acres  as  right  of  way  for  the 
Minneapolis,  Red  Lake  &  Manitoba  Rwy.  Co. 

Agency  abolished  June  30, 1889. 


,2  Surveyed. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


75 


TABLE  1  .—General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued.. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


MINNESOTA—  continued. 


Vermillion  Lake 

(Under   Vermillion   Lake 

School.) 

Tribe:    Bois    Fort    Chip- 
pewa. 

White  Earth 

(Under  White  Earth  School. 

Tribes:    Chippewa  of  the 

Mississippi,     Pembina, 

and  Pillager  Chippewa, 


Acres. 
il,080 


29, 736 


White  Oak  Point  and  Chip- 
pewa. 

(Under  Leech  Lake  Agen- 
cy.) 

Tribes:  Lake  Winibigo- 
shish  and  Pillager 
bands  of  Chippewa  and 
White  Oak  Point  band 
of  Mississippi  Chip- 
pewa. 


Total. 


574,344 


MONTANA. 


Blackfeet 

(Under  Blackfeet  School.) 
Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Blood, 
and  Piegan. 


1,491,805 


Crow 

(Under  Crow  School.) 
Tribes:      Mountain    and 
River  Crow. 


2 1,834, 511 


Fort  Belknap 

(Under  Fort  Belknap  School.) 
Tribes:     Grosventre  and 
Assiniboin. 


497,600 


Executive  order,  Dec.  20,  1881,  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,p. 
642. 


Treaty  of  Mar.  19,  1867,  vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders, 
Mar.  18,  1879,  and  July  13, 1883;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.  (See  agreement  July  29,  1889,  H.  R.  Ex.  Doc.  No. 
247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  34  and  36.)  Under  act  of  Jan. 
14, 1889  (25  Stat.,  642),  428,401.05  acres  have  been  allotted 
to  5,152  Indians,  and  1,899.61  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  and  religious  purposes  and  under  act  of  Apr.  28, 
1904  (33  Stat.,  539),  244,585.43  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
2,794  Mississippi  and  Otter  Tail  Pillager  Chippewa,  beini 


Jan.  14,  1889,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  29,736 
acres.  Lands  now  in  process  of  allotment  under  both  acts. 
Act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  353). 

Treaties  of  Feb.  22, 1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  of  Mar.  19,  1867, 
vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders,  Oct  29,  1873,  and  May  26, 
1874;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  742.  (See  H.  R.  Ex. 
Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess..  pp.  42,  49.)  64.732 
acres  allotted  to  826  Indians;  the  residue  opened  to  public 
settlement;  240  acres  reserved  for  ball  park.  (See  289-1908. ) 


i  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18, 1866,  and  of  July  13,  and  15  and  Sept.  1, 1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15, 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13, 1880,  and  agreement  made  Feb.  11,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  129;  agreement  made 
Sept.  26,  1895.  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29, 
p.  353;  act  of  Feb.  27,  1905,  confirming  grant  of  356.11  acres 
of  land  and  120  acres  of  unsurveyed  land.  (See  vol.  33 
p.  816.)  Act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stats.,  1035).  Five  Indians 
allotted  1,600  acres.  44,240.07  acres  timber  reserved. 
(See  4021-1913.) 

Treaty  of  May  7,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  649;  agreement  made  June 
12,  1880,  and  approved  by  Congress  Apr.  11,  1882,  vol.  22, 

8.  42,  and  agreement  made  Aug.  22,  1881,  approved  by 
ongress  July  10,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  157;  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  20,  1875,  Mar.  8,  1876,  Dec.  7,  1886;  agreement  made 
Dec.  8, 1890;  ratified  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1039-1040;  agreement 
made  Aug.  27,  1892.  (See  Ann.  Kept.,  1892,  p.  748;  also 
President's  proclamation,  Oct.  15,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1034.)' 
Act  of  Apr.  27,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  352,  to  amend  and  ratify 
agreement  of  Aug.  14,  1899.  Under  act  Feb.  8,  1887  (24 
Stat.,  388),  and  act  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stat.,  794),  and  Execu- 
tive order,  June  8,  1901  (modifying  Executive  order  of 
Mar.  25,  1901),  479,182.07  acres  have  been  allotted  to  2.439 
Indians,  and  1,822.61  acres  reserved  for  administration, 
church,  and  cemetery  purposes,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  1,834,511  acres,  and  14,711.96  acres  on  ceded  part 
have  been  allotted  to  81  Indians.  (See  L.  B.  743.  p.  50; 
852,  p.  160,  and  956,  p.  416.)  37  Indians  (Schedule  A)  have 
been  allotted  7,429.55  acres  under  acts  of  Apr.  11,  1882  (22 
Stat.,  42),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.,  388),  and  amendments 
thereto.  President's  proclamation,  May  24,  1906  (34  Stat., 
3200). 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  Sept.  1,  1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15, 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Jan.  21,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  124;  agreement  made, 
Oct.  9, 1895,  approved  by  act  of  June  10, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  350. 

•  Outboundaries  surveyed;  partly  surveyed. 


76 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

M  ONTANA—  continued  . 
Fort  Peck.., 

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 

(Under  Fort  Peck  School.) 
Tribes:  Assiniboin,  Brute, 
Santee,    Teton,   Hunk- 
papa,    and    Yanktonai 
Sioux. 

Flathead  . 

July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  of  Sept.  1,  1868; 
Executive  orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of 
Apr.  15,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875, 
and  July  13,  1880;  and  agreement  made  Dec.  28,  1886,  ap- 
proved by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  113,  act  May  30, 
1908  (35  Stat.,  558).  2,025  Indians  allotted  722,133.47  acres. 
1,225,849  acres  surplus  land  opened  to  settlement  and  entry 
by  President's  proclamation  July  25,  1913.    (See  42  L.  D.  . 
264.)    1,032.84  acres  reserved  for  town  site,  religious,  and 
administrative  purposes. 
Treaty  of  July  16  1855  vol  12  p  975     Under  acts  of  Apr  23, 

(Under  Flathead  School.) 
Tribes:  Bitter  Root,  Car- 
los Band,  Flathead, 
Kutenai,  Lower  Kalis- 
pel,  and  Pend  d'Oreille. 

Northern  Chevenne    . 

t  489  500 

1904  (33  Stats.,  302),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  and  Feb. 
28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  2,438  Indians  have  been  allotted 
226,633  acres,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  2,524.70  acres 
have  been  reserved  for  tribal  uses,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23, 
1904,  as  amended  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1905  (33  Stats.,  1049-1080), 
6,774.92  acres  have  been  reserved  for  agency  purposes, 
18,521.35  acres  reserved  for  Bison  Range  under  acts  of  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  267),  and  Mar.  4,  1909  (35  Stats.,  927). 
See  51019-1908.    May  22,  1909,  proclamation  issued  by  Presi- 
dent opening  surplus  lands.    Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats., 
795).    45,714  acres  reserved  for  power  and  reservoir  sites, 
act  Apr.  12,  1910  (36  Stats.,  863).    Executive  order  Jan.  14, 
1913. 
Executive  orders,  Nov  26,  1884,  and  Mar  19,  1900,  act  of  Mar. 

L  (Under    Tongue    River 
School.) 
Tribe:    Northern    Chey- 
enne. 

3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1000. 

Total.. 

4  313  416 

NEBRASKA. 

Niobrara  

Act  of  Mar.  3,  1863,  vol.  12,  p.  819,  4th  paragraph,  art.  6; 

(Under  Santee  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Santee  Sioux. 

Omaha 

4  500 

treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  637;  Executive  orders, 
Feb.  27,  July  20,  1866,  Nov.  16,  1867,  Aug.  31,  1869,  Dec.  31, 
1873,  and  Feb.  9,  1885.    32,875.75  acres  selected  as  home- 
steads, 38,908.01  acres  selected  as  allotments,  and  1,130.70 
acres  selected  for  agency,  school,  and  mission  purposes;  un- 
ratified agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.    (For  modification,  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624.    For  text,  see  misc.  Indian  doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.) 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted. 
Treaty  of  Mar  16  1854  vol  10  p  1043'  selection  by  Indians 

(  Under;  Winnebago  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Omaha. 

Ponca... 

with  President's  approval,  May  11,  1855;  treaty  of  Mar.  6, 
1865,  vol.  14,  p.  667;  acts  of  June  10,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391,  and 
of  June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  to  Winnebago  Indians, 
dated  July  31,  1874;  act  of  Aug.  7,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  341;  act 
of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stats.,  p.  612);  130,522  acres  allotted  to 
1,458  Indians;  the  residue.  4,500  acres,  unallotted;  act  May 
11,  1912  (37  Stats.,  Ill),  sale  of  surplus  land. 
Treaty  of  Mar    12,  1858,  vol    12,  p    997,  and  supplemental 

(Under  Santee  Agency  ) 

treaty,  Mar.  10,  1865,  vol.  14,  p.  675;  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  sec. 

Tribe:  Ponca. 
Sioux  (additional) 

640 

13,  vol.  25,  p.  892.    27,236  acres  allotted  to  168  Indians;  160 
acres  reserved  and  occupied  by  agencv  and  school  build- 
ings.   (See  letter  book  205,  p.  339;  also  President's  procla- 
mation, Oct.  23,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1559.) 
Executive  order,  Jan.  24,  1882. 

(Under  Pine  Ridge  School.) 
Tribe:  Oglala  Sioux. 
Winnebago  

1,139 

Act  of  Feb.  21,  1863,  vol.  12,  p.  658;  treaty  of  Mar.  8,  1865,  vol. 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Winnebago. 

14,  p.  671;  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  from 
Omaha  Indians,  dated  July  31,  1874.    (See  vol.  6,  Indian 
deeds,  p.  215.)    106,948.22  acres  allotted  to  1,558  Indians;  480 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.;  610.10  acres  sold;  act  Julv  4, 
1888;  the  residue,  1,139  acres,  unallotted. 

Total  

6,279 

Partly  surveyed . 


BEPOBT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES. 


77 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

NEVADA. 

Duck  Valley  

Acres. 
1321,920 

2  1,128 
1,000 

322,000 
40,746 

Executive  orders,  Apr.  16,  1877,  May  4,  1886,  and  July  1,  1910. 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  12,  1873,  and  Feb.  12,  1874;  act  of  Mar. 
13,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  445,  selection  approved  by  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  July  3,  1875;  Executive  orders  of  June  28,  1875. 
July  3,  1875,  July  31,  1903,  Oct.  28,  1912,  and  Nov.  26,  1912. 

7J  sections  (4,640  acres)  reserved  under  second  form   with- 
drawal, reclamation  act  June  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  for  re- 
allotment  to  Indians;  3,640  acres  have  been  allotted  to  364 
Paiute  Indians  and  10  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes 
(see  76982-1907),  1,000  acres  unallotted  and  unreserved. 
Executive  order,  Mar.  23,  1874.    Act  July  1,  1898  (30  Stats.  , 
594.)    (See  sec.  26,  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr 
21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  225.)    Executive  older  Sept.  4,  1913, 
creating  bird  reserve  out  of  Anaho  Island. 
'•Executive  order,  Mar.  19,  1874;   joint  resolution  of  June  19, 
1902,  vol.  32,  p.  744;  act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  pp.  245- 
260);  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  pp.  982-997;  act  of  June  21, 
1906,  vol.  34,  p.  325;  proclamation  of  President    Sept   26 

(Under  Western  Shoshone 
School.) 
Tribes:  Paiute  and  West- 
ern Shoshoni. 
Moapa  River  

(Under  Moapa  River  School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Kai- 
bab,    Pawipit,    Paiute, 
and  Shivwits. 
Paiute  ... 

(Under  Fallon  School.) 
Pyramid  Lake      . 

(Under  Nevada  School.) 
Tribe1  Paiute. 

Walker  River  .  . 

(Under  Walker   River 
School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 

Total 

1906,    opening   ceded   part   to    settlement.    It   contains 
268,005.84  acres,  leaving  in  diminished  reserve  50,809.16 
acres.    Allotted  to  490  Indians,  9,763.27  acres;  reserved  for 
agency  and  school,  80  acres;  reserved  for  cemetery,  40  acres; 
reserved  for  grazing,  37,848.29  acres;    reserved  for  timber, 
%.W>  62  acres;  reserved  for  church  purposes,  160  acres.    (L. 
B  885,  p.  187.) 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  25,  1874,  July  18,  1876,  Sept.  21,  1880, 
May  15,  1884,  and  Feb.  11,  1887;  129,313.35  acres  allotted  to 
845  Indians,  and  280.44  acres  reserved  for  mission,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.    (L.  B.  335,  p.  323.)    Executive  or- 
ders of  Nov.  11,  1907,  and  Jan.  28,  1908.    The  above-men- 
tioned 845  allotments  have  been  canceled;  reallotments 
have  been  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1413).    (See  64513-1909.  )    (Allotments  to  797  Indians  cover- 
ing 354,294  acres  approved  Aug.  28,  1909.) 
Executive  orders,  May  29,  1873,  Feb.  2,  1874,  Oct.  20,  1875, 
May  19,  1882,  and  Mar.  24,  1883.    (See  25961,  48680,  75169, 
75469-1908,  and  14203,  26542-1909,  and  Senate  bill  5602,  60th 
Cong.,  1st  sess.) 

Confirmed  by  United  States  patents  in  1864,  under  old  Span- 
ish grants;  acts  of  Dec.  22,  1858,  vol.  11,  p.  374,  and  June  21, 
1860,  vol.  12,  p.  71.    (See  General  Land  Office  Report  for 
1876,  p.  242,  and  for  1880,  p.  658.)    See  Executive  orders  of 
June  13  and  Sept.  4,  1902,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for 
San  Felipe  and  Nambe  Pueblos,  and  Executive  order  of 
July  29,  1905,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for  Santa  Clara 
Pueblo.    (See   60806-1905.)    Approximately    32,000   acres 
added.    Area  original  Santa  Clara  Pueblo,  17,368.52.    Ex- 
ecutive orders,  Dec.  19,  1906,  and  Sept.  1,  1911,  withdrawing 
23,040  acres  for  Jemez  Indians.    Area  of  original  Spanish 
grant,  17,510  acres.    Executive  order,  July  1,  1910,  28,800 
acres.    Area  of  Pueblo  proper,  125,225.    (See  55714-1910.) 
Total  area  Pueblos,  including  Zuni  and  Executive  order 
res'n,  1,008,346. 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  16,  1877,  May  1,  1883,  and  Mar.  3,  1885. 
(Area  of  original  Spanish  grant,  17,581.25  acres.) 

686,794 

NEW  MEXICO. 

Jicarilla  Apache... 

407,300 

474,  240 

*  40,  550 
2  95,  792 
217,545 
217,461 
«  34,  767 
M8,763 
224,256 
292,398 
217,361 
*  49,  369 
217,471 
2  17,  293 
213,520 
217,515 
2  24,  187 
*  110,  080 
213,586 
2154,025 
217,361 
2215,040 

(Under  Jicarilla  School.) 
Tribe:  Jicarilla  Apache. 

Mescalero  Apache  

(Under  Mescalero  School.) 
Tribes:      Mescalero    and 
Mimbrefio  Apache. 
Pueblo: 
(Under  Santa  Fe  and  Albu- 
querque Schools.) 
Tribe:  Pueblo— 
Jemez 

Acoma  

San  Juan 

Picuris  

San  Felipe 

Pecos  

Cochiti 

Santo  Domingo  

Taos 

Santa  Clara  

Tesuque 

San  Ildefonso  

Pojoaque 

Sia 

San  Dia  .... 

Isleta 

Nambe  

Laguna 

Santa  Ana  .  .  . 

Zuni  

(Under  Zuni  School.) 
Tribe:  Zuni  Pueblo. 

Total  

1,889,880 

1  Surveyed;  partly  in  Idaho. 


Outboundaries  surveyed. 


78 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allottted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

NEW  YORK. 

Allegany                           

Acres. 
130,409 

i  21,680 
1640 

i860 
6,100 

14,640 
27,549 

6,249 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  of  May  20,  1842, 
vol.  7,  p.  587. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601;  June  30,  1802,  vol.  7, 
p.  70,  and  of  May  20,  1842,  vol.  7,  p.  587.    (See  Ann.  Rept., 
1877,  p.  164.) 

By  arrangement  with  the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann. 
Rept.,  1877,  p.  166.)    Seneca  agreement  of  Jan.  3,  1893, 
ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  470;  act  of  June  7, 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:      Onondaga    and 
Seneca. 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga,  Ononda- 
ga, and  Seneca. 
Oil  Spring                       

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Seneca. 

Oneida                    

1897,  vol.  30,  p.  89. 
Treaty  of  Nov.  11,  1794,  vol.  7,  p.  44,  and  arrangement  with 
the  State  of  New  York.     (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  168.  ) 

Do. 

Treaty  of  May  13,  1796,  vol.  7,  p.  55.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877, 
p.  168.)    They  hold  about  24,250  acres  in  Canada. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  Nov.  5,  1857,  vol. 
12,  p.  991;  purchased  by  the  Indians  and  held  in  trust  by 
the  comptroller  of  New  York;  deed  dated  Feb.  14,  1862. 
(See  also  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  165.) 
Treaty  of  Jan.  15,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  551,  and  arrangement  (grant 
and  purchase)  between  the  Indians  and  the  Holland  Land 
Co.     (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  167.) 

Held  by  deed  to  Indians  under  decision  of  U.  S.  circuit  court 
for  western  district  of  North  Carolina,  entered  at  November 
term,  1874,  confirming  the  award  of  Rufus  Barringer  and 
others,  dated  Oct.  23,  1874,  and  acts  of  Aug.  14,  1876,  vol.  19, 
p.  139,  and  Aug.  23,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  441,  and  deeds  to  Indians 
From  Johnston  and  others,  dated  Oct.  9,  1876,  and  Aug.  14, 
1880.    (See  also  H.  R.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  196,  47th  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  and  No.  128,  53d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)    Now  held  in  fee  by 
Indians,  who  are  incorporated.    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32, 
p.  1000.     (See  Opinions  of  Asst.  Atty.  Gen.,  Mar.  14,  1894, 
and  Feb.  3,  1904.    35,000  acres  of  the  98,211  acres  sold. 
Deeds  dated  Oct.  4,  1906;  approved  Dec.  12,  1906.) 

Treaty  of  Feb.  19;  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505,  agreement  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June 
22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.     (See  pp.  328-337  Comp.  Indian 
Laws.)    137,381  acres  allotted  to  1,189  Indians;  727.83  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  193.61  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes.    Act  of  Apr.  27,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  319,  to 
amend  and  ratify  agreement  made  Nov.  2,  1901.    Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  June  2,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2368. 
Unratified  agreement  of  Sept.  17,  1851,  and  July  27,  1866  (see 
Laws  relating  to  Indian  Affairs,  Department  of  Interior, 
1883),  pp.  317  and  322;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  12,  1870,  July 
13,  1880,  and  June  17,  1892;  agreement  Dec.  14,  1886,  ratified 
by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1032.    (See  Pres.  proc. 
May  20,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  979.)    229,634.91  acres  allotted 
to  1,379  Indians  (see  letter  book  445,  p.  311):  the  residue, 
884,780  acres,  unallotted.    Lands  now  in  process  of  allot- 
ment under  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.  ,  1042).    Act  June 
1,  1910  (36  Stat.,  455).    (See  61502,  10  Pres.  proc.,  June  29, 
1911,  40  L.  D.,  151.)    227,504  acres  opened;  see  IL  J.  Res. 
Apr.  3,  1912  (37  Stat.,  631). 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Oneida,  Ononda- 
ga. and  St.  Regis. 
St  Regis                    

(  Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  St.  Regis. 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga  and  Ton- 
awanda  Bands  of  Seneca. 
Tuscarora                    

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondaga    and 
Tuscarora. 

Total                  

87,677 

NORTH  CAROLINA.     . 

Qualla  boundary  and  other 
lands. 
(Under    Eastern    Cherokee 
School.) 
Tribe:     Eastern  Band  of 
Cherokee. 

Total 

/     248,000 
\     215,211 

63,211 

NORTH  DAKOTA. 

Devils  Lake    .                

(Under  Fort  Totten  School.) 
Tribes:    Assiniboin,  Cut- 
head,  Santee,  Sisseton, 
Yankton,  and  Wahpe- 
ton  Sioux. 

Fort  Berth  old 

443,982 

(Under  Fort  Berthold 
School.) 
Tribes:     Arikara,     Gros- 
ventre,  and  Mandan. 

1  Partly  surveyed. 


2  Surveyed. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


79 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913— Continued . 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

NOKTH  DAKOTA—  continued. 
Standing  Rock  

Acres. 
166,  023 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders 

(Under  Standing  Rock 
School.) 
Tribes:   Blackfeet,  Hunk- 
papa,  Upper  and  Lower 
Yanktonai  Sioux. 

Turtle  Mountain  .        ... 

Jan.  11-Mar.  16,  1875,  and  Nov.  28,  1876.    Agreement  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and  Executive 
orders  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884  (1,520,640  acres  in 
South  Dakota);  unratified  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882. 
(For  modification  see  sundry  civil  appropriation  act  ap- 
proved Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  In- 
dian Doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)    Act  of  Congress  of  Apr.  30, 
1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.    Act  of  Congress,  Mar.  2, 
1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 
1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    Under  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stats., 
888),  and  authority  of  the  President  of  Sept.  26,  1905,  4,418 
Indians  have  been  allotted  1,338,571  acres,  leaving  unal- 
lotted 364,598  acres.     [See  act  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L., 
444,  451,  and  460);  61,938.14  acres  school  land,  act  of  Mar.  1, 
1907  (34  Stat  L.,  1041).]    Under  President's  proclamation 
of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.,  2500),  1,061,500  acres  were  opened 
to  settlement.    Act  of  Feb.  14,  1913  (Pub.,  380),  71,235.18 
acres  school  land. 

Executive  orders  Dec.  21,  1882,  Mar.  29  and  June  3    1884 

(Under    Turtle    Mountain 
Agency.) 
Tribe:  Pembina  Chippewa. 

Agreement  made  Oct.  2,  1892,  amended  by  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  and  ratified  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
/  p.  194.    43,820  acres  allotted  to  326  Indians  and  186  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  school  purposes  under  the  above- 
named  act.    Allotments  to  1,880  members  of  this  band  on 
public  domain  aggregating  280,619.04  acres  have  been  ap- 
proved. 

Total 

610  005 

OKLAHOMA. 

Apache  

Formerly  Fort  Sill     (See  Executive  order  Feb    26   1897  ) 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 
Cherokee 

i  895 

Act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173);  act  June  28,  1902  (32  Stat., 
467).    Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong.,  2dsess.,  act  Aug.  24,  1912 
(37  Stat.,  534);  act  June  30,  1913  (Pub.,  No.  4).   Lands  to  be 
purchased  for  those  members  of  this  band,  some  80  in  num- 
ber, who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma. 
Treaty  with  Western  Cherokees  at  city  of  Washington  May  6 

(Under  Union  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Cherokee. 

Cherokee  Outlet 

1828  (7  Stat.,  311),  as  amended  by  the  treaty  at  Fort  'Gibson 
of  Feb.  14,  1833  (7  Stat.,  414);   referred  to  in  treaty  with 
Cherokees  at  New  Echota,  Ga.,  Dec.  29,  1835(7  Stat.,  478); 
July  19,  1866  (14  Stat.,  799),  as  supplemented  by  treaty  of 
Apr.  27,  1868  (16  Stat.,  727).    Agreement  of  July  1,  1902  (32 
Stat.,  716).    Approximately  41,696  Cherokees,  including 
4,924  freedmen,  were  allotted  an  average  of  110  acres,  40  acres 
of  which  was  a  homestead  to  be  nontaxable  while  held  by 
the  original  allottee.    Total  acreage  allotted,  4,420,067.73; 
sold  49,765.44. 
Agreement  of  Dec  19  1891*  ratified  sec  10  by  act  of  Mar  3 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

1893  (27  Stat.,  640),  unoccupied  part  of  Cherokee  Outlet,  not 
included  in  Territory  of  Oklahoma  (26  Stat.,  81).    62  In- 
dians allotted  4,949.45  acres  under  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893. 
Executive  order  Aug   10   1869*    unratified  agreement  with 

(Under  Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho,  Cantonment,  and 
Seger  Schools.) 
Tribes:  Southern  Arapaho 
and  Northern  and  South- 
ern Cheyenne. 

Wichita,  Caddo,  and  others.  Oct.  19,  1872.    (See  Ann. 
Rept.,  1872,  p.  101.)    Executive  orders  of  Apr.  18,  1882, 
and  Jan.  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Supply  Military  Reserve 
(relinquished  for  disposal  under  act  of  Congress  of  July  5, 
1894,  by  authority  of  Executive  order  of  Nov.  5,  1894;  see 
General  Land  Office  Report,  1899,  p.  158).    Executive  order 
of  July  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Reno  Military  Reserve. 
Agreement  made  October,  1890,  and  ratified  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26, 
pp.    1022-1026.    528,789  acres   allotted   to   3,331    Indians; 
231,828.55  acres  for  Oklahoma  school  lands;  32,343.93  acres 
reserved  for  military  agency,  mission,  etc.,  purposes;   the 
residue,  3,500,562.05   acres,   opened   to   settlement.    (See 
Pres.  proc.  Apr.  12,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1018).    Executive  order, 
July  12,  1895.    President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  12,  1903, 
vol.  33,  p.  2317.    Act  June  17,  1910  (36  Stat.,  533),  57,637-10. 

1  Surveyed. 


80 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


OKLAHOMA— continued. 

Chickasaw -  - 

(Under  Union  Agency) 

Tribe:  Chickasaw.    Total. 


Choctaw 

(Under  Union  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Choctaw. 


Creek 

(Under  Union  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Creek. 


Iowa 

(Under      Sac      and      Fox 

School.) 
Tribes:  Iowa  and  Tonka- 


Kansa  or  Kaw 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Kansa  or  Kaw. 


Kickapoo 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Mexican  Kickapoo. 


Kiowa  and  Comanche 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Apache,    Coman- 
che.     Delaware,     and 
Kiowa. 


Modoc 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Modoc. 


Acres. 
7,839.00 
104.  05 


1 7, 943.  05 


21,721,107 


503 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


1  Surveyed. 


Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611;  agreement  of  Apr.  23, 
1897,  ratified  by  act  of  June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  505;  act  of 
July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  641,  ratifying  agreement  of  Mar.  21. 
1902;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  209;  act  of  Apr.  28,  1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  '544.  10,955  Indians  have  been  allotted  3,801,- 
989.91  acres;  sold,  859,500.32  acres;  unallotted  area,  104.05 
acres,  not  including  7,839.43  acres  segregated  coal  and 
asphalt  lands. 

Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611.  Same  as  Chickasaw. 
Approximately  26,730  Indians  have  been  allotted  4,297,- 
385,99  acres;  sold,  893,790.20  acres;  unsold,  1,296,257.88  acres; 
which  includes  1,278,753  acres  of  timber  land  in  the  Choctaw 
Nation,  but  does  not  include  424,745  acres  in  the  Choctaw 
Nation,  which  added  to  7,839  acres  in  the  Chickasaw  Nation 
makes  a  total  of  432,584  acres  of  the  segregated  coal  and 
asphalt  land  belonging  to  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
Nations  jointly. 

Treaties  of  Feb.  14,  1883,  vol.  7,  p.  417,  and  June  14,  1866, 
vol.  14,  p.  785,  and  the  deficiency  appropriation  act  of  Aug.  5, 
1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.  (See  Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  LIV.)  Agree- 
ment of  Jan.  19,  1889,  ratified  by  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1889, 
vol.  25,  p.  757,  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  23,  1889, 
vol.  26,  p.  1544,  agreement  of  Sept.  27,  1897,  ratified  by  act 
of  June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  514;  agreement  of  Mar.  8,  1900, 
ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  1,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  861;  President's 
proclamation  of  June  25,  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1971;  supple- 
mental agreement  of  June  30,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  500; 
President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  8,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
2021.  (See  act  of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  258;  act  of  Apr. 
21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  204.)  Approximately  18,716  Indians 
have  been  allotted  2,998,997.14  acres;  sold,  63,578.89  acres. 

Executive  order,  Aug.  15,  1883;  agreement  May  20,  1890,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  753.  8,605  acres 
allotted  to  108  Indians;  20  acres  held  in  common  for  church, 
school,  etc.;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement.  Proclama- 
tion of  President  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  0*9.  (See  Ann. 
Kept.,  1891,  p.  677,  and  letter  book  222.  p  3f.t.) 

Act  of  June  5,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228;  260  acres  reserved  for  cemo- 
tery,  school,  and  town  site.  Remainder,  99,644  acres, 
allotted  to  247  Indians;  act  of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  636, 
ratify  ing  agreement,  not  dated.  Act  Mar.  3,  1909.  (35  Stat, 
778.) 

Executive  order,  Aug.  15,  1883;  agreement  June  21,  1891;  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  557.  22,650  acres 
allotted  to  280  Indians;  479.72  acres  reserved  for  mission, 
agency,  and  school  purposes;  residue  opened  to  settlement 
by  proclamation  of  the  President  May  18,  1895,  vol.  29,  p. 
868;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1001.  June  21,  1906.  (34 
Stat.,  362.) 

Treaty  of  Oct.  21,  1867,  vol.  15,  pp.  581  and  589;  agreement 
made  Oct.  6,  1892;  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31, 
.  676,  ceding  2,488,893  acres,  of  which  445,000  acres  have 
een  allotted  to  3,444  Indians;  -11,972  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.  The  residue, 
2,033,583  acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  books  486,  p. 
440;  488,  p.  478).  President's  proclamation  of  July  4,  1901, 
vol.  32,  p.  1975;  June  23,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2007;  Sept.  4,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  2026,  and  Mar.  29,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.  Of  the 
480,000  acres  grazing  land  set  apart  under  act  of  June  6, 
1900,  1,841.92  acres  were  reserved  for  town  sites  under  act 
Mar.  20,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  801),  82,059.52  acres  were  allotted 
to  513  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  213), 
and  480  acres  allotted  to  3  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  as 
amended  by  act  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1018).  The  Gen- 
eral Land  Office  reports  the  sale  and  entry  of  approximately 
401,465.92  acres  under  act  of  June  5,  and  of  21,251.75  acres 
under  act  of  June  28,  1906,  to  June  30,  1911.  (See  87404-1909.) 
(See  75344-1908.)  Under  act  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.,  471), 
and  act  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  861),  20,498  acres  allotted  to 

.    169  Indians. 

Agreement  with  Eastern  Shawnees  made  June  23.  1874  (see 
Ann.  Kept.,  1882,  p.  271),  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.  Lands 
all  allotted—  3,966  acres  allotted  to  68  Indians,  8  acres  re- 
served for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  2  acres  for  school, 
and  24  acres  for  timber.  (Letter  book  220,  p.  102.)  Act 
Mar.  3,  1909.  (35  Stat.,  752.) 

2  Partly  surveyed. 


p. 

be 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


81 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Oakland 

Acres. 

Act  of  May  27,  1878,  vol.  20,  p.  84.    (See  Ann.  Kept,  for  1882, 
p.  LXII).    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee, 
vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  476.)    (See  deed  from  Nez  Perce, 
May  22,  1885,  vol.  0,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  504.)    11,456  acres 
allotted  to  73  Indians;  160.50  acres  reserved  for  government 
and  school  purposes.    The  residue,  79,276.60  acres,  opened 
to  settlement.    (Letter  book  257,  p.  240.)    Agreement  made 
Oct.  21,  1891,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.    (For  text,  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1893, 
p.  524.) 
Article  16,  Cherokee  treaty  of  July  19,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  804; 
order  of  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  27.  1871;  act  of  June 
5,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from 
Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  482.)    (See  act  of  June  28, 
1906  (34  Stats.,  539),  act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats.,  787),  and 
Public  Resolution  No.  51,  approved  Feb.  28,  1909.)    2,230 
Indians  have  been  allotted  1,065,134.31  acres  (3  selections). 
Since  July  1,  1909,  these  2,230  Indians  have  been  allotted 
1,465,350  acres  from  surplus  lands,  and  5,178.53  acres  have 
been  reserved  for  church,  town-site,  and  railroad  purposes. 
Act  Mar.  3,  1909.     (35  Stat.,  778.) 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1881,  vol.  21,  p.  381;  order  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  June  25,  1881.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883, 
from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  479.)    Under  acts 
of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats..  794). 
and  Apr.  21,  1904  (33  Stats.,  189),  128,251  acres  were  allotted 
to  514  Indians  (885  allotments—  see  letter  book  929,  p.  326), 
720  acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  cem- 
etery purposes,  and  640  acres  set  aside  for  tribal  uses. 
Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513;  12,995  acres  were  al- 
lotted to  160  Indians;  557.95  acres  were  authorized  to  be  sold 
by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891  (vol.  26,  p.  989).    The  residue,  1,587.25 
acres,  unallotted.    (Letter  book  229,  p.  115.) 

Act  of  Apr.  10,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  29.    Of  this,  230,014  acres  are 
Cherokee  and  53,006  acres  are  Creek  lands.    (See  deed  dated 
June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  470.) 
112,701  acres  allotted  to  820  Indians;  840  acres  were  reserved 
for  school,  agency,  and  cemetery  purposes;  the  residue, 
169,320  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (Letter  books  261,  p.  388, 
and  263.  p.  5.)    Agreement  made  Nov.  23,  1892,  ratified  by 
act  of  Mar.  .%  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.    (For  text  see  Ann.  Rept., 
1893,  p.  526.) 
Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.    43,334  acres  allotted 
to  218  Indians.    The  residue,  6,313.27  acres,  sold  under  act 
of  May  27,  1902.    (32  Stats.,  245.) 

Acts  of  Aug.  15,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  192;  Mar.  3,  1877,  vol.  19,  p. 
287;  May  27,  1878,  vol.  20,  p.  76;  and  Mar.  3.  1881,  vol.  21,  p. 
422.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee,  vol.  6, 
Indian  Deeds,  p.  473.)    There  have  been  allotted  to  782  In- 
dians 100,734  acres,  and  reserved  for  agency  ,  school,  mission  . 
and  cemetery  purposes  523.56  acres,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  320  acres.    (Letter  books  302,  p.  311,  and  813,  p. 
401.)    Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21,  1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  217. 
Treaty  of  Feb.  27,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  531;  act  of  May  23,  1872, 
vol.  17,  p.  159.    (222.716  acres  are  Creek  ceded  lands;  365,851 
acres  are  Seminole  lands.)    Agreements  with  citizen  Pot- 
awatomi June  25  and  Absentee  Shawnees  June  26,  1890; 
ratified  and  confirmed  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1016-1021.    215,679.42  acres  allotted 
to  1,489  Potawatomi,  and  70,791.47  acres  allotted  to  563 
Absentee  Shawnees,  and  510.63  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement  by  the 
President's  proclamation  of  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol.  27.  p.  989. 
(See  letter  book  222,  pp.  442,  444,  and.  Ann.  Rept.  for  1891, 
p.  677.) 
Treaties  of  May  13,  1833,  vol.  7,  p.  424,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867, 
vol.  15,  p.  513.    (56,245.21  acres  allotted  to  248  Indians,  400 
acres  reserved  for  school  and  40  acres  for  church  purposes. 
(Letter  book  335,  p.  326.)    Agreement  of  Mar.  23,  1893, 
ratified  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  2, 
1895,  vol.  28,  p.  907.    Agreement  of  Jan.  2,  1899,  ratified 
hi  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1901,  vol.  31, 
p.  1067.    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997. 

1  Surveyed. 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribes:   Tonkawa    and 
Lipan. 

Osage  

(Under  Osage  School.) 
Tribes:  Great  and  Little 
Osage. 

Otoe.. 

(Under  Otoe  School.) 
Tribes:  Oto  and  Missouri. 

Ottawa  .  . 

1  1,  587 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:      Ottawa      of 
Blanchards    Fork    and 
Roche  de  Boeuf. 
Pawnee  

(Under  Pawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Pawnee. 

Peoria  

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:    Kaskaskia,     Mi- 
ami,   Peoria,    Pianka- 
shaw,  and  Wea. 
Ponca  

1320 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 

Potawatomi 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribes:  Absentee    Shaw- 
nee  and  Potawatomi. 

Quapaw  

(Under     Seneca     School.) 
Tribe:  Quapaw. 

21716—14 


82 


EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


OKL  AHOM  A— continued . 


Saukand  Fox 

(Under    Sac   and    Fox 

School.) 

Tribes:  Ottawa,  Sauk  and 
Fox  of  the  Mississippi. 


Seminole 

(Under  Union  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Seminole. 


Acres. 


Seneca 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Seneca. 


Shawnee 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:  Seneca  and  East- 
ern Shawnee. 


Wichita 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:  lonL  Caddo,  Co- 
manche,  Delaware,  To- 
w  a  k  o  n  i     Waco,  and 
Wichita. 


Wyandot 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Wyandot. 


1.535 


Total. 


Grande  Ronde 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Kalapuya,  Clack- 
amas,  Cow  Creek,  Lak- 
miut,  Marys  River,  Mo- 
lala,    Nestucca,    Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Shasta, 
Tumwater,     Umpqua, 
Wapato,  and  Yamhill. 
Klamath 

(Under  Klamath  School.) 
Tribes:  Klamath,  Modoc, 
Paiute,  Pit  River,  Wal- 
pape,  and  Yahooskin 
Band  of  Snake  (Sho- 
shoni). 


Siletz 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Alsea,  Coquille, 
Kusan,  Kwatami, 
Rogue  River,  Skoton, 
Shasta,  Saiustkea,  Siu- 
slaw,Tututni,  Umpqua, 
and  13  others. 


1,733,050.05 


2  811,802 


3,200 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


1  Surveyed. 


Treaty  of  Feb.  18,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  495;  agreement  June  12, 
1890;  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  13, 1891,  vol.  26,  p.  749.  87,683.64 
acres  allotted  to  548  Indians,  and  800  acres  reserved  for 
school  and- agency  purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settle- 
ment by  the  President's  proclamation  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol. 
27,  p.  989.  (See  letter  book  222,  p.  169,  and  Ann.  Rept. 
for  1891,  p.  677.) 

Treaties  of  Mar.  21,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  755.  (See  Creek  agree- 
ment of  Feb.  14,  1881,  Ann,  Rep.  1882,  p.  54,  and  defi- 
ciency act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.)  Agreement  of 
Mar.  16,  1889.  (See  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  2, 1889.)  Agreement  recorded  in  the  treaty  book,  vol. 
3,  p.  35;  agreement  made  Dec.  16,  1897,  ratified  by  the  act 
of  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  567;  agreement  of  Oct.  7, 1899,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  June  2,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  250..  Approximately 
3,119  Indians  have  been  allotted  359,696.93  acres;  sold, 
4,223.74  acres. 

Treaties  of  Feb.  28,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  348;  of  Dec.  29,  1832,  vol. 
7.  p.  411,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.  41,813  acres 
allotted  to  435  Indians;  104.22  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment, church,  and  school  purposes.  Agreement  of  Dec.  2, 
1901,  ratified  by  act  of  May  27, 1902,  vol.  32.  p.  262. 

Treaties  of  July  20,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  351;  of  Dec.  29,  1832,  vol. 
7.  p.  411;  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vcl.  15,  p.  513,  and  agreement 
with  Modocs.  made  June  23,  1874  (see  Ann.  Rept.,  1882, 
p.  271),  confirmed  by  Congress  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.  12,745  acres 
allotted  to  117  Indians;  86  acres  reserved  for  agency  pur- 
poses (letter  books  208,  p.  266,  and  233, p. 207);  the  residue, 
2,543  acres,  sold  (agreement  of  Dec.  2,  1901.  ratified  by  act 
of  May  27, 1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262). 

(See  treaty  of  July  4,  1866,  with  Delawares,  art.  4,  vol.  14,  p. 
794.)  Unratified  agreement,  Oct.  19,  1872.  (See  Ann. 
Rept.,  1872,  p.  101.)  Agreement  made  June  4,  1891,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  2,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  895.  152,714  acres 
allotted  to  957  Indians;  4,151  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.  The  residue,  586,468 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  book  490,  p.  90).  Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  July  4.  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1975. 

Unoccupied  Chickasaw  and  Choctaw  leased  lands  west  of 
the  North  Fork  of  the  Red  River.  Act  of  May  4,  1896,  vol. 
29,  p.  113.  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  16,  1896.  vol.  29, 
p.  878.  Act  of  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  680). 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.  20,942  acres  allotted 
to  244  Indians,  16  acres  to  churches,  etc.,  leaving  534.72 
acres  unallotted  (letter  book  228,  p.  332). 


Treaties  of  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1143,  and  of  Dec.  21,  1855, 
vol.  12,  p.  982;  Executive  order  June  30,  1857.  440  acres 
reserved  for  Government  use  and  32,983  acres  allotted  to 
269  Indians.  (See  letter  book  210,  p.  328.)  Act  of  Apr.  28, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  567,  amending  and  ratifying  agreement  of 
June  27,  1901  (33  L.D.,  586). 


Treaty  of  Oct.  14,  1864,  vol.  16,  p.  707.  Act  June  10, 1896  (29 
Stat.,  321).  Act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.,  260).  207,373 
acres  allotted  to  1,345  Indians;  6,094.77  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  and  church  purposes.  Indian  appropria- 
tion act  approved  Apr.  21, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  202;  act  of  Mar.  3, 
1905,  vol.  33,  p.  1033,  and  act  of  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat.,  367). 
(See  act  of  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  752),  removal  of  Modocs 
in  Oklahoma  to  Klamath  and  allotments  thereto.)  Bound- 
ary Dispute  (see  9881-1911). 

Unratified  treaty,  Aug.  11,  1855;  Executive  orders  Nov.  9, 
1855,  and  Dec.  21, 1865,  and  act  of  Mar.  3, 1875,  vol.  18,  p.  446. 
Agreement  Oct.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  323.  44,459  acres  allotted  to  551  Indians.  Resi- 
due, 177,563.66  acres  (except  5  sections),  ceded  to  United 
States.  (See  letter  book  281,  p.  358.)  President's  proclama 
tion,  May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  866.  Acts  of  May  31,  1900, 
vol.  31,  p.  233,  and  Mar.  3, 1901,  vol.  31,  p.  1085.  Act  of  May 
13,  1910  (36  Stat.,  367). 

2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


83 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


OREGON— continued . 

Umatilla 

(Under  Umatilla  School.) 
Tribes:  Cayuse.  Umatilla, 
and  Wallawalla. 


Warm  Springs 

(Under      Warm      Springs 

School.) 

Tribes:  Des  Chutes,  John 
Day,  Paiute,  Tenino, 
Warm  Springs,  and 
Wasco. 


Total. 


SOUTH  DAKOTA. 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winne- 

bago. 

(Under  Crow  Creek  School.) 

Tribes:  Lower  Yank tonai, 

Lower  Brule,  Minicon- 

jou,    and   Two    Kettle 

Sioux. 


Lake  Traverse 

(Under  Sisseton  School.) 
Tribes:  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux. 


Cheyenne  River 

(Under     Cheyenne     River 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Mini- 
conjou,  Sans  Arcs,  and 
Two  Kettle  Sioux. 


Acres. 
174,232 


322,760 


Treaty  of  June  9, 1855,  vol.  12,  p.  945,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882, 
vol.  22,  p.  297;  Mar.  3,  1885,  vol.  23.  p.  340,  and  sec.  8  of  act 
of  Oct.  17,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  559.  (See  orders  Secretary  of 
Interior,  Dec.  4,  1888,  Ann.  Kept.,  1891,  p.  682.)  82,542.15 
acres  allotted  to  1,116  Indians,  980  acres  reserved  for  school 
and  mission  purposes.  (See  letter  book  255,  p.  132.)  Act 
of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  730. 

Treaty  of  June  25,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  963.  140,044  acres  allotted 
to  965  Indians,  and  1,195  acres  reserved  for  church,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.  The  residue,  322,108  acres,  unallotted 
and  unreserved  (letter  book  334,  p.  295). 


1,211,994 


i  29,266  Order  of  department,  July  1,  1863  (see  Ann.  Rept.,  1863,  p. 
318);  treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868;  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive 
order,  Feb.  27, 1885  (see  President's  proclamation  of  Apr.  17, 
1885,  annulling  Executive  order  of  Feb.  27, 1885;  Ann.  Rept., 
1885,  p.  51);  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888;  President's 
proclamations,  Feb.  10,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  There  have 
been  allotted  to  1,348  Indians  254,656.82  acres,  and  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes  1,076.90  acres, 
leaving  a  residue  of  111,711  acres  (letter  books  302,  p.  443;  372, 
p.  485;  373,  p.  347).  Lands  are  now  in  process  of  allotment. 
Treaty  of  Feb.  19,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505;  agreement,  Sept.  20. 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337,  Comp.  In- 
dian Laws.)  Agreement,  Dec.  12,  1889,  ratified  by  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1035-1038.  308,838  acres  allotted 
to  2,006  Indians,  32,840.25  acres  reserved  for  State  school  pur- 
poses, 1,347.01  acres  for  church  and  agency  purposes;  the 
residue,  574,678.40  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  Apr.  11, 1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1017.) 


340, 540 


Lower  Brule 

(Under  Lower  Brule  School.) 
Tribes:  Lower  Brule  and 
Lower  Yanktonai  Sioux. 


52, 159 


.     , ,       .     ,    .         . 

Treatv  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.'  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.     (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10. ) 
President's  proclamations  of  Feb.  7,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  2035, 
and  Mar.  30, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.    930,987. 14  acres  have  been 
allotted  to  3,154  Indians.     (See  L.  B.  828,  p.  321.)     Act  of 
May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  460).    Under  President's  procla- 
mation of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.,  2500),  1,158,010  acres  were 
opened  to  settlement,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved 
340,540  acres. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20,  1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10.) 
Agreement  made  Mar.  1, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899, 
vol.  30,  p.  1362,  ceding  120,000  acres  to  the  United  States. 
187,356  acres  allotted  to  777  Indians,  and  964.06  acres  re- 
served for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes,  leaving 
unallotted  and  unreserved  175,470.76  acres.    (See  letter 
book  498,  p.  336.)    (See  act  of  Apr.  21, 1906,  34  Stats.,  124  and 
1048,  and  President's  proclamations  of  Aug.  12,  1907,  and 
Sept.  24,  1913.) 

1  Surveyed. 


84  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OBEGON—  continued  . 


Pine  Ridge.  ........  .  ......... 

(Under  Pine  Ridge  Agency.) 
Tribes:    Brule  Sioux, 
Northern  Cheyenne, 
and  Oglala  Sioux. 


Rosebud 

(Under  Rosebud  School.) 
Tribes:  Loafer,  Minicon- 
jou,  Northern  Oglala, 
Two  Kettle,  Upper 
Brule,  and  Wazhazhe 
Sioux. 


Yankton 

(Under  Yankton  School.) 
Tribe:  Yankton  Sioux. 


Total 

UTAH. 


Uintah  Valley 

<Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Gosiute,  Pa  van  t. 
Uinta,  Yampa,  Grand 
River,  Uncompahgre, 
and  White  River  Ute. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
1385,329 


i  72, 342 


879, 636 


1249,340 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan!  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20,  1875,  and  Nov.  28,  1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive' orders.  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3. 1883,  22  Stats., 
624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs,,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act  of 
Apr.  30,  1888  (25  Stats.,  94),  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.     (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  29  Stats.,  10.) 
A  tract  of  32,000  acres  in  Nebraska  was  set  apart  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Jan.  24,  1882,  and  was  restored  to  the  public 
domain  by  Executive  order  of  Jan.  25,  1904,  and  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  640  acres  of  this  land  was  set 
apart  for  Indian  school  purposes  and  is  called  the  Sioux 
additional  tract.    (See  Nebraska.)    Act  of  Mar.   2,   1889 
(25  Stats.,  888),  authority  of  President  of  July  29,  1904, 
2,032,980.18  acres  have  been  allotted  to  5,750  Indians,  and 
11,333.68  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school,  and  church 
purposes,  aggregating  866,323.19,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  385,329  acres.    Lands  still  in  process  of  allot- 
ment under  acts  of  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.  L.,  888),  Mar.  1, 
1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1048),  and  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451), 
Act  May  27,  1910  (36  Stat.,  440),  40,960  acres  State  school 
land;  22,434  acres  timber  reserved.    President's  proclama- 
tion, June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  169,592  acres 
May  1,  1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305). 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of 
Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of 
Feb.  10, 1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol. 

29,  p.  10.)    1,643,048.80  acres  allotted  to  7,195  Sioux  Indians, 
416,000  acres  opened  to  settlement,  29,392.01  reserved  for 
Government    purposes,    churches,    cemeteries,    etc.    The 
residue,  436,151  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved.    Agree- 
ment made  Mar.  10, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899,  vol. 

30,  p.  1364.    Act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  254,  ratifying 
agreement  made  Sept.  14,  1901.    President's  proclamation 
of  May  16,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2354.    Act  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat., 
1048);  act  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stat.,  1230);  act  May  29.  1908  (35 
Stat.,  451);  act  May  30,  1910  (36  Stat.,  448);  President's 
proclamation,  Aug.  24,  1908  (35  Stat.,  2203),  opening  838,000 
acres  in  Tripp  County.     President's  proclamation,  June 
29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  300,000  acres  in  Mellette 
and  Washabaugh  Counties,  43,520  acres  State  school  land. 
Executive  order,  July  6,  1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  19,  1858,  vol.  11,  p.  744.  268,263  acres  allotted 
to  2,613  Indians  and  1,252.89  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
church,  and  school  purposes.  (See  letter  book  207,  p.  1.) 
Agreement  Dec.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  314.  The  residue  open  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation  May  16, 1895,  vol.  29,  p.  865.) 


Executive  orders,  Oct.  3,  1861;  act  of  June  18,  1878  (2 
Stats.,  165);  acts  of  May  5,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  63,  and  May 
24, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  157;  joint  resolution  of  June  19, 1902,  vol. 
32,  p.  744;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997;  Indian  appro- 
priation act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  207;  Presi- 
dent's proclamations  of  July  14, 1905,  setting  aside  1,010,000 
acres  as  a  forest  reserve,  2,100  acres  as  town  sites.  1 ,004,285 
acres  opened  to  homestead  entry,  2,140  acres  in  mining 
claims;  under  act  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  263),  99,407  acres 
allotted  to  1,284  Indians,  and  60,160  acres  under  reclama- 
tion, the  residue  179,194.65  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved. 
(See  letter  book  75,  p.  398.) 

1  Surveyed. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


85 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

UTAH—  continued. 
Uncompahgre             ...     . 

A  cres. 

Executive  order,  Jan.  5,  1882.    (See  act  of  June  15,  1880,  rati- 
fying the  agreement  of  Mar.  6,  1880,  vol.  21,  p.  199.)    12,540 
acres  allotted  to  83  Indians,  remainder  of  reservation  re- 
stored to  public  domain,  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  62. 
(  Letter  book  403,  p.  115.)    Joint  resolution  of  June  19,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  744. 

Order  of  the  Secretary  ol  the  Interior,  July  8,  1864;  Executive- 
order,  Oct.  1,  1886.    471  acres  set  aside  for  school  purposes. 
The  residue,  3,753.63  acres,  restored  to  the  public  domain 
for  Indian  homestead  entry.    36  Indians  made  homestead? 
selections,  covering  all  the  land.    (See  letter  book  152,  p, 
201,  and  153,  p.  45.) 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  19,  1879,  Mar.  6,  1880,  and  Feb.  23,. 
1883.    (See  Indian  apt>ropriation  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23  r 
p.  79.)    Agreement  made  Julv  7,  1883,  ratified  bv  act  of 
July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79.    Executive  order,  Mav  1,  1886; 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  9,  1894;    department  orders  of 
Apr.  11,  1894,  and  Apr.  20,  1894,  and  Executive  order  off 
Jan.   19,   1895.     26,218  acres  allotted   to  35  Indians  (see- 
Executive  order  of  May  21,  1886.  and  act  of  Mar.  8.  1906,  34 
Stats.,  55). 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  9  and  July  2,  1872;  agreement  made 
July  7,  1883,  ratified  by  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.   79 
Act  of  Julv  1,  1892,  vol.   27,  p.  62.    (See  ac";s  of  Feb.  20;. 
1896,  vol.  29,  p.  9,  and  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30.  p.  593.)    5t,65S 
acres  in  north  half  allotted  to  660  Indians  (see  letter  book$ 
428,  p.  100):  remainder  of  north  half,  estimated  at  1,449,268 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  Oct.  10,  1900  (see  proclamation 
of  the  President,  dated  Apr.  10,  1COO,  31  Stats.,  p.  1963). 
240  acres  have  been  reserved  for  town  sites.    2  750.82  acre* 
temporarily    withdrawn    lor   town    sites.    The    residue,. 
1,297,009  acres  (estimated),  unallotted.    Act   of  Feb.  7, 
1903,  vol.  32,  p.  803.    Allotments  to  be  made  under  act  of 
Mar.  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  80),  and  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36* 
Stat.,  863).    Lands  now  being  allotted. 
Executive  order,  Sept.  11,  1893. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Executive 
order,  Nov.  22,  1873.    Allotted  12,560.94  acres  to  109  Indians  ; 
reserved  for  Government  school,  80  acres. 

Treaty  of  Neah  Bay,  Jan.  31,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  939;  Executive- 
orders,  Oct.  26,  1872,  Jan.  2  and  Oct.  21,  1873.    3,727  acre* 
allotted  to  373  Indians.    (See  letter  book  960,  228  and  376791 
1907.) 
Executive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  Apr.  9,  1874.    44  Indians 
have  been  allotted  3,532.72  acres. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26.  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  Exec- 
utive order,  Jan.  20,  1857.    Land  all  allotted.    4,718  acres  to* 
30  Indians. 

Executive  order,  Apr.  12,  1893. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  order  o£ 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  Oct.  21,  1864.     7.219  acres 
allotted  to  51  Indians;  the  residue,  65  acres,  unallotted. 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 
Agency.) 
Tribe:  Tabaquache  Ute. 

Total 

249,340 

WASHINGTON. 

Chehalis 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Chinook  (Tsinuk), 
Clatsop,  and  Chehalis. 

Columbia  

(Under  Colville  School.) 
Tribe:    Columbia    (Moses 
band.) 

Colville  

U,297,009 
640 

(Under  Colville  Agency.) 
Tribes:      Coeur  d'Ale'ne, 
Colville,  Kalifpel,  Okin- 
agan,    Lake,    Methow. 
Nespelim,      Pend      d' 
Oreille,     Sanpoil,     and 
Spokan. 

Hoh  River 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Hoh.     ' 
Lummi  

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,    Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Makah... 

219,312 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribes:  Makah  and  Qui- 
leute. 
Muckleshoot  

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribe:  Muckleshoot. 

Nisqualli.. 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes  :  Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualli,  P  u  y  a  1  1  u  p, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 
Ozette 

640 
365 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Ozette. 
Port  Madison  

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,    Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 

1  Partly  surveyed. 


a  Outboundaries  surveyed 


8  Surveyed. 


86 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

WASHINGTON—  continued. 
Puyallup  

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854.  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualli,  Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 

Quileute 

1  837 

ecutive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  Sept.  6,  1873.    17,463 
acres  allotted  to  167  Indians.    Agreement  made  Nov.  21, 
1876,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  464.     (For 
text  see  annual  report  1893,  p.  518.)    The  residue,  599  acres 
laid  out  as  an  addition  to  the  city  of  Tacoma,  had  been  sold, 
with  the  exception  of  39.79  acres  reserved  for  school,  and 
19.43  acres  for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  under  acts  of 
Mar.  3.  1893  (27  Stat.,  633,  June  7,  1897)  (30  Stats.,  62),  and 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  377). 
Executive  order  Feb  19  1889 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Quileute. 
Quinaielt  

2  158,  784 

Treaties  of  Olympia,  July  1,  1855,  and  Jan.  25,  1856,  vol.  12, 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Quaitso  and  Quin- 
aielt. 

Shoalwater  

2335 

p.  971;  Executive  order,  Nov.  4,  1873.    Under  acts  of  Feb. 
8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388).  and  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794)  ,  690 
Indians  have  been  allotted  54,989.80  acres  and  456.56  have 
been  reserved  for  agency,  lighthouse,  and  other  purposes, 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  158,784  acres.    Act  Mar. 
4,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1545).    Lands  now  being  allotted. 
Executive  order,  Sept.  22,  1866,  55,535-7-1909. 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:   Shoalwater    and 
Chehalis. 
Skokomish 

Treaty  of  Point  No  Point,  Jan.  26.  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  933;   Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:   Clallam,    Skoko- 
mish, and  Twana. 

Snohomish  or  Tulalio  
(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Spokan  .   ... 

2324 
82,  647 

ecutive  order,  Feb.  25,  1874.    Allotted  in  treaty  reserve 
4,990  acres;  residue,  none.    (See  L.  B.,  895,  p.  268.)    Allot- 
ted in  Executive  order  addition,  known  as  the  Fisher  ad- 
dition, 814  acres;  residue,  none.    (L.  B.,  895,  p.  285.)    62 
allotments. 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 
tive order,   Dec.   23,   1873.    22,166  acres  allotted   to   164 
Indians. 

Executive  order,  Jan.  18,  1881.    Agreement  made  Mar.  18, 

(Under  Spokane  Agency) 
Tribe:  Spokan. 

Squaxou  Island  (Klahchemin) 

1887,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  July 
13,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  139.    (For  text  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1892, 
p.  743.)    Joint  resolution  of  Congress  of  June  19,  1902,  vol. 
32,  p.  744.    Under  act  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  458), 
approximately  626  Indians  have  been  allotted  64,794  acres, 
and  1,247.30  acres  set  aside  for  church,  school,  agency,  and 
town-site  purposes.    By  proclamation  of  May  22,  1909,  the 
President  opened  the  surplus  lands  to  settlement.    5,781 
acres  classified  as  agricultural  land,  82,647.50  acres  classi- 
fied as  timber  reserved  for  tribal  use.    Act  May  29,  1908. 
Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  land 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Nisqualli,  Puyal- 
lupj     Skwawksnamish, 
S  tailakoom,  and  5  others. 
Swinomish  (Perrys  Island) 

all  allotted,  1,494.15  acres,  to  23  Indians. 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 

(Under Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Yakima 

3  796,  753 

tive  order,  Sept.  9,  1873.   Allotted,  7,359  acres  to  71  Indians; 
reserved  for  school,  89.80  acres;  unallotted,  0.35  acres. 

Treaty  of  Walla  Walla,  June  9,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  951.    Agree- 

(Under Yakima  School.) 
Tribes:  Klikitat,  Paloos, 
Topnish,    Wasco,    and 
Yakima. 

ment  made  Jan.  13,  1885,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  631.    (For  text  see 
Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  41,  p.  227;  see  also  Ann.  Kept., 
1893,  pp.  520-521,  and  Senate  Ex.  Docs.  No.  21,  49th  Cong., 
1st  sess.,  and  No.  45,  50th  Cong.,  1st  sess.)   Executive  order, 
Nov.  28,  1892.    Agreement,  Jan.  8,  1894,  ratified  by  act  of 
Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  320.    296,407  acres  allotted  to  3,137 
Indians,  and  1,020.24  acres  reserved  for  agency,  church,  and 
school  purposes.    (See  letter  books  354,  p.  419;  416,  p.  263, 
and  879,  p.  243.)    Act  of  Dec.  21,  1904  (33  Stats.,  595),  recog- 
nizing claim  of  Indians  to  293,837  acres  additional  land,  sub- 
ject to  the  right  of  bona  fide  settlers  or  purchasers,  acquired 
prior  to  Mar.  5,  1904.    (See  39848,  1909.)    Act  Mar.  6,  1906 
(34  Stat.,  53),  and  act  May  6,  1910  (36  Stat.,  348). 

Total  

2,  357,  346 

1  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


2  Surveyed. 


Partly  surveyed. 


KEPOR-T    OP    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


87 


TABLE  7, — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for  its 
establishment,  to  Nov.  3,  1913 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

WISCONSIN. 

Lac  Court  Oreille 

Acres. 
1403 

26,  153 

46,  613 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  lands  withdrawn  by 
General  Land  Office,  Nov.  22,  1860,  Apr.  4,  1865.    (See  re- 
port by  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  1,  1873.)    Act  of  May 
29,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  190.    68,511  acres  allotted  to  876  Indians. 
Act  of  Feb.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  795. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109,  lands  selected  by 
Indians.    (See  report  of  Superintendent  Thompson,  Nov. 
14,  1863,  and  report  to  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  June  22, 
1866.    Department  order  of  June  26,  1866.    Act  of  May  29, 
1872,  vol.  17,  p.  190.    44,877  acres  allotted  to  589  Indians; 
act  of  Feb.  3,  1903  (32  Stats.,  795),  leaving  unallotted  26,153.40 
acres. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.    368.91  acres  patented 
under  art.  10;  195.71  acres  fishing  ground.    83,871  acres  allot- 
ted to  1,063  Indians.    (See  letter  to  General  Land  Office, 
Sept.  17,  1859,  and  letter  book  381,  p.  49.)    Acts  of  Feb. 
11,  1901  (31  Stats.,  766),  and  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stats.,  1217), 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  46,613  acres. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  Executive  order, 
Feb.  21,  1856.    (See  Indian  Office  letters  of  Sept.  3,  1858,  and 
May  25,  1863,  and  General  Land  Office  letter  of  May  27, 
1863.    See  Executive  orders.    See  report  of  Superintendent 
Thompson,  May  7,  1863.    Lands  withdrawn  by  General 
Land  Office  May  8  and  June  3,  1863.)    2,535.91  acres  allot- 
ted to  35  Indians  under  treaty;  of  the  residue  11,566.90  acres 
were  allotted  to  169  Indians  under  joint  resolution  of  Feb. 
20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  970,  and  40.10  acres  were  reserved  for 
school  purposes. 
Treaties  of  Oct.  18,  1848,  vol.  9,  p  952;  of  Mav  12,  1854,  vol. 
10,  p.  1064,  and  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679." 

Treaty  of  Feb.  3,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  566.    65,402.13  acres  allotted 
to  1,501  Indians;  remainder,  84.08  acres,  reserved  for  school 
purposes. 
Treaties  of  Nov.  24,  1848,  vol.  9,  p.  955;  Feb.  5,  1856,  vol.  11, 
p.  663,  and  of  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679;  act  of  Feb.  6, 
1871,  vol.  16,  p.  404.    (For  area,  see  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  174.)    167  Indians  allotted  8,920  acres.    Patents  in 
fee,  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  382).    Act  Mar.  3,  1893  (27 
Stat.,  744). 

(Under  Hay  ward  School.) 
Tribe:  Lac  Court  Oreille 
Band  of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 
Lac  du  Flambeau 

(Under  Lac  du  Flambeau 
School.) 
Tribe:  Lac  du  Flambeau 
Band  of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  
(Under  La  Pointe  Agency.) 
Tribe:  La  Pointe   Band 
of,  Chippewa  of  Lake 
Superior. 

Red  Cliff 

(Under  Red  Cliff  Agency.) 
Tribe:   La  Pointe  Band 
(Buffalo  Chief)  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 

Menominee 

2  231,  680 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribe:  Menominee. 
Oneida 

.  (Under  Oneida  School.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 
Stockbridge  

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribes:  Stockbridge  and 
Munsee. 

Total..., 



304.  849 

WYOMING. 


Wind  River 

(Under  Shoshone  School.) 
Tribes:  Northern  Arap- 
aho  and  Eastern  Band 
of  Shoshoni. 


Total 

Grand  total . 


3608,526.06 


608, 526. 06 


36,319,691.05 


Treaty  of  July  3, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  acts  of  June  22, 1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  166,  and  Dec.  15, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  291;  Executive  order, 
May  21,  1887.  Agreement  made  Apr.  21,  1896,  amended 
and  accepted  by  act  of  June  7, 1896  (vol.  30,  p.  93);  amend- 
ment accepted  by  Indians  July  10,  1897.  (See  Land  Div. 
letter  book  359,  p.  468.)  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1905,  ratifying  and 
amending  agreement  with  Indians  of  Apr.  21,  1904.  (See 
vol.  33,  p.  1016.)  President's  proclamation  June  2,  1906, 
opening  ceded  part  to  settlement.  It  contained  1,472,844.15 
acres.  (See  letter  book  866,  p.  157.)  Reserved  for  Mail 
Camp,  120  acres;  reserved  for  Mail  Camp  Park,  40  acres; 
reserved  for  bridge  purposes,  40  acres.  Subject  to  disposi- 
tion under  President's  proclamation,  1,438,633.66  acres. 
223,236  acres  were  allotted  to  2,154  Indians,  and  1,792.05 
acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  ceme- 
tery purposes,  under  acts  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats..  388), 
as  amended  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  and 
treaty  of  July  3,  1868  (15  Stats.,  673),  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  608,526.  06  acres. 


1  Surveyed. 


8  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


» Partly  surveyed. 


88 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  8. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1913. 


Stains  and  reservations. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted 

Total. 

Arizona: 
Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River) 

24,971 
240,  640 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,  231 
357,  120 
518 
730,  880 
138,240 
2,472,320 
9,880,397 
136,319 
46,720 
1,  834,  240 

24,971 
240,640 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
357,  120 
518 
730,  880 
138,  240 
2,472,320 
9,889,997 
177,925 
46,720 
1,834,240 

Colorado  River  

Fort  Apache  .                                                

Fort  Mojave 

Gila  Bend  (Pima)  

Gila  River  (Pima). 

Havasupai 

Hualapai                                                                         

Kaibab 

Moqui               .   .       .                  

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico) 

9,600 
41,606 

Papago         

Salt  River 

San  Carlos  

Total 

51,206 

17,585,844 

17,637,050 

California: 

Digger 

370 
99,051 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,  880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
4,360 
3,896 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
5,461 
15,042 
370 
20,800 
480 
1,111 
48,  551 
39,386 

370 
128,  142 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
4,480 
5,195 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
5,461 
15,042 
640 
20,800 
480 
43,217 
48,551 
39,  386 

Hoopa  Valley  .  . 

29,091 

Mission— 
Agua  Caliente  

Augustine  (Malki). 

Cabazon  (Malki) 

Cahuilla  (Soboba)  

Campo  

Capitan  Grande  (Volcan)                                    

Cuyapipa  (Campo) 

Inaja  (Volcan)..    .  .         .  .         

Laguna  (Campo) 

La  Posta  (Campo) 

I  os  Coyotes  (Voban). 

Manzanita  (Campo)  

Martinez  (Malki)     .                                                   .  . 

Mission  Creek  (Malki)  

Morongo  (Malki)  .                                   .... 

Pala  

120 
1,299 

Pechanga  (Temecula)  

Potrero  (Pala) 

Ramona  .                

Rincon 

San  Manuel  (Malki)  

San  Pascual 

Santa  Rosa  (Soboba) 

Soboba 

* 

Santa  Ysabel  (Mesa  Grande) 

Syquan  (Volcan) 

270 

Torres  (Malki) 

Twenty-nine  Palms  (Malki)  

Round  Valley 

42,  106 

Tule  River  

Yuma 

Total                                                                  

72,  886 
72,  651 

364,  743 
483,910 
23,542 

437,  629 
556,  561 
23,542 

104,077 
454,  239 
212,390 

Colorado:  Ute 

Florida:  Seminole..                      .    .                

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene                                             

104,077 

Fort  Hall 

6,299 
178,  812 

447,940 
33,  578 

Lapwai.  .      .                          

Total 

289,  188 

481,518 
3,251 

770,  706 
3,251 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox                                                       

Kansas: 
Chippewa  and  Munsee.  .       .         

4,195 
11,769 

4,195 
11,769 
27,  735 
220,785 
8,103 

Iowa  (Kickapoo)                                                                       .  .  . 

Kickapoo 

27,216 
220,  785 
8,079 

519 

Potawatomi                                                  

Sac  and  Fox  (Kickapoo) 

24 

Total                                                           .           

272,044 

543 

191 
732 
160 

272,  587 

Michigan: 
Isabella...                                                 

98,395 
52,041 
2,391 

98,586 
52,  773 
2,551 

L'Anse 

Ontonagon 

Total                                                                                    

152,  827 

1,083 

153,910 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  89 

TABLE  8. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1913— Continued. 


States  and  reservations. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted 

Total. 

Minnesota: 
Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake)  

54  524 

54,524 
296 
27,637 
24,  191 
47,453 
12,582 
543,528 
1,080 
704,623 
64,  733 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake) 

296 
27  637 

1 

Fond  du  Lac  

Grand  Portage  

24,  191 
47.453 
12,  582 

Leech  Lake... 

Mdewakanton  

Red  Lake  

543,528 
1,080 
29,736 

Vermillion  Lake  

White  Earth  

674,  887 
64,  733 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake)  
Total  

903,303 

574,  344 

1,480,647 

1,503,450 
2,313,213 
497,600 
721,  743 

228,227 
489,500 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

1,600 
479,028 

1,501,850 
1,834,185 
497,600 

Crow  

Fort  Belknap  

Fort  Peck  

721,743 
227,970 

Jocko  (Flathead)  

257 
489,500 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River)  

Total  

1,430,341 

4,323,392 

5,  753,  733 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

130,522 
27,236 
72,  567 

4,500 

135,022 
27,236 
72,639 

640 
108,838 

Ponca  (Santee)  

Santee  

72 
640 

Sioux  (additional)  

Winnebago  

108,838 

Total  

339,  163 

5,212 

344,375 

Nevada: 
Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone)  

321,  920 
1,000 
'  1,220 
322,000 
40,526 

321,920 
1,000 
1,320 
322,000 
50,509 

Moapa  River  

Paiute  (Fallen)  

100 

Pyramid  Lake  (Nevada) 

Walker  River  

9,983 

Total  

10,083 

686,  666 

696,  749 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla  Apache 

353,812 

407,300 
474,  240 
1,980,637 

95,792 
24,256 
110,080 
17,510 
154,025 
13,586 
18,763 
17,  461 
13,520 
24,  187 
17,545 
34,767 
17,361 
49,369 
92,398 
17,515 
17,293 
17,361 
17,471 
215,040 

761,  112 
474,240 
2,300,000 

95,792 
24,256 
110,080 
17,510 
154,025 
13,586 
18,763 
17,  461 
13.520 
24,  187 
17,545 
34,767 
17,361 
49,369 
92,398 
17,515 
17,293 
17,361 
17,471 
215,040 

Mescalero  Apache  

Navajo  (see  Arizona) 

319,363 

Pueblo— 
A  co  ma  (Albuquerque)  

Cochiti.  

Isleta  (Albuquerque).. 

Jemez  

Laguna  (Albuquerque). 

Nambe  

Pecos  

Picuris  

Pojoaque  

San  Dia  (Albuquerque)  

San  Juan. 

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque).  . 

Santa  Ana  (Albuquerque) 

Santa  Clara  

Santo  Domingo.  .  . 

Sia...                           

San  Ildefonso  

Taos  

Tesuque  .  . 

Zuni......  

Total 

673,  175 

3,847,477 

4,520,652 

New  York: 
Allegany  

30,  469 
21,680 
640 
350 
6,100 
14,640 
7,549 
6,249 

30,  469 
21,680 
640 
350 
6,  100 
14,640 
7,549 
6,249 

Cattaraugus  . 

Oil  Spring  

Oneida  

Onondaga 

St.  Regis  

Tonawanda 

Tuscarora 

Total.  .  . 

87,  677              87.  677 

90  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  8. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  reservations. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

North  Carolina:  Qualla                                                               

63,211 

63,211 

North  Dakota: 
Devils  Lake  (  Fort  Totten)  .                              .           

137,381 
229.554 
1,338,530 
44,140 

137,381 
673,616 
1,637,767 
45,894 

Fort  Berthold 

444,  062 
299,237 
1,754 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain 

Total      .      .     .                              

1,749,605 

745,053 

2,494,658 

Oklahoma: 
Cherokee.   .                                                      .            

4,346,793 
3,801,263 
4,303,666 
2,999,360 
360,464 
4,949 
528,789 
8,605 
99,644 
22,650 
546,  375 

625 

349,430 
2,273,328 
1,553 
160 

4,347,418 
4,150,693 
6,576,994 
3,000,913 
360,624 
4,949 
528,789 
8,605 
99,644 
22,650 
546,375 
3,966 
11,456 
1,465,350 
128,351 
14,582 
112,860 
43,334 
101,  691 
291,616 
56,245 
87,  684 
41,813 
12,  745 
152,714 
21,  477 

Chickasaw 

Choctaw  

Creek 

Seminole  

Cherokee  Outlet  ... 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Iowa  (Sac  and  Fox)  

Xansa  (Kaw) 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee)  

Kiowa  and  Comanche  and  Apache. 

Mo  doc  (Seneca) 

3,966 
11,  456 
1,  465,  350 
128,351 
12,  995 
112,  701 
43,334 
100,  745 
291,  616 
56,  245 
87,  684 
41,813 

Oakland  .           .                   

Osage 

Otoe  

Ottawa  (Seneca) 

1,587 
159 

Pawnee 

Peoria  (Seneca)     ...             

Ponca 

946 

Potawatomi  (Shawnee)  ..        

Ojuapaw  (Seneca) 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seneca  ~  

Shawnee  

'       12,  745 
152,  714 

Wichita  (Kiowa)  

Wyandot  (Seneca)  

20,  942 

535 

Total 

19,565,215 

2,628,323 

22,193,538 

Oregon: 
Grande  Ronde  

32,983 
207,374 
44,459 
82,  156 
139,  729 

165 

811,802 
3,200 
74,618 
323,075 

33,  148 
1,019,176 
47,  659 
156,774 

462,804 

Klamath 

Siletz 

Umatilla          

Warm  Springs  

Total 

506,  701 

1,212,860 

1,719,561 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

869,  307 
254,657 
308,838 
187,350 
1,853,672 
1,642,889 
268,263 

389,  704 
34,348 
1,347 
165,  510 
733,  593 
72,342 

1,259,011 
289,005 
310,  185 
352,  860 
2,  587,  265 
1,715,231 
268,263 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago 

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton)  

Lower  Brule  

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud  

Yankton 

Total  

5,384,976 

1,396,844 

6,781,820 

Utah: 
Paiute.       .     .. 

600,000 
179,  154 

600,000 
278,  561 
12,  540 

Uintah  Valley 

99,407 
12,  540 

Uncompahgre  

Total 

111,947 

779,  154 

891,  101 

Washington: 
Chehalis  (Cushman)  .  .  .                      

3,799 
22,  618 

3,799 
22,  618 
1,348,662 
640 
12,561 
23,040 
3,491 
4,717 
640 
7,284 
17,463 

Columbia  (Colville)  .  .  . 

Colville 

51,653 

1,297,009 
640 

Hoh  River  (Neah  Bay) 

Lummi  (Tulalip) 

12,561 
3,728 
3,491 

Makah  (Neah  Bay  ).....                   

19,  312 

Muckleshoot  (Cushman)  

Nisqualli  (Cushman)  

4,717 

Ozette  (Neah  Bay)                                              

640 
65 

Port  Madison  (Tulalip) 

7,219 
17,  463 

Puyallup  (Cushman)  .  .  . 

REPORT    OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  8. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


91 


4 

Irea  in  acres 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Quileute  (Neah  Bay) 

837 

837 

Quinaielt  (Cushman)  

54,990 

168.  553 

223  543 

Shoalwater         

335 

335 

Skokomish  (Cushman) 

7  803 

7  803 

Snohomish  (Tulalip)  

22.  166 

324 

22*  490 

Spokan 

64  794 

82  648 

147  442 

Squaxon  Island  (Cushman)  

1,494 

1,494 

Swinomish  (Tulalip)  

7,359 

7,359 

Yakima 

294  967 

797  852 

1  092  819 

Total 

580  822 

2  368  215 

2  949  037 

Wisconsin: 
Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Hayward) 

68  511 

403 

68  914 

Lac  du  Flambeau  

44,  877 

32,  346 

77  223 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

83  871 

39  880 

123  751 

Menominee  

231,680 

231,  680 

Oneida  

65,440 

65,440 

Red  Cliff 

14  166 

14  166 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  

8,920 

8,920 

Total 

285  785 

304  309 

590  094 

Wyoming:  Wind  River  (Shoshone)               

221  943 

608  526 

830  469 

Total  reservation  lands  

32,676,861 

1  38,  575  697 

71  252  558 

Public  domain 

893  986 

893  986 

Grand  total 

33  570  847 

138  575  697 

72  146  544 

Does  not  agree  with  unallotted  area  in  Table  7,  dated  Nov.  3, 1913. 


92 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


fiscal  y 


Use  of  ag 


:  :  :22! 


S!88 


00  CO  O  O  >O 

"•        ^ 


e 


s 


kOC^t^.Tf<O 


OOl^- 

CC  O>  i-« 


O:  (N        CC 


§»c  o  0}  »o  Is—  »o  i 
IM  (M  ^H  rH  ^H 


ojoo 


'  •—!        «  CO  O  1--       • 

JO  I-H  CO      • 


CO        «O  r-l 


i  iO     •     <     •  O CO< 


2*5  2  «::::::: 
EPS-ife-d  ::::::• 


..tiffpaiflJiiSlI 

Isllll^alll«llllS 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  93 


S        S3 


SSlIi 


a  91 


O  -H  -^  lO 

-sis 


« 


258  :! 


i-4  -^  OO  iO  i 

t>-  CD  CO 


rH  lO  O  I 

10  Tt<  O ' 


5SSS 


O  O  »O  «C 
(NOO       rt 


6      :  : 
.S     :  : 


3^3 


_ 


a  fee 

tuOC3  O 

SPSS 


94 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


l 


of 


'  O 

•  t^- 


SJSSSSSSj 


o  •*  k 


>  O  O  O  CS  iC 


* 


S? 


o  10  o  »c  co  o 

i—  1  Tf  C^         i-H  ^ 


cc 


53 


3l!   . 

ill 

i 


De 
____ 

Riv 
rn  Sh 


-+S        . 


..§§21,33 
rfss-g&^s 

S3gSS££ 


f~  o-  . 
S  ' 
&?  0 


Total 
North  Caroli 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  95 


OfOicoooco  o 

r-t  o  r^  I-H  co  (N  co  to 

t- (M  05  <N  <N  ,-H  00         ,H 


•  1C 

•  T(< 


!§£Si 

>        I>-  1C  < 


oo  10 

r-l  i-H  I 


ss  s 


;s£g§S! 

r-T   <N~ 


CO  IO  O  "ft4 

TP  co  GO  r* 


(M       00  O      O    O    C<)  1C 
C^l      CDOO      t-    00    CO(M 


CD  1C  CO  »C        "^        1C  O 


»c  ro      o 


S8- 


Sgfl 

03  O  S 


i  ilp^jyli^llFi 


m* 


H,   EH 


TI 


96 


REPORT    OP    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


| 

. 

i 

s? 

1  : 

OOC<«        (N 

-S    9 

I 

il 

i 

1 

a 

0 

?l 

•1 

{8 

SH 

cn 

J3 

**  \ 

;  *^ 

^ 

•*! 

§ 

•d 

g 

Ki? 

§ 

i§ 

1SSS 

^  ^ 

a 

1 

i 

S 

s 

3      • 

| 

CO 

t^ 

*^ 

i-H  1- 

•" 

CO 

0 

CP 

1 

g^    ' 

11 

|S 

I 

r-HJO 

i 

BIS§! 

il 

•^i  »H  i- 

3 

1 

i 

P 

1 

ll  is 

t 

C3 
> 

°S 

ss 

'    "• 

•« 

^^ 

^ 

(Nt-^H.^ 

50« 

M 

S? 

1-1 

1-1 

II           : 

3 
^d 

1 

§ 

1 

|P 

Ig 

i 

P 

§ 

§SooS2 

OO^H^COCC 

IP 

F 

00 

oT 

? 

1 

«-« 

e^ 

>-| 

OS 

>-( 

! 
i 

1 

6 

if 

^^" 

VC  if 

1 

1| 

» 

*"H 

*; 

ii 

" 

3 

! 

«? 

2^^S 

£ 

*£ 

3 
1 

t^ 

N 

§ 

5! 

s 

•<£ 

?! 

H 

§ 

ci 

1 

.i 

(M  <N        ^ 

i 

a 
p 

cultiva- 
tion. 

s-ss 

^j? 

c: 

gs 

$ 

S2 

8« 

18 

! 

tf! 

* 

•* 

^    2 

1 
1 

4 

; 

j 
i 

< 

1C 

li 

3« 

q 

|a" 

? 

8S 

*" 

^^  o  co  e> 

s  = 

P 

o 

8 

r 

-f 

0500^-10 

•d 

_TJ 

t- 

•5 

10      • 

g 

<N 

•1 

-S 

Sj 

:    : 

C-! 

-3 

S 

T3 
0 

2 

CO 

g 

S 

:  :  :  : 

1     : 

& 

OQ 

0 

^ 

o 

| 

o   -    •    • 

e 

:    * 

£ 

^ 

"3 
> 

ft 

| 

S 
1 

CO 

g 

c3 

1 

1" 

£ 

5 

OSCO        lO 

a 

S 

P 

s 

8 

8S«S 

1 

1 

S 

o 

It 

.  o 

' 

§ 

NrH           (N 

ra 

"C 

10" 

8 

«D 

|S1 

1 

i 

f 

g 

}8S 

1 

<M  •* 

3 

s   s 

=s> 

fe 

•  a 

^o 

o 

00        >0 

:^ 

tc 

CO        0 

1 

i| 

|3 

^ 

1—1 

R 

> 
1 

! 

!: 
| 
1 

f 

S 

0 

\i 

i™ 

0 

s 

c 

1-1 

"gr'°° 

s. 

C<l  ^H 

8 

i 

ss 

"1 

1 

1 

I 

ITS 

:  : 

\> 

% 

: 

1 

1 

"s? 

..§1 

? 
o 

jj! 

a 

6 

! 

>* 
| 

' 

Total  
Pennsylvania:  Car 

J 
5c 

S| 

r 

Illl 

|||  || 

<!;    K 
tf  ^ 

3| 

II 

"ial 

|s| 

^ssl 

d-se 

Yankton  

'1 

i 

I 

_> 

•  •^ 

^V 
5 

5 

~ 
^ 
* 
"~ 

1 

r- 

Washington: 
Colville  
Cushman  
Neah  Bay  
Spokane  

REPORT    OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


97 


8 

i 

§    j 

i 

sa 

I 

35 

2 

38 

811 

ii 

g 

§g 

CT3 

i 

11 

SI! 

ii 

g 

<N 

CO 

" 

c*^. 

'•"*'H 

S"5 

1 

11 

5 

co' 

1 

Rl 

asa 

!-! 

1 

31 

of 

s 

Si 

*'8 

12 

I 
s 

°s 

1 

? 

o  >o 

COrH 

sss 

II 

3 

5 

sg 

2 

1 

2- 

B|« 

gf 

§ 

s?8 

0 

CC 

(NO 

(NOCO 

COO 

CO 

rf 

(M 

1 

§ 

I 

5 

«S 

oo 

» 

1 

iO       Oi 

^*  lO 
CO  *O 

I 

3 

i 

jjs 

II 

2 

*g 

1 

i 

i 

8ig 

2 

i 

S~ 

^ 

8 

1 

10     eo 

00  ~f 

<N 

•i 

:g 

:  g 

:5 

"S 

Tulalip... 
Yakima.  .  . 

s 
1 

Wisconsin: 
Havward  . 

^1 

^^d 
•>  w  n 

s^ 

«!jd  fl 
Sf  J 

III 

Total... 
Wyoming:  Sho 

2 

TJ 

21716—14 


98  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  10. — Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1913. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act. 

Citation. 

Acres. 

Idaho:  Fort  Lap  wai.... 

Minnesota:     Fond  du 
Lac. 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Pres- 
byterian   Church    in    United 
States. 
The  Northern  Minnesota  Confer- 
ence of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church. 
Trustees  (named)  for  the  Associ- 

Mar.    3,  1909 
do  
.do  

35Stat.,  814  
do  
35Stat.,  752  

20.00 
80.00 
44.22 

South  Dakota*     Rose- 

ated  Executive  Committee  of 
Friends  on  Indian  Affairs. 
Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Pres- 

do   

35  Stat.,  814  

40.00 

bud. 

byterian    Church    in    United 
States. 

TABLE  11. — Lands  set  aside  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913,  for  temporary  use  and 
occupancy  by  mission  organizations. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization  for  which  set  apart. 

Date  of  act. 

Warrant  for  action. 

Acreage 
of  lands. 

Arizona: 

Franciscan  Fathers 

General  policy  

5.00 

Salt  River 

Maricopa  Stake  of  Zion  Church  of 

do 

10  00 

Jesus   Christ   of   Latter    Day 
Saints. 
Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Pres- 

do 

1  50 

Minnesota:  NettLake.. 

byterian    Church    in     United 
States. 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  . 

.  do... 

26.00 

Nevada*  Western  Sho- 

Boartl  of  Home  Missions  of  Pres- 

do 

25.23 

shone. 
New  Mexico  *  Mescalero 

byterian    Church    in    United 
States. 
Reformed  Church  in  America 

do 

10.50 

Bureau  Catholic  Indian  Missions.. 

.      do  

10.00 

South  Dakota: 
Lower  Brule 

do 

do 

40  00 

Pine  Ridge 

Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary 

May   27.1910 

do 

10.00 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

Society   Protestant   Episcopal 
Church  in  United  States. 
Bureau  Catholic  Indian  Missions 

(36  Stat.  L., 
440). 

do 

1.00 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES. 


99 


:|&5|3l2f  II 

1s«22??s  !« 


|l|f|l||.p   II 


1-sgltS   III 


iisii^  11111°: 


';Ql^|Sl" 


xa  ;%  v .  *-" 

302«'^r2        <D 


f{B| 

•sll  803-    1SS| 

l<s*°ig  |a»3 

Irfii^jlSlJ 

's^g-tio-^-gs- 

'liil^^kl 

'   ~  *^        Ol  ftO5   ^  PH  C  ^ 
J-^TS  OJIM^1^  0^,-S  S 

^Ili^llll 

^^"^^^i^s§^ 


^5  ^S-oc'1-1 

^—k.^,^.0  rt^cSQJp?     • 

isPN  lisili 

oficS^       5?  ^P.co^g'g 

2    ^^,^  g  .a^ig 


iifr 


s-2lPsSP 


„-»£ 

So, 
5S§l£ 


18*" 

^^'  >,«« 

.  ra  i 


-«-'*|  5  8<fl8Qj 

a  J  k  ?*&S  8  |"Sl€^ 

KNixaJs^l: 


V   El  ,2 

^5-s. 


lle!!5iSI||!° 

•Q<0-d«2^!S 


»,  S-:  p-  co-^i       —  ^     ..       3 

S  u5"S  US  ftgcj^-S -2 
J        02 


sl^B^ftllsiSa 
lKl8%iJ«£01X§g 


sifljflll^l^ti^^cll 

liiiySifFuiili 

!•§ ^5 S53  p,cc  o  5  r-i  -c  fi  P,TS  cS  >.  o  cc 


^Itilitlilf!- 

*jffi<$§mft 


^.    wj    Q    —  ^j  ir^    p 

^ssaS^s 


^H^ 

l| 

§s 

li 

a5 

^s 


^H 

CO  CO 


S3 

t)& 

03  «) 

s! 

32 


ff     s 

CS  ^r' 


^S 


0  O 

?3        £ 


5iil 

of                                           <N~                                  J 

1    ^ 

g                      8       3                         §                               § 

O                                             &              CO                                                   00                                                               O 
CO                                             O              O                                                   O                                                               CO 

1           i    ^            £               5 

^         £U 
P 

1               Si.               1                     i 

<M~                                                                                                                                          IN"                                                                         r* 

Hi! 

O  OO  O                         Q             Q 
(M  CO  <C  CC                             W               00 

Is- 

I§1 

JP                   co"      c-f 

1    1 

111 

l^co,            a,    |S-«g~<o                       ft~w                             p,S3« 

Reservation. 

«                I      •                                         ^ 

L             y       :.-'i:'>        I 
l«            Is  1               I                  1« 

o                        uo                           o                                 G 

100 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


ill!  % 

«5~  S  W>  OT        •<  X 

CN  S  a  S      ^P 

SP  ii 

o-sgo     £§ 
pa     ^  03        ^C 

5  ill  -§a 

lli        S   r 

•il-Sl   "SJ. 

I.SIslS 

o  m 


fi  OQ  H^ 


1 


2  | 


<N 


lid 

S^2 


Act  author- 
izing allot- 
ments. 


i  sHJ  §j  |. 

I  rH^J         ,-H. 

!    .  S?  oo^«      «. 

ilSSII  ^lig! 

^      5  S^00^ 


i  ^.^S^, 


Agr 
M 
an 


1 
I 

«  v 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          101 


l« 


|||  "a*!    JlffS    ll« 

S|l  WPiHi!^fC|; 

SJsfS  -Sist^S1 
-coq 


33  boat's 


«5~   ip°i«ss. 

§3^325; 

J  O  M 


Is  *m 


Pi*iii^iii    * 

Llis^-i:-i7  *-> 


.S'S 


Oa 

s           s 

^H 

8 

0 

£2 

IB 

o4 

i 

1 

i 

S 

oT                      J^ 

00                                    *V 

o> 

§ 

a 

*fc 

.111 

885J- 


K 

o              o 

s      i 

s 

i 

00 

I 
i 

1 
i 

8r-l                           1C 
<N                        r-t 

§                 s 

3 

9 

i           1-1 

i           § 

§ 

^ 

s          f 

a                    g"~ 

C-i" 

S 

SS§          S 

S 

go                          o 
1-1  » 

ss 

1 

•*• 

0 

8 

£              S 

1 

CC" 

si 

t-T 

J> 

jj 

• 

0 

Bi 

I 

^ 

*l 

Q 

Soft 
§1| 


O  ^   >» 

;2-^a 


1ESI§1 


. 

<<M-i    -,CQ^_ 

} 

i 

a 

a 
i 

^' 

1 
02 

a^        i 

ts 
p 

I 

FQ 

'C 

S 

tT 

>         g 

2~ 

Jn  -^ 

42 

5| 

5 

d         s 

5 

15 

0fl 

S  03 

i 

1 

§         1 

1 

M 

fc 

tf 

£ 

«                            CO 

V2 

102 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


S  — 
^ 


3% 


t 


IIs 


1*33  .' 

g  OCQ^-Oi  en  g  e  «M 


O  O  O  ; 
00  o  •*  c 


^ 

»^ff£ 

3$3S 


i 


31 

co  ... 


y 

?!  ^ 

as 


d  Soo  o 

3  j!S  i~*  r^ 


fill, 

Ogcq 


,—t  ^ 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          103 

.  ,-H  t>,  10  O  iO  C^  ^  ^  O  O>  OJ  rH  O        t^  Tt<        Tf  OO  O  O  t^O  O>  OOO  I-H        OO 

)iOO5OGOt^-C^Ol>-COOi»O        C^O        rH     \         OOOOCOOCOOOOt^-        OO 


^ 


.itff 


its  . 


111 


:gS8SS    ^ 

O      't^CO^OS        J5S 


10s  rH  W  CO       •  ^*          i-H  CO"        CO  1C 


slss  ilill  1 


<-IQo5<ScOfOOOOC«OieOr-iiO         O5  CO 


ot^-oooc^o 
o^-t^-ioooo 
co  PI  o  *H  10  35  IN 


MO  O  • ' 

^ft  O  •  < 

C^<X>  -i 

<o~o~  • 


I811§ 


>o  e^  o 

•<*•          rH 


o  -^     i>-i> 


lil 


sil 


<0 

^~ 


::::  :§ 


00 


I  i-H  O  O5  O 


v^sri 


III 


S^lsl  lsll  il 


'S 

>-s 


^ 


104          REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


s 


t 


ifll 

^  a  &o  fe-s 


F 


II 


ills 

te  11 


ss 


Hi 


e 


oooT 


8*12" 


18 


fetC^H 

OO  00  •* 


1 


i  o 


a>    •  g;  -HH  Jr 

•<dli  ^ 

^3  3!  ^ 

•  11s  &&  a"a 

=  ofe^  «  I EU 

3  5  M 


i 


& 


3 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  105 


88S 


S    8 


8    S2 


8    S 


£S 
II 


8  • 


Tf<  <N  CO  SO  <N 
t-  COCO  CO  O 


0(3  £l 


OCOCO.0 


'O 

•  Is- 


8S 


Si    1 


382 

Tt»lO-* 


1  O  O  CO 

Sfg 


£S 


r-co  C3  o  30 


N¥wif 


s~s 


S  : 


0*0     '     *     * 


82 


99" 


§§§ 


§88 


oT«> 


a>  co"i  oo     o 


88 


ooc<« 


:S 


28 

oo^« 


>  CO  00  CO" 
SCO  O  COt 


3« 


^  Tt<  -^-H  CO 


* 


l  1 

a>       " 


:  6    "3 


•5:25^ 
^-<^      i 


106          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

%    SSSSBE 


t^  06      ^H 

C^  Tf        Oi 

i-H  CO          5* 


s  s  s 
g  1  g 

«"  *" 


S    88 


^ 


.illl 


88 


ili 


§s  Si 

oo  <N~     i-Tc>r 


615 


Ifs 
ill 


tn 

rll 


S    22    S 


:88 


T-T       0"      tN 


c?      S 


£ 


i 


co      ^I-H 


8s 


2    g 


PH  *•£ 


3      1 
co"     of 


$  il  i 


•3  •!!  fa  C  ftp 


iii, 

*g§&! 

Sis  >>£  ' 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  107 


O  O  1C  t^  (M  <N  t- 

00  00  IM  "f  OO  C  CO 


2    8    S 


s 


S    8 

i  s 


g  :  :g  :8  : 


8888 
1111 


If 

s  I 

se 


o5    •  ir  i-5  06 

^1- 


^  t^       1C 

ss  ^ 


S    S    8S 

10      co      SS1^ 

CO        *O        C"q  O 


™ 


CsT 


2      : 


%  0 


t  co  <o  I-H  co 


p 


:S 

•  1C 


i  S  S  SB  i 

i-T     r>T     r>T     9^     c* 

S    S    3    «o    2 


£§  iii 

g<N  -f< 


(  i— <  -r«  CO  C4  i-H  i-H 

i  e<i  oo  ic  oo      co 

'  O  00  O3  O5        O 


5 

ec         i-r 


.>     PO     O     O 


Jg 


C3    5«& 
ifj^lfi 

^4«lsta^ 


S|  :  :  : 

«l^'d| 

i<m« 

leg 


;  fi|lli|li 

is  6oooS3o:p: 


108          REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 


o  oooo  oo 

SoOOOOiC 


8    S?    8 

2    3    § 
S    S3    S 


(N  O  StD  S 


88S    88 


J£s 


ll 


II 


ef     us 


ill 


SI 


<N       O 


888 


^00        1C  S 


io~co~     odcsf 


to  oo  t^  i>-  oo  t-^ 
oo  o  o  i>- 1^-  c^ 


}gg  II 


gs 


:® 


o      *o      o 

CO        00         O 
TH          r-(          IO 


i 

H° 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  109 


s  s 


2  $ 


•-4      r- 


0  iO 
CO        T-< 

01  t^- 


53^ 


10    -  ** 


(N  CN  COCC 


Si§ 


Is 


110  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


HIS 

31*53 


!ifJ? 
lilp 


l~>«<^l 


age  a 
tiva 


s£>  CS|  -*t<  i—  (^ 


iCOl^- 


O  <N       .'       ^O^C^CO         Oi  CC  t- 


Tt<  O  >C  i-H  i-H  (M          ^H 


ng  by 


1111-l 


CO  ^H        !N  oo  <M  TJ<  (N        lO^-l        I-H 


•'f  c<i 


'SS^S 


oo  t^  o    iooo 

>  t£>  i-H  CO       •  O>  O  t~- 
t^iMlM      .»<Ml^ 


:$  :8  : 


EH 


:S 


IlllUjjjili 


jilil  i  isil  ;|- 


SggiBM^agSSSS^^ 


EEPOET   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          Ill 


T 


3£    33 


sll 


s* 


* 


O5  O  i—  ( 
LC  iO  iC 


100 


t^  CO  CM  CO  Cw  1C  O 


8 


:8  i8 

.1C      •  1O 


Is 
Jsf 


CO  CM  S  C 


S8 


CC  If) 


t^-  O  *—  t  »^  *O  Oi  »—  * 

^ 


•  W  O  Qi  CO 

.r-(t^C>  O> 


•P 

O2  d 

ill 


JJtJ 

i$s  i 
J«  e- 
i0^^ 


Kicka 
Potaw 


an: 


fi    M 


Michig 
Ba 
Ch 


Fond  du  Lac 
Gd  Portag 
L  Lake 
N  Lake 
Pone  (  B 
R  ake 
Earth 


e 
ip 
ed  L 
hite 


112  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


: 

CO  W 


jc^oggooo 


agri 
ted 


OO~O?<N'' 


''CO'CM"' 


i-l         US  CO  CO 


Un- 
allotte 


O5         IO  CO  OO 


00  i-H  > 


«CiM  00  CO 
1C>C  rf  CO 

1-H  O  Tf 


JS* 


le-bodied  male  adults  on 
reservation. 


8       ^'~l 


£832 


3 

s  e 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OP   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          113 


OOOOOO 
OiCO<NCT>CNCO 


iC  O  O  O  iO 
GO  ^*  OO  1C  Cl 


O  Q  »C  Q  O 

ic  o  -^  o  o 

<N~  CCSO 


eo  ci     T-IC 


§8^8 


^H  i-H         1"-  !>• 


»O       Is-  CO  O 

;S    86B 


:2 

Ji 


•3        51-|* 

H    gll|l| 
BMg5&^ 


52    «       'S-3     « 

i-a  p     PS   o 


Shi 
Uin 


21716—14 8 


114 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER 

5ON  O5        O 

Ji35,-iO»      <N 


fill 


Number 
Indians 


s 


1 


sss 


OQC 
CON  < 


foooo 
«o  Soo 
(NOOC5 


OOOIM 


8 


INO 


OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

8 


<N« 


§1 


EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          115 


•a, 
1 


1 


11 


la 


i  i  i  il  !  !  I  !  !  H 


[ill 


8  :  : 


ISSgt 

>r-«NCC( 


>-i      to  t^  os  -^  eo  <N 


;OiOOOCiC5OlO( 


SiSS    8 

-IOOOD35         ^h 


JGOCJOOO-f  ! 


s 


I 


Jj 


116          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


•e 

i 

1 

I 

1 

1 
eo 

§ 

11 

1 

I  !  *.  1  1  1 

§ 

!|§ 

?7 

s. 

c 

:  .        . 

>osition  of  en 

"o 

CQ 

£ 

I 

1 
£ 

§ 

e 

1 

i 

g       0       Q       0 

cT 

!J| 

Continued 

.23 
Q 

fl 

'= 

CO 

gl 

fc 

o 

11 

Is 

§f  ^"d110"1 

CO    I 

IJI 

1 

s 

sf 

"o 

i| 

•*£ 

II 

CO 

00 

II 

Is 

O  iO  O  »C  1C  O  GO 

tO  *O  CD  iO  CS  O  O 

i-T     co"1    co^i-ToT 

tf 

11! 

3*8 

8 

8 

1 

1 

§ 

;  ; 

S3  1 

1 

i   1 

1 

p 
> 

J| 

10 

oo 

j  i 

TH 

>H 

:    S3 

! 

8 

1 

11 

CO 

GO  O 

!§ 

§3i§!  1 

00 

s 

32    1 

1 

i! 

0 

1 

<N  OtT 

IO  CO 

2 

o,^ 

1 

-  s  «  » 

' 

iO  O4        iO 

S5 

|j§ 

60* 

II 

i 

8 

1 

ii 

I 

J 

-S  ^  § 

SCT^ 

^Ht- 

00 

0 

CT 

^H 

cTrH  s-»o  cTexTiN 

0 

4 

111 

>          0 

£ 

1 

rt: 

I 

1 

i 

'       ' 

;;;;!;; 

I 

I!  § 

^ 

:  i 

| 

w 

88 

O  CO 

1 

1 

f§ 

I 

§11 

s 

mi 

1 

1 

1 
c 

i 

0) 

"" 

s 

^H  1-H 

- 

i-l        CO 

00 

c"ao" 

> 

|j 

^ 

4 

§1 

1 

i 

1§ 

1 

1  1 

1 

1111 

i 

i 

S 
EC 

1  £ 

™ 

" 

l-li-H 

cc 

IM 

2E-8 

i 

1 

i  1 

1 

|| 

i 

I  111 

i      1 

l 

5 

1  ° 

"O 

P 

^ 

i-l  C-i 

«fl 

* 

1C 
i—  H 

S 

pq 

1 

28 

0 

8S8 

»o  •* 

o" 

1 

3 

-1  §g 

1 

11! 

£ 

§ 

|r  j 

|  j  i  1  1  1 

States  and  reserva 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs.. 
Souther  nllte  

1 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene... 
Fort  Hall  

1 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox.  . 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  
Potawatomi  

Total... 
Michigan:  Bay  Mills 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage.. 
Leech  Lake  
NettLake  
Pipestone  (Birch 
Red  Lake  
White  Earth  2... 

3 

i 

Montana: 
Blackfeeti  
Crow  

Flatbed 
Fort  Belknap  .  .  . 
Fort  Peck  

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  117 


«5  COCO 


:    88 


rlGr 


SQ  O  O  I>  O  ^ 

Tt<  oo  o  co  o  -^ 


i-H  IO  i-H  W  O4  !N 


coo 


OOO  O  O 


cfod" 


t^-OiC  ' 
iQ  O  ^f  < 
t-  Ot^  i 


^H  00  00  CO 


^•O  CO  01  OJ  10  CM  ,-1 


»c  o  o  c 


§O  Tfi  »T3  lO  O  O  O 
O  r-t  t^  Oi  O  O  O 
or- co  oo  cfe  o  o 


<N05<N         rH( 


:  o 


«"£ 

S 


orf,-' 

il     ' 


:    -9 


2  ; 


od^ 


H 

9^ 


oo 


118  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

g 


t-TcTco"     cT 


s£s^s 


OOOCOCO  T-H  iO 


Oi-HOOCOOOO 


8rH 
T-H 


CC  OOO 

r*  TF  o  *o 


egetables 
nd  mis- 
llaneous. 


ss 

o    8 


CCCCrHOCOOO 


tO*  r-?rJso' 


Sen 
Sha 


&MS          .-Srt£g?t5r2^^  a  s«3          y   .Qff®   :  • 


£ 

o 


REPORT    OF   THE   COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


119 


5 

5 

§ 

1C 

2 

cc 

gcogcq^ 
iC1     cTc^T 

1 

3 

CO 

IC«C  Q  1-1  Q 
CQrlS-^S 
00  t—  OOi  ^H 

Si 

00 

,-Tio'xjro'io 

CO 

! 

iCOO  Qrt<  >C 

c»  00000  oo 

si 

1 

«  « 

3S 

i 

s  % 

1 

i 

<N       ^ 

CO 

ri 

1       |g§ 

11 

i 

* 

g" 

s 

cTr-rio"oo"uf 

SS5SS 

2,116,570 

1 
^ 

g 

1 

s 

8 

!  § 

!! 

I 

§  I 

S  kC 

w~ 

o" 

o1 

1 

iC  i-H  IN  (N 

28 

2 

Wisconsin: 
Hayward  
Keshena  
Lac  du  Flambeau 
La  Pointe  
Red  Cliff  

Total  

Wyoming:  Shoshone. 

Grand  total  

120  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  16. — Indians  engaged  in  stock  raising  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Able- 
bodied 
male 
adults 
on  res 
erva- 
tion. 

Indians  engaged  in 
stock  raising. 

Acreage  of  lands  used  by  In- 
dians for  grazing. 

Value  of 
stock  grazed 
by  Indians. 

As  prin 
cipal 
means 
of  sup- 
port. 

As  par 
tial 
mean 
of  sup 
port. 

Total. 

Allotted 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Tot*. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  
Colorado  River 

110 
115 

J914 
23,650 
268,  655 
16;  858 
11,025 
8,500 
93,900 
415,750 
3,  240,  000 
410.  095 
40;  134 
57,200 
293,  195 
2,200 
406,  175 

8 
496 
67 
69 

80 

""566 

""966 
251 
600 
850 
1 
500 

8 
1,043 
69 
69 
80 
300 
2,000 
6,000 
1,722 
252 
625 
1,300 
1 
2,500 

1,000 
510,  100 

1,000 
510,100 
1,000 
138,  240 
40,  960 
75,  100 
1,588,320 
4,  990,  000 
316,960 
46,  698 
742,  268 
342,  086 
125 
3,  039,  647 

Fort  Apache  
Fort  Mojave. 

467 
221 
61 

547 
2 

"~i,~666 

Havasupai 

138,  240 
40,  960 
75,100 
1,588,320 
4,990,000 
316,  960 
29,648 
742,  268 
35,  566 
125 
3,039,647 

Kaibab  

29 
513 
1,531 
3,375 
1,232 
331 
664 
1,525 
104 
1,650 

Leupp  .  . 

300 
1,500 
6,000 
822 
1 
25 
450 

Moqui 



Navajo... 

Plena 

Salt  River  

17,050 

San  Carlos 

SanXavier  

306,  520 

Truxton  Canyon. 
Western  Navajo.. 

Total 

2,000 

11,918 

11,647 

4,322 

15,  969 

324,  570 

11,507,834 

11,  832,  404 

5,  288,  251 

California: 
Bishop 

3 
1 

447 
40 
4 

450 
41 

4 

9,530 

9,530 
13,  688 
220 
18,000 
1,925 
4,600 
7,664 
3,091 

35,  596 
7,365 
44 
17,  775 
13,880 
55,375 
25,291 
40,  732 
3,122 
65,  540 
36,  812 
58,100 
29,357 

Campo  

55 

14 
164 
229 
309 
187 
206 
89 
424 
142 
43 
183 

13,  688 
^220 

Digger  

Fort  Bid  well  
Fort  Yuma 

2 

40 

42 

i  18,  000 

1,925 
3,000 
7,664 
2,617 

Hoopa  Valley  .  .  . 
Malki... 

212 
105 
86 
30 
100 
107 
15 
8 

212 
105 
86 
30 
112 
132 
30 
12 

1,600 

Pala 

474 

Pechanga  

""12 
25 
15 
4 

Round  Valley  
Soboba  

39,  612 

80 
9,825 
15,000 
1,650 

39,  692 
9,825 
15,000 
1,650 

Tule  River  

Volcan  8 



Total 

2.045 

62 

1,194 

1,256 

69,  216 

55,  669 

124,  885 

388.989 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  
Southern  Ute  

80 
74 

90 
66 

90 
73 

i  210,  010 

210,010 
2,000 

40,  275 

47,  881 

7 

2,000 

Total  

154 

7 

156 

163 

2,000 

210,  010 

212,  010 

88,  156 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  
Fort  Hall  

150 
390 
152 

42 
6 

304 
120 
600 

346 
126 
600 

42,  772 
337,  040 
1.000 

42,  772 
440,160 
6,000 

80,  565 
192,  800 
221,  -460 

103,  120 
5,000 

Fort  Lapwai... 

Total  

692 
104 

48 

1,024 
50 

1,072 
50 

380,  812 

108,  120 
1,255 

488,  932 
1,255 

494,  825 
14,971 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas: 
Kickapeo  

131 
156 

135 

135 

1,577 
18,834 

1,577 
8,834 

151,062 
68,  340 

Potawatomi.  .  . 



Total  

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills  

287 



135 

135 

10,  411 



10,  411 

219,  402 

66 
290 

6 
175 

6 
175 

240 

240 

640 
17,  955 

Chippewa,    Lake 
Superior  

Total..... 

356 

181 

181 

240 

240 

18,595 



Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  

217 
70 
371 
121 

125 

309 
841 

50 
5 
137 
18 

4 
200 
400 

50 
5 
137 
18 

4 
200    . 

400  1. 

1,000 
800 
6,718 
930 

1,000 
800 
6,718 
930 

4,350 
268 
32,  533 
5,753 

4,194 
29,700 
38,  960 

Grand  Portage  
Leech  Lake  



NettLake  

Pipestone  (Birch 
Cooley)  
Red  Lake  

White  Earth  

Total  

2,054 

814 

814  !        9,448 



9,  448 

115,758 

1  Overestimated  last  year. 


*  1912  report. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  121 

TABLE  16. — Indians  engaged  in  stock  raising  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  80, 1913 — Con. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Able- 
bodied 
male 
adults 
on  res- 
erva- 
tion. 

Indians  engaged  in 
stock  raising. 

Acreage  of  lands  used  by  In- 
dians for  grazing. 

Value  of 
stock  grazed 
by  Indians. 

As  prin 
cipal 
means 
of  sup- 
port. 

As  par- 
tial 
means 
of  sup- 
port. 

Total. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

528 
395 
551 
266 
365 
200 

1,050 
37 
1,500 
30 
100 
465 

1,589 
275 
400 
530 
200 
28 

2,639 
312 
1,900 
560 
300 
493 

847,  240 
324,  167 
162,  526 

121,  214 

968,  454 
324,  167 
259,  026 
127,  688 
150,000 
349,  500 

$634,  420 
361,  686 
930,000 
101,250 
379,  465 
450,  100 

Crow 

FJathead  

96,500 
127,  688 
180,000 
i  349,  500 

Fort  Belknap  
Fo^t  Peck  

1  70,  000 

Tongue  River  
Total  

2.305 

3,182 

3,022 

6,204 

1,  403,  933 

774,  902 

2,178,835 

'  2,856,921 

Nebraska: 
Omaha  

349 

333 
279 

4,900 
14,  450 
2,449 

280 

5,180 
14,  450 
2,449 

163,  782 
30,150 
124,936 

Santee 

115 
209 

115 
209 

Winnebago     . 



Total  

961 

324 

324 

21,  799 

280 

22,079 

318,868 

Nevada: 
Fallon 

126 
69 
35 
142 
140 
144 

64 
150 

64 
150 

3,465 
5,200 
1,935 
9,154 
18,905 
118,550 

24,900 

Fort  McDermitt.  . 
Moapa  River  
Nevada  

Walker  River  
Western  Shoshone 
Reno,   special 
agent  . 



1,800 

1,030 
470 
120,000 

"'75,'  666" 

2,830 
470 
120,000 
2,000 
75,000 

11,300 



20 
50 
140 

1,000 

20 
50 
140 

1,000 

2,000 

11,300 

Total.. 

656 

1,424 

1,424 

15,100 

196,  500 

211,600 

182,  109 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pu- 
eblos. .  . 

1,305 
177 
140 

206 
10 
6 
2,985 

658 
20 
92 

864 
30 
98 
2,985 
2,000 
1,000 
1,200 

30,  862 
100,577 

379,012 
15,000 
46,  810 
1,000,000 
3,  810,  000 
37,440 
114,  600 

409,  874 
115,577 
46,810 
1,448,000 
3,810,000 
37,  440 
114,  600 

276,  385 
54,752 
67,  570 
608,510 
2,  186,  550 
141,250 
163,775 

Jicarilla 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

448,000 

San  Juan 

1,000 

1,000 
1,000 
400 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos  . 
Zuni 

980 
490 



800 

Total.. 

3,092 
450 

5,007 

3,170 
300 

8,177 
300 

579,  439 

5,  402,  862 
40,000 

5,982,301 
40,000 

3,498,792 
30,044 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  

North  Dakota: 
FortBerthold  
FortTotten  
Standing  Rock  
Turtle  Mountain.. 

217 
230 
750 
435 

250 

188 
250 
1,500 

438 
250 
2,400 

194,789 
12,000 
1,094,277 
15,000 

161,495 

356,  284 
12,000 
i  1,  256,  564 
15,000 

332,850 
104,350 
1,  474,  000 
132,  151 

900 

162,  287 

Total 

2,082 

1,150 

1,938 

3,088 

1,316,066 

3'23,782 

1,639,848 

2,043,351 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

176 

289 
829 
490 
80 
137 
177 
43 
132 
130 
311 
546 

4,385 

4,385 

19,000 
82,000 
(2) 
3,160 
7,120 
7,980 
1,240 
3,051 
20,000 
5,422 
28,010 

39,  169 

158,253 
300,000 
175,000 
37,  280 
47,789 
186,  120 
20,  832 
36,  650 
69,  580 
168,  738 
76,  320 

Cheyenne  and 

250 

150 

(2) 
110 
115 
195 
2 
91 

250 
185 
(2) 
110 
115 
195 
2 
91 

19,000 
82,000 

3,000 
7,120 
7,980 
1,240 
3,051 
20,000 
5,221 
3  28,  010 

Kiowa 

35 

(2) 

Osage 

(!)™ 

Otoe 

Red  Moon 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger 

Seneca 

238 
457 

238 
457 

201 

Shawnee  



Total4  

3,340 

35 

1,608 

1,643 

181,007 

361 

181,368 

1,315,731 

1  Overestimated  last  year. 
a  Unknown. 


a  Estimated. 

*  Exclusive  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


122          EEPOET   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  16. — Indians  engaged  in  stock  raising  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913— Con. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Able- 
bodied 
male 
adults 
on  res- 
erva- 
tion. 

Indians  engaged  in 
stock  raising. 

Acreage  of  lands  used  by  In- 
dians for  grazing. 

Value  of 
stock  grazed 
by  Indians. 

As  prin- 
cipal 
means 
of  sup- 
port. 

As  par- 
tial 
means 
of  sup- 
port. 

Total. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total. 

Oregon: 
Klamath  

233 
C1) 
83 
194 
160 

260 
5 
2 

40 
25 
40 
300 
205 

300 
30 
42 
300 
205 

56,  900 
•     18,  000 
21,375 
25,  600 
129,  696 

151,000 

207,  900 
18,000 
21,  375 
99,  200 
199,  056 

$348,  933 
25,000 
17,  940 
12,000 
62,  620 

Roseburg 

Siletz 

Umatilla 

73,  600 
69,  360 

Warm  Springs  
Total 

670 

267 

610 

877 

251,  571 

293,  960 

545,  531 

436,  493 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum 

10 

987,  890 
273,  820 
6,350 
150,  625 
1,537,937 
554,  380 
199,  896 
264,  510 

Cheyenne  River.  .  . 
Crow  Creek 

539 
200 
72 
97 
1,375 
930 
473 
378 

582,  835 
265,  092 

259,  629 
15,  873 
200 

842,  464 
280,  965 
200 
2  44,  424 
2  2,  628,  505 
525,  634 
49,  000 
11,000 

180 
66 
107 
2,600 
650 
50 
350 

180 
66 
319 
6,810 
1,350 
50 
350 

Flandreau  

Lower  Brule 

212 
4,210 
700 

44,  424 
2,  139,  670 
401,  394 
49,000 
11,000 

Pine  Ridge  

488,  835 
124,  240 

Rosebud  3 

Sisseton 

Yankton 

Total  

4,064 

5,122 

4,003 

20 
126 

9,125 

3,  493,  415 

888,  777 

4,  382,  192 

3,  975,  418 

Utah: 
Shivwits  

41 
341 

20 
148 

6,200 
<  218,  080 

6,200 
255,  754 

2,061 
138,358 

2,510 

Uintah  and  Ouray 
Salt  Lake,  special 
agent 

22 

37,  674 

Total 

382 

22 

146 

168 

37,  674 

224,280 
325,  000 

261,  954 

394,  052 
14,  488 
3,710 
250 
8,439 
231,000 

142,  929 

Washington: 
Colville 

556 
356 
187 
148 
370 
779 

69 

347 
77 
63 
164 
180 
1,050 

416 
77 
63 
164 
186 
1,057 

69,  052 
14,  488 
3,530 
250 
8,439 
126,  000 

613,  995 
32,  155 
13,  055 
37,  612 
63,  849 
16,800 

NeahBay  



180 

Tulalip 

6 

7 

Yakima  

105,  000 

Total 

2,396 

82 

1,881 

1,963 

221,  759 

430,  180 

651,  939 

777,  466 

6,335 
5,460 
35,  192 
14,  625 
89,  711 
100,  000 
5,  785 

Wisconsin:' 
Carter  5 

325 
400 
103 

75 
200 
200 
200 
400 
12 

75 
200 
200 
200 
400 
12 

12,  300 

12,  300 
76,  812 

1m 

Keshena 

76,  812 
(<)700 

Lac  du  Flambeau. 
La  Pointe 

(fi) 
1,700 

Oneida 

668 
123 

Red  Cliff  
Total     .  .  . 

100 

100 

1,619 
324 

1,087 
175 

1,087 
206 

14,  100 
2211,567 

8,  544,  127 

77,  512 
75,  700 

20,  611,  984 

91,  612 

287,  267 

257,  108 

282,898 

Wyoming:  Shoshone.. 
Grand  total  

31 

39,  951 

26,  662 

27,  564 

54,  226 

29,  156,  111 

22,  777,  075 

COMPARISON. 


Total  1912. 

39,  901 

26,  014 

25,  366 

51,  380 

8,  755,  552 

21,  314,  688 

30,  070,  240 

22,  238,  242 

Total,  1911  

^  65,  634 

20,  178 

24,  807 

44,985 

4,  696,  446 

18,  729,  124 

23,  425,  570 

17,  971,  209 

Total  1900 

6  11,  697,  29G 

Total  1890 

5  11,  660,  240 

1  Unknown. 

2  Overestimated  last  year, 
s  1912  report. 


4  Underestimated  last  year. 
6  Only  item  reported. 


«Not  reported. 

7  Includes  female  adults. 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  

Basket  making  

50 

$300 

Woodcutting 

25 

100 

Total         

75 

400 

Colorado  River  

Beadwork  

10 

200 

Woodcutting 

20 

2  000 

Others  

112 

0) 

Total 

142 

2  200 

Fort  Apache  .. 

Basket  making 

(i) 

500 

Beadwork  

1 

50 

Woodcutting 

500 

8,750 

Total         

500 

9,300 

Fort  Mojave 

Basket  making 

10 

250 

Beadwork 

75 

500 

Woodcutting  

(i) 

3,500 

Others 

(i) 

44  027 

Total  

85 

48  277 

Havasupai  

Basket  making  

26 

350 

Others 

20 

1  220 

Total    . 

46 

1  570 

Kaibab  

Basket  making  

20 

150 

Leupp  2  

...  do  

50 

500 

Blanket  weaving.  . 

400 

7  000 

Total  

450 

7  500 

Moqui  

Basket  making  

100 

1  000 

Blanket  weaving. 

500 

100  000 

Pottery  

100 

1  000 

Woodcutting 

250 

(i) 

Others  

20 

14,602 

Total 

970 

116  602 

Navajo                       • 

Blanket  weaving 

(i) 

270  000 

Woodcutting  

0) 

3  200 

Total  

(1) 

273  200 

Pima 

Basket  making 

1  200 

14  500 

Pottery 

550 

4  300 

Woodcutting  

600 

26  500 

Others              

929 

(i) 

Total  

3,279 

45,300 

Salt  River 

Basket  making 

130 

2  400 

Pottery 

2 

100 

Total  

132 

2  500 

San  Carlos  

Basket  making  

200 

800 

Beadwork 

100 

200 

Woodcutting  

200 

9,000 

Total 

500 

10  000 

San  Xavier 

Basket  making.  . 

750 

7  000 

Pottery  

60 

400 

Woodcutting  

350 

46  500 

7-^^"  <:-- 

Others 

6 

350 

Total 

1,166 

54  250 

Truxton  Canyon  2 

Basket  making  

34 

250 

Woodcutting 

30 

3  000 

Others  

122 

4,000 

Total 

i    •   • 

186 

7  250 

1  Unknown. 


2  Estimated, 


124 

TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
"ical'i  *  " 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  anc 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Arizona  —  Continued  . 

Basket  making 

75 

$250 

Blanket  weaving  

1,000 

15,000 

Woodcutting 

20 

900 

Others  

125 

1,500 

Total  

1,220 

17,  650 

Total  '  Arizona 

8,771 

596,  149 

California: 
Bishop 

Basket  making  

5 

(i) 

Woodcutting..  . 

8 

1,280 

Total 

13 

1,280 

Campo 

Basket  making  

4 

125 

Others 

1 

80 

Total 

5 

205 

Digger 

Basket  making  

3 

40 

Woodcutting 

4 

96 

Total 

7 

136 

Fort  Bidwell 

Basket  making  

50 

750 

Beadwork 

15 

300 

Woodcutting  ..  . 

50 

10,000 

Others 

10 

450 

Total 

125 

11,500 

Fort  Yuraa 

Beadwork.. 

40 

2,500 

Woodcutting 

50 

4,200 

Others             .... 

3 

2,200 

Total 

93 

8,900 

Greenville                

Basket  making  

50 

250 

Beadwork 

10 

75 

Fishing  

150 

700 

Woodcutting..  . 

125 

10,  000 

Total 

• 

335 

11,025 

Hoopa  Valley  

Basket  making  

80~ 

500 

Fishing 

120 

25,000 

Woodcutting  

35 

2,400 

Total  

235 

27,900 

Malki 

Basket  making 

44 

698 

Lace  making  

4 

(i) 

W  oodcutting 

65 

4,780 

Total                      

113 

5,478 

Pala»  

Basket  making  

37 

650 

Lace  making 

71 

471 

Woodcutting 

9 

281 

Total                         .... 

117 

1,402 

Soboba  

Basket  making  

10 

200 

Fishing 

1 

300 

Woodcutting 

2 

90 

Total                               ..    . 

13 

590 

Tule  River  

Basket  making  

22 

450 

Woodcutting 

14 

420 

Total 

36 

870 

Total  California     .  . 

1  092 

69  286 

Colorado:  Navajo  Springs  

Beadwork  

10 

50 

1  Unknown. 


2  Estimated. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


125 


TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene 

Woodcutting 

20 

18,000 

Fort  Hall  

Basket  making  

7 

250 

Beadwork 

9 

1,000 

Others  

60 

18,000 

Total 

66 

19,250 

Total  Idaho              

86 

27,  250 

Iowa: 
Sac  and  Fox  l 

Beadwork 

20 

100 

Others 

58 

11,  025 

Total  Iowa 

78 

11,125 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 

Fishing 

40 

14  000 

Woodcutting... 

3 

180 

Others. 

200 

19,000 

Total  

243 

33,180 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior  

Basket  making  

50 

1,000 

Fishing... 

100 

4,000 

Woodcutting  

175 

8,000 

Total 

325 

13,000 

Total  Michigan  

568 

46,180 

Minnesota: 
Grand  Portage 

Beadwork 

5 

30 

Blanket  weaving.  . 

10 

45 

Fishing.. 

10 

80 

Others 

40 

454 

Total  . 

65 

609 

Leech  Lake  .  . 

Basket  making                          

100 

900 

Beadwork 

110 

1,600 

Lace  making 

25 

1,400 

Fishing. 

450 

16,450 

Woodcutting  

112 

3,150 

Others.. 

420 

12,525 

Total  

1,217 

36,025 

Nett  Lake  '  

Basket  making  

15 

380 

Beadwork.. 

15 

1,030 

Fishing 

68 

1,100 

Others  

(2) 

7,800 

Total  

98 

10,310 

Red  Lake 

Beadwork 

50 

100 

Fishing  

200 

12,000 

Woodcutting.                            

50 

4,000 

Total..  

300 

16,100 

White  Earth  1 

Beadwork 

50 

1,000 

Fishing  

200 

2,000 

Woodcutting                                 .  .  . 

100 

5,000 

Total. 

350 

8,000 

Total  Minnesota  

2,030 

71,044 

Montana: 
Blackfeet.                 .                ... 

Woodcutting  

20 

2,500 

Fort  Belknap 

do  

30 

2,100 

Fort  Peck 

Beadwork 

30 

700 

Woodcutting  

75 

2.400 

Others                                 

40 

2,000 

Total  

145 

5,100 

Estimated . 


* Unknown. 


126 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Montana—  Continued. 
Tongue  Kiver 

Beadwork 

150 

$300 

Lace  making  

15 

75 

Woodcutting  

25 

1  500 

Total 

190 

1  875 

Total  Montana 

385 

11  575 

Nebraska: 
Santee  »  .  .   . 

Beadwork 

21 

1  300 

Others  

58 

29  300 

Total  

79 

30,600 

Winnebago  ... 

Woodcutting 

2 

i  300 

Others 

5 

3  120 

Total  

7 

3  420 

Total  Nebraska  

86 

34  020 

Nevada: 
Fallen  

Basket  making 

10 

25 

Beadwork 

5 

25 

Total  

15 

50 

Fort  McDermitt  

Woodcutting 

g 

400 

Others 

25 

100 

Total  

31 

500 

Moapa  River  

B  asket  making  

15 

600 

Nevada  i  

do  

30 

200 

Beadwork  .  .  . 

30 

300 

Fishing 

50 

2  000 

Woodcutting..     . 

20 

1  500 

Others 

4 

500 

Total  

134 

4  500 

Walker  River 

Basket  making 

50 

400 

Beadwork 

30 

300 

Blanket  weaving.  .  . 

10 

100 

Fishing... 

15 

400 

Woodcutting 

15 

1  300 

Total  , 

120 

2  500 

Reno,  special  agent  ' 

Fishing 

30 

2  000 

Total  Nevada...               .  . 

345 

10  150 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos 

Basket  making 

5 

i  30 

Blanket  weaving.  .  . 

5 

300 

Pottery... 

130 

1  275 

Total  

140 

1,605 

.Ticarilla1  

Basket  making 

100 

900 

Beadwork  

60 

300 

Woodcutting  . 

48 

5  Q14 

Total  

20S 

7,114 

Mescalero  

Basket  making 

12 

300 

Beadwork  

15 

125 

Woodcutting 

20 

600 

Others  

15 

310 

Total  

62 

1  335 

San  Juan  . 

Basket  making 

25 

200 

Blanket  weaving 

1  000 

200  000 

Total  

1  025 

200  200 

i  Estimated. 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


127 


TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
Santa  Fe  Pueblos  l  

Pottery  

1,500 

$2,000 

Woodcutting  

20 

500 

Total  

1,520 

2,500 

Zuni 

Beadwork 

100 

5  000 

Pottery  

30 

60 

Woodcutting  

10 

2,000 

Total  

140 

7,060 

Total  New  Mexico 

3  095 

219  814 

'N  orth  Carolina: 
Cherokee.  . 

Basket  making.  . 

26 

(2) 

Pottery 

1 

(2) 

Woodcutting  

40 

800 

Others 

10 

(2) 

Total  North  Carolina 

77 

800 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

Beadwork     . 

200 

500 

Woodcutting  

10 

800 

Total 

210 

1,300 

% 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Beadwork  

133 

7,100 

Woodcutting  

10 

250 

Total 

143 

7  350 

Otoe 

Others 

20 

4  000 

Red  Moon  

Basket  making  

7 

20 

Beadwork  

41 

400 

Total  

48 

420 

Seger 

Beadwork 

100 

1  000 

Total  Oklahoma  3 

521 

14,  070 

Oregon: 
IQamath 

Baskftt  Ticking 

200 

1,000 

Woodcutting.  . 

10 

2,650 

Total  

210 

3,650 

Roseburg  ' 

Fishing 

200 

1  000 

Woodcutting  

100 

2,000 

Others 

1,000 

2,000 

Total. 

1,300 

5,000 

Total  Oregon  

1,510 

8,650 

South  Dakota: 
Crow  Creek. 

Basket  making.  ...                

1 

25 

Beadwork 

80 

450 

Woodcutting  

8 

100 

Others 

15 

200 

Total  

104 

775 

Flandreau 

Beadwork 

6 

200 

Others  .  .              

5 

500 

Total 

11 

700 

Lower  Brule  

Beadwork  

84 

(«) 

Pine  Ridge.     . 

Beadwork  

800 

(*) 

Woodcutting              

50 

5,000 

Total  

850 

5,000 

Total  South  Dakota 

* 

1,049 

6,475 

Estimated. 


2  Unknown. 


» Exclusive  Five  Tribes. 


128 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Utah: 
Shivwits 

Basket  making 

20 

$350 

Woodcutting  

28 

1,250 

Total 

48 

1,600 

TTjntah  aind  Ouray 

Basket  making  .  . 

10 

125 

Beadwork 

24 

1,000 

Total 

34 

1,125 

Total  Utah      . 

82 

2,725 

Washington: 
Colville 

Basket  making  

9 

600 

Beadwork 

17 

600 

Fishing  

100 

900 

Woodcutting 

12 

2,000 

O  thers  

150 

Total 

145 

4,250 

Cushman 

Basket  making.            .  . 

70 

550 

Fishing 

100 

20,  300 

Woodcutting.. 

22 

3,300 

Others 

23 

710 

Total 

• 

215 

24,  860 

Neah  Bay  l  

Basket  making  

96 

4,200 

Fishing  

90 

8,000 

Others 

96 

15  600 

Total 

282 

27  800 

Tulalip 

Basket  making 

30 

400 

Fishing 

58 

i  16  750 

Woodcutting.. 

102 

60,  528 

Others 

10 

6  149 

Total 

200 

83  827 

Yakima  

Basket  making  

50 

200 

Beadwork 

100 

500 

Woodcutting  

8 

102 

Total 

158 

802 

Total  Washington  

1  000 

141  539 

Wisconsin: 
Hayward 

Beadwork  .  . 

54 

400 

Fishing  

500 

400 

Woodcutting 

30 

1,600 

Others 

350 

3  125 

Total  

934 

5  525 

Keshena  

Basket  making  

20 

100 

Beadwork  . 

50 

150 

Fishing 

500 

300 

Woodcut  ting..     . 

50 

2,000 

Others 

230 

1  165 

Total  

850 

3,715 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Basket  making 

200 

1  000 

Beadwork  

200 

1  500 

Fishing 

500 

1  500 

Woodcutting.  .  . 

15 

1,200 

Others.. 

500 

3    50 

Total  

1,415 

8,700 

1  Estimated. 


129 

TABLE  17. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
.fiscal  y 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  anc 
fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Wisconsin—  Continued. 
La  Pointe  

Basket  making  

7 

$35 

Beadwork 

23 

200 

Lace  making  

16 

125 

Fishing.   . 

6 

1  700 

Woodcutting 

g 

378 

Others  

11 

(i) 

Total. 

71 

2  438 

Oneida  

Lace  making 

70 

1  600 

Others  

3 

(i) 

Total  

73 

1  600 

Red  Cliff  

Lace  making 

2 

10 

Fishing 

10 

5  000 

Others  

25 

500 

Total  

37 

5,510 

Total  Wisconsin 

3  380 

27  488 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone 

Beadwork 

50 

m 

Woodcutting.. 

10 

403 

Others 

265 

17  505 

Total  Wyoming  

325 

17  908 

Grand  total  

24,490 

1  316  298 

RECAPITULATION. 


Total  

Basket  making  

4,115 

$45,  703 

Beadwork 

2  922 

31  085 

Blanket  weaving.  .  . 

2,925 

592,  445 

Fishing 

3  498 

135  880 

Lace  making  

203 

3,681 

Pottery 

2,373 

9  135 

Woodcutting  

3,621 

270,702 

Others 

4,833 

227,  667 

Grand  total  

24,  490 

1,316,298 

COMPARISON. 


Total,  1912  . 

22,564 

$1,211,335 

Total  1911 

21  235 

847  456 

Total,  1900  

8  177,  169 

Total  1890 

*131  374 

1  Unknown. 
21716—14 9 


2  Only  item  reported. 


130          BEPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

S2£S§    8 


H 

o  £P 

1J 

So 


i-li-l         CO 


SO  i 
K 
>  t^  (N  < 


rH  O  t>-?5  CO 


II 


O  O5  QO       <N  to  - 


^- 

-f  io  r?  ^o  S  o  rC  < 

S30.00.0-   ^-J 


t— lOOi^rH^OOlO 

<N  10  •*  oo     es  Tf  Is- 


^    J5    ^K 


(N 


>  «5  r^ 


i-l  CO          <-H 


co i>  <o  T»< o  -+i  e>i  o  d I-H  c<i 


r-i  t-  oo  oq  IN  •*  co 


§.2. 
^> 


ii^ii^tijiiips 


asSfS^SK^^^ 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OP   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  131 


co-gg 


888 


10  co 


O5  rf< 


888S 

S^CO 


<N 


IS 


lOO^Hi^tOi^O^HCO^H 
CM  CO  t^CO  CO         00         Tt* 


[33S 

Tn^co 


JCOOOCOO 


5 

•v"  I!      co  co  eo 


<o1i-Tco'td-H1« 


Sobo 
Tule 
Volc 


p 

_    ras  _ 

5   •••l.s  -2 

o     _p°J'H  - 


rd'A 
Hall 
Lap 


3  aifS  i  «3: 

O         f?   ^   Q.9         O        •£  tn 


?iS     *S         ^WM     -S  w          2  cs  ?  -S      "S  fta  ^2      «>H-'OX:H-I 

M!  « s§n  §  *  yip  s  |6ti  e  iiiii| 

2£co          ^of^fe  y     |WMp^  s^oS  cof^Ot^Jz; 

*  ^     «?  -S  -9 

"O  OK/I  ^  ^ 


132          REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


S  OS  •**•  O5  »O  : 
-*0000  O  t 


<N  00  iO  OS  i 
CN  iO       I-H 


t~-       CO  I-H  • 


811        rn! 


S111S 


11 


s* 


00  CM  t-l  r-  t-  rH 

•°ro 


M  00  ^  ! 
OOCO  CO 


g 

•s. 


P 


OS  r^  0 

TP  O  1-1 
CN  «O  TT  I 


O  T  10 
CO  1O  1O 


g     §18 


CN  i-l  i-l  CO  O  (M  CO 


a  3 


:3 

•3 

ll 


o  IH 


**  a 


=  g        O        £  3  3 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

£ 


133 


cooc  T-H  ,-H  o 

Tf  (M  rf  >O  C2 
t-^oo<M~'-i'(M~ 


1111 


3dO<Ni-Hi*(Nt-ICOOi-irO»Ot 


o 

s££ 


§§ 


CO"OOJCOO  r^OC3  -^ 
^-OOi—  ikOiOi-H^C-I 


§11 

£  o  %  rn  ^  N  ^  M  cc  3'wjor-~ 


ot^io 
""- 


C     (M  O>  ( 


SiliSl 


QO(NCOCO<N 


igOOO 
^f-^*iO 


COOOiOCCO 


(NO  Oi  00 
CO~Co'rH(N" 


CO  QC  l>-  »0  ^H  •* 
CO        to  »—  t 


0,00 


8« 

•=5=^  :     * 
gxj^5-;    ** 

Isss 

M  ^  rt  c3 

SPHr^oi 


jffjjif  il 


iii  "a        ^  *• 

3 


o     o 

55     55 


134          REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


* 


rH  CM          5OCO 


cocoo 


SSI 


•8 


g£ 
ttS 


Sglill 


O  •*  •*  Tt<  CO  C<1 


t 


COO40O!N 


i-H  «O  OC  t^-  Tl<  O  CO  r-< 


CM  *£  ^  o  o 

- 


95188 

•<foC'~4C*CG-# 


BSI3S* 


11S 


Rl   i: 


10  10  I-H  I-H 


d  O 
City 


m  i         i 

..|.s^  EH  fll8g.fa  ^ 

^JCQPW 

S 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIB8.          135 


»  CO 
-OO 


;S 

•** 


d(NiOC4OO5Oi*O 


g  :  : 


lOOrH 


{2  ||3 


§    85 


iSE 


211 


jffi 

g£, 


SS 


»TH 

S& 


136          REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


S* 


u 


11 

32 


t^^H^HCO^HOirHOCD^-lOO 
l-H  I-I  C<l  i-H  O  i-H  i-H  r-t  Tfl 


10  cq  o  I-H 


i  <o  «5  10 


o  r-o 


1 


.1 


OT-I     oo  ?o  c<i  IH  oa  oo 


?o  c<i  IH  oa  oo    -oo 


of        •^VeSVi-Tc'iV  o~ 


c^c^^c^-^oiooc^r^^ 
tNCseo          ca  OJ  <n  o  »o  I-H  1 


OT^CDCCOutJCDt^-^cO 


r-t  M<  (N        »H  ( 


1 1. 


i  ills! 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          137 


5*8 


8* 


"**  is 


o  Is*  io 

O  CO  *-H 

eoeooi 


lC  Cv) 


>O  CO  «3  «O  • 


eoco 


83 


JO  «N  00  00 


co  >o  t^  Oi  eo  eo  10 


SI!  $ 


£§£ 


5<  i-i 


00  OO  'tt* 


,-u 


s§l 


Si 


«     a 

HI  I 


Sobo 
Tule 
Volc 


if 

istJi{ 

"d      o 

II 


*  \& 


M 

£ 
II  1| 

SSS     HM 

ufupn      y 


a 

§3 

&^  1 
j£!  § 

[0(S 


>S    M 


Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 
Chippewa 


«    » 


138 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


8    SS 


O  >00i05       CO 

t^-  O  »O  "^       i— I 

•«*          co  CON 


ooo  •*  iraco  os 


s 


i-(  ^  »OO  O  t>-  O 
•*  •*  TH  (M  (N  •*  (N 


»oa>  r^«o  o  I-H 
oo  OT  co  IN  o  t^ 


(N  i-l  (M  rt  i-H  r-l 


I-H  O  »o  CO  < 


O  t>-  iO  CO  CO  O 

t>-  *o  t~-  ^t*  o  t^» 


CQQ_r^         *C3  .  .    ^    OJ    O-1 

«cl  I  llsl 


Om 
San 
Wi 


ada: 
Fallon 
Fort  McDermi 
Moapa  River 
Nevada 
Walker  River 
Western  Shosh 
Reno,  special  a 


OgJ 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

O  iO  O 

00  as 


o-\  oo  o  t*-  -H 


t—  1  t>-  1C  O  CO  *.D 

<N  CSI  t^  O  CO  --S 


OO  iM  O  O  O  O 


•  o  • 
-* 


(M  ?OU3  O> 


00  O5  "O  « 

»  O3  i-l  > 


g 


.•«>  r- 


COICOO  -Cl       -r-l         OOr-l 


O5  rf  C<l  CO  00  i-H  «o  CO  «5  CO 


C^t        »O  OOi-i 


cct-o 

i-l  CC-W 


5"9<  Ol 


5OQ  i-<  CC 


1  ill! 


HI  h'l.yti 


is  SSI  si  §  6=2 

N        C    "t 

S  z 


I  •If 


139 


140          REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


II' 


f|s 

If* 


S  o  o 

PH       A 


§||     2£3?1 

S  lOCOwS, 


i-H  IOC004.-HNI 


c«  co  ec  JH  co  «o  N 


lO       d  »O  CO  C<I 


»O  CO 


oo  »-<  eo  c»  o  co 


TJi  Tf  CO  CD  CO 


co         t-  »>  tn  d  oo< 


I 


<N  <N  TP  T»<  ^i 


OO  CD  >-l-«j<  TJI  CO 
CO        CO-^COi-l 


OiOCOCOOKNCCOO 
O  tO         1—  *  O5  CO  CO  "^ 


00  O5IM  OOrH 
OO  1-1  W  (N  »O  - 


'- 

O  O5  IM  •*  O5  CO  O  t-- 


CO  10  i-i  <N  ^  t-  0  OS 


i^-KM-^COOOO 


CO  T-iiOCO< 


1 


03  "SrM  03 

+j  rSv 

£  ..||  5 
3°°" 


=1  1 
«  £ 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS,       "141 


|Q  10  CO  '£>  O5 


OSOOiOOiC^O 


OJr-  lOSO 


oo 


3    3 

II     tN-* 

CO 


.    .-S  o"55 
•    'o^5 

ilill 

11113 

Ilill 

g§o«o  = 

pill 

•§•§ 


•5-5 


- 

aa 


sS 


142 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  20. — Prevalence  of  tuberculosis  and  trachoma  among  Indians,  fiscal  year  ended 

June  30, 1918. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Popu- 
lation. 

Indians 
exam- 
ined 
for 
disease. 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tuber- 
culosis. 

Esti- 
mated 
number 
having 
tubercu- 
losis, all 
forms. 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tra- 
choma. 

Esti- 
mated 
num- 
ber 
having 
tra- 
choma. 

Treatment  of 
trachoma. 

Cases 
operated 
upon. 

Cases 
treated 
but  not 
operated 
upon. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  ."  

419 

486 
2,397 
820 
171 
1,400 
4,108 
10,000 
4,096 
0) 
1,214 
2,362 
4,907 
482 
6,550 

200 
354 
462 
78 
165 
500 
1,797 
1,000 
3,233 
236 
99 
1,350 
400 
300 
741 

2 
105 
256 
5 

6 
23 
1,552 
10 
44 
46 
29 
1,100 
645 
4 
59 
167 
237 
247 
652 

75 
140 
208 
13 
6 
235 
502 
300 
367 
130 
67 
55 
64 
130 
70 

100 
243 
925 
45 
11 
235 
2,000 
1,500 
819 
40 
307 
210 
325 
270 
320 

6 
14 
96 
13 

50 
140 
126 

Colorado  River.. 

Fort  Apache  

Fort  Mojave  

Havasupai 

2 

200 
442 
500 
232 
88 
16 
50 
41 
27 
48 

Leupp  

46 
23 
110 
472 
4 
14 
15 
76 
81 
213 

29 
60 
300 
86 
42 

Moqui 

Navajo 

Pima  

Rice  Station 

Salt  River  

San  Carlos 

San  Xavier  

7 

Truxton  Canyon  .  . 

Western  Navajo 

Total 

39,  412 

10,915 

1,422 

4,821 

2,362 

7,  350 

653 

1,962 

California: 
Bishop 

1.355 
217 
651 
794 
1,000 
1,251 
613 
640 
213 
1,528 
412 
693 

108 
152 
310 
600 
30 
301 
379 
202 
13 
525 
107 
235 

33 
3 
37 
32 
10 
35 
16 
16 

68 
4 
76 
32 
13 
74 
25 
11 

6 
5 

198 
50 

6 
6 
410 
60 

6 
5 
94 
20 

Campo  

Fort  Bidwell 

34 

20 

Fort  Yuma  

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley... 

2 
9 
11 
3 
17 
24 
14 

15 
41 
11 
8 
35 
26 
22 

31 
5 
7 
3 
14 

ie 

4 

Mallei 

Pala 

4 

Pechanga  

Round  Valley 

15 

8 

18 

15 
4 
31 

3 
2 
1 

Soboba  

Volcan  2 

Total  

9,367 

510 
360 

2,962 

178 
180 

223 

353 

339 

640 

64 

205 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  

1 
46 

17 
55 

75 
55 

4 

10 
55 

Southern  Ute  

46 

Total 

870 

358 

47 

46 

72 

130 

4 

65 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene... 

857 
1,819 
1,413 

279 

700 

844 

21 
33 

180 

16 
92 
239 

7 
75 
40 

11 
360 

82 

7 
59 
34 

Fort  Hall  

16 

15 

Fort  Lapwai 

Total  

4,089 
365 

1,823 
215 

234 
31 

347 

72 

122 

75 

453 
120 

31 
35 

100 
35 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  

590 
755 

90 
700 

7 
16 

7 
32 

45 

7 

59 

7 

32 
3 

Potawatomi  *  

4 

Total  

1,345 

790 

23 

39 

52 

66 

4 

35 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills  

248 
1,097 

115 
500 

2 
4 

4 
4 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior.  . 
Total  

5 

5 

5 

1,345 

615 

6 

8 

5 

5 

5 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac..  . 

978 
309 
1,735 
675 
300 
1,456 

*%» 

201 
285 
764 
450 
«315 
963 
128 
2,525 

14 
11 
134 
43 
5 
38 
15 
201 

14 
6 
611 
72 
5 
222 
13 
1,000 

10 

10 

8 

2 

Grand  Portage  

Leech  Lake  

117 

475 

2 

110 

NettLake  

Pipes  tone  (Birch  cooley)  .  .  . 
Red  Lake... 

62 
356 
1 
492 

135 
515 
1 
1,600 

27 
45 

35 
35 

1 
292 

VermillionLake... 

White  Earth  

200 

Total  

11,338 

5,631 

461 

1,943 

1,038 

2,736 

282 

475 

i  Under  San  Carlos. 
*  1912  report. 


8  Includes  pupils  at  Pipestone  school. 
*  Pupils  from  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin. 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  20. — Prevalence,  of  tuberculosis  and  trachoma  among  Indians,  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Popu- 
lation. 

Indian 
exam- 
ined 
for 
disease 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tuber- 
culosis 

Esti- 
mated 
number 
having 
tubercu- 
losis, all 
forms. 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tra- 
choma. 

Esti- 
mated 
num- 
ber 
having 
tra- 
choma. 

Treatment  of 
trachoma. 

Cases 
operated 
upon. 

Cases 
treated 
but  not 
operated 
upon. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

2,842 
1.693 
2,311 
1,195 
1,857 
1,433 

1,162 
670 
166 
1,000 
1,076 
650 

498 
138 
19 
367 
235 
109 

505 
166 
199 
250 
296 
406 

269 
431 
7 
300 
149 
387 

450 
431 

55 
350 
225 
500 

269 
76 
7 
250 
47 
367 

Crow 

143 
1 

Flathead  

Fort  Belknap... 

Fort  Peck  

67 
20 

Tongue  River 

Total  

11,331 

1,479 
1,099 

4,724 

1,366 

1,822 

1,543 

2,011 

231 

1,016 

14 
24 

Nebraska: 
San  tee  

564 
115 

14 
38 

350 

94 

14 
56 

500 

85 

Winnebago  

2 

Total 

2,578 

679 

52 

444 

70 

585 

2 

38 

Nevada: 
Fallon  

415 
337 
113 
609 
503 
579 

123 
173 
70 
358 
300 
160 

14 
60 
15 
7 
89 
10 

41 
110 
35 
7 
205 
39 

285 
123 
29 
365 
55 
17 

203 
222 
52 
430 
135 
144 

5 

36 
72 
10 
85 
25 
18 

Fort  McDermitt  

Moapa  River  

4 

78 

Nevada 

Walker  River  

Western  Shoshone  

Total  

2,556 

4,653 
669 
629 
2,685 
8,000 
3,473 
1,616 

1,184 

980 
342 
130 
213 
482 
456 
325 

195 

437 

75 
73 
20 
46 
1,766 
170 
2 

874 

1,186 

87 

106 
6 

246 

79 
14 
15 
2 

170 
566 
8 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos... 
Jicarilla  

60 
70 
10 
8 
26 
47 
3 

204 
35 
15 
13 
191 
566 
12 

560 

40 
30 
1,405 
3,000 
1,736 
30 

Mescalero  

Pueblo  Bon  ito  

5 
21 
1 
2 

San  Juan 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos... 

Zufii  

Total... 

21.725 
2,109 

2,928 
806 

224 
13 

2,152 
22 

1,036 
24 

6,801 
133 

141 

854 
24 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

North  Dakota: 
FortBerthold  

1,168 
999 
3,415 
2,956 

500 

2,219 
2,400 
160 

25 
15 
457 
13 
11 

25 
225 
852 
13 

155 
175 
459 
173 
17 

161 
375 
680 
200 

124 
42 
54 
93 
12 

10 
3 

50 

Fort  Totten. 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain  

Wahpeton  

5 

Total 

8,538 

5,279 

521 

23 

50 
168 
27 
8 
6 
2 
38 
6 
20 

1.115 

979 

1,416 

225 
400 
1,500 
450 
400 
85 
76 
85 
300 
250 

325 

68 

45 
98 
150 
15 
60 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  

774 
1,247 
4,214 
2,038 
449 
660 
812 
151 
657 
578 

425 
909 
720 
150 
65 
365 
227 
41 
325 
173 

221 

105 
863 
171 
26 
24 
8 
42 
6 
63 

45 
149 
400 
20 
36 
60 
47 
20 
300 
145 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  
Kiowa  

33 
20 
1 
"62 
60 
1 

Osage 

Otoe  

Pawnee  . 

Ponca  

45 
4 
25 
145 

Red  Moon  . 

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger  .  . 

Seneca  

Shawnee  

1,655 

22 

»680 

»30 

>92 

Total  

13.235 

3,400 

348 

-•    "-—  •  '    —  

58 

1.551 

••_.'         •      '_"'.- 

34 
2,000 
65 
72 
234 

1,222 

—  —  ,      .  ._-. 

30 

WH 

25 

1 

4,451 

•...-.    ,.    ,.--  — 

80 
2,000 
16 
60 
10 

207 

= 

679 

===== 

30 

Oregon: 
Klamath  

1.112 

3,000 
429 
1.124 
749 

486 

Roseburg  2 

Siletz  

295 
365 
450 

43 
56 
131 

8 
25 
1 

Umatilla 

Warm  Springs 

Total 

6,414 

1,596 

288 

2,405 

70 

2,166 

64 

»  No  examination. 


» Estimated. 


144 


REPORT    OP   THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  20.-— Prevalence  of  tuberculosis  and  trachoma  among  Indians,  fiscal  year  ended 

June  SO,  1913— Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Popu- 
lation. 

Indians 
exam- 
ined 
for 
disease. 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tuber- 
culosis. 

Esti- 
mated 
number 
having 
tubercu- 
losis, all 
forms. 

Found 
afflicted 
with 
tra- 
choma. 

Esti- 
mated 
num- 
ber 
having 
tra- 
choma. 

Treatment  of 
trachoma. 

Cases 
operated 
upon. 

Cases 
treated 
but  not 
operated 
upon. 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum         

57 
1,363 
600 
1444 
250 
4,460 
2,200 
500 
420 

11 
458 
49 
16 
38 
793 
403 
110 
61 

5 
458 
65 
11 
53 
1,250 
465 
243 
61 

8 
307 
143 
89 
20 
213 
220 
110 
210 

7 
650 
195 
89 
40 
229 
600 
600 
1,440 

155 
35 
35 
20 
153 
185 
10 
74 

Cheyenne  River 

2,618 
978 
282 
472 
6,940 
5,391 
2,083 
1,791 

23 

Flandreau 

54 

Pine  Ridge         

4 
25 

83 
43 

Rosebud  

Sisseton  *          

Yankton 

Total  

20,  555 

130 
1,185 

10,294 

111 

580 

1,939 

3 
33 

2,611 

1,320 

3,850 

232 

8 
26 

668 

78 
100 

Utah: 
Shivwits 

3 

60 

119 
135 

128 
300 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

Total  

1,315 

2,285 
3,071 
703 
637 
1,494 
3,052 

691 

36 

63 

763 
34 
22 
47 
71 
1,120 

254 

28 
32 

428 

750 
32 

34 
1 

178 

27 
32 

Washington: 
Colville                    

519 
388 
228 
600 
656 
600 

23 
18 
8 
47 
67 
31 

Neah  Bay 

67 

78 
81 

67 
150 
500 

3 

64 
62 
40 

Tulalip          

Yaklrna 

15 

Total........  

11,242 

2,991 

194 

2,057 

286 

1,499 

19 

225 

Wisconsin: 
-    Carter 

291 
1,252 
2,298 
706 
1,192 
2,422 
501 
1  268 

8 
996 
788 
210 
510 
8 
350 

5 
106 
48 
31 
56 
8 
87 

22 
113 
67 
31 
99 
150 
87 
61 

H  ayward                 

35 
50 
46 
6 

42 
70 
65 
6 
2 

25 
50 
36 
2 
2 
1 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau    

4 

La  Pointe 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff 

1 

Tomah  8 

Total  

9,930 
1,  715 

181,374 

2,870 
450 

61,201 

341 

48 

630 
161 

138 
225 

185 

857 

37,  068 

4 

20 

2,375 

116 
300 

77358 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Grand  total  

8,012 

23,  099 

12,  106 

i  Includes  pupils  at  Flandreau  school.  2  Estimated. 

SUMMARY. 


*  Only  items  reported. 


Of  61,201  Indians  reported  by  superintendents  as  examined  for  disease,  13.09  per  cent  were  found  afflicted 
With  tuberculosis  and  19.78  per  cent  with  trachoma. 

Of  181,374  Indians  reported  upon  by  superintendents,  12.73  per  cent  are  estimated  to  have  tuberculosis 
and  20.44  per  cent  trachoma. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  145 

TABLE  21.— Hospitals  and  sanatoria  in  Indian  Service,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Agency 
or  school, 
hospital,  or 
sanatorium. 

1 
55 

}; 

« 

i 

i 
i 
i 
i 
i 

Characte 
of  con- 
struction 

Capacity. 

Remaining  in  hos- 
pital June  30,  1912. 

During  fiscal  year  1913. 

Remaining  in  hos- 
pital June"  30,  1913. 

Admitted. 

Total  treated. 

Discharged. 

i 

Total  dis- 
charged 
and  died. 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache 

Agency  
School  
...do  
...do 

/Camp.. 
\...do.. 
Brick.. 
Stone.. 
...do... 
Frame.  . 
Brick.. 

Frame 
Adobe  . 
Stone. 
Brick. 
Stone. 

12 
10 
8 
10 
40 
40 
50 

70 
8 
15 
6 

8 

12 
12 

4 
1 

68 
81 

16 
13 

68 
81 

4 
6 
67 
81 

""i 

'  4 
6 
68 

81 

12 

7 

Do  

Fort  Mojave  
Leupp  

Moqui 

Agency.  .  .  . 
School  
...do  

Navajo  

5 
6 

39 

294 
'508 

68 
148 
59 
134 
42 

299 
514 

107 
148 
59 
134 
42 

273 
511 

50 
148 
59 
133 
41 

6 
3 

2 
.... 
1 

279 
514 

52 
148 
59 
134 
42 

20 
55 

Phoenix—  G  e  n  - 
eral. 
Phoenix  

Sanatorium 
School  
...do  
...do  
...do  

Pima 

Rice  Station  
Truxton  Canyon.  . 
Western  Navajo.. 

Total  

10 

277 

10 
25 
12 
6 
100 

74 

1,407 

30 
175 
74 
31 

464 

1,481 

36 
175 

77 
31 
479 

1,373 

34 
172 
73 
31 
471 

14 

2 

""3 
.... 

1,387 

36 
172 
76 
31 
472 

94 

.... 
1 
"7 

California: 
Fort  Bid  well  
Fort  Yuma  
Greenville  
Hoopa  Valley  .... 

School  .  .  . 
...do  
...do  
do 

Frame.  . 
...do... 
...do.... 
do 

i 
i 
i 
i 

""3" 

Sherman     Insti- 
tute. 
Total  

...do  

Brick... 

15 

6 

153 

18 
"'46' 

780 

50 
142 

798 

781 

6 

787 

11 
"i45 

Idaho: 
Fort  Hall 

School  
Sanatorium 

1 

1 

2 

Stone... 
Frame.  . 

8 
100 

50 
182 

49 
33 

4 

50 
37 

Fort  Lapwai  
Total  

108 
70 

24 

40 
4 

3 

192 
529 

340 

-.__-_._.  —  — 

200 

72 
375 

232 
533 

343 

82 
530 

342 

..  ••  ~ 

200 
73 
370 

5 
2 

1 
..„. 

87 
532 

343 

145 
1 

Kansas:    Haskell  In- 
stitute. 
Michigan:         Mount 
Pleasant. 

Minnesota: 
Pipestone  
Vermillion  Lake.. 
White  Earth  

Total  

School  

1 
1 

Brick... 
.do 

..  do  

...do  
...do  
Agency  

Stone... 
Frame.  . 
..do.... 

(2) 

12 
6 
25 

1 
14 

201 
73 
389 

200 
73 
377 

1 

""i2 

? 

43 

6 
5 

16 

5 
1 

647 

663 

643 

7 

650 

13 
2 

Montana: 
Crow 

Agency  
School 

Frame.  . 
Log  3.... 

1 

(2) 

108 
128 

113 
129 

111 

128 

..... 

111 
129 

Fort  Peck  

Total..  

1 

11 

20 
11 

6 
1 
3 

—  "  "  -----  ~ 

...„ 

236 
349 
243 

503 
15 

35 
10 

142 
209 

242 
350 
246 

239 
350 
174 

1 
..... 

240 
350 
175 

2 

'"n 

Nebraska:   Genoa  
Nevada:  Carson  

School... 

1 
1 

Frame.  . 
do 

do 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  
Albuquerque 
Pueblos. 
Jicarilla 

...do  
Sanatorium 

School 

..do.... 

Adobe.. 

Frame.  . 
Tent.... 
Brick... 
do 

1 
1 

1 

<; 

1 

44 
25 

8 
10 
8 
40 

503 
17 

35 
10 
142 
209 

503 

8 

34 
5 
142 
209 

1 
1 

503 

8 

35 
6 
142 
209 

9 
4 

Mescalero  
San  Juan 

Agency  
School  
do 

Santa  Fe  

Total  

5 

135 

2| 

914 

213 

81 

916 

213 

87 

901 

213 

84 

2 

903 

13 

North  Dakota: 
FortTotten  
Standing  Rock... 

Total  

School  
Agency  

1 
1 

0 

Brick... 
Frame.. 

10 
16 

J 

6 

""3" 

213 

87 



26 

6 

294 

300 

297 

3 

300 



...„ 

In  process  of  construction. 
21716—14 10 


2  A  large  room  is  used  when  needed. 


Temporary. 


146 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  21.— -Hospitals  and  sanatoria  in  Indian  Service,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913 — 

Continued. 


States  and  super  in- 
tendencies. 

Agency 
or  school, 
hospital,  or 
sanatorium. 

Number. 

Character 
of  con- 
struction. 

I 

Remanaing  in  hos- 
pital June  30.  1912. 

During  fiscal  year  1913. 

1  Remaining  ha  hos- 
pital June  30,  1913. 

Admitted. 

Total  treated. 

Discharged. 

•g 

5 

Total  dis- 
charged 
and  died. 

Oklahoma: 
Cheyenne       and 
Arapaho. 
Chilocco 

School  
do 

1 

1 
1 

Frame.  . 

Stone... 
Frame.  . 
do 

10 

40 
10 
2 

15 

0) 

100 

483 
(•*) 

25 

100 

498 

1 
25 

100 

479 
C1) 

100 
479 

25 

19 

0) 

Osage 

do 

C1) 

Red  Moon 

Agency 

Seger  

School  

1 

Brick... 

8 

25 



Total 

4 

70 
38 
60 

15 
22 
15 

609 
177 
538 

624 
199 
553 

60 
274 
124 
10 

84 

604 
187 
534 

i 

3 
3 

605 
190 
537 

19 

9 
16 

Oregon*  Salem 

School... 
do 

1 

Brick.., 
.do  

Pennsylvania:     Car- 
lisle. 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum  8. 
Cheyenne  River  .  . 
Flandreau 

Agency.  .  . 
...do  
School 

...do.... 
Frame.  . 
do 

1 
1 
1 

48 
18 
40 
4 

52 
1 
2 

8 
273 
122 
10 

84 

3 
272 
111 

9 

84 

5 

8 
272 
111 
10 

84 

52 
1 

Lower  Brule  
Rapid  City  

Total  

do 

1 

School.... 

1 

4 

Brick... 

12 



122 

55 

497 

552 

479 

6 

485 

729 
119 
109 

67 

Washington: 
Cushman 

School  
do 

1 
1 

Frame.  . 
do 

35 
12 

738 
119 
109 

738 
119 
109 

729 
119 
109 

9 

Tulalip 

Yakima  
Total 

...do  

1 

...do.... 

12 



„ 

59 

966 

966 

957 

957 

—  --—" 

614 

88 

9 

Wisconsin: 
Hay  ward 

School.... 
Agency  
School 

Brick... 
Frame.  . 
do 

1 

4 

1 
1 

(4) 

9 
30 
24 

1 
15 

613 

86 

614 
101 

613 

84 

Keshena 

13 

Lac  du  Flambeau 
Oneida 

do 

1 

do 

8 



52 

52 

48 

1 

49 

3 

Total 

3 

71 
60 

16 

751 
6 

767 
6 

745 
4 

6 
1 

751 
5 



9,293 

16 

478 

Wyoming:  Shoshone. 
Grand  total 

Agency.  .  . 

1 

Stone... 

548 

1,358 

296 

9,475 

9,771 

9,231 

62 

COMPARISON. 


Total  1912 

653 

1,256 

258 

9,257 

9,515 

9,141 

68 

9,209 

306 

Total  1911 

^0 

1  268 

330 

8  078 

8  408 

7  940 

65 

8,005 

403 

Total  1900  7  

5 

84,176 

Total  1888  1 

4 

8  2  198 

i  Not  reported. 

8  Temporary. 

»  Asylum  for  insane  Indians. 

*  Not  used. 

5  Does  not  include  rooms  in  dormitories  used  for  ill  pupils. 

« Includes  rooms  in  dormitories  used  for  ill  pupils. 

7  Only  items  reported. 

8  Cases  treated  during  year,  by  physicians,  not  all  in  hospitals. 


BEPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          147 


3 1  §| 

sflJ 


•IS* 


III 


OJC^t-U50Dioe«5N«:t^C<» 


c^ic^r^coooiooc^io^Hc 


Ratio 
men 


S          ™    £§3 


iO<NO'-H 


»OCO«OC75OO*—  IL^- 
^  (N  CO  N  t^  >C  •* 


'^ 


i 


148  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


u 


tj<  Tf<N  Tf<  OS 

i-i  CO  O  **  OS 
COOSCOOlO 

eo^co-ocg 


T-  O  Cl 

w 


Indians 
ing  ration 


cc  o  ^ 

O5  »O 


3s 


I 


I 


Rations  issued  in 
ment  for  labor 
formed. 


Able-bo 
adult  Ind 


^-1  rH  OO  CO  fO  OS 


1  rH  OO  CO 
i-(  QO  '* 


SI 


o  o 

"O  >O  « 


8S3: 


«; 


fj  lid 


H 
1  a 


i  jfil!  i 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          149 


CC  O> 
rH  CS| 


^3  O> 


oo  o 
•*f  in 


s 


;£S8!3 


iO  O 


E-Ji-i 


o  ®  ;  2  fl  ®* 

5  3  03  a-  C3fu 


•J  :1 


..( 

If  la!          8-  1 

i  illfi  3    !Mg 


3    !Mg  3  |ls 
«ll,s  H  filliilll 

rt3£         6oooS3p,tf^ 


-g  2    32|    3 
11  ^  ffill  ^ 


5? 


e 

o 


150 


EEPOET   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN    APFAIKS. 


all- 

^11. 


1 

•a, 


"? 

I» 


I 


5  r^  locsi 


!!• 


sll 


II 


111 


§1 


inte 
li 


.3^2-500 

S^l^^'2    H^ 
8awJJ«       I 


CO  OC  O<M 
I>-  i-H  O  OC  *O 

O  O?CO  £H  £ 

i 

CO 

1 

i 

CD  OJir 

.. 

§ 

1 

§ 

•-1 

s 

Tf 

1 

O 

i 

*•* 

OO" 

g 

10 

! 

s 

eo* 

:  :  :  :  : 

cq.-<gco 

"o  o  o  "o  "o 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


151 


_0 

•3  3^-d 

£2co§eoo5S^?S£o§roS>05c8 

^&OiOCO»OiOOCOO}»H  C^COOOO 

1 

iCOil^cO^OOOO<N-H 
COi—  (OiOOOiOI^-OO1^* 
tO       1-*  O>  W  *n*  C^  ^H 

i^Sol 

t>-  OOrH 

3 

alfl 

CO  I-H                   C*»  •*  O  CN  f-l  >-l  l-H  r-t  CM 

c€ 

CO 

iJiJ. 

9^ 

'i 

•  ioc^^oot^-»ooico      c^o^oo 

•  O  rH  CO  10  U3  O  CO  0?  t-H         tD  O  00 

g 

^  1  Si§  §3 

ll§ 

e&sl 

«-i  J    5? 

cS  c/ 

1 

'  <£>  »-l                 CN  •«*«  O  C<1  -H          rH  ^H  CM 

•  e^                       T-I 

c^ 

CO 

^  §^,«2 

.11  a 

lui 

1* 

5| 

ij 

'a 

S 

s  8  ri  jT'*'i§  ii  i 

i 

:2  :§8  :  :    |JS 

Ii 

>  ^ 

COO'*li-IC5Tj<eNCOt-COOCOa>CO 

CO 

ooc>»oa>O5WoocoT-(co 

8£8 

.^  p 

g  0 

•-1  fi 

^^ 

3 
1 

^rt<        °rt  Wrtt^^o"50 

co~ 

-S   W    OT 

s 
P 

c-2  S 

S 

^^p, 

3^& 
|Sfi 

Adults- 

M!£3S3328£gS?g8 

CS»  rjl               ^H  CO  -^  •&         CO 

tt 

oo^ooogoo^jHco 

8S« 

11^ 

S^i 
t|| 

1 

w 

O3Oi-(CT>'l<C<l<-iC<lc<5OCOOiCC 

<NCO                   rH  C«5  CO  CO          CO 

s 

cf 

00  :§    88°°  :2§? 

sss 

s    ® 

O    d    ^ 

Jc»  -1  g 

e 
p 

3 

ip 

11^ 
Si 

Adults. 

O5Oi-Ht>-T^C^i-^OCOOCOOiCO 
OTjH^cO-^^^Nt-OtOCOCD 

1 

<N 

00    5    g§S°°    2?? 

§s§ 

i 

£• 
1 

3 

s 

:°*  :  :  :  :  :^n  :  : 

S5 

^ 

§ 

^3 

B 

Is 

i 

i 

:     :  :  i  i             :     i 

a 
t 

^ 

9 

a 

q 

9 

iJ 
"3 

O                    *o  r^     •  O              • 
CO                         l^»0      .01 

il 

:N  :  :  :  :  :SM  :  : 

s§ 

2  S 

i 

€ 

1 

•3 

co     3;                  '22    '•           ' 

CO                                 •  "*l      •      • 

s  ! 

sg 

P 

E 
| 

1 

'S 

O 

I 

i 

:      :      :  :  :  :  : 

;  :  :      :  :  .  :      :  : 

1     ' 

3 

I 

0 

i 

~ 
1 

<! 

00     21              '   '22   ' 

CO                    i      «      .  t^      

s  1 

.     .     .05      •      •     •     -IN     •     • 

3g 

States  and  reservation 

Mil  Ml  ^3! 

^^  So  ^  •  •  •  •  >~  %  a  a 

St^Sfe'f  jaWli 

rtfi^M^  >"?>  g^fl  CHS 

I^IIwJISlllII^ 

•< 

i 

;  :  :  :     ::>>::: 

Mil   IdlilJ 

«a«'^rt-  :«'g^tf§ 

lilill-slllil 

.2oPfeOgPHfMP5o2EH> 
O 

Total  

Colorado:  Southern  Ute  
Idaho:  Fort  Hall  

152          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


Ill 

CNI--  C5CO  CO 

IO~              r*~ 

i 

0 

CO 

OO  O  COCO 

7 

I8 

Value  of  miscel- 
laneous supplies 
issued  to  In- 
dians for  which— 

ill 

m 

£88 

OO    II         IO      • 

y     1~l  • 

| 

S3c3    0 

! 

S  i31S 

Sis 

Hi 
ni 

p§il 

! 

i 

rf 

! 

ffl 

s 

ii|i 

co" 

Total  Indians  receiv- 
ing miscellaneous 
supplies. 

I 

«**| 

CO    II        C000£-0 

00 

Ss3g 

a 

O  "*  CM  O  •*  IO 

t^  CM  1C  CO  CO  -^ 

g§ 

j 

" 

"  1        ':« 

% 

" 

" 

'      '2 

0     • 

1 

5 

38*S 

i 

I 

Liz 

s 

£l£ 

OO 

i 

P3SSS* 

gs 

Miscellaneous  supplies 
issued  in  payment 
for  labor  performed. 

•3 
1 

i  ss 

1 

S 

1 

1 

"s 

s 

M 

*3W 

CO  00 

1 

o    • 

"3 

|w 

1 

II 

8 

§ 

§ 

» 

. 

§ 

•ra* 

- 

Miscellaneous  supplies  issued  for  which  no  labor 
was  performed. 

>•. 

1 
!• 
•1 

f 
1 

I 

S 

SSS?| 

i|r- 

3 

§8 

CO 

•= 

§  :    N 

S3 

q 

:  : 

Adults. 

83382 

co                   O 

3 

88 

M 

I 

%  \    N 

83 

<J 

1 

CO         O 

co           S^r^ 

i  : 

!        3 

ifl 

8  i     i 

8 

2 

|a 

g 

i  njjT] 

1 

""g  § 

[ 



o  c^oo 

-I 

1 

to 

S 

I      :  :g  :  :  : 

i 
I 

GO 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage  
Leech  Lake  
NettLa  e  
White  Earth  

Total....  

Montana: 
Blackfeet  
Flathead  
Fort  Pec-  
Tongue  River  

Total  

Nevada: 
Fort  McDermitt  
Nevada  
Walker  River  

Western  Shoshone.  .  '.  

Total  

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos  .  .. 
Jicarilla  
Mescalero  
Pueblo  Bonito  
San  Juan  
Santa  Fe  

Total  

North  Dakota:  Turtle  Mountain.  . 

REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          153 


*8S 

r-T        to"            i-Tc<r 

0 

is 

c/i 

95 

1S| 

of 

88 

1 

o    2? 

t^        N 

s 

i 

8 

_ 

S 

CO 

S 

«3 

gooo 
m  <N 

§ 

:i    -§I 

S 

§ 

B|  SM 

-i 

CO 

!             ""*  ^ 

"* 

NOOOO 

8 

sssssg 

i 

t~  1C 

8|    §"S 

|S§ 

§ 

C«5 

eg 

T 

000      I 

S3 

( 

00  CO 

«|  *§!;*8g 

1 

l"«3 

»|  S"« 

lO  »O  O5 

100 
oo 

§ 

hnl 

[jr 

oo 

i 

* 

s 

i  tit 

!!!l 

c 

oo  os 

v^ 

S3 

a   g 

a 

Tl 

" 

s"s 

sss 

! 

t    i 

•«*<«o 

^H 

|   ; 

i 

; 

; 

00005 

i 

«§ 

a  g 

s 

* 

" 

a"- 

^ss 

! 

« 

jll 

1 

s 

M 

2    2 

^H      -CO 

«ij 

h 

eq 

.« 

•00 
•U5  lO 

? 

S 

S 

I'' 

.    :  ; 

f 

Oregon: 
Klamath  
Siletz  
Warm  Springs  

Tntal 

I 

Utah: 
Shivwits  
Uintahand  Ouray  

Total  

|                             ?£" 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum. 
Cheyenne  River 
Crow  Creek  
Flandreau  
Lower  Brule  
Pine  Ridge  

154          EBPOET   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


co  r-<  co  •*  I 

CO  ^f  O  00 


isf 


2s 

•I  ^ 

•§ 

lo 

:§> 


tr 
w 

g 


>  £  o>  £?  2  o  oc  oc  5 


1C  Tfi  I--.  O5  OS         -^ 
CO         i-l  <N  O5         Tf 


1  ^t<  o  co  o  c^  Is-  oi  < 

i  00  >O  »O  C^  O  O        < 


os  •* 


a 


la 


!SS^?iS855 


I 

CJ 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          155 


•CO      •         CO 


gsgi 


SR 


:$ 


""§ 


" 


O  (M  TJ< 
1-1 


PJ 

8fll 


li!l     i 


I 


>  O  »-  ®  *>  -ST 
fe03^&H 


156          KEPOKT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 


> 

3  o 
W 


Ill 


«>^" 


-2~, 

fs 


M; 

|2' 


III 


CO  CO  1C  OS  f>  -V  CO 
CO  CC  >O  CNI  CO  CS1 


%       3S2 


O3  fO  IO 
O5O5CO 


CO  CO  CO  O  00  CO  CO 

co  ^  a  ^  es   >o 


<N  (M  CO  O  -*  (N 


'»!    - 

S^<S«    5 

rSgl!    £ 


3  CO 


:8 


O5  OOCO 
^f  CO  CO 


•    •  w>  • 
-ijjfl     "3 

HIP  ° 

S  gj?  g      E-" 
^Oco^M 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          157 


***" 

i 

of 

1 

1 

] 

So  oo  o    • 
IOCOO      • 

: 

,    ^^  ^ 

5 

2  Not  reported.  *  Enrolled  at  Fort  Totten  boarding  school. 

e*3§$*§ 

i    gas 

oiH 

!- 

J        <N-t^^ 
II 

gl! 

-Til 
II 

V 

.    .    .    .    .e> 

1           : 

II           : 

OS 

CO    II                     O 

II 

0 

"*  *°  J5  ^      ^  *° 

8«8S 

! 

[if;  S 

o  co    '• 

OS 

* 

§ 

^gsis^g 

«*W 

1 

'2 

L 

o        I 

lsgs 

1 

(M 

o 

S3 

'$*\ 

i 

o 

pooc* 

i 

• 
. 

ri 

H 

oo 
co  co 

s 

Ml- 

2    '    ' 

j.,, 

r 

1 

1      : 

g 

a 

•    .    .eo    • 

% 

s 

eo 

B89§s;g| 

1 

|S5S 

SS3S 

at. 

"/; 

iO  O" 

co  oc 

S8 

& 

g 

S^S$?SS^ 

So  8 

3*83 

0^ 

of 

S3S2S 

Cl 

6* 

ite|« 

§ 

f 

B    SI  i 

1 

ooo    •    «    •    • 

¥ 

.    .    .    . 

.    .    ,    . 

f^    !o 

— 

|§s 

•  OS     •  O 
.0      -OS 

i 

t 

SElIj 

5 

*g§3*§3  ssg§ 

| 

as-  j-g 

i   r* 

a«.la 

»£ 

ft 

SJ32SS 

re 

ssssass-s-ss 

a 

gg*§8§i 

8 

w 

m 

I!!1 

Is 

^ 

r-<  "<f  OO  C 
CO  W  t^  C 

& 

n 

BSSgggg«S3gg 

! 

8SS»3S2g 

g 

^^s 

s£s§ 

3 

?' 

S£SS: 

g 

S3§iss-s-3ags 

§ 

, 

IOOOOOOCO  OO 

5 

111 

S!f 

ISS 

o" 

II 

-c  c-- 
:Z  : 
-'_  C 

* 

I 

ffillSSIWS 

3 

1           iiliiiiiiii!     i 

j      i    i    i     i 

•  •i 

I        ii      i   M   ii 

II      1    §    8    --si 

~        ^1*             ^       'd°    1         :-2o 

fill  i  ill!  1 

i        i        ii 

Sslll  1 

tjp^pm/:Hco 

:2           :      :  :      :  : 

JUl  !!!§!«  !lj  ^ 

^QOMOOPHPiKcooQaaoD 
3 

o 

158 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

^  »O  o  g     •  00  •* 

pill 


number  in 
8  —  Contin 


ol  atte 
d  June 


le  for 
year 


population,  number 


TABLE  24.  _  T 


i—  *      GO 

§  S5 


;282 


00  CO  O5  CD  >O 

C<i  ^H  -vtri  CM 

o  co  oo  o  10 

<xT  co"  ^cf 


T-H     CO  i 

co    •* 

rH      COI 


co    <N    co. re 


1:2 


g  :S  : 


i- 
i-H  T-H  T-H  OO  C^  rH 


IO  i-(  OO 

kO  CO  1^- 

O5  O5  CO  « 

oo"  co"  irT 


O     CO     CO  <M  00 

{§   c8   ^S^ 


O  O  i-l  COOl     • 
TJ<OCOt^-<t«      . 


HI 


C<l     O  00  l 


-  T- 

00  1OOCOOOO5 


StSfOrHCOCO^HCO 


a|  1 1  a 

lilii 

oso^l   ^   ft  S.  S      ^    o 
B  ®0   O  OOcn  off 


i 


M  r-H 

|N( 


KEPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          159 


g 

&  ^ 

1  1-1 

JN 

j|      os  TI  '-r 

s  s 

Q 

<£ 

c 

»r 

= 

>  O5  -*1  -H  « 

5 

OC  t~- 

a 

r 

i 

1" 

2    g 

" 

5 

T 

•>  t 

h  i- 

'  £3 

s 

Tt*  oo  c<" 

^t*  CO  *™ 

^  »C  (N  CM 

! 

1 

J5 

<  -i 

^ 

i8HS 

!i 

ico 

1 

i 

I 

t> 

CO 

Tf  0 

^H(N 

CO 

> 

I 

,0rH^, 

; 

ao  t~ 

oo 

Tfl 

•^s 

s 

ICO  CN  CO 

; 

SN 



0 

; 

<N 

f- 

1 

£ 

-r 

s^ 

og 

go 

2 

5 

g 

,OJH^ 

S^ 

II     § 

g      « 

' 

1     ™" 

1      1 

|j 

M          PH 

e 

•_; 

CO 

^g 

1C 

<       i       •       i       i                i       *        > 

0 

l.i^ 

^ 

illf 

»* 

I 

' 

- 

asas 

1 

• 

§1 

::::::::: 

S&0 

I^^S 
0^-3.2 

dSSis 

|8 

1 

"sss 

2 

Is 

Si 

co" 

pils  only  fror 
Joseph's  Sen 
y  Family  Scl 
Gary's  Indus 

, 

:  : 

1 

•1 

»=, 

g 

C^  CO 

^   i   III  \ 

I 

to  t.  oo  a 

> 

& 

s 

M 

i 

w 

i 

-• 

|? 

n« 

3 

§8 

C$  CO 

i 

II  ^ 



s®2 

*2 

1C 

g    S 

8~ 

1 

i 

S 

„ 

:" 

::::::::: 

sS 

oT 

ES 
^ 

2 

— 

s§s 

co  r^  •*  ca 

1C 

5 

| 

? 

:<N  ^  ic  CC 
^r^^t. 

I 

CC  C<l 

§5  CO 

8 

1 

I 

1 

^ 

i 

5. 

S12 

^SooS 

s 

•f 

S 

l: 

l^ 

1 

CM  co  co  cs 

s 

OO  1C 

^,,,sr. 

s 

1 

1 

Z 

^— 

<X 

? 

0 

,/         ^H      -*- 

s^s 

f-4  r>-  ic 

i 

2 

? 

* 

2 

ssss 

CO  W 

oT 

i  1 

S 

• 

S 

R 

ssa 

OCOCOO 

! 

» 

S 

S 

f 

liSI 

s 

co" 

2^ 

• 

S 

Q<      CQ 

Srf^ 

pit! 

• 

:  :  :  : 

.s^s>u 

1 

3, 

1 

d  <p  03^5 

•  •  i^ 

2  X  ta  S 

"P 

S 

^ 

^ 

Ija 

: 

1 

i  !  i  j  i  i  i  1  i 

! 

^ 

>. 

| 

* 

I 

q  «2 

c^ 

S 

o55-§ 

S 

3  Vn 

•  08     '§*'•'  8 

s 

S 

I1 

> 

S 

.a 
p 

g 

|65^ 

<^  ^  *y  +^ 

Ig^l 

1 

11 
'^ 

1 

'8 

1 

o  d 
6*1 

liij^illi 

1 

o 

160          REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


.§ 


^p    ,-J 

.s| 

i!i 
i*  i 


i 


.5.2 


•BS 

II 


If 


1  1 

3     I 


It 
|B 


I 


fo  B  «  ;; 
!§WP 


Govern 
No 


If 

-§,§£§ 
^-g^l 

fill 

•c  ^ 

P-CM 


^2 


^^ 

s* 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


161 


21716—14 11 


162 


EEPOET    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


Ij 

ft: 

1 

i 

t- 
i 

55 

55 

§ 

! 

S 

IS 

§ 

c 

m 

S1" 

es£ 

1 

b. 

•^ 

M 

i 

II  4 

SP^g1 

IP 

Bl 

il 

c 

5^ 

'S 

3 

o 

^ 

jr-H 

SI 

SR 

g- 

8£ 

i 

ir 

i 

*•* 

If 

*!l 

i 

i 

^ 

'! 

& 
IH 
j 

1 

& 

1 

SI 

! 

^ 

18 

sS 

i 

5 

8 

i 

| 

<&! 

? 

5" 

5^ 

| 

g 

i 

c 

1 

5R* 

K 

s 

2 

a 

1 

*j 

S 

32 

/  if 

3  t- 

S 

!• 

S 

58 

i 

M 

•^ 

?§S 

S" 

§? 

i 

« 
TJ 

§ 

i 

Is! 

I 

S 

J2 

'S 

4 
> 

§ 

g 

12 

g 

j 

§|| 

-S 

|8 

i 

S! 

1 

§ 

s 

5 

1  C^ 

1 

% 

\ 

S 

e> 

^° 

». 

B 

B 

^ 

S 

Public. 

1 

il 

^ 

1  Cv 

4 

s 

\ 

i 

c 

<s 

**. 

R 

S 

s 

5 

1 

,3 

• 
\ 

il 

V 

CO 

3  g 

3 

O 

1 
1 

i 

1 

j 

§§ 

0 

1 

1 

£ 
I 

| 

. 

i 

1 

i 

5w 

§ 

a 

" 

! 

T3 

1 

>, 

: 

1 

g 

§ 

p 

j 

i 

"o 
>> 

1 

I 

S1 

§ 

i 

|8 

0 

a 

a 

n 

I 

i 

||  u, 

m 

1 

S 

§ 

3 

5^ 

8 

{2 

§ 

11 

|S 

SI 

S 

S3 

g 

i 

s 

§ 

3 

1 

g 

8 

s 

8 

83 

38 

^ 

8 

• 

6 

P 

| 

S 

3 

53 

II 

1 

s 

S 

1 

1 

-4 

a 

superintendencies. 

California—  Continued. 
Soboba... 

Tule  River.  .  . 

> 

H 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs.  .  . 

Southern  Ute  

ij 

1 

'C 

Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lapwai  

Total  

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

• 

M 

"o 

,3 

MS 

Chlppewa,  Lake  Superior 

H 

REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          163 


164  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 


8SS 


^Su"3!* 

Ilslj 

^  8S 


o     T3 

&£>£ 


of  co"  ic~ 


"=3 


S  R  8- 


t^  CD  1C  rH  «>  1C 
rH          rM  rH  ^  -^t1 


III 


S  2  5 

o    co   oc 

od   co    T*~ 


S 


:S 


S       8 


1  1 


illil* 

5fc53!i  M 

ii^ll  ^ 

21111  ^ 

5fefe^S 


[fciji  ^  in 

!2a*8g  I  ?66 


^  ^  I' 


EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  165 


166 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


d 

o 


States  and 
perintendene 


l>-  Tt^ 

c-4  Tf 


D  O  O  5O 
-rr  »o  -^^ 


3-S    N 


CO  0  tj  t- 
C<l  *-H  00  »^ 


O     -O 

10  10 


« 


~     « 


1 

II      :-D 


13 


gf  I 


er 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


167 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 

ended  June  30,  1913. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees.1 

Capacity 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

2 

30 

37 

31.9 

Day 

Colorado  River  

3 

80 

84 

71.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort    Apache   superintend- 
ency— 
Fort  Apache 

6 

153 

225 

200  8 

Do 

Canyon  

2 

42 

46 

40.6 

Day. 

Cibecue 

2 

50 

53 

40  3 

Do. 

East  Fork  

2 

40 

42 

39.7 

Do. 

Cibecue        

20 

16 

14.0 

Mission  day  Evangelical  Lu- 

East Fork  

20 

21 

15.9 

theran. 
Do. 

Total 

12 

325 

403 

351  3 

Fort  Mojave 

5 

200 

197 

192  1 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Havasupai    

1 

35 

31 

23.0 

Dav 

Kaibab 

2 

22 

20 

14  0 

Do 

Leupp  superintendency  — 
Leupp  

Tolchaco       .  . 

3 

63 
20 

69 
25 

63.5 
19  3 

Reservation  boarding. 
Mission  boarding  •    independ- 

ent. 

Total 

3 

83 

94 

82  8 

Moqui  superintendency— 
Moqui      

6 

120 

130 

107.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Bacabi. 

3 

65 

51 

48  7 

Dav 

Chimopovy  

3 

65 

55 

49.9 

Do. 

Oraibi 

5 

156 

124 

95  6 

Do 

Polacca 

4 

100 

81 

71  0 

Do 

Second  Mesa  

4 

90 

96 

87.5 

Do 

Total         

25 

596 

537 

460  0 

Navajo  superintendency— 
Navajo 

g 

240 

281 

260  5 

Reservation  boarding 

Chin  Lee  

5 

62 

77 

76.0 

Do. 

Tohatchi 

5 

150 

135 

111  7 

Do 

Cornfields 

2 

40 

35 

29  6 

Day 

Ganado 

35 

35 

30  0 

Mission  day  'Presbyterian. 

Rehoboth  

40 

56 

54.8 

Mission    boarding;     Christian 

St  Michaels 

150 

138 

116  1 

Reformed. 
Mission  boarding1  Catholic 

Total 

21 

717 

757 

678  7 

Phoenix 

19 

700 

785 

647  1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pi  ma  superintendency— 
Pima 

g 

218 

224 

203  1 

Reservation  boarding 

Blackwater  

2 

36 

36 

19  4 

Day 

Casa  Blanca 

2 

36 

47 

35  5 

Do 

Gila  Crossing  

2 

40 

43 

32  6 

Do. 

Maricopa 

2 

40 

34 

32  4 

Do 

Sacaton  

1 

36 

35 

17.4 

Do. 

San  tan 

2 

40 

49 

36  1 

Do 

St.  Ann's  

35 

44 

22.4 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

St  John's 

235 

217 

200  9 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 

Catholic. 

Total 

19 

716 

729 

599  8 

Rice  Station 

6 

216 

227 

204  4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Salt  River  superintendency— 
Salt  River 

2 

30 

47 

35.7 

Dav. 

Camp  McDowell  
Lehi 

2 
2 

40 
30 

40 
30 

32.2 
23.2 

V 

Do. 

Total  . 

6 

100 

117 

91.1 

Includes  teachers,  disciplinarians,  housekeepers,  and  seamstresses. 


168 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

AT  izona—  Continued  . 
San  Carlos  superin  tendency- 
San  Carlos 

5 

CO 

J99 

97  4 

Day 

Globe  

28 

36 

31  4 

Mission  day  Evangelical  Lu- 

theran. 

Total 

5 

88 

16  5 

128  8 

San     Xavier    superintend- 
ency— 
San  Xavier  

3 

155 

139 

119  9 

Day 

Tucson 

2 

35 

60 

31  3 

Do 

Tucson  Mission  

140 

146 

97  8 

Mission   boarding'     Presbyte- 

rian. 

Total            

5 

330 

345 

249  0 

Truxton  Canyon  

3 

100 

80 

66  7 

Western    Navajo    superin- 
tendency  — 
Western  Navajo 

4 

88 

126 

95  6 

Do 

Moencopi  

2 

35 

44 

32  6 

Total  

6 

123 

170 

128  2 

Total  Arizona 

143 

4  461 

4  778 

4  019  9 

California: 
Bishop  superintendency— 
Bishop 

2 

36 

59 

33  4 

Do 

Big  Pine  

2 

25 

21 

14  0 

Do 

Independence 

2 

25 

14 

9  9 

Do 

Total 

g 

86 

94 

57  3 

Carnpo 

2 

30 

22 

21  1 

Do 

Fort   Bidwell  superintend- 
ency — 
Fort  Bidwell  

4 

98 

95 

87  4 

Alturas  

I 

24 

17 

8  4 

Day 

Likely 

2 

26 

25 

14  7 

Do 

Total 

7 

148 

137 

110  5 

FortYuma            .  . 

4 

180 

117 

105  2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Greenville  

4 

90 

104 

89  3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Hoopa  Valley  

7 

146 

187 

148  9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Malki  superintendency— 
Malki 

1 

30 

20 

16  7 

Dav 

Martinez  

2 

30 

22 

16  5 

Do 

St.  Boniface  (Banning).  . 

100 

113 

102.1 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

3 

160 

155 

135  3 

Pala  superintendency  — 
Pala  

2 

40 

26 

21.5 

Dav. 

La  Jolla     . 

2 

30 

23 

16.4 

Do  ' 

Total  

4 

70 

49 

37.9 

Pechanga                               •. 

1 

30 

13 

10  9 

Do 

Round  Valley  superintend- 
ency— 
Round  Valley  

4 

135 

121 

103.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Manchester 

1 

18 

16 

8  3 

Dav 

Ukiah  

1 

25 

32 

17.3 

yi)o. 

Upper  Lake 

2 

30 

34 

22.4 

Do 

Total  

8 

208 

203 

151.3 

Sherman 

15 

550 

700 

555  0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Soboba  superintendency— 
Soboba 

2 

25 

12 

10  4 

Dav 

Cahuilla  

2 

25 

10 

9.7 

Do. 

Total 

4 

50 

22 

20  1 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


169 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

California—  Continued  . 
Tule     River     superin  tend- 
ency — 
Tule  River     

2 

30 

19 

12.1 

Pay. 

\uberry 

1 

36 

39 

18.3 

Do 

Total                     -  ... 

3 

66 

58 

30.4 

Volcan  superintendency— 

1 

30 

.     20 

22.7 

Do 

Capitan  Grande  

2 

24 

11 

10.6 

Do. 

Total 

3 

54 

37 

33  3 

Total  California 

71 

1  868 

1  898 

1  506  5 

Colorado: 

2 

20 

24 

15  9 

Do 

Southern  Ute  superintend- 
ency — 
Southern  Ute 

3 

45 

56 

45  6 

Reservation  boarding. 

\llen                       

2 

30 

25 

17.7 

Dav 

Total               

81 

63.3 

Total  Colorado 

7 

05 

105 

79  2 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  superintend- 
ency— 
De  Stnet         

. 

80 

87 

59.6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic* 

St  Joseph's 

100 

45 

24  3 

Do 

Total 

180 

132 

83  9 

Fort  Hall  superintendency— 
Fort  Hall 

7 

160 

184 

165  5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Good  Shepherd         .   .  . 

30 

23 

21  0 

Mission  boarding-  Episcopal. 

Total                  

7 

190 

207 

186  5 

Fort   Lapwai   superintend- 
ency— 
Fort  Lapwai  

3 

100 

143 

93.0 

Reservation  boarding  (sanato- 

Kamiah  

1 

30 

31 

10.9 

rium). 
Dav 

Total         

4 

130 

174 

103.9 

Total  Idaho 

11 

500 

513 

374  3 

Iowa: 
Sac  and   Fox  superintend- 
ency— 
Fox             

2 

40 

32 

17.2 

Do. 

Mesquakie 

2 

20 

20 

13.4 

Do. 

Total 

4 

60 

52 

30.6 

Kansas: 
Haskell 

23 

650 

797 

635.1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kickapoo  superintendency— 
Kickapoo  

Great  Nemaha 

3 
1 

71 
40 

90 
28 

69.5 
12.7 

Reservation  boarding. 
Dav. 

0 

Total  

4 

111 

118 

82.2 

Potawatomi      superintend- 
ency — 
Blandin  

2 

40 

20 

5.7 

Day. 

Kewankah.  . 

2 

30 

30 

17.5 

Do. 

Witcheway  

2 

30 

23 

11.3 

Do. 

Total 

6 

100 

73 

34.5 

Total  Kansas  

33 

861 

988 

751.8 

170 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
"ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills  

2 

32 

46 

31.4 

Day. 

Chippewa,    Lake    Superior 
superin  tendency— 
Baraga  (Holy  Name) 

152 

-     82 

22.5 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 

Harbor    Springs    (Holy 

200 

138 

133.0 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Childhood). 

Total 

352 

220 

155  5 

Mount  Pleasant. 

10 

325 

363 

311.2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Total  Michigan. 

12 

709 

629 

498.1 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 

2 

40 

51 

42.6 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fond  du  Lac  

2 

30 

43 

20.2 

Day. 

Grand  Portage 

2 

20 

21 

11  2 

Do 

Leech    Lake    superintend- 
ency  — 
Leech  Lake     .  . 

4 

54 

110 

83.1 

Reservation  boarding. 

Old  Agency  

2 

24 

12 

8.8 

Day. 

Squaw  Point  . 

2 

29 

21 

12  0 

Do 

Sugar  Point  

2 

24 

28 

7.9 

Do. 

Total 

10 

131 

171 

111.8 

Nett  Lake 

2 

35 

67 

44  9 

Dav 

Pipestone  superin  tendency  — 
Pipestone  ~. 

6 

225 

228 

197.4 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Birch  Cooley 

2 

36 

20 

13  g 

Dav 

Total  

8 

261 

248 

211.2 

Red  Lake  superintendency  — 
Red  Lake  

4 

74 

104 

87.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cross  Lake 

3 

40 

60 

49  7 

Do 

St.  Mary's 

70 

103 

69.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total        

7 

184 

267 

206.2 

Vermillion  Lake  

5 

110 

137 

112.1 

Reservation  boarding. 

White    Earth   superintend" 
ency— 
White  Earth 

6 

130 

166 

130.6 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pine  Point  

3 

53 

65 

39.4 

Do. 

Wild  Rice  River 

3 

43 

69 

ol  8 

Do 

Elbow  Lake  

2 

30 

28 

15.0 

Day. 

Porterville 

2 

45 

35 

23  4 

Do 

Round  Lake  .... 

2 

30 

22 

16.4 

Do. 

White  Earth 

2 

36 

99 

56  1 

Do 

Twin  Lake  .  . 

2 

30 

30 

20.2 

Do. 

St  Benedict's 

130 

118 

98  6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

22 

527 

632 

451.5 

Total  Minnesota  

60 

1,338 

1,637 

1,211.7 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  superintendency— 
Biackfeet  (Cut  Bank).  .  .  . 
Browning  

3 
1 

62 
60 

101 
40 

69.3 

28.0 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 

Burd 

1 

16 

18 

12  2 

Do. 

Cut  Finger  

2 

30 

28 

8.7 

Do. 

Holy  Family  .  . 

145 

113 

83.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total... 

7 

313 

300 

201.2 

Crow  superintendency— 
Crow  .  . 

4 

91 

74 

54.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pryor  Creek 

2 

51 

42 

31.5 

Do. 

Lodge  Grass 

50 

35 

32.1 

Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Black  Lodge 

30 

19 

15.5 

Day;       American    Missionary 

Reno 

35 

27 

26.3 

Association. 
Do. 

St.  Anne's.  .  . 

25 

23 

16.9 

Mission  day;  Catholic  . 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  171 

TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

CapacUy. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Montana—  Continued  . 
Crow  superiutendency—  Con. 

San  Xavier 

• 

125 

43 

42  0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Wvola  

30 

12 

11.9 

Mission  dav  Baptist 

Total  

0 

437 

275 

230.7 

Flathead  superintendency  — 
Flathead  

2 

30 

31 

14.0 

Day 

St.  Ignatius   .  . 

300 

199 

167.0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Total                  

2 

330 

230 

181.0 

Fort   Belknap  superintend- 
ency— 
Fort  Belknap 

3 

47 

67 

34  6 

Lodge  Pole. 

2 

37 

39 

22.1 

Day 

St  Paul's 

160 

93 

91  0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Total 

5 

244 

199 

147  7 

Fort  Pecksuperin  tendency  '  — 
Fort  Peck  

5 

95 

126 

100.3 

Reservation  boarding 

No.  1 

2 

30 

24 

16  7 

Dav 

No.2  

2 

30 

28 

21.2 

Do 

No.  3 

2 

30 

18 

14  9 

Do 

Wolf  Point  

40 

65 

53.2 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 

Presbyterian. 

Total                

11 

226 

261 

206.3 

Tongue  River  superintend- 
ency — 
Tongue  River  

4 

09 

87 

64.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Birney 

2 

35 

53 

34.9 

Dav 

Lamedeer  

2 

32 

42 

26.4 

Do 

St.  Labre's 

60 

49 

48.0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic. 

Total 

8 

196 

231 

173.3 

Total  Montana.  . 

39 

1,745 

1.496 

1  140.2 

Nebraska: 
Genoa  

9 

345 

415 

313.2 

Nonreservatiori  boarding. 

Santee       superintendency  — 
San  tee  Normal  Training. 

125 

123 

108.2 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 

Congregational. 

Winnebago        superintend- 
ency— 
Decora  

2 

30 

27 

14.3 

Day 

St  Augustine 

122 

Chi 

38.6 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic. 

Total 

2 

152 

80 

52.9 

Total  Nebraska  
Nevada: 
Carson  .  .  ,  . 

11 

7 

622 
286 

618 
294 

474.3 
235.7 

-NonreservatioQ  boarding. 

Fallon  superintendency— 
Fallen 

2 

40 

30 

16.4 

Day. 

Lovelocks  

2 

25 

17 

8.9 

Do. 

Total  

4 

65 

47 

25.3 

Fort  McDermitt 

2 

80 

49 

35.7 

Do 

Moapa    River   superintend- 
ency — 
Moapa  River  

2 

30 

36 

15.9 

Day. 

Las  Vegas 

2 

25 

6 

4.7 

Do. 

Total 

4 

55 

42 

20.6 

Nevada  superintendency— 
Nevada 

4 

70 

77.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wadsworth  

25 

19 

13.0 

Day. 

Total... 

5 

95 

96 

90.0 

1  Day  school  No.  4  not  reported. 


172 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Knroll- 
ment. 

57 
67 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Nevada—  Continued  . 
Walker  River  

i 
2 
4 

60 
65 

% 

40.9 
63.3 

Day. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Nonrcservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Mission    boarding;  Presbyter- 
rian. 
Mission    boarding;    Methodist 
Episcopal. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Mission    day;    Christian    Re- 
formed. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Western  Shoshone 

Total  Nevada  .  .  . 

28 
11 

706 
321 

652 
365 

511.  5 
336.2 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  

Albuquerque  Pueblos— 
Acoma  ...                 

2 
2 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

32 
30 
60 
34 
25 
18 
65 
20 
60 
32 
125 

66 
33 
105 
47 
38 
0) 
66 
35 
52 
36 
101 

28.5 
25.1 
63.8 
38.5 
25.6 

C1) 

55.4 
26.1 
38.4 
30.2 
94.4 

Encinai 

Isleta               

Laguna 

McCarty's  

Mesita 

Paguate  

Paraje 

San  Felipe  

Seama 

Bernalillo  

Total  

21               501 

579 

96 

28 

426.0 

Jicarilla  superintendency— 
Jicarilla     

5  I           107 
2  1             30 

90.6 
24.4 

Do 

Total 

7 
4 
2 

5 
2 

137 
83 
25 

150 
30 
30 

20 

124 

109 
32 

169 
17 

30 

22 

115.0 

88.3 
25.0 

152.3 
12.5 
26.6 

22.0 

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Juan  superintendency— 
San  Juan  

Toadlena 

Liberty  (  Jewett)  

Navajo  Mission  

Total 

7 

230 

238 

213.4 

Santa  Fe  superintendency— 
Santa  Fe 

12 
2 
2 

1 

3 

! 

300 
28 
120 
19 
25 
40 
70 
40 
30 
70 
75 

364 
22 
69 
14 
22 
22 
63 
35 
18 
119 
183 

333.9 
14.0 
40.1 
8.4 
17.2 
14.0 
47.2 
21.1 
13.8 
71.2 
176.8 

Cochiti 

Jemez 

Nambe  

Picuris 

San  Ildefonso  

San  Juan 

Santa  Clara  

Sia 

Taos  

St  Catherine's  . 

Total 

32 

817 

931 

757.7 

Zuni  superintendency— 

5 

2 

66 
35 
30 

90 
60 
29 

76.5 
39.5 
18.2 

Do  

Christian  Reformed... 

Total 

7 

131 

179 

134.2 

Total  New  Mexico  

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  superintendency— 
Cherokee 

91 

2,245 

2,557 

2,095.8 

5 

2 
1 

160 
40 
40 
20 
40 

199 
30 
36 
16 
32 

160.1 
14.6 
20.1 
8.1 
18.5 

Big  Cove  

Birdtown    . 

Little  Snow  Bird  
Snow  Bird  Gap  

Total 

10 

300 
i  Not  in  se 

313 
ssion. 

221.4 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


173 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 

'  June  30,  19.73— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck 

3 

60 

98 

95 
27 
20 
28 
12 

71.1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission    boarding;    Congrega- 
tional. 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do. 
Do. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Do. 
Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission    boarding;    Reformed 
Presbyterian. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Do. 

Day. 
Reservation  boarding  and  day. 
Day. 

Fort  Berthold  superintend- 
ency— 
Fort  Berthold  

4 
2 
2 
2 

75 

30 
30 
30 
13 

62.0 
18.7 
15.6 
23.6 
10.0 

No  1 

No.2  

No.  3 

Congregational  

Total 

10 
10 

5 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

178 
323 

200 
85 
40 
40 
30 
40 
24 
20 
50 

182 
407 

232 

120 
38 
40 
21 
23 
17 
15 
56 

129.9 
331.8 

188.5 
93.9 
29.6 
29.6 
14.7 
18.0 
12.1 
13.2 
37.4 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock  superintend- 
ency  — 
Standing  Rock  

Martin  Kenel 

Bullhead  

Cannon  Ball 

Grand  River  

Little  Oak  Creek 

Porcupine... 

No.  1 

St.  Elizabeth's  

Total  

24 

529 

562 

437.0 

Turtle    Mountain    superin- 
tendency— 
No.  1 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

30 
30 
30 
30 
30 

73 
42 
56 
88 
43 

22.1 

18.8 
21.5 
31.8 
16.7 

No.2... 

No  3 

No.  4... 

No  5 

Total                     

10 
6 

150 
180 

302 
156 

110.9 
129.0 

Wahpeton 

-    Total  North  Dakota  .  .  . 
Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

63 
3 

1,420 
80 

1,707 
94 

1,209.7 
73.9 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  su- 
perintendency  — 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  . 
St.  Luke's  

6 

140 
45 

164 
35 

142.3 
33.9 

Total... 

6 
15 

185 
500 

199 
657 

176.2 
534.9 

Chilocco.                 

Kiowa  superintendency— 
Anadarko 

5 
6 
6 
6 

175 
173 

147 
150 
50 

158 
172 
176 
114 
42 

134.8 
161.2 
142.9 
103.0 
31.0 

FortSai  

Rainy  Mountain 

Riverside  

Cache  Creek 

Total 

23 

695 

662 

572.9 

Osage  superintendency— 
Osage  

7 

130 
65 
75 

124 
16 

77 

109.3 
9.2 
56.1 

St.  John's 

St.  Louis's  

Total 

7 
4 
4 

270 

77 
74 

217 
75 
104 

174.6 
64.6 
97.1 

Otoe  

Pawnee 

Ponca  superintendency— 

Ponca.. 

5 
1 

90 
23 

118 
10 

91.8 
9.2 

Tonkawa  

Total 

6 

113 

i  Not  in  s 

128 
ession. 

101.0 

174 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Oklahoma—  Continued  . 
Red  Moon  

1 

65 

38 

24.3 

Day. 

Sac  and  Fox 

5 

75 

84 

74.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Seger  

4 

90 

93 

75.6 

Do. 

Seneca  superintendency  — 
Seneca  

4 

85 

•    127 

105.9 

Do. 

St.  Mary's 

45 

36 

33.9 

Mission  boarding-  Catholic 

Total 

4 

130 

163 

139.8 

Shawnee  superintendency— 
Shawnee 

5 

110 

150 

103.1 

Reservation  boarding 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Bene- 

100 

64 

39.7 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic 

dict's)  i. 
Sacred  Heart(St.  Mary's)1 

100 

93 

74.0 

Do. 

Total  

5 

310 

307 

216.8 

TotaH  

87 

2,664 

2,821 

2,324.9 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Cherokee  Nation- 
Cherokee      Orphan 
School. 
Hildebrand  

5 
1 

75 
35 

91 
32 

65.8 
15.1 

Tribal  boarding. 
Day. 

Total 

6 

110 

123 

80.9 

Creek  Nation— 
Euchee  

6 

100 

167 

111.3 

Tribal  boarding. 

Eufaula.. 

6 

100 

109 

76.5 

Do. 

Nuyaka  

6 

90 

143 

77.9 

Do. 

Tullahassee.  . 

5 

75 

101 

74.5 

Do. 

Total  .... 

23 

365 

520 

340.2 

Seminole  Nation—  Mekn- 
sukey. 

6 

100 

115 

89.3 

Do. 

Choctaw  Nation- 
Armstrong     Male 
Academy. 
Jones  Male  Academy. 
Tuskahoma  

5 

5 
6 

100 

100 
100 

123 

181 
168 

103.4 

94.5 

107.0 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 

Wheelock  Academy  . 
Old  Goodland  

6 

100 

80 

89 

88 

73.  3 
77.0 

Do. 

Mission     boarding;    Presbyte- 

St. Agnes  Mission 

40 

51 

40.4 

rian. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic 

Total 

22 

520 

700 

495.6 

Chickasaw  Nation— 
Bloomfleld  Seminary 
Collins  Institute  
El  Meta  Bond  College 

5 
3 

SO 
60 
35 

99 
74 
16 

71.7 
46.0 
13  5 

Tribal  boarding. 
Do. 
Private  boarding 

Total 

8 

175 

189 

131.2 

Choctaw  and  Chicka- 
saw Nations  — 
Murray  School  of 

150 

73 

54.9 

Do. 

Agriculture. 
Hargrove  College  

55 

47 

27.2 

Mission  boarding;  Methodist. 

Oklahoma  Presbyte- 

50 

51 

37.7 

Mission    boarding;    Presbyte- 

rian College. 
St.  Agnes  Academy. 

160 

96 

70.3 

rian. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic1. 

St.  Elizabeth's 

70 

55 

44  3 

Do 

St.  Joseph's  

30 

10 

7.0 

Do. 

Total 

515 

332 

241  4 

Total    Five   Civilized 
Tribes. 

65 

1,785 

1,979 

1,378.6 

Total  Oklahoma  

152 

4,449 

4,800 

3,704.5 

i  These  schools  are  filled  by  Indian  pupils  from  various  tribes  and  reservations. 
»  Exclusive  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


REPOBT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


175 


TABLE  26.— Location, 


ity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
'  June  30,  1918— Continued . 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Oregon: 
Klamath  superintendency— 
Klamath 

5 

70 

101 

83.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Modoc  Point 

2 

30 

18 

10  3 

Dav 

Yainax      

2 

30 

26 

19.5 

Do. 

No  1 

2 

30 

18 

11.7 

Do 

No.2      

2 

30 

12 

7.1 

Do. 

No  3 

2 

30 

34 

22.1 

Do 

Total            

15 

220 

209 

154.6 

Salem 

17 

650 

684 

515  6 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Siletz  superintendency— 
Siletz  

1 

30 

42 

14.8 

Day. 

Upper  Farm    . 

1 

20 

17 

12.0 

Do 

Total 

2 

50 

59 

26.8 

Umatilla  superintendency— 
Umatilla 

4 

93 

111 

77.8 

Reservation  boarding 

St.  Andrews  (Kate 

150 

78 

60.1 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Drexel). 

Total 

4 

243 

189 

137.9 

Warm  Springs  superintend- 
ency— 
W  arm  Springs  

4 

100 

109 

100.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Simnasho 

2 

30 

21 

16  3 

Dav 

Total 

6 

130 

130 

116.6 

Total  Oregon 

44 

1.293 

1,271 

951.5 

Pennsylvania*  Carlisle 

25 

737 

982 

798  5 

Nonreservation  boarding 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne    River    superin- 
tendency — 
Cheyenne  River  .  .  . 

9 

200 

182 

162.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

-   No.2 

2 

30 

17 

11  6 

Dav 

No.  7... 

2 

22 

20 

17.1. 

bo. 

No  8 

2 

22 

23 

17.9 

Do 

Oahe  

75 

14 

14.0 

Mission    boarding;    Congrega- 

tional. 

Total 

15 

349 

256 

223.0 

Crow     Creek     superintend- 
ency— 
Crow  Creek 

5 

82 

97 

83  8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Grace  Day  

1 

25 

17 

13.0 

Day. 

Immaculate  Conception 

75 

54 

50  7 

Mission  boarding1  Catholic. 

Total 

6 

182 

168 

147  5 

Flandreau  

14 

360 

383 

370.4 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Lower  Brule  

4 

84 

83 

68  5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pierre  

5 

234 

212 

171.3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pine     Ridge     superintend- 
ency— 
Pine  Ridge  

No.  3 

7 
2 

210 
30 

235 
17 

215.6 
12  1 

Reservation  boarding. 
Dav. 

No.  4  

2 

32 

28 

21.4 

Do. 

No.  5 

2 

30 

41 

28.3 

Do. 

No.6  

2 

31 

31 

23.9 

Do. 

No.  7  .  . 

2 

33 

36 

26.6 

Do. 

No.  8... 

2 

30 

21 

9.5 

Do. 

No.  9  

2 

30 

25 

17.8 

Do. 

No  10 

2 

30 

35 

20.4 

Do. 

No.  11  

2 

33 

20 

17.5 

Do. 

No.  12  . 

2 

30 

16 

7.6 

Do. 

No.  13  

2 

26 

16 

12.9 

Do. 

No.  14  . 

2 

40 

27 

9.7 

Do. 

No  15 

2 

25 

27 

16.4 

Do. 

No.  16  

2 

30 

56 

28.2 

Do. 

No.  17 

2 

19 

20 

13.1 

Do. 

No.  18  

2 

24 

34 

18.3 

Do. 

No.  19 

2 

24 

26 

15.2 

Do. 

No.  20  

2 

24 

25 

21.8 

Do. 

No.  21  

2 

33 

17 

9.9 

Do. 

No.  22... 

2 

26 

36 

19.2 

Do. 

176 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26.— Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1913— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

South  Dakota—  Continued. 
Pine     Ridge    superintend- 
ency  —  Continued  . 
No  93                         

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

30 
35 
30 
30 
33 
30 
33 
240 

36 
31 
23 
.      23 
25 
19 
18 
240 

25.2 
19.2 
15.3 
15.5 
13.7 
12.1 
10.1, 
207.4 

Day. 
*Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Nomeservation  boarding. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 

Reservation  boarding* 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

No  24 

No  25                          

No  26 

No  27                           

No  28 

No.  29                 

Holy  Rosary 

Total                       

61 
10 

1.251 
208 

4.204 

285 

883.9 
252.6 

Rapid  City 

Rosebud  superintendency— 
Rosebud          

6 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
2 

200 
35 
20 
32 
33 
24 
29 
23 
26 
25 
24 
29 
26 
25 
20 
23 
25 
26 
21 
26 
27 
19 
70 
325 

197 
28 
24 
16 
37 
39 
27 
26 
16 
10 
18 
21 
20 
42 
21 
22 
18 
31 
29 
15 
18 
21 
73 
.     311 

141.8 
22.4 
21.6 
12.3 
27.1 
26.2 
19.4 
25.4 
13.3 
9.5 
17.9 
12.9 
18.4 
24.1 
19.5 
19.8 
15.8 
23.3 
26.3 
11.5 
15.4 
16.2 
73.0 
249.0 

Big  White  River 

Blackpipe    

Bull  Creek 

Cut  Meat                     .  .. 

He  Do^'s  Camp 

Ironwood                  

Little  Crow's 

Little  White  River  

Lower  Cut  Meat 

Milk's  Camp           

Oak  Creek 

Pine  Creek           

Red  Leaf 

Ring  Thunder      

Rosebud 

Spring  Creek        

Upper  Cut  Meat 

Whirlwind  Soldier  

White  Thunder 

White  Lake      

St  Mary's 

St.  Francis's 

Total  

47 

5 
2 

5 

1,133 

107 
60 
70 

1,080 

172 
81 
110 

862.1 

156.  4 
51.5 
80.9 

Sisseton  superintendency— 
Sisseton  

Springfield 

Yankton      

Total  South  Dakota... 

Utah: 
Deep  Creek  

174 

4,038 

4,034 

3,268.1 

1 

1 

4 

25 
40 

67 

24 
17 

72 

16.0 
10.5 

53.6 

Shivwits                           .  . 

Uintah       and       O  u  r  a  v  - 
Uintah 

Total  Utah           

6 

132 

113 

80.1 

Washington: 
Colville  superintendency  — 
No  3 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

30 
30 
25 
25 
25 
25 
90 
100 

48 
35 
31 
26 
8 
18 
32 
94 

27.2 
21.3 
19.8 
16.5 
5.9 
14.7 
29.5 
79.3 

No.  4 

No  5 

No.6  

No  7 

No.9  

Sacred  Heart  Academy 

St.  Mary's  

Total 

12 

350 

292 

214.2 

Cushman  superintendency— 
Cushman  * 

7 
1 
1 

1 

350 
15 
28 
28 
70 

389 
12 
31 
25 

74 

338.3 
9.9 
22.0 
18.9 
62.0 

Queets  River  

Skokomish     

Taholah 

St.  George's  

Total 

10 

491 

531 

451.1 

Receives  197  pupils  from  other  reservations. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


177 


TABLE  26. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools,  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1918 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of 
schools. 

Number 
of  em- 
ployees. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school  and  remarks. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Neah  Bay  superintendency  — 
Neah  Bay  

2 

60 

78 

66.7 

Day 

Quileute                   

2 

60 

46 

40  2 

Do 

Total    

4 

120 

124 

106  9 

Spokane  superintendency— 
No.  1     

2 

33 

31 

14.9 

Day 

No  2 

2 

32 

32 

28  4 

Do 

No.  8  

2 

33 

25 

15.6 

Do 

Total 

6 

98 

88 

58  9 

Tulalip  superintendency— 
Tulalip  

6 

196 

203 

192.2 

Reservation  boarding 

Jamestown 

24 

23 

16  4 

Dav 

Lummi  

1 

30 

45 

22.9 

Do 

Port  Gamble 

1 

25 

27 

16  6 

Do 

Swinomish  

1 

60 

29 

22.8 

Do 

Total 

10 

335 

327 

270  9 

Yakima      

6 

131 

146 

119  6 

Reservation  boarding 

Total  Washington  
Wisconsin: 
Eland  (Bethany) 

48 

1,525 
50 

1,508 
40 

1,221.6 
35 

Lutheran. 

Hayward  superintendency— 
Hayward  * 

7 

150 

196 

173  0 

Nonreservation  boarding 

La  Courte  Oreille  

2 

45 

43 

33.3 

Day 

Total 

9 

195 

239 

206  3 

Keshena  superintendency  — 
Keshena  

6 

78 

87 

77.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Neopit 

2 

55 

48 

26.7 

Dav 

Stockbridge  No.  2  

1 

34 

20 

9.8 

Do. 

St.  Joseph's 

220 

182 

145  3 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic. 

Total    

9 

387 

337 

258.8 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

5 

170 

119 

111  6 

Reservation  boarding 

La  Pointe  superintendency— 
Bayfleld  (Holy  Family)  . 

65 

43 

37.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Odanah 

2 

490 

128 

80.4 

Day 

Odanah  (St.  Mary's)  

200 

125 

94.6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

2 

755 

296 

212  2 

Oneida  superintendency— 
Oneida  

8 

112 

152 

132.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

20 

10.  4 

Mission   day;  Seven-Day   Ad- 

Hobart Mission  

25 

17 

6.4 

ventist. 
Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Total  

8 

162 

189 

148.8 

Red  Clifl 

2 

80 

53 

37.4 

Day. 

Tomah  

7 

250 

111 

231.9 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Wittenberg 

4 

106 

135 

121.8 

Do. 

Total  Wisconsin  

46 

2,155 

1,685 

1,363.8 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone  superintendency  — 
Shoshone 

7 

135 

178 

172.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Arapaho... 

2 

15 

28 

17.6 

Day. 

Crowheart 

2 

20 

19 

10.  4 

Do. 

St.  Stephen's  

120 

•    116 

105.8 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Shoshone  Mission 

20 

16 

10.8 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Total 

11 

310 

357 

317.1 

Grand  total  

1,089 

31,569 

32,693 

25,830.2 

1  Receives  pupils  from  other  reservations. 


21716—14- 


-12 


178          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  27. — School  libraries.  . 
[Schools  not  listed  have  reported  no  library.    Leaders  indicate  not  reported.] 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  in  library. 

Circulation. 

Expend- 
ed for 
books, 
fiscal  vear 
1913. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Liter- 
ature. 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Liter- 
ature. 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

227 
30 
113 

227 
150 
281 
262 
131 
131 
131 
1,600 
129 
204 
145 
23 
27 
238 
136 

$185.85 
142.  89 
142.  89 
281.94 
142.88 
142.  88 
142.88 
98.32 
142.88 
151.87 

Fort  Apache 

120 
158 
262 
131 
131 
131 

Leupp 

10 

Moqui  .  . 

Navajo 

Chin  Lee 

Tohatchi. 

Phoenix 

1,000 

600 

Pima 

129 
148 
145 
7 
9 
127 
136 

Bice  Station.  . 

40 

16 

30 

25 

55 

San  Carlos 

San  Xavier  .  . 

9 
12 
14 

7 
6 
97 

2 

2 

Truxton  Canyon 

Western  Navajo  .  .  . 

151.43 

Total  

1,634 

1,445 

736 

3,815 

32 

25 

57 

1,  726.  71 

California: 
Bishop 

39 
60 
182 
33 
127 
129 
60 
8 
131 
212 

31 

9 

79 
60 
213 
236 
284 
129 
237 
82 
131 
948 

Big  Pine 

5 

5 

Fort  Bidwell  

21 
50 
119 

""177" 
20 

10 
153 
38 

148.  75 
142.  89 
129.99 
140.  89 

Fort  Yuma.  . 

Greenville  

115 

38 

153 

Hoopa  Valley..  . 

Malki 

Pala..               

54 

5 

18 

23 

Round  Valley. 

142.88 
296.10 

Sherman  Institute 

550 

186 

11 

60 

71 

Total  

981 

968 

450 

2,399 

131 
205 
10 

136 

116 

252 

1,001.50 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs 

131 
22 
3 

142.89 
264.68 

South"  ern  Ute..  . 

147 
5 

36 
2 

12 

22 

34 

Allen 

Total  .  . 

152 
98 

156 
35 

38 

346 
133 

12 
16 

22 

34 
16 

407.  57 
316.23 

Idaho'  Fort  Hall 

Kansas: 
Haskell 

383 
40 

483 
34 

518 
12 

^ 

2,,35 

2,463 
12 

4,598 
46 

Kickapoo..  . 

21.41 

Total...             

423 
160 

517 
143 

530 

141 

1,470 
444 

2''% 

2,475 
30 

4,644 
45 

21.41 

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 

159.98 
127.64 
142.  89 
142.  89 
142.  89 
142.89 

127 
160 
25 

127 
202 
202 
128 
186 
270 
144 
125 
7 
22 
298 

Leech  Lake  

21 
177 
128 
134 
165 
40 

21 

30 

30 

Red  Lake 

Cross  Lake 

VermillionLake  

38 
66 
49 
50 
1 
20 
100 

14 
39 
55 
75 
6 
2 
53 

20 

7 

27 

White  Earth 

Pine  Point 

Porterville  

100 
2 

250 

4 

350 

6 

50.00 

Round  Lake 

White  Earth  .. 

Wild  Rice...            .  .  . 

145 

142.89 

Total 

810 

636 

265 

1,711 

152 

261 

413 

1,052.07 

Montana: 
Blackfeet—  Cut  Bank 

93 
133 
2 
142 
9 
19 
5 
10 
6 

21 
60 
5 

114 
411 
14 
142 
666 
200 
16 
15 
25 

5 

6 

11 

142.  89 
142.89 
7.53 
153.  15 
142.89 

Crow..                   

218 

7 

Flathead. 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck..    . 

657 
179 
10 

9 

9 

No.  1...                    .  . 

2 
1 
5 

7 

No.  2 

No  3 

No.  4... 

12 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  27. — School  libraries — Continued. 


179 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  in  library. 

Circulation. 

Expend- 
ed for 
books, 
fiscal  year 
1913. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Liter- 
ature. 

218 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Liter- 
ature. 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Montana—  Continued. 
Tongue  River 

172 
141 

78 

468 
141 

$142.89 

Total  

1,396 

637 
3 

179 
11 

2,2,2 

14 
3 

6 
11 

20 
14 

732.24 

Nebraska'  Winnebago    Decora 

Nevada: 
Fort  McDermitt 

21 
131 

22 

13 

56 
131 
50 
131 

14.48 
142.  89 

Nevada 

Walker  River 

27 

23 

Western  Shoshone 

131 

142.  89 

Total 

283 

49 

36 

368 

300.26 

New  Mexico: 

129 
316 
51 
5 
137 
215 
139 

129 
383 
157 
135 
137 
330 
139 
162 

122.  82 
142.  89 
117.36 
155.  37 
141.98 

Jicarilla 

41 
91 
126 

26 
15 
4 

..        47 

47 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito 

- 

San  Juan 

Santa  Fe 

50 

65 

9  day  schools 

63 

63 

133.  49 
142.89 

Zuni 

142 

20 

Total  

450 
127 

36 
121 
129 
27 
131 

992 

130 

1,572 
127 

63 

47 

110 

956.  80 
144.  43 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck  .  . 

60 
30 
66 
5 

96 
155 
212 
45 
131 

8|           9 

17 

0) 
142.  89 
238.  78 
45.00 
142.  89 

Fort  Berthold 

4 
17 
13 

Standing  Rock  

Martin  Kenel 

Turtle  Mountain  
Total  

444 

161 

34 

639 

8 

9 

17 

569.56 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  

108 
135 
436 

3 
260 
617 

128 

7 

111 
610 
1,580 

128 
128 
131 
297 
165 
136 
259 
158 
412 
400 
131 

20 
40 
1,359 

20 
200 
2,485 

140.97 
142.  89 
171.  48 

142.  89 
142.  89 
142.  89 
142.  89 
142.  89 
83.97 
142.  89 
148.  62 
152.  89 
126.00 
120.  90 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

215 
527 

160 
1,126 

Chilocco 

Kiowa- 
Anadarko 

Fort  Sill  

121 
131 
172 
144 
136 
56 
149 
215 
173 
131 

Rainy  Mountain  . 

Riverside 

100 
16 

25 
5 

Otoe  

Pawnee 

Ponca  

180 
104 

23 
9 

49 

33 

82 

Sac  and  Fox  . 

Seger 

131 

50 

131 

130 

Seneca  .... 

80 

Shawnee 

Total2... 

2,107 

1,612 

====== 

60 

927 

===== 

21 

4,  646 

136 
20 
79 
66 
107 
43 
88 
177 
90 
194 
181 
142 

1,649 
40 

1,399 
21 

3,048 

1 

61 

1,945.06 
61.81 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Armstrong 

55 
20 
22 
46 
16 

Bloomfield 

Cherokee. 

50 
11 
71 
23 
29 
103 
14 
82 
53 
71 

7 
9 
20 

20 

18 

51.50 
35.64 
43.06 
12.54 

Collins 

Euchee  

34 

26 

60 

Eufaula 

Jones 

41 
74 
65 

85 

Mekusukey  

Nuyaka. 

11 

27 
128 

Tullahassee 

53 

48 
20 

39 

198 
56 

92 
246 
76 

2.50 
50.82 

.72 

Tuskahoma  .  . 

Wheelock 

71 

Total,  Five  Tribes  
Total,  Oklahoma  

495 

567 

261 

1,323 

195 

340 

535 

258.59 

2,602 

2,179       1,188 

5,969 

1,844 

1,739 

3,583 

2,  203.  1)5 

1  Belong  to  superintendent. 


»  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


180  REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  27. — School  libraries — Continued. 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  in  library. 

Circulation. 

Expend- 
ed for 
books, 
fiscal  year 
1913. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Liter- 
ature. 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Liter- 
ature. 

Fiction. 

Total. 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

208 

528 

208 
615 
191 
174 
250 

$142.  89 
13.00 

Salem 

87 

Siletz 

191 
76 
151 

Umatilla 

68 
71 

30 

28 

142.  89 
16.88 

\v  arm  Springs.  . 

108 

72 

180 

Total 

418  !        875 
1,  3,043 

145 
745 

1,438 
3,788 

108 
1,831 

72 
899 

180 
2,730 

315.  66 
237.29 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

Crow  Creek 

108 
213 
30 

45 
186 
60 
131 

105 

26 
""75" 

179 
399 
165 
131 
499 
131 

131 
170 
131 

142.  89 
165.08 

Flandreau 

Lower  Brule.  .. 

142.  89 
23.50 
158.  33 

158.  33 
177.  87 
142.  89 
142.  89 
41.50 
142.  89 

Pierre 

314 

131 

131 
85 
131 
179 
100 
151 

80 

Pine  Ridge  

Circulating  library  among 
25  day  schools 

Rapid  City  

10 

75 

10 

75 

85 

Sisseton  

9 
95 
12 

16 
95 
3 

204 
290 
166 

25 

35 

60 

Springfield 

Y"ankton 

Total 

1.573 
114 

653 

370 

2,  596 
114 

35 

110 

145 

1,439.06 
142.  89 

Utah'  Uintah 

Washington: 
Colville  

129 
298 

129 
869 

142.89 
142.89 

Cushman  . 

258 

313 

Spokane  — 
No.l  

No.  2 

44 
75 
44 
35 
129 

36 
46 
45 

18 
29 
80 

98 
150 
169 
35 
131 

4 
4 

4 
12 

8 
16 

70.89 
72.00 
142.  89 

No.  8... 

Tulalip. 

Swinomish 

Yakima. 

2 

142.  89 

Total  

754 

387 

440 

1,581 

8 

16 

24 

714.  45 

Wisconsin: 
Hayward  

La  Courte  Oreille 

Keshena  

143 

49 
131 

192 
131 
139 
195 
131 

142.  89 
142.89 
151.28 
140.  78 
142.  89 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Oneida 

139 
130 
131 

Red  Cliff  

'\S  ittenberg 

55 

10 

20 

4 

24 

Total  

543 
12,  962 

235 
- 
13,114 

10 

— 
5,448 

788 
31,524 

20 
6,466 

_^ 
5,842 

24 
12,308 

720.  73 
13,002.51 

Grand  total  

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


181 


TABLE  28. — School  statistics  for  37  years. 
INDIAN  SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE  FROM  1877  TO  1913.1 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.2 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

~- 

attSS, 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

1877.  .  . 

48 
49 
52 
60 
68 
71 
80 
87 
114 
115 
117 
126 
136 
140 
146 
149 
156 
157 
157 
156 
145 
148 
149 
153 
161 
163 
162 
162 
167 
169 
173 
170 
161 
158 
156 
*170 
»168 

102 

119 
107 
109 
106 
76 
88 
98 
86 
90 
110 
107 
103 
106 
110 
126 
119 
115 
125 
140 
143 
149 
147 
154 
143 
136 
144 
141 
145 
149 
168 
173 
202 
227 
227 
242 
230 

150 
168 
159 
169 
174 
147 
168 
185 
200 
214 
227 
233 
239 
246 
256 
275 
275 
272 
282 
296 
288 
297 
296 
307 
304 
299 
306 
303 
312 
318 
341 
343 
363 
385 
383 
412 
398 

3,598 
4,142 
4,448 
4,651 
4,976 
4,714 
5,686 
6,960 
8,143 
9,630 
10,  520 
11,420 
11,552 
12,232 
13,  588 
15,  167 
16,303 
17.220 
18,  188 
19,262 
18,676 
19,  648 
20,  522 
21,568 
23,077 
24,  120 
24,382 
25,104 
25,455 
25,492 
25,802 
25,964 
25,568 
24.  945 
23.647 
26,281 
25,830 

1878  

1879 

1880  

1881 

1882 

3,077 
3,793 
4,723 
6,201 
7,260 
8,020 
8,705 
9,146 
9,865 
11,  425 
12,  422 
13,635 
14,  457 
15,061 
15,683 
15,026 
16,  112 
16,  891 
17,  708 
19,  464 
20.  576 
20,  772 
21,582 
21,812 
21.848 
21,825 
21,725 
20,  940 
20,  106 
18,  774 
20,  973 
20,  607 

1,637 
1,893 
2,  237 
1,942 
2,370 
2,500 
2,  715 
2,406 
2,367 
2,163 
2.745 
2,668 
2,639 
3,127 
3,579 
3,650 
3.536 
3,631 
3,860 
3,613 
3,544 
3,610 
3,522 
3,643 
3,644 
3,977 
4,239 
4,678 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5,223 

1883  

188£ 

1885 

1886 

1887 

1888  

1889 

1890 

1891  

1892 

1893  

1894     

1895 

1896  

1897 

1898.  

1899     

1900 

1901  

1902 

1903  

1904  

1905 

1906  

1907 

1908  

1909     

1910 

1911  

1912 

1913  

1  Some  of  the  figures  in  this  table  as  printed  prior  to  1896  were  taken  from  reports  of  the  superintendent 
of  Indian  schools.    As  revised,  they  are  all  taken  from  the  reports  of  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs. 
Prior  to  1882  the  figures  include  the  New  York  schools. 

2  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 

3  Includes  Five  Tribes  boarding  schools. 

APPROPRIATIONS  MADE  FOR  SCHOOLS  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  SINCE  1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877... 

$20,  000 

1897... 

$2,  517.  265 

22.45 

1878 

30  000 

50.00 

1898 

2,631  771 

4.54 

1879  

60,000 

100.00 

1899  

2,  638.  393 

.25 

1880 

75,  000 

25.00 

1900                          

2,936,080 

11.28 

1881  

75,000 

1901  

3,  080.  367 

4.91 

1882  

135,000 

80.00 

1902     

3,244,250 

5.32 

1883 

487  200 

260.  00 

1903 

3,531,250 

8-84 

1884  

675,200 

38.00 

1904  

3,522,950 

1.23 

1885.. 

992,  800 

47.00 

1905  

3,880,740 

10.15 

1886 

1  100  065 

10  00 

1906 

3  777  100 

12.67 

1887 

1  211  415 

10  00 

1907 

3  925  830 

3  93 

1888 

1,179,916 

i  2.60 

1908 

4,  105,  715 

4.58 

1889 

1  348  015 

14  00 

1909 

4  008  825 

12.36 

1890  . 

1,364,568 

1.00 

1910  

3,757,909 

i  6.26 

1891 

1  842  770 

35.00 

1911                     

3,685  ?90 

i  1.93 

A  892 

2  291  650 

24  30 

1912 

3  757  495 

1  96 

1893 

2,315,612 

1.04 

1913     

4,015,720 

6.87 

1S94 

2  243  497 

13  50 

1914 

24  403  355 

9.65 

1895 

2  060  695 

i  8  87 

1896 

2  056  515 

i  2.00 

Total  since  1876  

84,  985,  220 

Decrease. 


2  Includes  $400,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 


182 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  29. — Industrial  instruction  and  value  of  articles  fabricated  in  shops  during  fiscal 

year  ended  June  30,  1913, 


States  and  schools. 

Employees. 

Value  of 
material 
used. 

Market  value  of  articles  fabricated. 

Number. 

Cost. 

Used. 

Sold. 

On  hand.     Total. 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache  School  

2 
2 
1 
3 
4 
3 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 

$1,020 
1,440 
540 
1,980 
2,240 
1,560 
1,260 
1,800 
900 
300 
600 
540 

$1,  121 
1,122 
1,071 
-     772 
1,432 
589 
215 
297 
17 
305 
42 
452 

$1,673 
1,270 
1,371 
710 
1,986 
729 
325 
525 
62 
633 
30 
422 

$1,  181 
1,077 

$2,854 
2,347 
1,371 
1,056 
1,986 
1,524 
525 
525 
62 
633 
84 
569 

Fort  Mojave  School 

Leupp  School  

Moqui  School 

346 

Navajo  Schools 

Phoenix  School       

$28 

767 
200 



Pima  School 

Rice  Station  School     

San  Carlos  Agency 

San  Xavier  School 

Truxton  Canyon  School  
Western  Navajo  School  

Total 

54 
147 

24 

14,  180 

7,435 

9,736 

28 

3,772 

13,536 

California: 
Campo  Day  School 

1 

1 

•j 

1 

300 

500 
600 
520 
1,860 
300 

58 
2,992 
400 
253 
819 
54 
3 
3,514 

106 
4,467 
568 
640 

•••s 

4 
5,966 

26 
50 
111 

132 
4,517 
679 
640 
1,766 
83 
4 
6,230 

Fort  Bidwell  School 

Fort  Yuma  School 

Greenville  School 

Hoopa  Valley  School 

463 
11 

Malki  School  „.  . 

Pechanga 

Sherman  Institute  
Total  

5 

3,500 

264 

13 
1 
1 

7 

7,580 
480 
840 
4,400 

8,093 
242 
842 
Mil 

13,  126 

285 
622 
88 

925 
110 
1,054 
350 

14,051 
395 
1,676 
856 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute  School  .  . 
Idaho:  Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium 
Kansas*  Haskell  Institute        L 

418 

Michigan: 
BayMills  School 

193 
2,713 

118 

9,822 

200 

318 

9,822 

Mount  Pleasant  School  
Total       .           

5 

2,260 

5 

2,260 

2,906 

9,940 

200 

10,  140 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake  School 

1 

A 

2 
1 
5 

300 
300 
2.500 
1,320 
480 
2,520 

204 
64 
1,224 
1,059 
339 
2,139 

252 
124 
1,811 
3,385 
477 
2,777 

96 
25 
539 
860 

348 
149 
2,350 
5,935 
477 
3,527 

Nett  Lake  School  .  .  .•  



Pipestone  School 

Red  Lake  Agency  

1,690 

Red  Lake  School 

White  Earth  Schools  
Total 

88 

662 

14 

7,420 

5,029 

8,826 

1,778 

2,182 

12,786 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  School 

1 

500 

590 
15 

397 
(2) 
214 
910 
166 

1,010 

459 
32 

549 
3,197 

1,469 
32 
625 
5,195 
428 
1,058 
241 

Crow  Agency 

Crow  School  

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 

500 
900 
500 
540 
600 

76 
1,975 
428 
964 
216 

""23" 

Flathead  School 

Fort  Belknap  School 

Fort  Peck  School 

94 

25 

Tongue  River  Schools 

Total 

6 
5 

3,540 
3,780 

2,292 
4,572 

4,669 
7,111 

23 

443 

4,356 
55 

9,048 
7,609 

Nebraska:  Genoa  School    

Nevada: 
Carson  School  
Fallon  School 

2 

1 

1 

1,440 
300 
300 
500 
500 

958 
4 
21 

209 
159 

1,379 
7 
36 
303 
200 

6 

1,386 

52 
335 
302 

Fort  McDermitt  School  
Nevada  School 

16 
32 
102 

Western  Shoshone  School... 
Total 



6 

3,040 

1,351 

1,925 



156 

2,081 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  School 

6 
3 

v      '            1 

1 

3,620 

900 
500 
500 
fiOO 

1,686 

343 

625 
387 
35 

6,174 

759 
1,046 
244 

146 

6,320 

759 
1,046 
387 
125 

Albuquerque  Pueblo  Day 
Schools 

Jicarilla  School 

Mescalero  School       

143 
125 

San  Juan  School... 

i  Full  value  not  reported. 


2  Not  reported. 


BEPOKT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


183 


TABLE  29. — Industrial  instruction  and  value  of  articles  fabricated  in  shops  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  schools. 

Employees. 

Value  of 
material 
used. 

Market  value  of  articles  fabricated. 

Number. 

Cost. 

Used. 

Sold. 

On  hand. 

Total. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
Santa  Fe  School 

4 
1 

$2,  720 
540 

$4,  131 
0) 

$4,  131 
179 

$4,  131 
563 

Zuni  School 



$384 

Total 

17 
2 

9,380 
1,060 

7,207         12,533 
1,  198              463 

$146 

652 
2,037 

13,331 
2,500 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  School 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck 

1 

500 

1,637 
42 
112 
1,165 
1,591 
56 
581 

2,065 
56 
87 
1,662 
1,985 
3 
1,074 

234 

2,299 
56 
162 
1,977 
2,337 
81 
1,074 

Fort  Berthold  School  

1 

7 
3 

420 
4,200 
1,560 

75 
315 
352 

78 

Fort  Totten  School 

Standing  Rock  Schools  
Turtle  Mountain  School 

Wahpeton  School 

1 

480 

Total 

13 

6,660 

5,184 

6,932 

1,054 

7,986 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  School 

1 

2 
7 
4 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 

9 

480 

1,000 
4,660 
1,980 
540 
500 
1,260 
740 
500 
450 
500 

3,810 

152 

1,054 
2,132 
1,386 
386 
97 
575 
147 
12 
250 
1,211 

722 

213 

1,124 
3,421 
2,333 
65 
192 
575 
214 

213 

1,661 
3,421 
4,537 
519 
192 
575 
342 
22 
504 
1,465 

1,181 

Cheyenne     and     Arapaho 
School 

537 

Chilocco  School 

Kiowa  Schools 

2,204 
454 

Osage  School 

Otoe  School 

Ponca  School 

128 
22 
21 
398 

515 

Red  Moon  School 

Sac  and  Fox  School 

483 
1,067 

607 

Shawnee  School 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 
Schools  

59 

Total  

32 

16,420 

8,124 

10,294 

59 

4,279 

14,632 

Oregon: 
Klamath  School 

2 
5 
1 
1 

1,220 
3,680 
500 
540 

593 

707 

698 
3,342 

88 
791 

231 

705 
115 
218 

929 
4,302 
203 
1,009 

Salem  School 

255 

Umatilla  School 

Warm  Springs  Agency  
Total 

9 

8 

5,940 
5,500 

1,456 
12,716 

4,919 
41,556 

255 

1,269 

6,443 
41,556 

Pennsylvania*  Carlisle 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum               .  .  . 

1 
3 

1 
4 

2 
4 
3 
2 
1 

500 
1,520 
540 
1,960 
480 
1,260 
2,340 
1,880 
1,240 
540 

402 
994 
100 
2,378 
429 
676 
1,074 
1,287 
1,085 
385 

757 
1,536 
153 
3,673 
429 
948 
1,663 
1,237 
633 
1,081 

757 
1,536 
153 
3,713 
429 
1,209 
1,663 
1,287 
1,085 
1,081 

Cheyenne  River  School  
Crow  Creek  School       .  . 

Flandreau  School 

40 

Lower  Brule  School     

Pierre  School 

36 

225 

Rapid  City  School  

Rosebud  Schools 

50 

452 

Sisseton  School 

Yankton  School 

Total 

22 

12,260 

8,810 

12,  110 

76 

727 

12,913 

Utah: 
Shivwits  School 

22 
151 

33 
293 

33 
293 

Uintah  School 

1 

500 

Total 

1 

500 

173 

326 

326 

Washington: 
Colville  School       

61 
961 
460 

818 

167 
1,289 
761 
482 

9 
456 
352 
633 

176 
1,745 
1,113 
1,  115 

Cushman  School 

2 

2 

2 

1,380 
1,100 
1,220 

Tulalip  School    

Total 

6 

3,700 

2,300 

2,699 

1,450 

4,149 



Not  reported. 


184 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  29. — Industrial  instruction  and  value  of  articles  fabricated  in  shops  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1913 — Continued. 


States  and  schools. 

Employees. 

Value  Of 
material 
used. 

Market  value  of  articles  fabricated. 

Number. 

Cost. 

Used. 

Sold. 

On  hand. 

Total. 

Wisconsin: 
FTaywaTd  School 

2 
3 
1 
2 
2 

$1,260 
1.620 
540 
1,260 
840 

$2,962 
3,  033 
508 
547 
'    974 

$4,082 
1.337 
680 
1,193 
1,174 

$4,082 
4,028 
680 
1,193 
1,174 

Keshena  Agency 

$2,691 

Keshena  School 

Lac  du  Flambeau  School.  .  . 
Tomah  School 

Total. 

10 
3 

5,520 
1,560 

8,024 
656 

8,466 
940 

2,691 

11.157 
940 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  School.  .  .  . 
Grand  total 

205 

116,020 

89,021 

157,  566 

5,917 

$24,628 

188,111 

TABLE  30. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  schools. 

Acreage. 

Value. 

Value  of 
tools  and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Arizona: 
San  Carlos  l  . 

San  Xavier 

260 

$12,000 

$902 

7 

$1,978 

$1,295 

$594 

$701 

California: 
Campo 

7 
1 

280 
75 

1 
1 

720 
266 

240 
50 

100 

$140 
50 

Pala. 

Total  

8 
40 

638 
410 
1,156 

355 
400 

5,104 
32,800 
50,659 

"'ioi' 

390 
556 

2 
1 

13 

986 
900 

643 

290 
.(8) 

845 
1,250 

100 

(3) 

47 
975 

190 

(3) 

720 
275 

Montana:  Blackfeet.... 
North    Dakota:    Fort 
Berthold 

(3) 

78 

Oklahoma:   Cheyenne 
and  Arapaho 

Grand  total  

1,949 

23 

4,507 

3,680 

•  1,716 

779 

1,185 

1  Included  in  agency  farm,  Table  9.  2  Leased.  3  Not  reported. 

TABLE  31. — Experimentation  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  schools. 

Acreage. 

Value. 

Value  of 
tools  and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

$383 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Arizona:  Pima  
California:  Pala  
Montana  :  Blackfeet  .... 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pu- 
eblos 

50 
2 
9 

$5,000 
150 
90 

$1,165 

i  69 

1 
1 

$3,  400 
266 
1,200 

$2,818 

$2,123 

$312 

71 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

47 
10 

418 
150 

1 
1 

1,100 
900 

(2) 
112 

(2) 
112 

(2) 

(2) 

San  Juan  

Total 

57 
36 

568 
360 

2 

6 

2,000 
300 

112 
1,600 

112 
1,600 

Utah:  Shivwits  
Grand  total  



154 

6,168 

1,236 

79 

7,166 

4,530 

2,095 

2,123 

312 

1  Includes  68  cotton  pickers. 


2  Not  reported. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  185 

TABLE  32. — Suppression  of  liquor  traffic  among  Indians,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 


States. 

a 

0> 

M 

S.& 

•§•3. 
1 

o> 
13 

£« 

"Hs 

In" 

CO 

rfg 

1* 

Total  cases,  1913. 

Disposition  of  cases. 

I 
^ 

|s 
ss 

o 

Convictions. 

Q 

Acquittals. 

| 

ft 

f 

to 

0 

«1 

fl£ 

0 

M 

Total  cases 
disposed  of. 

Arizona 

3 

48 

189 
26 

84 

237 
26 
93 
2 
7 
88 
39 
2 
1 
108 
181 
26 
34 
66 
101 
12 
5 

141 
12 

68 

19 

4 
2 

164 
14 
69 

73 
12 
24 
2 
3 
48 
31 
2 

Arkansas 

California 

7 
1 

9 
2 

1 

Colorado  .  .  . 

Florida 

7 
54 
11 
1 
1 
47 
101 
18 
22 
28 
34 
12 

4 
24 
4 

4 
40 

8 

Idaho  .  . 

7 
3 

34 

28 

1 

13 

4 

3 

Iowa 

Kansas... 

Michigan 

1 

19 
51 

A 

18 
21 
11 
6 

1 

Minnesota  

4 
3 

5 

7 

61 
80 
8 
12 
38 
67 

8 
18 
4 
3 
4 
7 

1 
1 

28 
70 
8 
23 
28 
19 
6 

80 
111 
18 
11 
38 
82 
6 
5 

'  '  "37i 
32 

1 
68 
1 
95 
242 
9 

Montana 

Nebraska 

Nevada  .  . 

1 

1 
1 

""2" 

New  Mexico 

New  York  

North  Carolina 

North  Dakota.. 

5 

Ohio 

1 

Oklahoma  

16 
1 

263 
24 
1 
66 

179 
15 
1 
26 
2 
110 
82 
4 

442 
39 
2 
92 
2 
170 
271 
12 

52 
7 
1 
16 
1 
69 
20 
3 

18 

1 

71 
7 
1 
24 
1 
75 
29 
3 

Oregon  .  . 

Pennsylvania  

South  Dakota.  . 

1 

4 

3 

1 

Utah 

Washington. 

7 

60 
189 

8 

5 
6 

1 

3 

Wisconsin 

Wyoming 

Total  

67 

1,004 

1,054 

2,058 

553 

114 

17 

1 

•6 

2 

693 

1,365 

COMPARISON. 


Total,  1912 

184 

846 

1,480 

2,326 

1,002 

267 

32 

2 

6 

13 

1  322 

1  004 

Total,  1911  

143 

596 

1,717 

2,313 

1,168 

265 

34 

1 

1 

1  78 

1,547 

766 

Total,  1900 

M63 

•     97 

18 

83 

118 

345 

Includes  75  suspended. 


2  Cases  prosecuted. 


Suspended. 


186 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  32. — Suppression  of  liquor  traffic  among  Indians,  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 

1913 — Continued . 


State. 

Fined  but  not 
sentenced. 

Jail  sentences. 

Penitentiary 
sentences. 

Number. 

Fines. 

Number. 

Term. 

Number. 

Term. 

Arizona 

3 
19 
1 

$15 
845 
150 

1 
33 

Yrs.  m.  d. 
6     0 
8    6    15 

2 

Yrs.  m.  d. 

260 

California..  . 

Idaho 

1 

200 

Michigan  

1 
4 
2 

1      0 
9    20 
6      0 

Minnesota    ...       '         ... 

2 

160 

Montana 

New  Mexico  

1 
1 

128 
50 

New  York 

6 
1 
2 

100 

4      0 
240 

North  Carolina  

Oklahoma     ....                         .  . 

2 
5 
2 
13 

81 
1,350 
50 
1,250 

2 

6  a  o 

Oregon 

South  Dakota  

Washington 

2 

3     10 

1 
1 

1    0    1 
1    6    0 

Wyoming           

Total  

49 

4,079 

52 

14    4    15 

7 

13    0    1 

State. 

Miscellaneous.1 

Seizure  of  liquors  (gallons). 

Num- 
ber. 

Fines. 

Term. 

Whisky. 

Bran 
dy. 

Alco- 
hol. 

Malt. 

Wine. 

Miscel- 
lane- 
ous. 

Total. 

135 
11 
17 

$13.403 
1,000 
1,285 

Yrs.  m.  d. 
36        11 
342 
3         25 

0.25 
777.50 
5.75 
.25 

5.00 
7.00 

5.25 
1,088.00 
7.00 
.25 

Arkansas 

83.00 

120.50 
1.25 

100.00 

California  

Colorado 

Florida  

4 
21 
4 

300 
2,250 
400 

140 
720 
8    0 

Idaho 

14.75 
23.00 
.75 

3.00 
2.00 
.25 

.50 

.50 

18.75 
25.00 
1.00 
11.50 
14.25 
8.75 
9.50 
6.50 

Iowa  

Michigan 

Minnesota 

13 
49 
4 
18 
20 
4 
5 
46 
1 
1 
14 
1 
53 
20 
2 

1,150 
6,255 
500 
2,000 
2,400 
550 
50 
5,264 
200 
100 
1,300 
500 
5,200 
2,000 
105 

2      2  10 
12      9  13 
1      1    0 
616 
5    10  12 
100 
5    0 
10    10  14 
2    0 
3    0 
6      1  11 
1      6    1 
8    10    0 
3    11    0 
8    0 

10.50 
13.25 
2.50 
2.50 
3.00 

1  00 

Montana.  .  .  . 

1.00 

Nebraska 

.25 
1.00 

6.00 
6.00 

Nevada  

New  Mexico 

3.50 

New  York  

North  Carolina.  .  . 
Oklahoma  

6,342.50 

24.50 

352.50 

17,043.50 

721.  50 

380.  50 

24,865.00 

Oregon.  . 

Pennsylvania  
South  Dakota  
Utah  

3.00 

1  00 

4.50 

8.50 

Washington  
Wisconsin 

5.25 
9.50 

".'56' 

.50 

2.00 

1.50 
1.00 

7.25 
103.00 

90.00 

Wvoming  

Total  

443 

46,212 

113      4  15 

7,214.25 

25.00 

446.50 

17,181.25 

825.  50 

487.00 

26,  179.  50 

1  Includes  fined  and  sentenced,  alternative  sentences,  and  sentences  suspended. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  187 


•—;  05  ( 

3  P-: 


»H  CO  C4  <D  «  ^  CO 


cTcc'io' 


i§  8 


§o«o 
«3t~ 


:§    § 


£8    S 


g       S 


S5SS" 


ft . 

I! 
ii 


00000< 
O  O  O  O  iO  t 


^H  co  ci  «o  <ri  ^4  co 


§§ 

iOQO 


-r'-i 


II 


:§ 


II 


If 


188 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


ggi 


Sggggg 

T-i  r-H  CO  N  1-H  C<l 


lO  r-H 

£ 


ggg 


N 


OIMOOCJOO 
T— I  pH  ^^  CO  T— I  !>. 


g§ 


sggggg 

I-H  ,-<  co  o>  I-H  e^' 


22g£?2£ 


CO  CC         i-   CO 


coooooi 

r-l  r-<  O  1C  I-I 


Ij 

si 


m 


§§ 

^H  CO 


'J8S. 


•3 
•    .  o> 

:  :£ 


ill  t 

:lg    «rt 

111       o^ 


{«   ^  a^ 

S5   6££ 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  189 


ggggg 


cTo  t-'-'oo'1 


gg 


o  o 

§8 


BIS 


1C  »C        I-H        CO 


•  •*)•  O  O  O  ^5 

'  <W  O  O5  C  CO 


i-c  i-l  O3  «O  00  CO 
C^  -^f  1^-  O  r-t  f-H 

^  o  e<i  oic  M  ^H 
co"  irT  of 


«      -T 


ro '  Q  S  £  t-i  CO       S 


iC-*  i 


§g§ 


J3S8S 


^  co  m  10 


gig 


)  00        CO  CO  i-l 


Sgggg 


gg 


2gg  !    : 


•ss 


ssf  ^s 


Ifi 


ill  a 

^WS     . 


I     il  ^ 


[ooifuS     '    IStfS^I   E"    5, 

I ....  9  a 


gl  3   a|l, 
II  £  »] 


190 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 

•i 


actors 
ittees. 


i 

« 


18  : 


iOOO 


o  .- 


csoco  u-*  ccsc 

i-HlOOli-Hi-IOO-^iO 


sag 


«  : 


& 
sis 


e  d 


l 
Navaj 


83£aS££«£$ 


^^^ 
?w3 

I  ,i^^ 

g    ,§ofefe 

a  2 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          191 


?§ 


IS! 


SS3 


roof 


Si  I' 

PI 


;1 


I  al' 


5?    fc 


HI 

It*         •§( 


192 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


f 


.REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


193 


TABLE  35. — Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber,  relative  percentage  of  cost  of  protection 
to  value  of  forests,  and  acreage  per  employee  for  protection,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1913. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber  during  year. 

Relative  percentage  of 
cost  of  protection  to 
value  of  forests. 

Acre- 
age per 
em- 
ployee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Employees. 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting.i 

Total. 

Sala- 
ries. 

Fire 
fight- 
ing. 

Total. 

Special. 

Forest  guards. 

Num- 
ber. 

Sala- 
ries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Sala- 
res. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

2 

7 
3 

1900 
1,425 
900 

$900.00 
3,555.75 
2,300.00 

4.00 
.07 
.03 

4.00 
.10 
.03 

11,250 
81,250 
107,500 

Fort  Apache  
Navajo 

1 

1 

$1,300 
1,400 

$830.75 

0.03 

Pima2  

San  Carlos 

1 

583 

6 
1 

1 

3,973 
1,000 
900 

128.00 

4,684.00 
1,000.00 
900.00 

.75 
1.30 

.02 

.77 
1.30 

15,857 
32,000 

TruxtonCanyon. 

Western  Navajo 

Total 

3 

3,283 

20 

9,098 

958.75 

13,339.75 

California 
Hoopa  Valley 

.08 
.37 
1.20 

'VL-  

.10 
.37 
1.21 

33,333 
200 
3,000 

3 
1 
1 
3 
1 

1,900 
600 
900 
780 
900 

527.50 

2,427.50 
600.00 
912.00 
780.00 
900.00 

.02 

Pala  

Round  Valley 

12.00 

.01 

Soboba  

Tule  River 

1.30 



1.30 

45,000 

Total 

9 

1 

5,080 
263 

539.50 

5,619.50 
263.00 

Colorado:    Navajo 
Springs 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene 

1 
2 

750 
1,920 

750.00 
1,920.00 

.56 
.24 

.56 
.24 

29,400 
9,333 

Fort  Lapwai  
Total          .      . 

1 

1,100 

1 

1,100 

3 

2,670 

3,770.00 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage  

1 

1,700 

5 
2 
4 

950 

600 
1  800 

6.50 

2,656.50 
600.00 
1,800.00 
480.00 
2,359.00 
3,300.00 

1.00 

1.40 
.85 
.35 
.14 
.30 

.002 

1.00 
1.40 
.85 
.35 
.20 
.30 

2,666 
20,221 
22,979 
26,290 
25,  785 
54,339 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake  

2 
3 
2 

'480 
1,080 
600 

Red  Lake 

1 
2 

600 
2,700 

679.00 

.06 

White  Earth  
Total 

4 

--     .       '    . 

5,000 

== 

18 

== 
2 
2 
13 
3 

5,510 

1,050 
400 
4,512 
2,839 

685.50 

....... 

11,195.50 



1,050.00 
400.00 
4,527.00 
2,839.00 

Montana: 
Blackfeet 

.87 
1.60 
.08 
.40 

== 

.87 
1.60 
.08 
.40 

5,000 
6,400 
16,  769 
2,333 

Crow 

Flathead 

15.00 

.0002 

Tongue  River 

Total 

20 

8 
1 

8,801 

3,895 
450 
600 

15.00 

8,816.00 

1 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla 

1 

1,300 
1,000 

! 

5,195.00 
1,515.00 
600.00 

.40 
.03 
.30 

.40 
.03 
.30 

51,064 
175,000 
10,000 

Mescalero 

65.00 

.001 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos 

Total 

2 

2,300 

10 

4,945 

65.00 
9.00 

7,310.00 
9.00 

North  Carolina:  Cher- 
okee 

.006 

•  

.0003 

.006 

.02 
.40 
5.00 
.12 

Oregon: 
Klamath  
Siletz 

===== 

1,500 

9 
5 

7 

5,012 
900 
942 
2,100 

79,000 
800 
3,020 
33,250 

84.30 

6,596.50 
900.00 
942.00 
2,921.00 

.02 
.40 
5.00 
.12 

Umatilla 

Warm  Springs... 
Total 

1 

817 

4.00 

.0001 

2 

2,317 

22       8,  954 

88.30 

11,359.30 

______    .—  . 



21716—14- 


Calendar  year  1912. 
—13 


*  Not  reported. 


194 


KEPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  35. — Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber,  relative  percentage  of  cost  of  protection 
to  value  of  forests,  and  acreage  per  employee  for  protection,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1913 — Continued . 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber  during  year. 

Relative  percentage  of 
cost  of  protection  to 
value  of  forests. 

Acre- 
age per 
em- 
ployee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Employees. 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting. 

Total. 

Sala- 
ries. 

Fire 
fight- 
ing. 

Total. 

Special. 

Forest  guards. 

Num- 
ber. 

Sala- 
ries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Sala- 
ries. 

South  Dakota: 
Pine  Ridge 

3 
1 

$2,340 
960 

$2,340.00 
960.00 

1.50 

1.50 

25,400 

Rosebud  

Total... 

4 
3 

3,300 
1,080 

3,300.00 

Utah:    Uintah  and 
Ourav 

1,080.00 

3.00 

3.00 

2,220 

Washington: 
Colville  

8 
3 
3 
1 

8 

3,625 
900 
1,750 
350 
3,590 

$402.25 

4,027.25 
900.00 
1,768.00 
350.00 
5,182.46 

.06 
.01 
.14 
.10 
.14 

0.007 

.07 
.01 
.14 
.10 
.14 

92,250 
75,007 
37,000 
19,435 
48,590 

Cushman 

Spokane  

18.00 
"  l92.~46 

.001 
""."665" 

Tulalip 

VftlHTTlft 

1 

$1,400 

Total  

1 

1,400 

•  ••-—  •- 

23 

•^      ^- 

3 

5 

4 
2 

1 

10,215 

2,160 

1,470 
1,680 
500 
525 

612.  71 
450.00 

12,227.71 

Wisconsin: 
Keshena  

.04 

21.00 
1.30 
.54 
1.30 

50,327 

266 
22,747 
10,159 
8,000 

2,610.00 

2,578.00 
2,760.00 
500.00 
525.00 

.03 

21.00 
1.30 
.54 
1.30 

.007 

Lac    du    Flam- 
beau   

1 
1 

1,108 
1,080 

La  Pointe 

Hay  ward  

Red  Cliff 





Total.  . 

2 

2,188 

15 
4 

152 

6,335 
1,564 

450.00 

8,973.00 
1,564.00 

Wyoming:  Shoshone. 
Grand  total.... 

13.80 

13.80 

75 

-     - 

15 

17,588 

67,815 

3,423.76 

88,826.76 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          195 


o'o1 


OO  t^-  M  »O  i-H 


^t*  to  o  o 


0*000^00^001 

otc  «rS 


11 
1? 


:+»£ 


.£88 


S88 


888 

Soooo 


8" 


88888888888 


.   S 


88" 


88  : 

^  i-SS^'S 


88 


8  :  :8  :  :8  :  :  : 


888SS8888 


«NOJOOOCO«OJ^O 


O  w^     i  O 

55<N    -o 
06   *    =06 


88 

^00 


li 


: 

i^s>* 

a  M^-e 


196          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


•s 

I 

! 

X 

*H 
§ 

1 

>> 

1 

3 
'£ 

t9 

00 

1 

CJ 
^ 

1 

09 

*c* 
O* 

§ 

s 
1 
£ 

w 
_1 

H 

£ 

ll 

r 

M 

N 

goo'o" 
I18 

^ 

$ 

1 

1 

ssiin 

i 

IS1I8 

1 

CO  O 

cTo'^^t^or 

g 

^    S"*2 

i 

•*  « 

I  - 

'd  s1"1 

r 

o 
^ 

1 

II 

if 

sCts^gf  ^ 

s 

^.  •'   ".  'w 

^r 

o  o 

irTrH 

Area  susceptible  of  irrigation. 

EH                         ^ 

£ 

S™ 

8 
ti 

;  111 

ja 

S 

§ 

^*5*i 

•^* 
8 

p 

ft 

jll 

£ 

l 

1 

ill  i§ 

i 

§i 

| 

§§ 

5 

T-H   »C 

^ 

Under  project. 

|r 

1 

^ 

^   « 

8 

5 

ntj 

ot 

IQ 

44-2  ® 

grf" 
•^ 

CO* 

S 

§§     Sfssg  ^ 

tf 

O  CO  >O  CO  O  "^T1 

S 

^? 

K? 

^ 

Ditches  on  reservation. 

~o 

EH 

^.88 

8 

iO 

C^S 

§  ' 

§ 

s 

J11H 

s 

g 

PHI 

8 

S 

S8 

| 

1 

1 

1 

§ 

S 

S 
S 

9 

§ 

9' 
g 

8SS82 

5 

S    8888 

cs     Weo^^ 

s 

«D 

1  88 

3H 

d 

88 

S^oo 

'-*        CO 

5 

B 
$ 

^  ' 

$ 

^ 

jllp 

§ 

1 

oggogo 

^5  l^  l~  GO  CO  iO 

R 
£5 

S8 

•'  '  ,*. 
States  and  superintendencies. 

g 

P 

T 

a 

c 

'S  * 
p 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos  
Jicarilla... 

:         « 

Southern  Ute... 
Total  

• 
a 

M 

•3 

£, 

zi 

1 

S     '> 

03*0  ^5  -^  —  ^       "S 
O 

i 

E 
..  C 

c3  EI- 
1 

Fort  McDermitt 
Moapa  River  .  .  . 
Nevada  
Walker  River..  . 
Western  Shoshor 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS.          197 


13 


s?g 


88 


888 


888 


88 


S8 


^  CO        «? 


SS 


88 


888 

co  co  o 


S8 


I! 


^ 


2£««« 

Soo§^ 

i'gs^^ 

Illlll 


Jo   a. 

s   & 

I  I 


tH  H 


th 
Pi 
Pi 


S  3 
§   § 


Utah: 
Shivwite 
Uintah  and  O 
Salt  Lake,  spec 


3  IS  a 

£     d'^3 

H  is? 


Total.  . 
ing:  S 


198 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER 


Estimated 
additional 
required  in 
excess  1914 
appropria- 
tions. 


Main- 
tenanc 


Main 
enanc 


8 

xL' r^ 


iss 


§•*!<  CO  iO< 
o  co 
« 


SS8 


§•00 
.10 

?2  io? 


ii; 


s 


f~i-l  (N 
«^-O  1C 


O5  t^-  CO 


INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

8        :::::::  :888  :  :8 


:  :  :  :8 


§8 


.(NO 

-oo 


oo" 


O»C<IO 

ooco 


I--  O5  Tfi  O  <M  O  CO 

00  05  «5  "O  CO  10  •* 

^CS 


lOCO 

oo  10 


C^COC<IOO  •  00«5O<M  < 
f-H-^rH-^t^  ••^frHf-<»O 
i-lOOOOO  •  CO  <N  CO  <N 


!  9  §  "3,0,0:2  3  3 

>ooofe(^WW^ 


Scfi     •    .     • 
^wso'd-Pl 

tiii^pi 


- 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  199 


88 


88888 


•  O  ^H 

•  TjTco" 


rH          CO          T-H 


8       8    88 


88 


:8  :8  : 


33 


88    8 


88888 


88838 


88 


S^H  1C 
m  10 


co  co 
53 


if 


c?oo£3ooo 


i-i  O  O  CO 

3S33 


— 1 t~ 

£8 


85 


CO  C<l 


s  :8 

:  °  :  § 


E* 


S3 


S  :  :S 


tg 


Si 

oSTS 

S3 


a  . 


jajsirsj 


» 


200 


EEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONEK    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 


0      •     •       ( 


oo  r~o  co  "*  o  ce 

O  r-l  CO  (N  t^.  ?5  O 

2S322?JS§ 

CO  t*  Oi  i-H  "^  !>•  t>- 


88 

•  00 

ooo 
3 


88 


38 


:88  s 


88  : 


T)<  t^  O 

r-HO^H 


oi  c^i  OO^H 
^ 


CO  00 


:    S 


* 


S  : 


8S3 


S 


53 


cO  ^J1  Is*  ' 

CO  i-H  O  < 

SS38: 


U 


Jl 

,     ifj    ill 

:Sci1ls:    :^'B 


51  :'   3    fa   lid*!   3    "p   lillfj    9ttfl    I 

all  e  Jl  ^«ia§  ^  II  ^fllll  ^ia  o 


1    G> 

5SStf 

3 


n: 
S 
U 


in 
Col 
M 
Q 
Y 


Wyo 
Adm 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          201 


la 
ndi 


cont 
way. 


under  p 
,  but  no 


•pTOi  XouaSy 


•pirei  poqos 


1 


•pUBj  looqog 


Cill         OCOOO 


0^         ^      ;         ~ 


S  i*  i  ;  ;  i  ;g 

:     :::::« 


•*  O>  O  iO  O  N  O 


"-  1 


« "?       ic'^o>t>r 


t-T          c^ 


18 


00     .  .0 


l^s%s 


I 


t  2 


202 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


plated 


unde 
tinu 


—  Co 


bu 
13 


•61 

1^ 
S"9 


plat 


1§ 
tl 


now  unde 
vated  by 


under 
ted,  but 


•pirei  jfoueSv 


•pUBi  jooqos 


"3N 

EoS 


•pirei  lootjog 


iffftf 


Sf 

t      l 

"o 


sse 


rado: 
Navajo  Sprin 
Southern  Ute 


sfs 


ai  i  j 

- 


i-3  S«     - 
HW|     « 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          203 


S3 


IO'CD'CO" 


(N 


§s 


:g 


8SI3 


sr 


all; 

hj.*^1-* ' 


«    .-§ 


a 
I 

5^^   , 
c«ra  _.     o3 


Sf! 


fta1!    -a    S«§    aT.    s 

^        ^«t-3    5    -S3  3    ^  6i    g 

CO        O  >  **  ^j        O        W^  |5        O  C        Vi 


^S 


204          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


co  so  t^  oc  1-1  o 
c*3  oo  oi   r^  10 


: 


S 


s 


:g 


Ag 


02  JO  « 


CO  00  O5  CN   O 


••*  t>-  O  -^  O  O 
»—  *  CO  "^t1  CO  t-*  C^l 


ss; 


^oo  °< 


8iO  CO  •* 
l^  l~  OO 

r-HTflOCO 


ultivating 
lands. 


II 


PAS 


O  •*  O 

CO  CO  1O 


fS- 


*il« 

•BlaIfiw«ajiK««a 

•3 


C3 

^  11 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          205 


w 

•4P 

0  CC  CO  JO  C  C 

•* 

1C 

JCOOQCOCO 

* 

t~" 

:** 

§ 

11 

1 

§8 

§IQ 
~s 
c^ 

g 

s" 

r 

oT 

eo 

oo^ 

5? 

co~ 

1C 

1 

co  O 

oo  >c 

\      \ 

1 

2 

C-J 

§ 

00 

s_ 

5j| 

IS 

ii 

1     sgl° 

0 

2 

1    :  : 

:  :0 

1 

!!8 

1 

CMQ 

!! 

L 

!  <o^ 

Is" 

is 

1  i 

i  !| 

§ 

i  • 

CM 

i-l 

2 

! 

1      : 

;  ; 

ii 

S 

eg; 

5 

1 

:  :  ! 

i 

::! 

I 

II 

!! 

o" 

3g|gjl 

gll     S|S 

I1SS 

i 

o  ',0  o  o      oo 

CO  CO  O  S  ^__OO 

I 

88 

1 

SSi 

to 
5> 

iO  l>- 

oo'o" 

SCO 

i 

CO  ^  00  .-H 

Tt<COCM^ 

S                 ^05CCOCC5g 

i 

8  —  8=-S 

8 

c^05 

CO 

co^cc 

S 

«i 

•^T-^TtcT 

55 

>c' 

S 

-yf 

ic~          ic"co"co" 

»o 

c? 

CO 

10" 

§ 

CO 

•o" 

»c" 

CO 

ic" 

§  § 

!! 

i 

'fiifp 

^ 

! 

§ 

8  ':  ': 

i 

§  i 

§ 

11? 

IS 

CO 

sC 

»H 

CM     •-; 

*i 

* 

•*. 

•-?W|- 

s 

0 

g  :  : 

§ 

1 

§ 

i 

«5 

CNCO 

* 

III 

~  pv 

| 

^5S   S 

S 

^' 

cf     w 

CO  ^  00 

^rs 

1 
| 

I 

s 

co 

i 

i 

1 

"—  '     '"•''to' 

i 

«eT 

IO~ 

00 

«cT 

1  S 

"jjf 

o  o  o 
lo'ccTcc" 

a" 

0 

0 

§ 

S 

e 

§ 

s" 

3i 

ill   11 

g 

S 
?5 

ss 

:  1 

§ 

88 

§ 

IM  W 

1 

CO  O> 

"si" 

£rf«* 

^8 

oo           ci"oc 

O5 

A 

COCO 

:  ; 

2 

805 

SI 

;    2 

CO 

_|| 

""'TjTTjT 

s 

of 

§1 

1 

»o 

S 

IS 

1 

11 

1 

|| 

1 

§1 

C4 

•-1 

^ 

«5 

>o> 

»o 

m 

"HCO 

oc  t^ 

s 

_§g|S 

1 

32S 

:  :  : 

to 

& 

gsa§|| 

00 

s 

ICL 

«S 

S 

§33 

CM  O 

?52 

i 

C-f 

£  :  :  :  : 

,  ,  .      . 
•  •  i  i    . 

;  : 

; 

CO 

££§s 

I 

§ 

^TCO"~ 

g 

"5s 

S 

S 

CO 

CO 

-1 

o>" 

gJJS 

3     S3 

i 

1C 

S 

|S 

:  : 

s 

2 

»c 

es 

SI 

0 

«3 

CM" 

§30 
CM 

""*# 

g 
g* 

5 

$ 

II 

g 

-M 

^ 

§ 

eo 
i--T 

S 

CO 

t-T 

§co 
s 

s 

CO  O5 

5»* 

i 

3" 

:  :  :  :  :      :        :  :  :  : 

C3 

Grand  total  

:  :  :afe              :  a  *' 
i  j  :s£              :£> 

C3«—i         •    Q)  £Q     r«            "5             •  •     (-•  ^     C3  T^ 

iiifSi  H  ii*  ti 

•S.2  2.2  oo           ?"«  oo  ® 
o«o^feH            £fefs.g£ 

*i    ..ii 

S"  -3  !!> 

L,      P               -*^                 ^      ^      C3      CJ 

11    *    fill 

££                   |5«S 

ci  ®        "3        £ 

§fe     -i     ts 

•51-    H     g£ 

fl  c            S55 
KMN            £M 
n 

o|                 :       1 

•§£               y         |          S 

^    *3      ^'3^     ^     BJcs'    3  si 

1  ?  ..1|3  ^  III  si 

2         •SS-S'3           ^"3  =a        o 

£               -202^03                   «U>H             >> 

t>                    is.             ^ 

206 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  40. — Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June 
SO,  1913,  and  made  in  the  field.  Many  of  the  latter  were  not  approved  during  the 
year. 


States  and  tribes  or  reservations. 

Approved  by  the  de- 
partment. 

Made  in  the  field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Arizona  and  New  Mexico: 
Colorado  River                       

510 
982 

5,100.00 
122,240.00 

Public  domain           » 

32 

4,  709.  41 

Total 

32 

4,  709.  41 

1,492 
441 
112 

127,340.00 
76,760.00 
8,326.85 

Idaho-  Fort  Hall 

Minnesota:  White  Earth      

112 

8,326.85 

Montana: 
Blackfeet                     

3 
2 
2,024 

960.00 
480.00 
721J43.32 

Crow 

Fort  Peck                  

Total 

2,029 
4 

723,183.32 
40.00 

Nevada:  Paiute           

4 

40.00 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold                .                

61 
193 

17,280.00 
65,  401.  89 

Standing  Rock 

193 

65,401.89 

Total 

193 

65,401.89 

254 

82,681.89 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

405 
506 
21 
549 
382 

82,432.02 
82,445.01 
3,311.91 
125,  586.  52 
63,134.24 

Crow  Creek  .        

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridge          

640 

152,341.00 

Rosebud 

Total               

1,863 
1 

356,909.70 
40.00 

640 

152,341.00 

Utah:  Uintah 

Washington: 
Colville  

601 
180 
28 
241 

79,018.11 
14,400.00 
974.00 
37,240.00 

Cushman  (Quinarelt)                  .    . 

Tulalip  (Lummi)  

28 

974.00 

Yakima          .                 .       . 

Total  

28 

974.00 

1,050 
148 

131,632.11 
12,650.64 

Wyoming:  Wind  River 

Grand  total.. 

4,262 

1,159,585.17 

4,141 

591,  772.  49 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  207 

§38 


8^4 


a°- 

ii. 


II! 


28 


88 


S8 


88 

8  <N 


88 


38 


£28 


88 


38 


od  od 


88 


888 


888 


8S 


88 


88 


00 
00 


8, 
2, 


88 


88 


88 


S      SSS8 


28-2 


882 


88S 


O  JO  £J  O 


8882 


8288 


CO  r-li-H 
»O  b-  O5 


888 


888 


8882 


8SS8 


I 

fe 


IJ 

fl  « 


QQ  "t^ 

..  o 


ll 


=3 

..-a1-" 


Illl  1 1 

fr,,_5^  »i 


fill 


I! 

II 

"S^S 


«  w 

^  ss 


s  s 


208 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

CO  00  CO 


888888888888 


&83888S88888 

CO  3  <O  <-1  O  <N  CO  00          rH  CS  CO 


888 


t-'  0  ^f  0  C4  CO  t^ 


CO-.0 


go3 

III 


88 

li 

csco 


88 


88 


oToo 


888 

C3OC5 


883 


ss 


88 


888 


88 


888 


888 


§8 

gg 


303 

II! 


888 


£OOT 


£8S? 

csooi 

CO  CO  O 


88888 

i-4  o  -?  d  d 

OOOrHCoS 


88^88 

1000^  oo 


OO  Tfl  CO  Ttl  rH 


88 


888 


88S 


SSfeS 

1OCO  »O  (^ 

rH  W  CO 


SO  O  r-< 
o  oo  oo 

8  CO  C^  O5 


«N 


CO  00  00 


j8 


|  |.    |      ^    ^gC 

.°    .ilafl    o   ^Jgs.soSS   E- 

•SUO^^PHOT^  J3 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


209 


888888 

-H  (NO  O  Oi  Tj5 


888888 
828§££ 


888 


8O5  O5 
^0 

OCB'CO 


888 


88 


8S 


<N 


^  CD  1O  >O  i-H  T)5  <N  Tj!  O*  IO  i 


COTt«rHOCOr-~'^'-Hod<y)eO 

F-«eo5a«C3*goSaS3 


(M  i-t    ,-1  rt  i-H  CO  CO  ^H 


o5  o  od  od  l0^0!4 

i-<  i-KN<N-H 


•  OC  co  O  OO  I-H  O 

•  00  CO  00  S  T-H  GO 


SM 
"0*0 
«« 

II 
"0*0 


_ 

511 


21716—14 


210          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  42.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  as  modified  by 
acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}. 


States  and  superinteu- 
dencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to  June  30, 
1913. 

Applications  for  pat- 
ents in  fee  during  fis- 
cal year  ended  June 
30,  1913. 

Original  allot- 
ments. 

Inherited  land. 

Total. 

Received. 

1 
§ 
ft 

Approved. 

fr 
% 

®  o 

0  P, 

<J 

iti 

P 

<B     ' 

•*i 

P 

ft 

ft 

®® 

f| 

1 

_L 

2 
1 
14 
2 

40.00 

1 

12-40 

2 

52.40 

240.00 
80.00 
798.00 
175.00 

California: 

240.00 
80.00 
798.00 
15.00 

2 
1 
14 
3 

Hoopa  Valley 

3 

3 

240.00 

Round  Valley 

1 

160.00 

Total  

19 

1,133.00 

1 

3 
34 

160.00 

--'-••' 

470.00 
1,538.52 

20 

,     -  ~ 

31 
60 

1,293.00 

•    —  '  "     '    --~ 

5,021.49 
2,596.02 

3 

i? 
JL 

10 

7 

g 
3 

3 

240.00 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  

28 
26 

4,551.49 
1,057.50 

6 

9 

961.  49 
740.00 

Fort  Lapwai 

Total  

Kansas: 
Kickapoo 

54 

•-1"-1     —     - 

37 

18 

5,608.99 

2,391.71 
1,240.00 

37 

29 
20 

2,008.52 

2,612.84 
1,610.00 

91         7,617.51 

6 

15 

1,  701.  49 

66 
38 

5,004.55 
2,850.00 

6 
3 

4 

4 

182.30 
330.00 

Potawatomi  

Total  

55     3,631.71 
12        937.28 

16     1,280.00 
5        400.00 
14     1,101.60 
3        260.60 
3,573285,840.00 

49 

4,222.84 

104 
12 

7,854.55 
937.28 

17 

9 

8 

512.30 

Michigan:  Chippewa,  Lake 
Superior 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac    . 

1 

3 

4 

7 

80.00 
80.00 
301.60 
240.00 

16 
5 
14 
5 
5,093 

1,280.00 
400.00 
1,101.60 
420.60 
407,440.00 

2 
4 

I 

1 

^ 

3 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake 

NettLake  

2 

1,520 

160.00 
121,600.00 

White  Earth  i 

Total  

3,611288,882.20 

= 

32     6,371.00 
183   16,962.33 
2          80.00 

1,522 

== 

206 

17 

121,760.00 

25,051.48 
1,527.06 
200.00 

5,133 

410,642.20 

31,  422.  48 
18,489.39 
280.00 

15!      6 

~ 

119     51 

9 



1 
68 

701.60 

160.00 
5,645.83 

Montana: 
Crow 

238 
200 

3 

Flathead  

Fort  Peck  * 

Total  .  . 

........ 

217 

23,413.33 

35,779.00 
16,290.00 
8,638.07 

224 

154 
245 
22 

26,  778.  54 

441 

50,191.87   127     58 

69 

5,805.83 

—  •       -               _•_' 

1,020.00 
760.00 
454.39 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

560 
226 
152 

22,431.00 
16,630.00 
1,670.37 

714 
471 
174 

58,210.00 
32,920.00 
10,308.44 

. 

16 
13 

12 

8 
5 

12 
8 

8 

Santee  

Winnebago 

Total  .  . 

938 
3 

6 
26 
156 
117 

60,707.07 
360.00 

635.  75 
2,284.39 
50,492.29 
16,015.88 

421 

40,731.37 

1,359 
3 

6 
52 
192 
122 

101,438.44 
360.00 

635.  75 
4,515.69 
57,534.50 
16,735.62 

1 
* 

1 

3 
7 
33 

44 

25 

i 

.... 

5 
22 

28 
1 

-' 

1 

2 
2 
11 

2,234.39 
40.00 

80.00 
160.00 
422.  44 
1,386.29 

Nevada:  Carson  

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  

ssasl?3! 

: 

Fort  Totten 

26 
36 
•     5 

2,231.30 
7,042.21 
719.  74 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain 

Total  

305 

69,  428.  31 

67 

9,993.25 

372 

41 
115 
167 
20 
151 
33 
66 
107 
?3 

79,421.56 

5,  759.  47 
16,481.55 
21,960.07 
10,000.00 
16,395.03 
3,517.90 
4,586.17 
11,942.21 
2.280.00 

28 

16 

2,048.73 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  

37 
104 
148 
20 
146 
26 
44 
88 
22 

5,  125.  71 
14,296.96 
18,920.07 
10,000.00 
15,655.03 
2,919.97 
1,880.61 
9,375.14 
2.240.00 

4 
11 
19 

633.76 
2,184.59 
3,040.00 

1.. 
10       4 
7       1 

6 
6 

160.00 
630.37 
560.07 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  .  . 
Kiowa  

Osage  8    .  .  .  . 

Otoe 

15 
7 
22 
19 
1 

i   740.00 
597.  93 
2,705.56 
2,567.07 
40.00 

J    i 

I   I 

11... 

2 
1 
2 
3 
1 

200.00 
80.00 
50.00 
240.00 
40.00 

Pawnee  

Ponca 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger.... 

Patents  issued  under  act  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat  L.,  353).        2 1911  report.         ^1912  report. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


211 


TABLE  42. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  May  8,  1906  (84  Stat.  L.,  182),  as  modified  by 
acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855)— Con- 
tinued. 


States  and  superinten- 
dencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to  June  30, 
1913. 

Applications  for  pat- 
ents in  fee  during  fis- 
cal year  ended  June 
30,  1913. 

Original  allot- 
ments. 

Inherited  land. 

Total. 

1 
39 

Denied. 

I 

1 
19 

* 

Ijj 

el 

•< 

ft 

|i 

ft 

if 

ft 

|i 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Seneca  

531 
465 

31,976.00 
38,468.56 

169 
19 

10,982.00 
2,130.00 

700 

484 

42,958.00 
40,598.56 

"26 

40.00 
1,476.01 

Shawnee 

Total 

1,531 

140,858.05 

276 

— 

5 
5 

25,620.91 

.  -  

800.00 
800.00 

1,807 

957 
16 
2 
239 
7 

166,478.96 

62,335.97 
2,446.70 
120.00 
14,526.51 
1,000.00 

79 

37 

^"^~  • 

""5 

"~8 

42 

^= 

1 
2 

1 
5 

3,476.45 

....._.,,„-_• 

160.00 
256.70 
40.00 
256.64 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

1952 
11 
2 
209 
2 

161,535.97 
1.  646.  70 
120.00 
12,318.62 
240.00 

1 

7 
1 
13 

Roseburg 

Siletz 

Umatilla                 

30 
5 

2,207.89 
760.00 

Warm  Springs 

Total 

1,176 

75,861.29 

45 

4,567.89 

1,221 

80,429.18 

22 

13 

9 

713.34 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

42 
39 
53 
193 
238 
62 
210 

10,598.26 
6,161.20 
15,021.85 
39,393.02 
59,229.78 
6,  159.  55 
27,354.28 

7 
1 
2 
17 
46 
3 
8 

1,  120.  00 
160.00 
410.00 
3,029.22 
7,711.30 
409.44 
850.00 

49 
40 
55 
210 

284 
65 
218 

11,718.26 
6,321.20 
15,431.85 
42,422.24 
66,941.08 
6,568.99 
28,204.28 

15 
4 
6 
153 
64 
59 
28 

1 

1 
1 
19 
7 
21 
15 

14 
3 

5 
134 
57 
38 
13 

2,964.56 
476.60 
610.00 
28,999.41 
9,824.08 
3,525.62 
1,002.28 

Crow  Creek 

Lower  Brule  

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud    

Sisseton 

Yankton. 

Total..  . 

837 
3 

34 
3 
7 
1 

112 

163,917.94 
200.00 

84 

13,689.96 

921 
3 

35 
6 

7 
2 
360 

177,607.90 
200.00 

2,865.55 
444.90 
780.00 
654.06 
27,675.69 

329 

65 

264 

47,402.55 

Utah:  Uintah 

Washington: 
Colville  

80.00 
153.90 

13 

823.25 

2,785.55 
291.00 
780.00 
490.21 
7,827.43 

-    1 

3 

3 

10 

CvjshmaTi 

Spokane 

1 

.... 

1 

120.00 

Tulalip 

248 

163.85 
19,848.26 

Yakima  

i 

1 

3 
2 
38 

2 

5 

178.78 

Total  

157 

5 
7 
972 
1 

12,  174.  19 

53.04 

428.  15 
560.16 
38,624.03 
80.00 

253 

20,246.01 

410 

32,420.20 

_• 

~"6 

16 

z=z= 

1 
3 
2 
32 

1,122.03 

—  '-   -  -_             -; 

53.04 
251.30 
160.00 
925.00 

Wisconsin: 
Hayward 

,1 

« 

7 
1,126 
2 

53.04 
428.  15 
560.16 
46,467.52 
160.00 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

La  Pointe 

Oneida 

154 

7,843.49 
80.00 

Red  Cliff 

Total  

986 
12 

39,745.38 
1,400.69 

155 
36 

7,923.49 
2,241.65 

1,141 
48 

47,  668'.  87 
3,642.34 

1,168,256.26 

44 
2 

6     38 
2 

1,389.34 
89.44 

Wyoming'  Shoshone 

Grand  total 

9,917 

888,299.43 

3,171 

279,956.83 

13,088 

779 

259  520 

67,477.49 

SUMMARY  OF   PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8,    1906. 


- 

Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907                                                                                                  

889 

92,132.50 

1908 

1  987 

153  991  78 

1909                                                                                                    

1,166 

133,331.79 

1910 

955 

99,  339.  10 

1911                                                                                                    

1,011 

115,575.37 

1912 

344 

45,529.49 

1913                                                                                               

520 

67,477.49 

Total                                                           

6,872 

707,377.52 

1 1911  report. 


212          REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  43. — Removals  of  restrictions. 


Fiscal  year. 
/ 

Quapaw   (Seneca) 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.* 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

1910.  .  . 

215 
68 
53 
37 

10,170.25 
4,  104.  91 
3,218.28 
1,930.00 

1,740 
966 
679 
983 

99,  717.  02 
64,006.71 
45,075.51 
60,532.64 

1911... 

1912 

1913  

Total 

373 

19,  423.  44 

4,368 

269,331.88 

1  Act  of  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

2  Act  of  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

Act  of  Congress  dated  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312),  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  intermarried 
whites,  freedmen,  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands,  except  homesteads,  of 
Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove  restric- 
tions from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 

TABLE  44. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich  

2 

60  00 

Absentee  Wyandot.  Oreg 

18 

1  440  00 

Lac  du  Flambeau,  Wis  

2 

60  00 

La  Pointe,  Wis 

1 

40  00 

Total.... 

23 

1  600  00 

SUMMARY. 


1911 

42 

3  809  58 

1912  

25 

1  917  05 

1913 

23 

1  600  00 

Total  

90 

7  326  63 

TABLE  45. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


Fiscal  year. 

Kaw.i 

Osage.» 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

1906... 

1 
6 
6 
20 

400 
2,400 
2.400 
8,000 

1907  

1908.  .       .  . 

1909... 

19 
293 
84 
22 
23 

9,310 
143,570 
41,160 
10,890 
10,890 

1910  

1911... 

1912  

1 
1 

480 
400 

1913  

Total  

35 

14,080 

441 

215,820 

i  Act  July  1, 1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  636). 


2  Act  June  28, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539). 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  213 

TABLE  46. — Lands  leased  for  mining  purposes  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913. 


States  and  super- 
intendencies. 

Kind  of  lease. 

Allotted  lands. 

Unallotted  lands. 

Total. 

Acreage. 

Annual 
rental. 

Acreage. 

Annual 
rental. 

Acreage. 

Annual 
rental. 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment. 

640.00 

2,024.00 
9,  283,  26 
19,000.00 

786,250/00 

$225.00 
973,  822.  95 
3,350.00 
7,601.00 
10,143.00 
{1,061,061.00 
37,630.00 
25,915.00 
47.00 

640.00 
C1) 
2,024.00 
9,283.26 
19,000.00 

1891,010.00 

$225.00 
973,822.95 
3,350.00 
7,601.00 
10,143.00 
!  1.061.061.  00 
37,630.00 
242,666.41 
522.20 

Oil  and  gas... 
C1) 
C1) 
Oil 

Otoe 

Five     Civil- 
ized Tribes 

Total 

do  

Gas 

Coal 

99,800.00 
4,960.00 

1216,751.41 
475.20 

Asphalt  

817.  197.  26 
7.11 
2,079.93 

2,119,794.95 

w 

1,551.50 

104,  760.  00 

217,226.61 

921,957.26 
7.11 
21,009.93 

2,337,021.56 

w 

3,090.95 

Oregon:  Klamath 
Wyoming:   Sho- 
shone. 
Grand  total 

0) 
Coal  and  oil.  . 

18,930.00 

1,539.45 

819,284.30 

2,121,346.45 

123,690.00 

218,  766.  06 

942,974.30 

2,340,112.61 

... 



i  Not  reported. 

TABLE   47. — Production  of  minerals  and  royalty  therefor,  on  restricted  lands  of  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  and  0 sage,  Ponca,  and  Shoshone  Reservations. 


States. 

Product. 

Fiscal  year  1913. 

1913  and  preceding  years. 

Production. 

Royalty. 

Production. 

Royalty, 

Oklahoma: 
Five  civilized  tribes  

Total. 

Oil...  barrels.. 
Gas  

10,876,568.00 
0) 
323,  953.  00 
473.00 
(2) 

$1,061,061.00 
37,630.00 
25,915.00 
47.00 

144,122,432.00 
0) 
33,402,799.00 
49,646.00 
(2) 

$7,505,106.00 
182,401.00 
2,821,656.00 
25,713.00 
1,927.87 

Coal  tons.. 
Asphalt  .do... 
Miscellaneous  . 

1,124,653.00 

310,536,803.87 

Osage  

Oil...  barrels.. 
Gas 

«  973,  822.  95 

0) 

773,982.19 
4,318.03 

<  6,  552,  818.  33 
fo 

3,328,633.12 
24,803.76 

Total. 

778,  300.  22 
32,439.52 

63,353,436.88 
«40,633.43 

Ponca  

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

Oil...  barrels.. 
Oil  do 

293,578.98 

371,103.14 

68.55 
517.00 

95.81 
51.70 

834.55 
354,514.07 

178.50 
40,088.44 

Total 

Coal  tons.. 

147.51 

M0,266.94 

1  Not  reported. 

2  Brick,  rock,  gravel,  limestone,  etc. 

a  From  1899  to  1913.    This  does  not  include  $2,442,004.36,  such  as  rental  on  nonproducing  leases,  bonus,  etc. 
«  One-eighth  of  actual  production. 

*  From  1899  to  1913. 
«  From  1911  to  1913. 

*  From  1907  to  1913. 


214          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  48. —  Tribal  lands  leased  or  under  permit  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Purpose. 

Number 
leases  or 
permits. 

Acreage 
under 
lease  or 
permit. 

Income. 

Total. 

Per  acre. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

Grazing  permit  — 
.  do  

1 
53 
27 

75.000 
997,920 
97,  120 

$12,113 
41,689 
958 

$0.16 
.04 
.10 

Fort  Apache.  .  . 

Kaibab 

do 

San  Carlos. 

do  

16 
2 

1.090,000 
4 

61,952 
10 

.06 
2.50 

Total 

Farming  lease  

18 
10 

1,090,004 
300,000 

61,962 
12,600 

.06 
.04 

Truxton  Canyon  

Grazing  permit  — 

Total.  Arizona 

109 
3 

2,560,044 
25,000 

129,  322 
1,500 

.05 

.06 

California: 
Tule  River  . 

Grazing  permit  

Volcan  i 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  

Grazing  lease  

Grazing  permit  — 

1 
2 

86,400 
214,000 

1,925 
2,075 

.02 
.01 

Total  Colorado  

3 

4 

300,400 
815 

4,000 
1,925 

.01 
2.23 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Farming  lease  

Gravel  lease  
Hay  lease 

Minnesota: 
Grand  Portage  

3 

1 

206 
69 

742 
20 

3.60 

.29 

Nett  Lake. 

Total,  Minnftsota  . 

4 

275 

762 

2.77 

Montana: 
Blackfeet 

Grazing  permit  
do 

58 
6 
57 
9 

(2) 
1,844,182 
9,854 
410,000 

9,214 

158,  158 
2,884 
19,200 

(1).08 
.29 
.05 

Crow 

Flathead  .  .  . 

Power  site 

Fort  Belknap 

Grazing  permit  — 
Grazing  lease 

Fort  Peck 

2 

7 

382.083 
(3) 

7,741 
2,342 

.02 

Total  

Grazing  permit  

9 

4 

382,083 
460,000 

10,083 
16,  832 

.03 
.03 

Tongue  River  

Grazing  permit  

Total,  Montana  

143 

3,106,119 

(0 
40 
204 

216,371 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

Farming  lease  
Grazing  lease 

33 
1 
5 

3,543 
11 
162 

(1).27 
.80 

Winnebago 

Total  Nebraska 

Farming  lease  

39 

244 

3,716 

Nevada'  Nevada 

Grazing  permit  — 
Gravel  permit  

7 
1 

179,000 
<2 

3,181 
2,000 

.02 
1,000.00 

Total            

8 

3 

8 

179,002 

5,181 

768~ 
5,339 

.03 

~7io 

.03 

Walker  River 

Grazing  permit  — 
do  

7,680 
210,000 

Western  Shoshone 

Total,  Nevada.  .    .  . 

19 

396,  682 

11,288 

.02 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla 

Grazing  permit  
do 

27 
5 

325,931 
351,280 

5,352 
8,250 

.02 
.02 

Mescalero 

Total,  New  Mexico  . 

32 

677,211 

13,602 

.02 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold 

Grazing  permit  — 

Grazing  lease  
Grazing  permit  — 
Farming  lease  

-10 

204,  448 

18,026 

.Ofr 

Standing  Rock  .... 

379 
12 
3 

120,092 
312,896 
703 

12,  389 
15,817 
959 

.10 
.05 
1.36 

Total  

394 

433,  691 

29,  165 

.07 

Total,  North  Dakota  

404 

638,  139 

47,  191 

.07 

i  Not  reported. 
*  Unknown. 


3  Grazing  territory  not  denned  by  acres. 
«  Estimated. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


215 


TABLE  48. — Tribal  lands  leased  or  under  permit  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913 — 

Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Purpose. 

Number 
leases  or 
permits. 

Acreage 
under 
lease  or 
permit. 

Income. 

Total. 

Per  acre. 

Oklahoma*  Pawnee  * 

Grazing  lease  
Farming  lease  
Mining  lease 

30 

501 
112 

46,  148 
66,  141 
9,283 

$11.990 
46,  117 
7,601 

$0.26 
.70 
.81 

Total 

643 

121,572 

65,708 

.54 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  

Grazing  leases  and 
permits  . 

3,128 
116 

232,268 
104,760 

116,  134 
217,  227 

.50 
2.08 

Total 

Mining  lease  

3,244 

337,028 

333,361 

.99 

Total  Oklahoma 

3,887 

458,600 

399,069 

.83 

Oregon: 
Umatilla  

Farming  lease  
Grazing  permit  

14 
7 

479 
204,000 

623 

2,418 

1.30 

.01 

Warm  Springs  . 

Total,  Oregon  

21 

204,479 

3,041 

.01 

South  Dakota*  Cheyenne  River 

Grazing  lease  
Grazing  permit  

4 
11 

813,418 
175,920 

36,604 
5^17 

.05 
.03 

Total            

15 
1 
8 
15 

989,338 
15,873 
56,000 
83,306 

42,021 
525 
4,351 
5,175 

.04 
.03 
.08 
.06 

Crow  Creek 

Grazing  permit  .  .  . 
do  

Lower  Brule  

Pine  Ridge 

do     . 

Total  South  Dakota  

39 
1 

1,144,517 
20 

52.072 
120 

.05 
6.00 

Utah-  Shivwits 

Mining  Ifiasfi 

Washington4  Colville 

Grazing  permit  
Farming  lease  

9 
16 

|U 

6,791 
600 

Total,  Washington  

.33 

25 

1,855 

7,391 

Wyoming*  Shoshone 

Grazing  lease  
Grazing  permit  
Mining  Iftasfi 

5 

42 

8 

261,000 
987,943 
18,930 

6,450 
20,  479 
1,540 

.02 
.02 
.08 

Total,  Wyoming 

55 

1,267,873 

28,469 

.02 

Grand  total 

4,788 

10,782,273 

919,  839 

RECAPITULATION. 


Number. 

Acreage. 

Income. 

Grazing  leases 

422 

1,709,181 

$77,  110 

Grazing  permits  .  .                   .         .                   

361 

8,627,499 

440,  522 

Farming  leases 

578 

70.  201 

53,  939 

Grazing  leases  and  permits  

3,128 

232,268 

116,  134 

Hay  leases 

69 

20 

Gravel  leases  

3 

206 

742 

Gravel  permits 

1 

2 

2,000 

Mining  leases  

237 

132,993 

226,  488 

Power  sites                                                                         

57 

9,854 

2,884 

Total.    .                                   .              

4,788 

10,782,273 

919,  839 

COMPARISON. 


Total,  1912. 
Total,  1911. 
Total,  1900. 


3,300 

7.290 
167 


8,408,194.47 
6,042.852.00 
2,102,904.00 


471,541.65 
547,657.00 
109,946.00 


1  Allotted;  erroneously  reported. 


» Not  reported. 


216          BEPOET   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  49. — Allotted  lands  under  lease  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

How  leased. 

Allot- 
ments in- 
volved. 

Acreage 
leased. 

Income. 

Total. 

Per 
acre. 

California: 
Bishop 

Through  department  control 
.do... 

1 
2 
195 

40 
240 
1,310 

$80 
252 
4,258 

$2.00 
1.05 
3.26 

Greenville  

Round  Valley 

do 

Volcan  i  

Total  California 

198 

1,590 

4,590 

3.00 

Colorado  •  Southern  Ute  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

5 
6 

465 
497 

528 
385 

1.11 

.77 

Total,  Colorado 

11 

962 

913 

1.00 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene 

Through  department  control 
do  

301 
68 

47,671 
4,800 

206,004 
(2) 

4.32 

Fort  Hall  

Fort  L/apwai 

do 

863 
62 

50,155 
3,130 

116,115 
6,053 

2.31 
1.93 

Total 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

925 

53,285 

122,  168 

2.30 

Total  Idaho 

1,294 

105,756 

328,172 

3.10 

Kansas*  Kickapoo. 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct,  with  de- 
partment permission. 

139 

67 

11,970 

7,428 

29,960 
14,944 

2.58 
2.01 

Total                 

206 
341 

19,  398 
29,858 

44,904 
45,  616 

2.30 
1.53 

Potawatomi 

Through  department  control 

Total  Kansas 

547 
1 

49,  256 
40 

90.520 
50 

1.72 
1.25 

Michigan:  Bay  Mills  

By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

Through  department  control 
do 

Minnesota: 
Leech  Lake  

6 
1 
3 

288 
69 
240 

209 
20 
148 

.73 
.29 
.62 

Nett  Lake 

White  Earth  

do 

Total,  Minnesota  

10 

597 

377 

.63 

Montana:  Crow  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

163 
9 

19,983 
2,004 

18,650 
2,155 

.93 
1.07 

Total 

172 
466 

21,  987 
37,608 

20,£05 
21,836 

.95 

.58 

Flathead  

Through  department  control 

Total,  Montana  

638 

59,595 

42,641 

.72 

Nebraska:  Omaha  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

209 
394 

19,311 
31,108 

57,941 
0) 

3.00 

Total 

603 

50,419 

67,941 

1.15 

San  tee  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

160 
40 

5 

17,200 
5,300 

400 

812,500 
(') 

« 

Total  

205 

22,900 

12,500 

Wimvhftgo. 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

590 
291 

33,  486 
16,799 

85,270 
47,976 

2.55 
2.85 

Total  

881 

50,285 

133,  246 

2.65 

Total,  Nebraska  

1    «8Q 

123,604 
a  Partially  r 

203,687          1.65 
eported. 

»  Not  reported. 

2  Income  not  reported. 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          217 
TABLE  49. — Allotted  lands  under  lease  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies 

How  leased. 

Allot- 
ments in- 
volved. 

Acreage 
leased. 

Income. 

Total. 

Per 
acre. 

Nevada:  Walker  River... 
New  Mexico-  Jicarilla 

Through  department  control 
do 

2 
464 

40 
150,000 

$200 
6,374 

$5.00 
.04 

North  Dakota:  Fort  Berthold 
Total  . 

do 

159 
15 

13,  642 
1,059 

9,076 
614 

.67 

.58 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

174 
362 
382 

14,701 
23,  730 
121,496 

9,690 
23,  730 
14,  307 

.66 
1.00 
.12 

Fort  Totten 

Through  department  control 
...    do  

Standing  Rock  

Total  North  Dakota 

918 

159,927 

47,727 

47,  915 
0) 

.30 

Teo 

Oklahoma:  Cantonment  
Total 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

500 
155 

80,320 
24,800 

655 

105,  120 

47,915 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  .  . 
Total  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

772 
241 

123,466 
52,000 

94,  693 
40,560 

.76 
.78 

1,013 

175,466 

135,253 

.77 

Kiowa  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

3,100 
60 

496,000 
9,600 

180,000 
6,000 

.36 
.63 

Total 

3,160 

505,600 

186,000 

.37 

Osage 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
Through  department  control 
do  

0) 

785 
617 
19 

P) 

89,  576 
75,425 
3,160 

0) 

73,790 

75,728 
2,600 

Otoe                            .  .. 

.82 
1.00 
.73 

Pawnee  

Total 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

636 

78,585 

78,328 

1.00 

Ponca 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

513 
101 

59,762 
44,252 

53,410 
55,516 

.89 
1.25 

Total 

614 
76 

104,014 
30,082 

108,926 
24,538 

1.04 
.81 

Kaw  

Through  department  control 
do 

Red  Moon 

21 
43 

64 

2,505 
6,038 

9,513 

1,630 
7,064 

6,933 

.65 
1.17 

.73 

Total. 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

128 

18,056 

15,  627 

.87 

Sac  and  Fox.          .... 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

299 
33 

4 

36,808 
3,451 

400 

52,  280 
8,460 

415 

1.41 
2.45 

1.00 

Total 

336 
411 

40,659 
56,672 

61,155 
51,114 

1.50 
.90 

Seger. 

Through  department  control 
...do... 

Shawnee  

323 
3 

30,136 
120 

29,505 
230 

.98 
2.00 

Total 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

326 
11,338 

30,256 
843,642 

29,735 
1,495,991 

.98 
1.77 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  
Total  Oklahoma 

Through  department  control 

19,  478 

2,077,728 

2,308,372 

1.11 

Not  reported. 


218          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES. 

BLE  49 . — Allotted  lands  under  lease  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1913 — Con  tinued. 


States  and  superintendencies 

How  leased. 

Allot- 
ments in- 
volved. 

Acreage 
leased. 

Income. 

Total. 

Per 
acre. 

Oregon: 
Klamath     

Through  department  control 
do 

171 
10 
4 

20,075 
1,569 
331 

$4,758 
225 
275 

$0.24 
.14 
.83 

Roseburg 

Siletz                 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

Umatilla        

445 
9 

41,965 
628 

105,420 
2,170 

2.51 
3.46 

Total  

454 

42,593 

107,590 

2.53 

Total  Oregon 

639 

64,568 

112,848 

1.72 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

Through  department  control 
do 

25 
2 
175 

5,206 
480 
51,861 

1,141 
220 
3,233 

.22 

.46 
.06 

Crow  Creek 

Pine  Ridge  

do  

Rosebud    

do  

223 
6 

34,349 
960 

10,689 
240 

.31 
.26 

Total 

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

229 
500 
850 

35,309 
70,  680 
72,250 

10,929 
61,  677 
113,688 

.31 
.87 
1.58 

Sisseton 

Through  department  control 
do 

Yankton 

Total  South  Dakota 

1,781 

235,786 

190,888 

.81 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray.  .  .  . 
Total 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

133 
1 

7,240 
80 

5,590 
2 

.77 
.03 

134 

7,320 

5,592 

.76 

Washington-  Colville 

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

99 
3 

20 

7,476 
240 

1,600 

7,023 
256 

1,600 

.94 
1.08 

1.00 

Total 

122 
23 

9,307 
1,550 

8,879 
2,887 

.95 
1.86 

Spokane    

Through  department  control 
.    do  

Tulalip  

3 
1 

288 
30 

0) 
450 

Total  

By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

15.00 

4 

318 

450 

Yakima  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 
By  Indians  direct  without 
department  permission. 

701 
6 

3 

47,442 
440 

240 

98,  772 
1,760 

360 

2.08 
4.00 

1.50 

Total 

710 

48,122 

100,  892 

2.10 

Total,  Washington.. 

859 

59,297 

113,108 

1.92 

Wisconsin: 
La  Pointe  

Through  department  control 
do     . 

5 
1 

277 
53 

1,551 
106 

5.59 
2.00 

Oneida  ..    . 

Total,  Wisconsin  

6 

330 

1,657 

5.02 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Through  department  control 
By  Indians  direct  with  de- 
partment permission. 

124 
54 

7,814 
4,999 

4,292 
4,304 

.55 

.86 

Total,  Wyoming  . 

178 

12,813 

8,596 

.67 

Grand  total  

28,847 

3,  109,  209 

3,466,312 

1  Not  reported. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


219 


TABLE  49. — Allotted  lands  under  lease  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913 — Continued. 

RECAPITULATION. 


Allot- 
ments 
in- 
volved. 

Acreage 
leased. 

Rental. 

Total  leased  through  department  control 

27,  127 

2,  878,  562.  00 

$3,254,940.00 

By  Indians  direct  with  permission  to  lease  without  departmental 
control                                                                                     . 

1,623 

218,  454.  00 

202,014.00 

By  Indians  direct  without  permission  to  lease  without  departmental 
control                                                

97 

12,193.00 

9,358.00 

Grand  total  

28,847 

3,  109,  209.  00 

3,466,312.00 

COMPARISON. 


Total,  1912                          

27,605 

2,  792,  798.  52 

$3,071,429.61 

Total  1911 

19,  753 

2,  528,  494.  75 

1,844,370.34 

Total,  1900                  

12,592 

1  Only  item  reported. 
TABLE  50. — Buildings,  etc.,  erecte^  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913. 


School. 

State. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Albuquerque  
Albuquerque  Pueblos  

N.Mex.. 
do... 

Addition  to  brick  dormitory 

$10,000.00 
4,095.00 
4,296.00 
7,559.00 
3,700.00 
10,765.00 
7,760.00 
2,950.00 
2,600  60 
4,008.00 
5,559.00 
2,999.20 
3,842.00 
1,890  00 
2,350  00 
4,879.00 
1,690  00 
1,895.00 
527.00 
12,467.00 
2,508.00 
2,615.00 
482.50 
18,545.00 

2,200.00 
2,298.15 
6,183.00 
7,125.00 

Mesita  day  school  building  

Do 

do 

McCarty's  school  building 

Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River  day)  

Ariz  

Brick  schoolhouse  

Cass  Lake 

Minn.... 
Ariz  

Frame  cottage  and  laundry 

Colorado  River  

Frame  schoolhouse  

Crow 

Mont.... 
do  

Bridge,  Crow  Reservation 

Fort  Belknap  

Tank  and  tower  

Fort  Berthold 

N.Dak.. 
Idaho... 
do 

Demonstration  farm  barn 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium 

Remodeling  schoolhouse 

Do 

Heating  system 

Do 

do 

Water  system 

Fort  Peck                          .             ... 

Mont... 
S.Dak.. 
Minn 

Frame  Quarters  .  .                       .... 

Lower  B  rule  
Pipestone                 

Steel  bridge 

Electric  lighting  plant  .               ... 

Rapid  City  
Red  Lake                    

S.Dak.. 
Minn  .. 

Extension  heating  system 

Bridge,  Red  Lake  Reservation  

Red  Lake  (Cross  Lake)  
Red  Lake  .  .                

...do.... 
do  ... 

Heating  plant 

do  .         

Salem 

Oreg 

Addition  to  schoolhouse 

Do  

do  .  . 

Oil-burning  plant  

Do 

do 

Ice-making  plant 

Sac  and  Fox  

Iowa  
N.Mex.. 

Wyo.... 

Ariz  
Minn    . 

Steam-heating  plant  

Santa  Fe  Pueblos 

Cochiti    and    Santa    Clara   day-school 
plants. 
Day-school  building  

Shoshone  (  Arapaho)  
Western  Navajo  
White  Earth               

3  farmers'  cottages 

4  frame  cottages  

Zuni  (Zuni  day)  
Total 

N.Mex.. 

Frame  schoolhouse 

137,787.85 

220 


REPORT    OF  ^  THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  51. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  191$, 

but  not  completed. 


School. 

State. 

Improvement. 

Cost.i 

Blackfeet 

Mont  .. 

Brick  schoolhouse 

$16,254.65 

Minn.... 

Barn  and  2  cottages  

3,363.00 

Okla. 

Brick  dining  hall 

8  842.66 

Chilocco                                           

...do.... 

Dairy  barn  

5,615.35 

Idaho.  . 

New  agency  plant.            

31,251.10 

Colville 

Wash 

do 

!26  196  38 

Crow  Creek                                          -  - 

S.Dak.  . 

Heating  and  lighting  plants  and  2  cot- 

21, 000.  00 

Fort  Bidwell                         .          

Cal  

tages. 
Water,  sewer,  and  lighting  systems  and 

18,238.03 

Fort  Bidwell  (Likely  day) 

do 

laundry  equipment. 
Frame  schoolhouse 

4  875.00 

Nebr.  . 

Brick  dormitories  

48,000.00 

Kiowa  (Riverside  School) 

Okla 

Brick  dormitory 

17  304.22 

Navajo                                              -  -  - 

Ariz  

Frame  mess  hall  

4,  029.  68 

Nett  Lake 

Minn 

Frame  schoolhouse 

3  145.00 

Pawnee                                          .... 

Okla.   .. 

Stone  schoolhouse  

8,980.00 

Ariz 

Brick  office  building                 .          .  . 

6,377.96 

Pueblo  Bonito                      

N.Mex.. 

Brick  schoolhouse  

10,  150.  00 

Round  Valley 

Cal  . 

Frame  employees'  building  

7,143.00 

Sac  and  Fox               

Iowa  

Screen  porches  

5,000.00 

Salem 

Oreg 

Brick  industrial  building  

4,645.00 

Santa  Fe  (Santo  Domingo  day) 

N  Mex 

Schoolhouse  and  quarters 

12  000.00 

Shoshone                                                -  . 

Wyo 

Superintendent's  quarters  

5,800.00 

Southern  Ute 

Colo 

Tank  and  tower 

3  030.00 

Standing  Rock                                 ...  . 

N.Dak.. 

Concrete  reservoir  

2,600.00 

Tongue  River 

Mont 

Superintendent's  quarters 

1  4,  000.  00 

Yankton                                   .          ... 

S.Dak.  . 

Frame  dormitory  

8,997.00 

Total                  

276,838.03 

*  Cost  to  June  30, 1913. 

TABLE  52. — Plans  for  buildings,  etc.,  prepared  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1913, 

but  not  under  contract. 


School. 

State. 

Improvement. 

Cost.i 

Albuquerque  Pueblos 

N.Mex 

Paguate  school  buildings 

$12  300.00 

Canton  Asylum  

S.Dak.. 

Brick  hospital  

31,149.00 

Cherokee 

N.  C 

Quarters  and  laundry 

10  000.00 

Crow  (San  Xavier)  

Mont.  .  . 

Quarters  

2,667.50 

Cushman 

Wash 

Superintendent's  quarters 

6  000.00 

Flandreau 

S  Dak 

Gymnasium  building 

8  000  00 

Fort  Apache                     .  . 

Ariz 

Dormitory                              .      .      .  . 

18,  000.  00 

Fort  Berthold 

N  Dak 

Employees'  quarters 

4  105  00 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium  

Idaho 

Plumbing  and  heating  

3,205.97 

Do 

do 

Remodeling  dormitory 

8  510  00 

Fort  Peck.              

Mont  .. 

Frame  hospital  

9,864.00 

Fort  Totten 

N.Dak 

Improvements  to  heating 

10  000.00 

Hayward.                

Wis 

Additions  to  dormitories  

18,000.00 

Keshena 

do 

Dormitorv,  schoolhouse,  and  lavatory 

42  000  00 

Kiowa  (Fort  Sill)  

Okla 

building. 
Brick  hospital...         

40,000.00 

Lower  Brule 

S  Dak 

Central  heating  plant 

6  370  00 

Pine  Ridge.      .         

do.... 

Additions  to  buildings  

25,250.00 

Red  Lake 

Minn 

Frame  schoolhouse 

7  000.00 

Shoshone 

Wyo 

Saw  and  grist  mill  * 

9  500  00 

Tulalip                              .  . 

Wash 

Extension  of  water  system  and  addition 

16  513.00 

Vermillion  Lake  

Minn... 

to  school. 
Alterations  to  dormitory  

6,000.00 

Wahpeton 

N.Dak 

Brick  hospital 

18  000.00 

Warm  Springs  

Oreg.... 

Bridge  over  Deschutes  River,  Warm 
Springs  Reservation 

12,  450.  00 

White  Earth 

Minn 

Laundry  building 

5  000.00 

Yankton.  .              

S.Dak.. 

do   .... 

1,937.00 

Total  

331,821.47 

i  Estimated. 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          221 


try,  etc.,  be 


li 


3 


O 


i^H      <  C4  i-H         CO 


:$  • 


•  irf<NcT     I      • 

•  r-t  rH  O       '        ' 


^iooio 


"'-HlCOOi—  ICO 


O  O  Q  00  •*        O  I-H  O  O 


^  O  O  <N        O 

COpOCO 


3S88S2! 


1C  iO  O  O  < 
(NCSgoOj 

of 


O  ^-*  i 

t^  Tt«  » 


S8 


IS"1! 


,  :  '      :  :®- 


i 


:  :  «  :  :  : 
' 


222          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


^ 

88 


T»I  05 
«N1 


IS 


s 


17 

li 


sis 


iO        O 


eC 


(N 


O  i-H  O  ^O        O 


pP 

Bfl 

s 


:§  : 
.o  . 


I 


i        i 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  223 


<  t— i  O  *— <  O:  ' 
jtocoor-' 


eo"io"^"oi  oo  ocV 


s 


«oco 
irfto" 


|S 


I 

il 

|1 
II 


55 


88 


Is 


OJOOOQO 


cf 


-H          lOiCrt 


:S  :- 


•  •  S        :s  "^H  HH 

IJg^fefe 

Spq^^f^^ 


SL9     H 


glfelpil  I  lllillli  1^  ^lllf 


224          REPORT   OP    THE   COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


llilllllllll 


i-H  •*  C^O  rH  rH  M          i-H          OO 


a  i 


••O  O  O  Q  O  ( 

(MSoCOOC 


I 

S 


I 
1 


8    2    g 


>  -^  O      •  < 

)«g   .< 

ifT(N~    ' 


S.3 


>  >C  Tf  O  urs  O  O  < 

>  OO  -^  OO  -^  CO  "^  < 
I  Win        d  CO  O5  < 


s  s 


•I 


llllol^lllfll   H    |wim   H   6ll«rf^llll 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIKS.          225 


-j 


of 


00         OlO 
IO      •  COt~- 


O  C^  IO  T-H  O  IO 

to  O5  <N  ^H  O  CO 


05    t^ 

>-"      S 


3ft 
o« 


•  ci  ®  • 
w  eS-^  •     : 

1^1    3    ^ 
^ca|  2    ^£ 

.slgS1      9s 


21716—1^ 


ard 


IJS-S 

'Hl|8  1 

i^i^l-g    e- 

iKwJ^oa? 


15 


oo> 


- 
»O  t^- 


H2S 


226 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


SI1SB 


il  i  i  i  i  ;§ 


rnVT 


83 


s  « 


S    8 


I 

Mfl 

>fil 

<£ca 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  227 


ssf 


rf-v 


of 


SS 


ss 


S| 


n 


8 


tei  i  ill  I 


228  REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


g 


«vr 


f 

3 

^ 

S 

s 


II 


.S3       12 


r-Tc<rco 


|| 


li  I!  S! 

H;^OQN  if^a! 


e 
ca 
Moon.. 
nd  Fox 
a 


s*  i  i 
JJI 


ahom 
Chey 
Otoe 
Paw 
Pon 
Red 
Sac 


G  £M 
So? 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          229 


ef 


wToo" 


CO 


t^c^Tr-Tc 


i 


W  03 

*l  1     S-S  3 
II  £    .J.s  § 

P-iPS  ^CCt> 

ta 


)^ME 


230          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


I! 


S3 


050  us  » 

t>-  OO  CS  " 


t-    II     00    I   O 

5  II  SS    55 


S!! 


•SSft' 

Pii 


i-lOO 


I! 


*—   O> 

I! 


• 
3s* 


&* 


OOQ 


rizo 
Camp  V 


R 
y 
ing  sc 


)  CQ  CQ 


na 
mp 


^  5 


ardingsc 
nyon  Day 
Cibecue  Day 
East  Fork  Da 


3     o'o-g 


A 
B 


A 
B 


2 
§     § 


'1  3 
,&  ^ 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          231 


*O  CO  CO  GC 
CO  t^-  1C  TJ<  C 


i2S£    S       S8    K 

>  CO  Ci  <M        t-  OOO        00 


i  i-H  CO  CO  CO  i-H  CO 


8S 


g»oo 
»H 


11  !  :  :  i  i 


ISSSSS 


>  r*  o  o  o  < 

3  CD  Tji  -^  l>-  < 


£>::::: 


!S8S^ 

(  rfi  -^  t^  C 


:§  i  '•- 


II 


il  i  ! 


«     KK3SK  *€  ^ll 


1  IP 
§  «l& 


232          REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


88 


00* 


•2S- 


3  5 
g  I 


ti&sf  I  |l&  li 

S'§Qfq»S  8<1O         ^ 

§S  5  5 

o 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          233 


I   TJ4  O  i-H  t-»  1C  1C  O 

IS<3Q    s     8a    < 


1C   »O  T-H 


si 


sss 


§1 


CD 


8    S 


88S 


§8 


88 


lils 


II 

-HOO" 


ss§ 


oo 


y  D 


i  &is 

wg&s  °   ^§i 

*.Soo.-^  ^     ^,§00 

S^RA  g<5fQ 

^  PH 


i 


ill 

II  I  &§  3  ,  &i".a  3 

:1  |l§  si y§i  Si 

£     §<JPQ  -3<5oSS         1- 

OB  S                      P^ 


i« 


•    '.CD  "3  "• 

i  i ,  ii|ls  if 

;     I  i,  j||«|  ;-| 

>          ;    ^     •  tl£  £<!3  '•  £ 

§*  iipiii  if 

g<jpq3pt>  2 

«  w 


234 


KEPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


ii 

|1 

8 

§f 

a* 

cT 

5 
o" 

!!! 

1 

f 

11 

S 

CM  CO 

o 

S 

5 

^w 

|^g 

«0 

c^ 

1 

S 

i  § 

! 

i 

co" 

CO 

1 

1 

co" 

! 

1 

0< 

rtf 

l« 

1 

g 

g 

oo 

12 

ro' 

o 

IO 

S 

gS 

i 

I 

3 

•ai| 
If  § 

I 

1 

0 

s 

8 

s 

g 

jf 

1 

8 

11 

1 

§ 

II 

in 

1 

1 

1 

8SS 

rr  rH  M 

i 

I 

1 

s 

|| 

co" 

* 

§ 
•S 

f. 

Md 
»  0  vis 

^Tj-^in 

s|« 

8 

g 

0? 

s» 

g 

S 

i 

< 

* 

--  | 

t 

y 
§  * 

|sa 

s 

§ 

o 

10 

t- 

S 

|g 

1 

If 

•^r 

of 

8" 

4 

I 

M 

PI 

Ell 

§ 

§« 

i 

1 

1 

0 

s 

CO  M 

s 

888 

§ 

i 

•as 

Ssg 

I 

S 

s 

III 

1 

s 

10  o 

S 

U50CO 

1 

i 

i 

II 

1-1  <N  t^- 

s 

CO 

en 

eo'c^c^ 

06 

1 

CM 

as- 

0 

eg 

i 

i 

II 

s 

S 

i 

S 

g 

§1 

! 

c-T 

§ 

mprove 

bfj 
11 

|!§ 

1 

! 

! 

O 

o 

I 

§ 

i 

IS 

§ 

cc 

s 

a 

||i 

s 
3 

g 

CO 

! 

8 

i 

i 

lO 

to 

nd 

a 

s 
W 

Heat  and 
power 
plants. 

1 

1 

s 

i 

m 
£ 

PQ 

p! 

1 

g 

1 

!!! 

I 

1 

l§ 

8 

D 

IP 

i 

s 

1 

ill 

181 

! 

i- 

! 

in 

1 

CO 

S82 

i 

i 

9 

•    • 

erintendencie 

I            * 

y  School  .  .  .  . 

•  o  O 
'  rt    O> 

s 

£S, 

,11 

j 

3 
1 

OS 

California—  Con 
Soboba— 
Agency  — 
Day  school 
Cahuilla  Da 

1 

*3  f—i  "^ 

1 

Volcan  i  — 
Day  school. 
Capitan  Gra 
Mesa  Grand 

1 

"3 

CJ 

1 

fri 

Colorado: 

Navajo  Spring 
Agency.  ,  .  . 
Day  school  . 

1 

Southern  Ute 
Agency  — 
Boarding  sc 
Allen  Day  £ 

§ 

i 

1 

REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


235 


gf'" 


«        1 


OOOi 

F-t    1--   1— I 


SI 


288 


-»l  O>  O 

cTt-^co 


212S 

b-  «5  I-H 


£8£ 


s 


S88 


1  1 


S    B 


otTotT 


(M  IM  O4 


i 
scol 
m  schoo 
Day  Sch 


l  5 
School 
Day  Sc 


ill. 

•  C/)  rC 

^» 
JO£ 
§«Q 

I-IN 


For 
A 


LlSfe  I  I    -S-S0    P   5     -g-ag  i 

'?«^"Q  ^  x"02®0*3        OTSr?  ti 

>  fc£  3  t~l  o       t*  ^73      h         2       I   W)  ® "  I 

Illl  3  3  >ll|  3  ^   il2i  S  i 

iMi  ^  «  Itfll  ^a3  t«8  «    I 

|nSM  g§<Bi2s       |a   .amo^ 


ool 


®  ^3        ^ 

•§*ll 

i  teAP 

SfS-s? 
ffllfc 
ill 
«B^I|| 

;<;pqp3W^ 


M      2 


236 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


II 


1  s 


8 


icic  oic 


Ml 

f*f| 


g    8 


Co"     o 


ooo 

CO  CO  CO 


I! 


t^ScooS. 

OCOOICO' 

t-H          CO 


s 


«  "  S 


I-H  coi-ici: 

£~g~ 


oToT 


ii! 


ool 
S 


l  Michigan 
e  Boarding 


alii*?  2|3  •§ 

W«^l     H|g     3&§ 

§S§     §^0 
•So    fe 

s  s 


I  3S 


I  3 


>^  MCQPQ  WOoQ  OQ  "S^PQ 

I  K 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

228S  IS 


237 


OOOO         t-  1C  OO  ••*!  r-«N  O>  O5 
CO'o'o'        C3-^'t<}tOr^'-*£r-4-&'t 


ss: 


82 


«3Q 


33     s  !  i! 


(NrH  •* 


SI  i 


)  CO         COC<5 


?f£v 


g 


^^  = 


t*  •*  <M  • 


i-So    --5 


I  31 


-OM  i-is^'ifewb^fe 

ill  1!!!^^ 

fflrt  :^|®^^o«Q6 

III  i^i^illil 


5'   -I    »J 

o      o      ^  <« 


•a 

ll 


238          REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


3% 
fit 


ill 


O*=  *  § 


S3 


I 


j 


§ 


O«Dr-l 

IN  CO  T}< 


J28 

U5  !N 

58    8" 


si 


fc  Q 


«T 


1    3 


8 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONEB    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.          239 


3^ 
*"£, 


88S 

<M  CO  (M 


ef 


8    § 
^   <* 


<xa6~n 


s  s 


§8; 


o  o 
oTccT 


g         g 


be    ;s 


»i       ^ 

>>£  I    -3    tf  i* 
lil    S    b§ 


:  j 

1  o 

M 

:*D 

i  1  3 


*^  "  *~* 


240  EEPOET   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


I 


4!  ill 


a 


E-t  0 


Light- 

ta 


§1 


a 


a 


OM 


»O  l«  CO  O  IN  § 


il 


il 


to  — 


It  s  ipll  3  i|l  3  !|i  a 

!I  («fct^  in  ..^.  j 


o 

uelo 
A 
Day 

To 


T 
bl 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          241 


GO  r- 

3? 


OOOOOO 

0*0"  co*     co*oo 


8  IIS 


OOU5000 


oo  |0  jo  jo' 


S        :  : 


35     .     .     .__. 


f 


sat 


*  i  ii'lii 

«-     I     •  Xflfifi 
2  |1  ill 


g     g^SSfcfiaaaQoQwSE 

02       02 


oO 


21716—14 16 


242          REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

t*  t**        t^-OiCDQir^ClO^O 

SS    2SSS8838 


)  1C  >C»C  »C  1C 


»C  O  O<  -* 

i-H  "5  rH  rH 


JOOOOO 


I! 


H 


§8    §SSSS| 


t-H  tc      I-H  e 


fafl&JJjffrb 


p;^.a^ 


|H  3    iHlllli^tKS   3 

Engfe      o     SgitfSaS53i¥1"      o 


§111      :; 

1i 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          243 


•«*> -H          O5O          "5  OO 


^-Ti-TioW 


§§  SI 


"5  CO 

8 


1 


§1 

F-Teo" 


||    |8 


SS5 


IN 


\iS  '•' 


II*  'M       1 

M>         cj;bj°m         sS— -'-a  S          M             -^ 

1 1  111  u  ifliii  it  ill  i  ill 

PQ           2<jfffl        •s.2<lfc<cJDi  *2^W 

O               &     M  CO 


id-3^ 


244          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


61 


^  O  GO         CO         CC 

S  t>     o     S 


Illff 


»O  C^ 

oo  ^ 


88 


3       3 


1    « 

1*8 


N 


t-000 

00  §  O  »O 


8         £8 

05  TT*»0 


O5  O  O  O 


ding  Sch 


Total 
Seneca  B 


gency 
oarding  sch 


II 
p 


,f  J: 
,  iilll 

I    59*31 


a  ;  ; 


dill 
*B-* 


gii  !$;P  *SHH  - 

-  33<  *^  ^a§  i  ^^^^-i  1 

-2     5£  fl     o 


|s.2  g-a  o^. 

^  »c  So  ^ccc 

.>t  c      o 

fe 


111     | 

i-*  o        ~ 


BEPOBT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS.          245 

a;  eg  o      o   :  i-      o          re      t^ll        o«c>o»'o-t<"*-<ti|<Nc5 


s 


S8S2' 


s  ; 


III  S!8  S 
' « 


2    S 


off 


CO        US   I!        i-l 


g    8 


1II.2 


illll 


«  «" 

r 


^iil     : 


^o" 


246          REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

S£S 

iBf" 


is 


a 


lil 


S 


8 


li 

pq.9 


oi-H 


8888 


o^wo         8      |i 
O  P=<     J 


J     fl     I-H  eo  •*  «o  co  t^  oo 
"  •  3  •••••••• 

<D  MO  O  O  O  O  O  O  O 


REPORT    OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          247 


^^^ 


>OOlOOOO»oqOO       10  O  00  O  CO  00  10 

>pec          co  1-1  c<i  1-1  TJ<      1-1  eo i-H  co oj c<i  co 


>or^  t^eq  o  oooo     o«5oot^c^i»o 


II 


)  »O  O  00  <N  N  OO  O  •«*       >O  00  N  O  N  O  OO 


oogoooooooogooogooooojo 


m 

coo 


o  10  o  t< 


JIOOU5OIOOOIOI 


(N  C«  C<1  (M  ( 


(M  <N  (N  (M  C<l       »H 


OTOOWOTOTMOTOTOTOTOTOTCOOTOTOTOT 


248 


REPOKT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 


8 

§ 

9 


REPOB 

T 

OP    THE 

£1111 

oo: 

MMISSI 

ISS 

ONER   OF   ] 

NI 

s 

>IAN    AFF^ 

UR5 

i 

&***** 

1 

-s 

* 

i 

SB 

*8r- 

CO  '"' 

«d 

:![]' 

! 

§se 

I 

1C      •      • 

ex: 

oc  o     o    • 

icio    ^  : 

sc  '-c' 

o 

§§S255-S3S5 

oo 

s;s 

S 

SM 

l 

lr 

| 

•  CO            • 

CO 

of 

§ 

|3   B 

B 

g.  j 

a 

|S§? 

§ 

•  IV             O 

'o       2 

r- 



| 

II     i 

i 

S! 

i 

g!      : 

| 

iC  1C                  l 

e€ 

ON     

^   i  i  !  i  i 

:    *8aaS* 

S 

'•  o     •           ' 

c 

S8S 

S 

is   i 

eo        ; 

2 

CO 

sis" 

r-c 

ir; 

1 

in 

§ 

8SSS 

g 

1   is 

O5 

^•O^CMNN'-HIN 
OC«C 

1 

«|5S| 

0 

ill 

S 

Illl 

8 

S|8« 

05' 

iiSSSIIl 

Oft 

CC  O  OV  N  1C 

i 

IIS 

i 

S  §  <M  CS 

0 

1C  CO  1C  O  O 

Tt<  So-«ti  t^.  o 

I 

icco"""1  w           w 

§ 

i-H  OV         CO  •* 

N 

1 

00  1-1  -H 

t^coco      <N 

:§  i      :      i 

S 

S  H 

! 

8 

S 

££     i 

igSSSggfl 

3 
3 

to 

O         CC 

oT 

cc 

O5 

i 

§ 

re 

££ 

$    i  i 

g 

££i 

o  :  :  :  1 

0 

££ 

i  i  •  i   i  i 

^Mi 

s 

COi-Hi-Ht^COCOCSCC 

1 

igiii 

1 

SIS 

i 

giSS 

S 

Oi 

•^  00  TM^.  S 

i>  oo  ec      c^T 

§ 

fe%*M«.M 

g 

I1*- 

3 

<N-H-< 

1C 

NCO" 

1C  °< 

! 

i§| 

1 

M 

i 

ilil 

(0 

O  CO  1C  ^  1C 

1 

249 


rill!  i  H|i  i 


lifts- 


* 


III 

all 


250          REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


S    8  IS 


11 


liiff 


PH 


S 


g  i 
s 


11  si 


11 


8IS 


s    as 


CO        O 

s  s 


1C  CM 


;f 

o  c     (N 


it 

l 

;  .3 


. 


1          : 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.          251 


§  i 

ec 


ooo 


SI 


\>*i  \ 

i  I 


.S.8 


I? 

3  § 

*2-<! 

rt 


§s  i  §  §5  fei^?i'§ii-iii'ci"i^ s 

£S^Ca2£  S^OOflfefrt^OfeS^-g- 


ft     O 


!-i 


iSffg 


252         REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


0  j 

5PS 


^£§§ss: 
§388! 


*1 

•8 


i 

1 

C5 

I 

ghting  systems.  .  . 

ntpr  svsfo.rns 

^v>      J 
£       | 

;u  re  and  fixtures.. 

IPS  on  hanrl  .  . 

ment  for  industrial 

tonk  . 

I 

| 

c 
C 
| 

1 

| 

E 

y- 

t: 

0 

1 

! 

Grand  total  .  .  . 

MfeccK  J<1OS 


EEPOET  OF   THE   COMMISSIONEE  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  253 

TABLE  56. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30,  1913. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

General 
admin- 
istration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total  .. 
value. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

$5 

325 
4,720 

$3,178 
84,240 
91,629 
93,403 
9,717 
3,580 
55,473 
110,630 
225,  777 
407,  595 
98,840 
84,  370 
16,230 
19,000 
10,237 
114,  605 
103,390 

$3,183 
131,389 
132,  694 
104,331 
10,447 
5,340 
81,118 
135,  536 
290,929 
438,320 
140,507 
89,020 
29,742 
119,  875 
17,907 
121,745 
150,669 

Colorado  River  . 

$4,390 
19,000 

$466 

$36,708 

$5,  257 
2,180 
2,456 

$3 
15,  165 

Fort  Apache  

Fort  Mojave  

1,806 
695 
350 
13,050 
14,001 
41,400 

6,666 
35 
50 
7,150 
9,380 
17,940 
30,  725 

Havasupai 

Kaibab 

1,360 
3,545 
1  525 



Leupp 

1,900 

Moqui  

Navajo 

120 

979  !    4.713 

1 

Phoenix 

Pima  ... 

6,150 

3,580 
4,650 

31,937 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River  

5,490 
74,  780 
2,335 

295 
5,870 
850 
6,440 
6,900 

7,727 

San  Carlos 

11,500 
4,450 

8,726 

San  Xavier 

35 
600 

Truxton  Canyon 

100 

Western  Navajo  
Total 

5,665 

34,  714 

189,  112 

105,581 

586 

39,243 

107,630 

28,706 

1,531,894 

2,002,752 

California: 
Bishop 

22,413 

7,184 

22,413 
10,  189 
4,814 
93,849 
75,  735 
40,924 
61,455 
23,623 
25,947 
4,100 
81,  180 
353,  106 
38,785 
10,316 
11,440 

Campo 

2,735 
4,814 

165 

105 

Digger 

Fort  Bidwell 

4,325 

150 

505 

88,  869 
75,  735 
36,204 
38,  220 
14,  095 
8,900 
2,515 
73,415 
274,903 
21,  389 
10,016 
11,440 

Fort  Yuma 

Greenville   . 

3,985 

735 
9,400 
3,667 
5,761 

Hoopa  Valley 

7,700 
1,827 
9,121 
1,585 
2,585 

2,035 
90 
1,809 

4,100 

Malki 

3,944 
356 

Pala 

Pechanga  

Round  Valley 

950 
1  24,115 

100 

4,130 

Sherman  Institute  

1  54,  088 

Soboba 

6,601 
(2) 
(2) 

555 

9,000 

1,240 
(2) 
(2) 

Tule  River  

300 
(2) 

Volcan  *    . 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

Total 

36,968 

38,029 

150 

13,400 

75,  501 

8,530 

685,298 

857,876 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs 

2,820 
18,975 

880 

775 

2,200 

200 
40,016 

6,100 
65,  810 

Southern  Ute  

2,571 

3,473 

Total  

21,  795 

1,655 

2,571 

5,673 

40,216 

71,910 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'  Alene  

12,991 
45,685 

1,040 
10,800 
26,840 

34 

277 
147,  823 
43,581 

14,342 
209,708 
131,389 

Fort  Hall 

5,400 
59,695 

Fort  Lapwai  

1,273 

Total  

58,676 

38,  680 
125 

65,095 
415 

1,307 

191,681 
38,  198 

355,439 
38,738 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Kansas: 
Haskell  Institute  
KicVapoo  

13,635 

122,638 
225 

415,975 
67,  533 
11,308 

442,248 
67,758 
21,208 

Potawatomi 

9,900 

Total  

13,535 

22,863 

494,  816 

531,  214 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 

2,465 

1,900 
155,  119 

2,465 

2,000 
198,  265 

Chippewa,  Lake  Supe- 
rior   

100 

Mount  Pleasant  

1  11,600 

i  31,  546 

Total 

100 

11,600 

31,546 

159,484 

202,  730 

17,811 
12.085 
7,578 
96,683 
35,209 
144,177 
88,738 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 

17  811 

Fond  du  Lac.  .  . 

7,835 
7,395 
29,558 
15,493 

500 
137 
1,636 

240 
46 
1,410 

3,510 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake  

4,900 

59,  179 
19.  716 
137,  752 
73,004 

NettLake.. 

Pipes  tone 

6,425 
779 

Red  Lake. 

8,6i8 
1912  report 

6.337 

i 

2  Included  in  school. 

254  REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  56. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1913 — Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendences. 

General 
admin- 
istration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Minnesota—  Continued  . 
Vermillion  Lake 

$350 

$53  863 

$54  213 

White  Earth 

$83,  076 

20  000 

107,  414 

210,  490 

Total  

151,975 

29,827 

$11,237 

$1,696 

472,  249 

666,  984 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

39,  120 

2,370 

3,062 

84,  198 

128,  750 

Crow 

88  988 

9  410 

$30,  612 

25,345 

1,200 

90  898 

246  453 

Flathead  

22,  094 

555 

131,  094 

1,075 

8,725 

25,380 

188,  923 

Fort  Belknap  . 

30  810 

1,050 

4,580 

40,092 

53  298 

129  830 

Fort  Peck  

63,187 

6,265 

$1,  786 

14,  706 

72,235 

158,  179 

Tongue  River. 

28,400 

1,945 

1,400 

9,200 

3,290 

62,025 

106  260 

Total  

272,  599 

21,595 

1,786 

167,  686 

93,  480 

13,  215 

388,  034 

958,  395 

Nebraska: 
Genoa   . 

5,452 

243,  753 

249,  205 

Omaha 

23  560 

23  560 

San  tee  

24,  615 

460 

4,955 

8,615 

38,645 

Winnebago 

58  075 

12  355 

70  430 

Total 

106  250 

5  912 

4  955 

264  723 

381  840 

Nevada: 
Carson 

79  243 

79  243 

Fallon  '  

225 

i  1,464 

12,381 

14,  070 

Fort  McDermitt  . 

1  965 

290 

75 

1  790 

10  050 

14  170 

Moapa  River  

45 

80 

3,565 

3,690 

Nevada 

9  900 

66  950 

76  850 

Walker  River  

4,225 

1,100 

560 

4,050 

6,  740 

16,  675 

Western  Shoshone 

12  225 

1,425 

380 

2,200 

39  660 

55  890 

Total  

28,  315 

3,085 

1,095 

9,504 

218  589 

260  588 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  

10,  300 

8,975 

30,335 

168,830 

218,440 

Albuquerque  Pueblos  . 

1.470 

7,870 

7,204 

27,  000 

43,544 

Jicarilla 

18  303 

5  710 

215 

7  516 

3,145 

85  712 

120  601 

Mescalero  

20,  163 

3,272 

7,830 

6,480 

86,714 

124,459 

Pueblo  Bonito 

18  525 

1  431 

32  034 

51  990 

San  Juan  

29,923 

9,036 

24,599 

3,080 

153,  980 

220,  618 

Santa  Fe 

8  325 

4  750 

213  667 

226,  742 

Zuni  

1,310 

18,820 

8,319 

350 

124,  703 

153,  502 

Total 

107  009 

42  354 

19  035 

85  803 

13  055 

892  640 

1  159  896 

New  York  Agency  .  .  . 

393 

393 

North  Carolina:  Chero- 
kee....                  .     .. 

500 

56,  598 

57,098 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck  .  .  . 

87,  773 

87,  773 

Fort  Berthold 

17  964 

1  640 

373 

22  190 

8  641 

50  808 

Fort  Totten. 

4,269 

2,422 

19,  468 

162,  000 

188,  159 

Standing  Rock 

84  756 

7  605 

1  410 

35  024 

185  358 

314,  153 

Turtle  Mountain  

23,465 

5,725 

4,860 

26,671 

60,721 

Wahpeton 

8  185 

185 

30,  198 

146  770 

185,  338 

Total  

138,639 

17,  577 

1,783 

111,740 

617,213 

886,952 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

1,350 

300 

100 

64  690 

35  765 

102,  205 

Cheyenne  and   Arap- 
aho..             

23,  961 

1,450 

88,  387 

238,  156 

351,954 

Chilocco 

661  567 

661,567 

Kiowa  

40,  503 

5,871 

415,  141 

461,  515 

Osage  . 

40  075 

141  752 

181,827 

Otoe  

6,880 

63,  008 

69,888 

Pawnee  .         

21,982 

300 

97,  771 

120,053 

Ponca 

18,270 

200 

76  846 

95,316 

Red  Moon  

670 

68,811 

69,481 

Sac  and  Fox  .... 

13,  622 

953 

39,  495 

54,070 

Seger  

1,520 

2,710 

7,400 

79,  745 

91,375 

Seneca..         

195 

31,  749 

31,944 

Shawnee 

6,760 

150 

93  708 

100,  618 

Total*  

134,  848 

52,  874 

100 

160,477 

2,043,514 

2,391,813 

Agricultural  implements. 


2  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  255 

TABLE  56. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  SO,  1913—  Continued 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

General 
admin- 
istration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Union  Agency.  ... 

$12,054 

$12,054 

Cherokee    Nation- 
Cherokee  Orphan 
School 

$26,  499 

26,499 

Chickasaw  Nation— 
Bloomfield  Semi- 
nary 

$46 

36,055 

36,  101 

Collins  Institute.  .  . 

125 

14,  731 

14,856 

Choctaw  Nation  — 
Armstrong     Male 
Academy  

49,  105 

49,105 

Jones  Male  Acad- 
emy   

60 

29,  450 

29,510 

Tuskahoma  Acad- 
emy 

28  670 

28,670 

Wheelock    Acad- 
emy 

24,653 

24,653 

Creek  Nation— 
Euchee  Boarding 
School 

280 

$10  115 

37  083 

47,  478 

Eufaula  Boarding 
School 

79 

2,775 

25,655 

?8,509 

Nuyaka  Boarding 
School 

18,  070 

18,070 

Tullahassee  Board- 
ing School 

10,  770 

10,  770 

Seminole   Nation— 
Mekusukey  Acad- 
emy 

53,129 

53,  129 

Total.  Five  Civi- 
lized Tribes... 

12,054 

590 

12,890 

353,870 

379,404 

Total,  Oklahoma 

146,902 

53,464 

$100 

173,367 

2,397,384 

2,771,217 

Oregon: 
Klamath  

3,645 

2,865 

$7,453 

25,  523 

$13,  360 

80,  216 

133,  062 

Roseburg 

33 

1,800 

1,833 

Salem... 

4,295 

26,553 

99,345 

220,477 

350,  670 

Siletz 

12,886 

515 

35,071 

48,  472 

Umatilla 

600 

70  361 

860 

45  210 

117,031 

Warm  Springs. 

5,295 

1,975 

4,496 

5,079 

58,056 

74,901 

Total  

26,  121 

32,508 

33 

7,453 

199,  725 

19,  299 

440,  830 

725,  969 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

25,920 

109  900 

397  245 

533,065 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum  

0) 

100,984 

1,224 

102,20 

Cheyenne  River  

143,472 

4,600 

6,515 

44,  475 

109,  992 

309,  054 

Crow  Creek  

22,440 

2,160 

175 

4  725 

58,  998 

88,  498 

Flandreau  

232,207 

232,207 

Lower  Brule. 

39,  922 

5,616 

500 

41,  199 

87,237 

Pierre... 

4,450 

8,500 

37,032 

121,080 

171,062 

Pine  Ridge  

2  396,  750 

6,550 

735 

42,298 

1  025 

187,558 

634,916 

Rapid  City 

4,340 

6  650 

50  250 

183  585 

244  825 

Rosebud  

420,644 

7,110 

182,  790 

610,544 

Sisseton 

19,505 

59  504 

79  009 

Springfield... 

33,659 

33,  659 

Yankton 

-     42,  675 

740 

43  503 

86  918 

Total  

1,  094,  198 

134,  410 

7,425 

9,000 

180,004 

1,025 

1,254  075 

2  680  137 

Utah: 
Shivwits    

305 

310 

7  563 

8  178 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

128,546 

1,930 

28,448 

8,058 

4,560 

44,859 

216,  401 

Total  

128,  851 

2,240 

28,  448 

8  058 

4  560 

52  422 

224  579 

Washington: 
Colville... 

130,  444 

750 

6  000 

24,  150 

16  800 

3  721  903 

900  047 

Ciishman 

14,  671 

11  500 

442  525 

468  696 

Neah  Bay  

4,195 

500 

4,330 

9  025 

Spokane 

3  856 

825 

150 

7  900 

16  422 

29  153 

Tulalip... 

29,216 

7.150 

. 

159,225 

195  591 

Yakima.. 

28,  075 

3,950 

2,135 

18,  150 

6,824 

4  105 

63  833 

127  072 

Total 

210  457 

24  675 

8  285 

18  150 

30  974 

28  805 

1  408  238 

1  729  584 

1  Included  in  health.         2  Includes  timber  reserve.         '  Includes  sanatorium,  now  abolished. 


256  REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  56. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30,  1913—  Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendences. 

General 
admin- 
istration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Wisconsin: 
Carter 

$1  351 

$1  351 

Hayward  . 

l'805 

$5,240 

$19,235 

$25 

$79,  415 

105,  720 

Keshena 

41  775 

7  344 

1  679,031 

51,553 

779,  703 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

1,600 

82,  416 

84,  016 

La  Pointe 

5  792 

100 

245 

55 

100 

6.292 

Oneida  

1,450 

69,235 

70,685 

Red  Cliff. 

450 

255 

590 

1,155 

742 

3,192 

Tomah 

4  447 

145  934 

150  381 

Wittenberg    .  .  . 

58,  730 

58,  730 

Total  

51,  173 

20,436 

20,070 

680,266 

488,  125 

1,260,070 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone  

91,  275 

3,213 

$1,818 

$12,  493 

1,170 

1,600 

150,745 

262,  314 

State  totals  

2,  874,  343 

636,  249 

21,  966 

318,574 

1,  325,  847 

802,064 

12,  640,  697 

18,619,740 

Miscellaneous:  2 
Warehouses. 

2  884 

2,884 

Liquor  suppression  .  .  . 

650 

650 

Allotting  service  

8,984 

8,984 

Irrigation  service  

9,  854,  542 

9,854,542 

Indian  Office... 

34,742 

34,742 

Grand  total.. 

2,912,619 

3  636,  249 

30,  950 

10,  173,  116 

1,  325,  847 

802,064 

12,  640,  697 

28,521,542 

1  Forestry  property  not  included  in  1912  report. 

2  See  recapitulation,  Table  55. 

3 1912  report  includes  sanatorium  at  Colville,  now  abolished. 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  257 


>  co  o  oa  o  r- 


o^««     ^ 


:S  : 


<N  r-ti-l 


>r-t  O  O  O  LO  < 


S|g§2 


11! 


I 

ij| 

I! 


21716—14 17 


o  J  ;n-a  :.£ 


i|  lull 


*i 


258  REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS 

sstsiiii 


CO(N  ICO 

SScSS 
«w 


coScoo 

CO  CO  O  T— i 


§8! 


§1 

ssf< 


if 


oo" 


"§SSS" 


^gfa""" 


CO  0000  (N 


asf 


Isii 


S5S' 


SJ 

II 


88 


0«» 

SSi 


CQ  Ct 

of|     1 


a 

•-3  "  p<c3 

^2      ffi 


j 


ss 

:S&    S      S 


•8  J-ga 

3  -JJ|« 


2wo 

3 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  259 


co-us'i-ToToo'c 


^       -KN^g 


!ggS 

I  CM  r-H  C 


)  Tt<  »H  >o  o  el  m 


3C  F-  CO  O  O 
i-H  CO  C-l  CO 


<MO  O 


»O  <M  CO  ^-xif5  >C  53 
O3  i-l         »   t>-  CO  O 


^iO        O  O5Ot^( 

»— <  »— (  CO  CO 

T-lTticO 


8933 

i-Tr-TirTic' 


•as 


11 

oco t^- e*    ^^ 

ggSS   ~" 


l 

II 

~ 


:.^  : 

Us 


lSIl 


SI  |  jilll  1  Jll 


fc 


mm 

^     13  :•§ 

jgjS 

laiSH 

snS^^j. 


3      S  :' 


:S  :  : 


5    6S^S^ 
I    I 


S°>»s^ 
"  1=5-2 


260  REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


>OCN»OOO      t^^-i 

•  *—  I  C>  O  T—  I         C4  "**< 
>C^O5i-Ht^         C^'*' 


jo  •*  £.  m  jo  CD      <NGC          ec  £-  •*  o  •*  oo  oo  o  cc 

OO  »—  I  OS  CO  l~~  O        »—  I  CO  rHOCOCDlCi—  t^-HOf-H 

i-HOOOO>0»-l         COCOOO         CO 


if 


38  : 


u^tCtC 
i>  ec -»< 


>  o  o  o  o  < 


o  10  m  t~- 

1-(  t~~  Oll-H 


iO  O  iO  O 


S**s    °°-s:2 


as" 


I-H  ^  r^  o 

10 


-  .. 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  261 


oco  >o 


•<»<          eot^ioogcc      O>          -3"  up  eg  o  •<?  •*< 
f  co  oo  <N  t-  t»      co 


'  tH          .-H  CO  O 


OJrHOOOOOO 

ttc*fQ-^<n  <o 
•-H  co  i-t  co  to  1-1 


>oo     < 


oVefoVT 
rH     eo  N 


o  o  S  oo  o  S  oo  S 


>=IW 


^ojS-S    .'u 

^«!l 


i! 

>  to 


1 


III 


262 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  58. —  Value  of  Indians'  tribal  property,  and  tribal  and  individual  property,  June 

SO,  1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Lands,  ex- 
clusive of 
timber. 

Timber. 

Funds  in 
Treasury. 

Live 
stock. 

Total. 

Total  tribal 
and  indi- 
vidual 
property. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

$1,589 

Colorado  River 

$1  745  500 

$22,500 

$56,  481 

$1,824,481 

2.  240,  481 

Fort  Apache 

15,441,140 

3,  500,  000 

33,  793 

8,974,933 

9,  249,  088 

Fort  Mojave 

412,  888 

Havasupai 

15  000 

15,000 

28,  673 

Kaibab 

174,  000 

174,000 

184,  700 

Leupp 

15  550 

15,  550 

117,950 

Moqui 

167  432 

167,  432 

631  682 

Navajo 

U2  500  000 

7,  500,  000 

20,000,000 

23,  288,  200 

Phoenix 

1,404 

Pima 

2,  525,  880 

65,000 

2,590,880 

3,  123,  475 

Salt  River 

331  180 

331,  180 

1,  216,  595 

San  Carlos 

21,485,111 

603,  250 

158,  146 

2,  246,  507 

2,321,707 

San  Xavipr 

81,599 

1,500 

427 

83,  526 

1,  627,  221 

Truxton  Canyon  

900,  580 

76,800 

36,001 

1,013,381 

1,020,881 

Western  Nav°jo 

1,  759,  673 

1,  759,  673 

2,183,048 

Total                 

27,  142,  645 

11,769,050 

284,  848 

39,  196,  543 

47,  649,  582 

California: 
Bishop..  ..                     .  .  . 

469,  296 

Canrpo 

81  855 

81,  855 

89,  730 

Digger  

359 

Fort  Bidwell 

15,000 

15,000 

503,  275 

Fort  Yuma  

56,000 

16,000 

2,273 

74,273 

904,  653 

Greenville 

132 

Hoopa  Vallev 

159  000 

425  000 

584,000 

2,  597,  846 

Malki    . 

1,  057,  260 

1,057,260 

1,113,121 

Pala 

30  952 

1,600 

32,  552 

226  263 

Pechanga  

10,700 

10,700 

17,921 

Round  Valley 

320 

700 

1,020 

572,  497 

Soboba 

176  700 

176  700 

225,517 

Tule  River 

108,  000 

65,666 

1,691 

174,  691 

241,947 

Volcnn 

8  83  125 

w 

83,  125 

112,482 

Total 

1,763,912 

522,  600 

4  664 

2,291,176 

7,  075,  039 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  

21,971,500 

$1,260 

21,972,760 

2,  017,  024 

Southern  Ute         

180 

180 

415,  025 

Total  

1,971,500 

1,440 

1,972,940 

2,  432,  049 

Florida:  Seminole 

111,746 

111,746 

111,746 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene. 

408,  402 

408,  402 

2,  713,  167 

Fort  Hall  

2751,571 

460,000 

53,  163 

21,264,734 

4,551,711 

Fort  Lapwai 

118,  100 

742,500 

12,  349 

872,  949 

6,  893,  603 

Total  

869,  671 

1,202,500 

473,  914 

2,546,085 

14,  158,  481 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

290,912 

5,000 

400,  608 

696,  520 

724,  661 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo 

136  117 

136  117 

2  072  292 

Potawatomi 

302,  433 

302,  433 

1,711,000 

Total  

438,  550 

438,  550 

3,  783,  292 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills     

1 

8,040 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior 

284  998 

Total          

293,  038 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac..          ...     . 

404,  086 

404,  086 

1,  067,  196 

Grand  Portage 

2  80  205 

ie  642 

169  347 

265  594 

390  691 

Leech  Lake  

845,  233 

845,  233 

1,533,359 

Nett  Lake          

338  093 

338  093 

808,  595 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley) 

63  994 

Red  Lake  

912,271 

1,  124,  300 

1,316,351 

3,  352,  922 

3,  535,  501 

White  Earth  

34,  972 

10  000 

2,561  779 

2  606  751 

7,740  617 

Total 

1  027  448 

1  150  342 

5  634  889 

7  812  679 

15  139  953 

'Underestimated  last  year.     2  Overestimated  last  year.    3  Only  item  reported  1912.    *  Included  in  lands. 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


263 


TABLE  58. —  Value  of  Indians'  tribal  property,  and  tribal  and  individual  property,  June 

30,  1913,—  Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Lands,  ex- 
clusive of 
timber. 

Timber. 

Funds  in 
Treasury. 

Live 

stock. 

Total. 

Total  tribal 
and  indi- 
vidual 
property. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet                           

$3,  169,  100 

$120,000 

$295  443 

$3  584  543 

$8  958  163 

Crow 

5  531  107 

21  600 

878  153 

6  430  S60 

11  402  945 

Flathead                

4,  920,  395 

4,  475,  314 

58,953 

9  454  662 

14  699,810 

Fort  Belknap 

3,  739,  600 

192  000 

2  915 

3  934  515 

4  091  501 

Fort  Peck  

6,931,398 

60,000 

11,  792 

7,  003,  190 

11,408,751 

Tongue  River                 . 

2,680,000 

600,000 

62  877 

3  342  877 

3  906  961 

Total  

26,971,600 

5,  468,  914 

1,310,133 

33  750  647 

54  468  131 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

92  200 

1  240 

?"  858 

130  298 

4  449  821 

Santee                 

£  '.593 

81  593 

1  473  251 

Winnebago  

31,100 



3(   ,040 



398,  140 

6,  434,  700 

Total 

123  300 

1  240 

485  491 

610  031 

12  357  772 

Nevada: 
Fallon                 

22,  800 

22  800 

154  095 

Fort  McDermitt  

9,000 

9yOOO 

62,  650 

Moapa  River        .   

1  10,  300 

10  300 

16  535 

Nevada 

639  000 

639  000 

655  350 

Walker  River  

37,  390 

37,390 

360,  110 

Western  Shoshone  

750,000 

17,576 

767,576 

908.  126 

Reno,  special  agent  

399,900 

Total 

1  468  490 

17  576 

1  486  066 

2  556  766 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos 

1  856  716 

55  000 

1  911  716 

2  595  816 

Jicarilla  .' 

141,231 

30,000 

23,913 

195,  144 

1  849,409 

Mescalero 

619  800 

4  500  000 

5  119  800 

5  208  770 

Pueblo  Bonito  

1,875,000 

(2) 

1,875,000 

3,  045,  010 

San  Juan 

3  930  000 

45,000 

3  975  000 

6  310  536 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos  

221,  723 

19,882 

241,  105 

443,  355 

Zuni 

783  000 

22,500 

805  500 

1  108  275 

Total     

9,  427,  470 

4,  671,  882 

23,913 

14.123  265 

20  561,  171 

New  York:  New  York  Agency 

76  326 

76  326 

76  326 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

621,639 

140,000 

14,  791 

776,  430 

880,  989 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold              

1,  157,  784 

247  339 

1  405,123 

3,291,111 

Fort  Totten  

25,  146 

25,  146 

1,354,372 

Standing  Rock  

1,  189,  163 

758,  708 

1,  947,  871 

17,  760,  772 

Turtle  Mountain 

5  041  695 

Total 

2  346  947 

1  031  193 

3  378  140 

27  447  950 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  

\      713  911 

713  91l{ 

1,733,030 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  
Chilocco 

3,  625,  430 
7,637 

Kiowa  

10,000 

4,  292,  686 

4,  302,  686 

19,930,148 

Osage  

12,000 

7,024,565 

7,036,565 

19,  515,  586 

Otoe 

6  480 

102,  709 

109,  189 

2,168  175 

Pawnee  

232,  458 

232,  458 

2,  123,  425 

Ponca              

4,800 

130,  323 

135,  123 

4,444,016 

Red  Moon 

524  678 

Sac  and  Fox  

518,  804 

518,804 

1,  963,  023 

Seger 

1  816  992 

Seneca  

6,005 

6,005 

1,081,110 

Shawnee  . 

2  933 

2,933 

2,511,651 

Total     

42  218 

13,015,456 

13,  057,  674 

61,444,901 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Union  A  gencv        

322,863,058 

2,  365,  542 

25,  228,  600 

200,521,041 

Cherokee  Nation 

(4) 

(4) 

607,  431 

607,  431 

607  431 

Chickasaw  Nation 

M 

M 

657,  547 

657,  547 

657,  547 

Choctaw  Nation 

Ml 

(4) 

2,  390,  128 

2,  390,  128 

2,  390,  128 

Creek  Nation 

(4) 

(4) 

2  695  677 

2  695  677 

2  695  677 

Seminole  Nation 

(4) 

(4) 

2,  182,  553 

2,182,553 

2,  182,  553 

Total,  Five  Civilized 
Tribes          .      . 

22,  863,  058 

2,365,542 

8,533,336 

33,761,936 

209,054,377 

Total,  Oklahoma 

22  905  276 

2  365  542 

21  548,792 

46  819  610 

270  499  278 

1  Overestimated  last  year. 

2  Unknown. 


s  Includes  $15,000,000  lowest  estimated  value  coal. 
<  See  Union  Agency. 


264 


KEPORT   OF   THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  58.—  Value  of  Indians'  tribal  property,  and  tribal  and  individual  property,  June 

30,  1913— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Lands,  ex- 
clusive of 
timber. 

Timber. 

Funds  in 
Treasury. 

Live 
stock. 

Total. 

Total  tribal 
and  indi- 
vidual 
property. 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

$3,  257,  000 

$23,160,000 

$249,  361 

$26,666,361 

$28,  781,  54& 

Roseburg  

2,000 

2,000 

2,488,214 

Salem               

897 

Siletz 

8,000 

195,000 

27,  237 

230,  237 

701,072 

Umatilla 

214  800 

14,200 

233,  645 

462,  645 

4,035,920 

663  853 

2  280  000 

2  853 

2,946  706 

3,  669,  412 

Total 

4  145  653 

25  649  200 

513,  096 

30,  307,  949 

39,  677,  061 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  

24,368 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum 

• 

1  113 

Cheyenne  River  

1,519,258 

1,148,508 

$6,  550 

2,674,316 

10,903,213 

Crow  Creek 

46  619 

186  389 

233  008 

2  882,842 

Flandreau 

60,000 

60,000 

98,560 

Lower  Brule  

112,000 

106,  669 

4,000 

222,  669 

1,992,823 

Pierre                    

18 

Pine  Ridge 

1  665,223 

100,000 

982,776- 

2,  747,  999 

15,761,317 

Rosebud 

1  619  300 

3  102  522 

4,721  822 

24  203,212 

Sisseton 

609,  673 

609,  673 

10,  710,  689 

Yankton 

277  152 

277,  152 

5,  442,  158 

Total 

5  022  400 

100  000 

6,  413,  689 

10  550 

11,  546,  639 

71,995,945 

Utah: 
Shivwits  

15,000 

• 

15,000 

20,211 

Uintah  and  Ouray    

548,  400 

34,  875 

4,240,253 

4,  823,  528 

6,  645,  431 

Salt  Lake,  special  agent 

2,510 

Total 

563,  400 

34,  875 

4,  240,  253 

4,838,528 

6,668,152 

Washington: 
Colville 

i?  372  120 

4,  714,  480 

664,  844 

12,  751,  444 

16,854,857 

Cushman 

843  054 

4  213  272 

141  407 

5  197  733 

7  054,080 

Neah  Bay 

22,650 

275,  000 

580 

298,  230 

387,075 

Spokane  

2835,085 

817,  875 

187,  520 

3,000 

1,843,480 

3,268,776 

Tulalip          

82 

82 

3,260,787 

Yakima 

1,  763,  550 

3,398  450 

19,500 

5,181,500 

15,  866,  273 

Total 

10,  836,  541 

13,  419,  077 

1,  013,  851 

3,000 

25,  272,  469 

46,691,848 

Wisconsin: 
Carter 

33,804 

Hayward 

1  000 

1  000 

733  745 

Keshena      .                ... 

31,947,513 

6,  038,  840 

2,  061,  362 

10,  047,  715 

10,  156,  197 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

92  245 

3  050 

114  628 

209,  923 

769,  293 

La  Pointe  

89,  827 

570,  635 

660,  462 

4,  404,  896 

Oneida 

1,  688,  844 

Red  Cliff  

341,826 

Tomah 

534,  355 

534,  355 

556,  995 

Total  

2,  130,  585 

6,  612,  525 

2,  710,  345 

11,  453,  455 

18,685,600 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

960  664 

11  250 

31,  779 

60,150 

1,063,843 

2,  972,  065 

Grand  total  

120,  701,  799 

73,  123,  997 

46,668,701 

75,  140 

240,  569,  637 

666,931,263 

1  Included  timber  last  year. 

2  Overestimated  last  year. 

8  The  report  for  1911  erroneously  gave  the  value  of  land  as  $8,755,200,  the  value  of  the  timber  having 
been  included  by  mistake. 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  265 


<N  T  O  CC  tO  OO  '•tf1  < 


I  I-H  <N  O  < 

^-t  i-H  CO 


DOCOOOO50OCiCMO5O 


4 

I 

.5 

.1 

1 


:S  i  i  :§ 


i-H    •  CD  1-1 N  co  i-H  ec 


•  i-HC<l       .  OCO 


•^  Tf 


>  O  O  O  O  c 

>  C^  GO  rr  Tfri  C 
>•<*<  OiO^  < 


8*0    •  o 
•  00      'S 


|8 


7 


II  i 


8  :8  : 

t-      -05      -» 


Illi 

i»^ 


o         o 

§     I 


g| 

II 


Hlsei 


i  s  |  s^^^-g-s-;  £*  fos  ^8  :  j  8.3  Srg  B-S^&^rg 

;ss^^  5  2^1 11  i|  §  -« g  § 8<Jig^ "  -  §  §11 

««Jl  ^  |3li  8J  Srg3f«^  S°  fe  h  <2  2.2  ®00iz;^ 

oo  la-s1-?^^^  §•<  **<ii 


266  REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


3    §8£3 

,-H         t^JSSTf 


il. 


C«5  i-(  r-l  rH  <N 


§     Ilil 


8       §8 

c3          oto 


o    • 

§  : 


to    -com t>-    -cs    -c<« 


1      § 


3       8 


Cq  «N    i  ^ 


U5          I   CO 


Us 

oca  o 


IS  :  :S  :§ 


§  I 


1      III 


« 


1  I 


11 


»         s 


JK|E 

BB^ 

.a.e^s 


Ii 


l§ 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  267 

S    311    8§88    i  S    S       8    8    ii383$RS 


rt  OS          i-H  O  CO  t^  CO  CO  O5 


rH  1C     I    rH    ||          rH  rH     I    CN     ||          lO  i 


O      'O      »O        O      •     »O      • 

1  :1  :|    5  :   l  : 


Oil        O  O 


I       il 

:<N 


^H  CM  rH  CN  ^H  i-H  - 


'8    CN  8  -8  •  CN  8 


;OCO    |g 


3 


11    1 


S8»o 

CNOO-rH- 


i-l  -f     "OrHCOCN 


W|| 


8  : 


rn'oo" 


rH'rH'eo"rH~CN~r-r 


:g  :8  :  :§  : 


S  8 


O»O 

Mt^ 


OO      'OCOCOCNCNCO^ 

OSrH        •IOHO1OOCOCOCO 


.  rH  CM  rH  CN  rH  tf  t~- 


88    8    S 
55as    oo    oo 


I      1      11 


8§ 
i-Tc<r 


§8 

OS 


* 


ai      3 

^MWJJJ    o 

•      .»-»  4->  -u  >->  -tj      ^ 

€  5  b  tS  € 

0  0  0  0  0 


.... 

oo     • 

ss  3 


ill 


"gSS    -3 


I 


268  EEPOKT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 


CO  »O  CO  t~- 


>  o  o 
1 5  co 

>«5CO 


" 


t>-          CO^H 


I      §      I      1 


II      II 


3    5! 


BIB 


N^   I  oo  n      c* ^ 


Illl  •: 


I  1 


III 


U10,^' 


ill 


II      1 


-  [8 


«eo    "-H 


1      ggggl    I 


S     O   *3 

Ota  a> 


-H  CO        1C  N  CO  -H  CO  I-H  CO  i-H 


»O     «O     »O     «O      »O 

<o    -o    -io    -S    -o 
.<o    «o      «M    -So    -25 


•<t  CO        OCO 


t^  n          eq^H  co 


co          o  o  o  < 

O  CD  O  O  < 

00  O  CO  CO  < 


88 

«s3 


.2,2  2  2        o  o  o  o  §  o 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  269 


«      -r 


W 


rH          rH          rH          O<  "  *"*  <N  rH 


§§ 


I-!-*     n 


ss  3 

OJOO        10 


JH"      rH^rH^rH" 


1  1  111 


M         rH         t~ 


t-  CO  05  CO  &  rH 


10 

»oT    of 


3    8 

-*       (N 


§11  II 


17 


^  la 


P<  rt  •*COr-<l 


5 


e<)    -co     ^K     1-1    -c* 


»«^ 


§   1   §|§  !§  :§  :lil  :| 


§   1 


10          0»        '^H        '^H        .^H^HIO        "-H 


!1!8 


-r   <N-H-of 


1    I 


i  B    9    i      :§  :°  :§  :§  :^  If 

O  U5       r-(  .(N'CO'Ol'iC'O-IN 


i-H  «5        CO 


co    «c<»    •        --^    -t-    -co 


^    .u;    .(N    .«    -t^ 


11 
ofof 


I       il          1          1 


8  ||    2    2 


CO    I   t- 


N          CO  rH          C<)  CO  f       -i-l 


11  :| 


S  I 


(N       (N     M 


•  O      •  O      '  O      •  O      •  < 

:1  :^  :g  :s  \\ 


C*        t-l        CO 


Oi    II          (30 


O     'CO       (N       •*     •  O     -CO 


1     2*  1  II  I 


:§  :e 


00   II        C4  to 


•*"    ;c» 

oo~~r=* — 


SJ 


-II 


111  § 


&\    ,c*    .        .^    -c<« 


111  il  II 


IT 


:a  :s  :a 

•  t>.    .00    .00 


•(N       •  •!>       -rH 


of; 


I  CO  C^l  (N  tO 


111     11     1 

* 


"1" 


ra  - 


^OqRTwcqO =*^4 


dill        ^       .«. 


Hi  §  ail  i§  i 


of 


0,-So 
a02^ 

Pj    O  ^ 

"^  ScQ 


m 


ilill 


% 


>>  o  X 
o   '     oS2§ 

,||&li« 

m~m 

!« 


.H«l 


'^H^SSP-iP-iajcccBaiNN         » •< 


Oi-iSS^-ij'''OOW  VV,*\ 

ri  i  mil 

>|5£  pi^^siiiii    jiiii 


270 


REPORT   OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


<M  i--*  co"     t-i-t 


I 


11 

£^ 


l-H  1-4  1-4  C<3  CO  C<l 


§3    S 


co^^ 


MiO 


I 


«D  <M      -CO      -N      -N      •  W      • 


N~   IN"   -n      <N" 


|  « 


S888  :8  :S  :S  :8  :S  :8 

t^t^-CO^       JOO       |CO       I  •*       |«O       JOO       I  rH 
OO~oT        cf-rH''!-?'^'  Ir-Tlc^T 


r-t  •<£>       .10       .<M 


t-Tic^od'c^co'io'     i-Ti-Ti 


OO  5O  OS  (N  CO  •*  i-H  <N  (N  CO  N  •«*         rH  i-H  "O         COIM(NCO<N 


88888 

id  O  «5  r^  OO 


jaqranN  | 


!§§!§ 


N         •*      -rH 


il  il  i§  11  II  i 


| 


iSj-If 
- 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  271 


5 


11  s  1 


ooT 


OO        00        CO 


O  O  O  C 
•O  O  O  c 
<N  OO  t^C 


SI  1 


51    rt 


I  :   ill    il 


§§ 


oo" 


•u  m 


II 


Of 


>  iO        O 

J53     £ 

PrH"        Of 


»H         O«         i-l 


§§     g     1 


81 


11     §     1 
of  of     of     of 


of 


WrH 


g  g  g  g 


1  g 


rH    II          rH  i-H     I    O4 


11    1    1 


n  1111 


^        $5 


£1,8 

nil 


i    C3      ' 

ill 


C 


C 


IP, 

|g|    ,2 

03  o  -3         O 
^^3       ^ 

|So 

o 


«5^«g 

^£§31 


S  \S  \S  if  i 

•g  :-g  :*E  :1  : 


pq   -pq 


3    l.^njuvh    35 


£«! 
0 


ll 

302 


To 
nole 
kus 


•^  ^  s  o 

is«i 

a-il^ 


gsa«a§ 


272 


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

;g88S§3iSi£8gg8£ 


&e 


il§ll 


*o"     •*" 


lAHAB^vetsaSS! 
t£*f&£ 


OOOO      ' 

Sill  : 


^T-T  !c<T     i-Too'i-T     to 


IN  [8 


a  i 


1    1 


IS  :g 


CO        S 


ill 


818 


Mr-tlCO          rHll       i-Hi-H«O 


1        I 


:«  ,;«     182 


O  O 

Is 


me*      -*o 


•  C^  lO      •        JO      •  ^  j 


II  : 


COCO      •  i-H  <N 


IS 


02- 


1  I  I  § 


a  a 


*O 

*c^ 

•  t* 


<N  C<)  rH        •  (N  i-H 


a 
JIT 


i^ 

E  o 
fl  0 


O 


jH!lilli|!|^i 

If  223*4*^    I-S^-SSrto 

x£££«4s  o>  s.-scc^MrC)  ®° 

^^^2 


^B««^^f|| 


Q  0''i<jj®®®3e<r-rG  OOWWa^*"  ^cQ-^^i™ 

Ii  ii!!^""!!Pi!il! 


IS 

If 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  273 


274  REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  60. — Miscellaneous  field  employees. 


Designation. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Total. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force. 
Inspection  

1 
1 
1 
'1 
1 

1 
1 
1 

2 

$3,000 
2,000 
3,000 
3.000 
3,000 

3,000 
2,000 
2,000 

6,100 

8 
16 
4 
19 
6 

2 

$15,300 
19,  720 
7,300 
26,400 
8,900 

2,700 

9 
17 
5 
20 

7 

3 
1 
5 

2 
4 
6 
20 
14 
1 
1 
1 

$18,300 
21,720 
10,300 
29,400 
11,900 

5,700 
2,000 
6,020 

6,100 
5,300 
13,300 
24,450 
22,410 
3,652 
2,000 
1,500 

Liquor 

Construction  .  .  . 

Health  ... 

Schoo's 

Industries: 
Farming 

Stock  raising  

E  mploy  ment 

4 

4,020 

Forestry: 
Forester  and  assistant  forester  

Headquarters  at  Washington,  D  .  C  

4 
6 
19 
4 

5,300 
13,300 
22,450 
3,360 

Field  supervising  officers  

Menominee 

1 
10 
1 
1 
1 

2,000 
19,050 
3,652 
2,000 
1,500 

Special  agents  

Purchasing  Agent  of  land  for  California  Indians 

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  Indians.  . 
Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians 

Total  

24 

55,302 

92 

128,750 

116 

184,052 

10,700 
13,600 

Field  irrigation  service. 
t^hief  inspector  

1 

6 

4.000 
13,600 

4 

6,700 

5 
6 

Superintendents  of  irrigation 

Total  

7 
1 

17,600 
2,000 

4 
21 

6,700 
30,660 

11 

22 

24,300 
32,660 

Arizona  and  New  Mexico:  Albuquerque  

Arizona: 
Pima  

1 
1 
1 
1 

1,500 
1,200 
1,650 
780 

2 
15 
15 

1,920 
1,405 
3,463 

3 

6 
6 
1 

3,420 
2,605 
5,113 
780 

Salt  River 

San  Carlos  .  .  . 

San  Xavier 

Total 

4 
1 
1 
1 

5,130 
2,000 
720 
2,000 

12 
239 

6,788 
38,880 

16 
40 
1 

7 

11,918 
40,880 
720 
6,995 

California:  Miscellaneous  work  

Colorado:  Southern  Ute 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall  

36 

4,995 

Montana: 
Crow..           

1 
1 
1 

1,600 
2,000 
1,200 

9 
14 
13 

8,620 
1,118 
1,830 

10 
5 

4 

10,220 
3,118 
3,030 

Fort  Belknap 

Tongue  River  . 

Total  

3 

4,800 

16 

11,568 

19 

1 
2 

16,368 

Nevada: 
Walker  River  

1 
i  1 

1,200 
562 

1,200 
900 

Western  Shoshone 

11 

338 

Total 

2 

1 
1 

1,762 

1 

35 
1 

338 

'      4,780 
69 

3 

2,100 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

2,000 
129 

6 
12 

6,780 
198 

Warm  Springs  

Total  

2 

2,129 

6 

4,849 

8 

13~ 
23 
14 

6,978 

Utah-  Uintah 

1 
1 
1 

2,000 
2,100 
2,100 

*  12 
<22 
*13 

10,  112 
21,119 
10,960 

12,  112 
23,219 
13,060 

Washington:  Yakima  .  

Wyoming'  Wind  River 

Grand  total                    .  . 

25 

44,341 

152 

146,969 

177 

191,310 

Field  allotment  service. 
Special  allotting  agents 

11 

7 
2 
16 
3 
4 
12 

32,  142 
25,564 
4,000 
16,507 
1,350 
1,490 
990 

11 
7 
2 
16 
14 
15 
3 

32,  142 
25,564 
4,000 
16,507 
2,430 
2,930 
1,990 

Appraising  commissioners..  .  . 

Competency  commissioners 

Surveyors,  etc.  ,  at  large  

Arizona'  Colorado  River 

1 

1 
1 

1,080 
1,440 
1,000 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall  

North  Dakota:  Fort  Berthold.     .  . 

1  All  temporary  positions. 
2 18  were  temporary  positions. 


3  1  temporary  position. 

*  5  were  temporary  positions. 


KEPOBT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  60. — Miscellaneous  field  employees — Continued. 


275 


Designation. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Total. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  allotment  service  —  Continued. 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

1 
1 

$2,  160 
2,160 

1 
5 

$2,160 
5,580 

Pine  Ridge  

4 

$3,420 

Total 

2 

(1>i 

4,320 

4 

1  —  '-            —  = 

18 
3 

3,420 

•—     -'•'    -•_'     ~" 

20.640 
3,860 

6 

18 
4 

7,740 

20,640 
4,440 

Washington: 
Colville  

Yakima                               ... 

1,080 

Total  

1 

1,080 

21 
"IT 

230 
<9 
*4 
*5 
4 

24,000 

22 
76 

31 
9 
5 
6 
5 

25,080 
118,383 

20,720 
8,225 
5,260 
6,160 
6,520 

Grand  total 

_.    -  . 

6 
1 

», 

1 
1 

8,920 
2,200 

109,463 

18,  520 
8,225 
3,260 
4,160 
4,520 

Warehouses. 
Chicago                            .  .                   

New  York 

Omaha   .             

2,000 
2,000 
2,000 

St  Louis 

San  Francisco         

Total  

4 

8,200 

52 

38,685 

56 

46,885 

1  Special  allotting  agent  in  charge. 

a  20  were  temporary  positions  for  six  months. 


9  Clerk  in  charge. 

*  1  temporary  position. 


TABLE  61. — Recapitulation  of  all  Indian-Service  employees. 


Designation. 

Number. 

Salary. 

School 

2,796 
2,250 
116 
177 
76 
56 
i  222 

$1,864,254 
1,454,279 
184,052 
191,310 
118,383 
46,885 
284,559 

Agency 

Field  irrigation  and  supen 
Irrigation  service 

rising  force  

Allotment  service  

\V  arehouses 

Indian  Office  employees  exclusive  of  commissioner  and  assistant  commissioner  

Grand  total  

5,693 

4,143,722 

The  number  of  employees  in  Table  1  includes  15  field  employees  detailed  to  the  Washington  office. 


276  KEPOET   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  62. — Statements  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1913,  with  unexpended  balances. 


Titles  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1912. 

Appropria- 
tions for  fiscal 
year  1913. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1913. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

General  provisions: 
Court  costs,  etc.,  in  suits  involving  lands  al- 
lotted to  Indians 

$2,000.00 
4,000.00 
125,000.00 
1,420,000.00 
480,000.00 
82,000.00 
400,000.00 
335,700.00 
75,869.00 
200,000.00 
1,200.00 
10,000.00 

285,000.00 

90,000.00 
10,000.00 
75,000.00 

250,000.00 
9,000.00 

10,520.00 
6,000.00 
30,000.00 
6,000-00 
4,500.00 

5,000.00 
35,000.00 
7,000.00 
4,000.00 

11,000.00 
3,000.00 

23,  740.  00 
30,000.00 

7,000.00 

330,000-00 
57,000.00 
18,500.00 

13,000.00 
9,000.00 
20,000.00 
15,000.00 
30,000.00 
35,000.00 
4,000.00 
6,  000.  00 
4,  000.  00 

1,  500.  00 
2,000.00 
2,000.00 
85,000.00 
6,600.00 
500.00 
10,000.00 
8,000.00 
7,000.00 
1,000.00 
500.00 
1,000.00 
200.00 
9,  846.  00 
6,000.00 
12,000.00 
5.000.00 

$118.39 
3,204.47 
104,  717.  08 
1,324,490.51 
305,368.72 
70,116.02 
354,278.30 
301,  447.  38 
77,364.00 
184,  779.  02 
525.94 
8,  883.  05 

258,727.08 

76,531.73 
5,129.27 
68,886.58 

209,979.03 
5,  809.  95 

17,769.69 
6,  197.  43 
29,291.00 
5,995.87 
3,696.02 

4,895.33 
32,389.02 
6,614.28 
3,948.89 

10,  753.  78 
2,532.20 

22,601.51 
23,007.96 

6,105.62 

298,673.88 
47,349.21 
15,288.96 

12,421.73 
7,268.32 
18,163.89 
12,350.54 
29,133.86 
31,008.99 
3,759.64 
5,831.73 
3,  520.  85 

1,  175.  00 
1,953.91 
1,  504.  64 
76,664.14 
6,421.18 
6.87 
8,643.04 
6,379.61 
5,063.46 
896.  48 
363.  69 
715.  79 

81,881.61 
795.53 
20,282.92 
95,509.49 
174,631.28 
11,883.98 
45,  721.  70 
125,068.68 
97,450.44 
15,220.98 
674.06 
1,116.95 

26,272.92 

13,468.27 
4,870.73 
6,  113.  42 

82,966.48 
3,190.05 

10,520.00 
10,536.07 
7,714.41 
2,676.02 
905.05 

104.67 
2,610.98 
385.72 
51.11 

246.22 
487.80 

1,138.49 
6,992.04 

894.38 

31,326.12 
9,650.79 
3,211.04 

578.27 
1,  731.  68 
1,836.11 
2,649.46 
866.  14 
3,991.01 
240.  36 
168.27 
479.  15 

325.00 
46.09 
495.36 
5,335.86 
178.82 
493.  13 
1,  356.  96 
1,620.39 
1,936.54 
103.52 
136.  31 
284.21 
200.00 
8,497.91 
765.85 
281.  82 
162.31 

Expenses  of  Indian  Commissioners  

General  expenses,  Indian  Service 

Indian  schools  support 

Indian  school  and'agency  buildings 

Indian  snhnnl,  tran*rnrtatinn 

Industrial  work  and*  care  of  timber  

Irrigation,  Indian  reservations 

$90,816.06 
98,945.44 

Judgments,  Indian  depredation  claims  
Pay  of  Indian  police     

Pay  of  interpreters 

Pay  of  judges,  Indian  courts 

Purchase  and  transportation  of  Indian  sup- 
plies 

Relieving  distress  and  prevention,  etc.,  of 
diseases  among  Indians 

Sanitary  investigations  among  Indians 

Suppressing  liquor  traffic  among  Indians 

Surveying  and  allotting  Indian  reservations 
(reimbursable) 

42,945.51 

Telegraphing    and    telephoning,    Indian 
Service 

Fulfilling  treaties  with— 
Choctaw,  Oklahoma 

17,  769.  69 
10,733.50 
7,005.41 
2,671.89 
101.  07 

Crow,  Montana 

Pawnee,  Oklahoma    

Seneca  of  New  York 

Six  Nations  of  New  York  .... 

Support  of— 
Bannock,  employees,  Idaho  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Oklahoma 

Chippewa  of  Lake  Superior.  Wisconsin 

Chippewa  of  the  Mississippi,  Minnesota 

Chippewa,  Turtle  Mountain  Band,  North 
Dakota 

Coeur  d'Alene.  Idaho 

Confederated  Bands  of  Ute— 
Employees,  etc.,  Utah  

Subsistence,  Utah 

Dwamish  and  other  allied  tribes  in  Wash- 
ington   

Support  of  Indians  in— 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico.. 

California  

Nevada 

Support  of  Indians  of  — 
Colville  and  Puyallup  agencies  and  Joseph's 
Band  of  Nez  Perces,  Wash  

Flathead  Agency,  Mont    . 

Fort  Belknap  Agency,  Mont 

Fort  BerthoW  Agency,  N.  Dak    

Fort  Hall  Reservation,  Idaho 

Fort  Peck  Agency,  Mont 

Grande  Ronde  and  Siletz  Agencies,  Oreg    . 

Klamath  Agency,  Oreg 

Warm  Springs  Agency,  Oreg  

Support  of— 
Kansa  Indians,  Oklahoma 

Kickapoo,  Oklahoma 

Makah,  Washington  

Northern  Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Montana 
Pawnee,  employees,  etc.,  Oklahoma  

Pawnee,  iron,  steel,  etc.,  Oklahoma 

Pawnee,  schools,  Oklahoma 

Poncas,  Oklahoma 

Potawatomi,  Wisconsin  .  . 

Quapaw,  education,  Oklahoma.   .. 

Quapaw,  employees,  etc.,  Oklahoma  

Quinaielt  and  Quileutes,  Washington... 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Missouri,  Kansas 

Seminole  in  Florida..  . 

1,348.09 
5,234.15 
11,  718.  18 
4.837.69 

Shoshoni,  employees,  etc.,  Wyoming  

Shoshoni  in  Wyoming  

Sioux  of  Devils  Lake,  North  Dakota  .  .  . 

REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


277 


TABLE  62. — Statements  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1913,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Titles  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1912. 

Appropria- 
tions for  fiscal 
year  1913. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1913. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

Support  of—  Continued. 
Sioux  of  different  tribes- 
Employees  etc 

1100,000.00 

350,000.00 
14,000.00 
1,000.00 

$94,557.01 

265,369.52 
12,969.23 

$5,442.99 

84,630.48 
1,030.77 
1,000.  00 

418.85- 
1,355.09 
545.29 

1,340.17 
50.41 
7,358.96 
6,290.32 

Subsistence    and    civilization,   South 
Dakota                 ...                  

Sioux  Yankton  tribe  South  Dakota 

Spokan,  Washington  

Walla  Walla,  Cayuse,  and  Umatilla  tribes, 
Oregon 

3,000.00 
5,000.00 
3,000.00 

56,900.00 
10,000.00 
22,  700.  00 
152,000.00 
8,769.86 
56,  100.  00 
32,000.00 
6,000.00 
90,500.00 
300,000.00 
66,500.00 
8,000.00 
38,  400.  00 
74,500.00 
58,  100.  00 
10,000.00 
1,690.85 
39,  170.  00 
18,000.00 
17,860.00 
138,750.00 
61,275.00 

116.37 
128,  400.  00 
39,000.00 
4,000.00 
46,  175.  00 
57,500.00 
5,352.07 
104,350.00 
111,000.00 
6,000.00 
58,500.00 
35,025.00 
50,000.00 
52,950.00 
22,200.00 
33,500.00 
12,500.00 

200,000.00 

5,000.00 
30,000.00 

15,000.00 
1,000.00 
15,000.00 
1,000.00 

700.00 
1,000.00 

40.000.00 
2,000.00 
25,000.00 

2,581.15 
3,644.91 
2,454.71 

55,559.83 
34,898.93 
15,341.05 
145,  709.  68 
8,769.86 
50,516.00 
25,485.69 
2,097.62 
85,171.07 
296,368.47 
60,642.40 
6,588.21 
33,950.59 
65,120.21 
53,912.61 
606.88 
1,690.85 
33,041.35 

Wichita  and  affiliated  bands.  Oklahoma  

Yakima  and  other  Indians  Washington 

Indian  schools: 
Albuquerque,  N  Mex  

Albuquerque'  N  Mex    buildings 

$24,949.34 

Bismarck.  N  Dak  

Carlisle  Pa 

Carlisle  Pa    heating  plant 

Carson  City/Nev 

5,584.00 
6,514.31 
10,840.88 
5,328.93 
3,631.53 
5,857.60 
1,411.79 
4,449.41 
9,379.79 
4,187.39 
48,271.00 

Cherokee  N  C 

Cherokee,  N.  C    buildings  

6,938.50 

Chilocco  Okla 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  Oklahoma 

Flandreau  S  Dak                                     .  .. 

Flandreau  S  Dak    buildings 

Fort  Mojave  Ariz  '                       

Fort  Totten  N  Dak 

Genoa,  Nebr  ...         

Genoa  Nebr    buildings                            .  . 

38,  877.  88 

Hampton  Va 

Hayward  Wis               .               .        

6,128.65 
18,000.00 
3,144.50 
5,170.33 
5,395.79 

Hayward  Wis    buildings 

Kickapoo  Reservation,  Kans  

14,715.50 
133,579.67 
55,879.21 

116.37 
119,010.51 
37,364.58 
2,815.38 
43,320.41 
55,081.12 
12,409.00 
100,856.74 
106,346.48 
13,875.68 
55,999.62 
30,888.66 
47,852.73 
47,060.54 
18,768.81 
32,540.49 
43,388.98 

199,651.86 

1,857.10 
22,529.80 

Lawrence  Kans 

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich  

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich.,  claim  of  John  E. 
Meyer 

Phoenix,  Ariz 

9,389.49 
1,635.42 
1,184.62 
2,854.59 
2,418.88 

Pierre  S  Dak 

Pierre,  S.  Dak.,  irrigation  system  

Pipestone   Minn 

Rapid  City,S.  Dak  

Rapid  City.  S  Dak    heating  plant  

7,056.93 

Riverside  Cal 

3,493.26 
4,653.52 
7,124.32 
2,500.38 
4,136.34 
2,147.27 
5,889.46 
3,431.19 
959.51 
21,208.29 

348.14 

3,142.90 
7,470.20 

15,000.00 
1,000.00 
14,972.86 
925.00 

1,700.00 
655.34 

37,000.00 

Salem,  Oreg                

Salem   Oreg    buildings 

15,666.  66 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex      

Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming 

Tacoma,  Wash  

Tomah,  Wis                           

Truxton  Canyon  Ariz 

Wahpeton,  N.  Dak  

Wahpeton  N  Dak    buildings 

52,097.27 

Miscellaneous: 
Administration  of  affairs  of  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  Oklahoma 

Appraisement  and  sale  of  improvements  on 
coal  and  asphalt  lands,  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw    Nations,    Oklahoma    (reim- 
bursable) 

Asylum  for  insane  Indians,  Canton,  S.  Dak. 
Asylum   for   insane   Indians,   Canton,   S. 
Dak    buildings 

Bridge  across  the  Colorado  River,  Yuma 
Reservation,  Cal  and  Ariz 

Bridge  across  the  Deschutes  River,  Warm 
Springs  Reservation.  Oreg  

27.14 
75.00 

Bridge  across  the  San  Juan  River,  at  Ship- 
rock  Navajo  Reservation  N  Mex 

Bridge  on  Old  Red  Lake  Agency  Road 
across  Clearwater  River  Minn 

1,000.00 

Bridges,  San  Carlos  Reservation,  Ariz  
Buildings,  etc.,  Flathead  Agency,  Mont, 
(reimbursable) 

344.  66 

3,000.00 
2,000.00 
24,059.56 

Counsel  for  Pueblo  Indians,  New  Mexico 

Dike,  Fort  Mojave  Reservation,  Ariz  



940.44 

278 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  62.— Statements  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1913,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Titles  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  or  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1912. 

Appropria- 
;ions  for  fiscal 
year  1913. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1913. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

Miscellaneous—  Continued. 
Education  Sioux  Nation,  S.  Dak  

$61,228.62 

$200,000.00 
35,000.00 
38,035.00 

52,362.62 
35,000.00 

15,000.00 
15,000.00 

100,000.00 
200,000.00 
100,000.00 
15,022.45 
5,000.00 
75,000.00 
50,000.00 
15,000.00 
1,500.00 
20,000.00 

2,200.00 
2,000.00 
2,250.00 
1,080.00 
2,060.00 
1,500.00 
900.00 
1,800.00 

$167,  772.  53 
12,  219.  84 
38,035.00 

52,362.62 
33,  764.  36 

42,145.20 
14,791.53 

180,650.67 
194,122.67 
20,333.67 
15,  154.  22 
4,928.37 
34,523.67 
27,855.16 
15,062.34 
1,440.00 
9,441.85 

1,986.10 
2,000.00 
2,250.00 
1,080.00 
2,060.00 
1,500.00 
900.00 

$93,456.09 
22,  780.  16 

Granada  irrigation  project,  Navajo  Reser- 
vation Ariz                    

Indemnity  to  certain  Chickasaw  Indians 
for  losses    treaty  of  June  22  1855 

Irrigating;  allotments,  Yuma  and  Colorado 
River  Reservations,  Cal.  and  Ariz,  (reim- 
bursable)                         

Irrigation,    Colorado    River    Reservation, 

500.00 
48,915.64 

1,735.64 

21,770.44 
208.47 

71,834.93 
152,291.03 
79,  772.  43 

Irrigation,   Pima  Indian  lands,   Arizona 

Irrigation  San  Carlos  Reservation,  Ariz  

Irrigation  system,  Blackfeet  Reservation, 
Mont  (reimbursable) 

152,485.60 
146,413.70 
106.10 
131.  77 

Irrigation  system,  Flathead  Reservation, 
Mont  (reimbursable) 

Irrigation  system,  Fort  Peck  Reservation, 
Mont  (reimbursable) 

Irrigation  svstem,  Milk  River,  Fort  Bel- 
knap  Reservation,  Mont,  (reimbursable).. 
Irrigation   system,    Papago    Reservation, 
Ariz                                                

71.63 
118,006.14 
35,509.86 
820.45 
60.00 
10,  558.  15 
213.90 

Irrigation,  Uintah  Reservation,  Utah  (re- 
imbursable)                        

77,529.81 
13,365.02 
882.79 

Irrigation  system,  Wind  River  (diminished) 
Reservation  Wyo  (reimbursable) 

Irrigation,   Yakima    Reservation,    Wash, 
(reimbursable)               .. 

Line  riders,  northern  Cheyenne  Reserva- 
tion, Mont  

Maintenance  and  operation,  Fort  Hall  irri- 
gation system  Idaho 

TPay  of  employees: 
Fort  Lapwai  Agencv,  Idaho  

Mackinac  Agency,  Mich  

New  York  Agency  N.  Y 

Sac  and  Fox  Agency,  Iowa  

Sac  and  Fox  Agency,  Okla                       ... 

Seneca  Agency,  Okla  

Shawnee  Agency,  Okla                        

Pay  of  Indian  agent,  Utah  

1,800.00 
.01 

18,206.59 

Pay  of  physician,  Shivwits  School,  Utah.  . 

500.00 
40,000.00 

726.  67 
100,000.00 

660.00 
66,000.00 

15,000.00 

500.00 
10,000.00 
15,000.00 

200,000.00 
10,000.00 
25,000.00 
3,000.00 

20,000.00 
5,000.00 

5,000.00 

499.99 
21,  793.  41 

726.  67 
99,957.65 

660.00 

Payment  of  drainage  assessments,  Indian 
lands,  Oklahoma  (reimbursable)  

Payment  to— 
N.  D.  Bray  ton,  physician,  Pima  Reserva- 
tion Ariz 

Confederate  Bands  of  Utes  (reimbursable).. 

42.35 

Clarence  J.  Stacy,  supervisor  of  ditches, 
Pima  Reservation,  Ariz  

Tillamooks  and  other  Indians  of  Oregon... 

66,000.00 
1,089.96 

Protecting    property    interests    of   minor 
allottees,  Five  Civilized  Tribes  

13,910.04 

500.00 
6,267.06 
15,000.00 

26,748.25 
478.47 
24,525.36 

Reimbursement    of    Peter    Moctelmy,    a 
Coeur  d'  Aleno  Indian,  Idaho  

Relief  of  Indians  in  Utah  .  . 

3,732.94 

Relief  of  Kickapoos  in  Mexico  

Relief  and  settlement  of  Apache  Indians 
held  as  prisoners  of  war  at  Fort  Sill,  Okla 
Roads  and  bridges,  Shoshone  Reservation, 
Wyo.  (reimbursable) 

173,251.75 
9,521.53 
474.  64 
3,000.00 

12,268.75 
47.16 

123.58 

Sale  of  unallotted  lands,  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  (reimbursable) 

Sale  of  unallotted  lands,  Omaha  Reserva- 
tion, Nebr.  (reimbursable)  

Sawmill,  etc.,  Flathead  Reservation,  Mont, 
(reimbursable)  

7,731.25 
4,952.84 

4,876.42 

Surveying  Fort  Belknap  Reservation,  Mont 
Water  supply,  Nomadic  Papago  Indians, 
Arizona  

Total 

918,467.54 

9,084,755.89 

7,844,323.28 

2,158,900.15 

KEPOBT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


279 


TABLE  63. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913. 

(Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner,  are  received 
"tin  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guarantees  for  rights  of  way  across  Indian 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.    For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
,    as  required  by  section  3622,  Revised  Statutes.] 

On  hand  July  1, 1912 $13, 110. 10 

Receipts: 

July,  1912 $81.60 

August.  1912 1.50 

September,  1912 8,127.20 

October,  1912 5,004.10 

November,  1912 9,848.41 

December,  1912 3,664. 85 

January,  1913 362. 44 

February,  1913 116. 02 

March,  1913 1,241.18 

.  April,  1913 703.16 

May,  1913 31.45 

June,  1913 355.09 

29,537.00 

Total  on  hand  and  received 42, 647. 10 

Disbursed  and  deposited  during  year: 

July,  1912 8,071.10 

August,  1912 3.10 

September,  1912 5,001.60 

October,  1912 7.50 

November,  1912 11.35 

December,  1912 76.60 

January,  1913 32.10 

February,  1913 124.90 

March,  1913 5,137.75 

April,  1913 55.17 

May,  1913 1,640.40 

June.  1913 345.54 

20,507.11 

Balance  June  30,  1913 22,139.99 

TABLE  64. — Classified  statement  of  total  receipts  and  disbursements  of  the  Indian  Sermc 
for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1913  (exclusive  of  individual  Indian  moneys}. 


In  Treasury 

and  hands  of 

disbursing 

officers 
June  30, 1912. 


Received 

during  fiscal 

year  1913. 


Total  on 
hand  and 
received. 


Disbursed 

during  fiscal 

year  1913. 


In  Treasury 

and  hands  of 

disbursing 


June  30, 1913. 


General  provisions 

Fulfilling  treaty  stipulations 

Supports  (gratuities) 

Schools  and  school  buildings 

Trust  funds  and  interest 

Indian  moneys,  proceeds  of  labor . 
Miscellaneous 


$281,531.58 


137,381.98 

948,084.65 

38,828,773.67 

2,568,675.65 

8,768,560.56 


$1,962,329.74 

860,263.89 

777,846.00 

4,215,595.61 

9,683,700.10 

4,489,248.60 

4,301,390.33 


$2,243,861.32 

1,357,124.79 

915,227.98 

5,163,680.26 

48,512,473.77 
7,057,924.25 

13,069,950.89 


$1,688,253.80 

856,961.03 

765,583.40 

4,277,380.54 

8,434,327.41 

i  3,373,552.23 

7,434,017.75 


$555,607.52 

500,163.76 

149,644.58 

886,299.72 

40,078,146.36 

2  3,684,372.02 

s  5,635,933.14 


Total 52,029,868.99 


26,290,374.27 


78,320,243.26   *  26,830,076. 16 


51,490,167.10 


1  The  $3.373,552.23  disbursed  as  "Indian  moneys,  proceeds  of  labor,"  includes  $1,509,158  placed  in  Okla- 
homa banks,  under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  Congress  approved  Mar.  3.  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-70). 

2  Includes  $1,959,308.12  balance  of  proceeds  of  sale  of  unallotted  lands  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma. 
8  Includes  proceeds  of  sale  of  Indian  lands  (other  than  Five  Civilized  Tribes).  $4,209,315.35;  irrigation 

funds,  $521,560.23;  surveying  and  allotting  Indian  reservations,  $89,088.20,  and  other  miscellaneous  funds, 
$815,969.36. 

4  The  total  amount  disbursed  during  the  fiscal  year  1913  includes  reimbursements  to  the  United  States 
on  account  of  reimbursable  appropriations,  surplus  fund  items,  amounts  placed  in  Oklahoma  banks  (see 
note  1),  transfers,  and  disbursements  on  account  of  obligations  incurred  during  the  fiscal  year  1913  and 
former  years. 


280  REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


os      o 
co      o 


?3  §  8  co    2  So    3 
icior-r-     oo         T 


S  3 


I 


SO     CO  O  «3 
T»<     O  O5  O 


CO  00     iOCO  I 


Oi  S  CO     ^     S^  ' 

coi-noo    o    d-oSi 


» 

o       ^ 


IS;  § 


S    S 


o   ?3 
oo   t*- 

rf-£ 


8       S 


II 


Hi  If: 

a  «  «    •§  *». 

O         C3  >•      fl  " 


•gas  i  ^i^ 

§  2  i  «  ail 

«  ^  I  I  «rti 

a  -  5  silll     * 

KH        a)        <a  ®<ri+3Oi-!  el 


, 


«:| 


\& 


II 


-<  '• 


ii  li  i 


•S  !C«  : 


Kflil 


M'EPSS    * 


S 


|S^f 
|1|J 

rt  •***      0>     •— « 


|^l|lllP|p3| 

!llillPltIlllii^S5 


S  S  s 
*f  t 


5  6  6    8S& 


REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  281 


i>-  os  I-H  oo  OP  ^  I-H  01  o«  r~  osr-  -^        •      to      •*      c<i      eo      e^    oo    <o 

O  TT  rfi  W  (N  •»  O  O  0>  "<r  t^  OO  rH           .        OO       t-        CO        «O       OO     CO     U5 

CO  O«  r-i  O  r^  <N -^     "5  O  OS  M  t^  00  ci  O  •**  CO  t>  g  i£ 

i-M  OS  IO  ^J1  O  *O  CO     CO  t~  i— *  f— I  OS  CC  CN  CO  CO  -<J<  COO  <N 


<N 


&  o-SS 


8SS8833S88 
8    2 


i    1    S    8 


g  s  5  g     s 


g  :8SS5g£ 


«8    S    S  S 


S    2    S    S 


i  I  il 


CO     Ot 

«>•    -^  1 

00     101 


£  SI  :£2 


t~       OS       ^* 

S    -    3 


xc<»eo      co  co  oo  cs  CD  co 


cocococscoco    Q 


II 


&S35 


9    '  cs  *-< 

siijfplillilff 

|s*dl||  -  *  .PJill  * 

^llilli-K-E.iiil-s^! 


121  1  I  1 


2     < 


2    2 


I    1    5 


«  fl 

-2  « 


dfi'g  WBfiilfil  j&ffl  1  I  *» 

iii*asiiUHf|5J|  I  III 

_g-.2.S^   S     S    2    J-'  S     ~     B»M 

'&  ^^  «oooooooO 


fll«Sl|  I  Ssslitee  3  Ssll   &  i 


l  Illill 

i    kT    B   5    te    ^  o 

S  P5 

53     <D      _ 

v-T  ^    fl        S 

I    I 


282  REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

8 


I 


REPORT   OF    THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


283 


1  3 


<N        »+? 


8  §'£ 

i  •«!: 

1  |S 

1  §« 

N  &'C 

^  Wo 

s  :•§ 

1  »a 

B  -S^  i 


<»  .  g  >.<^ 

^   OT    »-^   £H    O 

Milt 

*H     ^     3     O     S 


i  JHH 


284 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE    67. — Interest-bearing  tribal  funds  held  in   trust   by   the  Government   July  1, 

1913. 


Tribe  and  fund. 

Date  of  acts, 
resolutions,  or 
treaties. 

Statutes  at 
Large. 

Amount  in 
United  States 
Treasury. 

Annual  in- 
terest at 
3,  4,  and  5 
per  cent. 

Vol- 
ume. 

Page. 

Apache  Kiowa  and  Comanche  fund 

/June    6,  1900 
\Mar.     3,1901 
{June    5,  1906 
June  28,1906 
Mar.  27,1908 
June  10,1896 
Apr.     1,  1880 
do     .. 

31 
31 
34 
34 
35 
29 
21 
21 
21 
26 

36 
35 
36 
21 
25 
29 
32 
35 
21 
21 
34 
34 
37 
21 
32 
33 
33 
28 
31 
36 
21 
32 
21 
29 
34 
21 
21 
26 
28 
19 
17 
22 
16 
17 
21 
26 
19 
19 
26 
36 
21 
21 
21 
21 
36 
27 
34 
36 
26 
26 
29 

26 
35 
36 
/        35 
\        36 
21 

678 
1062 
213 
•550 
49 
354 
70 
70 
70 
1024 

533 

460 
602 
70 
642 
17 
400 
455 
70 
70 
1027 
335 
934 
70 
249 
352 
352 
888 
672 

4^ 

638 
70 
328 
367 
70 
70 
146 
331 
197 
391 
341 
362 
90 
292 
344 
208 
28 
60 
442 
422 
70 
70 
70 
289 
633 
1230 
451 
658 
1006 
331 

749 
803 
289 
803 
289 
70 

}      $965,514.93 

1    2,951,403.18 

256,259.50 
194,331.80 
32,851.38 
270,530.41 
593,119.07 

103,472.71 
}        677,419.29 
214,255.15 

1    4,995,438.82 

39,  710.  69 
49,472.70 
334,154.94 
386,916.57 
3,516,731.65 

2,472,946.15 

100,000.00 
50,000.00 
28,850.44 
2,504.78 
217,537.68 
170.81 
126,957.61 
89,115.65 
3,397.57 
127,035.12 
645.84 
153,039.38 
1,737,550.67 
2,854.88 
14,790.96 

|         15,804.75 

6,697,722.86 

348,955.97 
|        224,  126.  88 

97,365.28 
66,  125.  12 
40,063.14 
46,085.41 
9,030.17 
180,758.00 
125,299.17 
1,000,000.00 
204,  165.  38 

}               699.69 
10,334.96 

16,200.35 
\        386,878.20 

!•        497,036.02 
1.000.000.00 

$48,275.75 

118,056.13 

10,250.38 
9,716.59 
1,642.51 
13,526.52 
29,655.95 

3,104.18 

20,322.58 
10,  712.  76 

249,  771.  94 

1,985.53 
2,473.63 
10,024.65 
11,607.50 
140,669.27 

123,647.31 

4,000.00 
2,000.00 
1,154.02 
100.19 
6,526.13 
8.54 
6,347.88 
4,455.78 
169.88 
6,351.76 
32.29 
7,651.97 
86,877.53 
142.  74 
739.55 

790.24 

334,886.14 

17,447.80 
11,206.34 

2,920.96 
3,306.25 
2,003.16 
2,304.27 
451.51 
9,037.90 
5,011.97 
30,000.00 
6,124.96 

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Comanche  4  percent 
fund         .         ...            

Blackfeet  Reservation  4  per  cent  fund  

Cherokee  orphan  fund                      

do 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  in  Oklahoma  fund. 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  in  Oklahoma  3  per 
cent  fund                       

Mar.     3,  1891 

June  17,1910 
/May   29,1908 
\June  23,1910 
Apr.     1,1880 
flan.    14,1889 
1  Feb.  26,1896 
IJune  27,1902 
(May  29,1908 
Apr.     1,  1880 
do 

Cheyenne  River  Reservation  3  per  cent 
fund                        .         

Chickasaw  national  fund 

Chippewa  in  Minnesota  fund          

Choctaw  orphan  fund          

Choctaw  school  fund 

Choctaw  3  per  cent  fund       

Mar.    1,  1907 
June  21,1906 
Mar.     4,1913 
/Apr.     1,1880 
\May  27,1902 
Apr.  27,1904 
do 

Coeur  d'Alene  3  per  cent  fund 

Confederated  Bands  of  Utes  4  per  cent  fund 
Creek  general  fund 

Crow  4  per  cent  fund           

Crow  4  per  cent  hospital  fund  

Crow  Creek  4  per  cent  fund  
Fort  Hall  Reservation  4  per  cent  fund  
Fort  Berthold  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund. 
Iowa  fund 

Mar.     2,  1895 
June    6,1900 
June    1,1910 
Apr.     1,1880 
July     1,1902 
Apr.     1,1880 
June  10,1896 
June  21,1906 
Apr.     1,  1880 
do  

Kansas  consolidated  fund  l  
Kickapoo  general  fund 

Kickapoo  in  Oklahoma  fund  

Klamath  fund 

L'Anse  and  Vieux  Desert  Chippewa  fund. 
Menominee  fund  

Menominee  log  fund  

Nez  Perces  of  Idaho  fund 

June  12,1890 
Aug.  15,1894 
Aug.  15,1876 
/June  10,1872 
\Aug.    7,1882 
fluly   15,1870 
1  May   19,1872 
ijune  16,1880 
1  Aug.  19,1890 
Aug.  15,1876 
/Apr.  10,1876 
\Apr.  22,1890 
May  27,1910 
Mar.    3,1881 
Apr.     1,  1880 
do 

North  Carolina  Cherokee,  payment  to  

Oto  and  Missouri  fund  

Pawnee  fund 

Pine  Ridge  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund.  .  . 
Ponca  fund 

Potawatomi  education  fund  

Potawatomi  general  fund  

Potawatomi  mills  fund 

do 

Potawatomi  of  Kansas  and  Wisconsin  fund 
Puyallup  4  per  cent  school  fund  

Apr.     4.  1910 
Mar.     3,1893 
Mar.     2,  1907 
May  30,1910 
/Oct.     1,1890 
\Mar.     3,1891 
June  10,1896 

Feb.   13,1891 
/Mar.     3,  1904 
\Apr.     4,  1910 

[....do  
.Ar»r.     1.1880 

Rosebud  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  
Rosebud  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  

Round  Valley  <"eneral  fund  * 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  in  fowa  fund 
Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  in  Okla- 
homa fiiTid 

516.  75 

810.02 
19,343.91 

24,851.80 
50.000.00 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  fund,  Iowa. 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  fund,  Okla- 
homa   

Seminole  general  fund  .  .  . 

1  The  "Osage  fund"  and  "Kansas  consolidated  fund"  have  been  segregated  and  are  carried  on  the  books 
of  the  Indian  Office  to  the  credit  of  individual  members  of  the  tribes. 

2  The  "Round  Valley  general  fund"  will  bear  no  interest  until  the  United  States  has  been  reimbursed 
for  the  amount  appropriated  in  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the  acts  approved  Oct.  I,  1890  (20  Stat.  L., 
058),  and  of  Mar.  3,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  100'J). 


REPORT   OF   THE    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


285 


TABLE   67. — Interest-bearing   tribal  funds  held  in   trust   l>y   the  Government    July   1, 

1913 — Continued . 


Tribe  and  fund. 

Date  of  acts, 
resolutions,  or 
treaties. 

Statutes  at 
Large. 

Amount  in 
United  States 
Treasury. 

Annual  in- 
terest at 
3,  4,  and  5 
per  cent. 

Vol- 
ume. 

Page. 

Seminole  school  fund  .  . 

July     1,  1898 
Mar.     3.1909 
Apr.     1,  1880 
do 

30 
35 
21 
21 
35 
22 
28 

25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
26 
35 
16 
25 
23 
22 
18 
35 
37 
/        35 
\       37 
28 

568 
806 
70 
70 
800 
149 
324 

895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
895 
1039 
463 
405 
157 
243 
297 
41 
798 
187 
798 
187 
310 

$500.  000.  00 
528,770.00 
48,842.60 
1,565.31 
11,931.22 
6,521.83 
13,948.76 

302,444.15 
148,262.64 
36.33 
35,955.02 
834,085.48 
458.00 
689,030.56 
122.85 
478,638.95 
48,075.07 
•  003,719.36 
200,560.95 
71,522.30 
18,499.01 
193,700.59 
22,078.71 
455,493.67 

|        344,932.19 

|        534,354.74 
276,504.33 

$25,000.00 
26,438.50 
2,442.13 
78.26 
596.56 
326.09 
697.44 

15,122.21 
7,413.13 
1.82 
1,797.75 
41,704.27 
22.90 
34,451.53 
6.14 
23,931.95 
2,403.75 
30,185.97 
6,016.83 
3,576.11 
924.95 
9,685.03 
1,103.93 
22,774.68 

17,246.61 

26,717.74 
13,825.22 

Seminole  of  Oklahoma  fund 

Seneca,  Tonawanda  Band,  fund  .  .  . 

Seneca  and  Shawnee  fund 

Seneca  of  New  York  fund  

Mar.     3,1909 
July     3,  1882 
Aug.  15,1894 

Mar.     2,  1889 
.  do... 

Shoshoni  and  Bannock  fund 

Siletz  general  fund  

Sioux  funds: 
Cheyenne  River 

Crow  Creek  

Flandreau         .  . 

do     . 

Lower  Brule 

do 

Pine  Ridge           .  .                .  . 

do 

Ponca 

do 

Rosebud      .... 

.  do  .   . 

San  tee 

do 

Standing  Rock  

.  do  

Tongue  River 

do 

Sisseton  and  Wahpeton  fund  

Mar.    3,  1891 
May  29,1908 
Feb.     6,  1871 
May  24,1888 
Mar.     3.1885 
Aug.    5,  1882 
Apr.  29,1874 
/Mar.     3,  1909 
\July     1,  1912 

do  .    . 

Standing  Rock  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund 
Stock  bridge  consolidated  fund  

Uinta  and  White  River  Ute  fund 

Umatilla  general  fund  

Umatilla  school  fund 

Ute  5  per  cent  fund  

Winnebago  fund,  Nebraska 

Winnebago  fund,  Wisconsin            .  . 

Yankton  Sioux  fund  

Aug.  15,1894 

Total 

38,045,686.30 

1,767,506.92 

CHANGES  DURING  THE  YEAR  ENDED  JUNE  30,  1913,  IN  INTEREST-BEARING  TRIBAL 
FUNDS  HELD   BY  THE   GOVERNMENT. 


Tribe  and  fund. 

Increase. 

Decrease. 

Apache  Kiowa  and  Comanche  fund 

544  897  22 

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Comanche  4  per  cent  fund 

$52,860  57 

Blackfeet  Reservation  4  per  cent  fund  

17,650.00 

Cherokee  national  fund  .... 

129,869  30 

Cherokee  orphan  fund  

329,970.00 

Cherokee  school  fund  

262,  266.  45 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  in  Oklahoma  fund 

111  394  86 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  in  Oklahoma  3  per  cent  fund      

33,672  07 

Cheyenne  River  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund 

230  598  59 

Chickasaw  national  fund  

6,367.03 

Chippewa  in  Minnesota  fund 

612  513  86 

Choctaw  3  per  cent  fund  

44,  101.  14 

Coeur  d'Alene  3  per  cent  fund 

124  777  45 

Confedeiated  Bands  of  Utes  4  per  cent  fund  

3,  516,  731.  65 

Crow  fund  .    . 

6,614.05 

Crow  4  per  cent  fund  

100,000.00 

Crow  4  per  cent  hospital  fund 

50,000  00 

Crow  Creek  4  percent  fund  

6,533.91 

Fort  Belknap  Reservation  4  per  cent  fund                        :  . 

3,  940.  94 

Fort  Berthold  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund 

44  005  59 

Fort  Hall  Reservation  4  per  cent  fund                         

397.  87 

Iowa  fund 

170.54 

Kansas  consolidated  fund 

11  908  66 

Klamath  fund 

7,  946.  55 

L'Anse  and  Vieux  Desert  Chippewa  fund 

38  35 

Menominee  log  fund                                                       

1,369,742.55 

Menominee  4  per  cent  fund 

1,079,079  40 

North  Carolina  Cherokee  payment  to 

14  790  96 

Omaha  fund                                                                    .  . 

1  356  06 

Osage  fund                                                                          .... 

1  699  588  68 

Osage  school  fund                                                       

119,911.53 

Pawnee  fund                                                                       .... 

107,  400.  07 

Pine  Ridge  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  ...                   

14,576.10 

286 


KEPOKT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  67. — Interest-bearing  tribal  funds  held  in   trust   by   the  Government   July  1, 

1918 — Continued. 

CHANGES  DURING  THE  YEAR  ENDED  JUNE  30, 1913,  IN  INTEREST-BEARING  TRIBAL 
FUNDS  HELD  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT— Continued. 


Tribe  and  fund. 

Increase. 

Decrease. 

Ponca  fund                                                    

$865.  92 

392  80 

Potawatomi  general  fund                           

956.  68 

Potawatomi  mills  fund                                                    .  .        

88  52 

Puyallup  4  per  cent  school  fund              

54,541.21 

Rosebud  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund                     

$29  420  23 

Round  Valley  general  fund 

147  40 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  in  Iowa  fund       

7.05 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  in  Oklahoma  fund 

1  891  11 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  fund,  Iowa    

2,688.06 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  fund  Oklahoma 

60  171  48 

Seneca,  Tonawanda  Band  Ifund               

5,886.63 

Seneca  of  New  York  fund 

1  741  86 

Shoshoni  and  Bannock  fund                   

370.00 

Siletz  general  fund 

2  554.00 

Sioux  fund- 
Cheyenne  River                                    

24,837.06 

Crow  Creek 

6  547.68 

Flandreau  .                  .                 

5.19 

Lower  Brule 

2,267.30 

Pine  Ridge  ...                    ...         

51,895.78 

Rosebud 

651.  35 

Standing  Rock 

20,202  77 

Standing  Rock  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund 

65,386.87 

Umatilla  general  fund  

35,422.62 

Umatilla  school  fund 

5,  760.  72 

Ute  5  per  cent  fund 

4,167  55 

Winnebago  fund                                         .                      .... 

879,286.93 

Winnebago  fund  Nebraska 

344  932  19 

Winnebago  fund,  Wisconsin       .           .                              .                .  . 

534,  354.  74 

Yankton  Sioux  fund 

15,334.40 

Total 

7,060,133  56 

5,  248,  714.  54 

Net  increase  

1,811,419.02 

7,060,133.56 

7,060,133.56 

INTEREST-BEARING  FUNDS  BELONGING  TO  MINORS  AND  HELD  IN  TRUST  JULY  1, 

1913. 


Dat   of  acts, 
resolutions, 
or  treaties. 

Statutes  at 
Large. 

Amount  in 
United  States 
Treasury. 

Annual 
interest  at  3 
and  5  per 
cent. 

Vol- 
ume. 

Page. 

Devils  Lake  Sioux  minors'  3  per  cent  fund  . 
Grande  Ronde  minors'  fund 

June  21,  1906 
do 

34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 

34 
34 

34 

34 
34 
34 
34 
34 

327 
327 
327 
327 
327 
327 
327 
327 

327 
327 

327 

327 
327 
327 
327 
327 

$111.  82 
13,937.01 
69,752.09 
27,653.08 
14,797.23 
99,248.02 
61,699.08 
258.  16 

1,182.10 
65,460.35 

3,422.71 

1,594.20 
458.00 
2,825.57 
7,  198.  91 
4,075.64 

$3.35 
696.  85 
3,487.60 
1,382.65 
739.  86 
4,962.40 
3,084.95 
7.74 

35.46 
1,963.81 

171.  13 

79.71 
22.90 
141.  28 
359.  94 
203.  78 

Iowa  minors'  fund  

do  

Kickapoo  minors'  fund 

do 

Omaha  minors'  fund  

...do..., 

Otoe  and  Missouri  minors'  fund 

do 

Potawatomi  minors'  fund 

do 

Quapaw  minors'  3  per  cent  fund  

...  do 

Red  Lake  Chippewa  minors'  3  per  cent 
fund 

do 

Rosebud  Sioiix  minors'  3  per  cent  fund  .  .  . 
Sac  and  Fox  of  the   Missouri  minors' 
fund  

do  
....do  

Sioux  fund— 
Flandreau  minors' 

do 

Ponca  minors' 

do... 

Santee  minors'                                               Hn 

Sisseton  and  Wahpeton  minors'  fund    . 

..  do  

Tonkawa  minors'  fund 

rin 

Total                                                  ! 

373,673.97 

17,343.41 

REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


287 


TABLE  67. — Interest-bearing  tribal  funds  held  in  trust  by  the  Government   July  1, 

1913— Continued. 

CHANGES  DURING  THE  YEAR  ENDED  JUNE  30,  1913,  IN  INTEREST-BEARING  FUNDS 
BELONGING  TO  MINORS,  AND  HELD  IN  TRUST  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT. 


Tribe  and  fund. 

Decrease. 

Devil's  Lake  Sioux  minors'  3  per  cent  fund 

$7.55 

Grande  Ronde  minors'  fund 

1  752  78 

Iowa  minors'  fund  

6,  513.  30 

Kickapoo  minors'  fund 

341.  39 

Omaha  minors'  fund 

4  326  58 

Otoe  and  Missouri  minors'  fund  

6,  203.  54 

Potawatomi  minors'  fund 

2  788  68 

Quapaw  minors'  3  per  cent  fund  .     . 

129.  10 

"Red  Lake  Chippewa  minors'  3  per  nent  fund 

1,926  94 

Rosebud  Sioux  minors'  3  per  cent  fund  

17,  447.  80 

Sioux  fund— 
Flandreau  minors' 

159.42 

Ponca  minors'  

229.00 

Santee  minors'                   ...• 

245  70 

Sisseton  and  Wabpeton  minors'  fund  

371.  36 

Total  decrease 

42,443  14 

RECAPITULATION. 


Principal. 

Annual  in- 
terest. 

Tribal  interest-bearing  funds 

$38,  045,  686.  30 

$1,767,506  92 

Minors'  interest-bearing  funds  .         .  .  . 

373,  673.  97 

17,343.41 

Total 

38  419  360  27 

1  784  850  33 

TABLE 


>. — Incomes  of  Indian  tribes  from  all  sources  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 

1913. 


Tribe  or  Indians. 

Interest  on 
trust  fund. 

Treaty 
and  agree- 
ment ob- 
ligations. 

Gratuities. 

Indian 
moneys,  pro- 
ceeds of 
labor,  and 
miscellane- 
ous. 

Proceeds  of 
land,  includ- 
ing town 
lots. 

Total. 

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Co- 
mancne  

$166,  786.  43 

$77,571.23 

$244  357  66 

Arapaho  in  Wyoming 

$32  725  00 

$14  234  26 

46  959  26 

Bannocks,  Wyoming  

5,000.00 

5,000.00 

Blackfeet,  Montana  
Cherokee,  Oklahoma  

10,919.87 
41,434.73 



7,436.37 
3,822.20 

34,535.07 

18,356.24 
79,792.00 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  . 

35,106.52 

$35,000  00 

740  40 

33,682.47 

104,529  39 

Chickasaw,  Oklahoma.  . 
Chippewa  in  Minnesota.  . 

10,  790.  18 
222,  425.  76 

-  

67,106.34 

613,153.12 
1  805,  861.  39 

691,049.64 
1,028,287.15 

Chippewa  of  the  Missis- 
sippi (White  Earth)... 

4,000.00 

211.67 

4,211.67 

Chippewa  of  Red  Lake, 
Mjnn 

74  30 

72  454  60 

49  443  08 

121  971  98 

Chippewa  of  Lake  Su- 
perior   

7,000  00 

37,006.91 

44,006  91 

Chippewa,  Turtle  Moun- 
tain Band  

11,000.00 

11,000.00 

Choctaw,  Oklahoma 

15,014  84 

10  520.00 

87,  868.  46 

1,860,323  03 

1,973,726.33 

Coeur  d'Alene 

9  987  90 

3  000  00 

127  335  48 

140  323  38 

Colorado  River  Indians 

4  926  94 

7  211  00 

12  137  94 

Colville 

4,469.26 

6,807  94 

11,277  20 

Creek,  Oklahoma  

123,647.30 

13,453.76 

136,  105.  64 

273,206.70 

Crow,  Montana 

6,231.94 

6,000  00 

79,578.81 

378,721.85 

470,532.60 

Dwamish  and  other  al- 
lied tribes  in  Washing- 
ton     . 

7,000.00 

7,000.00 

Fort  Hall  Indians... 

30,000.00 

434.50 

30,434.50 

i  Proceeds  of  land  and  timber 


288 


EEPOET   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  68. — Incomes  of  Indian  tribes  from  all  sources  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 

1913— Continued. 


Tribe  or  Indians. 

Interest  on 
trust  fund. 

Treaty 
and  agree- 
ment ob- 
ligations. 

Gratuities. 

Indian 
moneys,  pro- 
ceeds of 
labor,  and 
miscellane- 
ous. 

Proceeds  of 
land,  includ- 
ing town 
lots. 

Total. 

Indians  in— 
Arizona   and    New 
Mexico... 

$330,000.00 

$44  965  31 

$374  965  31 

California.     . 

57  000  00 

59  88 

57  059  88 

Nevada  

18,500.00 

7,094  59 

25,594  59 

Indians  of— 
Colville  and  Puyal- 
lup  Agencies  and 
Joseph's  Band  of 
Nez  Perces  

13,000.00 

13,000  00 

Flathead    Reserva- 
tion, Mont  . 

9  000  00 

4  343  71 

$127  833  63 

141  177  34 

Fort  Belknap  Reser- 
vation. Mont  .    . 

$91  30 

20,000  00 

3  448  73 

23  540  03 

Fort  Berthold  Res- 
ervation, Mont  
Fort  Peck  Reserva- 
tion. Mont  

6,582.43 



15,000.00 
35,000.00 

22,368.22 
17,675  72 

105,349.49 
720  00 

149,300.14 
53,  395.  72 

Fort  Yuma  Reser- 
vation Cal 

o  299  87 

2  299  87 

Grande  Ronde  Res- 
ervation, Oreg 

773  30 

475  00 

1  248  30 

Grande  Ronde  and 
Siletz       Reserva- 
tions, Oreg 

4  000  00 

4  000  00 

Klamath    Reserva- 
tion, Oreg  

6,502.62 

6,000.00 

9,751.55 

22,  254.  17 

Klamath  River  Res- 
ervation, Cal  . 

34  39 

34.39 

San  Carlos  Reserva- 
tion   

59  713.54 

59  713.54 

Wind  River  Reser- 
vation, Wyo 

58  389.  18 

58,  389.  18 

Iowa  

3  700.73 

3  700  73 

Jicarilla.  New  Mexico 

23.  970.  49 

23,  970.  49 

Kaibab  

3  60 

3.60 

Kansa  

6,  636.  62 

l,500.iX> 

8,  136.  62 

Kickapoo.. 

6  019.35 

2  ,000.00 

8  019.35 

L'Anse  and  Vieux  Des- 
ert Chippewa,  Michi- 
gan.. 

33  18 

33  18 

Makah  

-':--ci  000.00 

2  000.00 

Malki... 

j   (> 

170  15 

170  15 

Menominee  

82  888.12 

382  827.  12 

465,  715.  24 

Navajo.. 

1  327  11 

1  327.11 

Nez  Perce  in  Idaho 

142.  74 

767.  48 

910.  12 

North  Carolina  Cherokee 

115.  93 

115.93 

Northern  Cheyenne     . 

$52,  275.  00 

52,  275.  00 

Omaha  

1,593.85 

1,152.00 

1,356.06 

4,  101.  91 

Osage. 

391  741  12 

786  245  44 

1  534  58 

1  179  521  14 

Otoe  and  Missouri  

22,  708.  85 

22,  708.  85 

Pawnee 

13  320  87 

47  100  00 

60  420  87 

Pima  

620.50 

620.50 

Ponca  in  Oklahoma  and 
Nebraska  . 

3  341.33 

8  000.00 

11,341.33 

Potawatomi,  Kansas.  .  . 

7,  979.  92 

14,  308.  41 

22,  288.  33 

Potawatomi  of  Kansas 
and  Wisconsin 

9  037  90 

9  037.90 

Potawatomi  of  Wiscon- 
sin   

7  000  00 

7,000.00 

Puyallup 

6  977  73 

9  288  44 

16  266.  17 

Quapaw  

11  38 

i  566  66 

1,511.38 

Quinaielt  and  Quileute.  . 

1,000.00 

1,000.00 

Round  Valley  Indians, 
California.   . 

1  418.71 

1,  418.  71 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, Iowa 

19  960  75 

3  905.00 

23,  865.  75 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, Oklahoma  

27,362.77 

27,362.77 

Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mis- 
souri . 

171  14 

200  00 

371.  14 

Seminole  in  Oklahoma 

101  475  17 

1  275.16 

11,  646.  44 

114,  396.  77 

Seminole  in  Florida 

9  846  00 

9  846.00 

Seneca  and  Shawnee  .  .  . 

78.26 

78.26 

Seneca,    Tonawanda 
Band,  New  York... 

2,  569.  35 

2,569.35 

REPORT  OF   THE   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


289 


TABLE  68.— Incomes  of  Indian  tribes  from  all  sources  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1918— Continued. 


Tribe  or  Indians. 

Interest  on 
trust  fund. 

Treaty 
and  agree- 
ment ob- 
ligations. 

Gratuities. 

Indian 
moneys,  pro- 
ceeds of 
labor,  and 
miscellane- 
ous. 

Proceeds  of 
land,  includ- 
ing town 
lots. 

Total. 

Seneca  of  New  York  

$652.  40 

$6,  000.  00 

$2,  329.  82 

$8,  982.  22 

Shoshoni  and  Bannock 

318.  95 

$410.00 

728.  95 

Shoshoni  in  Wyoming 

6  000  00 

$12  000  00 

14  213  22 

32  213  22 

Siletz,  Oregon. 

818.  14 

818.  14 

Sioux  of— 
Different  tribes  

562,  000.  00 

88,000.00 

366,  593.  26 

1,  016,  593.  26 

Cheyenne  River 

32  343.  53 

50  434.38 

233  495.99 

316  273.90 

Crow  Creek  

8,  976.  08 

8,  976.  08 

Devils  Lake 

6.00 

5,000.00 

9,  4i3.  50 

14  419.50 

Flandreau 

86  99 

86  99 

Lower  Brule  . 

1.850.94 

6,  381.  89 

1,  590.  76 

9,  823.  59 

Pine  Ridge 

46  600  53 

5  337  62 

2  667  84 

54  605  99 

Ponca,  Nebraska.  . 

54.24 

54.24 

Rosebud 

72,  488.  44 

116.00 

341  353.34 

413  957.78 

Santee  

151.  89 

151.89 

Standing  Rock  . 

32,  658.  33 

30,  240.  88 

324  497.87 

387  397.08 

Tongue  River 

2  403  76 

19  294  79 

21  698  55 

Yankton    Reserva- 
tion 

14  256  08 

14  000.00 

28  256  08 

Sisseton  and  Wahpeton. 

30,  557.  96 

30,  557.  96 

Six    Nations    of    New 
York  . 

4,500.00 

4,500.00 

Spokane  

1,000.00 

91.00 

4,  624.  60 

5,  715.  60 

Stockbridge  

3,  576.  12 

3,  576.  12 

Tonkawa 

203.78 

203.78 

Truxton    Canyon    In- 
dians 

13,  693.  00 

13,693.00 

Tule  River  Indians  

1,  757.  98 

1,  757.  98 

Ute,  Confederated  Bands 
of 

162  028.  45 

38  740.00 

15  000.00 

62  491.23 

278  259.68 

Ute,  Uintah,  etc 

924.  96 

6,  698.  05 

285,081.31 

292,  704.  32 

Ute'  Southern 

4  895  02 

4  236  51 

9  131  53 

Walla    Walla,   Cayuse, 
and  Umatilla  tribes 

11  541.38 

3,000.00 

51.50 

12  138.70 

26  731.58 

Warm  Springs  Indians 

4,000.00 

2,  765.  74 

6,  765.  74 

Wichita  and   affiliated 
bands.. 

5,000.00 

2,  157.  39 

7,  157.  39 

Winnebago,  Nebraska 

18  855.89 

54.75 

18,  910.  64 

Winnebago,  Wisconsin  . 

25,  108.  45 

25,  108.  45 

Yakima  and  other  tribes, 
Washington  

3,000.00 

16,  907.  33 

19,907.33 

Total  

1,  830,  583.  84 

780,  560.  0- 

•"7,  846.  00 

1,  940,  596.  91 

6,116,369.47 

11,445,956.22 

COMPARISON. 


Total,  1912  

$1,740,296.27 

$594,  560.  00 

$969,000.00 

$1,694,081.95 

$4,  475,  489.  24 

$9,473,427.46 

Total,  1911 

1,911,909.28 

1,177,566.45 

707,  145.  39 

2,051,015.21 

6,  010,  642.  17 

11,858,278  50 

Total,  1900  

1,  387,  349.  37 

270,  648.  82 

712,  625.  00 

797,  209.  92 

5,599,833.11 

Total,  1898 

1  419,213.25 

3,114,207.70 

738,  525.  00 

304,  942.  55 

5,  576,  888.  50 

21716—1'' 


290 


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  69. — Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30 , 

1913. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average 
pro  rata 
share. 

Amount 
paid. 

Iowa*  Sac  and  Fox 

Sac  and  Fox 

5 

$1,130  15 

$5  650  79 

Kansas:  Potawatomi 

Potawatomi  

4 

263.03 

1,052.14 

New  York:  New  York 

Tonawanda  (Seneca). 

26 

186.23 

4,843  18 

North  Dakota*  Standing  Rock 

Sioux 

125 

173  22 

21  653  40 

Nebraska:  San  tee 

Poncas  

12 

79.90 

958.86 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

81 

1" 

(    29,408  12 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

do 

166 

I     61  329  26 

RedMoon..  .         .           

..do... 

9 

368.  12 

3,  283.  76 

Seger 

do  

56 

I    20,834  59 

Kiowa  

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Comanche  

(    1127 

'     394.  14 

50,056.14 

Osage 

Osage  . 

\       2  1 
546 

943.  91 
3,244  64 

943.  91 
1,771,577  10 

Pawnee  

Pawnee  

161 

617.95 

99,490.98 

Sac  and  Fox 

Sac  and  Fox  

53 

1,  174.  24 

62,  234.  85 

Total.       ..                  

1,200 

2,099,158.71 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

Klamath  

27 

277.  77 

7,  499.  99 

Umatilla 

Umatilla,  Cavuse,  etc 

180 

297  87 

53  612  09 

Total 

207 

61,112.08 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

Sioux    . 

182 

142  35 

25,808  68 

Crow  Creek 

do 

39 

192  11 

7  492  34 

Lower  Brule 

.do... 

15 

182  57 

2,  738.  55 

Pine  Ridge  

Oglala-Sioux  

394 

134.20 

52,  874.  80 

Yankton.       .                     

Sioux  .  .  . 

48 

263.55 

12,  650.  53 

Do 

do 

326 

5  98 

1  951  39 

Rosebud.               .... 

do  

6 

140.48 

842.88 

Total  

1,010 

104,359.17 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray 

Utes  

17 

245.15 

4,  167.  55 

Grand  total  

2,606 

2,302,955.88 

1  Five  per  cent.  *  Four  per  cent. 

TABLE  70.—  Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  National  banks.1 


Tribes. 

Principal. 

Accrued 
interest. 

Total  Mar.  3, 
1911,  to  June 
30,  1913. 

Principal 
and  interest, 
fiscal   year 
1913. 

Choctaw  . 

12,204,949  00 

$119,659  21 

$2  324,608  21 

$567,  439.  24 

Chickasaw 

927  990  45 

39  482  68 

967  473  13 

365  803  13 

Cherokee.  .  .. 

266,  628.  70 

16,  585.  27 

283,  213.  97 

33,  965.  85 

Greek 

1,047,350  00 

41  851  40 

1  089,201  40 

611,309.23 

Seminole  

27,  271.  30 

1,372.93 

28,  644.  23 

11,254.55 

Total 

4,474  189  45 

218  951  49 

4  693  140  94 

1  589,772  00 

i  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  213  banks.    The  rates  of 
i  nterest  are  from  4  to  6  per  cent. 


REPORT  OF   THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  291 

TABLE  71. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1918. 


Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago  warehouse  

113,091 
6,596 
55,320 
48,  751 
21,929 

Pounds. 
32,890,082 
514,808 
6,171,223 
16,783,631 
1,816,129 

$610,  732.  60 
200,655.89 
220,188.69 
290,970.73 
66,  103.  22 

3 
5 
6 

Pounds. 
483 
51 
179 

$165.90 
186.85 
162.  75 

New  York  warehouse  

Omaha  warehouse 

St  Louis  warehouse 

San  Francisco  warehouse  

Total  

245,687 

58,175,873 

1,388,651.13 

14 

713 

515.50 

Packages  mailed. 

Requisitions  issued. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Contract. 

Open 
market. 

Total. 

Chicago  warehouse 

1,988 
1,028 
90 
297 

Pounds. 
3,771 
2,666 
210 
446 

$3,394.25 
2,  786.  33 
153.33 
392.  82 

92 
316 
238 
568 
31 

2,418 

as 

566 
610 
180 

2,510 
399 
804 
1,178 
211 

New  York  warehouse  

Omaha  warehouse 

St.  Louis  warehouse  

San  Francisco  warehouse. 

Total  

3,403 

7,093 

6,726.73 

1,245 

3,857 

5,102 

Total  number  of  shipments 249, 104 

Total  weight 58,183.679 

Total  value . .  $1, 395, 893. 36 


INDEX. 


A. 


Accountants,  expert,  employed 27 

Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs. .  279 

Accounts,  Indian  Service,  complicated 27 

Agency  lands,  how  used 92 

Agriculture: 

acreage  cultivated 110 

books  on,  furnished  schools 8 

cooperation  with  Department  of 8 

employees -  265 

experimentation 8 

fairs 10 

reimbursable  appropriations  to  promote .  9 

value  of  implements 238, 257 

See  also  Farming. 
Allotments: 

acreage  and  number 41, 88, 206 

acreage  irrigated 204 

disposition  of,  by  will 37 

employees 274 

Indians  allotted 60 

Indians  and  lands  unallotted 2, 60, 70, 88 

Indians  holding  patents  to 60  j 

leases  of 216  i 

on  land  grants,  relinquishment  by  rail- 
road   37   j 

prohibited  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico..  42 

sales  of 257  | 

value  property  used  in  allotment  work. .  253  j 

Annuities  due  Indians 282  j 

Apache  released  from  military  custody 34   j 

Appropriations: 

for  Indian  Service 1,35,276,279   , 

school,  since  1876 181 

Art,  native 38 

Asphalt,  mining 213   ! 

Attorneys,  probate,  employment 6  j 

Areas  of  Indian  lands 70, 88  | 

B. 

Banks,  deposits  Indian  moneys  in 27,257,262 

Basketry 38,123,129  ; 

Beadwork 123,129  j 

Bees,  kept  by  Indians 221  j 

Births,  number 136  | 

Blankets: 

making 123,129   i 

prize 38  j 

Bookkeeping,  system  for  Indian  Bureau...       36  ; 
Buildings: 

(erected  in  1913 219  \ 
Government,  valuation 230  j 
plans  made 220  i 
under  construction 220  i 

Bureau  of  Mines  prevents  waste  in  oil  drill- 
ing   39  I 


C. 

Cattle.    See  Live  stock. 

Chippewa:  Page. 

commission  to  enroll  .....................       36 

timber  ..................................  15 

Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  coal  leases  ..........       37 


Choctaw  pine  lands,  sales  ....................  16 

Churches  among  Indians  ....................  63 

See  also  Religious  and  missions. 

Citizen's  dress,  Indians  who  have  adopted  ...  63 

Citizens,  Indians  who  are  ....................  63 

Claims: 

Indian,  submission  to  Court  of  Claims  ...  7 

saving  of  time  in  settlement  .............  26 

Coal,  leases  for  mining  ......................  37,  213 

Colorado  River  reserve,  allotments  ..........  41 

Colville  reserve,  allotments  ..................  41 

Commissioner  Indian  Affairs,  account  .......  279 

Conferences,  educational  .....................  24 

Cooperation  with  other  bureaus  ..............  8,  39 

Correspondence,  Indian  Office,  increase  ......  5,  44 

Crimes: 

against  Indian  women,  unpunished  ......  25 

committed  by  Indians  ...................  68 

Crops  raised: 

value  ...................................  92,103 

quantities  and  value  .....................  115 

under  irrigation,  value  ...................  204 

D. 

Deaths,  number  .............................  136 

Demonstration  farms  ........................  184 

Diphtheria,  low  death  rate  ..................  19 

Disbursements  for  Indian  Service  .........  276,  279 

Divorce  of  Indians,  courts  without  jurisdic- 

tion .......................................  24 

Domestic  Science  employees,  number  and 

salaries  ....................................  265 

Drainage  districts  on  allotments  in  Oklahoma  36 
Drunkenness.    See  Liquor. 

E. 

Education.    See  Schools. 

Efficiency  of  employees  ......................  23 

Employees: 

furnished  heat  and  light  .................  24 

Indian,  number  and  earnings  ..........  130,  265 

industrial  instructors  ....................  182 

inspection  service  .......................  274 

irrigation  service  ........................  274 

liquor  service  ............................  274 

methods  to  increase  efficiency  ...........  23 

one-half  day  weekly  allowed  certain  .....  24 

promotions  for  efficiency  .................  23 

school  and  agency,  salaries  ...............  265 

school,  number  ..........................  167 

warehouse  ...............................  276 

293 


294 


INDEX. 


Employees  in  Indian  Office.  Page. 

need  of  additional 6 

since  1899 44 

Employment  of  Indians 25, 130 

English  language: 

Indians  who  use 63 

teaching  of 21 

Enrollment  with  Indian  tribes 26 

Experimentation  farms 184 


F. 


Fairs,  agricultural 10 

Farmer's  institutes 10 

Farming: 

demonstration      and      experimentation 

farms 184 

district  farmers  employed 7 

improvement  in  methods 8 

irrigated  land  cultivated  by  Indians 201 

leases 10, 214 

number  of  Indian  farmers 110 

value  of  equipment  for 253 

See  also  Agriculture. 

Fires,  forest 15 

Five  Civilized  Tribes: 

estates  of  minors 6 

funds  in  banks 290 

"restricted "  and  not  "restricted  " 34 

Forestry: 

employees 265 

forest  fires 15 

reforestation,  Menominee  reserve 17 

value  of  property 253 

See  nlso  Timber. 

Fort  Berthold  allotments 41 

Fort  Hall  allotments 41 

Funds: 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  in  banks 290 

Indian,  in  bank 27, 257 

Indian,  in  Treasury 262 

Indian  moneys,  proceeds  of  labor 103 

individual  Indian.   See  Individual  Indian 

Moneys, 

reimbursable,  to  promote  agriculture 9 

Funds,  trust: 

and  tribal,  segregating 7 

belonging  to  minors 285 

interest  on 103 

pro  rata  shares  settled 290 

tribal,  interest-bearing 285 

Furniture: 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 257 

Government,  value 230 

G. 

Geronimo   Apaches,  released  from  military 

custody 84 

Goats.    See  Live  stock. 

Gravel  leases 214 

Grazing: 

acreage  used  by  Indians 120 

lands  utilized  for 6 

leases 10,  *1, 214 

H. 
Health: 

conditions  deplorable 3 

employees,  salaries 265 

illustrated  lectures  on. ...  19 


Health— Continued.  Page. 

investigations  by  Surgeon  General 18 

value  of  equipment  for 253 

See  also  Sanatoria. 

Heating  and  power  plants,  valuation 230 

Heirship  cases: 

adjudication 2, 30 

appropriation  tor  determining 35 

fee  to  cover  cost  of  determining 31 

Hopi  refuse  to  send  children  to  school 33 

Horses.    See  Live  stock. 

Hospital  buildings  and  patients 145 

Housing  of  Indians: 

character  of  dwellings 136 

deplorable 4 

value  of  dwellings 257 

I. 

Implements,  agricultural,  \ralue 238, 257 

Incomes  of  Indians 103, 287 

Indian  Bureau: 

appropriation  to  investigate 35 

increase  in  work 38 

increase  in  work  and  employees  compared .  44 

to  provide  a  system  of  bookkeeping 36 

Indian  money,  proceeds  of  labor 103 

Individual  Indian  money: 

deposits  in  banks 28, 257 

expenditures 27 

payment  of  interest 27 

Industrial  instruction: 

cost  and  output 182 

value  of  equipment  lor 230 

Industries: 

appropriation  to  encourage 35 

engaged  in,  by  Indians 123 

Inheritance  cases.    See  Heirship. 

Inherited  lands,  sales  of 207 

Inspection  force,  salaries 274 

Irrigation: 

areas  cultivated 201,204 

areas  irrigable 201 

employees 274 

expenditures  for 6, 18, 198 

Indians  benefited  by 204 

legal  water  rights  of  Indians 17 

reimbursement  for  expense  of  mainte- 
nance    18 

value  of  property 253 

Uintah  and  Ouray  Reservation 10 

use  of  irrigated  lands 204 

use  tribal  funds  for 5 

value  crops  raised  under 204 

Yakima  Reservation ...  36 


J. 


3  icarilla  sawmill  burned . 


K. 
Zlamath  timber,  sale  of 16 

L. 

Lace  making 38, 124, 129 

Lands: 

agency  and  school,  how  used 92 

agricultural  acreage 110 

Indian,  valuation 257,262 

opened  for  settlement  since  1898 99 


INDEX. 


295 


Land  sales:  Page. 

allotted  lands 207 

amount  received 28 

delay  in  approval 28 

proceeds 103 

receipts  and  disbursements 280 


allotted  lands 216 

coal 37 

fanning  and 'grazing 10,214 

income  of  Indians  from 103 

mining 28,29,213 

Osageoil 29 

Shoshone  Reservation 11 

tribal  lands 214 

Uintah  and  Ouray  Reservation 10 

Leave,  educational,  granted  teachers 24 

Legislation  needed 7 

Liabilities  of  United  States  to  Indians 282 

Libraries  at  schools 178 

Lighting  systems,  valuation : .  230 

Liquor: 

conviction  for  sale  of  tiswin 12 

sale  to  Indians  in  Minnesota  under  State 

laws 12 

sale  to  Pueblos 12 

seizures  of 186 

use  by  employees  prohibited 13 

wines  for  sacramental  purposes 14 

Liquor  service: 

arrests  for  drunkenness 68 

conference  of  officers 14 

convictions  and  sentences  obtained 186 

dangers  of 12, 13 

disposition  of  cases 185 

employees 274 

general  operations 12 

fee  deputies  employed 185 

officers  killed  or  wounded 12 

operations  in  Oklahoma 12 

Livestock: 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 221, 257, 262 

Government,  valuation 230 

sold  and  slaughtered 226 

See  also  Stock. 
Logging.    See  Timber. 

Lummi  Reserve  allotments. . .  41 


Marriages  among  Indians: 

by  tribal  customs 63 

legal 24, 63 

plural 63 

Menominee  mill 16 

Mescal.    See  Peyote. 

Military  drill  in  schools 22 

Minerals,  production  and  royalty 213 

Mining: 

leases 28, 29, 213, 21 5 

on  Executive  order  reservations 7 

Minors: 

estates 6 

unsatisfactory  condition  of  probate  mat- 
ters   35, 

Misdemeanors  by  Indians - 68 

Missions  among  Indians: 

lands  patented  to 98 

lands  temporarily  assigned  to 98 


!  Missions  among  Indians— Continued.  Page. 

number  of  missionaries 63 

attendance  of  Indians  at  schools 20, 154 

capacity  of  schools 161 

See  a  I  no  Churches  and  religious. 

Mixed-blood  population 46 

Mules.    See  Live  stock. 

Murderers  of  Supt.  Stanley  convicted 25 

N. 

Navaho,  appropriation  for  schools ." 35 

Noncompetents,  sales  of  lands  of 207 


advance  in  price 28 

investigation  on  Quinaielt  Reservation. . .  28 

Osage  leases 29 

pipe-line  rights  of  way 40 

production 213 

Shoshone  Reservation  leases 29 

waste  in  drilling 39 

Opening  of  Indian  lands 99 

Osage  oil  leases 29 

Overtime  work  in  Indian  Office 5 

P. 

Patents  in  fee: 

issued  to  Indians 40, 210, 211 

issued  to  missionary  organizations 98 

Peyote  classed  as  an  intoxicant 14 

Physical  training  in  schools 22 

Pine  Ridge  reserve,  allotments 41 

Pipe  lines,  rights  of  way 40 

Population,  Indian: 

by  tribes 46 

by  States 45 

from  1759  to  1913 44 

number  mixed  bloods 46 

school 46, 154 

under  Federal  supervision 60 

Potawatomi  in   Wisconsin,  purchase   allot- 
ments         36 

Pottery 38, 123, 129 

Poultry.    See  Live  stock. 

Power  and  heating  plants,  valuation 230 

Property: 

Government,  valuation 230, 253 

Indian,  valuation 103, 257, 262 

Pro  rata  shares,  tribal  trust  funds 290 

Public  schools: 

among  Five  Civilized  Tribes 23 

attendance,  Indian  children 20, 154 

capacity 161 

payment  of  tuition  for  Indians  in 22, 23 

Pueblo: 

lands  subject  to  taxation 33 

lands  to  be  held  in  trust 32 

lands  not  "Indian  country" 12 

opposition  to  education 33 

Purchase  of  supplies 26 


Quinaielt: 

allotments . 
oilfields... 


R. 
Railroads: 

across  Indian  lands 

relinquishment  lands  for  allotment 


296 


INDEX. 


Rations:  Page. 

Indians  receiving 147 

value  of  those  issued 103, 147 

Receipts  and  disbursements,  Indian  Service. .  279 
Religious,  Indians  who  have  embraced  Chris- 
tianity   63 

See  also  Churches  and  missions. 
Reservations: 

areas  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved ...  70 

authority  for  establishing 70 

Rights  of  way  over  Indian  lands 39 

Road  building 11 

S. 

Sales  of  Indian  lands.    See  Land  sales. 

Sanatoria: 

buildings  and  patients 145 

four  in  operation 18 

Sanitary.    See  Health. 

Sawmills,  timber  cut 190 

School  and  schools: 

appropriations  since  1876 181 

attendance 154, 167, 181 

capacity 161, 167 

children  eligible  and  ineligible  for 154 

children  not  enrolled 154 

children  unprovided  with 3, 161 

employees,  number 167 

employees,  salaries 265 

essays  of  pupils  on  Home  building 22 

industrial  instruction 182 

in  sanatoria. 19 

lands,  how  used 92 

libraries 178 

military  drill 22 

opposition  of  Pueblos  to 33 

physical  training 22 

population 46, 154 

public.    See  Public  schools 20 

reading  circles 23 

types  of 20 

value  of  property 253 

visual  instruction 22 

vocational  training 21 

Self-supporting,  Indians  who  are 147 

Seminoles  of  Florida,  lands  for 31 

Sewer  systems,  valuation 230 

Sheep.    See  Live  stock. 

Shoshone: 

allotments 42 

heirship  cases 31 

leases 1 1, 29 

Smallpox 19 

Standing  Rock  reserve: 

allotments 42 

sale  of  lands 37 

Stanley,  Will  II.,  murderers  of,  convicted. . .  25 

Stereopticons,  use  of 19, 22 

Stock: 

eradication  of  diseases 8 

improving 8 


Stock— Con  tinued.  Page. 

Indians  engaged  in  raising 120 

sold,  value 103 

See  also  Live  stock. 

Supplies,  purchase 26 

Swine.    See  Live  stock. 

T. 

Taxation: 

Pueblo  lands 33 

unrestricted  Indian  lands  exempt 23 

Timber: 

amount  and  value 14 

cost  of  care  and  protection .  193 

logging  on  Chippewa  reservations 15 

quantity  and  value  on  each  reservation. .      187 

sold,  value 103 

valuation 2, 257, 262 

See  also  Forestry. 

Tiswin  classed  as  intoxicating  liquor 12 

Trachoma: 

number  of  cases 142 

prevalence 4,19 

Traders'  claims  against  Indians 37 

Treaty  liabilities  to  Indians 103, 282 

Truckee-Carson  allotments 41 

Tuberculosis: 

deaths  from 3, 136 

establishing  sanatorium  in  New  Mexico. .        36 
prevalence 18, 142 

Tulapai.    See  Tiswin. 

Typhoid  fever  becoming  frequent 19 


Uintah  and  Ouray: 
inheritance  cases . 


U. 


Union  agency,  character  of  work 

Utes,  Wiminuche,  exchange  of  lands. 

V. 


Valuations  of  property.    See  Property. 

Vital  statistics 136 

Vocational  training 21 

W. 

Wages  of  Indians 103 

Wagons  belonging  to  Indians,  value 257 

Warehouses: 

employees 275 

volume  of  business 291 

Water  rights,  conservation  of 5 

Water  systems,  valuation 230 

White  Earth  allotments 42 

Wills  of  Indians 37 

Wind  River.    See  Shoshone. 

Winnebago   in    Wisconsin,    distribution   of 

funds 36 

Work  in  Indian  O  ffice,  increase 5, 38, 44 


Yakima: 

allotments, 
irrigation... 


Y. 


REPORT 


OF  THE 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 


TO  THE 


SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


FOR  THE  FISCAL  YEAR 
ENDED  JUNE  30 

1914 


WASHINGTON  :  GOVERNMENT  FEINTING  OFFICE  :  1914 


CONTENTS. 


General  statement 1 

Indinn  viewpoint 4 

Indian  education 5 

Public  schools 5 

Cooperation  with   State  authorities 6 

Payment  of  tuition „ 6 

Benefits  of  public-school  training 6 

Navajo  and  Papago  schools 7 

Improvements  in  methods  of  instruction 7 

Vocational   training -  8 

Pueblo  schools 8 

Oklahoma   schools 8 

New  school  rules 9 

Essay  contest 9 

Physical  training 9 

Moral  training 9 

Institutes 10 

Indian  school  farms 10 

Health 12 

Tuberculosis 13 

Trachoma 14 

Other  contagious  diseases 14 

Field  matrons 14 

Dentists 15 

Physicians .. 15 

Stock  raising 15 

Use  of  reimbursable  fund 18 

Farming 20 

Indian  fairs 23 

Farming  and  grazing  leases 26 

Lensing  of  tribal  lands  for  grazing  purposes 27 

Testing  and  demonstration  work 28 

Mining  on  Indian  lands 30 

Prevention  of  waste 31 

Leases  of  Osage  oil  and  gas  lands 33 

Developments  outside  of  Oklahoma 34 

Native  industries 34 

Navajo  blankets 34 

Lace  making L 35 

Marketing  native  products 36 

Irrigation 36 

Forestry 39 

Suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic 41 

in 


IV  CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Allotments 45 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 47 

Disposition  of  tribal  affairs ± 48 

Supervision  of  individual  Indians 49 

Probate  work  in  Oklahoma 50 

New  York  Indians 55 

Fort  Sill  Apache  prisoners  of  war . 56 

Purchase  division 57 

Sales  of  Indian  lands ^ 59 

Patents  in  fee 59 

Individual  Indian  moneys 59 

Depositaries  for  Indian  moneys 60 

Inheritance   cases 60 

Rights  of  way 61 

Railroads 61 

Pipe  lines '. 61 

Highways 1 62 

White  Earth  land  suits 62 

White  Earth  roll 62 

Spo-Pe „ 63 

Indians  for  exhibition 

Statistics 

Indian  Service  employees 

Inspection 

Cooperation 

Indian  Office  regulations 

Enrollment  with  Indian  tribes 

Office  correspondence  and  records 

Court   decisions " 

Legislation 

Statistical  tables  (for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914,  unless  otherwise 
noted)  : 

Table   1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 75 

2.  Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  1914 75 

3.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted-  85 

4.  Marriages,  missionaries,  churches,  language,  dress,  citizen- 

ship, crimes,  misdemeanors 88 

5.  Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 94 

6.  Incomes  of  Indians 93 

7.  Use  of  agricultural  lands;  farming,  leasing 104 

8.  Use  of  grazing  lands ;  stock  raising,  leasing 109 

9.  Employment  of  Indians 114 

10.  Vital  statistics,  housing  and  disease 118 

11.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria 123 

12.  Indians,  self-supporting,   and  those  receiving  rations  and 

miscellaneous  supplies  issued . 126 

13.  School  population,  number  in  school,  capacity 130 

»     14.  Schools,  location,  enrollment,  attendance 137 

15.  School  libraries 147 

16.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876__  151 

17.  Demonstration  farms '. 152 

18.  Bx^rimentation  farms 152 


CONTENTS.  V 

Statistical  tables — Continued.  Paw. 

Table  19.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 153 

20.  Timber  on  reservations,  sawmills,  timber  cut 154 

21.  Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber 158 

22.  Areas  irrigable  and  under  projects,  expenditures 160 

23.  Miles  of  ditches,  use  of  irrigated  areas. 163 

24.  Allotments  approved  and  made 166 

25.  Sales  of  allotted  lands__ 167 

26.  Patents  in  fee  issued 369 

27.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land 171 

28.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25, 

1910 171 

29.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  In- 

dians   171 

30.  Lands   leased   for    mining,   production    of    minerals,   and 

royalty 172 

31.  Buildings  erected 173 

32.  Buildings  under  construction 174 

33.  Live    stock    belonging    to    Indians,    purchased,    sold,    and 

slaughtered 175 

34.  Government  property  valuations  classified 180 

35.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 184 

36.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field 189 

37.  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 190 

38.  Appropriations  and  disbursements  for  Indian  Service 191 

39.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 194 

40.  Receipts  and  disbursements  of  Indian  Service 195 

41.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements 196 

42.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians 198 

43.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled- 200 

44.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks 200 

45.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 201 

46.  Expense  at  warehouses 201 


REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR, 
OFFICE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 

Washington,  September  81,  191 4* 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  the  eighty-third  an- 
nual report  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs,  covering  the  period 
from  July  1,  1913,  to  June  30,  1914. 

GENERAL  STATEMENT. 

In  the  beginning  of  my  report  of  last  year,  written  within  a  few 
months  after  assuming  the  duties  of  my  office,  I  set  out  some  of 
the  more  important  problems  confronting  the  Indian  Service.  In 
view  of  the  magnitude  of  these  problems  and  the  fact  that  many  of 
them  yet  remain  at  least  partially  unsolved,  I  deem  it  of  sufficient 
interest  to  quote  from  last  year's  report  the  following: 

1.  It  is  estimated  that  under  the  act  of  June  25,  1910   (36  Stat.  L.,  855) 
there  are  now  pending  at  the  various  agencies  throughout  the  Indian  country, 
awaiting  the  determinntion  of  the  heirs,  about  40,000  heirship  cases,  which 
represent    inherited   lands   valued    at    approximately    $60,000,000.    There   are 
pending  in  this  office  about  1,500  heirship  cases  on  which  final  action  has  not 
been  taken. 

A  large  appropriation  is  needed  in  order  to  enable  the  office  to  bring  this 
work  up  to  date.  When  the  heirs  are  determined  the  inherited  lands  will  be 
available  for  sale  and  the  proceeds  can  be  used  to  improve  the  allotments 
of  the  heirs.  Expediting  the  work  of  determining  the  heirs  of  deceased  Indian 
allottees  is  one  of  the  urgent  necessities  of  the  Indian  Service. 

2.  The  allotting  of  lands  to  individual  Indians  has  been  continued  ever  since 
the  enactment  of  the  general  allotment  act  of  February  8.  1887   (24  Stat.  L., 
388).     It  is  estimated  that  there  have  been  allotted  to  180.000  Indians  about 
34,000,000  acres  and  there  remain  to  be  allotted  about  39,000,000  acres.     There 
are  nearly  120,000   unallotted   Indians.     There  has  been  expended   for  allot- 
ment work  heretofore  completed  about  $4,500,000,  and  it  is  believed  that  it  will 

require  at  least  $3,000,000  to  complete  the  allotment  work. 

*****  *  * 

3.  The  timber  holdings  of  the  Indians  have  stumpage  value  of  more  than 
$80.000,000.    Approximately  one-seventh  of  this  value  is  in  timber  upon  allotted 
lands.     The   greater  part   of   the   unallotted   timber   is   upon   nonagricultural 
lands  in  the  Rocky  Mountain  and  Pacific  States.    The  timber  cover  on  these 
tribal  lands  bears  a  very  direct  relation  to  the  regulation  of  a  water  supply 
for  lands  both  within  and  outside  of  Indian  reservations.     Even  where  it  Is 

1 


2  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

not  essential  that  the  forest  cover  be  maintained  on  tribal  lands  for  water 
conservation  purposes,  it  is  frequently  advisable  that  the  forest  be  perpetuated 
as  a  source  of  fuel  and  lumber  supply. 

One  of  the  difficult  problems  which  confront  the  Indian  Service  is  the  admin- 
istration of  these  timber  lands  so  as  to  derive  a  sustained  revenue  adequate  to 
provide  for  the  needs  of  the  Indians  as  agricultural  development  takes  place 
within  the  Indian  reservations  and  yet  not  affect  unfavorably  the  future  needs 
both  as  regard  the  timber  and  water  supply.  The  solution  of  this  problem  will 
require  sound  business  foresight,  enlightened  by  the  scientific  principles  which 

form  the  basis  of  the  practice  of  both  forestry  and  irrigation. 

******* 

4.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Government  has  provided  since  1876 
approximately   $80,000,000   for   schools   among  the   Indians,   there   are  to-day 
about  10,000  Indian  children  without  any  school  facilities  whatever,  principally 
in  the  Southwest  and  more  particularly  among  the  Navajo  and  Papago  Indians. 
There  are  also  about  7,500  defective  Indian  children,  either  physically  or  men- 
tally, for  whom  no  adequate  facilities  are  available  for  their  care  and  training. 

The  present  available  appropriations  for  Indian  schools  provide  for  223 
Indian  day  schools  situated  on  Indian  reservations  near  the  Indian  homes,  76 
boarding  schools  located  on  the  reservations,  and  35  boarding  schools  located 
off  the  reservations  and  known  as  nonreservation  schools.  Of  the  65,000  Indian 
children  of  school  age,  these  schools  care  for  approximately  25,000.  There  are 
enrolled  in  mission  and  public  schools  22,500  Indian  children,  leaving  17,500 
normal  and  defective  Indian  children  unprovided  for.  Efforts  will  be  made  to 
procure  increased  appropriations  for  Indian  school  work  so  that  ail  Indian 
children  may  be  provided  with  school  facilities.  All  Government  schools  for 
Indians  are  largely  industrial. 

5.  I  find  that  the  health  conditions  among  the  Indians  are  deplorable.    Under 
the  jurisdiction  of  this  bureau  there  are  approximately  25,000  Indians  suffering 
from  tuberculosis.     Available  Indian  hospital  facilities  for  all  these  patients, 
adults  and  children,  will  not  exceed  300  beds.    During  the  last  fiscal  year  1,905 
Indians  were  reported  as  having  died  from  tuberculosis.    This  is  probably  not 
more  than  75  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  Indians  who  have  died  from  this 
disease  during  the  fiscal  year.     Of  the  whole  number  of  deaths  reported  from 
the  various  Indian  reservations,  32  per  cent  were  due  to  pulmonary  tuberculosis, 
as  against  11.2  per  cent  due  to  the  same  disease  occurring  in  the  registration 
area  of  the  United  States.    The  death  rate  among  Indians  is  32.24  per  thousand, 
while  the  Census  Bureau  gives  16  per  thousand  in  the  registration  area  of  the 
United  States. 

It  is  also  estimated  that  there  are  more  than  60,000  Indians  in  the  United 
States  who  are  suffering  from  trachoma.  This  eye  disease  is  considered  so 
serious  as  to  cause  the  exclusion  from  this  country  of  all  immigrants  who  are 
thus  afflicted.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Indians  are  living  among  a  very 
large  white  population,  which  is  an  added  reason  for  taking  every  precaution 
to  check  and  control  this  disease.  Additional  appropriations  are  needed  to  con- 
struct and  equip  hospitals  to  be  located  on  Indian  reservations  and  to  check 
and  control  disease  among  Indians  and  to  improve  their  health  conditions 
generally. 

6.  The  housing  conditions  of  the  Indians  throughout  the  country  is  one  of 
the  important   subjects  which   demand   immediate   consideration.     It  is  esti- 
mated that  there  are  approximately  8,000  Indian  families  without  homes,  who 
live  in  mud  lodges,  tepees,  or  wickiups — a  large  number  of  them  on  dirt  floors 
and  under  the  most  revolting,  insanitary  conditions.     There  are  thousands  of 
other  Indian  families  who  live  in  one  and  two  room  shacks  or  cabins,  under 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  3 

sanitary  conditions  that  must  of  necessity  cause  the  propagation  and  trans- 
mission of  the  most  dangerous  diseases,  such  as  tuberculosis  and  trachoma. 


7.  The  Indian  water-right  situation  on  a  large  number  of  reservations  is 
such  as  to  demand  most  serious  consideration.  Unfortunately,  legislation  has 
been  enacted  by  Congress  which  makes  beneficial  use  of  water  on  Indian 
lands  within  certain  reservations  necessary,  if  the  water  rights  are  to  be  held 
by  the  Indians.  Congress  has  provided  appropriations  for  constructing  expen- 
sive irrigation  projects  on  several  reservations,  reimbursable  out  of  Indian 
funds,  and  the  Indians  are  required  to  make  beneficial  use  of  the  water  on 
said  reservations  within  a  limited  time.  If  this  is  not  done  they  will  be  in 
danger  of  losing  their  water  rights  and  forfeiting  the  same  to  subsequent  ap- 
propriators  of  the  water.  On  a  large  number  of  the  reservations  agricultural 
lands  are  practically  valueless  without  water.  The  Government  holds  the 
allotted  lands  in  trust  for  the  benefit  of  Indians  for  a  period  of  25  years,  be- 
cause of  the  fact  that  they  are  deemed  incompetent  to  protect  their  property 
rights.  It  seems  equally  important  to  conserve  the  water  rights  of  the  Indians, 
at  the  same  time  encouraging  them  to  make  beneficial  use  of  the  water  by 
farming  their  allotments.  In  this  connection  it  should  be  remembered  that  the 
Indians,  in  a  large  number  of  cases,  live  far  removed  from  railroad  facilities, 
that  they  are  handicapped  by  lack  of  adequate  live  stock  and  farming  imple- 
ments, and  that  they  are  living  and  working  under  conditions  which  would 
discourage  even  the  most  progressive  white  farmers  who  are  well  trained  and 
accustomed  to  hard  work  on  their  farms.  Legislation  will  probably  be  neces- 
sary in  a  number  of  cases  to  protect  fully  the  water  rights  of  the  Indians. 

I  find  also  that  Indian  tribal  funds  have  been  used  in  construction  and  main- 
tenance of  irrigation  projects,  and  that  only  a  certain  portion  of  the  Indians 
have  received  any  benefit  from  the  irrigation  systems.  This  is  a  question  that 
will  necessarily  have  to  be  worked  out  with  great  care,  in  order  that  the 
Indians  who  receive  the  benefits  from  irrigation  projects  shall  be  required  to 
pay  the  cost  of  the  same. 

It  is  proposed  to  give  the  question  of  water  rights  of  Indians  very  thorough 
and  careful  consideration,  with  the  hope  of  fully  protecting  the  rights  of  the 
wards  of  the  Government. 

*  *.*  *  *  *  * 

9.  The  conditions  existing   in  eastern   Oklahoma   among  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  in  connection  with  the  probating  and  handling  of  the  estates  of  minor 
Indians  in  the  local  State  courts  are  such  as  to  require  prompt  consideration. 
I  consider  it  very  important  that  an  appropriation  of  at  least  $75,000  be  pro- 
cured in  the  next  Indian  appropriation  act,  so  as  to  enable  this  office  to  employ 
probate  attorneys  to  look  after  the  interests  of  minor  Indians  in  the  Five 
Civilized  Tribes  and  to  meet  properly  the  probate  situation  now  existing  in 
eastern  Oklahoma. 

If  proper  action  is  not  promptly  taken,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  until  a 
very  large  number  of  the  Indians  in  eastern  Oklahoma  will  be  deprived  of  their 
property,  with  the  result  that  they  will  become  charges  on  the  local  community. 

10.  There  is  undoubtedly  a  larger  field  for  the  improvement  of  existing  indus- 
trial conditions  of  the  Indians  than  any  other  activity  of  the  Indian  Service. 

*  *  ***** 

Many  able-bodied  Indians  who  have  valuable  lands  are  wholly  or  partially 
without  seeds,  teams,  implements,  and  other  equipment  to  utilize  properly  such 


4  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

lands.  This  is  particularly  true  in  several  reservations  where  large  sums  of 
public  or  tribal  funds  have  been  used  in  constructing  irrigation  systems,  and 
Is  in  part  the  reason  why  such  large  areas  of  irrigable  and  other  agricultural 
lands  are  not  under  cultivation. 

The  valuable  grazing  lands  of  the  Indians  offer  unusual  opportunities  for 
increasing  the  meat  supply  of  the  country,  at  the  same  time  furnishing  a  profit- 
able employment  for  the  Indians  as  well  as  utilizing  their  valuable  grazing 
lands.  During  the  last  year  the  Indians  cultivated  less  than  600,000  acres  of 
their  vast  area  of  agricultural  lands. 

During  the  fiscal  year  covered  by  this  report  there  has  been 
the  greatest  activity  in  pushing  farming  and  other  industrial  activi- 
ties on  Indian  reservations,  in  purchasing  tribal  herds  for  Indians 
in  order  to  stock  their  reservations  with  cattle,  in  upbreeding  the 
low  grade  of  horses,  sheep,  and  cattle  belonging  to  the  Indians,  in 
suppressing  the  liquor  traffic  among  Indians,  in  protecting  the  In- 
dians in  their  property  rights — and  particularly  the  Indian  minors 
of  Oklahoma — in  bringing  about  cooperation  among  the  employees 
of  the  Indian  Service  and  coordinating  and  unifying  their  efforts 
in  promoting  the  best  interests  of  the  Indians,  in  raising  the 
standard  of  Indian  schools  and  providing  school  facilities  for  In- 
dian children  heretofore  without  school  advantages,  in  improving 
the  deplorable  health  conditions  of  the  Indians  and  providing  hos- 
pitals for  thousands  of  Indians  suffering  with  trachoma  and  tuber- 
culosis, in  improving  the  purchasing  system  of  the  Indian  Service, 
in  procuring  needed  legislation  for  promoting  the  industrial  ad- 
vancement of  the  Indians,  and  in  general  endeavoring  to  place  the 
Indian  Service,  which  I  found  disorganized  and  discouraged,  on  a 
sound,  economical,  efficient  business  basis,  working  in  harmony  and 
with  enthusiasm  with  a  view  of  promoting  the  best  interests  of  the 
Indians,  who  are  the  wards  of  the  Government.  The  following  pages 
cover  in  narrative  and  statistical  form  these  various  activities. 

INDIAN  VIEWPOINT. 

No  real  understanding  can  be  had  in  any  work  involving  social 
service  unless  there  is  a  clear  comprehension  of  the  viewpoint  of 
those  served.  With  that  thought  in  mind  I  have  endeavored  in 
every  way  practicable,  by  personal  interviews  and  by  personal  exami- 
nation of  correspondence  with  Indians  when  possible,  to  ascertain 
clearly  their  thoughts  and  ideas  in  connection  with  efforts  being  car- 
ried on  for  their  benefit.  I  find  this  of  extreme  value,  because  often- 
times the  Indian's  objection  to  various  plans  made  in  his  behalf  may 
be  based  on  minor  consideration  which  can  be  eliminated  easily  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  Indian  and  without  seriously  interfering  with 
the  successful  outcome  of  the  plans  devised  for  his  interests. 

As  the  individualization  of  the  tribal  property  takes  place  the 
Indians'  interests  in  their  personal  belongings  develop.  In  order 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  5 

that  I  might  definitely  know  the  number  of  Indians  visiting  the  city, 
a  register  has  been  established,  and  since  February  7,  1914,  over  94 
Indians  have  called  at  the  office.  Probably  a  larger  number  of  dele- 
gations than  ever  before  have  also  visited  Washington,  and  I  have 
made  it  a  practice  in  the  case  of  every  delegation  and  every  indi- 
vidual Indian  to  understand  reservation  matters  from  the  Indian's 
point  of  view  and  to  give  them  the  personal  attention  which  is  their 
right  and  their  due. 

INDIAN  EDUCATION. 

PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 

The  year  has  been  especially  marked  by  the  large  increase  in  the 
number  of  Indian  pupils  enrolled  in  the  public  schools  throughout 
the  United  States.  There  are  now  more  Indian  pupils  in  these 
schools  than  there  are  in  all  the  Indian  schools  under  the  control  of 
the  Government. 

Except  for  the  necessity  of  increasing  school  facilities  for  the 
Navajoes  and  Papagoes,  the  Indian  school  system  is  very  close  to  the 
turning  point  as  regards  an  increased  enrollment  of  pupils.  On  the 
Cheyenne  River  Reservation  the  number  of  Indians  in  public  schools 
during  the  last  year  increased  100  per  cent  over  that  of  the  year 
previous.  From  such  reservations  as  Kiowa,  White  Earth,  Omaha, 
and  Santee,  and  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  increases  in  at- 
tendance in  the  public  schools  are  reported. 

Several  factors  have  contributed  to  this  trend  of  affairs.  I  have 
encouraged  the  entrance  into  the  public  schools  of  Indian  children, 
because  it  affords  training  of  the  greatest  value,  and  furnishes  an 
excellent  opportunity  to  begin  the  cooperation  of  the  Government 
with  the  State  in  the  education  of  the  Indian  that  must  surely  come 
and  which  will  hasten  the  solution  of  the  Indian  problem.  State 
authorities  are  more  and  more  coming  to  a  full  realization  of  the 
necessity  of  an  early  assumption  of  their  obligation  with  reference 
to  Indian  education.  They  appreciate  the  fact  that  the  Indian  is 
assuming  his  part  in  local  affairs,  and  that  an  intelligent  citizenship 
is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  community.  Indian  parents  them- 
selves show  a  marked  preference  for  this  form  of  education.  It 
permits  their  children  to  remain  with  them  in  their  homes,  the 
separation  from  which  has  been  heretofore  their  chief  objection  to 
enrollment  of  their  children  in  Government  boarding  schools.  With 
his  children  in  the  public  school,  the  advanced  Indian  who  wishes 
to  remain  on  his  allotment  is  able  to  do  so,  and  the  backward  Indian 
who  is  tempted  to  follow  his  children  to  the  boarding  school,  living 
in  camp  near  by,  can  be  encouraged  to  remain  on  his  allotment. 


6  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

COOPERATION  WITH  STATE  AUTHORITIES. 

For  the  intermediate  types,  various  forms  of  cooperation  with  the 
public  schools  have  been  employed  in  order  to  provide  educational 
facilities  for  Indian  children,  the  office  having  in  mind  not  only  the 
affording  of  educational  opportunities,  but  also  lending  of  aid  only 
to  the  extent  that  it  seemed  necessary  and  in  such  manner  that  it 
could  be  withdrawn  easily  as  soon  as  the  Indian  finds  himself  able  to 
do  without  this  assistance.  In  some  cases  the  buildings  and  grounds 
of  Government  Indian  schools  have  been  turned  over  to  the  public- 
school  authorities  for  use  on  condition  that  they  enroll  on  equal  terms 
with  white  children  all  Indian  children  of  the  district ;  in  others  the 
buildings  are  owned  by  the  public-school  authorities  and  a  part  of 
the  teaching  force  employed  by  the  Indian  Office;  in  others,  the 
schools  are  consolidated  public-school  districts,  the  Indian  Office 
furnishing  transportation  for  Indian  children  to  and  from  school 
daily;  at  others,  where  a  few  white  pupils  attend  a  school  largely 
made  up  of  Indian  pupils,  the  State  authorities  are  allowed  to  sup- 
plement the  salary  of  the  teacher  employed  by  the  Indian  Office.  In 
order  to  effect  enrollment  in  public  schools  of  Indian  children  who 
reside  outside  the  public-school  district,  tuition  has  been  paid  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  requirements  governing  the  enrollment  of  all  non- 
resident pupils. 

PAYMENT   OF    TUITION. 

Until  recently  the  office  paid  tuition  in  order  to  procure  the  en- 
rollment of  Indian  children  in  public  schools  where  their  parents 
were  not  taxpayers.  It  became  necessary  to  modify  this  plan,  how- 
ever, for  the  Comptroller  of  the  Treasury,  in  a  decision  of  October 
22,  1913,  ruled  that  the  Federal  Government  was  not  authorized  to 
pay  tuition  of  Indian  children  legally  entitled  to  attend  the  State 
public  schools.  For  example,  in  the  State  of  California  all  children 
born  therein  are  citizens  of  the  State,  and  entitled  to  public-school 
facilities.  A  contract  in  which  the  Federal  Government  agreed  to 
pay  for  their  enrollment  in  the  public  schools  would  be  illegal,  laclr 
ing  consideration,  the  State  doing  only  what  it  was  legally  under 
obligation  to  do.  In  a  Montana  case  it  was  held  that  if  Indian 
parents  paid  taxes  their  children  were  entitled  to  public-school  facili- 
ties and  a  contract  for  the  payment  of  tuition  would  be  void. 

BENEFITS   OF   PUBLIC-SCHOOL   TRAINING. 

The  typical  Indian  reservation  represents  the  most  satisfactory 
condition  in  which  to  bring  about  the  assimilation  of  the  Indian  race. 
After  allotments  have  been  made  the  Indians  are  encouraged  to  im- 
prove them;  allotments  soon  become  available  for  purchase,  and 
white  settlers  begin  building  homes  among  those  of  the  Indians. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  7 

Their  numbers  increase  until  they  feel  the  necessity  of  organizing 
public-school  districts.  When  this  is  done  it  is  a  very  easy  step  for 
them  to  permit  the  attendance  of  the  children  of  their  Indian  neigh- 
bors with  whom  they  have  been  associated.  The  Indian  is  thus 
immediately  led  into  the  most  vital  social  organization  of  a  com- 
munity, and  the  next  step,  which  is  easily  taken,  is  for  the  Indian 
parent  to  participate  in  its  management,  and  from  this  to  participate 
in  the  affairs  of  the  township  and  county. 

This  process  of  disintegration  of  the  Indian  reservations  is  a  splen- 
did example  of  the  elimination  of  the  Indian  as  a  distinct  problem, 
either  for  the  Federal  or  the  State  governments.  The  most  distinc- 
tive element  aiding  in  this  growth  is  the  public  school.  In  the  ac- 
quiring of  a  practical  knowledge  of  conversational  English  and  in 
the  opportunities  that  are  there  afforded  the  Indian  to  learn  and 
appreciate  the  "better  ways"  of  the  white  man  the  public  schools 
are  the  trysting  place  in  the  winning  of  the  race. 

NAVAJO   AND  PAPAGO  SCHOOLS. 

The  Indian  Service  is  extending  its  schools  in  the  Navajo  and 
Papago  countries  particularly.  For  these  Indians  additional  school 
facilities  must  be  provided.  During  the  past  year,  for  the  Navajos, 
a  day  school  has  been  constructed  at  Lukai  Chukai,  an  additional 
dormitory  at  the  Chin  Lee  boarding  school,  additions  to  two  dormi- 
tories at  the  Western  Navajo  School,  three  cottage  dormitories  at 
the  Pueblo  Bonito,  and  the  Marsh  Pass  School  has  been  completed. 
To  further  increase  school  facilities  at  Pueblo  Bonito  and  at  the 
Tohatchi  boarding  school  one  group  of  pupils  will  be  enrolled  at 
each  of  these  schools  for  six  months  and  another  almost  entirely  new 
group  will  be  enrolled  for  the  other  six  months.  These  school  plants 
will  be  in  continuous  use  during  the  12  months  of  the  year.  With 
these  additions  to  school  plants  and  change  in  the  method  of  enroll- 
ing pupils  educational  facilities  for  the  Navajos  will  be  increased 
nearly  500. 

IMPROVEMENT  IN  METHODS  OF  INSTRUCTION. 

The  work  of  the  schools  during  the  past  year  has  been  of  high 
order.  One  condition  which  has  contributed  to  this  result  has  been 
the  increased  amount  of  attention  that  has  been  given  by  the  office 
to  the  professional  work  of  our  teachers.  They  have  been  impressed 
with  the  necessity  of  employing  the  very  best  means  known  to  mod- 
ern educators  with  reference  to  the  materials  and  the  methods  used 
in  the  instruction  of  their  pupils.  Beading  circles  have  been  main- 
tained at  all  the  schools  by  the  direction  of  the  Indian  Office,  which 
has  also  included  other  instructors  than  the  classroom  teachers.  In- 
creased attention  has  been  given  to  the  purchase  of  libraries  for 


8  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

pupils;  educational  leave  has  been  available  for  teachers,  which  per- 
mits them  to  attend  summer  institutes  or  other  educational  institu- 
tions on  full  pay  for  a  period  of  two  weeks  in  order  to  further  ac- 
quaint themselves  with  the  best  methods  of  instruction  and  receive 
the  enthusiasm  and  inspiration  that  comes  from  mingling  with  other 
teachers,  particularly  those  from  the  public  schools.  Theses  on  some 
professional  subject  which  requires  considerable  reading  have  been 
required  from  them,  and  to  make  their  accomplishments  along  these 
lines  of  vital  importance  automatic  promotions  of  certain  grades  of 
teachers  have  been  made  of  not  less  than  $2.50  per  month  where 
their  record  during  the  year  has  been  excellent. 

VOCATIONAL  TRAINING. 

The  necessity  for  the  vocational  training  of  Indian  pupils  is  being 
appreciated  now  by  our  instructors,  and  as  a  result  the  work  along 
these  lines  has  been  much  better.  Superintendents  in  their  annual 
report  are  referring  to  the  closer  correlation  they  have  been  able  to 
effect  between  the  academic  and  industrial  work.  Chilocco  has  had 
an  unusually  successful  year  in  the  results  that  have  been  obtained 
along  the  line  of  agricultural  and  allied  subjects.  During  the  past 
year  it  has  presented  a  very  strong  course,  which  has  been  popular 
with  Indian  pupils.  Flandreau  has  extended  the  work  for  two  years, 
so  that  pupils  when  they  leave  school  will  be  able  to  take  charge  of 
their  own  farm,  if  they  have  land,  or  take  a  place  in  a  shop  or  with 
some  business  concern  and  earn  a  fair  livelihood.  Without  the  ad- 
dition of  these  two  years  to  the  course  it  has  been  found  not  only  at 
Flandreau,  but  at  other  schools  as  well,  that  the  pupil  leaves  just 
at  a  time  when  he  is  able  to  profit  by  taking  vocation  instructions. 

PUEBLO  SCHOOLS. 

Last  year  it  was  necessary  to  report  that  in  some  of  the  pueblos 
there  was  marked  opposition  to  Indian  education.  It  is  pleasing  to 
Dote  that  this  is  gradually  disappearing.  On  the  Moqui  Reservation, 
where  the  feeling  was  very  bitter  against  the  Government  and  also 
as  between  the  Hopis  and  the  Navajos,  the  superintendent  now 
reports  that  it  is  practicable  to  construct  a  day  school  where  both 
factions  will  attend,  showing  clearly  that  the  animosities  that  have 
hindered  the  advancement  of  these  people  for  some  time  are  gradu- 
ally disappearing. 

OKLAHOMA  SCHOOLS. 

The  $300,000  appropriation  in  aid  of  the  common  schools  among 
the  Five  Tribes  of  eastern  Oklahoma  has  been  distributed  on  prac- 
tically the  same  terms  as  was  done  year  before  last.  Marked  im- 
provement has  been  noted,  however,  in  the  ease  with  which  this  has 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  9 

been  accomplished ;  the  office  force,  as  well  as  the  recipients  of  this 
money,  the  school  districts,  being  more  familiar  with  the  principles 
of  distribution.  Results  have  been  good  and  a  larger  number  of 
Indian  children  have  been  enrolled  in  the  public  schools  from  those 
tribes  than  heretofore. 

NEW   SCHOOL   RULES. 

One  accomplishment  of  considerable  note  has  been  the  revision  of 
the  Indian  school  rules,  which  were  approved  by  the  department 
July  14,  1913.  The  last  revision  was  made  in  1904.  The  Indian 
problem  has  advanced  so  far  beyond  conditions  prevalent  at  that 
time  that  the  rules  were  in  many  respects  inapplicable  to  present 
conditions.  They  now  fit  the  service,  and  not  only  serve  as  directory 
to  the  field  officials  with  reference  to  school  matters,  but  set  a  stand- 
ard of  accomplishment  which  comports  with  the  advancement  of 
Indian  education. 

ESSAY  CONTEST. 

The  contest  in  essay  work  open  to  all  Indian  pupils  was  continued 
last  year  as  the  year  before,  the  subject  being  "  Citizenship."  While 
it  was  difficult  in  many  respects,  the  elementary  conception  which 
the  pupils  were  able  to  develop,  not  only  with  reference  to  civic 
problems,  but  with  respect  to  their  obligations  to  their  fellows  and 
their  Government,  was  highly  satisfactory.  Something  like  9  gold 
medals,  52  silver  medals,  and  548  bronze  medals  were  distributed  to 
Indian  pupils.  So  satisfactory  have  been  the  results  that  it  is 
planned  to  continue  this  contest  from  year  to  year. 

PHYSICAL  TRAINING. 

The  physical  welfare  of  the  pupils  has  been  given  careful  consid- 
eration, only  a  very  few  schools  now  reporting  that  they  have  no 
up-to-date  playground  equipment.  All  dormitories  have  ample  air 
space,  school  buildings  are  light  and  airy,  and  pupils  are  not  per- 
mitted to  work  in  damp  or  ill- ventilated  laundries  or  industrial 
buildings. 

MORAL  TRAINING. 

The  moral  interest  of  pupils  has  been  met  by  the  increased  atten- 
tion placed  upon  this  phase  of  instruction,  superintendents  and  in- 
structors having  been  told  that  this  subject  must  receive  their  con- 
stant attention.  Not  only  must  provision  be  made  for  each  pupil  to 
receive  religious  instruction  at  the  hands  of  the  denomination  which 
the  pupil  or  his  parent  may  select,  but  also  special  days  must  be  set 
apart  for  the  consideration  of  such  questions  as  the  effect  of  alcoholic 
liquors  upon  the  human  body  and  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals. 


10  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

INSTITUTES. 

As  a  further  and  entirely  new  means,  so  far  as  Indian  schools  are 
concerned,  of  increasing  the  efficiency  of  service  workers,  arrange- 
ments were  made  to  hold  six  institutes,  or  summer  schools,  of  two 
weeks'  duration  each  for  employees  of  all  departments  of  Indian 
schools  at  the  following  places  during  July  and  August : 

Chilocco,  Okla.,  July  6  to  18. 

Flandreau,  S.  Dak.,  July  20  to  August  1. 

Sherman  Institute,  Riverside,  Gal.,  July  20  to  August  1. 

Tomah,  Wis.,  August  3  to  15. 

Chemawa,  Oreg.,  August  3  to  15. 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  August  17  to  29. 

The  courses  of  instruction  outlined  for  the  institutes  include  and 
especially  emphasize  industrial  subjects  such  as  cooking,  sewing,  and 
lace  making  for  the  women,  and  gardening,  dairying,  horticulture, 
carpentering,  and  cement  masonry  for  the  men.  A  special  feature 
is  also  to  be  made  of  teaching  group  games  and  group  athletics  as  a 
means  of  encouraging  physical  training  in  the  schools  throughout 
the  service,  for  the  purpose  of  building  up  the  young  people  physi- 
cally, and  thus  preventing  disease,  rather  than  having  to  cure  it. 
Daily  conferences  on  subjects  of  general  interest  to  the  entire  service 
will  be  held,  and  lectures  will  be  given  daily  on  hygiene  and  sanita- 
tion, the  liquor  problem,  and  many  other  subjects  of  vital  importance. 

The  plans  for  the  institutes  are  thoroughly  complete,  and  it  is 
confidently  believed  that  they  will  result  in  heartier  cooperation, 
greater  unity  of  efi'ort,  and  a  much  more  efficient  service.  The  actual 
results  of  this  innovation  can  not,  of  course,  be  reported  at  this  time, 
but  it  is  believed  that  the  plans  are  of  such  importance  to  the  future 
of  Indian  schools  that  they  should  be  recorded  as  a  feature  of  the 
year's  activities. 

INDIAN  SCHOOL  FARMS. 

The  following  letter  concerning  activities  on  Indian  school  farms 
was  issued: 

To  all  superintendents: 

I  am  not  satisfied  that  we  are  making  the  greatest  use  of  our  school  farms. 
They  usually  consist  of  large  tracts  of  fertile  land  capable  of  raising  every  crop 
that  the  climate  in  which  the  school  is  located  will  permit.  In  some  cases  these 
farms  are  well  irrigated. 

In  every  case  the  schools  have  been  or  can  be  furnished  with  all  the  equip- 
ment necessary  to  till  their  farms  to  the  fullest  extent,  and  they  can  be  fur- 
nished with  stock  with  which  to  make  a  substantial  showing  in  stock  raising. 

The  agricultural  training  of  the  boy  pupils  in  our  schools  furnishes  ample 
opportunity  for  intensive  farming.  If  this  training  is  to  be  of  real  value  and 
be  effective  in  accomplishing  its  purpose,  the  farming  operations  should  be 
financially  successful  and  at  the  same  time  conducted  in  accordance  with 
modern  methods. 

I  am  convinced  that  there  is  a  large  field  for  improvement  in  the  handling  of 
these  farms,  and  I  want  every  field  officer  who  has  charge  of  such  a  farm  to  see 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  11 

that  its  management  is  of  such  a  nature  as  will  insure  its  development  to  the 
highest  degree  of  productiveness,  practical  usefulness,  and  object  lesson. 

The  constantly  increasing  demands  on  the  various  appropriations  for  the 
Indian  Service  make  it  necessary  not  only  to  exercise  the  most  careful  economy 
consistent  with  the  end  sought,  and  at  the  same  time  to  see  that  every  resource 
in  connection  with  Indian  education  and  industry  is  developed  to  the  highest 
obtainable  degree. 

See  that  employees  in  charge  of  your  farms  are  men  capable  of  rendering 
proper  and  efficient  service,  carefully  determine  the  suitable  crops  for  the  par- 
ticular soil  of  the  tillable  land  of  your  farm,  giving  the  best  attention  to  the 
raising  and  use  of  these  crops. 

Our  farms  should  grow  corn,  oats,  wheat,  and  raise  alfalfa,  clover,  timothy, 
etc.  You  should  raise  all  the  potatoes  and  other  vegetables  consumed.  We 
should  not  be  satisfied  with  raising  feed  for  the  school  live  stock,  but  we  should 
raise  everything  the  farm,  garden,  and  orchard  will  produce. 

I  want  you  to  raise  live  stock  to  the  fullest  of  your  capacity ;  raise  colts 
from  the  school  mares;  let  your  calves  grow  into  beef  for  your  school.  Grow 
a  good  herd  of  hogs  to  follow  the  cattle  that  you  feed,  and  use  the  waste  from 
the  table  at  the  school.  Make  your  dairy  amply  large  and  o±  such  kind  that 
there  will  be  plenty  of  milk,  cream,  and  butter.  Feed  the  skim  milk  to  the 
hogs,  and  grow  your  pork  meat.  Where  practicable,  cure  your  own  bacon  and 
ham,  make  your  own  sausage,  and  dry  and  corn  your  own  beef. 

Give  careful  consideration  to  chicken  raising.  You  should  establish  chicken 
houses,  and  place  girls  in  charge  of  the  chickens.  This  would  furnish  poultry 
and  eggs  for  your  needs  and  at  the  same  time  train  your  girls  in  an  industry 
which  will  be  of  value  to  them  in  their  future  homes. 

Under  some  conditions  it  may  be  practicable  to  have  a  few  swarms  of  bees. 
Start  an  apiary  and  teach  bee  culture,  while  at  the  same  time  obtaining  a 
supply  of  honey  for  table  use. 

We  should  have  orchards  and  vines  to  grow  fruit  at  our  schools  which  are 
best  adapted  to  the  locations  and  climates.  The  care  of  these  orchards  and 
the  raising  of  small  fruits  will  give  important  training  to  the  boys  and  girls. 

Each  school  should  have  a  truck  garden  to  produce  the  green  stuff  necessary 
for  its  own  table.  Under  proper  climatic  conditions  enough  corn,  onions, 
cabbage,  tomatoes,  beans,  etc.,  should  be  grown  not  only  to  supply  the  school 
with  fresh  vegetables  but  to  furnish  a  good  supply  for  winter  use.  The  can- 
ning of  vegetables  and  fruits  is  highly  important. 

I  fully  appreciate  the  fact  that  at  some  of  our  schools,  because  of  climatic 
conditions,  diversified  farming  is  impracticable,  but  there  are  very  few  Indian 
schools  which  do  not  have  farms  peculiarly  adapted  to  certain  lines  of  agri- 
culture and  horticultural  development.  Where  diversified  farming  is  imprac- 
ticable the  natural  resources  of  the  farm  should  be  fully  developed.  If  you 
can  raise  nothing  but  wheat,  see  to  it  that  every  acre  of  available  land  is  used 
for  wheat.  Grow  the  best  wheat  and  produce  .the  maximum  yield  per  acre  for 
your  locality.  If  your  school  is  located  in  a  stock-raising  section  of  the  country 
and  you  have  a  large  acreage  of  grazing  land,  you  should  raise  beef,  not  only 
for  your  own  use  but  to  supply  other  schools. 

A  school  in  a  locality  where  vegetables  and  fruits  are  easily  raised  should 
can  or  preserve  a  surplus  of  these  products  for  sale  to  schools  not  so  fortunately 
located. 

I  believe  there  is  a  splendid  chance  for  increased  efficiency  of  our  school  service 
by  special  efforts  and  cooperation  along  the  lines  indicated.  I  must  insist  that 
you  give  the  development  of  the  school  farm  your  most  careful  attention  to  the 
end  that  the  highest  degree  of  efficiency  and  results  be  accomplished.  There  is 
63556—14 2 


12  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

absolutely  no  excuse  for  a  waste  acre  or  overlooked  opportunity  on  a  school 
farm.  We  need  all  they  will  produce,  and  can  not  justify  the  purchase  of  any- 
thing we  can  raise.  It  is  inconsistent  and  indefensible  for  us  to  expect  Indian 
boys  and  girls  to  return  home  from  their  schools  and  do  more  than  they  have 
witnessed  their  teachers  doing  for  them  when  they  are  supposed  to  be  qualify- 
ing themselves  for  industrial  equipment  and  self-support. 

Superintendents,  inspectors,  supervisors,  and  special  agents  are  directed  to 
give  this  matter  their  prompt  and  most  careful  attention  and  fully  advise  me 
of  the  steps  taken  by  field  officers  to  make  effective  these  suggestions. 

HEALTH. 

With  the  impetus  given  to  the  health  work  by  the  increased  appro- 
priations for  the  fiscal  year  1914  comes  the  realization  that  the  much 
neglected  sanitary  conditions  of  the  past  among  the  Indian  tribes 
can  be  tremendously  improved,  and  sanitary  homes  and  good  health 
replace  the  squalor  of  the  past,  on  most  of  the  reservations. 

The  opening  of  many  Indian  reservations  for  settlement  by  white 
men  has  made  the  health  problems  more  pronounced  in  the  districts 
where  the  white  settlers  have  come  in  contact  with  the  Indians.  The 
Indian  must  not  only  receive  treatment,  and,  if  possible,  be  cured  of 
trachoma,  tuberculosis,  etc.,  but  he  must  be  trained  to  live  in  sanitary 
homes  and  care  for  his  personal  hygiene,  so  that  he  will  not  become 
a  menace  to  his  neighbors,  either  Indian  or  white. 

The  work  of  eradicating  tuberculosis  and  trachoma  from  among 
the  Indians  will  be  continued  in  a  most  aggressive  manner.  The 
children  must  be  protected  in  the  schools  as  well  as  in  the  home. 
Disease  is  easily  transmitted  to  the  homes  of  the  healthy  from  the 
homes  of  those  afflicted  with  tuberculosis,  trachoma,  etc.,  and  it  be- 
comes an  imperative  duty  of  the  Indian  Service  to  see  that  the 
schools  maintained  by  the  Government  for  the  education  of  Indian 
children  do  not  become  a  focus  for  the  transmission  of  disease 
between  tribes  rather  than  an  instrument  for  the  eradication  of 
disease. 

In  the  Indian  schools  there  has  been  a  determined  effort  to  detect 
the  tubercular  cases  in  their  incipiency  and  place  them  in  a  sani- 
tarium for  treatment,  where  there  is  one  available,  or  return  the  child 
to  the  home,  more  for  the  protection  of  the  well  children  than  in  the 
hope  of  helping  the  afflicted  one.  The  trachomatous  patients  are 
segregated  in  the  schools  and  kept  under  treatment. 

There  is  a  vital  necessity  for  more  hospitals  to  care  for  these  chil- 
dren returned  to  their  homes.  Often  they  represent  families  which 
have  a  number  of  cases  of  tuberculosis  needing  sanitarium  treatment, 
or  the  removal  of  a  case  of  active  tuberculosis  to  a  healthy  home  may 
introduce  the  disease  there  and  form  another  source  of  infection  to 
the  surrounding  Indians. 


COMMISSIONEK  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  13 

At  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year  there  were  51  hospitals  with  a  com- 
bined capacity  of  1,432  patients,  and  6  under  construction,  to  care  for 
a  population  of  331,250  persons  with  a  high  percentage  of  tubercu- 
losis and  trachoma.  Out  of  199,438  Indians  on  reservations  67,895 
were  examined  last  year.  Tuberculosis  was  present  in  8,245  cases 
and  trachoma  in  13,841,  and  it  is  estimated  that  there  are  21,980 
suffering  with  tuberculosis  and  35,769  afflicted  with  trachoma.  The 
death  rate  per  thousand  last  year  was  30.76  per  cent,  and  the  percent- 
age of  deaths  due  to  tuberculosis  was  31.83,  while  the  birth  rate  per 
thousand  was  38.79. 

In  the  appropriation  act  for  the  next  fiscal  year  Congress  has  given 
the  health  work  $300,000.  There  will  be  $100,000  available  for  hos- 
pital purposes  besides  the  direct  items  for  a  sanitarium  in  the  Choc- 
taw  Nation  and  one  at  Red  Lake  or  Leech  Lake  and  one  on  the  Fond 
du  Lac  Reservation.  With  this  additional  money  it  is  proposed  to 
build  seven  small  hospitals,  at  a  cost  of  from  $12,000  to  $15,000  each, 
on  the  reservations  where  the  need  of  medical  attention  has  been 
most  keenly  felt  rather  than  place  this  amount  in  one  or  two  big 
hospitals  more  remotely  placed.  The  smaller  hospitals,  it  is  believed, 
will  provide  more  effective  and  prompt  attention  for  the  sick  and  at 
the  same  time  keep  the  patients  near  their  families. 

TUBERCULOSIS. 

This  is  the  scourge  of  the  Indian  race,  and  with  a  full  apprecia- 
tion of  the  seriousness  of  the  conditions  presented  an  earnest  effort 
is  being  made  to  successfully  combat  the  disease.  The  progress  of 
the  work  has  been  hampered  heretofore  mainly  by  insufficient  funds. 
I  am  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  to  perpetuate  the  Indian  race  the 
inroads  of  tuberculosis  must  be  stayed.  To  do  this  it  is  essential 
that  better  sanitary  conditions  be  instituted  in  the  Indian  homes,  and 
cleanliness,  better  ventilation,  and  sufficient  and  nourishing  food  not 
only  be  insisted  upon,  but  provided,  if  necessary. 

Realizing  the  importance  of  these  matters,  a  study  has  been  made 
of  the  physical  conditions  of  the  schools  with  a  view  to  giving  the 
children  sufficient  dormitory  space,  playground  equipment,  and, 
where  necessary,  nourishing  food  suited  to  their  physical  condition 
in  addition  to  the  rations  now  furnished.  Every  effort  is  being  made 
to  meet  conditions  of  this  type  as  soon  as  they  are  discovered. 

Regular  talks  are  given  to  the  children  on  sanitary  matters ;  many 
of  the  schools  are  provided  with  stereoptican  outfits,  and  where 
practicable  the  talks  are  illustrated. 

Constant  watching,  monthly  weighing,  the  use  of  the  Pullman 
towel  system,  daily  physical  training,  use  of  the  playground  equip- 
ment, and  sufficient  space  and  ventilation  of  the  dormitories  and 


14  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

school  buildings,  together  with  the  training  being  given  at  home  by 
the  field  matrons,  should  result  in  a  stronger  race  physically  in  the 
next  generation,  as  well  as  the  reduction  of  the  death  rate  to  one  not 
in  excess  of  the  white  race. 

TRACHOMA. 

The  trachoma  work  has  been  pushed  vigorously  during  the  past 
year.  The  field  has  been  divided  into  five  districts,  and  an  ophthal- 
mologist has  been  assigned  to  each.  .  He  goes  to  each  reservation  in 
his  district  instructing  the  reservation  physician  in  the  appropriate 
treatment  and  methods  of  operation,  and  also  cares  for  any  of  the 
more  serious  eye  complications  needing  treatment  or  operation.  On 
account  of  the  failure  to  recognize  trachoma,  the  lack  of  facilities 
for  handling  the  disease,  and  the  small  amounts  of  money  formerly 
appropriated,  the  disease  has  wrought  great  havoc  among  the  Indians 
of  every  tribe  except  those  in  New  York. 

Trachoma  is  only  second  to  the  tuberculosis  scourge  and  spreads 
rapidly  when  it  is  once  introduced.  The  increase  of  trachoma  is 
alarming.  The  service  is  fully  aware  of  the  conditions  presented  by 
this  disease  and  is  fighting,  in  accordance  with  the  best  precepts  of 
modern  medicine,  to  relieve  those  afflicted  and  to  prevent  the  further 
spread  of  the  disease. 

OTHER  CONTAGIOUS  DISEASES. 

There  have  been  epidemics  of  smallpox,  typhus  and  typhoid  fever, 
diphtheria,  measles,  and  mumps,  but  through  the  efforts  of  the 
physicians,  by  quarantine,  administration  of  sera,  and  careful  medi- 
cal attention  very  few  deaths  have  occurred  from  these  causes.  Co- 
operation with  the  State  boards  of  health  in  the  instance  of  an  epi- 
demic has  resulted  in  the  disease  being  held  within  the  reservation 
of  its  source,  and  usually  at  the  primary  focus. 

During  the  year  an  order  was  issued  to  vaccinate  every  individual 
on  the  reservations,  including  Government  employees  as  well  as  the 
Indians.  This  order  is  being  faithfully  executed,  although  in  some 
sections  considerable  tact  and  ingenuity  is  required  to  enforce  vacci- 
nation. On  reservations  where  epidemics  have  occurred  in  the  past 
the  Indians  appreciate  the  protection  and  readily  submit  to  vac- 
cination. 

FIELD  MATRONS. 

Due  to  the  lack  of  knowledge  in  the  care  of  infants,  there  is  a 
large  infant  mortality  among  the  full-blood  Indians.  To  meet  this 
condition  the  field  matrons  go  into  the  homes  of  the  Indians  and 
teach  them  the  care  of  children,  cooking,  and  sewing.  They  aid  the 
physicians  in  carrying  out  sanitary  measures  and  assist  in  sickness. 
They  give  particular  attention  to  seeing  that  Indian  mothers  have 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  15 

proper  care  and  nourishment  both  before  and  after  confinement.  An 
earnest  effort  is  made  to  do  everything  practicable  to  give  the  Indian 
baby  a  fair  start  and  to  build  up  a  constitution  which  will  resist 
disease.  Competent  field  matrons  with  personalities  that  command 
the  confidence  of  the  Indian  women  are  a  most  important  factor 
in  raising  the  Indian  race  to  a  higher  civilization,  and  should  be 
placed  on  the  plane  of  her  sister  who  undergoes  the  hardships  of 
missionary  fields. 

DENTISTS. 

During  the  year  seven  dentists  have  devoted  their  entire  time  to 
the  care  of  the  teeth  of  the  children  in  the  boarding  schools.  After 
the  close  of  the  school  they  work  among  the  adult  Indians.  The 
teeth  of  the  Indians  are  in  bad  condition  as  a  rule.  The  care  of  the 
teeth  and  the  elimination  of  the  constant  source  of  infection  from 
decayed  teeth  improve  the  general  health  condition  of  the  student. 

PHYSICIANS. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that  fully  60  per  cent  cf  the  Indians  under  the 
supervision  of  the  Indian  Service  are  still  entirely  dependent  upon 
the  Government  for  medical  service.  The  service  now  has  128  regu- 
lar physicians  who  devote  their  entire  time,  and  59  contract  physi- 
cians who,  according  to  their  contracts,  are  required  to  devote  only 
part  of  their  time  to  the  Indians.  The  service  has  difficulty  in  pro- 
curing efficient  men  at  the  salaries  permitted  by  present  appropria- 
tions to  carry  out  the  important  medical  task  before  it,  and  often  has 
still  greater  difficulty  in  retaining  the  services  of  those  capable  of 
meeting  the  responsibilities  placed  upon  them. 

STOCK  RAISING. 

Since  assuming  charge  of  Indian  matters  I  have  been  impressed 
with  the  idea  that  too  many  of  the  natural  resources  of  Indian  reser- 
vations which  are  exploited  to  the  profit  of  the  white  man  might  bet- 
ter be  developed  for  the  financial  benefit  of  the  Indians.  Particu- 
larly is  this  true  of  the  grazing  lands  of  the  Indians.  Probably  there 
are  located  within  the  borders  of  the  Indian  reservations  the  most 
desirable  grazing  lands  in  unbroken  bodies  in  the  United  States 
to-day.  The  grass  on  these  lands  is  in  its  natural  state,  usually  not 
heavily  grazed.  Stock  water  is  available  and  in  all  ways  an  ideal 
range  is  presented  for  the  raising  of  cattle  on  a  large  scale.  These 
lands  for  years  have  been  leased  to  white  cattle  owners  at  a  stated 
rental  per  head.  Vast  herds  of  cattle  have  been  developed  by  white 
men  on  Indian  lands  and  marketed  to  the  increased  wealth  of  the  cat- 
tlemen and  but  small  return  to  the  Indian  landowner.  The  constant 
diminution  of  grazing  land  throughout  the  United  States  has  caused 


16  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

a  natural  increase  in  the  price  of  meat,  and  unquestionably  under 
modern  conditions  this  price  will  not  diminish.  It  would  seem, 
therefore,  that  there  is  no  more  lucrative  or  important  industrial 
opportunity  open  to  the  Indians  having  grazing  lands  than  to  do 
away  with  the  old  grazing-leasing  and  grazing-permit  system,  and 
in  its  place  go  into  the  business  of  stock  raising  themselves.  The  In- 
dian is  by  nature  a  herdsman,  and,  with  but  small  teaching,  should 
develop  into  an  ideal  stock  raiser.  With  this  end  in  view,  I  have 
instituted  a  plan  of  creating  tribal  herds  upon  those  reservations  hav- 
ing large  areas  of  tribal  grazing  lands.  The  original  herds  pur- 
chased are  comparatively  small,  but  in  a  short  time,  by  careful  man- 
agement, should  so  increase  as  to  properly  graze  every  acre  of  Indian 
grazing  land. 

During  the  year  nearly  one  and  one-half  million  dollars  were  ex- 
pended in  the  purchase  of  live  stock  for  individuals  and  as  tribal 
herds  and  also  for  male  animals  for  improving  the  grade  of  cattle, 
horses,  and  sheep  already  belonging  to  the  Indians.  The  principal 
purchases  were:  For  Blackfeet  Reservation,  44  stallions,  at  $23,131, 
and  102  bulls,  at  $12,640.  For  Colville,  50  bulls,  at  $4,860,  and  12 
stallions,  at  $5,000.  For  Crow,  20  stallions,  at  $9,780 ;  7,021  heifers, 
at  $306,338;  2,000  steers,  at  $79,470;  and  251  bulls,  at  $20,075.  For 
Cheyenne,  80  bulls,  at  $9,680;  682  heifers,  at  $33,418;  46  cows  with' 
calves,  at  $3,197;  and  46  mares,  at  $5,248.  For  Crow  Creek,  64  cows 
with  calves,  at  $3,776;  74  mares,  at  $7,410;  and  10  bulls,  at  $1,350. 
For  Fort  Apache,  56  bulls,  at  $7,000.  For  Lower  Brule,  12  stallions, 
at  $6,687 ;  55  bulls,  at  $6,187 ;  and  601  heifers,  at  $29,968.  For  Navajo, 
175  rams,  at  $2,187,  and  4  stallions,  at  $940.  For  Navajo  Springs,  20 
stallions,  at  $4,910;  25  bulls,  at  $2,325;  and  12  mares,  at  $2,020.  For 
Pine  Ridge,  1,486  heifers,  at  $75,000;  150  cows,  at  $6,000;  and  25 
stallions,  at  $12,500.  For  Rosebud,  248  heifers,  at  $12,098;  2,016 
cows,  at  $133,205;  1,216  mares,  at  $166,339;  19  stallions,  at  $9,503; 
and  90  bulls,  at  $10,930.  For  San  Carlos,  40  stallions,  at  $8,000;  SO 
bulls,  at  $7,440;  and  1,000  heifers,  at  $37,000.  For  Shoshone,  101 
bulls,  at  $9,512.  For  Standing  Rock,  128  heifers,  at  $5,117,  and  2 
stallions,  at  $1,180.  For  Tongue  River,  1,046  heifers,  at  $49,622;  36 
bulls,  at  $3,100;  and  4  stallions,  at  $575;  and  for  Truxton  Canyon, 
510  cows  at  $21,300,  and  20  bulls,  at  $2,300. 

The  total  purchases  for  these  and  other  reservations  amounted  to 
267  stallions,  1,048  bulls,  12,272  heifers,  2,510  steers,  3,738  cows,  2,110 
mares,  670  horses,  67  mules,  513  sheep,  and  469  rams. 

This  stock  has  been  placed  in  the  care  of  experienced  stockmen,  and 
will  not  only  give  the  Indians  an  insight  into  the  practical  manage- 
ment of  the  live-stock  industry  and  enable  them  to  learn  proper  meth- 
ods in  stock  raising,  but  will  furnish  a  nucleus  from  which  the  indi- 
vidual herds  can  be  created  by  issue  or  purchase.  It  will  be  noticed 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  17 

that  the  largest  herd,  comprising  9,021  head  of  cattle  and  251  bulls, 
was  purchased  for  the  Indians  of  the  Crow  Reservation  under  the 
provisions  of  the  act  of  April  27,  1904.  (33  Stat.  L.,  352-353.)  This 
herd  has  been  placed  in  a  separate  pasture  set  aside  for  its  exclu- 
sive use.  They  are  in  splendid  condition,  and  the  Indians  have  cut 
and  stacked  5,000  tons  of  hay  to  be  fed  these  cattle  next  winter. 

Many  of  the  Indians  have  heretofore  opposed  the  plans  for  the 
improvement  of  the  grade  of  animals  belonging  to  them  and  for  re- 
placing the  worthless  male  stock  with  animals  of  improved  breed. 
They  are,  however,  gradually  beginning  to  appreciate  the  benefits 
to  be  derived  from  this  policy  as  the  results  of  such  breeding  become 
apparent.  This  is  aptly  illustrated  by  the  fact  that,  although  the 
Indians  of  the  Cheyenne  River  Reservation  were  opposed  to  the 
establishment  of  a  breeding  station  on  their  reservation,  the  superin- 
tendent reports  that  they  have  bred  over  600  mares  at  that  station 
during  the  present  season. 

While  the  development  of  the  horse-breeding  industry  as  a  means 
of  livelihood  for  the  Indians  is  largely  confined  to  those  reservations 
located  in  North  and  South  Dakota  and  Montana,  high-grade  stal- 
lions have  been  provided  for  many  of  the  other  reservations  in  order 
that  high-grade  work  horses  may  be  provided  to  enable  the  Indians 
to  cultivate  their  allotments,  engage  in  freighting,  and  for  market. 

Some  idea  may  be  had  of  the  benefits  that  will  be  derived  by  im- 
proving the  grade  of  the  1,500,000  sheep  belonging  to  the  Navajo 
Indians  living  in  the  Southwest  by  the  fact  that  experiments  during 
the  past  year  have  demonstrated  that  the  result  of  the  first  cross 
between  native  sheep  and  high-grade  rams  is  the  production  of  an 
animal  20  to  25  per  cent  greater  in  weight  and  yielding  50  to  60  per 
cent  more  wool  of  a  considerably  better  grade  than  that  produced  by 
the  native  Navajo  sheep.  Owing  to  the  limited  amount  of  funds 
available  for  expenditure  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indians  living  in  that 
locality  it  is  impracticable  to  introduce  a  sufficient  number  of  rams 
to  improve  the  entire  number  of  sheep  belonging  to  these  Indians  at 
one  time,  but  the  plans  outlined  contemplate  the  yearly  purchase  of 
such  number  of  rams  as  available  funds  will  permit  to  be  issued  to 
Indians  in  payment  of  labor,  which,  with  those  purchased  by  the 
more  prosperous  Indians  with  their  personal  funds  and  under  the 
supervision  of  the  superintendents  in  charge  of  their  reservations, 
will  aid  materially  in  the  development  of  this  industry. 

The  cooperation  of  representatives  of  the  Bureau  of  Animal  In- 
dustry has  aided  materially  in  the  inspection  of  animals  purchased 
and  the  eradication  of  infectious  diseases  among  the  animals  on  the 
various  Indian  reservations,  particularly  the  disease  of  dourine, 
which  had  spread  to  an  alarming  extent  among  the  horses  belonging 
to  the  Indians  living  on  the  reservations  located  in  Montana  and 


18  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

North  and  South  Dakota.  In  order  that  individual  Indians  might 
not  suffer  the  entire  loss  resulting  from  the  killing  of  his  animals 
for  the  benefit  and  protection  of  the  tribe  as  a  whole  on  account  of 
being  infected  with  such  disease,  where  animals  are  destroyed  on 
account  of  being  infected  with  glanders,  dourine,  or  other  infectious 
diseases,  the  Indians  to  whom  they  belong  are  reimbursed  their  value 
in  an  amount  not  exceeding  $100,  in  order  that  those  depending  on 
such  animals  for  a  livelihood  will  not  be  deprived  of  their  means  of 
securing  a  living,  or  that  persons  having  a  better  grade  of  animals 
may  not  feel  that  they  were  suffering  the  entire  loss,  but  that  such 
loss  is  shared  by  the  tribe  as  a  whole. 

The  foregoing  brief  resume  of  the  year's  work  in  advancing  the 
live-stock  industry  of  the  Indians,  if  compared  with  past  efforts 
along  the  same  line,  will  show  conclusively  that  there  has  been  more 
activity  in  this  branch  of  work  than  ever  before  in  the  history  of 
Indian  administration,  and  that  more  has  been  accomplished  than 
ever  before  toward  making  the  Indian  the  beneficiary  of  all  instead 
of  a  small  part,  as  heretofore,  of  the  profits  to  be  derived  from  the 
exploitation  of  his  own  grazing  resources. 

USE  OF  REIMBURSABLE  FUND. 

The  money  appropriated  by  Congress  for  use  in  the  purchase  of 
live  stock  for  work  and  breeding  purposes  and  agricultural  equip- 
ment for  sale  to  Indians,  under  a  plan  whereby  the  Indians  must 
reimburse  the  Government  for  the  cost  of  the  stock  and  for  equip- 
ment they  receive,  has  been  utilized  to  advantage  during  the  year. 

The  act  of  April  30,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  70-83),  appropriated 
$25,000  for  use  at  the  Fort  Belknap  Reservation,  and  the  act  of  March 
3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  781-795),  authorized  the  expenditure  of  the 
repayments  made  by  the  Indians  until  June  1,  1915.  There  are  ap- 
proximately 164  accounts  with  Indians  at  this  jurisdiction,  and  the 
total  purchases  made  from  the  fund  aggregated  $29,768.26.  Al- 
though there  is  apparently  $9,430.43  still  due  from  Indians,  in  nearly 
every  instance  partial  payments  have  been  made  on  the  various 
accounts.  During  the  last  two  or  three  years  these  Indians  have  been 
reluctant  to  make  further  use  of  this  reimbursable  fund,  giving  as  an 
excuse  their  desire  to  avoid  going  further  into  debt.  This  money 
was  appropriated  for  the  purchase  of  a  class  of  articles  which  will 
aid  the  Indians  to  add  to  their  incomes,  and  not  for  subsistence  sup- 
plies to  be  eaten  up  with  nothing  left  to  show  for  the  expenditure 
but  a  debt.  This  has  been  explained  to  the  Indians,  and  they  are 
now  beginning  to  see  the  advantages  of  the  fund,  and  have  asked 
that  the  time  for  returning  the  money  to  the  Treasury  be  extended 
for  five  years,  as  they  desire  to  make  further  use  of  it. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  19 

The  act  of  April  4,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  269-277),  appropriated 
$15,000  for  encouraging  industry  among  Indians  at  the  Tongue 
River  Reservation.  Nearly  300  Indians  have  participated  in  the  use 
of  this  money,  for  whom  live  stock,  wagons,  harness,  and  agricul- 
tural equipments,  aggregating  in  value  apDroximately  $22,872.21, 
were  purchased,  and  repayments  amounting  to  $15,944.76  have  been 
already  made,  leaving  a  balance  of  $6,927.45  still  due.  This  money 
has  been  used  very  largely  for  breeding  stock,  wagons,  harness,  and 
seed,  and  it  is  therefore  quite  apparent  that  the  Indians  will  derive 
great  benefit  therefrom  and  add  materially  to  their  incomes. 

As  stated  in  last  year's  report,  the  sum  of  $30,000,  appropriated 
by  the  act  of  March  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1061),  for  use  as  a 
reimbursable  fund,  was  apportioned  among  14  different  superin- 
tendencies.  The  amount  of  money  made  available  at  many  places 
was  found  inadequate  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  Indians,  and  al- 
though in  some  instances  further  apportionments  were  made  from 
the  appropriation  of  $100,000  made  in  the  act  of  June  30,  1913 
(Public,  No.  4,  p.  4),  still  further  requests  for  more  money  are  being 
made  by  the  Indians  and  the  superintendents  in  charge.  The  money 
appropriated  in  the  act  of  June  30, 1913,  supra,  has  been  apportioned 
among  24  superin tendencies  in  various  amounts,  ranging  from  $1,000 
to  $25,000,  namely,  Colorado  River,  Fort  Mojave,  Pima,  Havasupai, 
San  Juan,  Leupp,  Pueblo  Bonito,  Navajo,  Round  Valley,  Hoopa 
Valley,  Fort  Yuma,  Fort  McDermitt,  Western  Shoshone,  Walker 
River,  Fallon,  Moapa  River,  Nevada,  Santa  Fe,  Albuquerque,  Zuni, 
Cherokee,  Shawnee,  Shivwitz,  and  Jicarilla. 

While  it  is  not  known  at  this  time  the  precise  number  of  Indians 
who  have  participated  in  the  use  of  these  two  appropriations,  the 
incomplete  reports  indicate  that  the  number  will  exceed  400.  Prop- 
erty, consisting  of  seeds,  breeding  and  work  stock,  harness,  wagons, 
agricultural  implements  of  all  kinds,  was  purchased,  and  the  reports 
from  the  field  indicate  that  the  benefits  which  the  Indians  will  derive 
from  the  use  of  the  stock  and  implements  thus  furnished  will  be  far- 
reaching  and  very  materially  aid  them  in  attaining  self-support.  At 
many  places  Indians  were  furnished  with  cows  and  horses  to  start  in 
the  cattle  business;  some  were  furnished  poultry  to  go  into  the 
poultry  business.  Others  were  furnished  agricultural  equipments 
and  stock  to  farm  their  lands,  and  still  others  were  furnished  stock, 
wagons,  and  harness  to  engage  in  freighting  supplies.  Although  the 
title  to  the  property  remains  in  the  Government  until  full  payment 
is  made  by  the  Indians,  and  the  property  can  be  retaken  upon  default, 
it  is  gratifying  to  recite  that  out  of  all  the  reimbursing  agreements 
entered  into  it  was  necessary  to  retake  the  property  in  only  six  or 
eight  cases.  A  few  of  the  Indians  for  whom  stock  was  purchased 
were  so  unfortunate  as  to  lose  their  stock  by  various  diseases,  but 


20  COMMISSIONER    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

those  Indians  have  manifested  an  inclination  to  pay  off  their  in- 
debtedness, notAvithstanding  their  loss.  By  reason  of  short  crops  or 
some  other  inability,  it  has  been  necessary  to  extend  the  time  in  which 
partial  payments  must  be  made  in  perhaps  40  or  50  cases,  but  in  all 
cases  the  Indians  desire  to  keep  the  property  and  make  payments 
when  they  harvest  and  sell  their  hay  and  other  crops.  The  Indians 
are  rapidly  becoming  accustomed  to  the  real  purpose  and  advantage 
of  funds  of  this  character  and  the  benefits  to  be  derived  therefrom, 
and  are  honestly  cooperating  with  the  view  of  getting  the  very  maxi- 
mum results  from  the  limited  amount  of  money  available. 

In  addition  to  the  congressional  appropriations  referred  to,  tribal 
funds  are  being  used  at  12  different  reservations,  under  the  reimburs- 
able regulations,  in  the  purchase  of  work  and  breeding  stock,  agricul- 
tural equipment,  lumber  for  homes,  fence  material,  and  digging  of 
wells.  Much  good  is  being  accomplished  through  the  use  of  tribal 
funds  in  this  manner.  More  than  300  Indians  have  already  been 
benefited,  through  expenditures  aggregating  more  than  $57,886.42, 
and  approximately  $14,000  have  been  already  repaid  by  the  Indians. 
Where  tribal  funds  were  used,  only  two  Indians  were  delinquent  in 
payments  on  their  accounts,  and  in  not  a  single  instance  has  it  been 
necessary  to  retake  the  property  from  the  Indians  to  whom  it  was 
sold.  In  one  case  the  property  was  returned  to  the  Government 
because  of  the  death  of  the  Indian  to  whom  it  was  sold  and  the 
inability  of  the  heirs  to  meet  the  payments.  This  property  was 
promptly  sold  to  another  worthy  Indian. 

The  estimates  submitted  to  Congress  in  December,  1913,  for  funds 
to  pay  the  current  and  contingent  expenses  of  the  Indian  Service 
for  the  fiscal  year  1915  contained  a  number  of  reimbursable  items 
designed  to  provide  fund's  to  be  used  in  the  purchase  of  seeds,  live 
stock,  and  agricultural  equipment  of  all  kinds  required  to  enable  the 
Indians  at  various  jurisdictions  to  engage  in  some  industrial  pursuit 
from  which  they  might  obtain  self-support.  Well-balanced  indus- 
trial programs  were  formulated  and  brought  to  the  attention  of 
Congress  in  support  of  the  estimates  submitted,  and  it  has  generously 
appropriated  the  sum  of  $725,000  for  encouraging  industry  and  self- 
support  among  the  Indians.  This  is  the  largest  appropriation  ever 
obtained  for  the  advancement  of  industry  and  self-support,  and 
aggressive  steps  have  already  been  taken  to  work  out  the  details 
incident  to  the  use  of  the  money  in  such  a  way  as  to  obtain  for  the 
Indians  the  very  maximum  benefits. 

FARMING. 

Special  effort  was  made  during  the  past  year  to  increase  the  In- 
dians' interest  in  farming  wherever  their  lands  are  adapted  to  this 
industry.  For  this  purpose  approximately  450  farmers  were  em- 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIES.  21 

ployed  at  salaries  ranging  from  $600  to  $1,200  per  annum,  there 
being  only  a  few  at  the  latter  salary.  Their  task  is  to  instruct  the 
Indians  how  to  prepare  the  soil,  the  kind  of  seed  to  select,  and  how 
to  plant,  cultivate,  and  harvest,  and  the  best  disposition  to  make 
of  their  crops. 

The  plan  generally  followed  is  to  district  the  reservations,  station 
a  farmer  in  each,  who  keeps  in  close  touch  with  the  Indians,  fur- 
nishing individual  instruction  and  advice. 

It  was  found  in  some  cases  that  farmers  were  being  used  around 
the  agencies  as  laborers  or  clerks  and  that  superintendents  devoted 
too  much  attention  to  office  work,  neglecting  the  more  important 
field  work.  In  order  to  remedy  this  undesirable  condition  of  affairs 
on  April  5,  1914,  the  following  circular  letter  was  issued : 

To  all  reservation  superintendents: 

I  greatly  desire  it  to  be  understood  throughout  the  service  that  the  present 
administration  of  Indian  affairs  is  determined  that  every  Indian  shall  have 
opportunity  and  encouragement  to  accomplish  industrial  betterments. 

I  want  you  to  know  that  the  magnitude  of  this  undertaking  is  fully  realized, 
and  that,  while  I  do  not  think  it  can  be  accomplished  in  one  summer,  nor  that 
It  can  be  done  without  hard  work  and  some  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  all  of  us, 
I  am  firmly  of  the  opinion  that  it  can  be,  should  be,  and  must  be  done. 

I  am  not  at  all  satisfied  with  the  agricultural,  stock,  and  industrial  condi- 
tions generally  existing  throughout  the  Indian  country,  and  I  am  determined 
that  unceasing  efforts  shall  be  put  forth  to  bring  about  a  radical  and  speedy 
change. 

Primarily  the  opportunity  for  advancement  among  Indians  is  largely  agricul- 
tural and  stock  raising.  The  Indians  own  the  land,  and  with  proper  encourage- 
ment can  so  develop  their  possessions  as  to  insure  ultimate  self-support. 

The  farming  season  is  at  hand.  Every  farmer  should  at  once  become  actively 
engaged  in  advising  and  teaching  the  Indians  how  to  prepare  the  soil,  the  kind 
of  seed  to  select,  when  and  how  to  plant,  grow,  and  harvest,  and  the  best  use  to 
be  made  of  his  crop  when  produced. 

The  Indian  should  be  made  to  realize  that  the  grazing  lands  of  the  United 
States  are  now  almost  entirely  his  own,  and  that  he  has  readily  within  his 
reach  the  possibility  of  becoming  the  cattle,  horse,  and  sheep  king  of  America. 

All  these  things  involve  earnestness  of  purpose  and  close  cooperation  between 
the  Indian  Service  employes  and  the  Indians.  To  insure  the  best  results  every 
man  charged  with  such  a  responsibility  as  farmer  or  stockman  must  devote  his 
time — every  day  of  his  time — in  heart-to-heart  association  and  hand-to-hand 
working  in  his  particular  sphere.  It  must  be  "a  long  pull,  a  strong  pull,  and  a 
pull  altogether,"  as  they  say  at  sea. 

I  can  not  refrain  from  calling  attention  to  a  situation  that  is  very  unsatisfac- 
tory. I  have  information  from  dependable  sources,  and  from  all  sections  of  the 
country,  that  farmers  in  the  Indian  Service  devote  most  of  their  time  to  work 
associated  with  the  business  end  of  the  agencies;  that  our  farmers,  with  a  few 
notable  exceptions,  are  not  in  fact  practical  and  helpful  as  farmers;  that  they 
do  not  go  out  among  the  Indians  on  their  farms  as  they  should  and  as  hereafter 
I  earnestly  desire  them  to  do.  It  is  almost  discouraging  to  contemplate  that 
after  years  of  employment  of  men  who  have  been  especially  charged  with  the 
work  of  advancing  the  farming  interests  of  the  Indians  not  more  has  been 
accomplished. 


22  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Commencing  immediately,  I  wish  word  to  go  down  the  line  from  the  Indian 
Office  in  Washington  to  the  agencies,  and  from  the  agency  throughout  every  res- 
ervation and  on  to  each  allotment,  that  every  Indian  Service  farmer  shall  give 
his  time  to  actual  farming,  and  that  under  no  circumstances  shall  he  continue, 
as  so  generally  has  been  done,  making  the  office  work  the  first  consideration  and 
the  promoting  of  the  farm  work  of  the  Indians  secondary.  These  things  must 
be  reversed. 

Congress,  the  taxpaying  public,  and  the  Indians  have  a  right  to  expect  full 
return  for  every  dollar  appropriated  and  such  permanent  industrial  advance- 
ment of  the  Indians  each  year  as  will  justify  the  maintenance  of  the  force  of 
farmers  and  stockmen  now  employed  and  give  promise  that  eventually  they 
may  no  longer  be  required. 

Nor  am  I  satisfied  with  the  fact  as  I  am  now  convinced  that  the  superin- 
tendents, generally  speaking,  spend  altogether  too  much  time  in  the  office  at- 
tending to  duties  which  properly  belong  to  clerks,  when  the  superintendent,  to 
accomplish  the  best  results,  should  be  out  in  the  field  among  the  Indians  look- 
ing into  their  home  comforts,  after  health  conditions,  and  in  close  contact  with 
them,  giving  personal  attention  to  their  farming,  stock  raising,  and  other  rela- 
tionships that  they  may  be  encouraged  to  do  for  themselves  the  things  that 
they  can  not  have  done  for  them  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time. 

Hereafter  the  superintendent,  in  place  of  devoting  three-fourths  or  more  of 
his  time  to  office  duties,  shall  devote  a  very  large  part  of  his  time  among  the 
Indians  on  the  reservation. 

I  do  not  anticipate  that  the  carrying  out  of  these  directions  will  bring  about 
any  appreciable  congestion  of  the  so-called  "  paper  work "  of  the  office.  I 
believe  the  greater  portion  of  the  office  work  will  be  found  to  fit  in  with  the 
field  work  so  that  it  will  be  done  in  connection  therewith  and  without  hindrance 
to  it. 

Reservation  employees  should  know  the  Indians  and  know  them  well;  under- 
stand their  condition  and  substantially  aid  them  in  their  forward  march  toward 
self-support  and  equipment  for  citizenship. 

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  the  services  of  properly  qualified 
men  for  farmers  at  the  comparatively  small  salaries  paid,  and  limited 
funds  available  will  not  permit  of  the  employment  of  a  sufficient 
number  to  get  the  best  results.  In  fact,  I  believe  that  one  of  the 
greatest  needs  of  the  Indian  Service  is  an  adequate  force  of  prop- 
erly qualified  farmers,  to  instruct  the  Indians  in  agricultural  opera- 
tions. We  need  men  not  only  with  a  technical  and  practical  knowl- 
edge of  farming,  in  all  its  varied  phases,  but  with  certain  personal 
qualities  even  more  essential  to  success,  such  as  a  real  interest  in  the 
Indians'  welfare  and  a  desire  to  help  them  all  they  can;  in  other 
words,  men  imbued  with  the  real  "missionary  spirit,"  who  can  in- 
spire the  Indians  with  the  ambition  to  make  the  most  of  their  oppor- 
tunities in  order  to  become  self-supporting,  independent  citizens. 

In  this  connection  the  following  extract  from  report  of  Supt. 
Thackery,  of  the  Pima  School,  dated  March  31,  1914,  will  no  doubt 
be  of  special  interest: 

I  have  recently  been  able  to  stir  up  a  splendid  interest  on  the  part  of  our 
more  progressive  Indians  in  the  settlement  of  a  new  district  on  the  reservation, 
recently  supplied  with  an  irrigation  system  by  the  irrigation  branch  of  our 
service.  The  interest  of  this  progressive  element  of  the  tribe  has  been  such 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  23 

that  they  have  already  cleared,  ready  for  cultivation,  several  thousand  acres 
of  new  land,  and  this  settlement  will  within  a  year  swell  to  approximately 
1,000  Indians,  covering  in  the  neighborhood  of  10,000  acres  of  irrigated  lands. 
This  progressive  colony  is  made  up  largely  of  returned  students,  who  are  par- 
ticularly anxious  to  demonstrate  what  they  can  do  on  their  own  initiative  as 
farmers  by  irrigation  in  this  locality.  Their  fences  and  ditches,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  main  ditches,  will  be  placed  upon  sectional  lines,  and  their  homes 
and  other  improvements  will  be  built  as  nearly  as  possible  out  of  the  material 
at  hand,  but  in  a  sanitary,  up-to-date  manner.  Some  of  the  men  taking  great 
interest  in  this  new  plan  are  of  the  older  type  of  Indians,  and  are  unable  to 
speak  English,  but  all  are  experienced  farmers  by  irrigation.  They  have 
recently  suggested  to  me  the  propriety  of  giving  them  an  Indian  farmer,  prom- 
ising to  stir  up  what  should  be  a  splendid  competition  between  this  entirely 
Indian  district  and  other  districts  which  are  under  the  supervision  of  a  white 
farmer. 

Special  attention  has  been  devoted  during  the  year  to  efforts  look- 
ing toward  improvement  in  the  personnel  of  the  farming  service  by 
the  elimination  of  inefficient  employees  of  this  class  with  very  good 
results. 

Actual  figures  are  not  yet  available  in  regard  to  the  number  of 
Indians  engaged  in  farming  or  the  crop  production  on  the  various 
reservations  during  the  fiscal  year  1914,  but  it  can  safely  be  stated 
that  both  the  number  of  Indians  farming  and  the  cultivated  acreage 
were  increased  on  practically  all  of  the  reservations. 

INDIAN  FAIRS. 

Indian  fairs  were  held  during  the  year  on  the  following  reser- 
vations : 

Blackfeet.  Red  Lake. 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  Ros?bud. 

Colorado  River.  S-m  Carlos. 

Crow  Creek.  San  Juan. 

Fort  Bidwell.  Santee. 

Fort  Totten.  Shlvwits. 

Keshena.  Sisreton. 

La  Pointe.  Standing  Rock. 

Malki.  Tongue  River. 

Pima.  Tule  River. 

Pine  Ridge.  Yankton. 

It  is  deemed  desirable  to  bring  the  Indians  into  direct  competi- 
tion with  their  white  neighbors,  when  they  are  sufficiently  advanced 
to  do  this  with  profit  to  themselves,  and  with  this  end  in  view 
exhibits  of  Indian  agricultural  products  were  shown  during  the  year 
at  conveniently  located  State  and  county  fairs  by  the  following 
reservations : 

Fallon.  Sac  and  Fox  (Iowa). 

Fort  Lapwai.  Salt  River. 

Leech  Lake.  San  Xavier. 

Nevada.  Union. 


24  COMMISSIONEK   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

For  several  years  a  joint  fair  has  been  held  by  the  Cantonment, 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Bed  Moon,  and  Seger  Indians.  This  fair 
has  now  been  abolished,  and  a  comprehensive  plan  is  being  worked 
out  for  large  exhibits  of  Indian  products  at  the  Oklahoma  State 
Fair  next  fall,  which  has  donated  a  building  50  by  100  feet  for  this 
purpose,  and  will  offer  special  prizes  or  trophies  for  Indian  exhibits. 

Exhibits  of  Indian  products  were  also  shown  at  the  Arizona  and 
Nevada  State  Fairs,  and  at  the  International  Soil  Products  Ex- 
hibition at  Tulsa,  Okla.,  last  fall,  at  each  of  which  a  number  of 
prizes  were  won  by  the  Indians  in  direct  competition  with  products 
shown  by  their  white  neighbors.  Plans  are  also  being  arranged  for 
the  Sisseton  Indians  to  participate  in  the  Tri-State  Fair  at  Browns 
Valley,  Minn.,  on  the  same  basis  as  the  whites,  and  it  is  expected  that 
next  year  their  own  fair  can  be  abolished. 

Instructions  have  been  issued  limiting  Indian  fairs  to  three  days' 
duration,  prohibiting  old-time  Indian  dancing,  and  restricting  horse 
racing,  believing  that  the  attention  of  the  Indians  should  be  directed 
primarily  to  the  agricultural  and  industrial  exhibits  rather  than  to 
the  amusement  features  of  the  fair. 

The  Indian  fairs  on  the  various  Sioux  reservations  were  formerly 
held  on  different  dates,  thus  encouraging  the  Indians  to  be  con- 
stantly visiting  from  one  fair  to  the  other  during  the  fall  of  each 
year.  In  order  to  overcome  this  practice  the  plan  was  adopted  last 
year  of  holding  all  the  fairs  during  the  same  week,  with  such  satis- 
factory results  that  the  practice  will  be  continued. 

The  following  circular  letter  concerning  Indian  fairs  was  issued: 

To  superintendents : 

You  should,  now  be  arranging  for  your  Indian  fair,  and  I  desire  to  impress 
upon  you  my  idea  of  the  purpose  and  possibilities  of  these  exhibitions. 

I  want  these  fairs  so  conducted  as  to  open  to  the  Indians  the  vision  of  the 
industrial  achievements  to  which  they  should  aspire.  I  want  them  to  be  an 
inspiration  in  arousing  in  the  Indian  a  clear  appreciation  of  the  great  oppor- 
tunity before  him  for  real  industrial  advancement. 

The  ownership  of  land  always  has  been  and  always  must  be  the  principal 
basis  of  man's  wealth.  A  wise  development  of  the  vast  natural  resources  of 
the  Indian  reservations  has  tremendous  possibilities.  The  Indian's  rich  agri- 
cultural lands,  his  vast  areas  of  grass  land,  his  great  forests,  and  his  prac- 
tically untouched  mineral  resources  should  be  so  utilized  as  to  become  a  power- 
ful instrument  for  his  civilization. 

I  hold  it  to  be  an  economic  and  social  crime  in  this  age  and  under  modern 
conditions  to  permit  thousands  of  acres  of  fertile  lands  belonging  to  the  Indians 
and  capable  of  great  industrial  development  to  lie  in  unproductive  idleness. 

With  keen  appreciation  of  these  conditions  Congress,  in  the  current  appro- 
priation bill,  has  made  available  for  the  Indians  over  $600,000  as  a  reimbursable 
fund  and  $250,000  additional  for  general  and  specific  industrial  use,  all  for  the 
purchase  of  stock  and  farm  equipment,  as  well  as  about  $800,000  of  the  funds 
of  the  Confederated  Bands  of  Utes  for  the  civilization  and  support  of  those 
Indians. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  25 

I  feel  that  a  serious  obligation  rests  upon  me  and  upon  every  employee  of  the 
Indian  Service  to  see  that  no  effort  is  spared  to  make  the  most  of  the  great 
opportunity  which  the  Indian's  property  and  the  action  of  Congress  now  pre- 
sents to  the  Indian.  It  is  my  duty  to  require  that  every  supervising  officer, 
every  superintendent,  every  farmer,  every  stockman,  and  in  fact  every  employee 
of  the  Indian  Service  meets  this  obligation  in  full  measure. 

The  political  conditions  of  the  world  will  make  the  next  few  years  a  period 
of  great  prosperity  for  the  American  farmer.  Let  us  see  that  the  Indian  with 
his  broad  acres  is  in  truth  an  American  farmer  and  that  he  properly  participates 
in  this  unusual  opportunity. 

I  desire  that  our  Indian  fairs  this  year  be  made  the  opening  of  an  intelligent 
and  determined  campaign  for  the  industrial  advancement  of  the  Indian.  Let 
this  year's  fair  mark  the  start  of  the  Indian  along  the  road  the  purpose  of  which 
is  self-support  and  independence.  Hereafter  let  your  fair  each  year  be  a  mile- 
stone fixing  the  stages  of  the  Indian's  progress  toward  that  goal. 

It  is  a  primary  duty  of  all  superintendents  to  understand  the  Indians  under 
their  charge,  to  study  the  resources  of  the  reservation  for  which  they  are 
responsible,  its  climate,  the  character  of  its  land,  the  type  of  cattle  owned  by 
the  Indians,  their  horses,  their  sheep,  and  their  other  stock. 

With  this  information  you  should  map  out  a  comprehensive  plan  of  cam- 
paign based  on  the  conditions  presented  by  your  Indians.  This  plan  should 
cover  not  only  one  year  but  a  period  of  years,  having  in  view  an  ever-increasing 
number  of  able-bodied  Indians  farming  better  and  more  acres  of  land,  the  con- 
tinual improvement  of  the  live  stock  of  the  individual  Indian  and  of  the  tribe, 
and  the  use  of  grazing,  timber,  and  mineral  lands  with  the  greatest  economical 
benefit. 

This  campaign  should  be  understood  by  the  farmers,  the  stockmen,  the 
industrial  teachers,  and  in  fact  all  employees  connected  with  industrial  work 
on  your  reservation,  and  you  should  endeavor  not  only  to  procure  their  efficient 
aid  in  carrying  out  your  plan,  but  also  their  personal  interest  and  sympathetic 
cooperation.  Let  your  fair  this  year  be  the  place  and  time  at  which  you  will 
join  in  launching  this  live  campaign  for  industrial  betterment. 

Former  widespread  negligence  and  mismanagement  in  the  cultivation  of  the 
soil,  the  breeding  of  stock,  and  the  handling  of  grazing  land  is  no  excuse  for 
the  continuance  of  such  conditions,  and  they  will  not  be  permitted  to  exist  on 
an  Indian  reservation  during  my  administration. 

Be  continually  at  the  fair  yourself  with  your  farmers  and  all  of  your  indus- 
trial employees. 

Let  the  exhibits  emphasize  in  an  impressive  manner  the  difference  between 
inferior  and  high-grade  agricultural  products,  and  let  them  demonstrate  in  no 
uncertain  way  that  greater  profit  results  from  raising  the  best  and  the  most 
of  everything  produced  on  the  farm  or  ranch.  Encourage  the  Indian  to  take 
the  progressive  view.  This  should  not  be  difficult  where  he  has  before  him  a 
clear  object  lesson  such  as  is  emphasized  by  placing  his  horses,  cattle,  and  sheep, 
his  corn,  oats,  wheat,  alfalfa,  and  forage  on  exhibition  in  legitimate  rivalry 
with  those  of  his  neighbor  at  the  Indian  fair. 

The  improvement  of  stock  should  be  aggressively  advocated  and  impressed 
upon  the  mind  of  every  Indian  farmer  and  stock  raiser.  He  should  be  brought 
to  understand  that  the  thousands  of  well-bred  bulls,  stallions,  and  rams  were 
purchased  during  the  last  few  months  to  do  away  with  the  evils  of  lack  of 
sufficient  and  well-bred  male  stock  and  the  inbreeding  almost  universal  in  the 
past.  He  should  understand  that  in  order  to  secure  the  best  results  the  male 
stock  must  not  only  be  improved,  but  that  the  old  and  worse  than  useless  male 


26  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

animals  which  have  heretofore  been  so  destructive  to  the  Indian's  success  as  a 
stock  raiser  must  be  disposed  of. 

Every  advantage  must  be  taken  of  the  opportunity  to  teach  the  Indian  the 
importance  of  careful  preparation  of  the  soil,  the  necessity  for  the  best 
quality  of  seed,  and  the  advantage  of  proper  cultivation.  The  Indian  should  be 
made  to  clearly  understand  the  waste  which  comes  from  the  use  of  bad  seed 
and  poor  cultivation. 

Arouse  enthusiasm  and  rivalry  between  the  men,  women,  and  children  by 
showing  at  the  fair  their  native  products,  such  as  blankets,  baskets,  pottery, 
beadwork,  silversmith  work,  and  lace ;  their  vegetables  and  fruits  of  every  kind 
and  description ;  and  between  the  women  by  showing  the  products  of  the  home 
and  the  farmyard,  including  chickens,  butter,  eggs,  and  canned  fruits. 

Conduct  your  fair  so  as  to  arouse  interest  in  every  form  of  agriculture  and 
stock  raising.  Hold  daily  demonstrations  of  modern  farming  activities.  Open 
a  series  of  industrial  meetings  which  will  extend  throughout  the  winter.  See 
that  the  enthusiasm  aroused  grows,  and  do  not  permit  it  to  wane  before  the 
farming  season  next  spring.  Take  the  opportunity  of  the  fair  to  ascertain 
what  the  Indians  require  in  the  way  of  farm  equipment  and  stock-raising  needs, 
and  make  your  recommendations  to  the  office  during  the  winter  in  order  that 
steps  may  be  taken  for  their  delivery  to  them  in  ample  time  for  the  next 
season;  and  in  this  connection,  after  you  have  started  your  campaign,  advise  me 
fully  of  what  you  have  done  and  what  you  propose  to  do. 

Indian  fairs  should  be  as  nearly  as  practicable  a  counterpart  of  the  white 
man's  fair.  Eliminate  the  wild  west  features  and  the  horse  racing  as  much  as 
possible.  Remember  that  the  campaign  for  the  Indian's  industrial  development 
anticipates  the  passing  of  the  Indian  fairs  in  favor  of  the  county  and  State 
fairs  where  the  Indian  farmers  on  equal  terms  will  compete  with  the  white  man. 

In  conclusion,  I  fully  understand  that  the  task  presented  is  not  an  easy  one. 
It  is  worthy  of  the  steel  of  all  capable  and  energetic"  employees  in  the  service 
who  are  ambitious  to  accomplish  real  things  for  the  Indian,  and  I  feel  that  I 
have  and  will  have  their  active  cooperation.  It  is  necessary  that  I  require  the 
highest  efficiency  and  the  greatest  interest  in  these  matters.  I  can  not  and  will 
not  tolerate  the  failure  of  employees,  through  negligence  or  lack  of  interest,  to 
furnish  Indians,  by  example  or  precept,  with  proper  incentive  to  industry  and 
progress.  If  employees  responsible  for  industrial  betterments  are  not  efficient 
and  can  not  produce  results,  they  must  be  replaced  by  men  who  can  and  will. 
Inspectors,  supervisors,  and  special  agents  are  directed  and  required  to  make 
the  most  careful  study  of  industrial  conditions  on  every  reservation  visited  by 
them  and  fully  report  to  me  what  is  being  accomplished  by  each  employee. 

I  have  received  a  number  of  invitations  to  attend  Indian  fairs  this  year,  and  I 
am  arranging  to  accept  as  many  of  these  invitations  as  my  other  engagements 
will  permit.  I  will  be  glad  by  this  coming  together  and  the  privilege  of  contact 
with  the  individual  Indians  and  their  families  and  the  employees  of  the  service 
to  give  encouragement  and  aid  in  aggressively  starting  an  effective  and  continu- 
ous campaign  for  the  industrial  training  of  the  Indian  and  the  development  of 
his  property. 

FARMING  AND  GRAZING  LEASES. 

The  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  authorizes  Indian  al- 
lottees who  hold  their  lands  under  trust  patents  to  lease  their  allot- 
ments for  not  exceeding  five  years  under  regulations  prescribed  by 
the  department. 


COMMISSIONEK  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  27 

The  practice  of  Indians  leasing  their  lands  is  a  poor  one  at  best, 
as  the  purpose  of  allotment  was  to  give  each  Indian  a  tract  of  land 
which  he  could  call  his  own  and  on  which  he  could  make  an  effort 
to  become  a  self-supporting  member  of  the  community  in  which  he 
might  live.  There  are  many  cases,  however,  in  which  an  Indian  can 
not  make  beneficial  use  of  his  allotment,  and  in  such  cases  it  has 
been  the  endeavor  of  the  office  to  so  regulate  the  leasing  as  to  be 
of  the  greatest  benefit  to  the  allottee.  Old  Indians,  women,  minors, 
and  those  engaged  in  some  gainful  occupation  are,  as  a  rule,  per- 
mitted to  lease  their  lands.  In  other  cases,  where  an  Indian  has 
more  land  than  he  can  conveniently  care  for,  he  is  encouraged  to 
lease  part  and  use  the  proceeds  in  improving  his  retained  land. 

It  has  been  the  aim  of  the  office  in  cases  where  Indians  have  dem- 
onstrated their  competency  to  permit  them  to  negotiate  their  own 
leases  and  collect  the  rentals. 

LEASING  OF  TRIBAL  LANDS  FOR  GRAZING  PURPOSES. 

On  the  Sioux  reservations  the  greater  part  of  the  land  is  allotted 
and  the  remaining  tribal  lands  are  for  the  most  part  scattered  in 
small  tracts  among  the  allotments.  The  practice  of  leasing  large 
districts  as  tribal  pastures  has  been  discontinued,  and  the  various 
white  cattlemen  who  have  been  running  stock  on  the  open  range  on 
these  reservations  have  been  notified  that  their  leases  will  not  be  re- 
newed and  that  they  must  remove  all  stock  this  summer  and  fall. 

One  of  the  large  grazing  districts  of  the  Crow  Reservation  has 
been  greatly  reduced  in  size,  owing  to  the  purchase  of  cattle  for  the 
Indians  and  the  necessity  of  using  part  of  the  district  for  such 
cattle. 

This  plan  is  in  furtherance  of  the  policy  of  the  office  to  aid  the 
Indians  in  increasing  their  cattle  holdings  and  to  foster  stock  in- 
dustry among  them. 

It  is  believed  that  this  plan  will  enable  the  Indians  on  reservations 
suitable  mainly  for  grazing  purposes  to  acquire  a  better  knowledge 
of  stock  raising  and  to  increase  their  holdings  of  cattle,  and  thereby 
to  become  self-supporting. 

The  only  Indian  reservations  remaining  where  large  tracts  may  be 
used  for  grazing  purposes  are  those  on  which  the  Apache  Indians 
are  located  in  Arizona  and  the  Crow  Reservation  in  Montana.  On 
the  San  Carlos  Reservation  approximately  42,700  head  of  cattle  be- 
longing to  cattlemen  are  being  cared  for ;  on  the  Fort  Apache  Reser- 
vation about  21,375  cattle  and  52,000  sheep,  and  on  the  Crow  Reserva- 
tion approximately  45,411  cattle  and  85,000  sheep. 

Steps  have  been  taken  on  several  reservations  to  determine  the 
number  of  stock  that  may  be  safely  carried  on  the  ranges  the  entire 

63556—14 3 


28  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

year,  taking  into  consideration  the  amount  of  feed  during  the  grazing 
season,  the  water  available  for  the  stock,  and  whether  there  are 
winter  ranges  or  whether  it  is  necessary  to  put  up  hay  for  the  stock. 
As  tribal  herds  are  put  on  the  various  reservations  and  the  number 
©f  cattle  belonging  to  outsiders  reduced  or  removed  entirely  reports 
will  be  called  for  showing  the  conditions  on  each  reservation  in  order 
that  proper  action  may  be  taken  to  stock  the  ranges  to  capacity  and 
to  care  for  the  Indian  cattle  during  all  seasons  of  the  year.  On 
reservations  where  there  are  tribal  herds,  the  superintendents  have 
been  instructed  to  see  that  the  Indians  put  up  sufficient  hay  to  care 
for  the  stock  during  the  winter  season. 

TESTING  AND  DEMONSTRATION  WORK. 

Experimental  work  designed  to  test  the  possibilities  of  the  soil  and 
climate  in  various  sections  of  the  country  in  the  cultivation  of  trees, 
grains,  fruits,  and  vegetables  was  carried  on  at  a  number  of  Indian 
schools,  principally  at  Colville,  Blackfeet,  Pala,  Shoshone,  Shivwits, 
Havasupai,  Leupp,  San  Juan,  Pima,  Lower  Brule,  San  Xavier, 
Malki,  and  Tomah.  The  most  important  work  of  this  character,  how- 
ever, was  done  at  the  San  Juan  and  Pima  Reservations. 

At  San  Juan  several  years  ago  the  superintendent  obtained  from 
the  superintendents  in  charge  of  the  various  reservations  samples  of 
seed  corn  grown  by  the  Indians.  Corn  from  over  40  different 
places  was  received  and  planted.  Some  of  this  seed  matured  nicely 
and  did  well;  where  the  seed  was  a  failure  it  was  discarded. 

The  most  promising  seed  was  saved  from  year  to  year  until  now 
the  experiments  are  confined  to  three  distinct  varieties  of  the  new 
eorn,  consisting  of  a  soft  Calico  corn  received  from  the  Rosebud 
Reservation,  a  soft  white  corn  from  the  Eastern  Cherokee  Reserva- 
tion, and  the  other  soft  corn  from  the  Havasupai  Reservation,  which 
varieties  are  doing  exceptionally  well. 

Shallu  produced  a  fair  crop  and  succeeded  better  than  kaffir  corn. 
This  belongs  to  a  group  of  grain  sorghums,  and  stands  more  wet  or 
dry  weather  than  other  maize  or  cane  tried  in  this  section.  Vicia 
Villosa  grew  well. 

Dry  land  alfalfa,  planted  for  the  first  time,  is  showing  evidence  of 
improvement  over  other  varieties. 

Pencilaria  made  enormous  yields  and  is  perhaps  the  greatest  and 
best  yielder  of  any  grain  forage  plant  tried.  Drought-resisting  red 
plover  was  planted  and  apparently  will  be  a  success  and  second  to 
alfalfa  as  a  general  hay  crop. 

Tobacco  was  raised  with  good  success.     The  plants  were  strong 
,and  vigorous,  grew  rapidly,  and  matured  early  in  the  fall. 
,     Beans  were  planted  quite  extensively,  because  this  vegetable  forms 
a  large  part  of  the  bill  of  fare  of  the  Indians  of  this  jurisdiction. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  29 

Various  kinds  of  melons,  of  which  the  Indians  are  very  fond,  were 
successfully  grown.  Among  them  were  a  number  of  new  melons, 
including  a  winter-pie  melon,  which  is  suitable  for  cooking,  and 
Soboba  cantaloupe,  which  can  be  kept  all  winter.  New  varieties 
of  pumpkins,  squash,  radishes,  lettuce,  tomatoes,  onions,  and  other 
vegetables  were  tried  out  with  varied  success. 

With  a  view  of  getting  the  Indians  interested  in  growing  timber 
for  shade  and  other  purposes  in  this  barren  country  where  there  is  no 
timber  except  a  few  cottonwoods  along  the  river  and  cedar  pinions  and 
pines  on  the  mountains,  many  varieties  of  tree  seeds  were  planted. 
The  elm,  yellow  locust,  white  ash,  sugar  maple,  soft  maple,  boxwood, 
osage  orange,  Carolina  poplar,  willow  poplar,  several  varieties  of 
willow,  box  elder,  tamarack,  cypress,  arbor  vitse,  and  a  few  varieties 
of  pines  and  fir  are  making  good  growth  and  proving  successful. 

One  of  the  most  important  branches  of  experimental  work  and 
one  from  which  large  results  are  expected  is  the  testing  and  demon- 
stration work  in  connection  with  the  production  of  Egyptian  cotton 
at  Sacaton,  Ariz.,  under  the  Pima  jurisdiction.  This  work  is  con- 
ducted under  a  cooperative  agreement  between  the  Departments  of 
Agriculture  and  the  Interior.  During  the  planting  season  of  1913 
15  acres  of  Egyptian  cotton  were  grown,  from  which  8,730  pounds 
of  lint  were  produced  at  a  value  of  $1,875.  The  seed  cotton 
was  sold  at  an  average  price  of  21^  cents  per  pound.  The  Indians  in 
this  section  of  the  country,  by  reason  of  the  success  obtained  with 
this  crop  at  the  farm,  are  planting  cotton  seed  obtained  from  the 
demonstration  farm  on  their  own  lands.  About  200  acres  were 
planted  by  them  during  the  year,  and -they  were  so  well  pleased  with 
the  result  of  the  crop  that  an  increased  area  was  planted  this  spring. 

Egyptian  cotton  is  being  largely  raised  by  the  settlers  in  the  Gila 
Valley  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  Salt  River  Valley.  The  raising 
of  Egyptian  cotton  by  the  whites  is  of  great  importance  to  the  In- 
dians, because  it  creates  for  the  Papagoes  and  Pimas  a  market  for 
their  labor  during  the  cotton-picking  season.  This  is  of  especial 
importance  to  the  Papago  Indians,  who  are  usually  poor,  and  for 
whom  the  wages  received  from  this  industry  will  be  of  great  im- 
portance in  raising  them  to  a  higher  plane  of  living.  The  use  of 
Indian  labor  in  connection  with  Egyptian  cotton  is  supervised  by 
representatives  of  the  Interior  Department  and  the  Department  of 
Agriculture,  and  care  is  taken  to  see  that  the  Indians  are  protected 
from  liquor  and  improper  influences  during  the  cotton-picking 
season. 

Experiments  were  also  made  with  what  is  known  as  Mexican  June 
corn,  which  produced  very  good  yields. 

Large  quantities  of  Bermuda  onion  sets  were  furnished  to  the 
Indians.  A  very  good  grade  of  this  type  of  onion  can  be  produced 
by  the  Indians,  and  there  is  a  ready  sale  therefor. 


30  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

The  policy  of  utilizing  Indian  school  farms  at  the  various  reserva- 
tions not  only  for  the  benefit  of  the  schools  and  the  pupils  in  attend- 
ance, but  also  to  demonstrate  to  the  older  Indians  the  possibilities 
of  the  soil,  was  continued  during  the  year. 

The  demonstration  farm  at  Fort  Berthold  provided  for  in  the  act 
of  June  1,  1910  (36  Stats.  L.,  455-456),  established  in  1911  and  1912, 
is  being  operated  with  good  results. 

MINING  ON  INDIAN  LANDS. 

Oil  and  gas  mining  operations  in  Oklahoma  have  been  very  active 
during  the  past  fiscal  year.  An  extensive  pool  was  discovered  a  little 
more  than  a  year  ago  about  14  miles  east  of  Gushing,  which  has  been 
productive  beyond  expectations.  Another  large  pool  has  been  dis- 
covered near  Healdton,  about  14  miles  west  of  Ardmore,  and  wells 
of  large  volume  have  been  brought  in. 

The  Gushing  oil  is  a  high-grade  refining  oil,  while  that  obtained 
from  the  Healdton  field  is  said  to  have  an  asphalt  base,  to  be  some- 
what inferior  to  the  Gushing  oil,  but  of  great  value  as  a  fuel  oil. 
Operations  have  been  conducted  in  other  directions,  proven  fields 
have  been  developed,  and  some  "  wild-catting "  done  with  probably 
the  usual  average  of  success. 

During  the  year  there  has  been  quite  a  fluctuation  in  the  price  paid 
for  crude  oil  in  Oklahoma,  which  is  of  concern  to  the  Indians  who 
own  oil-producing  lands,  as  their  royalties  are  based  on  the  price  of 
crude  oil. 

On  July  1,  1913,  the  market  price  of  crude  oil  in  the  Oklahoma 
field  was  88  cents  per  barrel  of  42  gallons,  which  price  had  been 
effective  for  five  months  prior  thereto.  On  July  7,  1913,  the  price 
was  increased  to  93  cents,  and  rose  comparatively  rapidly,  reaching 
$1.03  on  August  19,  1913,  and  was  finally  advanced  to  $1.05  per 
barrel  on  February  2, 1914. 

During  the  time  the  price  of  crude  oil  was  advancing  development 
work  was  extremely  active,  with  the  result  that  production  reached 
such  a  stage  that  the  pipe-line  companies  could  not  transport  all  the 
oil  being  mined,  and  on  April  8  the  market  price  was  reduced  to 
$1  per  barrel,  and  thereafter  reductions  were  made  rather  rapidly 
until  it  reached  75  cents  per  barrel,  on  April  30,  since  which  time  no 
further  change  has  been  made.  This  price  of  75  cents  per  barrel, 
however,  is  paid  only  for  the  high-grade  refining  oil.  The  operators 
in  the  Healdton  field  receive  but  50  cents  per  barrel  for  their  oil. 

The  oil  men  in  Oklahoma  are.  much  concerned  regarding  the  con- 
dition of  the  oil  business,  and  recently  a  general  meeting  was  held,  at 
which  steps  were  taken  to  curtail  and  control  the  production,  with 
the  hope  that  the  price  of  crude  oil  would  advance.  It  has  been 
agreed  between  many  of  the  producers  to  do  no  drilling  for  four 


COMMISSIONER   INDIA  If    AFFAIRS.  31 

months  except  that  positively  necessary  to  protect  the  lines  or  to  pre- 
vent forfeiture  of  a  lease. 

There  are  prospects  that  oil  and  gas  in  paying  quantities  will  yet 
be  discovered  on  the  Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming  and  the 
Quinaielt  Reservation  in  Washington.  Several  leases  have  been  ap- 
proved covering  Quinaielt  lands  aggregating  about  16,000  acres,  and 
the  lessees  are  active  in  their  preparations  to  begin  work.  On  ac- 
count of  the  very  rough  character  of  country  and  its  inaccessibility, 
development  work  in  this  section  will  be  extremely  expensive. 

PEEVENTION  OF  WASTE. 

Special  efforts  have  been  made  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  waste 
incident  to  drilling  for  and  producing  oil  and  gas  on  Indian  lands 
in  Oklahoma,  and  this  office  has  had  the  valuable  and  hearty  cooper- 
ation of  the  Bureau  of  Mines  in  this  important  work.  The  task  has 
not  been  an  easy  one.  We  have  had  to  combat  ignorance  and  preju- 
dice, and  although  the  results  have  not  been  all  that  could  be  desired, 
we  are  encouraged  to  believe  that  there  has  been  some  improvement 
and  that  oil  men  are  being  awakened  to  the  seriousness  of  conditions. 

Waste  of  oil  and  natural  gas  has  been  particularly  noticeable  when 
a  new  field  has  been  discovered  with  a  production  far  in  excess  of 
expectations,  such  as  the  Gushing  and  the  Healdton  fields,  in  Okla- 
homa, and  has  been  caused  by  a  lack  of  facilities  to  care  for  the 
production  and  to  the  eagerness  of  each  lease  owner  to  get  his  share. 
When  an  oil  well  of  good  capacity  is  discovered  in  a  hitherto  un- 
proven  field,  great  activity  in  drilling  immediately  follows,  and 
many  wells  are  drilled  and  a  large  quantity  of  oil  brought  to  the 
surface  before  pipe-line  companies  haye  extended  their  lines  into  the 
territory  or  tanks  can  be  constructed  in  which  to  store  the  production. 
The  result  has  been  that  hurriedly  constructed  open  earthen  tanks 
must  be  utilized  with  the  consequent  waste  due  to  evaporation  and 
seepage.  It  has  happened  in  some  cases  that  the  oil  has  gotten  away 
entirely  and  been  permitted  to  flow  down  the  streams.  It  is  said 
that  probably  50,000  barrels  of  oil  were  lost  in  the  Healdton  field  in 
this  manner. 

Another  source  of  waste,  particularly  of  natural  gas,  is  that  found 
in  connection  with  drilling  operations.  As  a  general  rule,  operators 
are  not  interested  in  finding  gas.  They  want  oil,  for  which  there  is 
a  ready  market  and  from  which  they  can  derive  a  greater  and 
quicker  income.  Thus,  when  the  seeker  for  oil — particularly  when 
there  is  a  probability  of  finding  oil  by  drilling  to  a  sufficient  depth — 
has  encountered  a  stratum  of  gas  in  his  drilling,  the  practice  of  some 
has  been  to  permit  this  gas  to  "  blow  off  "  or  escape  into  the  air  and 
continue  drilling  for  oil.  Many  million  cubic  feet  of  natural  gas  have 
been  wantonly  wasted  in  this  manner  in  the  Gushing  field. 


32  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

Yet  another  waste,  impossible  of  estimate,  has  been  caused  by  the 
failure  of  operators  effectively  to  confine  water  encountered  in  drill- 
ing to  its  own  stratum,  with  the  result  that  it  has  been  permitted  to 
flow  into  and  flood  lower  oil  and  gas  bearing  strata.  Not  all  of  this 
waste  has  been  on  restricted  lands,  which  comprise  but  about  30  per 
cent  of  the  area  on  which  oil  and  gas  operations  are  conducted.  Prob- 
ably the  greater  amount  of  waste  has  occurred  on  lands  not  under 
the  control  of  the  Government.  Some  waste  is  probably  unavoidable, 
but  there  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  greater  part  thereof  could 
be  avoided  if  the  operators  would  take  proper  precautions  in  advance. 
Aside  from  the  loss  to  the  landowners  of  the  royalty,  there  is  a 
greater  loss  to  the  State  of  Oklahoma  in  general  on  account  of  the 
dissipation  of  its  natural  resources. 

The  lack  of  a  market  for  natural  gas  has  been  due  in  a  great  meas- 
ure to  the  waste  of  the  gas.  A  gas-selling  corporation  will  not  care 
to  construct  its  pipe  lines  into  a  field  producing  both  oil  and  gas, 
while  this  wanton  waste  of  the  gas  is  permitted,  for  there  would  be 
no  assurance  that  there  would  be  any  return  on  the  investment.  If 
proper  methods  were  used  to  conserve  this  gas,  there  seems  to  be  no 
doubt  that  it  would  eventually  find  a  market,  and  thus  prove  a 
source  of  great  revenue. 

The  Bureau  of  Mines  has  made  a  careful  study  of  drilling  methods, 
and  has  introduced  the  so-called  mud-fluid  system,  by  which  the 
production  from  any  stratum,  whether  water,  gas,  or  oil,  may  be 
effectively  sealed  in  its  own  stratum  and  not  permitted  to  flow  into 
and  mingle  with  the  production  of  other  strata. 

Contrary  opinions  are  held  as  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  mud- 
fluid  method  of  drilling.  It  has  been  highly  praised,  and  it  has 
been  adversely  cidticized.  From  a  careful  study  of  the  matter,  how- 
ever, I  am  convinced  that  where  the  method  has  been  given  a  fair 
chance  and  has  been  employed  conscientiously  it  has  done  all  that 
is  claimed  for  it.  The  difficulty  is  due  to  failure  of  operators  to  pre- 
pare to  use  the  method  until  trouble  has  overcome  them,  then  there 
has  necessarily  been  some  delay  in  applying  the  method,  because 
the  apparatus  was  not  at  hand.  Oil  men  are  conservative.  They 
think  their  own  old  methods  are  sufficient,  and  hesitate  to  institute  new 
systems,  particularly  if  there  is  any  additional  first  cost,  overlook- 
ing the  vast  advantages  to  be  gained  in  the  end.  They  must  be 
educated  to  the  use  of  proven  scientific  methods.  The  efforts  of  the 
Bureau  of  Mines  in  this  direction  are  encouraging.  The  Oklahoma 
State  authorities  are  fully  alive  to  the  conditions,  and  are  endeavor- 
ing to  control  operations  so  as  to  benefit  the  greatest  number.  The 
indications  are  that  operators  themselves  are  becoming  impressed 
with  the  necessity  of  using  better  methods,  so  as  to  conserve  oil 
and  gas. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  33 

To  bring  about'  a  proper  regard  for  the  regulations  of  the  depart- 
ment, to  show  the  earnestness  of  the  office  and  its  intention  to  com- 
pel operators  to  put  forth  every  effort  to  prevent  waste,  I  found  it 
necessary  to  fine  several  lessees,  one  of  them  as  high  as  $1,000,  for 
failure  to  comply  with  the  regulations.  I  believe  this  action  has 
had  a  salutary  effect. 

The  force  heretofore  employed  by  the  office  and  the  Bureau  of 
Mines  to  inspect  oil  and  gas  mining  operations  has  not  been  sufficient. 
Development  has  been  so  active  that  it  has  been  impossible  for  oil 
men  to  give  proper  attention  to  detail.  For  instance,  where  efforts 
have  been  made  to  introduce  the  use  of  the  mud-fluid  system  a 
Bureau  of  Mines  representative  would  give  instructions  to  the  driller 
as  to  the  procedure  and  then  be  called  away  to  look  after  some 
important  case  and  not  be  in  a  position  to  see  that  his  instructions 
were  carefully  followed.  It  has  happened  in  cases  that  his  instruc- 
tions were  not  followed,  and  failure  to  obtain  proper  results  has 
been  charged  to  the  system  rather  than  to  the  lack  of  compliance 
with  directions. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1915  contains  an 
appropriation  of  $25,000,  to  be  expended  in  the  employment  of  not 
more  than  six  additional  inspectors  to  supervise  oil  and  gas  mining 
operations  on  allotted  lands  leased  by  members  of  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  from  which  the  restrictions  have  not  been  removed  and  to 
conduct  investigations  with  a  view  to  the  prevention  of  waste.  We 
have  hopes  that  with  this  additional  force  to  supplement  the  efforts 
heretofore  put  forth  we  may  see  great  improvements  in  drilling 
methods  during  the  present  fiscal  year. 

LEASES    OF    OSAGE    OIL   AND    GAS   LANDS. 

During  the  summer  of  1913  several  very  productive  wells  were 
brought  in  on  Osage  leased  lands  in  the  so-called  Boston  Pool.  Ad- 
joining these  wells  were  unleased  lands,  which,  it  was  concluded, 
should  be  offered  for  lease,  both  because  of  prospective  active  bid- 
ding and  for  the  reason  that  the  lands  were  being  drained,  and  con- 
sequently decreasing  in  value  as  oil  and  gas  properties. 

Accordingly,  about  11,000  acres  were  offered  for  lease  by  advertise- 
ment and  bids  opened  on  September  29,  1913.  The  bids  accepted 
covered  10,542  acres,  with  total  bonuses  of  $505,315.40.  This  was  an 
average  bonus  of  $49  per  acre.  This  is  the  largest  bonus  ever  re- 
ceived for  a  tract  of  land  of  that  size  in  the  history  of  the  depart- 
ment's dealings  in  oil  lands. 

Outside  of  the  Five  Tribes  and  the  Osage  Eeservation  but  little 
has  been  done  on  Indian  lands  in  Oklahoma  in  the  oil-mining  in- 
dustry. A  few  leases  have  been  made,  but  developments  have  not 
been  sufficient  to  indicate  whether  drilling  will  be  profitable. 


34  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

DEVELOPMENTS  OUTSIDE  OF  OKLAHOMA. 

Hopes  are  entertained  that  oil  and  gas  in  paying  quantities  will 
yet  be  discovered  on  the  Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming  and  the 
Quinaielt  Reservation  in  Washington.  Several  leases  have  been 
approved  covering  Quinaielt  lands,  aggregating  about  16,000  acres, 
and  the  leasees  are  active  in  their  preparations  to  begin  work.  On 
account  of  the  very  rough  character  of  country  and  its  inaccessibility 
development  work  in  this  section  will  be  extremely  expensive. 

NATIVE  INDUSTRIES. 

The  Indians  on  the  various  reservations  derive  a  considerable  in- 
come from  products  of  native  industries,  such  as  blanket  weaving, 
basketry,  pottery,  laqe  making,  and  beadwork. 

NAVAJO  BLANKETS. 

Undoubtedly  the  Navajo  blanket  industry  continues  to  be  the  most 
important  and  remunerative  of  the  native  industries  in  which  the 
Indians  are  engaged.  The  Navajo  Indians  derive  from  this  source 
about  $700.000  a  year.  The  work  is  done  by  the  women  usually 
during  their  spare  times.  With  a  view  to  avoiding  the  production 
of  large  quantities  of  low-grade  blankets,  known  to  the  trade  as  sad- 
dle blankets,  and  to  guard  against  imitations  and  to  satisfy  the 
public  of  the  genuineness  of  the  blankets  offered  for  sale  as  Indian- 
made  goods  and  at  the  same  time  increase  the  profits  to  the  Indian 
workers,  a  plan  has  been  devised  whereby  a  linen  tag  and  lead  seal 
is  being  attached  to  blankets  purchased  direct  from  the  Navajo  In- 
dians as  a  guaranty  of  their  genuineness.  The  Indians  receive  for 
these  blankets  $8  or  more  in  cash  or  its  equivalent.  The  tagging  sys- 
tem is  being  tried  out  at  Moqui,  Western  Navajo,  and  San  Juan 
Reservations,  and  if  it  proves  successful  at  those  places,  the  system 
will  be  extended  to  the  other  Navajo  reservations. 

In  order  to  assist  and  encourage  these  Indians  to  weave  high-grade 
blankets  and  to  obtain  suitable  blanks  for  exhibition  at  the 
Panama-Pacific  Exposition,  authority  was  granted  for  the  expendi- 
ture of  $375  in  the  purchase  of  the  five  best  blankets  shown  at  a 
contest  held  in  conjunction  with  the  San  Juan  Indian  Fair. 

This  contest  was  duly  held  as  contemplated.  About  700  blankets 
were  displayed  from  the  various  Navajo  reservations,  a  number 
from  points  125  miles  distant.  The  first  prize  ($100)  was  won  by 
Mrs.  Yabbiny  Begay  Camp,  an  Indian  without  education  but  noted 
for  the  extra-fine  quality  of  her  blankets.  The  second  prize  ($90) 
was  won  by  Miss  Susie  Bainbridge,  a  former  schoolgirl,  of  Two  Gray 
Hills,  N.  Mex.  The  three  remaining  prizes  were  limited  to  Indians 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Fort  Defiance  agency. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  35 

The  exhibit  was  considered  by  competent  judges  to  be  the  best 
display  of  Navajo  blankets  ever  seen  in  that  section  of  the  country, 
and  the  keenest  interest  was  shown  by  the  Indians,  traders,  and  vis- 
itors. About  $10,000  worth  of  blankets  were  sold.  Another  contest 
along  similar  lines  will  be  held  in  the  near  future.  The  Navajo 
Indians,  usually  the  men,  also  make  large  quantities  of  silverware 
from  Mexican  coin. 

A  large  number  of  Indians  on  various  reservations  are  more  or 
less  extensively  engaged  in  the  making  of  baskets,  beadwork,  and 
pottery,  from  which  they  derive  $100,000  or  more  annually. 

LACE   MAKING. 

Lace  making  is  becoming  a  very  important  industry  in  some  locali- 
ties, especially  among  the  Mission  Indians  in  Southern  California. 
This  industry  not  only  enables  the  women  and  children  to  utilize 
their  spare  time  in  the  home  and  derive  from  their  labors1  an  income 
to  aid  in  their  support,  but  the  very  nature  of  the  work  has  an  ele- 
vating and  refining  influence  upon  them. 

The  following  circular  concerning  native  industries  was  issued : 

To  superintendents  and  supervisors  of  Indian  schools. 

GENTLEMEN  :  As  you  are  doubtless  aware,  the  Indians  on  the  various  reser- 
vations derive  a  considerable  income  from  the  products  of  native  industries, 
such  as  blanket  weaving,  basket,  pottery,  and  lace  making,  and  beadwork,  their 
earnings  during  the  fiscal  year  1913  amounting  to  approximately  $700,000. 

I  desire  very  much  to  do  and  to  have  done  in  the  field  everything  possible  to 
encourage  the  Indians  to  improve  the  products  of  native  industries,  so  as  to 
make  the  articles  produced  very  largely  of  a  useful  and  practical  sort,  and  then 
to  find  the  best  market  for  disposing  of  the  products  to  the  best  advantage  for 
the  Indians.  To  obtain  the  maximum  and  best  results  every  employee  at  the 
schools  or  on  the  reservations  must,  and  is  here  directed,  to  take  advantage  of 
every  opportunity  to  encourage  Indians  engaged  in  native  industries  to  make 
better  articles  and  aid  them  to  dispose  of  what  they  make  to  the  best  advantage. 
Superintendents  and  field  matrons  in  particular  are  in  excellent  positions  to 
accomplish  much  good  along  this  line. 

In  order  to  enable  me  to  determine  just  what  further  action  is  necessary  on 
the  part  of  the  office  in  the  improvement  and  marketing  of  the  products  of  the 
Indians,  please  submit  at  your  earliest  convenience  answers  to  the  following 
inquiries,  supplemented  by  such  further  information  as  may  be  available,  and 
your  recommendation  as  to  the  course  you  feel  it  would  be  proper  to  pursue : 

1.  What  native  industries  are  the  Indians  at  your  jurisdiction  now  engaged  in? 

2.  Is  the  work  done  by  the  old  or  the  young ;  by  the  women  or  men  ? 

3.  Are  the  Indians  engaged  in  native  industries  throughout  the  year  or  only 
during  spare  times  or  when  in  special  need  of  funds  or  supplies? 

4.  What  means  are  now  employed  to  encourage  improvement  in  the  articles 
made,  and  are  the  young  Indians  to  any  extent  engaging  in  the  native  indus- 
tries? 

5.  In  some  localities  lace  making  is  becoming  an  important  and  profitable 
industry  among  Indians,  especially  the  women  and  children.     What,  if  any- 
thing, is  being  done  among  your  Indians  in  this  respect,  and  do  you  think  lace 
making  can  be  satisfactorily  developed? 


36  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

6.  If  possible,  give  number  of  baskets,  blankets,  pieces  of  beadwork,  amount 
of  lace,  etc.,  made  by  the  Indians  at  your  jurisdiction  annually ;  the  number  of 
Indians  engaged  in  the  work;  the  average  length  of  time  it  takes  to  make  the 
various  articles  and  their  minimum  and  maximum  values. 

7.  Where  do  the  Indians  obtain  the  material  entering  into  the  articles  made? 

8.  Are  the  local  markets  ample  to  handle  the  products  of  the  Indians,  and 
do  the  Indians  receive  the  full  value  thereof?    To  whom  do  the  Indians  sell, 
and  do  they  receive  cash,  merchandise,  or  store  credits  for  their  supplies? 

9.  Do  you  recommend  that  the  office  attempt  to  find  markets  in  the  East  for 
the  products  of  native  industries;  if  so,  why;  for  what  class  of  articles,  and 
what  length  of  time  would  it  take  to  fill  orders  for  the  various  articles? 

10.  Could  you  furnish  samples  of  the  various  articles  for  exhibition  to  mer- 
chants and  others  interested  with  fixed  prices  in  quantities  as  well  as  for  one? 

11.  Would  the  Indians  consent  to  send  their  wares  to  merchants  in  the  East, 
through  your  office,  C.  O.  D.  or  cash  30  days  after  delivery? 

Please  acquaint  the  employees  with  my  wishes  in  this  matter,  answer  the 
questions  as  fully  as  possible,  and  give  any  further  information  available  which 
you  believe  would  be  useful  to  the  office  in  arriving  at  definite  conclusions. 
Your  reply  should  be  mailed  in  time  to  reach  this  office  not  later  than  August  — . 

MARKETING  NATIVE  PRODUCTS. 

The  conditions  under  which  the  Indians  must  now  sell  the  prod- 
ucts of  their  native  industries  are  very  unsatisfactory.  In  some 
places  the  fineness  and  real  art  depicted  in  the  work  of  the  Indians, 
especially  in  basketry,  is  not  appreciated,  and  the  result  is  inferior 
articles  are  being  produced.  Investigations  are  now  being  made  with 
the  view  to  ultimately  formulating  plans  to  induce  the  Indians  to 
make  the  better  grade  of  articles  and  find  for  them  better  markets 
from  which  they  might  realize  the  true  value  of  their  work.  These 
native  industries  from  which  the  Indians  derive  so  large  a  sum  are 
recognized  to  be  of  great  importance,  but  the  problem  of  bringing 
about  improved  conditions  is  a  difficult  one,  primarily  because  the 
Indians  usually  want  their  money  as  soon  as  they  bring  in  their 
articles,  and  this  is  virtually  impossible  where  the  products  are 
disposed  of  in  markets  distant  from  the  homes  of  the  Indians. 

IRRIGATION. 

Under  the  direct  exclusive  supervision  of  this  bureau,  62  prin- 
cipal irrigation  projects  or  systems  on  56  different  reservations  or 
tracts  of  allotted  lands  will  afford  irrigation  when  completed  for 
the  farms  of  about  30,000  Indians.  These  projects  in  their  present 
completed  and  partially  completed  state  are  capable  of  delivering 
water  to  over  368,000  acres  of  land  without  additional  construction, 
and  will  require  for  completion  and  providing  an  adequate  supply  of 
water  an  estimated  expenditure  of  over  $13,000,000.  These  do  not  in- 
clude 40  or  50  minor  projects,  the  large  Indian  projects  in  Montana 
under  construction  by  the  United  States  Reclamation  Service  under 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  37 

contract  with  this  bureau,  nor  several  other  large  projects  known  to 
exist  but  for  which  plans  and  estimates  have  not  been  made. 

In  my  last  annual  report  particular  attention  was  invited  to  the 
Indian  water-rights  situation  on  a  large  number  of  reservations,  and 
the  necessity  for  some  provision  of  law  whereby  individuals  bene- 
fiting by  construction  and  maintenance  of  irrigation  systems  on  In- 
dian reservations,  allotments,  and  lands,  should  be  chargeable  with 
the  cost  of  the  work  done  in  their  behalf,  especially  in  cases  where  the 
cost  of  the  work  was  reimbursable  from  tribal  funds  or  where  the 
work  in  the  first  instance  was  done  with  the  expenditure  of  tribal 
funds. 

This  matter  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  Congress  by  this  office 
and  provision  was  made  in  the  appropriation  act  for  1915,  whereby 
it  is  hoped  that  these  conditions  can  be  adjusted  in  a  proper  manner. 

It  is  also  provided  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  that  one  of  the 
seven  superintendents  of  irrigation  heretofore  authorized  shall  be 
competent  to  pass  upon  water  rights,  and  the  general  irrigation  ap- 
propriation was  made  available  for  protection  of  irrigable  lands 
from  damage  by  loss  of  water  rights,  under  which  provision  this 
branch  of  the  irrigation  work  will  receive  special  attention. 

Specific  authority  of  law  is  also  given  for  the  apportionment  of 
the  cost  of  any  irrigation  project  chargeable  against  tribal  funds, 
in  accordance  with  the  benefits  received  by  each  individual  Indian, 
as  far  as  practicable,  from  such  project. 

These  legislative  provisions  are  considered  as  a  marked  advance 
in  the  policy  of  the  office  toward  protecting  Indians  in  their  water 
rights  and  apportioning  to  individuals  the  cost  of  benefits  to  be 
derived  from  expenditures  of  tribal  funds. 

The  attention  of  Congress  was  also  invited  by  the  office  to  the  con- 
ditions existing  on  the  larger  reservations,  where  water  rights  seem 
to  be  more  or  less  in  jeopardy,  and  provision  is  made  for  the  submis- 
sion to  Congress  of  special  reports  showing  the  status  of  the  water 
rights  of  the  Indians  and  the  method  of  financing  the  projects  and 
other  general  information  as  to  the  Uintah,  Shoshone,  Flathead, 
Blackfeet,  and  Fort  Peck  irrigation  projects.  Active  field  work  in 
carrying  out  this  provision  will  be  completed  in  the  early  part  of  the 
fiscal  year  1915. 

Particular  attention  is  invited  to  the  progress  during  this  fiscal 
year  in  respect  to  relieving  somewhat  the  condition  of  the  Pima  In- 
dians and  in  preparation  for  an  adjudication  of  the  waters  of  the 
Gila  River.  Extended  and  exhaustive  researches  are  being  conducted 
to  have  the  data  necessary  to  protect  the  water  rights  of  the  Pimas. 
A  great  many  of  the  older  Indian  ditches  have  been  cleaned  out  and 
extended  to  their  original  length  and  capacity,  new  diversion  and 
distributing  structures  have  been  installed,  and  a  gratifying  increase 
in  the  irrigated  area  is  reported. 


38  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS, 

The  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  Mission  Indians  and  others  in 
California  has  been  prosecuted  with  diligence,  and  it  is  believed  that, 
except  for  some  minor  projects,  the  main  part  of  this  work  will 
have  been  completed  by  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  1915. 

Among  the  most  important  undertakings  coming  under  the  irriga- 
tion branch  of  the  office  is  the  development  of  water  for  domestic  and 
stock  purposes  on  the  Navajo  Reservation  and  in  the  Papago  coun- 
try. On  the  Navajo  Reservation  several  well- drilling  outfits  have 
been  employed  as  the  funds  available  would  permit  in  developing 
water  by  drilling  and  erection  of  windmills  and  tanks,  with  very 
satisfactory  results.  This  work  has  materially  extended  the  effective 
range  of  the  grazing  lands,  and  the  number  of  stock  of  these  Indians 
has  shown  a  gratifying  increase  as  well. 

Similar  work  is  being  done  in  the  Papago  country,  and  also  sur- 
veys have  been  made  to  determine  the  feasibility  of  small  storage 
projects  and  to  assist  the  Indians  in  the  construction  of  dams  for 
stock  water  and  the  development  of  springs,  where  the  necessity 
appears.  Estimates  were  prepared  and  included  in  the  Indian  ap- 
propriation act  for  1915  for  continuing  the  work  and  for  the  con- 
struction of  permanent  systems  at  several  of  the  villages,  so  that  the 
Indians  might  reside  there  the  year  round.  About  25,000  Indians 
will  benefit  by  this  underground  water  development. 

The  long-standing  contention  for  water  rights  for  the  Yakima 
Indians  for  irrigation  on  their  reservation  in  the  State  of  Washing- 
ton has  been  settled  by  legislation  as  a  result  of  the  work  of  the  Joint 
Congressional  Indian  Commission.  Congress  has  passed  a  law  by 
which  the  Indians  are  to  receive  water  from  the  storage  reservoir 
free  of  charge  for  40  acres  of  each  allotment.  This  settlement, 
while  not  fully  satisfying  all  the  claims  made  to  water  for  the  In- 
dians, will  afford  each  Indian  a  water  right  free  of  storage  charges 
for  the  irrigation  of  a  tract  of  land  which  will  furnish  a  very  good 
income  when  properly  cultivated.  Provision  is  also  made  for  a 
report  to  Congress  upon  the  most  feasible  and  economical  plan  for  a 
distribution  system  in  connection  with  the  present  system,  and  for 
reimbursing  the  Government  for  any  sum  it  may  have  expended  or 
may  expend  for  a  complete  irrigation  system  on  the  Yakima  Reser- 
vation. 

During  the  year  the  report  of  the  Board  of  Engineer  Officers 
upon  the  proposed  San  Carlos  Dam  and  irrigation  project  was  re- 
ceived, and  upon  the  suggestion  of  this  office  an  item  was  included  in 
the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  sufficient  funds  for  completing  the 
investigation  shown  in  the  report  as  necessary  before  proceeding  with 
actual  construction  of  the  project. 

The  situation  affecting  irrigation  projects  and  the  interests  of  the 
Indians  thereunder  appears  to  be  greatly  improved  over  the  condi- 


COMMISSIONEK  INDIAN   AFFAIKS.  39 

tions  existing  a  year  ago,  and  with  the  authority  of  Congress  above 
referred  to  for  certain  changes  continued  progress  is  expected. 

FORESTRY. 

In  January  of  the  present  year  the  office  began  a  campaign  for 
the  improvement  of  housing  conditions  among  the  Indians.  It  is 
the  purpose  to  speedily  remedy  the  deplorable  conditions  which 
exist  on  many  reservations  and  to  afford  every  encouragement  to 
the  construction  of  sanitary  homes.  The  mills  at  the  Klamath  and 
Jicarilla  Agencies,  which  were  burned  near  the  close  of  the  fiscal 
year  1913,  have  been  rebuilt.  Several  new  mills  have  been  purchased 
and  installed,  namely,  two  on  Klamath,  one  on  Nett  Lake,  one  on 
Pine  Ridge,  one  on  Flathead,  one  on  Spokane,  and  one  on  Mescalero. 
Extensive  repairs  have  been  made  to  agency  mills  on  Red  Lake,  Me- 
nominee,  and  Fort  Apache.  There  are  now  over  40  agency  mills  .in 
operation  and  about  the  same  number  of  private  mills  located  upon 
Indian  lands.  On  many  reservations  a  new  interest  in  house  building 
has  been  aroused  among  the  Indians. 

The  superintendents  reported  222  forest  fires  during  the  calendar 
year  ending  December  31,  1913.  The  amount  of  timber  damaged 
was  estimated  at  3,934,450  feet  board  measure.  The  total  area  burned 
over  was  161,556  acres  and  the  damage  to  both  timber  and  forage 
was  estimated  to  be  $34,795.75.  Exclusive  of  the  salaries  of  regular 
forestry  officers,  who  assist  in  fighting  forest  fires  in  connection  with 
their  other  duties,  the  cost  of  extinguishing  fires  was  $3,463.92. 

Early  in  September,  1913,  about  1,275,000  acres  of  timberland  in 
the  Choctaw  Nation,  Oklahoma,  wrere  offered  for  sale  at  public 
auction.  Very  general  interest  was  manifested  in  this  sale  and  1,535 
separate  tracts,  comprising  306,286  acres,  were  sold  in  January,  1914, 
for  $1,460,244.85.  This  total  was  $162,557.37  in  excess  of  the  mini- 
mum price  which  had  been  placed  upon  the  tracts  which  were  sold. 
The  lands  which  were  not  sold  consisting  of  approximately  968,000 
acres  will  be  again  offered  at  public  auction  in  November,  1914.  At 
the  former  sale,  agricultural  lands  were  offered  in  tracts  not  exceed- 
ing 160  acres  and  no  one  person  or  corporation  was  permitted  to  pur- 
chase more  than  one  quarter  section  of  such  lands;  all  other  lands 
were  offered  in  tracts  not  exceeding  640  acres.  In  the  sale  of  .Novem- 
ber, 1914,  all  lands  will  be  offered  in  160-acre  tracts  and  the  limit  of 
160  acres  of  agricultural  land  will  be  maintained,  but  no  limit  will 
be  placed  upon  the  amount  of  grazing  or  timber  lands  which  may  be 
acquired  by  one  person,  firm,  or  corporation. 

One  small  sale  of  timber  has  been  made  on  the  Tulalip  Reserva- 
tion, and  about  290,000,000  feet  board  measure  have  been  offered  for 
sale  under  sealed  bids  to  be  opened  August  15,  1914.  Minimum 
prices  have  been  set  as  follows :  Cedar,  $3.50 ;  Douglas  fir,  white  pine, 


40  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

and  spruce,  $3 ;  hemlock  and  white  fir,  $0.75  per  thousand  feet  board 
measure,  Scribner  rule,  with  provisions  for  an  advance  of  stumpage 
rates  at  the  end  of  each  three  years  of  the  contract  period  of  12 
years.  This  offering  includes  the  major  part  of  the  timber  remaining 
on  allotments  on  the  Tulalip  Reservation. 

The  300,000,000  feet  board  measure  on  the  Fort  Apache  Reserva- 
tion which  was  offered  for  sale  in  January,  1912,  was  reoffered  in 
the  autumn  of  1913.  One  bid  was  received,  but  no  sale  was  effected. 

On  December  1,  1913,  prices  were  readjusted  under  the  contracts 
of  the  J.  S.  Stearns  Lumber  Co.  for  timber  on  allotments  of  the 
Bad  River  Reservation.  This  readjustment  will  result  in  a  gain 
of  over  $100,000  for  the  Bad  River  allottees  over  what  they  would 
have  received  at  the  old  rates. 

Contracts  have  been  approved  for  the  sale  of  the  timber  on  154 
allotments  of  minors  and  full  bloods  within  the  White  Earth  Indian 
Reservation,  Minn.  The  timber  on  these  allotments  was  exposed  to 
great  fire  danger  because  of  being  intermingled  with  lands  formerly 
owned  by  mixed  bloods  on  which  the  timber  had  been  or  was  being 
cut  by  private  operators  through  titles  acquired  under  the  acts  of 
June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  353),  and  March  1,  1907  (34  Stat,  L., 
1034). 

Logging  operations  on  the  Bad  River,  Lac  .Courte  Oreilles,  Fond 
du  Lac,  and  Leech  Lake  Reservations  have  been  continued  by  the 
regular  contractors.  The  amount  of  timber  cut  on  each  may  be 
ascertained  from  the  statistical  appendix  accompanying  this  report. 

The  most  important  single  industrial  enterprise  in  the  Indian 
Service  is  the  Menominee  Indian  mill  at  Neopit,  Wis.  On  the  Me- 
nominee  Indian  Reservation  the  stumpage  is  not  sold,  but  the  Gov- 
ernment manages  all  phases  of  lumber  manufacture  from  the  time 
the  tree  is  severed  from  the  stump  until  it  is  placed  on  the  car  in 
the  form  of  a  finished  product  ready  for  the  wholesale  or  retail 
market.  Within  the  fiscal  year  1914  32,520,330  feet  of  logs  were 
delivered  at  the  mill  by  the  railroad  owned  by  the  Indians,  37,270,494 
feet  of  lumber  were  produced,  and  23,179,511  feet  were  sold.  The 
inventory  of  June  30, 1914,  showed  40,443,793  feet  of  lumber  on  hand 
in  the  yard,  with  an  appraised  value  of  $581,581.74. 

During  the  fiscal  year  1915  especial  attention  will  be  given  to  the 
completion  of  an  inventory  of  the  timber  resources  of  the  Indians. 
The  knowledge  now  possessed  as  to  the  amount  of  timber  on  many 
large  reservations  is  indefinite  and  unsatisfactory.  The  office  is 
confident  that  a  great  improvement  may  be  effected  in  the  condition 
of  the  Indians  through  a  wise  administration  of  the  forests  embraced 
within  the  reservations  occupied  by  them.  The  keynote  of  Indian 
timber  administration  from  now  on  will  be  the  industrial  develop- 
ment of  the  Indians  and  providing  the  Indians  with  better  home 
conditions. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  41 

SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  LIQUOR  TRAFFIC. 

Below  is  an  extract  from  my  address  at  the  conference  of  field 
supervisors  held  at  Washington  February  16,  1914 : 

I  believe  that  the  greatest  present  menace  to  the  American  Indian  is  whisky. 
It  does  more  to  destroy  his  constitution  and  invite  the  ravages  of  disease  than 
anything  else.  It  does  more  to  demoralize  him  as  a  man,  and  frequently  as  a 
woman.  It  does  more  to  make  him  an  easy  prey  to  the  unscrupulous  than 
everything  else  combined.  Let  us  save  the  American  Indian  from  the  curse 
of  whisky. 

We  have  a  force  of  men  engaged  in  the  suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic. 
That  is  their  special  business.  But  it  is  my  business  and  it  is  your  business 
to  do  everything  we  can  without  injecting  ourselves  offensively  into  the  work 
of  others  or  assuming  a  duty  that  is  not  properly  ours  to  create  an  atmosphere 
and  suggest  conditions  that  will  be  helpful  in  this  respect,  and,  above  all,  to 
be  a  personal  object  lesson  inviting  the  Indian  to  banish  liquor  rather  than  to  be 
guilty  of  anything  that  may  cause  him  to  look  upon  one  of  us  as  a  justification 
for  doing  that  which  leads  him  to  the  destruction  caused  by  the  use  of  whisky. 

There  is  nothing  that  could  induce  me,  since  I  have  taken  the  oath  of  office 
as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  to  touch  a  single  drop  of  any  sort  of  intoxi- 
cating liquor,  and  this  regardless  of  my  attitude  on  the  prohibition  question. 

As  a  matter  of  good  faith  to  our  treaty  relationships,  to  legislative  enact- 
ments, to  the  Congress  which  appropriates  $100,000  a  year  for  the  suppression 
of  the  liquor  traffic  among  the  Indians,  we  should  do  everything  reasonably 
within  our  power  to  justify  this  appropriation  and  insure  the  best  results 
obtainable.  This  accomplished,  we  have  laid  a  substantial  foundation  for  all 
of  our  work  in  solving  the  Indian  problem  and  made  a  long  step  forward  look- 
ing toward  their  equipment  for  the  responsibilities  of  citizenship. 

That  these  ideas  should  receive  the  careful  consideration  of  all  the 
employees  of  the  service  and  imbue  them  with  a  realization  of  the 
tremendous  importance  of  this  work,  I  addressed  a  personal  letter 
to  every  employee  of  the  Indian  Service,  containing  the  above  quota- 
tion from  my  address  to  the  field  supervisors. 

The  same  letter  was  also  sent  to  many  persons  whom  I  knew  or 
thought  to  be  interested  in  the  uplift  and  advancement  of  the  In- 
dians. It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  nation-wide  expressions 
of  strong  approval  and  offers  of  cooperation.  This  letter  was  also 
sent  to  many  leading  Indians  of  the  various  reservations  and  has 
brought  numerous  promises  of  hearty  cooperation  and  active  as- 
sistance. The  6th  day  of  April  was  set  aside  on  which  this  letter 
was  directed  to  be  read  to  the  student  body  of  every  Indian  school, 
including  those  under  Government,  mission,  or  private  supervision, 
when  many  of  the  schools  adopted  resolutions  of  earnest  commenda- 
tion. 

In  many  instances  we  have  found  where  the  Indian  leased  his 
lands  that  the  lessees  introduced  liquor  thereon  in  the  belief  that 
there  was  no  law  prohibiting  same.  In  order  to  give  such  parties 
proper  notice  and  warning  and  to  afford  the  Indian  greater  protec- 
tion, a  formal  notice  was  printed,  calling  attention  to  the  law  and 


42  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

instructions  issued  to  the  superintendents  requiring  that  it  should  be 
attached  to  all  printed  leUses  covering  Indian  lands. 

It  was  found  that  the  Indians  were  purchasing  lemon  and  vanilla 
extracts  and  Jamaica  ginger  in  lieu  of  whisky.  In  some  localities 
these  liquids  have  been  the  principal  source  of  the  Indians'  supply 
of  intoxicants.  Several  cases  are  now  pending  in  the  Federal  court 
on  the  charge  of  selling  these  extracts  to  Indians. 

Along  the  same  line  we  have  found  that  the  Indian  has  been 
tempted  through  advertisements  to  purchase  "concentrated  extracts" 
whereby  they  can  make  their  own  liquors,  and  prompt  action  was 
taken  to  procure  an  indictment,  which  is  now  pending.  Not  only 
have  the  Indians  been  tempted  by  liquor  and  extracts,  but  it  has 
been  brought  to  our  attention  that  he  has  sometimes  been  furnished 
with  cocaine,  yenshee,  and  opium,  and  that  in  certain  sections  of  the 
country  he  purchases  proprietary  medicines  which  are  said  to  con- 
tain a  large  per  cent  of  alcohol. 

Our  efforts  to  suppress  the  use  of  peyote  or  mescal  among  the  In- 
dians have  been  carried  on  under  difficulties,  but  we  universally  en- 
deavor to  show  the  Indian  that  this  article  contains  properties  which 
are  detrimental  to  his  welfare  and  should  not  be  used. 

There  are  a  few  localities  in  which  we  have  no  trouble  on  account 
of  the  Indians  procuring  liquor,  but  generally  speaking  we  have 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  satisfactorily  handling  this  situation. 

It  is  very  gratifying  that  we  have  been  successful  in  convicting 
some  of  the  most  prominent  bootleggers  who  have  engaged  in  the 
liquor  business  on  a  large  scale. 

To  successfully  cope  with  the  shrewdness,  trickery,  and  persist- 
ence of  the  bootlegger  requires  character,  judgment,  tact,  and  ability, 
and  I  have  accordingly  in  every  way  endeavored  to  raise  the  standard 
and  efficiency  of  our  liquor  suppression  officers,  including  the  in- 
creasing of  the  salaries  of  those  regularly  employed  in  this  work. 
Furthermore,  all  new  men  are  now  employed  temporarily,  that  they 
may  first  demonstrate  their  fitness  for  this  difficult  and  important 
work,  which  practice  is  proving  very  satisfactory. 

The  use  of  decoys  has  developed  the  usual  comment,  but  consider- 
ing all  the  conditions,  the  decoy  judiciously  used  seems  fully  justified. 

On  December  31 1  attended  a  conference  of  the  special  officers  held 
at  Denver.  It  was  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  liquor  service 
that  a  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  had  attended  such  a  gather- 
ing. The  opportunity  of  meeting  with  the  men  engaged  in  this 
work  and  of  earnestly  presenting  my  views  has  well  repaid  me  for 
the  time  and  effort  involved.  The  officers  have  since  entered  into 
their  labors  with  renewed  energy,  and  taking  into  consideration  the 
various  ramifications  and  legal  questions  involved  are  securing 
splendid  results. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAX   AFFAIRS.  43 

I  am  glad  to  say  that  during  the  past  year  conditions  have  greatly 
improved  in  Oklahoma.  In  my  last  annual  report  I  stated  that  every 
step  was  being  contested  in  the  courts,  and  this  fact  is  further  borne 
out  by  the  work  during  the  past  year.  Actions  were  brought  to  com- 
pel the  railroads  endeavoring  to  cooperate  with  us  to  accept  liquor 
for  shipment  into  certain  portions  of  the  State;  a  restraining  order 
was  asked  for  and  a  suit  for  damages  filed  against  the  United  States 
marshal,  the  chief  special  officer,  and  deputies.  Many  cases  were 
filed  and  appealed  involving  other  phases  of  the  traffic,  hoping  to 
bring  about  unfavorable  decisions. 

Probably  the  most  important  case  involving  the  liquor  suppres- 
sion work  in  Oklahoma  is  now  pending  in  the  Federal  court.  An 
indictment  was  returned  involving  30  defendants  on  a  charge  of  con- 
spiracy to  violate  the  laws  of  the  United  States  with  reference  to  the 
shipment  of  liquor  into  the  eastern  district  of  Oklahoma.  Should 
the  Government  be  successful  in  this  case  it  is  believed  that  the  back- 
bone of  the  "  bootlegging  trust "  will  have  been  broken. 

I  can  not  refrain  from  making  special  mention  of  the  aggressive 
and  efficient  prosecution  of  violators  of  the  liquor  laws  by  the  United 
States  attorneys  and  marshals  of  Oklahoma. 

Most  of  our  work  in  Minnesota  has  been  under  the  provisions 
of  the  laws  of  the  State,  because  of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court 
in  matter  of  Heff  (197  U.  S.,  488),  and  the  fact  that  the  majority 
of  the  Indians  are  citizens.  The  famous  Bemidji  liquor  case  was 
decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  on  June  8 
favorable  to  the  contention  of  the  Government,  but  on  June  22  the 
appellees  were  granted  60  days  to  file  a  petition  for  a  rehearing  which 
has  effected  a  temporary  stay  of  the  enforcement  of  the  judgment 
of  the  court.  This  is  an  important  decision,  and  if  finally  sustained 
will  certainly  result  in  great  improvement  of  conditions. 

We  have  been  actively  engaged  in  suppressing  the  traffic  in  intoxi- 
cants in  South  Dakota  to  protect  the  Sioux  Indians  and  good  results 
have  followed.  Our  work  wras  materially  aided  by  the  decision  of 
the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  United  States  v.  Sam  Perrin,  the 
court  upholding  the  validity  of  the  liquor  provision  in  the  act  of 
August  15,  1894,  which  ratified  the  agreement  with  the  Yankton 
Indians. 

Operations  among  the  Pueblos  in  New  Mexico  assumed  an  active 
state  by  reason  of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States  on  October  20,  1913  (231  U.  S.,  28),  reversing  the  judgment 
of  the  United  States  District  Court  in  the  case  of  United  States  v. 
Sandoval  (198  Fed.,  539),  with  directions  to  overrule  the  demurrer 
to  the  indictment  and  to  proceed  with  the  disposition  of  the  case  in 
regular  course.  The  court  outlined  the  powers  of  Congress  in  deal- 
ing with  a  dependent  people,  confirming  prior  decisions  on  this  sub- 
ject, and  holding  that  although  these  Indians  have  a  fee-simple  title 
63556—14 4 


44  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN    AFFAIKS. 

to  their  lands,  it  is  a  communal  title,  no  individual  owning  any  sep- 
arate tract,  and  that,  considering  the  reasons  which  underlie  the  au- 
thority of  Congress  to  prohibit  the  introduction  of  liquor  into  the 
Indian  country,  it  seems  plain  that  this  authority  is  sufficiently  com- 
prehensive to  enable  Congress  to  apply  the  prohibition  to  the  lands 
of  the  Pueblos. 

The  question  of  citizenship  was  left  open,  the  court  saying  that 
citizenship  is  not  in  itself  an  obstacle  to  the  exercise  by  Congress  of 
its  powers  to  enact  laws  for  the  benefit  and  protection  of  tribal 
Indians  as  a  dependent  people. 

Our  work  in  Montana  has  developed  some  resentment  and  numer- 
ous obstacles,  but  we  are  accomplishing  much  good  and  shall 
increase  our  activities  there. 

Considerable  work  was  undertaken  during  the  year  to  protect  the 
Indians  residing  in  the  State  of  New  York  from  intoxicants.  An 
officer  has  been  thereabouts  for  several  months.  Whether  these  In- 
dians come  within  the  classes  enumerated  within  the  general  liquor 
]aw  is  an  important  question  and  is  now  pending  in  a  case  before  the 
Attorney  General. 

Conditions  in  other  States  inhabited  by  Indians  have  consider- 
ably improved  in  some  instances  and  have  remained  about  the  same 
in  others.  The  cooperation  of  State  and  Federal  authorities  in  the 
trial  and  punishment  of  offenders  is  as  essential  in  this  work  as 
special  officers  are  to  detect  them.  Likewise  it  is  essential  that  we 
have  both  the  moral  and  active  support  of  the  citizens  residing  in 
Indian  communities,  and  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  as  a  result  of  the 
manner  of  our  activities  and  the  sentiment  which  has  recently  been 
aroused  the  evil  results  of  the  liquor  traffic  among  the  Indian  is  fast 
becoming  a  matter  of  grave  concern  to  white  citizens  of  the  country, 
both  for  the  reason  that  they  are  properly  interested  in  the  uplift 
of  the  red  man  and  for  the  further  reason  that  impoverishment  of 
the  Indian  means  that  he  will  ultimately  become  a  charge  upon  the 
taxpayers  of  the  several  States. 

The  results  of  our  labors  show  that  during  the  past  fiscal  year  we 
were  successful  in  bringing  about  1,823  arrests  and  941  convictions; 
247,592  pints  of  liquor  were  seized  and  destroyed  under  the  provisions 
of  section  2140  of  the  Revised  Statutes. 

Our  operations  to  protect  the  Indians  from  intoxicants  extends 
from  Florida  to  New  York  in  the  East,  from  Washington  to  Cali- 
fornia in  the  West,  and  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  Oceans.  In 
this  work  we  endeavor  to  look  after  the  welfare  of  over  300,000  In-  j 
dians  scattered  through  more  than  20  States  of  the  Union.  Many 
complaints  are  received  during  the  course  of  the  year,  which,  by 
reason  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  liquor  suppression  force,  due  to  the 
limited  appropriation,  can  not  be  reached  at  all. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  45 

The  appropriation  for  this  work,  which  is  now  $100,000,  should 
be  materially  increased  that  we  may  be  better  enabled  to  protect  the 
Indians  from  irreparable  injury  by  taking  prompt  action  on  depend- 
able information  constantly  presented  showing  widespread,  gross, 
and  continuous  violations  of  the  Federal  and  State  laws  on  this 
subject. 

ALLOTMENTS. 

During  the  past  two  years  the  quantity  of  allotment  work  handled 
in  the  field  has  decreased  materially.  A  few  years  ago  the  office 
had  as  many  as  18  allotting  agents  in  the  field  at  one  time,  while  to- 
day we  have  but  three.  This  is  due  partly  to  the  fact  that  practically 
all  Indians  on  reservations  containing  land  susceptible  of  agricul- 
tural development  without  irrigation  have  been  allotted.  Some  large 
reservations  still  exist,  particularly  in  the  Southwest,  but  without 
water  for  irrigation  purposes  the  advisability  of  allotting  the  lands 
in  severalty  is  not  apparent,  as  the  reservations  as  they  now  stand 
are  best  adapted  for  stock  raising. 

During  the  past  fiscal  year  allotments  to  4,066  Indians,  covering  an 
area  of  452^921  acres,  were  approved,  and  8,521  allotments,  aggre- 
gating 1,474,044  acres,  were  made  in  the  field,  but  have  not  yet  been 
approved.  The  more  important  work  is  mentioned  below: 

Black  feet,  Mont. — Under  authority  of  the  act  of  March  1,  1907 
(34  Stat.  L.,  1035),  2,624  Indians  were  allotted  888,650  acres  of  land, 
in  areas  of  40  acres  of  irrigable  and  280  acres  of  grazing  land  each. 
Approximately  600,000  acres  of  surplus  land  remains  unallotted  on 
this  reservation. 

Colorado  River,  Ariz. — Under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March 
3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1063),  allotments  of  10  acres  of  irrigable  land 
have  been  made  to  each  Indian  having  rights  on  the  reservation. 
There  is  no  authority  of  law  to  dispose  of  any  of  the  surplus  lands, 
but  bills  have  been  pending  under  which  the  surplus  irrigible  lands 
would  be  turned  over  to  the  State  for  disposal  under  the  Carey  Act. 

Colville,  Wash. — Allotments  in  severalty  on  this  reservation  are 
practically  completed  and  a  commission  is  now  classifying  and  ap- 
praising the  surplus  lands,  approximating  1,000,000  acres,  for  dis- 
posal under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L., 
80).  It  is  expected  that  this  work  can  be  completed  during  the  fol- 
lowing year,  when  the  surplus  lands  will  be  opened  to  settlement  and 
entry. 

Flathead,  Mont. — Allotments  on  this  reservation  were  practically 
completed  some  years  ago,  but  owing  to  conflicts  of  allotments  with 
power  and  reservoir  sites  some  adjustments  were  necessary.  Three 
allotments  were  made  during  the  year  covering  an  area  of  480  acres. 

Fort  Hall,  Idaho. — Under  the  provisions  of  the  acts  of  April  4, 
1910  (3i>  Stat.  L.,  275),  and  March  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1063). 


46  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIBS. 

allotments  in  severally  to  the  Indians  having  rights  on  this  reserva- 
tion have  been  completed.  Allotments  were  made  to  1,832  Indians, 
covering  an  area  of  300,970.80  acres  of  grazing  lands  and  37.1)39:15 
acres  of  irrigable  lands,  a  total  of  338,909.95  acres.  The  acts  cited  also 
authorize  timber,  grazing,  stone  quarry,  agency,  school,  farming, 
cemetery,  and  church  reserves,  which  have  been  made,  aggregating  an 
area  of  83,356.87  acres.  No  law  exists  to  dispose  of  the  surplus  lands. 

Gila  River,  Ariz. — Under  authority  contained  in  the  act  of  Febru- 
ary 8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  as  amended  by  section  17  of  the  act  of 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  1,661  Indians  on  this  reservation 
were  allotted  10  acres  each  of  irrigable  land. 

Pine  Ridge,  S.  Dak. — Allotment  work  on  this  reservation  under 
authority  contained  in  the  act  of  March  2,  1889  (25  Stat.  L.,  888), 
and  supplemental  acts,  is  being  rapidly  brought  to  a  close.  There 
is  no  authority  of  law  to  dispose  of  any  part  of  the  diminished  reser- 
vation other  than  by  allotments,  and  the  land  suitable  for  this  pur- 
pose is  now  very  scarce.  During  the  past  year  allotments  have  been 
made  to  1,303  Indians,  aggregating  an  area  of  313,475.59  acres. 

Quinaielt  Reservation,  Wash. — Practically  all  of  the  agricultural 
and  grazing  lands  on  this  reservation  have  been  allotted.  The 
heavily  timbered  land  of  the  reservation  is  a  very  valuable  tribal 
asset,  and  the  sale  of  the  timber  should  be  administered  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  the  Indians  having  rights  on  this  reservation. 

Salt  River,  Ariz. — On  this  reservation  804  Indians  were  allotted 
24,404  acres  of  land  under  authority  of  the  general  allotment  act  of 
February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  as  amended.  These  allotments 
each  contain  10  acres  of  irrigable  and  20  acres  of  grazing  land. 
:  Shoshone,  Wyo. — During  the  past  year  255  allotments  were  made, 
covering  an  area  of  24,312  acres,  approximately  to  each  allottee  20 
acres  of  irrigable  and  120  acres  of  grazing.  Work  on  this  reserva- 
tion has  been  stopped,  as  practically  all  land  suitable  for  cultivation 
or  grazing  has  been  allotted. 

Standing  Rock,  North  and  South  Dakota. — On  this  reservation 
13,240  acres  of  land  were  allotted  to  83  Indians.  The  surplus  will 
be  disposed  of  under  authority  of  the  act  of  February  14,  1913  (37 
Stat.  L..  675) .  Allotments  are  now  being  made  to  unallotted  children. 

Turtle  Mountain  Indians. — Under  authority  contained  in  the 
agreement  with  the  Turtle  Mountain  Indians,  ratified  by  the  act  of 
April  21,  1904  (33  Stat.  L..  194),  571  Indians  of  this  band  were 
allotted  approximately  82,000  acres.  These  allotments  were  made 
from  public  lands  in  Montana  and  North  Dakota. 

Yakima,  Wash. — Under  authority  contained  in  the  act  of  May  6, 
1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  348),  1,119  allotments  were  made,  covering  an  area 
of  120,966  acres.  This  practically  completes  allotments  on  this 
reservation. 


COMMISSIONED   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  47 

Allotment*  on  railroad  land. — Under  authority  of  the  act  of  March 
4,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  1007),  which  act  authorizes  the  present  owners 
of  lands  under  a  railway-land  grant  to  relinquish  to  the  Government 
any  tracts  that  may  have  been  occupied  for  five  years  by  an  Indian 
who  would  be  entitled  to  the  allotment  on  said  land  but  for  the  grant, 
there  have  been  perhaps  25  or  30  Indians  provided  with  homes  or 
steps  initiated  to  carry  this  into  effect.  These  Indians  undoubtedly 
would  finally  have  been  ejected  from  the  lands  they  had  occupied 
and  improved,  as,  except  for  the  act  mentioned,  there  was  no  au- 
thority of  law  to  allot  the  lands. 

Scattered  bands  in  California. — A  number  of  Indians  living  near 
El  Tejon  Ranch  in  Kern  County,  Cal.,  were  in  danger  of  being 
evicted  from  lands  claimed  by  them,  but  their  interests  were  protected 
by  withdrawing  temporarily  vacant  unappropriated  public  lands  in 
the  vicinity  pending  a  careful  investigation  into  their  condition  and 
needs. 

Mission  Indians. — During  the  past  fiscal  year,  under  authority 
contained  in  the  acts  of  January  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712),  and 
March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1022 ),jthe  office  has  endeavored  to 
clear  up  the  tangled  threads  of  title  tojands  in7California  claimed 
by  the  Mission  Indians  in  that  State  by  reason  of  various  Executive 
orders  issued  difring  the  period  from  1875  to  1889.  Substantially  all 
of  the  area  recommended  by  the  Mission  Indian  Commission,  better 
known  as  the  Smiley  Commission,  appointed  under  the  act  of  Janu- 
ary 12,  1891  (supra),  as  reservations  for  the  Mission  Indians,  has 
been  patented  to  the  various  bands  entitled  under  authority  of  the 
acts  mentioned,  leaving  only  one  reservation,  the  Santa  Rosa,  un- 
patented. 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  in  Wisconsin. — Under  authority  of  the 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  382),  the  department  on  January 
21,  1914,  approved  a  roll  containing  the  names  of  369  Indians  of  the 
Stockbridge  and  Munsee  Tribe  entitled  to  money  in  lieu  of  allot- 
ments. The  superintendent  of  the  Keshena  School  is  now  making 
payments  to  the  beneficiaries  thereunder. 

FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

The  Five  Civilized  Tribes  comprise  the  Cherokee,  Choctaw,  Chick- 
asaw,  Creek,  and  Seminole  Tribes  of  Indians  in  Oklahoma.  Their 
original  domain  was  formerly  known  as  Indian  Territory,  and  be- 
fore the  allotment  of  their  lands  included  an  area  of  19,525,966  acres. 
Their  total  number  of  enrolled  members  and  freedmen  is  101,209. 


48  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

The  enrollment  and  original  area  of  these  tribes  are  shown  by  the 
following  table  :x 


Tribe. 

Number 
enrolled. 

Area. 

Cherokee 

41  693 

Acres. 
4  420  068  00 

Choctaw.                                                                                        

26,  730 

6.  95},  048.  07 

Chickasaw 

10.  955 

4  707  904.28 

Creek...                                                               .      .      ,  

18,712 

3,079,094.00 

Seminole 

3,119 

365,852  00 

Of  the  foregoing  the  freedmen  in  the  several  tribes  number  as 
follows  : 

Cherokee 4,910 

Choctaw 5,994 

Chickasaw 2,473 

Creek 6,  807 

Seminole 986 

DISPOSITION  OF  TRIBAL  AFFAIRS. 

Of  the  total  area  embraced  within  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  there 
were  allotted  to  members  15,794,400  acres.  Of  the  surplus  there  was 
sold  at  public  auction  under  the  act  of  Congress  of 'April  28,  1906, 
2,178,174  acres  for  a  consideration  of  $12,189,193.  There  has  been 
offered  for  sale  1,274,024  acres  of  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  timber- 
lands,  of  which  306,286  acres  were  sold  for  $1,460,244.85.  There 
remains  to  be  sold  in  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations  about  one 
and  one-half  million  acres,  of  which  one-half  million  is  segregated 
coal  and  asphalt  lands,  the  surface  of  which  only  will  be  sold,  and 
968,640  acres  of  timberlands.  There  have  been  collected  royalties 
on  coal  productions  since  1899  $3,615,594.16. 

Under  the  act  of  March  3,  1911,  authorizing  the  deposit  of  receipts 
upon  the  sales  of  surplus  and  unallotted  lands  in  national  or  State 
banks  in  the  State  of  Oklahoma  there  have  been  deposited  in  249 
banks  located  in  69  counties  in  Oklahoma  the  sum  of  $5,083,988.82. 
These  deposits  draw  interest  bearing  from  4  to  6  per  cent.  The  de- 
posits are  secured  by  surety  company  bonds.  There  have  been  de- 
rived from  the  sale  of  town  lots  $4,535,243.57.  The  total  revenue 
collected  and  deposited  to  the  credit  of  the  Five  Tribes  from  July  1, 
1898,  to  June  30,  1914,  wasv  $17,099,826,  and  there  is  yet  due  and 
unpaid,  for  lands  which  have  been  sold,  $5,623,950,  which  sum  is 
drawing  6  per  cent  interest. 

The  tribal  form  of  government  of  the  Cherokee  Tribe  was  practi- 
cally abolished  at  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year  June  30,  1914,  all  tribal 
officers  having  tendered  their  resignations  to  be  effective  as  of  that 
date.  The  resignations  of  all  were  accepted  except  that  of  the  gov- 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


49 


ernor,  whose  temporary  continuance  in  office  will  be  required  to  assist 
in  the  disposal  of  the  few  remaining  details  incident  to  the  complete 
dissolution  of  the  tribal  government. 

Pursuant  to  previous  acts  of  Congress  applicable  to  all  of  the 
tribes,  the  Choctaw,  Chickasaw,  and  Seminole  Tribes  have  been  de- 
prived of  their  legislative  and  judicial  functions,  retaining  only  a 
corps  of  executive  officers  for  the  transaction  of  business  matters. 

In  the  Creek  Nation  the  only  work  of  importance  looking  to  the 
ultimate  disposition  of  tribal  affairs  is  the  equalization  of  Creek 
allotments.  Preparations  have  already  been  made  for  this  work  in 
anticipation  of  congressional  authority  for  the  equalization  of  such 
allotments  on  basis  of  $800. 

Preparations  have  also  been  made  in  the  Cherokee  Nation,  in  an- 
ticipation of  congressional  legislation,  for  the  distribution  of  the  re- 
maining funds  still  held  in  common  to  the  credit  of  the  tribe.  It  is 
expected  that  after  deducting  all  necessary  charges  this  payment  will 
amount  to  about  $12  per  capita.  It  is  also  probable  that  a  per  capita 
payment  of  $100  to  the  Chickasaws  will  be  authorized. 

In  the  Seminole  Nation  there  remain  about  $1,800,000  of  tribal 
moneys  to  be  individualized  before  the  tribal  affairs  can  be  entirely 
finished. 

After  the  sale  in  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  tribes  of  the  timber 
lands  and  the  surface  of  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  lands,  which 
will  be  accomplished  in  the  main  within  the  next  six  months  if  pres- 
ent plans  are  carried  out,  the  chief  property  of  a  tribal  nature  in 
which  these  tribes  will  be  interested  will  be  the  mineral  deposits  and 
the  common  funds  held  in  trust  by  the  United  States,  estimated  to  be 
in  value  and  amount  between  twenty  and  thirty  millions  of  dollars. 

SUPERVISION  OF  INDIVIDUAL  INDIANS. 

Out  of  a  total  enrolled  population  of  101,209  members  and  f reed- 
men  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  those  of  the  restricted  class  number 
36,967.  They  are  apportioned  as  follows: 


Nation. 

Full 
bloods. 

Restricted  class. 

Mixed 
three- 
fourths 
or  more. 

One-half 
to  three- 
fourths. 

Total. 

1,515 

7,074 
1,344 
8,621 
6,830 
1,  250 

252 
706 
85 
1,783 
538 
132 

706 
1,644 
27 
2,966 
1,150 
344 

2,473 
9,424 
1,456 
13,370 
8,518 
1,726 

Chootaws                                                              

Cher  >kpos                                                           

Creeks                                                                                

Seminolos  

Total                                                                           

26,634 

3,496 

6,837 

36,  967 

50 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


From  the  foregoing  it  will  be  seen  that  while  the  work  of  the 
Indian  Department  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  is  approaching 
completion  in  tribal  matters  there  necessarily  remains  a  great  work 
to  be  done  among  the  individual  Indians. 

Since  the  passage  of  the  act  of  May  27,  1908,  removing  the  restric- 
tion as  to  alienation  from  the  lands  of  allottees  of  certain  classes 
there  have  been  approved  11,056  applications  for  the  removal  of 
restrictions  embracing  412,153.64  acres  of  allotted  lands. 

The  leasing  and  sale  of  allotted  lands  require  much  attention  by 
the  field  force  of  the  Indian  Department.  The  following  statement 
will  show  the  sales  of  individual  Indian  lands  consummated  under 
supervision  during  the  year  as  compared  with  previous  years : 

Comparative  statement  of  sales  consummated. 


Fiscal  year  ended— 

Tracts 
sold. 

Acres  sold. 

Consideration 
received. 

June  30  1909 

150 

10  924.  21 

$149  423  20 

June  30,  1910  

629 

53,  192.  75 

566,  666.  57 

June  30  1911 

871 

67  790.47 

674  730  71 

June  30.  1912  

504 

38,  277.  39 

315,  032.  66 

June  30  1913     .             . 

735 

51,817.89 

502  406.36 

June  30  1914 

934 

66  104  33 

636  042  80 

Total 

3  823 

288  107  04 

2  844  302  30 

The  funds  accruing  from  such  sales  are  being  paid  directly  to  the 
allottees,  or  invested  in  improvements  or  other  desirable  property, 
or  held  for  their  future  use. 

There  were  received  and  filed  at  the  Union  Agency  during  the 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914,  3,338  leases,  1,322  assignments,  and 
a  large  number  of  stipulations  for  the  renewal  of  leases,  bringing  the 
total  number  of  leases  received,  principally  oil  and  gas,  beyond  the 
30,000  mark.  During  the  same  year  the  receipts  on  account  of 
royalties  from  Indian  leases  were  $2,059,826.14,  and  the  disburse- 
ments for  the  same  period  were  $1,520,198.38. 

Great  difficulty  has  been  experienced  during  the  year  to  secure 
for  Indian  lessors  the  true  rental  value  of  their  agricultural  lands. 
This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  authorized  under  present  law  to 
lease  their  allotments  for  short  terms  without  supervision.  Such 
leases  also  operate  to  prevent  advantageous  and  successful  sales. 

PROBATE  WORK  IN  OKLAHOMA. 

The  minor  children  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  are  perhaps  the 
richest  average  children  in  the  United  States,  which  condition  results 
from  the  fact  that  in  allotting  the  Oklahoma  Indians  the  chil- 
dren were  given  the  same  number  of  acres  of  land  as  their  parents 
and  share  equally  in  tribal  funds.  Consequently  when  Congress,  in 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  51 

the  act  of  May  27,  1908,  conferred  upon  the  county  courts  probate 
jurisdiction  there  was  involved  a  greater  amount  of  probate  work 
than  existed  anywhere  else.  This,  together  with  the  fact  that  Okla- 
homa was  admitted  into  the  Union  in  1907  and  that  the  county  judges 
then  elected  did  not  all  possess  the  highest  standards  necessarily 
brought  about  a  demoralized,  inefficient,  and  in  some  instances  cor- 
rupt condition. 

It  is  apparent  that  many  guardians  were  appointed  without  re- 
gard to  their  fitness  and  insolvent  bondsmen  accepted.  It  was  not 
uncommon  for  lands  of  minor  Indian  children  to  be  sold  on  appraise- 
ments influenced  by  prospective  purchasers  and  for  inadequate  prices. 
Excessive  compensation  was  many  times  allowed  guardians  and  un- 
reasonably large  fees  paid  to  attorneys.  Under  these  conditions  the 
property  of  Indian  children  was  frequently  so  ravished  that  when 
final  reports  were  called  for  they  were  not  forthcoming,  and  estates 
were  often  found  to  have  been  dissipated  and  their  bondsmen  finan- 
cially irresponsible.  Altogether  it  developed  a  condition  demanding 
speedy  and  radical  reforms. 

I  found  this  startling  situation  soon  after  my  induction  into  office 
in  June,  1913,  and  immediately  proceeded  to  effect  an  organization 
whereby  there  might  be  assurance  that  this  indefensible  procedure 
might  no  longer  maintain.  Thereupon  I  arranged  for  conferences 
to  be  held  at  Muskogee  with  the  county  judges,  prosecuting  attorneys, 
district  judges,  and  others  interested  in  betterments  for  the  territory 
covered  by  the  Creek,  Cherokee,  and  Seminole  Nations,  at  McAlester 
covering  the  Choctaw  Nation  and  likewise  at  Ardmore  covering  the 
Chickasaw  Nation.  These  conferences  were  attended  by  practically 
all  of  the  county  judges,  and  after  some  10  days'  conference,  during 
which  all  matters  and  things  in  detail  concerning  Indian  minor  pro- 
bate conditions  were  exhaustively  discussed,  rules  of  probate  proced- 
ure were  adopted  which  are  said  to  be  more  complete  protection  than 
exists  in  any  other  State.  These  rules,  formulated  under  my  direc- 
tion after  being  adopted  by  the  county  judges,  were  approved  by 
the  president  of  the  State  County  Judges'  Association,  and  soon 
thereafter  officially  adopted  and  promulgated  by  the  justices  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  Oklahoma,  and  have  since  been  in 
full  force  and  effect,  a  copy  of  which  rules  are  herein  below  set  out. 

To  insure  the  prosecution  of  the  probate  work  in  a  systematic  and 
effective  manner  a  force  was  organized  consisting  of  the  best  obtain- 
able attorneys,  each  of  whom  was  chosen  on  his  merits  after  careful 
and  exhaustive  investigation,  to  assist  and  cooperate  with  the  county 
judges.  This  force  was  made  up  in  part  of  attorneys  employed  at  the 
expense  of  the  several  tribes  and  partly  at  the  expense  of  the  United 
States  under  authority  of  section  18  of  the  act  of  Congress  of  June 
30,  1913. 


52  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

Widespread  and  gratifying  results  have  already  been  accomplished. 
Wrongdoers  have  been  prosecuted ;  estates  have  been  recovered ;  dis- 
honest and  incompetent  guardians  have  been  removed;  worthless 
bonds  have  been  replaced  with  responsible  bondsmen;  and  many 
thousands  of  dollars  have  been  saved  to  Indian  minors  and  invested 
for  their  benefit.  These  direct  results  are  also  increased  to  an  extent 
which  can  only  be  approximated  by  the  moral  influence  which  has 
resulted,  operating  powerfully  to  prevent  a  repetition  of  wrongdoing 
and  to  insure  better  conditions  in  the  future. 

As  a  result  of  this  gratifying  progress,  together  with  the  public 
approval  now  almost  universal  in  Oklahoma,  it  is  confidently  be- 
lieved that  the  next  legislature  will  enact  laws  in  harmony  with  these 
probate  rules  and  that  permanent  protection  of  the  property  of  In- 
dian minors  will  be  assured. 

The  following  are  the  rules  of  probate  procedure  now  being  en- 
forced in  the  courts  of  Oklahoma,  and  it  is  my  firm  purpose  to  make 
unrelenting  effort  in  behalf  of  these  Indian  children : 

RULES    OF    PROCEDURE    IN    PROBATE    MATTERS    ADOPTED    BY   THE    JUSTICES 
OF  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  OKLAHOMA. 


Now,  on  this  llth  day  of  June,  1914,  the  justices  of  the  supreme  court,  pur- 
suant to  section  5347,  Revised  Laws  of  Oklahoma,  1910,  meet  at  the  capital 
of  the  State  of  Oklahoma  for  the  purpose  of  revising  their  general  rules  and 
making  such  amendments  in  addition  thereto  as  may  be  required  for  the  proper 
and  expeditious  conduct  of  the  business  of  said  court  and  other  courts  of  record 
of  said  State.  After  due  consideration,  the  justices  of  said  supreme  court 
promulgated  and  adopted  the  following  rules : 

RULE  1. 

The  —  —  of  each  -  —  are  hereby  set  apart  and  designated  as  the  dates 
on  which  the  court  will  hear  guardians'  reports;  provided  that  such  reports 
have  been  on  file  and  notice  given,  as  provided  in  rule  3. 

RULE  2. 

All  guardians  are  required  to  make  annual,  or  semiannual  reports,  unless 
otherwise  directed,  under  oath,  showing  fully  and  completely  the  description, 
character,  kind,  and  value  of  all  property  held  for  their  wards.  All  items  of 
receipts  and  disbursements  must  be  in  detail  and  receipts  produced  and  fi7ed 
for  sums  paid  out.  All  securities  and  assets  should  be  listed  in  each  report, 
and  copies  of  deeds,  mortgages,  etc.,  evidencing  same  recorded  and  attached 
thereto  as  exhibits.  Upon  an  approval  of  any  order  of  court  to  invest  the  funds 
Df  a  ward,  guardians  shall  attach  to  their  reports  copies  of  evidence  of  title 
or  other  investment.  The  date  and  amount  of  guardian's  bond,  premium  paid, 
if  any,  as  well  as  the  names,  addresses,  and  solvency  of  sureties  thereon,  must 
be  given.  The  name,  age,  sex,  of  the  ward  and  relationship,  if  any,  to  the 
guardian  should  be  stated,  and  the  school  advantages  disclosed.  All  reports 
must  be  self-explanatory.  A  failure  or  refusal  to  file  reports  as  due  will  be 

grounds  for  removal. 

RULE  3. 

Upon  the  filing  of  the  reports  and  fixing  of  the  date  for  hearing  thereof,  the 
judge  shall  cause  notice  to  be  given  of  the  date  of  such  hearing  to  the  persons 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  53 

having  custody  of  the  ward,  the  representative  of  the  Interior  Department  or 
probate  attorney,  at  least  10  days  before  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Any  person 
or  persons  interested  may  appear  and  make  objections,  if  so  desired,  to  the 
approval  of  such  reports,  and  offer  evidence  to  support  such  objections. 

RULE  4. 

No  receipts  from  the  ward  upon  the  final  accounting  of  a  guardian  will  be 
accepted  or  considered  unless  the  ward  be  brought  into  open  court,  and  upon 
the  hearing  of  said  final  receipt,  the  stenographic  notes  shall  be  transcribed 
and  a  copy  thereof  filed  with  the  papers  in  the  case.  In  the  consideration  of 
any  reports,  annual  or  final,  any  item  included  in  any  previous  reports  may  be 
reviewed. 

RULE  5. 

Petitions  for  the  sale  of  land  of  minors  and  incompetents  will  be  heard 
of  each  —  — .  On  the  hearing  on  petitions  for  sale,  the  guardian,  per- 


son in  custody,  and  the  ward  himself,  when  over  14  years  of  age,  must  be 
present  and  must  be  examined  as  to  the  necessity  for  said  sale  and  the  truth 
of  the  allegations  of  the  petition,  and  furnish  such  additional  evidence  as  the 
court  may  require.  The  evidence  offered  must  be  taken  down  and  transcribed 
and  a  copy  thereof  filed  with  the  papers  in  the  case.  No  bid  will  be  considered 
by  the  court  unless  a  certified  check  in  the  amount  of  10  per  cent  of  the  amount 
of  the  bid  be  deposited  either  in  court  or  with  the  guardian  offering  the  land 
for  sale. 

RULE  6. 

In  the  sale  of  minors'  lands  or  minors'  interest  in  land,  the  guardians  shall 
be  required  to  render  to  the  court  for  his  approval  before  confirmation  of  sale, 
an  account  of  sale  showing  each  item  of  expense  incurred  in  such  sale,  and  in 
no  case  shall  abstract  fees  be  charged  against  the  minor's  estate,  except  by  a 
special  agreement  with  the  court  at  or  prior  to  the  time  of  filing  bid.  Con- 
firmation will  not  be  had  except  on  the  —  — . 

RULE  7. 

Under  the  sale  of  real  estate  by  guardian,  no  fees  in  excess  of  the  the  follow- 
ing schedule  of  fees  will  be  allowed  attorneys: 

Per  cent. 

On  the  first  $500  or  less 10 

From  $500  to  $1,500,  inclusive .. 5 

From  $1,500  to  $3,000,  inclusive 2 

For  all  above  $3,000 —. 1 

But  in  no  case  shall  the  fee  exceed  the  sum  of  $300.  The  minimum  fee  will 
be  $25,  unless  the  court  in  granting  the  petition  for  the  sale  shall  stipulate 
that  the  fee  and  costs  incident  thereto  shall  be  borne  by  the  purchaser. 

RULE  8. 

No  petition  for  the  sale  of  ward's  property  or  voucher  for  the  payment  by  the 
Interior  Department  of  money  to  the  guardian  will  be  considered  if  said 
guardian  is  delinquent  in  making  reports  or  filing  inventory  as  required  by  law. 

RULE  9. 

No  oil  and  gas  or  other  mineral  lease  covering  lands  belonging  to  minors  or 
incompetents  will  be  approved  except  after  sale  in  open  court  to  the  highest 
and  best  responsible  bidder.  All  petitions  for  the  approval  of  oil  and  gas 
leases  shall  be  filed  at  least  five  days  before  the  same  are  sold,  as  provided 
herein,  and  notice  of  such  sale  must  be  given  by  posting  and  by  publication, 
where  publication  is  practicable,  and  shall  be  on  —  —  of  each  —  — . 


54  COMMISSIONER    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

RULE  10. 

Deeds  conveying  inherited  lands  of  full-blood  Indian  heirs  shall  be  approved 
only  on  the  verified  petitions  of  grantors,  which  shall  set  forth  the  names  of 
the  parties,  description  of  the  land,  roll  number  of  the  decedent  and  grantors 
and  quantum  of  blood,  the  permanent  residence  of  the  deceased  allottee  at  the 
time  of  death,  and  the  character  and  extent  of  the  interest  sold.  Said  petitions 
shall  be  set  down  for  hearing  not  less  than  10  days  from  the  date  of  filing,  and 
on  one  of  the  two  days  hereinbefore  provided  for  the  confirmation  of  sale  by 
guardian,  advertised  in  the  county  where  the  land  is  located  for  one  week,  and 
probate  attorney  or  local  counsel  for  the  tribe  of  which  the  grantor  is  a  mem- 
ber shall  be  notified  upon  the  filing  of  the  petition.  Said  land  shall  be  ap- 
praised, and  testimony  of  disinterested  parties  may  be  required  as  to  the  value 
of  the  land  conveyed  when  deemed  necessary  by  the  court.  The  grantors  shall 
be  present  and  be  examined  in  open  court,  and  before  such  deeds  shall  be  ap- 
proved, and  the  court  must  be  satisfied  that  the  consideration  has  been  paid  in 
full  in  the  presence  of  the  court.  No  petition  will  be  considered  when  any 
deed  has  been  previously  placed  of  record  upon  the  land  or  taken  within  30 
days  after  the  death  of  the  allottee.  The  evidence  shall  be  transcribed  by  the 
stenographer  and  filed  of  record  in  the  case,  the  expense  of  which,  including 
attorneys'  fees,  must  be  borne  by  the  grantee.  When  it  shall  appear  for  the 
best  interests  of  the  Indian,  approval  will  be  withheld  unless  the  grantor  agrees 
in  writing  for  the  deposit  of  the  proceeds  derived  from  the  sale  of  the  land,  to 
be  expended  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  county  court. 

RULE  11. 

Guardians  shall  not  expend  for  or  on  account  of  their  wards  any  sum  unless 
first  authorized  by  the  court,  except  in  case  of  sickness  of  the  ward,  or  other 
emergency,  in  which  event  notice  must  be  given  immediately  to  the  court. 

RULE  12. 

The  national  attorney  or  any  of  the  probate  attorneys  for  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  or  the  representative  of  the  Department  of  the  Interior  (or  Department 
of  Justice  in  the  Seminole  Nation)  will  be  recognized  in  any  matter  involving 
the  person  or  property  of  a  citizen  of  such  nation. 

RULE  13. 

Trust  funds  must  be  deposited  by  the  guardian  as  trustee,  and  not  to  his 
personal  account;  and  where  an  individual  is  guardian  for  several  persons  or 
estates,  the  accounts  shall  be  deposited  and  kept  separate  and  apart. 

RULE  14. 

In  the  settlement  of  a  guardian's  account,  where  the  guardian  is  the  parent 
of  the  ward,  no  allowance  will  be  made  from  the  ward's  estate  for  board  and 
keep,  except  it  is  made  to  appear  a  positive  injustice  would  result  from  the 
enforcement  of  such  rule  and  unless  said  parent  is  unable  to  support  said  ward. 

RULE  15. 

All  guardians  shall  be  required  to  secure  loans  for  funds  in  their  hands  be- 
longing to  their  wards  with  real-estate  first-mortgage  security,  not  to  exceed 
50  per  cent  valuation  of  the  land,  approved  by  the  county  court,  for  such  length 
of  time  as  will  insure  the  collection  of  the  principal  and  interest  before  the 
arriving  at  majority  of  the  wards. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  55 

RULE  16. 

No  will  or  other  instrument  purporting  to  be  a  will  covering  the  lands  of  a 
restricted  Indian  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  whether  such  land  be  his  indi- 
vidual allotment  or  inherited  land,  when  submitted  by  the  allottee  or  other 
l>erson  to  the  proper  probate  court,  as  required  under  existing  law,  shall  receive 
the  acknowledgment  of  nor  be  admitted  to  probate  by  such  probate  court  until 
after  notice  shall  have  been  given  to  the  local  probate  or  tribal  attorneys  for 
the  tribes  or  for  the  Department  of  the  Interior,  or  a  representative  thereof. 

RULE  17. 

These  rules  shall  also  apply  to  executorships  and  administrations  in  so  far 
as  they  are  applicable,  especially  inasmuch  as  sales  of  property  and  accountings 
are  concerned. 

RULE  18. 

All  advertisements  not  required  by  law  may  be  waived  with  the  consent  of 
the  county  court  upon  the  approval  of  the  probate  attorney  or  tribal  attorney. 

It  is  ordered  and  directed  by  the  supreme  court  that  the  judge  of  any  court 
wherein  said  rules  may  be  applicable  shall,  immediately  after  conference  with 
the  probate  attorney  assigned  to  his  county  or  district  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Indian  Affairs,  fill  in  all  blank  spaces  in  said  rules  left  vacant  by  the  justices 
of  the  supreme  court  to  suit  the  conveniences  of  said  judges  and  facilitate  the 
efficient  and  orderly  transaction  of  business  in  their  respective  courts. 

And  it  is  further  ordered  and  directed  that  the  rules  so  promulgated  and 
adopted  shall  apply  to  the  supreme  court,  district  courts,  superior  courts,  county 
courts,  and  all  other  courts  of  record  throughout  the  State  in  which  they  may  be 
applicable,  mid  that  they  shall  be  of  full  force  on  and  after  the  15th  day  of 
July.  1914. 

CERTIFICATE. 

STATE  OF  OKLAHOMA,  County  of  Oklahoma,  88  : 

I,  W.  H.  L.  Campbell,  clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court  for  and  in  the  State  of 
Oklahoma,  do  hereby  certify  that  the  foregoing  is  a  full,  true,  correct,  and  com- 
plete copy  of  certain  rules  promulgated  and  adopted  by  the  justices  of  said 
supreme  court  for  the  proper  and  expeditious  conduct  of  the  business  of  said 
court  and  other  courts  of  record  of  said  State  as  the  same  appear  of  record  in 
my  office. 

In  testimony  where  of  I  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  affix  the  seal  of  said  court 
this  24th  day  of  June,  1914. 

[SEAL.  1  W.  H.  L.  CAMPBELL, 

Clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  Oklahoma. 

NEW  YORK  INDIANS. 

The  Indian  situation  in  New  York  is  one  of  the  most  peculiar 
problems  with  which  this  office  has  to  deal.  Shortly  after  assuming 
duties  as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  instructions  wrere  given 
that  a  thorough  and  exhaustive  study  of  the  entire  situation  be  made, 
with  a  view  ultimately  of  working  out  some  feasible  solution  of  the 
present  anomolous  condition. 

In  the  seventeenth  century  jurisdiction  over  certain  territory  now 
in  the  western  part  of  the  State  of  New  York  was  claimed  both  by 
the  Plymouth  Colony  and  the  Duke  of  York  under  conflicting  grants 


56  COMMISSIONER    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

made  by  the  Crown  of  England.  Antedating  the  Federal  Constitu- 
tion the  two  colonies  (Massachusetts  and  New  York)  by  convention 
settled  the  points  in  dispute.  By  this  agreement  New  York  ceded  to 
Massachusetts  the  right  of  preemption  of  the  soil  from  the  native 
Indians,  and  all  other  right,  title,  and  property  in  and  to  these  lands, 
the  right  of  government,  sovereignty,  and  jurisdiction  being  excepted. 

In  March,  1791,  Massachusetts  sold  its  right  and  title  to  these  lands 
to  Robert  Morris,  and  by  several  mesne  conveyances  the  Ogden  Land 
Co.  acquired  a  claim  of  title  to  all  the  lands  embraced  in  the  Catta- 
raugus  and  Allegany  Reservations  and  a  part  of  those  in  the  Tusca 
rora  Reserve.  The  locus  of  the  fee  in  and  to  these  lands  is  an  inter- 
esting question.  The  Ogden  Land  Co.  claims  a  fee  through  the  sale 
to  Robert  Morris  by  the  Massachusetts  Colony.  The  Indians  claim 
the  fee,  advancing  the  argument  that  the  only  thing  Massachusetts 
had  the  power  to  sell  was  the  preemption  right  of  first  purchase 
whenever  the  Indians  get  ready  to  part  with  it.  New  York  has 
always  claimed  jurisdiction  on  the  ground  that  this  was  retained  in 
the  convention  with  Massachusetts  in  the  eighteenth  century.  The 
Seneca  Nation  or  Tribe  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  State 
of  New  York  in  1845  (sec.  1,  chap.  150),  and  individual  members 
of  the  tribe  hold  deeds  to  certain  tracts  within  their  reservation, 
which  deeds  have  been  placed  of  record  in  the  proper  county.  Sales 
of  individual  tracts  to  white  persons,  however,  is  prohibited.  These 
facts  have  tended  to  further  complicate  the  situation. 

In  1904  a  bill  was  pending  (H.  R.  7262,  58th  Cong.)  designed  to 
allot  in  severally  the  lands  claimed' by  these  Indians,  and  the  question 
was  quite  extensively  agitated  at  that  time.  The  legislation  failed  of 
enactment,  however,  and  I  am  now  giving  the  question  careful  con- 
sideration with  a  view  of  submitting  an  appropriate  draft  of  legisla- 
tion to  the  Congress  at  an  early  date  providing  for  a  division  of  the 
tribal  lands  and  the  placing  of  these  Indians  .on  a  basis  of  citizenship 
equal  to  other  residents  of  the  State — a  place  which  they  should  have 
occupied  long  ago. 

FORT  SILL  APACHE  PRISONERS  OF  WAR. 

The  remnant  of  Geronimo's  band  of  Apaches,  with  the  children 
born  to  the  members  since  their  capture  20  years  ago,  were  held  in  a 
nominal  status  as  prisoners  of  war,  and  of  late  years  have  been  lo- 
cated at  Fort  Sill,  Okla. 

The  last  of  this  band  was  released  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  War 
Department  in  March,  1914,  All  adult  Indians  among  those  who 
elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma,  instead  of  going  to  the  Mescalero 
Reservation  in  New  Mexico,  as  187  members  of  the  band  elected  to 
do  during  the  fiscal  year  1913,  have  been  allotted  suitable  tracts  of 
land  which  were  purchased  for  them. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  57 

All  reports  concerning  the  part  of  the  band  remaining  in  Okla- 
homa are  to  the  effect  that  they  are  now  reasonably  comfortably  sit- 
uated and  bid  fair  to  become  industrious,  self-supporting  Indians. 

The  part  of  the  band  who  removed  to  the  Mescalero  Reservation  in 
New  Mexico  have  possibly  not  made  so  much  advancement,  but  these 
Indians  have  been  placed  in  a  position  to  commence  farming,  and 
have  been  reported  as  fairly  comfortable  and  satisfied  during  the 
year. 

The  further  work  of  reestablishment  of  these  Indians  is  being 
made  the  subject  of  special  attention. 

PURCHASE  DIVISION. 

Goods  and  supplies  to  the  amount,  approximately,  of  $3,500,000 
were  purchased  for  the  service  during  the  fiscal  year  just  closed  and 
delivered  at  a  cost  for  transportation  of  about  $264,021.66,  exclusive 
of  wagon  transportation  from  the  terminals  of  railroads  and  boat 
landings,  which  service  amounted  to  $168,139.70.  The  cost  of  in- 
spection was  $6,862.47.  These  amounts  indicate  service  actually  paid 
for  to  date.  They  will  be  increased  by  liabilities  incurred  during 
the  last  three  months  of  the  fiscal  year  which  have  not  been  placed  on 
our  liability  ledgers.  The  high  cost  of  supplies  has  had  its  effect  on 
the  prices  paid  in  numerous  lines  during  the  year,  particularly  in 
the  purchase  of  beef,  both  net  and  gross. 

In  addition  to  such  supplies  as  the  superintendents  bought  direct 
other  purchases  were  made  for  them  through  the  several  Indian 
warehouses,  all  of  which,  except  emergency  purchases  from  Indians 
or  patented  articles,  were  made  after  proper  advertisement,  as  re- 
quired by  law.  These  purchases  were  authorized  only  after  the  bids 
secured  by  the  officer  had  been  presented  to  this  office  and  checked, 
freight  figured  when  necessary,  and  the  most  advantageous  quota- 
tion accepted,  price  and  quality  considered. 

The  service  has  not  received  quite  all  the  benefit  hoped  for  from 
its  policy  of  economy  in  purchasing,  as  oftentimes  what  was  saved 
in  original  cost  was  offset  by  delay  in  delivery.  The  necessity  for 
more  expeditious  execution  of  field  officers'  requests  is  realized  and 
steps  have  been  taken  to  modify  the  existing  plan  so  as  to  effect 
quicker  deliveries.  As  the  idea  is  developed  during  the  coming  year 
greater  efficiency  in  purchasing  will  result. 

Short  cuts  to  quick  results  have  been  adopted,  both  in  the  office  and 
field,  and  believing  that  concentrated  effort  will  materially  improve 
our  system  a  new  division,  designated  "  purchase,"  has  been  created, 
which  will  handle  exclusively  the  purchase  and  transportation  of 
supplies. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  current  fiscal  year  will  pro- 
vide for  three  permanent  warehouses  instead  of  five,  as  heretofore. 


58  COMMISSIONED    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

which  will  effect  a  material  saving.  During  the  active  shipping  sea- 
son temporary  receiving  and  shipping  depots  will  be  established  at 
points  found  to  be  necessary. 

In  effecting  these  economies  we  have  not  lost  sight  of  quality.  The 
old  idea  that  anything  was  good  enough  for  the  Indians  has  been 
driven  to  the  rear,  as  those  having  dealings  with  the  office  now 
realize,  and  the  Indian  Service  to-day  is  no  longer  the  depository 
for  such  supplies  as  dealers  otherwise  could  not  dispose  of.  High- 
grade  stock  cattle,  standard  agricultural  implements,  good  substan- 
tial foodstuffs,  and  good  grades  in  other  lines  are  bought  for  the 
Indians.  Under  the  reimbursable  plan,  where  an  individual  Indian 
must  pay  ultimately  in  cash  for  such  articles  as  may  be  bought  for 
him,  he  has  been  permitted  largely  to  make  his  own  selection,  pro- 
vided, of  course,  it  was  reasonable  and  the  articles  of  standard 
quality. 

Where  it  has  been  considered  advisable  to  do  so  the  commercial 
standing  of  successful  bidders  has  been  investigated  before  contracts 
were  awarded,  and  in  order  that  those  with  whom  we  have  business 
dealings  might  be  brought  into  a  clearer  relationship  with  the 
service,  each  contractor  personally  has  had  his  attention  called  to  the 
fact  that  his  contractual  obligations  must  be  fulfilled  to  the  very 
letter  and  that  no  deviation  therefrom  will  be  tolerated.  Inspectors 
of  goods  and  supplies  will  be  required  to  exercise  the  utmost  care  in 
passing  on  deliveries  to  see  that  inferior  articles  are  not  accepted. 
In  the  inspection  of  such  supplies  as  would  come  within  their  scope 
of  work,  we  have  been  materially  > assisted  by  the  Bureau  of  Stand- 
ards, the  Bureau  of  Mines,  and  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  fiscal  year  bids  were  opened  and  contracts 
awarded  at  San  Francisco  for  the  Pacific  coast  schools  and  agencies, 
this  being  the  first  opening  there  since  the  spring  of  1910. 

For  the  purpose  of  increasing  competition  in  connection  with  our 
woolen  piece  goods  and  clothing  contracts,  the  Bureau  of  Standards, 
at  our  suggestion,  drew  up  new  specifications  therefor,  under  which, 
during  the  latter  part  of  the  fiscal  year  just  closed,  clothing  was  pur- 
chased for  the  fiscal  year  1915. 

Realizing  daily  the. serious  handicap  imposed  by  certain  statutes 
governing  the  purchase  of  supplies,  remedial  legislation  has  been 
prepared  to  afford  relief  in  that  direction  and  place  our  purchasing 
on  a  more  business-like  plane.  This  legislation  we  hope  to  have  con- 
sidered during  the  next  session  of  Congress,  and,  should  it  pass,  our 
purchasing  will  be  done  writh  less  cirumlocution  and  greater  efficiency. 

It  is  my  purpose  to  continue  to  inaugurate  improvements  in  the 
purchasing  system  of  the  Indian  Service  until  it  is  placed  on  a  sound, 
economical,  efficient,  and  business-like  basis. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  59 

SALES  OF  INDIAN  LANDS. 

The  sale  of  allotted  and  inherited  Indian  land  is  provided  for  by 
the  acts  of  Congress  approved  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245), 
March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015),  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444), 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  and  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat,  L., 
678).  The  last-mentioned  act  extended  the  provisions  of  the  act  of 
June  25,  1910,  to  Oklahoma,  with  the  exception  of  lands  belonging 
to  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osages;  so  that  since  the  pas- 
sage of  this  act  patents  in  fee  simple  can  be  issued  to  the  pur- 
chasers of  Indian  land  in  Oklahoma,  with  the  above  exceptions. 

During  the  fiscal  year  947  sales  have  been  made  involving  90,768.30 
acres,  consideration  $1,652,815.50.  The  average  price  for  which  the 
land  was  sold  is  a  little  over  $17  per  acre.  The  year  previous  this 
office  sold  317  tracts  of  land,  involving  31,576.74  acres,  for  a  consid- 
eration of  $692,413.28. 

The  sale  of  land  in  1912  and  1913  was  seriously  affected  by  reason 
of  the  drought  that  prevailed  in  the  Indian  country,  but  during  the 
past  fiscal  year  there  has  been  more  demand  for  Indian  land. 

New  rules  now  in  effect  in  this  office  enable  the  prompt  handling 
of  all  sale  cases,  and  soon  after  the  papers  reach  the  office  the  pur- 
chaser is  placed  in  possession  of  the  land  and  the  money  made  avail- 
able for  the  use  of  the  Indian  owner. 

PATENTS  IN  FEE. 

The  issuance  of  patents  in  fee  to  Indian  allottees  and  the  heirs 
of  deceased  Indians  is  authorized  under  the  acts  of  May  8,  1906 
(34  Stat.  L.,  182),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  and  February  14, 
1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678). 

During  the  fiscal  year  1,382  applications  for  fee  patents  were  re- 
ceived in  this  office,  234  of  which  were  denied  and  1,148  approved. 
The  area  patented  embraced  152,405.44  acres.  Since  May  8,  1906, 
8,020  applications  for  fee  patents  have  been  received,  involving  an 
area  of  859,781.96  acres.  During  the  past  year  90  per  cent  of  the 
fee  patents  which  have  issued  cover  lands  allotted  to  Indians  of  one- 
half  Indian  blood  or  less,  and  about  50  per  cent  of  the  cases  involving 
the  issuance  of  patents  in  fee  covered  inherited  land. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

During  the  year  new  regulations  concerning  the  handling  of  indi- 
vidual Indian  money  were  promulgated,  and,  although  they  were 
felt  to  be  very  liberal,  amendments  conferring  further  authority  on 
superintendents  were  found  to  be  advisable  and  have  been  adopted. 
63556—14 5 


60  COMMISSIONER    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

The  funds  are  derived  principally  from  (1)  sale  of  allotted  and 
inherited  lands,  (2)  lease  accruals.  (3)  sale  of  timber,  (4)  oil  and 
gas  royalties,  an'd  (5)  earnings  of  outing  pupils.  The  amount  of 
deposits  of  this  character  in  bonded  depositaries  on  June  30,  1914, 
was  approximately  $13,000,000. 

Idealizing  the  vital  importance  of  the  Indian  procuring  his  money 
when  he  needs  it,  and  that  plans  made  by  the  superintendent  for  him 
should  not  be  allowed  to  become  impracticable  through  delay  in  ob- 
taining the  funds  with  which  to  carry  them  out,  the  method  of  han- 
dling the  requests  for  these  expenditures  has  been  changed  com- 
pletely, and  all  such  requests  now  receive  prompt  consideration,  with 
the  result  that  requests  which  formerly  required  a  month  or  longer 
to  receive  administrative  action  are  now  returned  to  the  field  the 
day  following  their  receipt  in  the  office. 

Special  attention  has  been  given  to  the  conservation  of  minors' 
funds,  and  authorities  have  been  largely  restricted  to  expenditures 
which  were  in  the  nature  of  investments. 

DEPOSITARIES  FOR  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

On  June  30,  1914,  the  amount  of  tribal  and  individual  moneys 
on  deposit  in  banks  was  $18,269,420.12.  The  rate  of  interest  paid 
on  these  moneys  for  the  year  averaged  higher  than  for  any  previous 
year. 

By  a  regulation,  effective  July  1,  1913,  Indian  moneys  held  to  the 
official  credit  of  superintendents  or  disbursing  officers  are  deposited 
at  the  same  rate  of  interest  as  that  paid  on  open  accounts  of  indi- 
vidual Indians.  The  amount  realized  from  this  source  during  the 
year  amounted  to  approximately  $34,000.  More  money  has  been 
placed  on  time  deposit  than  heretofore,  and  this  no  doubt  has  been 
a  contributing  factor  in  the  better  interest  earnings.  The  number  of 
holding  banks  increased  from  450  to  564. 

During  the  year  two  banks  carrying  bonded  Indian  deposits  were 
closed  by  order  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency.  Since  the 
placing  of  Indian  moneys  in  banks  there  have  been  five  failures 
among  the  holding  banks,  but  no  loss  to  the  Indians  has  resulted, 
either  of  principal  or  of  interest,  as  the  funds  were  fully  protected 
by  bonds  with  responsible  sureties. 

INHERITANCE  CASES. 

The  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  devolves  on  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior  the  duty  of  determining  the  heirs  of  de- 
ceased Indians.  The  work  in  the  past  has  been  greatly  handicapped 
by  the  lack  of  appropriations,  and  consequently  by  the  lack  of  suffi- 
cient employees  to  handle  it.  The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  61 

fiscal  year  1914  partially  removed  this  impediment,  by  an  appro- 
priation of  $50,000,  $40,000  of  which  was  available  for  use  during 
the  past  year  in  the  payment  of  salaries  of  examiners  of  inheritance, 
and  necessary  clerical  help,  at  some  of  the  larger  Indian  reserva- 
tions, namely:  Uintah  and  Ouray,  Utah;  Shoshone,  Wyo. ;  Crow 
and  Flathead,  Mont.;  Jicarilla,  N.  Mex. ;  Cantonment,  Cheyenne, 
Arapaho,  Kiowa,  Pawnee,  Seger,  and  Shawnee,  in  Oklahoma; 
Klamath,  Umatilla,  and  Warm  Springs,  in  Oregon;  Cheyenne  River 
and  Sisseton,  in  South  Dakota ;  and  Cushman  and  Yaldma,  in  Wash- 
ington. Through  this  expenditure,  the  work  has  been  brought  cur- 
rent at  Uintah  and  Ouray,  Jicarilla,  Seger,  Umatilla,  Flathead,  and 
Cushman.  The  remaining  $10,000  was  used  for  an  increased  office 
force  of  clerks  with  the  necessary  legal  training  to  prepare  the  cases 
for  final  action. 

During  the  year  over  11,000  cases  were  received  in  the  office,  and 
11,389  letters  were  written  by  this  force. 

Five  thousand  four  hundred  and  ninety-two  estates  of  deceased 
Indians,  who  held  their  allotments  under  trust  patents,  388  estates 
of  deceased  Indians  holding  their  allotments  under  restricted  fee 
patents,  and  251  estates  of  deceased  nonallottees  leaving  trust  prop- 
erty were  finally  acted  upon  during  the  year  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior,  and  approximately  $80,000  was  collected  or  is  due  under 
the  provision  of  law  requiring  that  $15  shall  be  collected  to  cover 
the  cost  of  determining  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees  in  each  case. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  of  August  1,  1914  (Public,  160), 
for  the  fiscal  year  1915,  appropriated  $100,000  for  this  work,  $20,000 
of  which  is  authorized  for  payment  of  clerical  assistance  in  the  office. 
It  is  the  intention  to  assign  an  increased  force  of  examiners  to  the 
field,  and  it  is  hoped  that  by  the  end  of  the  year  a  substantial  gain 
vvill  be  made  in  the  work  of  determining  the  heirs  of  the,  approxi- 
mately, 40,000  cases  pending  at  the  various  agencies,  representing 
inherited  property  valued  at  more  than  $60,000,000. 

RIGHTS  OF  WAY. 

BAILBOADS. 

• 

The  construction  of  railroads  across  Indian  lands  has  not  been 
active  during  the  past  fiscal  year.  No  extensive  lines  have  been  pro- 
jected. Rights  of  way  for  several  short  lines  have  been  approved, 
and  some  of  the  lines  already  in  operation  have  acquired  amended 
rights  of  way  for  the  purpose  of  eliminating  curves  or  otherwise 
improving  their  roadbeds. 

PIPE  LINES. 

• 

The  urgent  need  for  additional  facilities  for  the  transportation 
and  storage  of  oil  produced  from  the  Oklahoma  oil  fields  still 


62  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

continues,  and  rights  of  way  for  pipe  lines  and  tank  sites  have  been 
granted  to  the  following : 

Prairie  Oil  &  Gas  Co.  Gulf  Pipe  Line  Co. 

National  Refining  Co.  David  Gunsberg. 

Wichita  Natural  Gas  Co.  Oklahoma  Pipe  Line  Co. 

Magnolia  Pipe  Line  Co.  Quaker  Oil  &  Gas  Co. 

Cosden  &  Co.  Indiahoma  Refining  Co. 

Yale  Natural  Gas  Co.  Kathleen  Oil  Co. 

Creek  County  Gas  Co.  Oil  Production  Co. 

Only  Oil  Co.  Toxaway  Oil  Co. 
Charles  B.  Shaffer. 

HIGHWAYS. 

The  local  authorities  throughout  those  States  in  which  there  are 
reservations  have  shown  increased  activity  during  the  past  year  in 
making  applications  for  permission  to  open  and  establish  public 
highways  across  Indian  lands.  About  25  applications  have  received 
approval  and  as  many  more  are  now  pending. 

WHITE  EARTH  LAND  SUITS. 

The  prosecution  of  the  White  Earth  land-fraud  cases  has  been 
carried  on  with  such  dispatch  as  has  been  possible  under  the  con- 
ditions. 

The  Government  has  lost  one  very  important  point :  Judge  Morris, 
of  the  United  States  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Minnesota, 
had  rendered  an  opinion  holding,  in  effect,  that  an  allottee  having 
less  than  one-eighth  mixture  of  white  blood  should  be  considered  as 
a  full-blood  Indian,  and  that,  therefore,  such  allottees'  restrictions 
were  not  removed  by  the  acts  of  June  2,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  353),  and 
March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1034).  The  cases  were  appealed  to  the 
United  States  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Eighth  Circuit, 
where  the  decision  of  Judge  Morris  was  overruled,  the  court  holding 
that  every  Chippewa  Indian  who  had  an  identifiable  mixture  of 
other  than  Indian  blood  derived  from  ancestors  who  have  other  than 
Indian  blood  is  a  mixed-blood  Indian.  The  Government  thereupon 
appealed  the  case  to  the  Supreme  Court,  and  that  tribunal,  on  June 
8,  1914,  handed  down  an  opinion  upholding  the  decision  of  the  cir- 
cuit court  of  appeals. 

WHITE  EARTH  ROLL. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.  L., 
88),  contains  a  provision  for  the  preparation  of  a  roll  of  Chippewa 
Indians  allotted  within  the  White  Earth  Reservation,  Minn.,  by  a 
commission  consisting  of  two  persons  appointed  by  the  senior  judge 
of  the  United  States  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Minnesota. 
The  court  appointed  as  such  commission  Mr.  R.  J.  Powell,  an  attor- 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  63 

ney  of  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  and  Mr.  Gordon  Cain,  an  attorney  of 
the  Department  of  Justice.  The  work  of  preparing  the  roll  is  going 
forward. 

SPO=PE. 

Early  in  March  of  the  present  year  I  learned  that  a  Blackfeet 
Indian  by  the  name  of  Spo-pe  was  incarcerated  in  the  Government 
Hospital  for  the  Insane  in  this  city.  Facts  in  connection  with  this 
case  were  presented  to  me  which  aroused  my  immediate  interest. 

It  appeared  that  this  Indian  was  tried  and  found  guilty  of  murder 
in  Montana  Territory  on  the  14th  of  October,  1879,  and  was  sentenced 
to  be  hanged.  This  sentence  was  later  commuted  by  the  President  to 
life  imprisonment  in  the  Detroit  House  of  Correction.  After  a  year 
in  that  institution  it  was  determined  that  Spo-pe  was  insane,  and  he 
was  transferred  to  the  Government  Hospital  for  the  Insane,  in  this 
city,  where  he  had  remained  for  32  years. 

I  made  a  personal  investigation  of  the  case  and  spent  some  hours 
with  Spo-pe  at  the  Government  Hospital.  It  seemed  to  me  that 
without  regard  to  the  nature  of  his  crime  or  the  justice  of  the  pun- 
ishment to  which  he  was  sentenced,  this  Indian  had  long  since  paid 
the  penalty  for  his  offense.  The  fact  that  Spo-pe,  if  insane  at  all, 
was  but  mildly  so,  and  the  great  length  of  his  confinement  under 
most  unusual  circumstances,  appealed  to  my  sympathy.  It  seemed 
wholly  out  of  harmony  with  the  genius  of  American  institutions  that 
anyone  could  be  permitted  to  pay  such  a  terrible  penalty  for  the  com- 
mission of  an  offense  against  our  laws,  particularly  that  the  punish- 
ment should  be  imposed  under  the  very  shadow  of  the  Capitol  of 
this  great  Democracy. 

Upon  my  request  formal  application  was  made  for  the  pardon  of 
Spo-pe,  and  on  July  6, 1914,  the  President  pardoned  the  Indian  from 
his  sentence  of  life  imprisonment.  The  authorities  at  the  hospital, 
feeling  that  Spo-pe's  mental  condition  was  not  of  a  nature  which 
would  warrant  them  in  retaining  him  at  the  institution,  he  was 
immediately  freed,  and  I  took  steps  to  have  him  returned  to  the 
Blackfeet  Reservation. 

On  July  18,  1914,  the  Blackfeet  Indians  held  a  council,  at  which 
the  formal  enrollment  of  Spo-pe  as  a  member,  made  necessary  by 
his  long  absence  and  to  avoid  legal  complications,  was  unanimously 
approved.  The  action  of  the  tribe  in  adopting  Spo-pe  was  approved 
on  August  13,  and  on  the  next  day  the  superintendent  was  directed 
to  assist  Spo-pe  in  selecting  suitable  lands  for  allotment. 

INDIANS  FOR  EXHIBITION. 

The  office  is  frequently  in  receipt  of  requests  to  grant  permission 
for  the  use  of  Indians  from  various  reservations  for  exhibition 
purposes. 


64  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

I  am  opposed  to  this  kind  of  employment  and  feel  that  every  means 
should  be  utilized  to  urge  Indians  against  such  methods  of  livelihood. 
It  is  the  policy  of  the  office  to  persuade  Indians  to  erect  permanent 
and  substantial  homes  on  their  allotments  for  themselves  and  their 
families,  to  cultivate  their  lands,  to  surround  themselves  with  live 
stock,  and  to  become  thrifty  farmers.  I  can  conceive  of  no  line  of 
employment  for  a  people  by  nature  of  a  roving  tendency  more  in- 
consistent with  the  Government's  general  policy  of  training  Indians 
to  become  self-supporting  citizens  than  to  permit  them  to  travel 
around  the  country  with  so-called  wild- west  shows,  exhibiting  them- 
selves and  their  families  in  the  costumes  of  savagery,  presenting 
barbaric  episodes  of  the  past  which  might  better  be  forgotten. 

The  wages  earned  in  such  employment  are  small  and  can  not  be 
used  to  justify  the  risk,  even  with  the  best  of  supervision,  which 
comes  to  the  ordinary  Indian  in  the  traveling  life  under  the  condi- 
tions surrounding  the  average  show,  from  contact  with  liquor  and 
with  an  element  having  no  interest  Avhatsoever  in  his  moral  or  in- 
dustrial advancement. 

At  the  present  time  a  few  Indians  are  employed  with  show's  under 
supervision.  I  feel,  however,  that  I  should  endeavor  to  do  away 
with  the  white  man's  commercialization,  of  the  Indian  for  exhibition 
purposes  as  rapidly  as  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  Indians  have 
been  permitted  to  engage  in  such  employment  for  many  years  and 
can  not  easily  be  brought  back  to  an  appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  a 
different  mode  of  life. 

STATISTICS. 

During  the  year  special  attention  has  been  given  to  simplifying  the 
statistical  portion  of  the  annual  report.  Heretofore  statistical  in- 
formation has  been  spread  over  considerable  space,  but  now  by 
arranging  the  tables  in  the  most  concise  manner  possible  current 
data  is  still  able  to  be  shown,  while  the  cost  has  been  reduced  to  the 

minimum. 

INDIAN  SERVICE  EMPLOYEES. 

I  believe  that  the  preparation  of  the  Indian  for  full  citizenship 
will  be  accomplished  not  only  through  education  and  training,  but 
must  also  come  from  the  example  set  by  the  employees  of  the  Indian 
Service.  For  this  reason,  if  for  no  other,  I  have  devoted  a  great 
deal  of  my  time  to  a  careful  study  of  the  personnel  of  the  field 
service. 

There  are  approximately  2,500  Indians  regularly  employed  in  the 
field  service  and  a  large  number  are  employed  by  the  day  at  various 
schools  and  agencies.  The  number  of  Indians  employed  is  steadily 
increasing,  there  being  about  600  more  employed  now  than  were  so 
employed  in  regular  positions  during  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  30, 


COMMISSIONED    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  65 

1909.  While  the  greater  number  of  these  Indians  are  employed  in 
minor  positions  excepted  from  examination,  there  are  over  300  em- 
ployed in  the  more  important  places. 

The  automatic  promotion  of  teachers  has  been  continued  and  is 
proving  a  success. 

The  system  of  granting  educational  leave  to  school  employees  in 
order  that  they  may  be  given  an  opportunity  to  attend  summer 
courses  in  educational  institutions  has  resulted  in  a  marked  improve- 
ment in  their  teaching  methods. 

Until  recently  a  practice  prevailed  in  the  field  service  of  em- 
plo}rees  resigning  when  unable  to  procure  a  requested  transfer  and 
soon  thereafter  requesting  reinstatement,  which  resulted  in  a  large 
number  of  needless  resignations  and  reinstatements.  All  employees 
have  been  notified  that  they  will  not  be  considered  for  reinstatement 
until  six  months  shall  have  elapsed  after  the  date  of  their  resigna- 
tion, unless  the  resignation  contained  definite  information  as  to  their 
intention  to  request  reinstatement  and  giving  a  satisfactory  reason 
therefor.  This  has  resulted  in  a  marked  decrease  in  the  number  of 
resignations  and  reinstatements. 

A  very  careful  study  is  now  being  made  of  the  capabilities  of  each 
employee  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  the  proper  branch  of  the  service 
in  which  the  qualifications  and  abilities  of  the  employee  may  best  be 
utilized. 

Jin  the  early  part  of  May,  1914,  a  letter  was  directed  to  each  super- 
intendent requiring  that  each  position  recommended  for  continuation 
during  the  ensuing  fiscal  year  be  fully  justified.  This  resulted  in  the 
abolishment  of  45  unnecessary  positions,  carrying  salaries  aggre- 
gating $23,229. 

Iln  the  exercise  of  further  justifiable  economy  and  to  prevent  what 
often  was  a  mere  abuse,  Sunday  work  is  discouraged  as  much  as  pos- 
sible. No  employee  receiving  a  per  diem  rate  of  compensation  is 
permitted  to  receive  pay  for  work  performed  on  Sunday  unless  the 
services  are  actually  necessary. 

The  urgent  deficiency  act,  approved  April  6,  1914,  prohibits  the 
payment  of  a  per  diem  in  lieu  of  subsistence  unless  expressly  pro- 
vided by  law,  and  limits  the  amount  that  may  be  paid  for  actual 
expenses  to  $5  per  day.  This  provision  of  law  made  necessary  the 
modification  of  the  commissions  of  a  great  number  of  persons  in  this 
service  then  receiving  a  per  diem  in  lieu  of  subsistence,  and  while  the 
act  referred  to  permits  subsistence  charges  not  exceeding  $5  per  day, 
I  have  set  the  maximum  at  $3  for  most  of  the  employees.  This  will, 
it  is  believed,  effect  further  economics. 

An  innovation  recently  inaugurated  requires  that  all  employees  in 
the  Indian  Service  submit  to  the  office  a  photograph  taken  within  the 
last  two  years,  which  is  filed  with  the  status  record  of  the  employee. 


66  COMMISSIONER    INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 

This  plan  is  carried  further,  and  persons  seeking  transfers  are  re- 
quired to  submit  photographs  of  themselves  to  be  used  in  connection 
with  the  consideration  of  their  requests.  A  large  number  of  the  em- 
ployees of  the  service  are  not  personally  known  to  the  office,  and  a 
photograph  is  of  immeasurable  service  in  the  consideration  of  any 
change  involving  the  employee  in  question. 

INSPECTION. 

The  Indian  field  service  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  complex  un- 
der any  department  of  the  Government.  It  comprehends  the  per- 
sonal and  material  interests  of  more  than  three  hundred  thousand 
Indians,  involving  a  billion  dollars'  worth  of  property.  The  vital 
and  human  interests  of  these  Indians  are  in  immediate  charge  of 
6,000  emploj^ees.  Property  and  human  rights  are  intimately  corre- 
lated in  the  governmental  uplift  of  a  dependent  people,  and  that  this 
work  should  be  thoroughly  accomplished  is  the  task  of  this  bureau. 

It  is.  highly  essential  that  the  closest  possible  touch  should  be  main- 
tained between  the  office  and  the  field  service,  which  can  only  be  done 
through  confidential  and  dependable  reports  from  men  especially  se- 
lected and  equipped  for  the  work.  Conditions  are  constantly  arising 
which  strike  deep  into  the  vitality  of  the  service,  and  unless  they  are 
promptly  and  intelligently  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  office,  dire 
results  may  follow. 

This  situation  was  early  recognized  in  my  administration,  and  I 
have  sought  to  meet  it.  This  could  best  be  done  through  confidential 
inspectors  with  whom  I  could  sustain  intimate  relations,  and  from 
whom  I  could  obtain  reliable  information,  placing  me  in  full  posses- 
sion of  all  facts  affecting  the  integrity  of  this  vast  body  of  men  and 
women. 

The  Congress,  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act,  1915,  recognized 
that  evils  had  grown  up  in  the  Indian  Service,  and  to  afford  a  means 
to  remedy  them  provided — 

For  the  employment  of  six  Indian  Service  inspectors,  exclusive  of  one  chief 
inspector,  at  salaries  not  to  exceed  $2,500  per  annum  each  and  actual  traveling 
expenses,  and  $3  per  diem  in  lieu  of  subsistence  when  actually  employed  on 
duty  in  the  field. 

Appreciating  the  wisdom  and  desirability  of  procuring  the  mem- 
bers of  this  corps  of  confidential  men  in  such  a  way  as  would  not 
violate  the  true  principles  of  the  civil-service  laws,  yet  afford  such 
a  latitude  of  selection  as  would  procure  a  strong  body  of  inspectors 
disassociated  from  personal  interests,  the  Civil  Service  Commission, 
at  the  request  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  and  myself,  recom- 
mended to  the  President  that  schedule  B  of  the  civil-service  rules 
be  amended  by  adding  to  the  list  of  exemptions  from  the  competitive 
class  in  the  Interior  Department  the  following: 


COMMISSIONEB  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  67 

Six  inspectors  to  act  as  the  immediate  and  confidential  representatives  of  the 
Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  subject  to  such  evidences  of  qualifications  as 
the  Civil  Service  Commission  may  prescribe  after  consultation  with  the  Com- 
missioner of  Indian  Affairs. 

The  organization  of  this  branch  of  Indian  work  will  have  a  mate- 
rial and  far-reaching  effect  on  the  service,  and  through  it  there  will 
be  developed  the  keenest  spirit  of  hearty  cooperation  between  those 
in  charge  of  field  activities  and  the  office.  Its  work  will  be  to  weed 
out  the  incompetents,  discover  the  malfeasance  of  individuals,  remedy 
the  defects  of  the  functional  operations  of  all  those  charged  with 
supervision  and  direction  of  the  Indians,  and  to  formulate  a  correct 
basis  of  estimating  the  true  value  of  the  Government's  agents. 

In  the  selection  of  the  men  composing  this  corps  I  shall  be 
guided  solely  by  the  work  to  be  accomplished  and  the  adaptation 
of  the  man  to  do  what  is  required.  Strong  men  of  integrity  and 
practical  ideas,  with  constructive  tendencies,  can  and  will  develop 
the  best  service  from  our  employees,  and  they  will  furnish  the  infor- 
mation on  which  the  administrative  part  of  the  office  can  predicate 
intelligent  action. 

During  the  brief  period  of  my  incumbency  I  have  often  felt  the 
need  of  these  men.  With  accurate  knowledge  of  the  situation  at  any 
given  point  in  the  Indian  country,  the  application  of  an  adequate 
remedy  becomes  simple.  Without  this  clear  understanding,  action 
taken  here  is  largely  experimental. 

As  supplementary  to  this  inspection  force,  the  special  agents  and 
supervisors  form  a  secondary  aid  to  bringing  the  field  and  its  activi- 
ties into  closer  relationship  with  all  branches. 

COOPERATION. 

I  have  felt  that  no  one  thing  is  of  greater  importance  in  the 
administration  of  matters  concerning  the  Indians  than  to  bring  about 
the  closest  relationship  and  understanding  between  all  departments 
of  the  Indian  Service.  I  have  felt  especially  the  necessity  for  the 
closest  understanding  and  cooperation  between  the  office  and  the  field. 

With  this  end  in  view  I  have  concentrated  the  headquarters  of  as 
many  of  the  field  officers  in  Washington  as  could  profitably  be  estab- 
lished here,  so  that  for  a  part  of  the  year  they  would  be  available  for 
conference,  thus  bringing  about  a  closer  understanding  on  their  part 
of  my  policies  and  furnishing  me  with  valuable  information  concern- 
ing conditions  throughout  the  field. 

In  addition  to  this,  where  practicable,  I  have  called  together  repre- 
sentatives of  the  supervisory  force  and  those  field  men  employed  in 
the  several  distinctive  branches  of  work  for  consultation.  A  gen- 
eral conference  of  men  engaged  in  liquor  work  was  held  in  Denver, 
Colo.,  the  first  of  the  year.  This  conference  is  referred  to  elsewhere. 


68  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

In  February  a  supervisors'  conference  was  held  in  Washington, 
which  lasted  for  one  week  and  was  attended  by  all  of  the  super- 
visors. 

Following  the  same  policy  a  series  of  summer  institutes  for  the 
employees  of  the  service  will  be  held  during  the  year  at  some  six 
schools. 

I  have  felt  that  the  best  administration  requires  the  utmost  har- 
mony and  cooperation  throughout  the  various  branches  of  the  office, 
and  I  have  endeavored  to  foster  harmonious  relationship  between  all 
engaged  in  the  work  in  Washington.  I  have  reason  to  feel  that  these 
efforts  have  been  successful  and  that  the  entire  Indian  Service,  the 
office  as  well  as  the  field,  are  striving  together  as  a  harmonious  unit 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian. 

INDIAN  OFFICE  REGULATIONS. 

The  Regulations  of  the  Indian  Bureau  were  promulgated  in 
editions  of  1884,  1894,  and  1904.  Owing  to  changes  in  laws,  policies, 
and  methods  of  administration  a  new  edition  is  now  required  in 
order  that  practice  may  accurately  conform  to  present  procedure 
and  legal  changes.  This  has  demanded  a  complete  revision  of  the 
volume  by  the  addition  of  new  matter  and  a  revision  of  the  old. 

After  careful  revision  and  rewriting  a  new  edition  has  been  pre- 
pared and  will  soon  be  issued.  It  has  been  brought  down  to  date 
and  will  adequately  inform  those  concerned  in  the  present  rules  and 
policies  prevailing  in  Indian  affairs. 

ENROLLMENT  WITH  INDIAN  TRIBES. 

During  the  past  fiscal  year  497  persons  have  been  enrolled  at 
agencies  or  reservations  throughout  the  United  States,  exclusive  of 
the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  and  859  persons  have  been  denied  such 
rights. 

The  rights  of  a  number  of  enrolled  persons  among  the  North 
Carolina  Cherokees  and  the  Chippewa  in  Minnesota  have  been  chal- 
lenged, and  these  contested  cases  are  awaiting  final  adjudication  by 
the  department. 

OFFICE  CORRESPONDENCE  AND  RECORDS. 

The  number  of  communications  sent  out  from  the  office  during  the 
year  was  331,641,  an  increase  of  66,541  over  the  preceding  year. 

During  the  year  ending  June  30,  1914,  there  were  received  280,744 
communications,  an  increase  of  5,292  over  the  number  received  the 
previous  year.  In  the  year  1899  there  were  but  59,707  communica- 
tions received,  which  shows  the  great  increase  in  the  work  of  the 
Indian  Office  during  the  last  15  years. 


COMMISSION EE  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  69 

There  was  performed  during  the  year  1,957  days'  voluntary  over- 
time service  by  clerks  of  the  Indian  Bureau  in  order  to  keep  the 
work  of  the  office  practically  current.  This  does  not  include  the 
many  days  of  overtime  work  by  the  officials  of  the  bureau. 

The  archives  of  the  Indian  Office  are  very  valuable,  embracing  as 
they  do  the  history  of  the  difficult  question  of  the  management  of 
the  Indian  race  as  discussed  by  our  greatest  statesmen.  They  consist 
of  records,  reports  of  important  councils  leading  to  treaties,  litiga- 
tion, legislation,  decisions,  and  correspondence  of  great  importance 
pertaining  to  Indian  matters  from  the  congressional  legislation 
of  1785.  * 

COURT  DECISIONS. 

There  have  been  a  large  number  of  decisions  by  the  courts  on 
Indian  matters  during  the  past  year.  A  short  synopsis  of  the  prin- 
cipal points  decided  in  the  leading  cases  follows : 

United  States v.  Felipe  Sandoval  (231  U.S., 28)  :  This  was  a  crim- 
inal prosecution  for  introducing  intoxicating  liquor  into  the  Indian 
country,  to  wit,  the  Santa  Clara  pueblo  in  the  State  of  New  Mexico. 
The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  reversed  the  district  court, 
and  held: 

1.  The  status  of  the  Pueblo  Indians  in  New  Mexico  on  their  lands  is  such 
that  Congress  can  prohibit  the  introduction  of  intoxicating  liquors  into  such 
lands  notwithstanding  the  admission  of  New  Mexico  to  statehood. 

2.  It  was  a  legitimate  exercise  of  power  on  the  part  of  Congress  to  provide 
in  the  New  Meixco  enabling  act  against  the  introduction  of  liquor  into  the  In- 
dian country  and  the  prohibition  to  lands  of  the  Pueblo  Indians. 

Perrin  v.  United  States  (232  U.  S.,  478)  :  This  case  came  before  the 
Supreme  Court  on  a  writ  of  error  to  the  district  court  of  the  United 
States  for  the  district  of  South  Dakota,  to  review  a  conviction  for  un- 
lawfully selling  intoxicating  liquors  upon  lands  ceded  by  the  Yank- 
ton  Indians  by  the  act  of  August  15,  1894  (28  Stat.  L.,  286).  In  the 
seventeenth  section  of  the  agreement  with  the  Yankton  Indians,  rati- 
fied and  confirmed  by  Congress  on  the  above  mentioned  date,  it  was 
stipulated  that  no  intoxicating  liquors  nor  other  intoxicants  should 
ever  be  sold  or  given  away  upon  any  of  the  lands  ceded,  nor  upon  the 
lands  comprising  the  Yankton  Reservation  as  described  in  the  treaty 
between  said  Indians  and  the  United  States,  dated  April  19,  1858, 
and  as  afterwards  surveyed  and  set  off  to  said  Indians.  The  court 
held: 

1.  That  the  Government  has  the  power  to  protect  the  Indian  wards  against 
the  evils  of  intemperance,  and  Congress  can  prohibit  the  sale  of  intoxicants 
upon  ceded  lands  if  it  is  reasonably  essential  to  the  protection  of  the  Indians 
residing  on  the  unceded  lands. 

2.  That  the  failure  expressly  to  limit  the  duration  of  the  prohibition  against 
the  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  will  not  invalidate  such  prohibition  so  long  as 
the  period  during  which  the  United  States  holds  the  allotted  lands  in  trust  has 
not  expired,  the  tribal  relations  not  dissolved,  and  the  wardship  not  terminated. 


70  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

United  States  v.  Sam  Pelican  and  Tony  Ponterre  (232  U.  S., 
442)  :  The  defendants  were  indicted  for  the  murder  of  a  full-blood 
Indian,  a  member  of  the  Colville  Tribe,  on  lands  allotted  and  held 
in  trust  by  the  United  States  on  the  Colville  Reservation.  The  Su- 
preme Court  held  that  an  Indian  allotment  during  the  trust  period 
is  Indian  country  within  the  meaning  of  United  States  Revised  Stat- 
utes 2145,  extending  to  the  Indian  country  certain  general  laws  of  the 
United  States  as  to  the  punishment  of  crime,  and  that  the  killing  of 
an  Indian  allottee  during  the  trust  period  by  a  person  not  of  Indian 
blood,  when  committed  on  such  lands,  is  cognizable  in  the  Federal 
courts. 

United  States  v.  Willis  N.  Birdsall;  United  States  v.  Thomas  E. 
Brents;  United  States  v.  Everett  E.  Van  Wert  (233  U.  S.)  :  These 
cases  were  taken  to  the  Supreme  Court  to  review  judgment  of  the  dis- 
trict court  sustaining  a  demurrer  to  indictments  charging  respec- 
tively the  giving  and  accepting  of  bribes.  The  court  held  that  the 
official  action  which  it  was  thought  to  have  been  influenced  by  a  bribe 
need  not  have  been  prescribed  by  a  lawful  requirement  of  the  execu- 
tive department  under  whose  authority  the  officer  was  acting,  and 
that  the  requirement  need  not  have  been  prescribed  by  a  written  regu- 
lation but  might  be  found  in  an  established  usage  which  constituted 
the  common  law  of  the  department.  In  this  case  the  court  used  the 
following  language  with  regard  to  the  powers  of  the  Indian  Office, 
which  is  noteworthy : 

In  executing  the  powers  of  the  Indian  Office  there  is  necessarily  a  wide  range 
for  administrative  discretion  and  in  determining  the  scope  of  official  action 
regard  must  be  had  to  the  authority  conferred;  and  this,  as  we  have  seen, 
embraces  every  action  which  may  properly  constitute  an  aid  in  the  enforcement 
of  the  law. 

Apapas  v.  United  States  (233  U.  S.)  :  Ten  persons  described  as  In- 
dians were  indicted  for  the  murder  of  William  H.  Stanley,  superin- 
tendent of  the  Coahuila  Indian  Reservation.  The  Supreme  Court 
held  that  murder  committed  by  Indians  on  an  Indian  reservation 
is  a  crime  against  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  expressly 
punishable  by  the  Penal  Code,  section  328  (35  Stat.  L.,  1151),  and 
within  the  cognizance  of  the  Federal  courts,  irrespective  of  the  citi- 
zenship of  the  accused. 

United  States  v.  First  National  Bank  of  Detroit,  Minn.;  United 
States  v.  Nichols-Chisholm  Lumber  Co.  (233  U.  S.)  :  These  suits  were 
instituted  by  the  United  States  to  set  aside  certain  conveyances  under 
and  through  which  title  was  claimed  to  lands  in  the  White  Earth 
Indian  Reservation.  It  was  held  that  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Clapp  amendment  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  325),  and  the  act  of 
March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015),  removing  of  restrictions  as  to 
sale,  incumbrance,  or  taxation  of  allotments  within  the  White  Earth 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  71 

Keservation  held  by  mixed-blood  Indians,  that  every  Chippewa  In- 
dian with  an  identifiable  admixture  of  white  blood,  however  small, 
was  a  mixed-blood  Indian. 

Johnson  v.  Gearlds  (233  U.  S.)  :  This  case  was  decided  by  the  Su- 
preme Court  on  June  8,  1914,  on  appeal  from  the  district  court  of 
the  United  States  for  the  district  of  Minnesota,  to  review  a  decree 
enjoining  Federal  officers  from  closing  the  saloons  in  certain  terri- 
tory ceded  to  the  United  States  by  Indian  tribes.  The  case  was  re- 
versed and  remanded,  with  directions  to  dismiss  the  bill.  The  Su- 
preme Court  held: 

1.  That  the  entire  ceded  territory  was  subject  to  Federal  laws  prohibiting 
introduction  of  intoxicating  liquors  in  the  Indian  country,  by  the  Chippewa 
treaty  of  February  22,  1855   (10  Stat.  L.,  1169),  until  otherwise  provided  by 
Congress. 

2.  The  acts  under  which  Minnesota  was  admitted  to  the  Union  did  not  by 
implication  repeal  the  prohibition  as  to  the  introduction  of  intoxicants  into  the 
territory  cede!  by  the  Chippewa  treaty  of  1855,  supra. 

3.  Recession  to  the  United  States  by  the  Chippewa  treaties  of  May  7,  1864 
(13  Stat.  L.,  693),  and  March  19,  1887   (16  Stat.  L.,  719),  of  portions  of  the 
original  cession  set  apart  as  reservations  by  the  treaty  of  February  22,  1855, 
supra,  did  not  operate  to  remove  from  the  territory  thus  receded  the  prohibition 
against  the  introduction,  manufacture,  or  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  within 
the  ceded  territory  until  otherwise  provided  by  Congress.     A  motion  for  re- 
hearing is  now  pending  n  ths  case, 

LEGISLATION. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1915  was  not  ap- 
proved until  August  1,  1914.  Therefore  it  became  necessary  for  the 
appropriation  act  of  the  previous  year  to  be  extended,  which  was 
done  by  joint  resolutions  of  June  30  and  July  16,  1914. 

For  the  fiscal  year  1910  the  Indian  appropriation  act  carried  about 
$11,800,000;  the  act  of  1911  appropriated  about  $9,200,000;  act  of 
1912,  $8,800,000;  act  of  1913,  $8,900,000;  and  for  1914,  $9,600,000; 
and  for  the  fiscal  year  1915  there  was  appropriated  $9,771,902.76. 

The  Indian  Committees  of  Congress,  with  the  cooperation  of  this 
bureau,  have  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  1915  worked  out 
constructive  legislation  for  the  Indians  of  the  country  along  pro- 
gressive lines. 

There  has  been  appropriated  a  large  amount  of  money  for  improv- 
ing the  health  conditions  of  the  Indians  and  providing  hospital  facil- 
ities for  them.  Three  hundred  thousand  dollars  was  appropriated 
for  this  purpose,  $100,000  of  which  will  be  used  for  constructing 
hospitals,  to  cost  not  to  exceed  $15,000  each.  In  addition  to  this  the 
Indian  Bureau  is  now  constructing  three  hospitals  for  the  Sioux 
Indians,  to  cost  approximately  $25,000  each,  on  the  Rosebud,  Pine 
Ridge,  and  Cheyenne  Reservations.  An  appropriation  was  also 


72  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

made  in  the  Indian  bill  for  hospitals  in  the  Chippewa  country  in 
Minnesota,  and  $50,000  appropriated  therefor  out  of  the  Chippewa 
Indian  funds.  The  health  conditions  of  the  Indians  have  been  found 
to  be  deplorable,  and  little  effective  work  has  heretofore  been  done 
to  correct  this  condition.  The  appropriation  in  question  will  be  a 
long  step  forward  in  solving  this  important  problem. 

The  appropriation  for  educational  purposes  for  the  Indians  is  con- 
siderably increased,  and  special  provision  is  made  for  the  education 
of  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind  Indian  children  who  have  not  been  hereto- 
fore provided  for.  There  is  also  a  specific  appropriation  for  educa- 
tional purposes  among  the  Papago  and  Navajo  Indians.  These  In- 
dians have  heretofore  been  neglected  and  several  thousand  Papago 
and  Navajo  Indian  children  are  without  school  facilities. 

Upon  the  recommendation  of  this  office  large  reimbursable  appro- 
priations have  been  provided  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for 
industrial  work  among  Indians.  These  reimbursable  appropriations 
amount  to  $725,000.  The  Indians  have  heretofore  been  allotted  land, 
but  they  have  not  been  provided  with  tools  and  general  farming 
equipment.  This  appropriation  will  enable  the  Commissioner  of 
Indian  Affairs  to  improve  stock  conditions  and  place  herds  of  cattle 
on  a  number  of  Indian  reservations.  It  is  expected  that  this  appro- 
priation will  aid  very  materially  in  promoting  the  industrial  ac- 
tivities of  the  Indians  of  the  country  and  go  far  toward  developing 
them  into  self-supporting  and  progressive  citizens. 

The  current  Indian  appropriation  act  carries  a  proviso  which  re- 
quires that  detailed  information  regarding  each  Indian  irrigation 
project  be  furnished  Congress  at  its  next  session.  There  is  also  a 
provision  of  law  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  which  will  authorize 
the  office  to  equalize  the  irrigation  construction  charges  and  appor- 
tion said  charges  according  to  the  benefits  received.  This  is  new 
legislation,  which  was  obtained  on  the  recommendation  of  this  office. 
The  Indian  irrigation  projects  have  heretofore  been  appropriated 
for  and  constructed  largely  without  adequate  detailed  information, 
and  it  is  expected  at  the  next  session  of  Congress  that  the  Indian 
Office  will  furnish  a  complete  statement  regarding  each  of  these 
projects,  so  that  Congress  may  have  a  thorough  understanding  of 
conditions  on  each  of  the  reservations  where  irrigation  projects  are 
being  constructed.  It  is  also  expected  that  the  information  obtained 
from  these  reports  will  result  in  procuring  administrative  and  legis- 
lative action  which  will  protect  more  securely  the  water  rights  of  the 
Indians  of  the  country. 

There  is  included  in  the  Indian  bill  an  appropriation  to  cover  : 
salaries   and   expenses   of  probate   attorneys   who    are   engaged   in 
working  out  probate  reforms  for  the  more  certain  protection  of  the 
property  of  Indian  children  in  Oklahoma,  which  work  is  being  done 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  73 

in  harmony  with  rules  of  probate  procedure  adopted  at  a  conference 
of  the  county  judges  of  eastern  Oklahoma,  and  recently  adopted  and 
promulgated  by  the  justices  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Oklahoma. 

The  Indian  bill  also  carries  $100,000  to  support  a  widespread  and 
aggressive  campaign  for  the  suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic  among 
Indians. 

The  bill  also  provides  for  six  confidential  inspectors.  It  is  ex- 
pected that  this  appropriation  will  result  in  thorough  investigations 
being  made  on  Indian  reservations,  and  throughout  the  Indian  coun- 
try generally,  so  that  the  office  may  be  advised  of  the  actual  condi- 
tions, to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  effective  reforms. 

The  bill  provides  for  the  consolidation  of  the  offices  of  the  Five 
Civilized  Tribes  and  Union  Agency,  effective  September  1,  1914. 

The  controversy  regarding  the  enrollment  of  the  Mississippi  Choc- 
taws  was  compromised  by  omitting  the  Choctaws  of  Oklahoma  from 
the  per  capita  payment  made  to  Chickasaw  and  Cherokee  Indians 
of  $100  and  $15,  respectively. 

The  long  contest  regarding  the  water  rights  of  the  Yakima  Indians 
was  finally  settled  by  giving  these  Indians  a  free  water  right  to 
40  acres  of  their  allotments  in  perpetuity. 

Another  question  which  has  been  in  dispute  for  a  number  of  years 
was  settled  by  the  provision  in  the  Indian  bill  providing  for  allotting 
the  remaining  unallotted  Indians  on  the  Bad  River  Reservation 
and  the  distribution  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the  remaining 
tribal  timber  to  the  Indians  in  question. 

There  is  appropriated  out  of  the  funds  of  the  Confederated  Bands 
of  Utes,  in  Utah  and  Colorado,  about  $800,000 ;  $100,000  for  the  pur- 
chase of  stock  for  the  Navajo  Springs  Band  of  Indians  in  Colorado; 
$200,000  for  the  Uintah,  White  River,  and  Uncompahgre  Bands  in 
Utah ;  and  the  balance  to  be  expended  among  all  of  said  Indians  for 
the  promotion  of  civilization  and  self-support  among  them,  one  of  the 
chief  purposes  of  which  is  to  protect  the  water  rights  of  the  Ute 
Indians  from  being  forfeited  within  the  period  fixed  by  law,  and  all 
of  which  is  to  give  them  much  needed  help  in  industrial  progress. 

There  was  appropriated  $100,000  for  determining  the  heirs  of  de- 
ceased Indian  allottees,  so  that  the  title  to  inherited  Indian  lands 
may  be  definitely  determined. 

The  foregoing  refer  to  the  more  important  problems  handled  by 
this  bureau  during  the  past  fiscal  year.  I  have  necessarily  omitted 
from  this  report  a  reference  to  many  minor  activities  of  the  Indian 
^Service. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

CATO  SELLS,  Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES. 

TABLE  1. — Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  Affairs  since  1899. 


Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received. 

Increase 
over  pre- 
ceding 
year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(-)  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

1899 

59,707 
62,601 
67,376 
79,237 
79,  415 
86,588 
98,322 
106,533 
117,556 
152,  995 
176,  765 
194,241 
197,  637 
222,  187 
275,452 
280,744 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 
245 

Per  cent. 

1900  

4.84 
7.62 
17.60 
.22 
9.03 
13.55 
8.35 
10.34 
30.14 
15.53 
9.88 
1.74 
12.37 
23.97 
1.92 

+13.86 
+  3.48 
+10.92 
—    .75 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
-  2.68 
+10.34 
+11.87 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+11.82 
-  1.32 
+  5.80 
+  3.37 

1901 

1902  

1903          .                     

1904 

1905       

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910      ..     . 

1911 

1912  

1913 

1914... 

1 

Per  cent. 
Increase  in  work  1914  over  1899                                                                                                                  370.  20 

Increase  in  force,  1914  over  1899..  .                                                                                                      .  .  142.57 

TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1914. 

[Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 

census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  representative  is  located.] 
Grand  total 331, 250 


Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  whites 101, 209 

By  blood 75,263 

By  intermarriage 2,  582 

Freedmen 23, 364 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes 230, 041 


INDIAN  POPULATION   BY   STATES   AND  TERRITORIES. 


Arizona  

41,  916 

Nebraska    

Arkansas              

460 

Nevada  

California 

15  226 

New  Hampshire 

Colorado 

864 

New  Jersey 

Connecticut 

152 

New  Mexico 

Delaware 

5 

New  York 

District  of  Columbia 

68 

North  Carolina 

Florida 

562 

North  Dakota                    

Georgia 

95 

Ohio  

Idaho  .   .              .         ... 

.   ...     4,106 

Oklahoma  

Illinois 

188 

Oregon 

Indiana 

279 

Rhode  Island 

Iowa 

368 

South  Carolina 

Kansas 

1  366 

South  Dakota 

Kentucky 

234 

Tennessee  

Louisiana 

780 

Texas  

Maine 

892 

Utah  

Maryland 

55 

Vermont  

Massachusetts 

688 

Virginia 

Michigan 

7  516 

Washington          ... 

Minnesota 

11  532 

West  Virginia      

Mississippi 

1  253 

Wisconsin  

Missouri 

313 

Wyoming  

i  Includes  2 
63556—14  6 

3,364  freedmen  an 

d  2,582  intermarried  whites. 

11,  394 

3,932 

7,891 

34 

168 

21,  995 

6,029 

8,024 

8,623 

127 

117,  607 

6,399 

284 

331 

20,  813 

216 

702 

3,221 

26 

539 

11,  274 

36 

10,  053 
1,705 


75 


76  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Alabama:  Not  under  agent  .-.  

1909 

•     133 
75 

121 
63 

145 
93 

8 
5 

— 

Arizona: 
•  Camp  Verde  School— 
Mohave  —  Apache     

266 
156 

133 
81 

258 
151 

Tonto  —  Apache 

Total 

422 

63 
399 

214 

30 
221 

208 

33 

178 

184 

1       •              •__... 

|      223 

238 

-.      •       ,  - 

239 

409 
403 

13 
17 

Colorado  River  — 
Chemehuevi 

42 

Mohave.  ..                    

Total  

462 
2,485 

251 
1,219 

211 
1,266 

223 
1,281 

239 
1,204 

403 
2,401 

17 
11 

42 
73 

Fort  Apache  School  — 
White  Mountain  Apache  

Fort  Mojave  School— 
Chemehuevi 

149 
636 

78 
351 

71 
285 

73 

207 

76 
429 

149 

636 

Mohave 

Total      ..                   

785 

174" 
06 
1,432 

429 

95~ 
56 

755 

356 

79~ 
40 
677 

280 

73~ 
22 
299 

505 

ibT 

74 
1,133 

1,140 
859 

785 

174~ 
96 
1,432 

2,133 

2,000 

Havasupai  School—  Havasupai  
Kaibab  School—  Kaibab-Pamte  
Leupp  School  —  Navaho 

= 

— 

Moqui  School— 
Moqui  (Hopi) 

=== 

===== 

2,133 
2,000 

1,124 
1,047 

1,009 
953 

993 
1,141 

Navaho 

Total 

4,133 
10,000 

2,171 
5,400 

1,962 
4,600 

2,134 
3,800 

1,999 
6,200 

137 
2,319 
(3) 

(3) 

4,133 
9,990 

300 

3,786 
(3) 
(3) 

Navajo  School    Navaho  * 

10 

Pima  School— 
Maricopa 

===== 

300 
3,796 
700 
1,300 

146 
1,923 
(3) 
(3) 

154 
1,873 
(3) 

(3) 

163 

1,477 
(3) 
(3) 

Pima 

8 

(3) 
(3) 

2 
(3) 
(«) 

Gila  Bend  Reservation,  Papago.. 
Not  on  reservation  Papago 

Total  

6,096 

83 
258 
893 

2,069 

44 
138 
466 

2,027 

39 
120 
427 

1,640 

35 
92 
423 

2,456 

48 
166 
470 

4,086 

83 
256 
893 

8 

2 

Salt  River  School— 
Maricopa. 

Mohave  —  Apache 

2 

Pima 

Total 

1,234 

604 
69 
1,223 
712 

648 

320 
33 
613 
365 

586 

284 
36 
610 
347 

550 

282 
35 
538 
315 

684 

322 
34 
685 
397 

1,232 

602 
69 
1,216 
710 

2 

2 

San  Carlos  School- 
Cay  otero  —  Apache 

== 

Mohave  —  Apache 

San  Carlos  —  \pache 

7 
2 

Tonto  —  Apache 

Total 

2,608 

4,965 
474 

1,331 

2,385 
254 

1,277 

2,580 
220 

1,170 

1,790 
194 

1,438 

3,175 
280 

2,597 

11 

24~ 
10 

San  Xavier  School  —  Papago  

12 

4,929 
464 

Truxton  Canon  School—  Walapai... 

Western  Navajo  School— 
Moqui  (Hopi) 

== 

210 
6,150 
190 

101 
2,819 
80 

109 
3,331 
110 

99 
2,621 
80 

111 
3,529 
110 

210 
6,150 
190 

Navaho 

Paiute  

Total 

6,550 

3,000 

3,550 

2,800 

3,750 

6,550 
39,681 

Total  Arizona 

41,916 
1460 

1,350 

20,  277 

19,639 

16,440 

23,476 

106 

129 

Arkansas:  Not  under  agent 

California: 
Bishop  School— 
Paiute,   Shoshoni,   Digger,  and 
Moache  

680 

670 

(3) 

(3) 

(8) 

(3) 

(3) 

1 1910  census. 


2  Includes  Indians  in  New  Mexico  under  this  school. 


a  Unknown. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


77 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30, 1914 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

California—  Continued. 
Campo  School- 
Mission  Indians  at  Campo  

119 
8 
7 
6 

78 

64 
4 
3 
2 
34 

55 

4 
4 
4 
44 

40 

79 
8 
5 
4 
42 

116 
8 
7 
6 
66 

3 

Cuyapaipe                     *   

2 
2 

36 

La  Pasta                     

Manzanita 

12 

Total                                

218 
51 

107 
24 

111 
27 

80 
22 

138 
29 

8 
107 
338 

203 
25 

15 
21 

Digger  agency    Digger 

5 

Fort  Bidwell  School- 
Digger 

16 
196 
521 

8 
108 
230 

8 
88 
291 

8 
89 
183 

16 
190 
508 

Pamte                     

6 
13 

Pit  River 

Total 

733 
786 

1,000 

346 
417 

(x) 

1  "—    "  ' 

282 

282 
110 

387 
369 

C1) 

270 
270 
151 

280 
296 

(') 

205 

152 
104 

453 
490 

C1) 

—    --        -~— 

347 
400 
157 

714 
758 

C1) 

-..',—-  —..-..  ' 

158 
280 
120 

19 
21 

(') 

344 

172 
89 

Fort  Yuma  School  —  Yuma  

7 

0) 

— 

50 
100 
52 

Greenville  School  — 
Digger  and  Washo 

Hoopa  Valley  School— 
Hupa 

552 
552 
261 

Klamath.                

Lower  Klamath 

Total 

1,365 
25,000 

•_      _      .  _  

18 
38 
116 
16 
238 
47 
59 
81 

674 
2,500 

691 
2,500 

461 
0) 

904 
C1) 

558 
5,000 

605 

202 

Roseburg  (Oreg.)  School- 
Scattered  Wichumni,  Kawia,  Pit 
River,  and  others  in  northern 
California  

Malki  School- 
Mission  Indians  at— 
Augustine 

= 

10 
22 
68 
9 
128 
24 
31 
43 

8 
16 
48 
7 
110 
23 
28 
38 

8 
15 
37 
6 
90 
12 
15 
36 

10 
23 
79 
10 
148 
35 
44 
45 

18 
38 
102 
16 
190 
47 
59 
74 

Cabazon    

Martinez 

14 

Mission  Creek  

Morongo 

30 

18 

Palm  Springs  

San  Manuel  

Torres 

7 

Total 

613 

335 

278 

63 
124 
104 
29 
101 
60 

219 

51 
90 
71 
24 
53 
55 

394 

.-_.'•      ""  ~- 

80 
157 
127 
30 

158 

87 

544 

—  -•    -" 

117 
244 
154 
53 
203 
123 

51 

14 
3 
42 
1 
8 
19 

18 

Pala  school- 
Mission  Indians  at  — 
Capitan  Grande.  .  . 

131 
247 
198 
54 
211 
142 

68 
123 
94 
25 
110 
82 

LaJolla 

Pala  

2 

Pauma.  ..        

Pechanga 

Rincon  

Total 

983 

~    —    -L    •"'-' 

625 

904 

502 

-  — 

305 
459 

481 

320 
445 

344 

246 

346 

639 

379 

558 

894 

120 
435 

87 

2 

261 
130 

Round  Valley  school  — 
Concow  

244 
339 

Porno  and  Kipomo    . 

Total  

1,529 

764 

765 

592 

937 

555 

583 

2 
1 

391 

Soboba  School- 
Mission  Indians  at  — 
Cahuilla 

137 
35 
128 
191 
66 
70 
38 
137 
172 

73 
18 
76 
110 
38 
37 
21 
72 
94 

64 
17 
52 
81 
28 
33 
17 
65 
78 

44 
13 
46 
83 
12 
31 
16 
43 
93 

93 
22 
82 
108 
54 
39 
22 
94 
79 

135 
34 
128 
99 
57 
1 
38 
'  122 
140 

Inaja  

Los  Coyotes 

Mesa  Grande 

76 
9 
16 

16 

Santa  Rosa  

Santa  Ynez 

53 

Syquan  

Soboba  '  

15 
32 

Volcan 

Total  

974 

539 

435 

381 

593 

754 

151 

69 

1  Unknown. 


2  Estimated;  see  Roseburg,  Oreg. 


78 


COMMISSIONEB  INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


TABLE  2.— Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914— 

Continued. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

California—  Continued  . 
Tule  River  School  — 
Tule  River 

150 

474 

91 
234 

59 
240 

72 
C1) 

78 
C1) 

150 
C1) 

Outlying  districts  

C1) 

C1) 

Total  

624 

325 
7,213 

262 
174 

299 
7,013 

242 
186 

72 

78 

150 

Total  California  

2  15,226 

504 
360 

2,747 

4,655 

10,  155 

504 
343 

1,553 

694 

Colorado: 
Navajo     Springs     School—  Wimi- 

280 
164 

221 
196 

Southern  Ute  School—  Capote  and 

9 

8 

Total  Colorado 

864 
3152 
35 
368 
562 
395 

436 

428 

444 

420 

847 

9 

8 

District  of  Columbia:  Not  under  agent 
Florida*  Seminole             .        .... 

417 

145 

C1) 

0) 

0) 

C1) 

C1) 

Georgia:  Not  under  agent  

Idaho: 
Co3ur  d'Alene  School— 
Co3ur  d'Alene                   

607 
114 
133 

-•"•——— 

307 
54 
60 

300 
60 
73 

258 
50 
51 

349 
64 
82 

437 
114 
112 

91 

79 

Kalispel 

Kootenai             

1 

20 

Total     

854 

1,797 
1,455 

421 

900 

686 

433 

897 
769 

359 

696 

465 

495 

1,101 
990 

663 

1,506 
1,128 

92 

231 
182 

99 

60 
145 

Fort  Hall  School—  Bannock  and 
Shoshoni  

Fort  Lapwai  School  —  Nez  Perce  
Total  Idaho      

4,106 
3188 

3  279 

2,099 

2,007 

1,520 

2,586 

3,297 

505 

304 

Indiana:  Not    under    agent—  Miami 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  School—  Sac  and 
Fox  

368 

296 
209 
96 

193 

175 

181 

161 
122 
47 

187 

135 
87 
49 

368 

18 
184 
14 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  School- 
Iowa      

148 
119 
47 

148 
90 
49 

67 
25 
82 

211 

Kickapoo 

Sac  and  Fox  

Total 

601 
765 

314 
417 

287 
348 

330 
426 

271 
339 

216 
539 

174 
140 

211 

86 

Potawatomi  School—  Prairie  Band 
of  Potawatomi 

Total  Kansas  

1,366 
3234 
3780 
3892 
355 
3688 



252 
1,097 
3  6,  167 

731 

635 

756 

610 

755 

314 

297 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills  School—  Chippewa  
Chippewa,  Lake  Superior—  L'Anse, 
Vieux    Desert,  and    Ontonagon 
Bands  of  Chippewa 

126 
565 

126 
532 

103 
516 

149 

581 

64 
200 

115 
400 

73 

497 

Not  under  agent—  Scattered  Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa,  Potawatomi,  and 

Total  Michigan  

7,516 

691 

658 

619 

534 

140 

730 

264 

515 

570 

"-•  •_.     -     •_  _- 

385 
172 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  School—  Chippewa  
Grand  Portage  School  —  Chippewa.. 



998 
312 

510 

138 

488 
174 

464 
172 

87 

526 

140 

1  Unknown. 

2  Decrease  due  to  1,486  less  Indians  reported  this  year  in  outlying  districts  under  Tule  River. 
»  1910  census. 


COMMISSIONEE  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


79 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1914 — 

Continued. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Leech  Lake  School— 
Cass  and  Winibigoshish  

452 
810 

481 

219 
396 

261 

233 

414 

220 

220 
365 

221 

U32 

445 

260 

135 
500 

254 

210 
301 

171 

II 

50 

Leech  Lake  Pillager         ... 

White    Oak    Point    Mississippi 
Chippewa              

Total  

1,743 

528 
1 

95 

876 
242 

867 

286 
1 

44 

806 
243 

937 

285 

1 

41 

889 

...  ._._  ,.  -.- 

458 
1 

78 

682 

•-•-.  •-—'  '.-r_-'- 

52 

173 
18 

Nett  Lake  School— 
Chippewa  (Bois  Fort)  

Deer  Creek 

Vermillion  Lake  Indians  (Bois 
Fort) 

51 

54 

14 

3 

Total                              .  .  .  . 

624 
1,482 

2,280 
1,152 
797 
430 
276 
408 
279 
280 
107 
61 

293 

746 

1,152 
568 
400 
218 
128 
220 
126 
136 
61 
35 

331 

736 

1,128 
584 
397 
212 
148 
188 
153 
144 
46 
26 

297 
721 

-^_  ,-.-.,  -  r-_i 

3,098 

327 
761 

537 

2 

66 
(l) 

21 

0) 

2,101 

Red  Lake  School—  Red  Lake  and 
Pembina  Chippewa  

White  Earth  School- 
White  Earth  (Miss.)  Chippewa... 
Mille  Lac  (removal)  

2,972 

1,670 

2,299 

Otter  Tail  Pillager 

GullLake                   

Mille  Lac  (nonremoval) 

Pembina  —  Pillager           .  ... 

Leech  Lake  (removal)  

White  Oak  Point  (removal)  . 

Fond  du  Lac  (removal)  

Cass  and  Winibigoshish 

Total 

6,070 
303 

3,044 
157 

3,026 
146 

3,098 
93 

2,972 
210 

1,670 
190 

2,299 
87 

2,101 
28 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley)  Mdewak- 
anton  and  Wapaquta,  Sioux  and 
Sisseton,  and  Wahpeton  

Total  Minnesota  

11,532 

5,764 

5,768 

5,689 

5,843 

3,373 

3,800 

2,877 

Mississippi:  Not  under  agent  

2  1,  253 

Missouri:  Not  under  agent 

2313 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  School— 
Chippewa 

3203 
2,641 

105 
1,315 

98 
1,326 

95 
1,382 

108 
1,259 

& 

|k 

(1)3M 

Piegan  

Total  

2,844 
1,696 

2,305 



639 

585 

1,420 
849 

1,159 

1,424 
847 

1,146 

1,477 
681 

997 

—  —  - 

237 

263 

1,367 
1,015 

1,308 

402 
322 

1,189 
1,280 

741 

T—^ 

510 

473 

1,117 
227 

734 

1   •            .A-  ~ 

112 

99 

s 

830 

M 

17 
13 

Crow  School  —  Crow  .  . 

Flathead       School—  Confederated 
Flathead 

Fort  Belknap  School— 
Assiniboin  

335 

292 

304 
293 

Grosventre 

Total 

1,224 
1,904 
1,421 

627 
944 
698 

597 
960 
723 

500 
847 
534 
5,036 

674 

724 
1,057 
887 
6,358 

"•  

658 

983 
1,125 
1,341 
6,659 

—     "     ~TT: 

1,048 

211 
436 
28 
2,753 

110 

30 
343 
52 

Fort     Peck     School—  Fort     Peck 
Sioux  . 

Tongue    River    School—  Northern 
Cheyenne 

Total  Montana 

11,394 

5,697 

5,697 

-.—  .—  .,.  —  _ 

649 

1,779 

r       = 

174 

Nebraska: 
Omaha  School  —  Omaha 

1,332 

683 

Santee  School— 
Ponca  

312 

1,177 

149 

590 

163 

587 

166 
546 

146 
631 

81 
510 

126 
308 

105 
359 

Santee 

Total 

1,489 
1,111 

3,932 

-IT  .-^..;—  —  ' 

739 
600 

2,022 

750 
511 

= 
1,910 

= 

712 

479 

1,865 

777 
632 

2,067 

,  -  ,  

591 
811 

2,450 

434 
252 

796 

464 
48 

686 

===EC 

Winnebago  School—  Winnebago  
Total  Nebraska  

» Unknown. 


2 1910  census. 


« 1913  report. 


80 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914 — 

Continued. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Nevada: 
Fallen  School—  Paiute           

325 

89 
342 
115 
601 

559' 
1200 

264 
326 

159 
40 
173 
56 
265 

285 

166 
49 
169 
59 
336 

274 

90 

27 
142 
40 
200 

173 

235 

62 
200 
75 
401 

386 

318 

74 
328 
114 
591 

538 

7 
15 
14 
1 
9 

21 

Lovelocks    Paiute 

Fort  McDermitt  School—  Paiute.... 
Moapa  River  School    Paiute 

Nevada  School—  Paiute  

1 

Walker  River  School— 
Paiute                        

Under  agent,  but  off  reservation.  . 

Western  Shoshone  School— 
Paiute 

„       ..       T-~T 

139 
163 

"      " 

125 
163 

- 

128 
131 

136 
195 

261 
318 

3 

8 

Shoshoni  

TotaL  

590 

302 

288 

259 

331 

'  579 

11 

Reno,  special  agent- 
Digger           

1,000 
1,500 
1,200 
600 
770 

t  2,  620 

1 

2,450 

1,220 

3,850 

4,670 

400 

Paiute                       

Washo                       

Scattering  California  tribes 

Total  

5,070 

2,620 
3,900 

2,450 
3,791 

1,220 
2,151 

3,850 

4,670 

400 

Total  Nevada 

7,891 
234 
2168 

5,540 

7,212 

478 

1 

New  Hampshire:  Not  under  agent.  .  . 
New  Jersey:  Not  under  agent  

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque—  P  ueblo    Day 
Schools— 

358 
4,536 

174 
2,327 

184 
2,209 

1%0 

& 

358 

4,488 

Pueblo  

48 

Total 

4,894 
659 

<630 
2,685 
8,000 

3,525 
1,602 

2,501 
349 

303 
1,310 
4,000 

1,871 
846 

2,393 
310 

327 
1,375 
4,000 

1,654 
756 

1,990 
287 

271 
1,341 
5,000 

1,662 
676 

2,546 
372 

359 
1,344 
3,000 

1,863 
926 

4,846 
659 

590 

2,685 
8,000 

3,173 
1,602 

48 

Jicarilla  School—  Jicarilla  Apache.. 
Mescalero    School—  M  escalero 
Apache                

35 

5 

Pueblo  Bonito  School—  Navaho.... 
San  Juan  School  —  Navaho 

Santa  Fe—  Pueblo  Day  Schools- 
Pueblo       

282 

70 

Total  New  Mexico  

21,995 

179 
265 
541 
923 
1,291 
489 

21,368 
363 

11,  180 

81 
143 
271 
474 
669 
265 

^ 

10,815 

—  '     " 

98 
122 
270 
449 
622 
224 

(•) 
160 

11,227 

10,410 

21,555 

179 
265 
541 
923 

'•S 

<&, 

365 

75 

New  York: 
New  York  Agency  5— 

85 
91 
211 
422 
518 
207 

(?25 

94 
174 
330 
501 
773 
282 

(\ 

Seneca  (Allegheny) 

St.   Regis   (not  a   part  of  Six 
Nations) 

Total 

5,419 
2610 

2,106 

1,945 

1,659 

2,392 

4,051 

Not  under  agent  

Total  New  York 

6,029 

2,188 
25,836 

2,106 
1,178 

1,945 
1,010 

1,659 
1,263 

2,392 
925 

4,051 
905 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  School—  Eastern  Cherokee 
Not  under  agent  

517 

766 

-  « 

i  Estimated;  no  census  taken. 
8 1910  census. 
» Not  reported. 


<  Includes  183  Apache;  Fort  Sill  removal,  1913. 
•  1913  report. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


81 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914 — 

Continued. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  School— 
Arikara      

400 

477 
264 

209 
241 
143 

191 
236 
121 

192 
225 
117 

208 
252 
147 

277 
369 
220 

101 
81 
41 

22 
27 
3 

Grosventre 

Mandan    

Total 

1,141 

988 
3,431 

3,063 

593 

508 
1,716 

1,563 

548 

480 
1,715 

1,500 

534 

422 
1,473 

1,662 

607 

566 
1,958 

1,401 

866 

988 
2,407 

168 

223 

52 

Fort  Totten  School—  S  i  s  s  e  t  o  n  , 
Wahpeton,  and  Cuthead  Sioux 
(known  as  Devils  Lake  Sioux)... 
Standing  Rock  School  —  Sioux 

665 

2,895 

359 

Turtle    Mountain    School—  Turtle 
Mountain  Chippewa 

Total  North  Dakota  

«,623 
U27 

"  •     -  -—  '  --; 

247 
538 

4,380 

4,243 

4,091 

4,532 

4,429 

3,783 

411 

Ohio  '  Not  under  agent 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  School  — 
Arapaho                   

131 
286 

116 
252 

108 
214 



139 
324 

237 
495 

10 
27 

16 

Total 

785 

417 

368 

322 

463 

732 

37 

16 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School— 
Arapaho            

521 
735 

259 
367 

262 

368 

249 

292 

272 
443 

389 
558 

72 
145 

60 
32 

Cheyenne 

Total 

1,256 

168 
1,529 
1,493 
1,094 

626 

77 
769 
694 

548 

630 

91 

760 
799 
546 

541 

77 
743 
816 
546 

715 

91 

786 
677 
548 

947 

166 
841 
1,087 
1,010 

217 

1 
509 
263 
38 

92 

= 

1 
179 
143 
46 

Kiowa  School— 

Comancho              

Wichita  and  Caddo          

Total           

4,284 
2,187 
432 
679 

138 
613 
49 

2,088 
1,125 
247 
323 

71 
297 
25 

2,196 
1,062 
185 
356 

===: 

67 
316 
24 

2,182 
1,103 
214 
335 

•__••__   '  - 

61 
298 
20 

2,102 
1,084 
218 
344 

77 
315 
29 

3,104 
828 
377 
544 

.—        •    _     _ 

48 
251 
43 

811 
1,359 
50 
123 

369 

Osage  School    Osage 

Otoe  School—  Oto  and  Missouri  
Pawnee  School    Pawnee 

5 
12 

Ponca  School— 
Kaw 

26 
362 

64 

Ponca 

Tonkawa      

Total 

800 
152 

393 
80 

37 
292 

407 
72 

379 
50 

421 
102 

342 
152 

47 
366 

394 

64 

Red  Moon  School  —  Cheyenne 

Sac  and  Fox  school- 
Iowa 

38 

88 

===== 

85 
592 

48 
300 

40 
335 

45 
257 

Sac  and  Fox,  Mississippi  

138 

Total  „  

677 



146 
434 

329 

348 

375 

68 
181 

302 

78 
253 

413 

129 
393 

126 

138 

10 
32 

Seger  School— 
Arapaho        

66 

207 

80 

227 

7 
9 

Cheyenne 

Total 

580 

128 

275 
393 
330 
412 

447 

273 

51 
147 
181 
164 
201 
226 

307 

•     

-  77 
128 
212 
166 
211 
221 

249 

.;    := 

81 
150 
230 
182 
241 
227 

331 

47 
125 
163 
148 
171 
220 

522 

6 
5 
18 
91 
20 
2 

16 

—  '  .'  "-_^_  - 

65 
43 
74 
20 
262 
35 

42 

57 
227 
301 
219 
130 
410 

Seneca  School- 
Eastern  Shawnee 

Ottawa          

Peoria-Miami 

Quapaw          

Seneca 

Wyandot        

Total 

1,985 

970 

1,015 

1,111 

874 

142 

499 

1,344 

i 1910  census. 


82 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 

aun. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

O  klahoma—  Continued  . 
jShawnee  School  — 
Absentee  Shawnee 

460 
1,730 
306 

227 
856 
164 

233 

874 
142 

143 

861 
124 

317 

869 
182 

436 
52 
301 

24 
137 
5 

Citizen  Potawatomi  

1,541 

Mexican  TCickapoo 

Total                   

i  2,  496 
285 

1,247 
46 

1,249 
39 

1,128 
42 

-   ^    ..-_,_   '      •• 

1,368 
43 

789 
76 

-..,  L-.".. 

8,621 

166 
3 

4,749 

1,541 
6 

Under  War  Department—  Apache 
at  Fort  Sill            

Five  Civilized  Tribes*— 
Cherokee  Nation— 
By  blood 

36,294 
286 
197 
4,916 

23,407 

'     By  intermarriage       

Delawares      

Freedmen  

Total         

41,693 

"       

8,621 
1,515 

4,  749 

23,407 
3,821 

Chickasaw  Nation— 
By  blood  

5,649 
645 
4,661 

958 

By  intermarriage  
Freedmen  

Total          

10,955 

1,515 

958 

3,821 

Choctaw  Nation— 
By  blood 

17,446 
1,651 

8,418 

2,462 

9,856 

By  intermarriage  

Mississippi  Choctaw 

1,639 
5,994 

Freedmen 

Total 

26,730 

8,418 

2,462 

9,856 

Creek  Nation— 
By  blood            

11,905 
6  807 

6,830 

1,688 

3,387 

Freedmen 

Total 

18  712 

6,830 

—  — 

1,250 

1,688 
476 

3,387 

Seminole  Nation— 
By  blood  

_.,  -^,.-rj_'_  -?— 

2,133 
986 

407 

Freedmen 

Total             .  .. 

3,119 
01,209 

1,250 
26,634 
35.  602 

476 
10,333 

407 
40,878 
44,507 

Total  Five  Civilized  Tribes.. 
Total  Oklahoma... 

-r  — 

.._,_._.  .^_-_  _ 

'_'_•'—  —  m-_^—— 

-._.'--»__  

8.234 

8.031 

8.367 

17.607 

8.164 

14.  134 

Oregon: 
Klamath  School—  Klamath,  Modoc, 
and  Yahooskin  Band  of  Snake.  .  . 
Roseburg  School—  Scattered  Indians 
on  public  domain  

1,121 
3,000 

532 
1,500 

589 
1,500 

502 

619 

854 
3,000 

250 

17 

Siletz   School—  Clackamas,   Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Siletz  (confeder- 
ated), Umpqua,  Hapata  Lake, 
and  Yamhill.. 

426 

226 

200 

195 

231 

207 

202 

17 

Umatilla    School—  Cayuse,    Uma- 
tilla,  and  Walla  Walla.  . 

1  110 

508 

602 

471 

639 

575 

51 

484 

Warm     Springs     School—  Wasco, 
Tenino,  and  Paiute  . 

742 

333 

409 

281 

461 

714 

28 

Total  Oregon.  . 

6  399 

3  099 

3  300 

1  449 

1  950 

5  350 

531 

518 

Rhode  Island:  Not  under  agent    . 

4  284 

South  Carolina:  Not  under  agent— 
Catawbas,  Cherokee,  Oneida/and 
others  

*331 

1  Includes  687  Potawatomi  and  128  Mexican  Kickapoo  living  off  reservations. 

2  Mescalero,  New  Mexico,  includes  183  Fort  Sill  removal,  1913  report. 

8  Covers  only  those  Indians  enrolled;  no  data  as  to  number  not  enrolled. 
<  1910  census. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


83 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1914 — 

Continued. 


Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superiatendencies,  and  tribes. 

lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Manors. 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  School—  Blackfeet 
Miniconjou,  Sans  Arc.  and  Two 
Kettle  Sioux  

2,691 

1,342 

1,349 

1  222 

1,469 

1  782 

452 

457 

Crow  Creek  School—  Lower  Yank- 
tonai  Sioux 

968 

452 

511 

414 

549 

710 

210 

43 

Flandreau  School—  Flandreau  Sioux 
Lower  Brule  School—  Lower  Brule 
Sioux  

280 
478 

146 
249 

134 
229 

100 
219 

180 
259 

170 
294 

108 
140 

2 

44 

Pine  Ridge  School—  Oglala  Sioux.  . 
Rosebud  School  —  Brule  Sioux  
Sisseton  School—  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux 

7,059 
5,472 

2  065 

3,457 
2,  731 

1  051 

3,602 
2,741 

1  014 

3,543 
2,511 

979 

3,516 
2,961 

1  086 

4,641 
3,176 

1  200 

1,522 
1,592 

245 

896 
704 

620 

Yankton  School—  Yankton  Sioux.  . 

1,805 

843 

962 

834 

971 

858 

604 

343 

Total  South  Dakota  

20,813 

10,  271 

10,542 

9  822 

10,  991 

12,831 

4  873 

3  109 

Tennessee:  Not  under  agent.  .   .. 

1216 

Texas  (not  under  agent): 
Alabama  

2192 

Koosati,    Seminole,     Isleta,    and 
others  

1510 

Utah: 
Shivwits  School—  Paiute  

133 

64 

-"     r-  •"-,  

69 

47 

86 

133 

Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency— 
UintaUte 

438 

246 

192 

Uncompahgre  Ute  . 

451 

218 

233 

I      484 

688 

1  065 

83 

24 

Whiteriver  Ute 

283 

167 

116 

|2 

Total  .  . 

1,172 

631 

541 

484 

688 

1  065 

83 

24 

Salt  Lake— 
Under  special  agent—  Paiute  and 
others..  . 

500 

231 

269 

500 

Not    under   agent—  Paiute   and 
others  

U,416 

Total  Utah  

3,221 

926 

879 

531 

774 

1,698 

83 

24 

Vermont:  Not  under  agent  

126 

Virginia:  Not  under  agent.  .  . 

1539 

Washington: 
Colville  School—  Confederated  Col- 
ville  

2,425 

1,181 

1  244 

1  063 

1  362 

1  492 

442 

491 

Cushman  School  — 
Chehalis.. 

99 

57 

42 

41 

58 

70 

29 

Muckleshoot  

158 

75 

83 

63 

95 

124 

32 

2 

Nisqualli...  . 

82 

47 

35 

26 

56 

53 

19 

10 

Quinaielt  . 

732 

359 

373 

283 

449 

482 

231 

19 

Skokomish  

203 

94 

109 

82 

121 

130 

65 

g 

Squaxon  Island 

77 

41 

36 

39 

38 

40 

31 

6 

Unattached  — 
Puyallup  . 

372 

190 

182 

Cowlitz  

490 

240 

250 

1,000 

500 

200 

Clallam  

Various  other  Indians  

510 
328 

260 
160 

250 
168 

Total  unattached 

1,700 

850 

850 

1  000 

500 

200 

Total  Cushman.  . 

3,051 

1,523 

1,528 

534 

817 

1,899 

907 

245 

Neah  Bay  School— 
Hoh.  ...... 

49 

26 

23 

18 

31 

49 

Makah 

401 

199 

202 

175 

226 

355 

46 

Ozette 

17 

g 

g 

17 

17 

Quileute... 

226 

126 

100 

107 

119 

216 

10 

Total  

693 

359 

334 

300 

393 

637 

56 

1 1910  census. 


«  Special  agent's  report,  1910, 


84 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  80,  1914— 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
fetion. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Spokane  School—  * 
Chewelah 

607 
17 

286 

7 

321 

10 

\      260 

364 

413 

54 

157 

Spokane  

Total  . 

624 

293 

331 

260 

229 
81 
87 

183 

364 

413 

54 

157 

9 
33 

Tulalip  School— 
Lummi 

452 
165 
209 

413 

231 
85 
103 

208 

221 
80 
106 

205 

223 
84 
122 

230 

271 
70 
187 

321 

172 
62 
22 

87 

Susquamish  

Swinomish 

Tulalip  (remnants  of  many  tribes 
and  bands)  

5 

Total 

1,239 

3,149 
193 

11,274 
136 

627 
1,493 

612 
1,656 

580 
1,333 

659 
1,816 

849 
2,194 

343 

684 

47 
271 

Yakima  School—  Klikitat,  Yakima, 
and  Wisham  (confederated  Yak- 
ima)   

Not  under  agent  

Total  Washington 

5,476 

5,705 

4,070 

5,411 

7,484 

2,486 

1,211 

West  Virginia:  Not  under  agent 

Wisconsin: 
Carter  School  —  Potawatomi  . 

176 
642 

913 
315 

79 
545 

782 
274 

= 

313 
1,252 

137 
610 

808 
291 

234 
707 

313 
500 

Hayward  School  —  Chippewa.  Lac 
Courte  OreiUe  2  

711 

41 

Keshena  School— 
Menominee  

1,721 
606 

939 

332 

259 

(3) 

1,121 
(3) 

341 
(8) 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee 

Total  

2,327 
707 

1,222 
2.451 
507 

1,274 

1,228 
337 

611 
1,280 
272 

627 

1,099 
370 

611 
1,171 
235 

647 

1,056 
260 

(4) 
1,131 
251 

517 

1,271 
447 

w 

1,320 
256 

757 

259 
460 
50 

1,121 
200 

410 
2,451 

341 
47 

762 

Lac  du  Flambeau  School  —  Chip- 
pewa   

La   Pointe   School—  Chippewa   at 
Bad  River  

Oneida  School  —  Oneida  .  . 

Red  Cliff  School  —  Chippewa 

398 
(4) 

109 
(4) 

Tomah  School—  Wisconsin  Band  of 
Winnebago  .  . 

(4) 

Total  Wisconsin.  ..  . 

10,053 

5,173 

===== 

439 

425 

4,880 

======= 

435 

406 

3,839 

4,992 

1,582 

===== 

765 
491 

5,291 

1,300 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone  School— 
Arapaho 

874 
831 

440 
365 

434 
466 

103 
143 

6 

197 

Shoshoni 

Total 

1,705 
331,250 

864 

841 
100,260 

805 

900 

1,256 
171,804 

246 
43,138 

203 
59,469 

Grand  total5 

102,257 

84,235 

104,116 

1 1910  census. 
» 1913  report. 


*  Unknown. 

*  Not  reported. 


*  Correct  as  reported  by  superintendents. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN"  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 

patents,  June  SO,  1914- 


States  and  superintendences. 

Unallotted. 

Allotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
supervi- 
sion. 

Holding 
trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  . 

422 

422- 
462 
2,485< 
•785 
174 
9fr 
1,432 
4,133. 
10,000 
6,096- 
1,234 
2,608 
4,965 
474 
6,550 

Colorado  River 

462 

462 

Fort  Apache 

2,485 

Fort  Mojave 

785 

785 

Ha  vasupai  ... 

174 
96 
1,432 

Kaibab 

Leupp  

Moqui  

4.133 

Navajo  

10,000 
6,096 
521 
2,608 
2,195 
474 
6,550 

Pima 

Salt  River  

713 

713 

San  Carlos 

San  Xavier  

2,770 

2,770 

Truxton  Canon 

Western  Navajo 

Total 

37,  186 

4,730 

4,730 

41,916- 

California: 
Bishop 

1,175 
218 
51 
505 
50 
850 
808 
613 
704 
977 
974 
416 

173 

2 

175 

1,350 
21& 
51 
733 
786 
1,000 
1,365 
613 
983 
1,529 
974 
62* 

Campo  . 

Digger 

Fort  Bidwell       .     .  . 

228 
736 
150 
546 

228 
736 
150 
557 

Fort  Yuma 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley 

11 

Pala 

279 
550 

279 
552 

Round  Valley  

2 

Soboba 

Tule  River  

208 

208 

Total  

7,341 

2,870 

2 

13 

2,885 

10,22$ 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs  

504 
165 

504 
360 

Southern  Ute 

195 

195 

Total  .. 

669 
562 

195 

195 

864- 
562 

Florida'  Seminole 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'  Alene  

.    269 
49 
546 

585 
1,748 
783 

585 
1,748 
909 

854 
1,797 
1,455 

Fort  Hall 

Fort  Lapwai  

38 

88 

Total 

864 
368 

3,116 

38 

88 

3,242 

4,  10ft 
368 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas: 
Kickapoo 

292 
305 

270 
420 

8 
40 

31 

309 
460 

601 
765- 

Potawatomi 

Total 

597 

690 

48 

31 

769 

1,366 

===== 

252 
1,097 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 

252 

67 

252 
73 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior... 

1,024 

6 

Total 

1,024 

319 

6 

325 

1,349 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac 

730 

253 
307 
1,041 
312 
84 

15 
5 
12 

268 
312 
1,053 
312 
84 

993 
312 
1,743 
624 
303 
1,482 
6,070 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake 

690 
312 
219 
1,482 
2,636 

Nett  Lake    ...                         . 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley) 

Red  Lake 

White  Earth 

3,434 

3,434 

Total  

6,069 

1,997 

3,466 

5,463 

11,532 

86 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1914— Con  tinned. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Unallotted 

Allotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
supervi- 
sion. 

Holding 
trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet 

2,639 
1,323 
1,648 

1 
4 

27 

1 
33 
277 

2,641 
1,360 
1,952 

2,641 
1,696 
2,305 
1,224 
1,904 
1,421 

Crow  

336 
353 
1,224 
148 
1,421 

Flathead 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck    . 

1,753 

3 

1,756 

Tongue  River 

Total  . 

3,482 

7,363 

35 

311 

7,709 

11,191 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

689 
1,040 
717 

309 
207 
265 

20 
23 

314 

219 
129 

643 
449 
394 

1,332 
1,489 
1,111 

Santee  

Winnebago 

Total  

2,446 

781 

43 

662 

1,486 

3,932 

Nevada: 
Fallen 

96 
252 

318 
90 
115 

318 
90 
115 

414 
342 
115 
601 
559 
590 
5,070 

Fort  McDermitt  

Moapa  River.. 

Nevada 

301 
191 
590 
4,500 

Walker  River  

368 

368 

Western  Shoshone 

Reno,  special  agent  

570 

570 

Total 

6,230 

1,461 

1,461 

7,691 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pueblos 

4,894 
92 
630 
315 
8,000 
3,525 

C1) 
567 

4,894 
659 
630 
2,685 
8,000 
3,525 
1,602 

Jicarilla 

567 

Mescalero  

Pueblo  Bonito  .  . 

2,370 

2,370 

San  Juan 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos  

Zuni 

1,602 

Total  

19,058 
5,419 

2,937 

2,937 

21,995 
5,419 
2,188 

New  York:  New  York  Agency  

North  Carolina:  Cherokee 

2,188 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold 

136 
466 

991 
444 
3,274 
2,537 

13 
65 
92 
46 

1 
13 

65 
281 

1,005 
522 
3,431 

2,864 

1,141 
988 
3,431 
3,063 

FortTotten  

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  

199 

Total 

801 

7,246 

216 

360 

7,822 

8,623 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

382 
551 
1,198 
123 
72 
335 
159 
50 
407 
249 
1,052 
1,824 

403 

586 
3,001 
2,064 
340 
309 
583 
101 
187 
301 
159 
.487 

403 
705 
3,171 
2,064 
360 
344 
641 
102 
270 
331 
933 
672 
101,209 

785 
1,256 
4.369 
2,187 
432 
679 
800 
152 
677 
580 
1,985 
2,496 
101,209 

7^17,  607 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

55 

59 

64 
111 

Kiowa 

Osage  

Otoe  

11 
16 
55 
1 
47 
12 

9 
19 
3 

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Red  Moon  

Sac  and  Fox 

36 

18 
774 
116 
U01,209 

Seger  

Seneca  

Shawnee 

69 

Five  Civilized  Tribes. 

Total  

6,402 

8,521 

325 

102,359 

111,205 

1  1,614  allotments  made  but  not  approved  by  department. 

2  32,939  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


87 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1914 — Contained. 


States  and  superin  tendencies. 

Unallotted. 

Altotted. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
supervi- 
sion. 

Holding 
trust 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Total 
allotted. 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Oregon: 
Klamath                               

560 
6,000 
212 
545 
321 

561 
1,986 
115 
390 
418 

561 
2,000 
214 
565 
421 

1,121 

18,000 
426 
1,110 
742 

Roseburg 

14 
92 
175 
3 

Siletz 

7 

Umatilla 

Warm  Springs      



Total 

7,638 

3,470 

7 

284 

3,761 

11,399 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

364 

180 
280 

2,266 
748 

24 
5 

37 
30 

2,327 
783 

2,691 
963 
280 
478 
7,059 
5,472 
2,065 
1,805 

Crow  Creek 

Flandreau 

Lower  Brule        .             

425 
5,345 
5,004 
691 
655 

8 
292 
27 
337 
128 

45 

78 
241 
58 
83 

478 
5,715 
5,272 
1,086 
866 

Pine  Ridge 

1,344 
200 
979 
939 

Rosebud  

Sisseton 

Yankton  

Total 

4,286 

15,  134 

821 

572 

16,527 

20,813 

Utah: 
Shivwits 

133 
275 
500 

133 
1,172 
500 

Uintah. 

894 

1 

2 

897 

Salt  Lake  special  agent 

Total 

908 

894 

1 

2 

897 

1,805 

Washington: 
Colville 

40 
614 
390 
49 
1,031 

2,370 
2,428 
303 
560 
198 
3,059 

15 
5 

2,385 
2,437 
303 
575 
.208 
^xM59- 

2,425 
3,051 
693 
624 
1,239 
3,059 

Cushman  

4 

Neah  Bay 

Spokane  

4 

1 
20 

11 
9 

70 

Tulalip 

Yakima  

Total 

2,124 

8,918 

29 

ItO' 

9,057 

11,  181 

Wisconsin: 
Carter 

313 
535 
1,721 
348 

(U 

380 
(2) 

313 

1,252 
2,327 
707 
1,222 
2,451 
507 
1,274 

Hayward 

715 
606 
355 

«« 

126 
(2) 

2 

717 
606 
359 
7 
937 
127 
(2) 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau.          

4 
7 
725 
1 
(2) 

La  Pointe 

<8)78 

Oneida  

Red  Cliff 

Toman  

(*) 

Total 

4,205 
254 

1,936 
1,436 

78 

739 
15 

2,753 
1,451 

10,053 
1,705 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Grand  total  

121,333 

74,014 

1,643 

109,018 

184,675 

307,891 

COMPARISON. 


Total  1913 

121,233 

72,411 

1,420 

109,911 

183,742 

307,  433 

Total  1912  

120,  876 

103,417 

1,926 

70,904 

177,626 

300,  930 

Total  1911 

120,780 

88,  182 

8  76,  033 

164,215 

296,  320 

Total  1901  4 

64,853 

247,  522 

Totall890<  

15,166 

230,437 

i 5,000  of  these  Indians  in  California. 
2  Unknown. 


8  Includes  fee  patents  for  part  of  their  allotment. 
*  Only  items  reported. 


COMMISSIONER,  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


JO 


i^gfUSS 


££ 


oo  .-i  eo  <o  o  10  eo  N 

i—  i»oeoooocOi-H»—  < 

IN       I>t-Oco<0i0> 


IIOOOOOO^OTH     or^-io  co 


-Old    9ABq    Ot[AV 


•sueipui  Suotcre  sgtio.mt[0 


-co 


•streipui  Suorae 
3  u  j  2[  i  o  !M.    sat  JBUOISSJH 


5  o  t^  t»  »H  ^ 


»-<  N  CO 


rests 
nken 


•stretpui  ^g 


3  :  :  :i 


•S9^Tt(AV  ^Cg 


•srreipui  ^a 


:^°^gS 


-900Jd 


•rao;sno  requ^  AQ 


><OO      >O 
.i-HCO     •»« 


•srreipui  1199^93 


•S9JTTIAV  pWB 


§•1 


S "  o  c3  'c3     '     '     '          '     •  -i<  H  M  « ( 

gftg^ll^-i'i  J^SOM|!|  c3o^i«^rt^-j  i'gaJ^^ 

.i  I "3 .0.0 ^^ 


'    o  o  fa  PN 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


89 


| 

y-vO 


sssai 


CM        i-l        i-l 


CO  OO  i-H  O  CM  i-4  00 


10  <0  •«*  CO  0  •* 


e*     t~ -«n  «c  co  I-H 


1 


£8 


»-l  05  «*  CO  CO 


00  CO  00  CM  CM 


:£ 


a         o-*5  S&PL,  opuj'SnrM.sw  « 

is    II  i  Jh  1  aSfiifafi  i  ,s 


55a 


a 

^ 


5    M 


aPHi 
a 


90 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


'SJ9JOA  9JV 


JO     8U9ZPIO     9JV 


9IJUAY  ptre  pegy; 


1SI 


iqO  P9SS9J 

-oad  9Aeq  oqAY  strerpui 


S       g 


S|8 


"streipuj  9uoun?  sgqomqQ 


•srreipui  Suorae 

3  U  I  3[  J  O  AY      S9IJBUOISSI  J\[ 


•streipui 


'*  T6T  ' 


<N  — 


•gjnp 

-900Jd    1B39I 


CON  i-liO  P3Tf  O 


liiii 

m 


il 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIES. 


91 


§!§§ 


-s 


r-l         O 

10     IS 


!3S£: 


S8 


^^eo  o  >c  ?3 


>C<N 


ie^  o 


0        -4  <N  0>  0 


^ 


n 


:  :  :  :      3 

Mil-  » 

!  id*  J 
-;  :Sa    XB 


^  o 

63556—14 7 


g|   «|||||§ 
I    f  °^ 


92 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


jo    suazjip    9jy 


pire 


co"          IH' 


w 

O  CO  «O  W  >-l 
co"  rHCO" 


CS  t--"  O5  t—  1-H  1 

OOOO1  1-I5O 


ST-(   O 
000 


-oad  eABq  OTJM.  sueipui 


•strejpui  Suonre  sgqojnqo 


CO  00  rH  CO  •*  CO 


rH  •*  CO  CO  CO  "5  "*  <N 


•sirejpui  Snonre 
3  u  1  3[  j  o  JA.    S9  uenoisspH 


t-l  0  10  «  Oi  0 


•sireipni  ^g 


•H6I  '08  9tmf 


rHlOrHOCC 


-900Jd 


OOOOOINOOCO 


r-IOOr-llOOOINfOCD 


3 


:      „ 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


93 


SS25: 


88 


gg 
S2SS 

lO  US^f 


:s§8£ 


CC  (M  i-i  O< 

s  s  s  s ! 

aisi; 

^^^^E 


94 


COMMISSIONEB  INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  SO,  1913. 


States  and  reservations. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Arizona: 
Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River)                                          .  . 

24,971 
235,651 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
357,120 
518 
730,880 
138,240 
2,472,320 
9,880,397 
136,319 
22,  316 
1,834,240 

24,971 
240,640 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
357,  120 
518 
730,880 
138,240 
2,  472,  32C 
9,889,997 
177,  92S 
46,720 
1,834,240 

4,989 

Fort  Apache                                          .           

Fort  Mojave 

Gila  Bend  (Pima)  

Gila  River  (Pima) 

Havasupai  " 

Hualapai  .  .  

Kaibab 

Moqui  

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico)              . 

9,600 
41,606 
24,404 

Papago 

SaltRiver  

Sari  Carlos 

Total  

80,599 

17,556,451 

17,637,050 

California: 
Digger 

370 
99,051 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
3,084 
3,896 
8,329 
\           560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
15,042 
5,461 
370 
20,800 
480 
75,746 
48,551 
1,111 
31,386 

370 

128,  142 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
4,480 
5,195 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
15,042 
5,461 
640 
20,800 
480 
75,746 
48,551 
43,217 
39,386 

Hoopa  Valley  

29,091 

Mission  — 
Agua  Caliente  (MalM)  

Augustine  (Malki)  

Cabazon(Malki)... 

Cahuilla  (Soboba)  

Campo  

Capitan  Grande  (Pala)  

Cuyapipa  (Campo)  

Inaja  (Soboba)  

Laguna  (Campo)  

La  Posta  (Campo) 

Los  Coyotes  (  Volcan)  

Manzanita  (  Campo)  ...  . 

Martinez  (Malki)  

Mission  Creek  (Malki)  

Morongo  (Malki) 

Pala  • 

1,396 
1,299 

Pechanga  (Temecula) 

Potrero  (Pala)  

Ramona  (Soboba)  

Rincon  (Pala) 

San  Manuel  (MaM)  

San  Pascual  (Pala) 

Santa  Rosa  (Soboba)  

Santa  Ysabel  (Soboba)  . 

Soboba 

Syquan  (Soboba)  .  .  . 

270 

Torres  (Malki).  

Twenty-nine  Palms  (Malki)  

Paiute. 

RoundValley  

Tule  River  

42,106 
8,000 

Yuma  .  .  . 

Total    . 

82,162 
72,651 

431,213 
483,910 
23,542 

513,375 
556,  561 
23,542 

Colorado:  Ute  

Florida:  Seminole       

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene 

104,077 
6,299 

178,812 

104,077 
454,239 
212,390 

Fort  Hall  

447,940 
33,578 

Lapwai  

Total  

289,188 

481,518 
3,251 

770,706 
3,251 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas: 
Chippewaand  Munsee  

4,195 

4,195 
11,769 
27,216 
220,785 
8,079 

Iowa  (  Kickapoo)  

11,  769 

Kickapoo...........:....:::::::::  :  ; 

27  216 

Potawatomi 

220,785 
8,079 

Sac  and  Fox  (Kickapoo)  

Total  

272,044 

272,044 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  SO,  1913 — Continued. 


95 


Area  in  acres 

. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Michigan: 
Isabella    

98,395 

191 

98,586 

L'Anse                                                                     

52,041 

732 

52,773 

Ontonagon 

2,391 

2,391 

Total 

152,827 

923 

153,750 

Minnesota: 
Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

56,  467 

56,467 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)  

296 

296 

Fond  du  Lac  '.  

27,637 

27,637 

Grand  Portage 

24,191 

24,  191 

Leech  Lake                                               

47,681 

47,681 

Mdewakanton 

12,582 

12,582 

Red  Lake 

543,528 

543,528 

Vermillion  Lake 

1,080 

1,080 

White  Earth 

674  887 

29,  736 

704,  623 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake)                  .  . 

64,733 

64,733 

Total                                       

908,  474 

574,344 

1,482,818 

Montana: 
Blackfeet                                                                     ..    .  . 

2,220 

1,  491,  167 

1,493,387 

Crow 

479  028 

1  834,185 

2,313,213 

Fort  Belknap 

497,600 

497,600 

Fort  Peck 

722  453 

722,  453 

Jacko  (Flathead)  

228,408 

228,408 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River) 

489,500 

489,500 

Total 

1,  432,  109 

4,312,452 

5,744,561 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

130  522 

4  500 

135,022 

Ponca  (Santee)      .      .                      

27,236 

27,236 

Santee 

72  567 

72,567 

Sioux  (additional)  

640 

640 

Winnebago 

108  838 

1,139 

109,977 

Total..    . 

339  163 

6,279 

345,442 

Nevada: 
Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone) 

321  920 

321,920 

Moapa  River  

1,128 

1,128 

Paiute  (Fallon) 

3  690 

940 

4,630 

•    Pyramid  Lake  (Nevada)  

322,000 

322,000 

Walker  River 

9  763 

40  746 

50,509 

Total  

13,453 

686  734 

700,  187 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla  Apache 

353  812 

407  300 

761  112 

Mescalero  Apache  

474,240 

474,240 

Navajo  (see  Arizona) 

319  363 

1  980  637 

2  300  000 

Pueblo— 
Acoma  (Albuquerque)                             

95,  792 

95,792 

Cochiti 

24  256 

24  256 

Isleta  (Albuquerque)                                 

110,  080 

110,080 

Jemez 

40  550 

40  550 

Laguna  (Albuquerque)  

154,025 

154,025 

Nambe 

13  586 

13  586 

Pecos  

18,  763 

18.763 

Picuris  ... 

17,461 

17,461 

Pojoaque 

13  520 

13  520 

San  Dia  (Albuquerque)  .  .                          

24,  187 

24,187 

San  Juan 

17  545 

17  545 

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque}  

34,767 

34,  767 

Santa  Ana  (Albuquerque) 

17  361 

17,361 

Santa  Clara  

49,  369 

49,  369 

Santo  Domingo  ...      .                        

92,  398 

92,398 

Si  a 

17  515 

17  5J5 

San  Ildefonso  

17,  293 

17,293 

Taos.. 

17  361 

17  361 

Tesuque 

17  471 

17  471 

Zuni... 

215,040 

215,040 

Total 

673  175 

3  870  517 

4  543  692 

96 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  SO,  1913— Continued. 


. 

Vrea  in  acres 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

New  York: 

30,  469 

30,  469 

Cattaraugus                                                                      

21,  680 

21,680 

Oil  Sprintr 

640 

640 

Oneida                                                                    

350 

350 

Onondaga 

6  100 

6  100 

St.  Regis      ...                                                      

14,640 

14,640 

Tonawanda 

7,549 

7,549 

Tuscarora  

6,249 

6,249 

Total 

87  677 

87  677 

North  Carolina:  Qualla                                                    

63,211 

63,211 

North  Dakota: 
Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)                                                       .  . 

137.381 

137,381 

Fort  Berthold  

229,554 

444,062 

673,616 

Standing  Rock                                                                       

1,351,770 

166,  023 

1,517,793 

Turtle  Mountain 

44  140 

44  140 

Total 

1  762  845 

610  085 

2  372  930 

Oklahoma: 
Cherokee  

4,346,203 

80 

4,346,283 

Chickasaw 

3,800,350 

1,189 

3,801,539 

Choctaw  

4,291,036 

993,951 

5,284,987 

Creek..    ...                                                                 ..     . 

2,997,114 

2,494 

2.  999,  608 

Seminole 

359  697 

359  697 

Cherokee  Outlet                                                             

4,949 

4,949 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

528  789 

528,  789 

Iowa  (Sac  and  Fox)                .                 

8,605 

8,605 

Kansa  (Kaw) 

99,  644 

99,  644 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee)..          .            

22,  650 

22,  650 

Kiowa,  Comanche  and  Apache 

546,377 

546,377 

Modoc  (Seneca)... 

3,966 

3,966 

Oakland  

11,456 

11,456 

Osage 

1  465  350 

1,465  350 

Otoe  

128,351 

128,351 

Ottawa  (Seneca) 

12  995 

1  587 

14,582 

Pawnee  

112,  701 

112,  701 

Peoria  (Seneca) 

43,334 

43,334 

Ponca  

100,  745 

320 

101,065 

Potawatomi  (Shawnee)  

291,616 

291,616 

Quapaw  (Seneca)  

56,  245 

56,  245 

Sac  and  Fox 

87,  684 

87,  684 

Seneca  

41,813 

41,813 

Shawnee     ....                                                 

12,  745 

12,  745 

Wichita  (Kiowa) 

152,  714 

152,  714 

Wyandot  (Seneca)  ..                               

20,  942 

535 

21,  477 

Total  -.. 

19,548,071 

1,000,156 

20,548,227 

Oregon: 
Grande  Ronde  

32,983 

32,983 

Klamath 

207,374 

811,  802 

1,019,176 

Siletz  

44,  459 

44,459 

Umatilla 

82,  444 

74,330 

156,  774 

Warm  Springs  

139,  972 

322,  832 

462,804 

Total 

507  232 

1  208  964 

1,716  196 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

869  934 

389  077 

1  259  Oil 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago                 

254,497 

34,  408 

288,  905 

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton)  "  

308,  838 

308,  838 

Lower  Brule  

187,352 

52,  159 

239,511 

Pine  Ridge  .. 

2,  167,  148 

420,  117 

2,587,265 

Rosebud 

1  642  889 

72  342 

1  715  231 

Yankton  .                 ... 

268,  263 

268,  263 

Total 

5  698  921 

968  103 

6  667  024 

Utah: 
Uintah  Valley 

99  407 

179  154 

278  561 

Uncompahgre  

12,540 

12,540 

Total  

111,947 

179,  154 

291,  101 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  SO,  1913 — Continued. 


97 


. 

Vrea  in  acres 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Washington: 
Chehalis  (Cushman) 

3  799 

3  799 

Columbia  (Colville)  

22.  618 

22,  618 

Colville 

52  326 

1  296  336 

1  348  662 

Hoh  River  (Neah  Bay)  

640 

640 

Kalispel 

4  629 

4  629 

Lummi  (Tulalip)  

12,561 

12,561 

Makah  (Neah  Bay)  

3,728 

19,312 

23,040 

Muckleshoot  (Cushman) 

3  491 

3  491 

Nisqualli  (Cushman)  

4,717 

4,717 

Ozette  (Neah  Bay) 

640 

640 

Port  Madison  (Tulalip)  

7,219 

65 

7,284 

Puyallup  (Cushman)           ... 

17,463 

17  463 

Quileute  (Neah  Bay) 

837 

837 

Quinaielt  (Cushman)     

54,  990 

168,553 

223,543 

Shoalwater 

335 

335 

Skokomish  (Cushman)  

7,803 

7,803 

Snohomish  (Tulalip) 

22,  166 

324 

22,490 

Spokan  

64,794 

82,648 

147,  442 

Squaxon  Island                   .                                         ... 

1,494 

1,494 

Swinomish  (Tulalip)  

7,359 

7,359 

Yakima  .                

294,  406 

798,  413 

1,092,819 

Total  

580,  934 

2,372,732 

2,  953,  666 

Wisconsin: 
Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Hayward)  .     .                           

68,511 

403 

68,  914 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

44  877 

26  153 

71  030 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

83,871 

39,  880 

123,  751 

Menominee 

231  680 

231  680 

Oneida  

65,440 

65,440 

Red  Cliff  

14,  166 

14,  166 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  

8,920 

8,920 

Total 

285  785 

298  116 

583  901 

Wyoming:  Wind  River  (Shoshone)  

221,832 

608,  637 

830,469 

Total  reservation  lands 

33  033  412 

35  827  969 

68  861  381 

Public  Domain  

1,038,189 

1,038,189 

Grand  total  

34,  071,  601 

35,  827,  969 

69,899,570 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


£9*1 


*o IOOO5 o    •  co  o  co 

CSOi— tr- ICO       •  Tf  T— I  O 

i— IO»OOOO     '^OiOi-n 


a  H'-* 


oec 
i— (O^C^C 


I .-(       (NO 
,0       CO.N 


1. 


o^^c.^^ 


<COO£-, 

T-Tc^t^; 


80  c^  ^o 

^tWOOO 


x 

ea-sa 


•3  |  i 

:«-     :^|  :'  : 


^1»1| 


COMMISSIONEK  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

:  So1  §8  8  8  8 


99 


ScS 


COCOJCOiOj 


,-1  CO  .-I 

<N" 


OCOC^COCOCN 


0 


S10! 


roTco'co 


<O  CC1  CO  C^l 


iliisi 


COiOOi 


892 


%% 


883 


3     T!w^  3 

O  3+J+s         O 


£U 


is: 


100 


COMMISSIONEE  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 

sss; 


IS 


rHrH         <N  rH  (N      •         O 


OJC 
CO  rH 


833 


£2§S 


Is*  I>- 


J-v 


r»W«»V 


'^t1  oc 


SS 


I-H  OO  O 

t^  10  o 

co  ic^5 


OO  O  QOi-H  t» 
t-S  IOCS!  (M  l> 


CJiO  CO  O  "5 


cfoo'evfrH" 


PH         I 


i.«4i]  i    iSnlil 

Islll  g  ^'glls^^sg 
200^^      ^a^fes^^^s 


••<i  ;s  i   [« 

•  8  o    ;P-i    ;        -®  g 

ISIW  JU 


New 
Nort 


iO  1*-  iO  cp  <N  O 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

S 

co* 


101 


8 


cow     ;     JO 
t>-  »o    •    • 


98 


iS2; 

COCO' 


eC 


CO  CO  CO  • 


i-lt^OOOOOOcOOO 

OCOiOOiCO^I^^OOOT—  I 

NCO~T-Ti-4'co'T-rco'cO>       lO^c 


£g 


Si 


S3 


I! 

o  : 


1  1  Um 

f  laalsfllllilla  ^  3«^35 


ill 


if   I 


102 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

M  1-1  eq  o  eq  I-H  «>•  o  as  g 


— 


•8 


BIH 


-    • 

JM 


w 


oiosoooc^octioioi-HTfri 


II 


«»     '. 


***&- 


I     ill  £  .slflfi; 

^oo^^^P-itf^MM^          deSSP          -goo^M^^ 


+3     4sg  n'    c3±j  g     43 

o    wSa-S^aS    ^ 

t-4      di  «?  «  OF;2la     E-i 


|jy 

i*  Elf  I 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


103 


iSH 


CO  00 
CO  S 

s§ 


cT 


i  h-  tO  '. 

I  i-H   CO  ( 


jjogc^O 
!^o 


j^oco 
i  •*  o  10 


Illll 


33331 


*ss 


111 


81 

co^     - 


pi  I 

illl 


00  CO  CO  CO  10 


104 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


N 
of 
m 


IteSiLLJ 

•S'sSsss 

illfll 

fco|-a4J» 


i-f-c      o 


w  <xT»-i 


*i^ii&3§4«M|i  3    a&lg£&jft|"  3 

ailssliMlslill  ^  Pi|ii|||ili  5 

o&if^  ,|«oQPHf^KSPwrta3H 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

85       3       R       £  g  $          2§8 


105 


ss 


nia 


A    W 


106 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


fc.ASm 
.QTJ  SP 

la** 
£*1*: 


gOOO 


IN,  t^.  rH 


£&$£ 


ISi 


to  OO 


"1  I0501C 


<N 


raska: 
Omaha 
Santee 
Winne 


ver 

iver 
hosh 


ada: 
Fallon 
Fort  M 
Moapa  R 
Nevada 
Walker  R 
Western 


:S  : 
o»     :  1  : 

i  »1 

6 
K 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


107 


illg 


5  <N  t-  O>  ^ 


1C        U5 


g§ 


=78 


e 


is 


i-nOlOO^tOC5 

ot-oooco 


iO  O 
^f  O 


:§S 


hold 
en 
Rock 
unta 


BMIS  3  J 

2IIII « -ii 


•  x  • 
j£  : 


..2*  :|«  :.:  : 

eg  c  a?  3  c  &"   •    '    • 

-gq2g£.-2-o   ' 


alll  11 


^ 


3         ^2« 

*  11 

3* 

i'MP 

3 

p 


63556—14- 


108 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


D 

oo"      co~^ro" 

8 

i  is  ;  i  ; 

1 

5 

CO 

^tT 

cs  oo  cs  o 

|| 

21      "^g 

0 

:  :     ;  :  : 

S 

1 

h 

:  :     :  :  : 



fe 

C3 

8  :  :     :  :  : 

:  :s  :  :  : 

3 

2 

ii§9 

.9 

S 

^ 

. 

•g 

•g 

5 

*d 

i 

I 

fe 

o        w 

flog 

:  :^x  :  :  : 

S 

00  «O  O<N 

g^P 

f 

"S 
> 

0> 

§ 

'£ 

rt 

g3  sgg 

S 

cc 

:::::: 

I 

i 

ill 

1 

| 

| 

<J 

go"            IN"      N" 

1 

8 

::::;: 

CO' 

§ 

IIIs 

1 

4- 

:::::: 

W   4f'V 

bo 

§ 

9 

1^ 

1O  OS         i-H  -^*CO 

1 

:::::: 

1 

s 

SISi 

| 

£ 

|la 

:::::: 

S 

ajs« 

t 

»? 

% 

sgs 

as 

is<0S2g 

§ 

O  O  ^  C5  O  C5 

•^  o  -^  o  o  co 

1 

g 

1 

1 

1 

a 

3 
fe 

3  -l- 
°  5 

SI 

" 

- 

&\  C^  C^  iM  ^ 

• 

| 

i 

i®®. 

2 

S1S3S1 

0 

S 

§i§  IS 

CO 

1 

1 

ill 

f=H 

1 

3J8- 

i 

of 

—  * 

^ 

^- 

^g§8§ 

S 

4 

^ 

6| 

dgg°  1 

i 

0 

S 

3 

g 

SIS 

1 

1 

SI 

Dl 

^ 

00 

rt 

J 

i 

jzj 
o 

S 

SaS 

1 

^ 

si 

S 

1 

1  slgl 

1 

§ 

g 

« 

2 

111 

f>> 

•a 

a 
g> 

o 

1 

bo,         ^« 

n 

CO 

CO  OS 

co 

oo" 

1 

S 

8 

g^i 

1 

§ 

1  g 

1 

§ 

i 

§11 

1 

3 

i 

si 

rH          r^ 

CO 

S 

§ 

CO  (N  CO 
OO  "*  W 

1 

»§ 

<N 

<N<N<N 

M 

^0 

0 

i 

1 

a£  CO  OO  I>-  O  »O  O 

CN 

§        CO  OCO  -^l 

05 

co 

0 

<D<0<0 

| 

c 

> 

1-4 

•s? 

1 

( 

t*^ 

H 

M 

:::::: 

3  Not  report 

£ 

1 
? 

^j 

« 

CO 

* 

yilyi 

Ililt-il 

, 

N   '•£  a  :  : 
ErfS|  :^ 

lll-§l|^ 

g  ^,-3  o^s-ej 

1 

! 

O 

1     •     •  o   »o 

stimated.  a 

•gooSoje;* 
^ 

|MM^t^OPn 

1 

£' 

11111 

w 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


109 


P 

fc  o 


5» 

g 


111 


'S> 

O 


1 
5 

.I1 


10  coo  r-O  »ci 
w  o  e^  i-i  oo  •<*<  ( 


T-wcotc      coir 


^iOt^ 


* 

1 


110 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


SJ 

£  o 


o  a 


3 


SlSl  S 


1 


sii 


§  I 


1  I 


is 


I 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


Ill 


"^  »  *~ 

|g 

1 

s 

« 

00 

o  ~* 

§ 

^  §  TT  S 

oo 

i 

o" 

II 

1 

3S8 

s 

iisf 

| 

i 

1 

o 

w 

ill 

§ 

?700 
d  CM 

~ 

5  is  i 

il 

CO  (X  ^  "3- 

c 

i 

CO 

55    S 

i 

CO 

K8 

1C 

8    - 

i 

TJ.COC50 
M 

(M 

^ 

s 

s 

00  (NO 

8 

(N  OO 

8 

S    2 

s 

II 

i 

3 

00 

1 

I 

:  :  :Ss 

8 

S  : 

i 

sgs 

«C  1C  OC 

1 

** 

S3 

§ 

•"* 

^^ 

i  i  i" 

s 

5  : 

2 

^oc 

1 

^8 

j^ 

§ 

5 

33 

i 

CO       "i-H 

s 

s  •: 

eo 

sss 

01 

oc 

*v 

^ 

i 

; 

. 

1 

, 

pp 

'0  CO 

£3 

o 

CO 

8 

s 

** 

«s§ 

5 

1 

c££ 

1-1  O- 

^ 

|S 

oc" 

§ 

iO  ^O  O 

8 

i  SI 

I 

§ 

1 

p      o 

o 

g 

l=i 

1 

II 

C' 

§ 

1  :g  i 

S 

S  IS 

p 

g 

§      " 

2 

' 

»i 

vc 
V 

! 

s? 

2  :.2  : 

& 

cc 

e  co  x 

•     TT  O   Tf 

OC  CO  «S 

i 

g 

°l 

i 

C1'  C 

1      1 

2 

1  1 

C4 

llgl 

1 

Hi 

g 

i 

CC   »-H 

^ 

"-1 

«c 

2    5 

i 

S2is 

§ 

i=il 

1 

8 

i 

I 

o 

ll§ 

i 

g 

sli 

1 

si 

i 

1 

2  is  : 

i 

l|ls 

1 

CO 

i^g 

1 

s 

COCO  u; 

5 

c^ 

co  = 

c^ 

,4 

1    S  i 

I 

Igi 

1 

S 

II 

1 

1 

1      1 

§ 

£  1 

g 

IIS1 

fsj 

CO 

I 

s 

«:  10  02  co 

z 

1 

erokee  

1 

.    .    .  c 

i  :  :g 

Peck  
ue  River. 

a 

.  1 

rt.c 

;| 

si 

3 

gs 

ll 

>  S-2 

g 

'U^ 

^Pcc 

c 

^ 

1 

«D 

. 

0 

CS 

C 
"c 

5 

sii 

flu s 

0  V 

55  55 


|  | 


112 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


111 


r-(  COCO  <N 


s  .9 


oooesoio     goo 


i  aist 


1 


Isli 


5  iO  CO  OO  C^ 

T-H  >O  CO  r-l 


tates 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


113 


l 


§ 


Ouray 


s 
and 


c^i  o 


•      *o 


§ 


5*2    ^      iJlttSeLd     -  SS'^flJS'     ^ffl     * 

II  1  fff!gjf|  I  Illfllg  |l  I 


l«p 

5 


r-ttnin 

1C  <M  i-H 
CO  CO  00 


CO  CO  t^ 

8552 


Total  1913. 
Total  1912 
Total  1911 
Total  1900 


Deludes  far 
Includes  tim 


114  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  9. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914. 


States  and  superintendencies 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  

3 

13 
31 
13 

1 
2 
18 
38 
53 
30 
31 
11 
10 
34 
16 

$720 
5,760 
11,  668 
5,409 
300 
324 
4,  833 
9.664 
22.  442 
7,752 
14,  030 
5,264 
2,824 
12,  375 
2,682 

120 

$16,  500 
600 

10 
17 

$1,000 
890 

133 
59 

$18,220 
7,655 
21,668 
40,  050 
2,490 
2,424 
6,453 
11.421 
31,433 
23,858 
58.  661 
6,646 
18.384 
86,314 
61,712 
20.  178 
7,919 

Colorado     iver 

28 
1800 
197 

$405 
i  10,OOC 
4,373 

Fort  Apache 

831 
373 
13 
67 
198 
71 
337 
210 
956 
102 
141 
701 
820 
164 
207 

Fort  Mohave 

78 
11 
40 

27,  860 
1,740 
1,000 

85 
1 

2,408 
450 

Havasupai  

Kaihab 

25 
160 
33 
212 
12 
514 
91 

1,100 
1,620 
1  757 

20 

(2) 

Moqui 

5,  650 
871 
20,144 
1,382 

72 
168 
132 

3.341 
15;  235 
7,960 

Phoenix  . 

""279 

"i6,"527 

Pima 

r.  ice  Station         

Salt     iver 

131 

163 
683 
94 

25 

15  560 
50.  560 
49.230 
15,000 
750 

San  Carlos  

San  Xavier 

!500 

23,171 

4 
121 
35 

208 
9,SOO 
1,250 

Truxton  Canon  

15 

15 

2,156 
3,995 

20 

167 

1,772 
3,174 

Western  Navajo  
Total 

334 

112,  198 

2,759 

75,419 

—    ' 

32 
68 

1,625 

195,327 

665 

42,  542 

5.383 

11 
19 
25 
227 
392 
250 
263 
86 
141 
376 
312 
104 

425,480 

1,412 
2,  .538 
1,550 
29.  780 
70.  673 
12.  979 
41,879 
16.  520 
7.980 
21,576 
40.782 
3  270 

California: 
Bishop  

4 

1.380 
1,200 

2 

(2) 

1£ 

166 
280 
200 
191 
70 
(2) 

(2) 
1.270 
1,465 
24,380 
62.300 
9,700 
38.  220 
11,550 
(2) 

Campo             .  . 

Diejgor 

3i 
69 
45 
11 

85 
2.100 
5.566 
1,300 
250 

Fort  Bidwell 

2\ 

r 

2,000 
2.499 
1,979 

20 
15 

1,300 
308 

Fort  Yuraa  

Malki  

9 
12 
23 
12 

2,154 
4,188 

5,235 
5,292 

52 
4 
118 

1,255 

782 
2,  745 

Pala. 

r  ound  Valley  

(2) 
364 

(2) 
16,284 

Soboba 

1J 

6,818 
515 

57 
32 

2,  969 
655 

236 
70 

30,995 
2.100 

Tule  .  iver    

Total  

121 

33,  260 

307 

103 
76 

10.114 

1.247 

181,880 

531 

25,58532,206 

»  250,  939 

9,668 
4,375 

Colorado: 
Navajo  

6 
6 

2,273 

2,789 

7,395 
1,586 

109 
82 

Southern  Ute 

Total  

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  

12 

^== 

5,062 
2,464 

179 

8.981 

45 
112 

-' 

6,760 
12,000 



191 

14,043 

52 
449 
34 

9.224 
26,395 
5.921 

Fort  Hall  

27 
11 

7,370 
5,560 

305 
23 

6.800 
361 

5 

225 

Fort  Lapwai  

Total 



45 
4 

7 
9 
2 

15.394 
1,400 

4,960 
3,019 
600 

328 

7.161 

157 
85 

18,  760 
5,  950 

==J 

225 

535 

41,540 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

89 

7.350 

Kansas: 
Haskell  Institute 



109 

666 

116 
9 
22 

5,626 
3,019 
3.000 

Kickapoo  

Potawatomi  

20 

2,400 

Total  

18 

•—— 

8,579 

20 

2,400 

109 

666 

147 

11,645 

= 

48 
6,260 

Michigan: 
Chippewa,  Lake  Superior 
Mount  Pleasant  

3 

48 

3 
13 

13 

6,260 

Total  

13 

6,260 

3 

48 

16 

6,308 

»  Estimated.         2  Not  reported. 

8  Does  not  include  36  Indians  at  Hoopa  Valley  earning  $9,418. 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  115 

TABLE  9. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  80,  1914 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

dum- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 

6 
6 
3 
6 
9 
c 

32 
6 
35 

$1,605 
2,700 
960 
13.024 
1,743 
4.800 
11.388 
2,418 

12,7V:3 

6 
50 
39 
IS 
341 

276 

2 
253 

$97 
1,850 
1,465 
866 
2,418 
1^3 
8,618 
120 
7,752 

12 
150 
67 
107 
410 
23 
325 
12 
288 

$1,792 
16,815 
5,  925 
28,  7<!0 
5,411 
5.  1H8 

24.o;>6 

3,038 
20,545 

Fond  du  Lac  

94 
25 
83 
60 

$12,  265 

Grand  Portage           .  .  . 

3,500 
14,  tOO 
1,250 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake            

Pipestone 

11 

$245 

Ked  Lake  

17 

4 

4,050 
500 

Vermill  ion  Lake 

White  Earth  

Total  

112 

51.521 

988 

23,309 

...  .—  ._-.    .-  

350 

13.805 
1,849 
18.  160 

3,967 
8,884 

283 

59 

36,465 

11 

245 

1,394 

117 
554 
93 
759 
54 
372 

111,540 

32.034 
32,896 
7.  252 
24,532 
12.595 
27,404 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

41 
68 
12 
17 
54 
40 

19,784 
19,091 
5.403 
6,372 
8,628 
18,231 

17 

486 
81 
742 

^ 

11,800 



Crow 

Flathead    

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck    

Tongue  Iviver 

3 

265 

1 

24 

Total             

232 

13 
4 

77,503 

4,435 
1  38( 

1,654 
10 

47,  015 

-  -.  _     —  ~ 

719 

62 

12,  165 

1 

24 

1,949 

136.  713 

5.154 
1,380 
7.100 
4,260 

Nebraska: 
Genoa 

23 
6 
16 
9 

Omaha    

10 

0) 
3,000 

San  tee 

6 
3 

4,100 
2,160 

Winnebago  .  

ft 

2,100 

Total    

26 

7 
1 
3 
3 
10 
4 
11 

12,  075 

2,314 
300 
659 
552 
3,264 
984 
4,000 

16 

2,819         12 

3,000 

54 

55 
46 
214 
56 
225 
255 
168 

17,894 

3,696 
18,  675 
37,414 
6,932 
6,S'->7 
19,  279 
14,287 

Nevada: 
Carson               .  ... 

48 
45 

1,382 
18,375 

Fallen     

Fort  McDermitt 

49 
31 
116 
120 
65 

2,355 
3,080 
867 
4,500 
972 

162 
22 
89 
131 
92 

34,400 
3,300 
2,500 
13,  795 
9,315 

Moapa  River  

Nevada 

10 

196 

Walker  River  

Western  Shoshone  

Total 

39 

12,073 

381 

11,774 

402 
26,660 
4,001 
8,  927 
2,374 
3,334 
178 
14,  513 

496 

63,310 

103 
57 

19,953 
1,700 

1,019 

107,  110 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  

15 
22 
45 
12 
10 
78 
14 
9 

6,197 
7,689 
11,0,2 
1,336 
3,590 
11  541 

25 
92 
145 

598 
43 
141 
8 
434 

97 
126 
268 
614 
53 
234 
120 
443 

8,299 
34,403 
19,423 
10,543 
5,964 
15,883 
9,738 
18,593 

Albuquerque  Pueblos  
Jicarilla      

12 
fc 

(2) 
(2) 
(2) 

54 
3,751 

280 
O 
(2) 
(2) 

14 

640 

Mescaloro 

Pueblo  Bonito       

San  Juan 

15 

98 

1,008 
3,080 

Santa  Fe  Pueblos    .  .  . 

6,480 
4,080 

Zuni 

Total 

205 

51,945 

1,486 
3 
44 

60,389 
138 
1,393 

80 

| 

4,084 
(!) 

(2) 

184 

6,428 

1,955 
3 
55 

122,846 
138 
6,433 

New  York:  New  York  Agenc\ 
North  Carolina:  Cherokee  .  .  .". 

North  Dakota: 

11 

5,0:0 

8 

26 
38 
64 
12 
j 

2,655 
9,655 
10,642 
18  344 

8 
275 
85 
677 
15 
9 

2,655 
13,319 
13,059 
53,699 
4,929 
4,345 

Fort  Berthold 

244 
47 
613 

3,664 
2,417 
35,355 
149 

5 

(2) 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain     . 

4,780 
4  345 

(2) 

H 

(2) 

(-) 

Total 

157 

50,421 

807 

41,585 

5 

1,069 

92,006 







i  Not  reported. 


2  Unknown. 


116  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  9. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
State  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

9 
24 
21 
75 
18 
3 
11 
6 
2 
12 
19 
11 
10 
51 

17 

$4,900 
13,240 
9.308 
20,737 
13,  848 
1,200 
5,590 
3,070 
500 
5.131 
4,277 
6,490 
4,150 
28,  492 

6,048 

63 
31 
147 
11 
2 

$697 
561 
1.979 
413 
150 

17 

$336 

89 
55 
193 
86 
20 
14 
16 
6 
13 
17 
46 
11 
60 
51 

35 

$5,933 
13,  801 
11,737 
21,  150 
13,  998 
1,460 
6,540 
3,070 
756 
5,680 
4,919 
6,490 
5,045 
28,  492 

7,080 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  .  . 
Chilocco 

25 

$450 

Kiowa                     

C1) 

C1) 

Otoe                 

11 
l 

260 
900 

4 

50 

Ponca               

Red  Moon 

11 

£ 

256 
549 
642 

Sac  and  Fox      

Seger 

Seneca           

0) 
W 

8 

C1) 

C1) 

Shawnee 

50 

895 

Union  Agency  

Five  Civilized   Tribes- 
Schools  

18 

1,032 

Total 

289 

16 
9 
9 
10 
22 

126,981 

6,980 
6,820 
3,150 
3,791 

4,588 

369 

= 
(2) 

7,224 
(') 

29 

(2) 

1,496 
(2) 

25 

450 

712 

136,  151 

6,980 
6,820 
3,150 
3,791 
11,568 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

(2) 

(2) 

16 
9 
9 
10 
150 

Salem               

Siletz        



Umatilla                 .  . 



Warm  Springs  

121 

5,930 

w 

0) 

7 

1,050 

Total 

66 
16 

25,329 
5,633 

121 

87 

5,930 
2,071 

7 
596 

1,050 
22,291 

194 
699 

32,309 
29,995 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle    .  ... 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River..  .  . 



===== 

53 
36 
17 
9 
8 
100 
11 
55 
17 
4 
15 

18,705 
6,981 
6,490 
3,300 
1,968 
35,080 
3,091 
17,  420 
10,380 
1,900 
4,320 

19 
135 
36 
100 
2 
24 
10 
1,000 
16 

927 
2,309 
791 
2,900 
64 
7,240 
116 
10,000 
356 

72 
171 

98 
109 
10 
208 
21 
1.149 
73 
4 
43 

19,632 
9,290 
8,538 
6,200 
2,032 
60,390 
3,207 
30,465 
15,  254 
1,900 
4,731 

Crow  Creek  

Flandreau        

45 

1,257 

Lower  Brule  

Pierre            

Pine  Ridge 

84 

18,070 

Rapid  City  

Rosebud  ' 

94 

40 

3,045 
4,518 

Sisseton      

Springfield  

Yankton    

28 

411 

Total 

325 

109,  635 

1,370 

25,  114 

218 
32 

25,633 
1,404 

45 

1,257 

1,958 

161,639 

Utah: 
Shivwits  

2 

30 

170 
10,378 

38 
15 

14 

390 
1,047 

688 

9 

218 

81 
45 

14 

2,182 
11,425 

688 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

Salt  Lake  City,  special 
agent 

Total  

32 

10,548 

67 

2,125 

32 

1,404 

9 

218 

140 

14,  295 

Washington: 
Colville        

20 
32 

7 
7 
19 
15 

5,546 
8,849 
1,215 
1,563 
8,409 
6,798 

B 

47 
34 
37 
22 

12,  145 
2,906 
1,152 
609 
3,471 
2,454 

396 
94 
57 
147 
56 
37 

17,  691 
15,815 
3,687 
9,532 
11,880 
9,252 

Cushman  

41 
3 
106 

4,060 
1,320 
7,360 

Neah  Bay  

Spokane  

Tulalip  

Yakima  

Total  

100 

1 

15 
59 
13 
6 
17 

32,380 

720 
8,310 
19,043 
4,438 
1,510 
6,108 

537 

22,737 

150 

12,740 

787 

67,857 

Wisconsin: 
Carter  

50 
19 
842 
2 
13 

1,500 
788 
105,  849 
19 
177 

51 
612 
901 
15 
264 
17 

2,220 
34,  823 
124,892 
4,457 
48,300 
fi.108 

Hayward  . 

530 

25,290 

48 

435 

Keshena  

Lac  du  Flambeau  

La  Pointe 

245 

46,613 

C1) 

0) 

Oneida  

i  Unknown 


2  Not  reported. 


« 1913  report. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


117 


TABLE  9. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

51 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Wisconsin—  Continued  . 
Red  Cliff 

4 
11 
9 

$1,680 
4,000 
3,740 

$8,003 

167 

$32,350 

10 

$75 

232 
11 
9 

$42,108 
4,000 
3,740 

Tomah  

Wittenberg 

Total 

135 
27 

49,549 
8,158 

977 
635 

116,336 
33,810 

942 
110 

104,253 
20,550 

58 
1 

510 

09 

2,112 
773 

270,648 
62,518 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Grand  total  1  

2,319 

810,950 

13,218 

505,  492 

5,553 

689,517 

2,350 

121,444 

23,440 

2,127,403 

COMPARISON. 


Total  1913. 
Total  1912. 
Total  1911. 
Total  1900. 


2,271 
2,516 
1,995 
2,094 


762,264 
732,52612 
687,039 
749, 148 


12,290 
,420 
.582 


414, 706 
432, 470 
582,919 


5,585 
5,113 
3,204 


778, 117 
673,289 
591,672 
177, 169 


2,647 
2,375 
(2) 
807 


102, 129  2? 
27,256 


110,03722,7932,065,124 
,940,414 
,861,630 
953,573 


',42-1 
11,781 
2,901 


1  Reported  by  superintendents  as  employed. 

2  Included  with  adults  by  private  parties. 
*  No  data  available. 


118 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


III 


CO»H         CO 


(M  O  t~-  t-  CO        O         rl  C<)  lO  «3  IO 

lO-f<MrH<M        O         O>  CO  r-  -*<  TP 
"SC<I  C<l  "5          !N  IO  rH  i-l  i-l 


-^ooi-HiMiooKo 

<N  0  -91  03  00  t~-  r-«  10 


" 


Tubercu- 
losis. 


O  »O  O  1>-  i—  1  O 


•^p-rrO'^p4OCi;ir-*(Ni 


i—  t  COC 


Due  to 
tubercu 
losis. 


-Ot>.TtiiOOO 


00  O  O  •<><  »O  OJ         O 


<N  »  30  00  t^  O5  c 


4O»—  t»OCO 
COM         t^ 


iS 


rH  -"f  O  CO  r-i  <M  -f 


. 

S 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  119 

D  oS  O  <M  >0 

O   Tf    ^   C^   W   ^ 


00  O5 
00  t- 


CO 
«0 


<MO  O 


ss 


OO  t^.  CO  (N  (M  00  i 

i—  i      c^  r-  ^f  i—  * 


CO  O3  i"H 


t 


sss 


lOr-l 


OO  t^  M  CO  IM  < 


OiOO  O  i-HO 
O  OHOO  <N  OO 
IO  O3  -«J"9i  CO  «O 


§0- 
I-H 


*»*«*51 


HP 
MS 


aJ*    i« 

Sli  J§ 
Mwq   *§ 


ega     b..         3-u-u     bos        4<i3     o     SfclS 

111     "I      o|o|     ^      1^     e     M, 


jj«    6 

j1-3!^^ 


I  s 


K 
P 


Pi  S       $ 

*»  | 


120 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Houses 

i! 

CO  -f  IM 

00 

1 

OO  t-l        t^  <M  (MO 

5| 

Si 

gill 

§ 

i 

iving  in— 

c/r  w 

it1 

>O  O5  (M  (M  »O  (M  O 
CO  00  CO  00  (M  (M  0 

o 

-si 

i 

ij 

§ 

M 

1 

PH  fl,§ 

^ 

S 

Oi  1C        00  1C  COO 

OOrH          t^lMlCO 

s 

|12S  SI 

CO* 

iill 

!- 

L  having  — 

|| 

I* 

I 

cooogoo 

OO 

|^c?8§8^ 

1" 

lili 

8 

Estimatec 

J! 

00  IM 

1 

3£SS|S§ 

1 

88&agg§- 

IM" 

W 

i 

q 

i 

*1 

S£ 

CO 

S3-S3S 

i 

§S2f2^|^ 

5* 

8HI 

! 

•d 

Tubercu- 
losis. 

98 

8 

ae—s?a 

CO 

ssssaa- 

1= 

S3S, 

O5 

Indians 

ixj  <D  W 

^.a^ 

IS 

§ 

SiSgSf 

§ 

1C  Tj<  iO  >O  l>  O  O 

S* 

CO^CM" 

CO 
0 

Due  to 
tubercu- 
losis. 

3 

(NOCOCOCOrH 

N 

^H^H                       rH 

S" 

SScoS 

So 

d  deaths. 

i 

CO 

"H  * 

ss- 

<« 

•*  C^  <M  CO<M  <M 

"O 

S3-     as? 

S 

SS32 

8 

§ 

a 

5 

PQ 

fl 

I 

S9S 

i 

SS-^g2| 

0 

gets    «3S 

00  CO 

52535 

1 

1 

5 

S5S§ 

S 

-s»»sas 

§ 

1C  (Ml-H                  ^H  1C 

SSI 

S98S 

i 

l< 

555 

53 

5 

1 

I11!!!! 

>O  OO 

51!! 

oo 

1 

:  :  :  : 

States  and  superinte 

Nebraska: 
Omaha  

Winnebago  

"o 

Nevada: 
Fallon  

Fort  McDermitt  
Moapa  River  
Nevada  
Walker  River  
Western  Shoshone.  .  .  . 
Reno,  special  agent.  .  . 

1 

g  :  :  :  i  : 

03           •  *5     •  2 

S        •  a    •  S 

o1     J  5    If^ 

^  •<  1-5  S  P-t  co  02  N 

Total  

North  Carolina:  Cherokee.. 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  
Fort  Totten  
Standing  Rock  
Turtle  Mountain  

1 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


121 


CO  O  CO  »O  <N  r*-  i—  (C^C^OO^-^t1 


iC  ^  ^  1C  O5  O  O 
r^.  10  c^  Oi  't1  »-C  o 


c 

CS  O  00  i-H  i—  1  CS          i-H  i—  1  1 


i    iSSSSiin 
til          -cw 


CO        4O  l>  CO 


a 


<°2co- 


co  I-H  o  o»  o  • 


r-i  1-1          to 


SIISS 


(M  S 


?  ;,|« 

5^1g 
?^a« 


•-'SdS  fi 

i«5l|   3    "g-S 

till  fi    ^-s 


fKH 


122 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


&& 


g  . 


l 


2  «' 


C8 

P 
£ 


t^  OJ  I-H 


*t  >o 
M  O 


CN  rf  »O  i-i  00 


rH  ^H         T-i  CN         <-H 


if  g 

e'a  ° 
>» 


3        _     «     CO     * 


fil 
IF 

laf 
sl^ 
121 


"12 

^0.0 

^  rC     § 
£g§ 

eqpp^ 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


" 


1 1 


ill 


I       s  sa 

I  i  mi 

iii.1 
*     ri! 


tq 


oo 


SO  T—  » 
M  CO 


s5 


- 


!000 

-- 


Bidwell 
Yuma 
nv  ille 
pa  Valley 
man  Inst 

tal 


ia 
t 
t 


63556—14 9 


124 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


9  a  co  fl  «> 

I*!!3 


i-i         e<»  o 


m  m 


l-Hi-l 


§|S 


SS 


:<;«  : 


sj-a 

®  g-o  -a 

BD  M    '.  M 


«0 


s~*| 
feill 


^ 

^CQ     • 


m  IH 

•M     :|  : 


Crow 
Fort  Peck 


ico: 
uerque 
uerque 

ro 
n 
e 


a 
e 
Jua 
ta  F 


^S5     55 


ew  M 
Alb 
Alb 
Jlca 
M 


North  Dakota: 
Fort  Totten 
Standing  R 


aho 
Che 
ChE 
Osa 
Red 


Total 
Oregon:  Salem 
Pennsylvania:  C 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


125 


I    00 


S!8 


Ss 


! 


II 


I! 


*ililii  s  iiii  s  i&isi  si 

5  u  u  PH  t-3  fw  rt         -So^^1          SWM^o  § 

§S                       .2  >» 

C-  •'                  "'K  '    fc 

aj                                  ^                       ^  !> 


*w5 

SS£ 

SSI 

OSOSt- 

t-  —  (  O 

os  os  oo 

oTcToo  <* 

1 

00 

ill 

m 

<0    r- 

- 

;   ;   ;   ; 

; 

1 

:  :  :  : 

eoc<»»-i  o 

S222 

3333 

o  o  o  o 

| 

ii 

y 

* 


. 
•e  <u.S  § 

Hal 


B. 

ft! 

Q  O   ^'tJ 


126 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


.? 


jl 


il 


•§*.§ 

>     3 


O)          CO 

M 


ll 

I 


Jil 
3% 


a 


H 


.-HCO 


TJI<M 

»O!N 


O<N  O><M 


(M  O  PC       (N  (N 


•-<  to  10  o  i-i  c  IM  i-i  >o 

CO  O  OC  lr^  CO  O  «O  CO  CO 


O  00  »C  i-l  «5  CO 

OC  CO  i-H  CO  •*  r-t  lOOJCC^f"         >-l 

i-it~-Oe(M         rH  .-lOCOi-H         i-H 


rHiO>.-l<N 


II 


3     a 


°°s 


OOG 


C>)OCCSM^-CO<NO4 


si. 


f!X  :  :  :  :  l$£^* 


||II.IlfiIBitsM  ^ 

A 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


127 


CO  O 

1 

<-H  <N 

S 

i 

II 

1 

i 

CM 

§ 

jgg 

1 

s 

a 

2 

co 

5! 

8 

o>co  co  >r 

11 

5 

>o 

CO 

O5 

- 

**^ 

,0 

oo 

""3 

IB 

M^ 

t> 

c*  o 

O  to 

1 

8 

8 

SI 

s 

•• 

S3 

0 

N 

I 

flSS' 

gs 

S 

t^ 

,, 

^H 

c 

050 

0 

« 

01 

oo 

^ 

cs 

(M 

^.t-co 

« 

i 

S? 

* 

"* 

"* 

00 

io 

e 

0 

o 

IO 

"~ 

r^ 

Sooo 

2 

0 

rH 

rH 

co 

c*f 

oo" 

TjT 

«" 

" 

3 

§8 

S 

s 

i 

o 

CO 

cr 

s 

" 

-    9 

^ 

t 

M 

"^ 

8 

w     5 

? 

I 

ES 

to 
8 

C-1 

! 

i? 

§ 

8 

oT 

2 
or 

oc 

s 

2 

! 

T-H 

O  Oi       «• 

^5oo      c 

4E 

! 

•> 

** 

8 

<N 

s 

" 

§ 

CO 

SI 

1 

cc 

% 

S 

s 

g 

CO  O         T 
000        «" 

gs 

3 

is 

i 

S 

S 

1 

GoScc 

1 

1 

Sll 

11 

GC 

i 

p 

>0  rx 

|g 

1 

S  oo  c5 

COOSt^ 

o 

i" 

« 

O 

•^ 

, 

2" 

§ 

.-H  CO 

a 

IS 

a 

"O 

i 

" 

€ 

2*§ 

5 

00 

cs 

l-l 

IR 

! 

^ 

8f 

1- 

&3 

a 

-SI 

1 

1" 

1 

Si 

3 

S 

g 

1 

liS 

C5 

re 

00  O  (N 

g  CO  « 

ii 

1 

1 

•-C  * 

S| 

§S 

oo 

§is 

o 

+» 

JH 

cT 

O 

s— 

28 

i 

J 

" 

«* 

ss 

s 

1 

M 

88 

O 

1 

9 

s«s 

i 

! 

5S| 

IS 

! 

a 

a- 

S5: 

COCO 

1 

•is 

I" 

S 

I 

18 

•» 

e 

I 

i 

s 

s^s 

§ 

§ 

s 

s?5 

g 

i 

1 

1 

10  s 

g 

§ 

g 

23 

a 

-a 

S 

& 

s 

s 

8" 

S 

co 

1 

S 

a 

Is 

| 

S 

cf 

I 

"n-* 

iO  CO 

s 

gg 

|| 

HT 

1 

r  5 

:£- 

CO  §3 

i 

ijo  Sprin?s  
hernUte  

s 

ortHall  

Potawatomi  

H 

a| 

! 

&. 

-c 

Sjs'js 

^^« 
^^ 

i 
^ 
« 

3 

J 

..Bl« 

si 

cu  Q, 

&HE3 

s 

1 

E 

McDermitt  
ja  River  

1 
S 

•9S 

,ern  Shoshone  
>,  special  agent  

3 

cico: 
querque  Pueblos  .  . 
Ma...  
alero  

>lo  Bonito.  .. 

!i 

(H    « 
§fc 
^  c3 

tal  

irolina:  Cherokee.. 

ill  1  K  fiii-si  1  »H«1 1  a  --iSllIIi  lllfli!3 

III  e  ii  Himil  H  i  "!IIIIII 


128 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 


bor  equiva- 
t. 


Wi 


s 


o          *o      *o 

S3       S    S 


ll 

1 


sT  s 


cs 

T—  (  o  »—  t 


3*1 

>    2 


SI 


d  OO  1C  O>  O  l 
s  1C  CO  1C  C^l  T—  i 


o-2 


lii 


I 


•& 


ga 

£      -gOO^TO^ 


5 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


129 


i 

.  -f        t  - 

5"    3 

00  C<l 
(N  CO 

1 

2 

• 

'£  1 

II 

oT 

* 

•a  5 

OO  O 

oo 

'  « 
»— 

t-j        05 

C^  (N 

c<T 

1 

Is 

t 

^ 

1 

K 

i 

»si 

O  CO 

1 

§«3S°> 

,-110 

I 

n» 

11 

O5 

sag» 

Sg 

s 

oT 

CO 

B 

-* 

i  3 

CO 

§ 

O5 

t-       CO 

0 

1 

i 

18*5 

ss 

0 

§ 

Wisconsin: 

HartPr 

Keshena  
Lac  du  Flambeau  
La  Pointe  
Red  CM  

Total  

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

O 

" 


00  »O 


111111 


130 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


fe. 


Li 

fir 

.ra 


S  :§  :i§§3  : 


IS 


m 


coeoco 

(MOr-l 

?5 


oc  c<no  -^  eo  «o  o 

»O  O  CO  CO  T-H  rt  ^-1 


co    .    .03    . 
r*    •    iO    • 


t^  -^  co  i-t  -^  o 

OiCSOOCOCOt- 


§. 


®.^«®®      i      !'i      !      *      '      *      *      *^rt!      * 

iliiiliiliiiliiii  ' 
i  % 


!    !o3    ' 


.« i 

•a'S  ^ 


SIS 


cowocxo 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

II    5?  :    51       £8       S 

I-H  .-I  »H  CM  CO 


131 


32 


38 


s 


COlO      .' 


23 


2 -a 


ass 


§2 


itll 


ur  d'A 
t  Hall 
rt  Lap 


a 
red 


1     j|(-§ 


ife^ffi 


"'is     o 
§  *    ^ 

JCOTO 


sas: 
Kicka 
Potaw 
Scatte 


:  1 


132 
f 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


111! 


*H  o  ^H  •**<  co 


fliff 

s^-s^s- 


•8-8 
«  3 

-a 

«"! 
f 


3 

:§> 


a 


1C  00  «O  00 
O  •<»<  t^  -f 

r-H  CO 


* 


•i-c 
.a  P< 

i 


i 


53 


ss 


II! 


>3S5J5a8$ 

>^<£>(MiOeO 


b 
red 


|  ||ll|  1  ai 

^Oc»^!B 


S 

3  III 
^  |!8 

te*» 

g 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


133 


8  :: 


IS 

ei 


O5      l  O  <M  10 
1-H  <Sl  IO  O  •"»< 


Pueblo  Bonit 
Juan 
ta  Fe  Puebl 


ilsl 


STf<  rf  O5  00  O 
oot^<Mco-«< 


31  efssj 

r-T         oT  i-T  co'co" 


111 


t^    t~  (N  O 


§•*  Tf  O>  00  O 
00  t^  IM  CO  "»« 

cmn 


>"Ho?t>-  I 


t~     O     COM  CO 
CO     ?J     t^U5«-l 


^**     in     »O  i>-  C 

»o    c5    10  oo 


Is 


-s  ffi 


3   s 


02  "^ 

'Ota 


51 M 

-21 


0  151 

.    .        .      -3  o    M    ~X»      ^      3  1|| 

:s  ^    >§  3  8fa  |§  §  ™ 
gg  1  v£36s%     & 


134 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


c3  O  .3 


ss 


•SI 


1 


\s 


AS' 


>*•§ 


(NOit^OO 

^£5    ^3 


t^-us      ooi>-  cot- 

^H  ot-H 


rH  O  O  CO  iO 


00  1C  Tti  i-H  00  00  IO  >C  C<1 


3     Is^T'SaS^^-SS 

£  am  till) 


o         «Sjf 

H    IP  1 

^^s^1       o 

i^pM 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


135 


g§§8gg 

1 

i  i 

ill 

:      :::::::::::: 

g 

1 

1-1 

i  ; 

**• 

5 

3s  :    gl 

1 

§  :    S80.  :  : 

yti 

1 

3 

:  :      :g  :  :  : 

S  : 

§ 

•                       ;  ;  —  ;  

^     :  :  : 

s 

o,     |-|j|| 

„, 

! 

§i-H  O  O  O 
^t^CJOSt- 

i 

i 

^05        00.. 
Is-  GO        Oi        00     •     • 

iO  »O 
00  CO 

i 

00 

ao 

s 

» 

i? 

omi 

1s 

1  : 

1 

55 

:  j  j  J8  i  i  j 

CO      • 

2 

a 

1 

pjjjfj 

s 

|3  |«?5  r 

5S 

s 

ggsl^is 

! 

r*  Is  NJ 

r 

C^l                                                              T—  1                                          ^H 

Si 

g 

y^i 

« 
i 

.^»m 

O31O 

g  i 

oT 

naaaia 

1 

sgiHSSp 

if 

r™^J^ 

8j 

i 

SSSSRS 

i 

SSSS85SS 

§' 

=  ' 

8 

CO' 

N  t^  ^<  <N  CO  rH  CO 

69HSS83 

T-T 

CO 

^ISIIgSSS 

Is 

*™*^ 

l| 

§ 

s" 

3 
i 

Total  
Wyoming:  Shoshone. 

Total  
Capacity*  

Grand  total  

°? 


II 


136 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


137 

TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 

led  Jit 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

average  attendance,  e\ 
ended  June  SO,  1914. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde  superintendency— 
Camp  Verde  

30 

37 

23  2 

Day 

Clarksdale 

30 

44 

33  2 

Do 

Total   

60 

81 

56  4 

Colorado  River    . 

80 

87 

84  5 

Fort  Apache  superintendency— 
Fort  Apache 

"-'  "~  "     '  " 

200 

218 

198  9 

Do 

Canon 

42 

42 

37  7 

Dav 

Cibecue    

50 

43 

34  l 

Do 

East  Fork 

40 

40 

39  5 

Do 

Cibecue  

20 

16 
*" 

15  1 

Mission  day  Evangelical  Luth- 

East Fork 

20 

21 

20  0 

eran. 
Do 

Total          .  . 

372 

380 

345  3 

Fort  Mojave  

200 

207 

201.4 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Havasupai  

35 

27 

21  9 

Dav 

Kaibab 

22 

19 

14  4 

Do 

Leupp  superintendency— 
Leupp  
Tolchaco  

63 
20 

82 
25 

75.2 
22  7 

Reservation  boarding. 
Mission    boarding*  Independ- 

ent. 

Total  .  .. 

83 

107 

97  9 

Moqui  superintendency— 
Moqui  

Bacabi 

125 

65 

137 
54 

118.4 
51  7 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day 

Chimopovy  .  .  , 

55 

56 

53.5 

Do 

Oraibi 

156 

100 

93  3 

Do 

Polacca  

100 

96 

92.5 

Do 

Second  Mesa 

90 

90 

81  5 

Do 

Total  

591 

533 

490  9 

Nav^superintendency- 

300 

290 

263  5 

Reservation  boarding 

Chin  Lee 

70 

79 

75  0 

Do 

Tohatchi  

150 

170 

135.4 

Do 

Cornfields  

25 

33 

27  0 

Day 

Ganado 

35 

30 

30  0 

Rehoboth  

40 

54 

53  2 

Mission    boarding'"   Christian 

St.  Michael's  

150 

140 

140.0 

Reformed. 
Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Total 

770 

796 

724  1 

Phoenix  

700 

749 

635.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pima  superintendency  — 
Pima  

218 

251 

219.8 

Reservation  boarding 

Blackwater 

36 

35 

21  9 

Dav 

Casa  Blanca  

40 

56 

42.7 

Do. 

Gila  Crossing    ... 

40 

35 

16.1 

Do 

Maricopa      " 

40 

35 

31  6 

Do 

Sacaton  

28 

42 

20.0 

Do. 

San  tan 

40 

46 

32  9 

Do 

St.  Ann's  (Guadalupe)  

35 

38 

22.7 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

St.  John's  

235 

236 

227.1 

Mission    boarding    and    day* 

Catholic. 

Total  

712 

774 

634.8 

Rice  Station 

216 

244 

200  6 

Reservation  boarding 

Salt  River  superintendency— 
Salt  River 

88 

62 

50.5 

Dav. 

Camp  McDowell  .  .  , 

40 

39 

28.3 

Do. 

Lehi  

30 

41 

26.1 

Do. 

Total 

158 

142 

104  9 

San  Carlos  superintendency— 
San  Carlos 

100 

126 

99.5 

Do 

Rice  

25 

21 

15.8 

Mission  day;  Evangelical  Luth- 

Globe 

28 

41 

23.0 

eran. 
Do 

Total  

153 

188 

138.3 

138 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona—  Continued. 
San  Xavier  superintendency— 
San  Xavier                          

155 

130 

108.0 

- 
Day. 

35 

54 

28.6 

Do. 

Tucson  Mission      

140 

143 

98.0 

Mission    boarding;    Presbyte- 

rian. 

Total                        

330 

327 

234.6 

Truxton  Canon 

100 

92 

75.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Western  Navajo  superintendency  — 
Western  Navajo  
Moencopi                  

88 
35 

109 
39 

99.3 
32.4 

. 

Do. 
Day. 

Total  

123 

148 

131.7 

. 

Total  Arizona                           

4,705 

4,901 

4,  192.  6 

California: 
Bishop  superintendency— 

36 

65 

50.6 

Do. 

Big  Pine             •                    

30 

17 

14.6 

Do. 

20 

13 

10.1 

Do. 

Total 

86 

95 

75.3 

Campo 

30 

23 

22.0 

Do. 

Fort  Bidwell  superintendency— 
Fort  Bidwell                           

98 

97 

84.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Alturas       

24 

19 

8.9 

Day. 

Likely                      

20 

24 

12.8 

Do. 

Lookout 

18 

12 

12.0 

Do. 

Total                             

160 

152 

117.7 

Fort  Yuma        

180 

155 

120.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Greenville                                

90 

83 

72.5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Hoopa  Valley 

165 

178 

135.1 

Reservation  boarding. 

Malki  superintendency—  St.  Bonitice  .  .  . 

100 

113 

102.1 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Pala  superintendency— 
Pala                          

30 

28 

24.1 

Day. 

Capitan  Grande 

24 

14 

11.5 

Do. 

La  Jolla              

30 

24 

14.2 

Do. 

Total 

84 

66 

49  8 

Round  Valley  superintendency— 
Round  Valley 

135 

102 

89  8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Manchester                     

18 

12 

7.0 

Day. 

Ukiah 

25 

35 

16  1 

Do. 

Upper  Lake                     

30 

32 

20.7 

Do. 

Total 

208 

181 

133  6 

Sherman  Institute                    .       ... 

550 

700 

548.3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Soboba  superintendency— 
Cahuilla                                  .  .     .. 

30 

13 

10.8 

Do. 

Mesa  Grande 

30 

16 

13  7 

Do 

Volcan                    

30 

28 

23.5 

Do. 

Total 

90 

57 

48  0 

Tule  River  superintendency  — 
Tule  River  

30 

27 

16.5 

Do. 

Auberry       

32 

24 

19.5 

Do. 

Coarsegold 

20 

13 

13  0 

Do 

Total  

82 

64 

49.0 

Total  California 

1  825 

1  867 

1  473  6 

Colorado: 

Navajo  Springs 

"7 

T 

15  2 

Do 



COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


139 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc,,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Colored  o—  Continued  . 
Southern  Ute  Superintendency— 
Southern  Ute 

50 

55 

52  8 

Reservation  boarding 

Allen  

30 

17 

16.2 

Do. 

Total 

80 

72 

69  0 

Total  Colorado 

105 

91 

84  2 

Idaho: 
Coeur    d'Alene    supe-intendency—  De 
Smet  

80 

82 

53.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Hall  super  in  tendency- 
Fort  Hall 

200 

197 

183.1 

Reservation  boarding 

Good  Shepherd  

30 

25 

22.1 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Total 

230 

222 

205  2 

Fort  Lapwai  superintendency  — 
Fort  Lapwai  

50 

134 

96.9 

Reservation    boarding   (Sana- 

Kamiah 

50 

25 

16  4 

torium). 
Day 

St.  Joseph's         .         

100 

54 

36.4 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic. 

Total  

200 

213 

149.7 

Total  Idaho  

510 

517 

408.1 

Iowa: 
Sac  and  Fox  superintendency— 
Sac  and  Fox 

79 

50 

50  0 

Reservation    boardin**   (Sana- 

Fox.. 

40 

36 

18  0 

torium). 
Dav 

Mesquakio  

18 

38 

69.9 

Do 

Total  Iowa  

137 

124 

84.9 

Kansas: 
Haskell  Institute   .   . 

650 

845 

705  2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kickapoo  superintendency— 
Great  Nemaha...  .         .  . 

71 
40 

89 
30 

77.6 
14.0 

Reservation  boarding. 
Dav 

Total 

111 

119 

91  6 

Potawatorai  superintendency— 
Blandin  

40 

23 

11  4 

Dav 

Kewankah 

30 

17 

10  1 

Do 

Witcheway  

30 

17 

10.9 

Do. 

Total 

100 

57 

39  4 

Total  Kansas  

861 

1,021 

829.2 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills 

32 

38 

23  9 

Dav 

Chippewa,  Lake  Superior  superintend- 
ency— 
Baraga  (Holy  Name)  

152 

82 

42.5 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 

Harbor  Springs  (Holy  Childhood).. 

200 

114 

111.3 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

352 

196 

153.  8 

Mount  Pleasant  

350 

372 

32.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Total  Michigan 

734 

606 

497  7 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 


40 

53 

42  0 

Reservation  boarding 

Fond  du  Lac  superintendency  — 
Fond  du  Lac  

40 

29 

16.2 

Day. 

Normantown  

34 

23 

15.4 

Do. 

Total  

74 

52 

31.6 

Grand  Portage. 

20 

26 

14  6 

Do. 

63556— 1< 


140 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914 — Con  tinned. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Leech  Lake  superintendency  — 
Leech  Lake 

80 

119 

84.6 

Reservation  hoarding. 

Squaw  Point  

24 

22 

10.0 

Day. 

Sugar  Point 

24 

31 

7.1 

Do. 

Total... 

128 

172 

101.7 

Nett  Lake 

35 

73 

51.6 

Do. 

Pipestone  superintendency— 
Pipcstone 

212 

229 

199  2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Birch  Cooley  

36 

24 

13.1 

* 

Total 

248 

253 

212  3 

Red  Lake  superintendency— 
Red  Lake  

75 

92 

73.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cross  Lake 

43 

62 

56.1 

Do. 

St.  Mary's  

70 

90 

57.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

188 

244 

186  5 

Vermillion  Lake  

110 

135 

114.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

White  Earth  superintendency— 
White  Earth 

250 

144 

116.1 

Do. 

Pine  Point  

53 

62 

45.9 

Do. 

Wild  Rice  River  . 

48 

62 

53.2 

Do. 

El!  ow  Lake 

30 

17 

7  9 

Dav. 

Porterville  

40 

30 

21.6 

"Do. 

Round  Lake 

30 

21 

12  4 

Do. 

Twin  Lake  

30 

42 

28.2 

Do. 

White  Earth 

60 

80 

54  2 

Do. 

St.  Benedict's  

130 

110 

103.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

671 

568 

449  5 

Total  Minnesota 

1  514 

1  576 

1  197  0 

Montana: 
Black  feet  superintendency— 
Blackfeet 


144 

-=— 
181 

129.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Browning  

60 

44 

28.5 

Day. 

Old  Agency          ..... 

30 

33 

24.4 

Do. 

Burd 

16 

17 

9  6 

Do. 

Holy  Family  

145 

131 

94.7 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

395 

406 

285.6 

Crow  superintendency— 
Crow  

100 

52 

46.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pryor  Creek 

47 

45 

39  3 

Do. 

Lodge  Grass  

50 

35 

24.4 

Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Black  Lodge 

30 

20 

18  0 

Day;  American  Missionary 

Reno  

35 

32 

25.1 

Association. 
Do. 

St.  Anne's 

25 

13 

11  1 

Mission  day  Catholic. 

San  Xavier  

125 

53 

53.0 

Mission  hoarding;  Catholic. 

Wyola 

30 

16 

12  3 

Mission  day  Baptist. 

Total...     .            ... 

442 

266 

229  2 

Flathead  superintendency— 
Flathcad 

30 

27 

12.8 

Day. 

St.  Ignatius  

300 

168 

1E0.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

330 

195 

163  0 

Fort  Belknap  superintendency— 
Fort  Belknap 

51 

79 

53  1 

Reservation  boarding. 

Lodge  Pole  

40 

34 

18.1 

Dav. 

St.  Paul's... 

160 

104 

94  8 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic. 

Total... 

251 

217 

166.0 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


141 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Montana  —  Continued. 
Fort  Peck  superintendency— 
Fort  Peck 

120 

194 

94  3 

Reservation  boarding 

No.  1  

30 

25 

20.0 

Day. 

No.  2. 

30 

31 

18  0 

Do. 

No.  3  

30 

18 

12.9 

Do. 

No.  4  .     . 

30 

26 

15.7 

Do. 

Wolf  Point 

40 

55 

44  6 

Mission-  boarding    and    day 

Presbyterian. 

Total  

280 

279 

205.5 

Tongue  River  superintendency— 
Tongue  River  

69 

96 

61.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Birney 

47 

53 

42  0 

Dav. 

Lamedeer  

40 

36 

26.4 

Do. 

St  Lab  re's 

60 

39 

38  5 

Mission  boarding-  Catholic 

Total     . 

216 

224 

168  8 

•' 

Total  Montana  

1  914 

1  587 

1  218  1 

Nebraska: 
Genoa 

345 

397 

338  9 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Santee  superintendency—  Santee  Nor- 
mal Training. 

125 

99 

84.4 

Mission    boarding    and    day; 
Congregational. 

Winnebago  superintendency— 
Decora 

30 

13 

6  7 

Day 

St.  Augustine  

122 

28 

28.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

152 

41 

34.7 

Total  Nebraska 

62  *> 

537 

458  0 

Nevada: 
Carson  

286 

304 

258.1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Fallen  superintendency— 
Fallon 

40 

27 

14  8 

Dav. 

Lovelocks  

25 

17 

11.9 

Do. 

Total  

65 

44 

26.7 

Fort  McDermitt 

80 

63 

55  9 

Do. 

Moapa  River  

20 

18 

16.8 

Do. 

Nevada  superintendency— 
Nevada  

70 

79 

77.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wadsworth 

25 

20 

10  1 

Dav. 

Total 

95 

99 

87  1 

Walker  River  

60 

48 

36.3 

Do. 

Western  Shoshone 

65 

75 

65  4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Total  Nevada  .  .     .         

671 

651 

546.  3 

New  Mexico: 
Al  L  uquerque 

400 

431 

394  5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Albuquerque  Pueblos  — 
Acomita 

32 

71 

37.4 

Day. 

Encinal  

30 

22 

16.8 

Do. 

Isleta 

60 

107 

67.0 

Do. 

Laguna  

34 

43 

33.8 

Do. 

McCarty's 

38 

35 

29.9 

Do. 

Mesita  

38 

39 

31.5 

Do. 

Paguate 

-    60 

70 

56.7 

Do. 

Paraje  

20 

37 

24.6 

Do. 

San  Felipe  .           .         

60 

51 

35.5 

Do. 

Sea  ma 

28 

32 

26.0 

Do. 

Bernalillo  

125 

96 

94.4 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

525 

603 

453.  6 

142 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  14. — Location, 


ity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
1  June  30,  1914— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ant . 

Class  of  school. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
Jicarilla  superintendency— 
Jicarilla               

108 

116 

104.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do  

30 

25 

22.9 

Day. 

Total  

138 

"      141 

127.7 

100 

114 

98.2 

Reservation  hoarding. 

Pueblo  Bonito  

20 

32 

28.8 

Day. 

San  Juan  superintendency— 

150 

199 

163.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

30 

16 

16.0 

Do. 

Liberty  (  Jewett)  

30 

28 

19.0 

Mission    boarding;    Presbyte- 

Navajo Mission  

20 

31 

28.0 

rian. 
Mission   boarding;    Methodist 

Episcopal. 

Total                    t  • 

230 

274 

226.0 

Santa  Fe  superintendency— 
Santa  Fe     

m 

373 

332.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Cochiti 

28 

27 

18.2 

Dav. 

120 

61 

38.6 

Do. 

19 

13 

10.5 

Do. 

Picuris          

24 

24 

17.6 

Do. 

San  Ildefonso 

40 

20 

15  8 

Do 

70 

48 

35.0 

Do. 

Santa  Clara 

40 

42 

25  4 

Do 

Santa  Domingo 

50 

51 

38  8 

Do. 

gia                    

30 

15 

13.fi 

Do. 

70 

94 

60  0 

Do 

St  Catherine's    

75 

183 

176  8 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total                   

916 

951 

782  3 

Zuni  superintendency— 
Zuni            


80 

112 

95.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do                         

35 

86 

73  S 

Dav. 

Christian  Reformed  

30 

20 

18.0 

Mission    day;    Christian    Re- 

formed. 

Total                 

145 

218 

187.6 

Total  New  Mexico  

2,474 

2  764 

2,  298.  9 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee  superintendency— 
Cherokee          

160 

203 

174.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Bip  Cove 

40 

25 

12  7 

Dav. 

Birdtown          

40 

28 

12.4 

Do. 

Little  Snow  Bird 

30 

15 

8  2 

Do. 

Snow  Bird  Gap  

40 

31 

15.3 

Do. 

Total  

310 

302 

223.0 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck                

60 

112 

87.1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Fort  Berthold  superintendency— 
FortBerthold  
No.  1  

75 
30 

90 
21 

56.5 
14.6 

Reservation  boarding. 
Dav. 

No  2 

36 

19 

14  1 

"Do. 

No.  3  

30 

31 

20.1 

Do. 

Congregational       .      ... 

13 

11 

10.0 

Mission    boarding;    Congrega- 

tional. 

Total      ..       ... 

184 

172 

115.3 

Fort  Totten 

323 

385 

315  8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Standing  Rock  superintendency— 
Standing  Rock  

202 

238 

199.5 

Do. 

Martin  Kenel  

100 

96 

89.5 

Do. 

Bullhead  

40 

36 

28.1 

Day. 

Cannon  Ball  

40 

36 

24.7 

Do. 

Grand  River 

30 

22 

15.1 

Do. 

Little  Oak  Creek  

40 

21 

16.0 

Do. 

Porcupine 

24 

14 

10.1 

Do. 

20 

13 

10.5 

Do. 

St.  Elizabeth's  

50 

62 

51.9 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Total  

546 

538 

445.4 

•-•i-nr—  -r:  -n: 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


143 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

North  Dakota—  Continued. 
Turtle  Mountain  supcrintendency— 

40 

53 

27.2 

Day. 

No  2                        

30 

50 

28.3 

Do. 

No  3 

30 

35 

15.8 

Do. 

No  4 

30 

48 

28.7 

Do. 

No  5 

30 

40 

15.1 

Do. 

Total                   

160 

226 

115.1 

200 

225 

192  3 

Nonreservation  boarding* 

Total  North  Dakota 

1  473 

1  658 


1  271.0 

Oklahoma: 

90 

108 

72.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  superintend- 
ency— 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

= 
150 

140 

—  —-!!-- 

129.3 

Do. 

St  Luke's  

45 

60 

43.6 

Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Total 

195 

200 

172  9 

Chilocco                     -  -  . 

500 

656 

556.8 

Kiowa  superintendency— 

110 

145 

114.6 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Sill  

160 

154 

150.1 

Do. 

Rainy  Mountain  

155 

173 

151.7 

Do. 

168 

135 

110.5 

Do. 

Red  Stone               

40 

23 

17.0 

Mission  dav. 

Cache  Creek    '.  

50 

12 

9.3 

Mission    boarding;    Reformed 

Presbyterian. 

Total        

683 

642 

553.  2 

Osage  superintendency— 
Osage                           -  - 

115 

114 

62.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

St  Louis's  

75 

60 

43.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

190 

174 

105  9 

Otoe                        

80 

61 

52.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

100 

86 

80.2 

Do. 

Ponca                   . 

90 

111 

91.9 

Do. 

65 

37 

23.4 

Day. 

Sac  and  Fox  

80 

97 

78.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

8c"cr 

79 

91 

73.6 

Seneca              ....................... 

100 

130 

116.9 

Do. 

Shawnee  superintendency— 
Shawnce                     

110 

142 

108.1 

Do. 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Benedict's)  i  
Sacred  Heart  (St.  Mary's)  *  

100 
100 

55 
100 

38.1 
73.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Total  

310 

297 

219.2 

Total  2 

2  562 

2  690 

2  196.0 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Cherokee  Nation  — 
Cherokee  Orphan  School 

60 

84 

63.4 

Tribal  boarding. 

Hildebrand  

36 

17 

10.6 

Day. 

Total 

96 

101 

74.0 

Creek  Nation— 

100 

125 

100.8 

Tribal  boarding. 

Eufaula 

100 

139 

102.6 

Do. 

Nuyaka  

Tullahassee            .            .  . 

92 
75 

123 
93 

83.4 
71.2 

Do. 
Do. 

Total      

367 

480 

358.0 

Seminole  Nation—  Mekusukey  

100 

146 

94.5 

Do. 

»  These  schools  are  filled  by  Indian  pupils  from  various  tribes  and  reservations. 
*  Exclusive  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


144 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 

*  June  SO,  1914— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Oklahoma  —  Continued. 
Five  Civilized  Tribes-Continued. 
Choctaw  Nation  — 
Armstrong  Male  Academy  .... 

120 

119 

101.7 

Tribal  boarding. 

Jones  Male  Academy  

100 

143 

143.0 

Do. 

Tuskahoma  .           

110 

163 

107.9 

Do. 

^Tgelocir  Academy 

100 

130 

92.7 

Do. 

Old  Goodland  

80 

88 

74.7 

Mission    boarding;    Presbyte- 

St Agnes  Mission 

40 

56 

46.9 

rian. 
Mission  boarding-  Catholic. 

Total 

550 

699 

566.9 

Chickasaw  Nation— 
Bloomfleld  Seminary 

80 

88 

78.0 

Tribal  board  ing 

Collins  Institute  

52 

75 

51.6 

Do. 

El  Meta  Bond  College 

35 

24 

19.2 

Private  boarding. 

Total                              

167 

187 

148.8 

Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations- 
Murray  School  of  Agriculture... 
Oklahoma  Presbyterian  College. 

St  Agnes  Academy 

150 

50 

160 

90 
55 

146 

61.8 
43.4 

85  7 

Do. 
Mission    boarding;    Presbyte 
rian. 
Mission  boarding'  Catholic. 

St.  Elizabeth's  

70 

72 

57.8 

Do. 

St  Joseph's 

30 

16 

12.5 

Do 

Total 

460 

379 

261  2 

Total  Five  Civilized  Tribes... 

1,740 

1,992 

1,503.4 

Total  Oklahoma  

4,302 

4,682 

3  699.4 

Oregon: 
Klamath  superintendency— 
Khuuatn        

112 

127 

73.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Modoc  Point 

30 

22 

13  4 

Dav 

Yainax  

30 

30 

16.4 

Do. 

No.  1 

30 

24 

15.6 

Do. 

No  2 

30 

11 

6  4 

Do 

No.3..     .            .           

30 

33 

23.5 

Do. 

Total  

262 

247 

149.1 

Salem 

650 

727 

566.3 

Siletz  superintendency  — 
Siletz 

50 

35 

19  1 

Dav 

Upper  farm  

20 

10 

7.5 

ybo. 

Total  

70 

45 

26.6 

Umatilla  superintendency— 
U  matilla                          

-  

93 

98 

81.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

St  Andrews  (Kate  Drexel) 

150 

81 

69  1 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic. 

Total       

243 

179 

150.1 

Warm  Springs  superintendency  — 
Warm  Springs 

100 

126 

84.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Simnasho  

30 

26 

14.8 

Day. 

Total 

130 

152 

99  7 

Total  Oregon 

1,355 

1,350 

9^1.8 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  

757 

993 

667.9 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  superintendency  — 
Cheyenne  River 

180 

131 

103  0 

Reservation  boarding. 

No.  2  

30 

16 

13.3 

Day. 

No.  7  .     . 

22 

20 

13.2 

Do. 

No  8 

22 

23 

9  o 

Do 

Oahe  

75 

18 

18.0 

Mission  boarding;     Congrega- 

tional. 

Total  

329 

208 

156.5 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


145 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  SO,  1914 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South  Dakota—  Continued. 
Crow  Creek  super  in  tendency- 
Crow  Creek     

82 

97 

79.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Grace  Day                                   .  ... 

25 

14 

11.1 

Day. 

Immaculate  Conception 

75 

48 

44.9 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

182 

159 

135.3 

360 

375 

356.6 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Lower  Brule                                  

111 

60 

54.1 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pierre 

250 

232 

170.9 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pine  Ridee  superintendency  —  • 
Pine  Ridge 

210 

250 

215.7 

Reservation  boarding. 

No  1 

25 

33 

20.2 

Day. 

No  3 

23 

18 

12.9 

Do. 

No.  4 

30 

35 

26.5 

Do. 

No  5 

30 

44 

24.9 

Do. 

No.  6  

30 

39 

27.0 

Do. 

No  7                         

33 

43 

30.2 

Do. 

No  8 

33 

15 

11.6 

Do. 

No.9       ..         

SO 

27 

20.5 

Do. 

No  10 

33 

29 

20.5 

Do. 

No  11 

30 

14 

10.3 

Do. 

No.  12 

30 

13 

9.2 

Do. 

No  13 

24 

13 

11.1 

Do. 

No.  15 

24 

24 

15.9 

Do. 

No  16 

36 

49 

27.8 

Do. 

No.  17  

30 

21 

16.2 

Do. 

No  18 

33 

37 

22.7 

Do. 

No  19 

30 

28 

19.9 

Do. 

No  20 

24 

31 

25.5 

Do. 

No  21 

30 

21 

11.7 

Do. 

No.  22 

27 

25 

17.0 

Do 

No  23 

30 

31 

19.9 

Do. 

No.  24  

33 

40 

22.9 

Do. 

No  25 

30 

24 

18.9 

Do. 

No  26 

30 

25 

18.4 

Do. 

No.  27 

20 

21 

12.7 

Do. 

No  28 

23 

12 

10.0 

Do. 

No.  29         

30 

19 

8.6 

Do. 

No  30 

20 

22 

14.9 

Do. 

Holy  Rosary  

240 

237 

197.3 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total 

1.251 

1.240 

920.9 

Rapid  City                             

300 

300 

266.5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Rosebud  superintendency— 
Rosebud                                    .  ... 

200 

125 

113.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Bi<*  White  River 

35 

25 

21.2 

Day. 

Blar'kpipe                             

20 

29 

24.1 

Do. 

Bull  Creek 

32 

24 

16.9 

Do. 

Corn  Creek      

40 

27 

19.1 

Do. 

Cut  Meat                                       .  . 

24 

33 

28.3 

Do. 

He  Dos's  Camp  

27 

25 

23.2 

Do. 

Ironvvood 

24 

23 

18.9 

Do. 

Little  Crow's 

26 

21 

14.0 

Do. 

Little  White  River  

26 

15 

10.1 

Do. 

Lower  Cut  Meat 

27 

19 

12.6 

Do. 

Milk's  Camp  

29 

22 

13.0 

Do. 

Oak  Creek 

26 

29 

15.9 

Do. 

Pine  Creek  

25 

30 

24.1 

Do. 

Red  Leaf                              

23 

24 

19.7 

Do. 

Rinp  Thunder 

23 

25 

21.9 

Do. 

Rosebud       

25 

21 

13.9 

Do. 

Spring  ('reek 

26 

23 

18.2 

Do. 

Upper  Cut  Meat  

21 

26 

21.4 

Do. 

Wh  irlw  ind  Soldier                  

26 

18 

12.4 

Do. 

White  Thunder 

27 

15 

12.6 

Do. 

White  Lake         

19 

19 

14.5 

Do. 

St  Marv's 

70 

71 

64.9 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Francis's  

325 

279 

241.3 

Do. 

Total 

1,146 

908 

796.1 

Sisseton                

133 

199 

169.  0 

Reservation  bonrdin?. 

Springfield 

60 

90 

62.6 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Yank  ton  

115 

119 

89.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Total  South  Dakota  

4,237 

3,950 

3,  177.  7 

146 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  14.— Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  80,  1914— Continued . 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Utah: 
Deep  Creek 

30 

21 

20.0 

Day. 

Skull  Valley 

20 

18 

15.0 

Do. 

Shivwits           

40 

20 

13.3 

Do. 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

67 

82 

64.9 

Reservation  boarding 

Total  Utah                .                .  . 

157 

141 

113.2 

Washington: 
Colville  superintendency— 

25 

25 

16.0 

Day. 

No  3 

30 

34 

19.7 

Do. 

No  4 

30 

40 

25.7 

Do. 

No.  5 

30 

32 

21.3 

Do. 

No  6 

25 

28 

14.9 

Do. 

No.  7  

25 

8 

5.3 

Do. 

No  9 

25 

21 

16.0 

Do. 

Sacred  Heart  Academy  

90 

31 

30.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Mary's 

100 

96 

67.6 

Do. 

Total  

380 

315 

216.7 

Cushman  superintendency— 
Cushman 

350 

353 

280.5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Queets  River  

40 

10 

9.5 

Day. 

Skokomish 

40 

34 

22.2 

Do. 

Tfholah 

36 

26 

20.2 

Do 

Jamestown  

30 

27 

12.3 

Do. 

Port  Gamble 

25 

26 

13.3 

Do 

St.  George's  

70 

110 

92.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Total  

591 

586 

450.0 

Neah  Bay  superintendency— 
Neah  Bay  

60 

72 

51.5 

Dav. 

Quileute 

60 

51 

40.0 

Do 

Total 

120 

123 

91.5 

Spokane  superintendency— 
No  1 

33 

33 

12  6 

Do 

No.  2  

32 

49 

28.0 

Do. 

No.  8. 

25 

17 

9  8 

Do 

Total  

90 

99 

50.4 

Tulalip  superintendency— 
Tnlalip  .  . 

180 

200 

179  9 

Reservation  boarding 

Lummi  

40 

46 

24.2 

Dav 

Swinomish  ... 

30 

23 

20  2 

Do 

Total... 

250 

269 

224.3 

Yakima 

131 

140 

113  6 

Do 

Total  Washington 

1  562 

1  532 

1  146  5 

Wisconsin: 
Hay  ward  superintendency  — 
Havward  

200 

200 

169  2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

La  Courte  Oreille 

74 

54 

37  7 

Dav 

Total  

274 

254 

206  9 

Keshena  superintendency— 
Keshena  

75 

83 

70  1 

Reservation  boarding 

Neopit  

55 

26 

14.7 

Dav 

Stock  bridge  No.  2.. 

34 

19 

7  3 

Do 

St.  Joseph's 

220 

179 

140  1 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Total  

384 

307 

232  2 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

170 

103 

93  3 

La  Pointe  superintendency— 
Bayfield  (Holy  Family)  

65 

9 

5.0 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic. 

Odanah  

490 

129 

86  2 

Day 

Odanah  (St.  Mary's) 

200 

113 

107  0 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Total  

755 

251 

198  2 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


147 


TABLE  14. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1914 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Wisconsin—  Continued. 
Oneida  superintendency— 
Oneida                         

140 

154 

146.7 

Reservation  boarding. 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

12 

9.2 

Mission  dayj    Seven-day  Ad- 

Hobart Mission 

25 

20 

5.3 

ventist. 
Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Total      

190 

186 

161.2 

Red  Cliff  

80 

47 

31.7 

Day. 

Tomah                                                   .  . 

275 

247 

204.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Wittenberg 

110 

132 

120.9 

Do. 

Total  Wisconsin 

2,238 

1,  527 

1,  248.  4 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone  superintendency— 

135 

171 

164.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Arapaho 

25 

30 

21.7 

Day. 

Crowheart  

30 

17 

9.2 

Do. 

St  Stephen's 

120 

104 

91.6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Shoshone  Mission  

20 

19 

13.2 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Total  Wyoming 

330 

341 

300.2 

Grand  total 

32,  793 

32,  718 

26,  127.  5 

.  ..  4 

TABLE  15. — School  libraries. 
[Schools  not  listed  have  reported  no  library.    Leaders  indicate  not  reported.] 


States  and  schools. 
i 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number  of  books  in 
library  June  30,  1914. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

13 

309 
887 
122 
1,612 
130 
226 
91 
38 
131 
131 
131 
7,289 
7,534 
2,081 
891 
1,320 
450 
1,708 
423 

0) 

Colorado  River  

112 

1,226 

Fort  Apache 

Fort  Mojave  

35 

4 

35 

4 

Havasupai 

Kaibab 

40 
16 

21 
159 

82 

$29 
24 

Leupp 

27 

6 

22 
86 

40 
82 

10 
86 

Moqui 

Navajo 

Chin  Lee 

Tohatchi 

Phoenix 

1,277 
1,401 
502 
227 
505 
174 
3 
227 

12 

42 

6 

1,012 
42 
27 
4 
43 
10 
131 

'606 

746 
484 
60 

Pima 

15 

Rice  Station 

San  Carlos 

26 
1 
2 
3 

39 
31 

299 
30 

20 

San  Xavier 

3 
2 

162 
54 
450 
104 

Tucson 

Truxton  Canon 

Western  Navajo 

Total  

] 

4,385 

95 
25 
16 
10 
18 

86 

7 
2 

1 

44 

25,  504 

1,678 

111 
28 
18 

2,343 
7 

172 

287 
72 
48 

120 

2,113 

===== 

133 

34 
22 
14 
22 

California: 
Bishop  

420 
105 
70 
312 
22 
66 
310 
89 

118 
28 
18 

Big  Pine 

1 

Fort  Bid  well 

Likely 

1 

7 

4 

Fort  Yuma 

21 
52 
7 

Greenville 

60 
18 

16 

30 

180 
320 

60 

i  Not  reported. 


148 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  15. — School  libraries — Continued. 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number  of  books  in 
library  June  30,  1914. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

California—  Continued 
Malki 

60 

177 
3 

Pala  

11 

130 
14 
39 
20 
635 

Capitan  Grande 

Round  Valley  

18 
3 
227 

2 

233 

84 
439 

39 
20 

635 

10 
16 

154 

10 
16 
254 

12 
1 
677 

3-day  schools 

Sherman  institute  

85 

68 

Total 

550 

292 

107 

2,150 

1,366 

268 

1,245 

444 

975 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs 

131 
6 

Southern  Ute  

12 

1 

107 

2 



Total  

I  

12 

637 

1 

1 

107 

2,222 
886 

137 

2 
15 

1 

Idaho: 
Fort  Hall  

8 
4 

== 

240 
2 

167 
43 

Fort  Lapwai  

Total  

638 

12 

66 
14 

3 

148 
13 

3,108 

604 

244 
120 

210 

466 

48 

15 

648 
23 

242 

300 

79 

Kansas: 
Haskpll  Institute  

164 
204 

811 
48 

1,274 
25 

Kick  ap  oo 

Great  Nemaha  

Total 

368 

80 

161 

968 
100 

1,677 
48 
230 
262 
146 
189 
1,225 
1,319 
6 
257 
120 
156 
576 

514 
258 

34 

18 

671 
108 

10 

28 

859 
258 

1,299 
108 

379 
100 

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant. 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake  

105 
3 
83 
12 

28 
7 

7 
1 

Fond  du  Lac  

18 

28 

6 
42 
10 

Leech  Lake  

Pipestone  

25 

54 

60 
46 
89 
37 
15 
35 
2 

80 

10 
30 
75 

30 

Red  Lake 

Vermillion  Lake  

10 
356 
14 
6 
83 
37 
21 
126 

4 
34 
10 
71 
2 
6 
8 
102 

4 

White  Earth 

75 
3 
25 
33 
7 
23 
65 

Wild  Rice  

2 
35 
2 

2 
71 
2 

White  Earth  

Twin  Lakes 

2 

2 
11 

Round  Lake  

Elbow  Lake  

40 
12 

2 

85 
62 

Porter  ville  

100 

250 

Total 

856 

151 

140 

6,211 

483 
12 

355 

19 
5 
2 
3 

79 
2 
3 

235 

——...-,— 

325 

_....-  _...-__ 

289 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

78 
20 
9 
6 
1,8S4 
70 
457 
108 

Browning  

Burd  

2 
6 
102 
15 
38 
142 

Badger  Creek  

Crow  

84 
31 
57 
108 
1 
137 
41 
41 
41 
41 
90 

2 
5 
5 

12 

360 

Flatheacl  

Prvor  Creek  

30 

2 

11 
32 
48 
74 
16 
16 
16 
16 
34 

Fort  Belknap  .... 

Lodgepole... 

Fort  Peck 

11 

2 

11 

2 

No.  1  

241 
80 
93 
IV> 

No.2... 

No.3  

No.4  

Tongue  River  

1,427 

655 

56 

Total  

672 
1,995 

12 
~^ 

5,286 

3,097 
737 

983 

69 
3 

171 

341 

14 

53 

4 

623 

Nebraska: 
Genoa  

165 

69 

341 

1,056 
6 

Winnebago  

Total  





1,995 

18 

165 

4,431 

= 

72 

355 

69 

341 

1,062 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  15. — School  libraries — Continued. 


149 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number  of  books  in 
library  June  30,  1914. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 

during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture . 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Nevada: 
Carson        .    

165 
9 

5 

2 

1,899 
384 
16 
132 

49 
10 
9 

152 
6 
21 

66 
20 
2 

50 

$1,042 

Lovelocks 

Fort  McDermitt  

3 

3 

15 

3 

Nevada 

Walker  River 

6 
4 

2 

29 
75 

25 

8 

Western  Shoshone  
Total           

42 

661 

118 

216 

= 

1,577 
110 
460 
77 
654 
248 
1.060 
188 
24 

18 



40 

7 

T 

314 
8 
2 

3,092 

1,782 
2,090 
1,535 
724 
1,877 
3,458 
4,189 
773 
171 

172 

40 
3 
72 
5 

189 
406 
889 
208 

212 

314 
41 
21 
4 
18 
212 

""36" 

88 

65 

1,163 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque 

1,226 
95 
141 
24 
238 
135 
341 
78 
18 

Jicarilla  

33 

19 

Mescalero 

1 

71 

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Juan 

3 
6 
89 
12 

4 

Santa  Fe 

tDay  schools 

800 
30 
10 

Zuni 

10 

Day  schools 

Total  

4,398 

151 

7 

328 

16,602 

6 
121 
3,240 
1,975 
655 
4,834 

1,812 

67 
30 
556 
398 
102 
35 

640 

1 

4 

911 

62 

2,296 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck 

2 

Fort  Berthold  1  

Fort  Totten 

1,481 
113 

75 
716 

274 
8 
2 

...... 

855 
95 

""415 

Standing  Rock  

31 

50 
2 

Martin  Kenel 

100 
27 

50 

Turtle  Mountain 

Total  

2,387 

=== 

168 
6 
70 

4 

291 

===== 

6 

==== 

10.831 



1,188 

1 

88 

127 

50 

1,365 

99 
21 
134 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment. 

304 
201 
623 

121 
121 
125 
121 

2,455 
401 
376 
369 
1,203 
1,891 
168 
922 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho. 
Chilocco  

27 
641 

30 
667 

18 
1,066 

135 
1,427 

16 

27 

Kiowa— 
Anadarko 

Fort  Sill 

4 

Rainy  Mountain  
Riverside 

6 
4 

Osage 

206 
68 
12 
195 
115 
328 
102 
216 

7 

"  io 

32 
2 

200 
401 

"'49' 

""328 
30 

7 
68 

""33 

Otoe 

Pawnee  

38 
313 
68 
705 
8 
288 

11 

206 
30 
339 

Ponca 

15 
17 
36 
2 

9 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger 

Seneca  

7 
14 

107 
14 

75 

Shawnee 

60 

Total 

l,f.82 

20 
4 
509 
9 
37 
,   30 
20 
357 
79 
10 
290 
713 

86 

57 

9,401 
75 

1,910 
40 

869 
21 

2.092 

1,745 

900 

Five  Civilized  Tribes: 
Armstrong 

Bloomfield  
Cherokee 

80 

"'4' 

10 
4 
2 
16 

1,068 
55 
112 
252 
J,645 
4(12 
1,275 
60 
1,623 
784 

113 

14 
13 
30 
36 
18 
185 
24 
1 
117 
56 

113 

14 

36 
35 
43 

67 
4 
108 
20 
34 
159 
236 

Collins  ,  

Euchee 

13 
78 
29 
5 
66 
9 
131 
20 

36 

200 

Fuf!»ula 

Jones 

Mekusukey 

56 

3 
1 

Nuvaka 

Tuflahassee 

Tuskahoma  ..... 

54 

55 
20 

253 

56 

Wheelock 

Total  Five  Tribes. 
Total  Oklahoma.  . 

2.078 
3.  700 

190 
27lT 

36 

7,411 
lfi.812 

504 
2,414 

515 
1,384 

22* 

523 

742 
1,642 

93 

2.31C. 

2,  2(i8 

U913  report. 


150 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  15. — School  libraries — Continued. 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number  of  books  in 
library  June  30,  19U. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Oregon: 
KJuniath  schools. 

•  2.915 
605 
194 
90 
152 

275 

384 

79 
771 

Salem  

205 
3 
14 
1 

224 

727 

275 

329 

$599 
2 

Siletz 

Umatilla  l 

26 

2 

94 
71 

32 

28 

Warm  Springs 

20 

25 

1 

Total 

223 
25 

250 
372 

729 
290 

3,956 
25 

824 
3,415 

910 
1,035 

295 
1,622 

354 
1,612 

602 
562 

57 
14 
356 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River 

60 
18 
757 

22 
2 

26 

5,055 
231 
3,097 
675 
2,545 
8,771 
149 
400 
1,608 
506 
783 

22 
188 
217 
157 
401 
1,981 
104 

924 
399 
70 
34 
219 
1,293 
36 

Crow  Creek 

20 
35 

"i,'665' 

'"706" 

Flandreau      

Lower  Brule 

Pierre 

433 
994 
16 
400 
423 
6 
38 

54 
422 
9 

20 
508 
3 

192 

Pine  Ridge  2     . 

306 
149 
445 

291 
10 

Rapid  City 

57 

Rosebud,  21  day  schools. 
Sisseton 

12 

1 

118 
80 
10 

8 
40 
70 

Springfield 

75 
16 

Yankton 

1,020 

(8) 

Total 

3,142 
34 

547 

586 

23,820 

3,278 

3,093 

2,995 

1.001 

767 

Utah: 
Shivwits  

5 

4 

249 
310 

35 

16 

6 

5 

21 

Uintah 

Total 

34 

5 

4 

559 

35 

16 

6 

5 

21 

Washington: 
Colville 

5 
35 
36 
25 
1 
59 
13 
15 

14 
18 
15 
42 

14 
23 
1 
10 
1 
3 
20 
8 

8 
11 
10 

113 
99 
389 
44 
95 
267 
44 
308 

209 
275 
195 
268 
1,907 

49 
81 
49 
73 
52 
39 
42 
266 

48 
66 
57 
243 
50 

20 
92 
48 
40 
40 
10 
38 

..„. 

9 
1 
10 
4 
12 

13 
36 
23 
23 
6 
31 
24 

No  3 

3 
3 
3 

6 
6 
6 
22 

5 
5 
5 

7 
12 
4 
19 
17 
9 
335 

25 
37 
23 

138 

7 

No.  4  

No  5 

No.  6  

No  7 

No.  9  

Spokane- 
No  1     

25 
25 
25 

20 
30 
18 

32 
114 
171 
39 

No.  2  

No.  8  

Tulalip 

Yakima  ... 

Total  

278 

:  = 

273 

577 

109 

—  —     —-  —  ~ 

43 

26 

64 

—    .     .-  --  — 

15 

4,213 

1,115 

-TTT 

111 

217 
86 
561 
4 
228 

633 

28 
16 
38 
5 
3 
192 

363 

106 

512 

Wisconsin: 
Hay  ward 

2,023 
4,896 
1,766 
462 
693 
554 

68 

13 

152 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

29 
75 

97 

""i26 

Oneida 

341 

260 
369 

Red  Cliff 

""169" 

in 

Wittenberg 

320 

Total 

1,820 
25,759 

178 

186 

10,394 

1,207 

282 

172 
11,786 

110 
8,274 

598 
15,311 

Grand  total  

2,848 

2,914 

138,  172 

21,  161 

12^581 

1913  report. 


2  Circulating  library  among  25  day  schools. 


» Included  in  literature. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


151 


TABLE  16. — School  statistics  for  38  years.1 

INDIAN  SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE  FROM  1877  TO  1914. 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.8 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

1877 

48 
49 
52 
60 
114 
140 
157 
153 
167 
158 
156 
8170 
8168 
8166 

102 

119 
107 
109 
86 
106 
125 
154 
145 
227 
227 
242 
230 
233 

150 
168 
159 
169 
200 
246 
282 
307 
312 
385 
383 
412 
398 
399 

3,598 
4,142 
4,448 
4,651 
8,143 
12,232 
18,188 
21,568 
25,455 
24.945 
23,647 
26.281 
25,830 
26,  127 

1878                             

1879 

1880                          

1885 

6,201 
9,865 
15,061 
17,708 
21,812 
20,  106 
18,  774 
20,973 
20,  607 
20,858 

1,942 
2,367 
3,127 
3,860 
3,643 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5,223 
5,269 

1890                       

1895                                             .  . 

1900 

1905                                  .              -   -- 

1910 

1911                                           

1912 

1913                                       .         .   .. 

1914 

1  For  other  years  see  1913  report. 

*  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 
8 Includes  Five  Tribes  boarding  schools. 

APPROPRIATIONS   MADE   FOR   SCHOOLS   BY   THE   GOVERNMENT   SINCE   1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877 

$20  000 

1897 

$2  517  265 

22.45 

1878 

30  000 

50  66 

1898  

2,831,771 

4.54 

1879 

60  COO 

100  00 

1899 

2  638  390 

.25 

75  000 

25  00 

1900 

2  936  080 

11  28 

1881  

1882 

75,000 
135  000 

"so  66" 

1901  
1902      

3,080,367 
3,  244,  250 

4.91 
5.32 

1883 

487  200 

260  00 

1903 

3  531  250 

8.84 

1884 

675  200 

38.00 

1904    

3,  522,  950 

1.23 

1885 

992  800 

47  00 

1905 

3  880  740 

10.15 

1886           "  ~ 

l,10o'  065 

10  00 

1906       

3,  777,  100 

12.67 

1887 

1  211  415 

10  00 

1907 

3  925  830 

3.93 

1888 

1  179  916 

1  2  60 

1908 

4  105  715 

4  58 

1889 

l'  348*  015 

14  00 

1909 

4  008  825 

1  2.36 

1890 

1  364  568 

1.00 

1910    

3,  757,  909 

16.26 

1891 

1  842  770 

35  00 

1911 

3  685  290 

i  1.93 

1892 

2,  29l'  650 

24.30 

1912  

3,  757,  495 

1.96 

1893 

2  315  612 

1  04 

1913 

4  015  720 

6.87 

1894 

2  243  497 

1  3.50 

1914  

2  4.  403,  355 

9.65 

1895 

2  060  695 

l  8  87 

1915 

3  4  678  627 

6.25 

1896 

2  056  515 

l  2  00 

Total  since  1876  . 

89  663  847 

i  Decrease. 

*  Includes  $400,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

*  Includes  $440,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 


152  COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  17. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914. 


States  and  schools. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of 
tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Arizona: 
Kaibab  

$1,  150 
1,070 

6 
8 

$1,000 
1,915 

$50 
955 

$50 
290 

San  Xavier 

160 

$12,000 

$449 

$216 

Total  

60 
5 
4 
40 
638 

410 

12,000 
200 
40 
400 
5,104 

32,800 

2,220 

14 

2,915 

1,005 
140 
0) 
<*) 
2,977 

(3) 

340 
140 

449 

216 

California*  Campo 

Minnesota:  Grand  Portage.. 
Montana*  Blackfeet 

£ 

10,590 
4,400 

«; 

12 
(3) 

<!4, 

667 
(8) 

(2) 
2,714 

<k 

ft» 

North  Dakota:  Fort  Rerthold 
Oklahoma:    Cheyenne   and 
Arapaho.  .  .  

Grand  total 

1,157 

50,544 

18,  481 

27 

4,482 

4,122 

3,194 

612 

1,316 

i  Leased. 

1  Crops  do  not  mature. 

*  Not  reported. 


TABLE  18. — Experimentation  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1914. 


States  and  schools. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of 
tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Minnesota:  Grand  Portage... 
Montana*  Blackfeet  

1 
9 
10 
36 

$10 
90 
1,500 
360 

ft. 

C1) 

0) 

0) 

% 

24 

New  Mexico:  San  Juan  
Utah:  Shivwits  

1 

$720 

$80 
24 

Total  

56 

1,960 

276 

1 

720 

104 

104 

Not  reported. 


1  No  crops  to  date. 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


153 


i 

||.0            ;«^ 

.        g.        0^      ;co 

:g     :°s     i" 

i 

1-H   TJ<   IO 

I 

|| 

00"                        '• 

i 

ggg 

1 

of  liquors  (gallons 

j 

!  j  ]  j  i  i  .j* 

•00     

:S  i  i     :  :  :  : 

05 
05 

1C 

Includes  75  suspe 
'  Cases  prosecuted. 

*. 

I 

o 

1 

~T"  — 

5O             .       ! 

:  :a  I50-  :  : 

:§  :  :-g  :  :M 

i 

K! 

oi 

«o 

B^ 

.10      •• 

| 
S 

»? 

g| 

:2S  :  :  :  :  : 

2 

111 

1 

1 

K. 

nd  sentence 
jail. 

o 

.a 

t     !    !    !    !        ! 

8  :  :  :  :8  : 
^  :  :  :  i1"1  : 

ill  j  j  i  j  j 

1 

rHCOCO 

g§i 

fences  and  n 

1 

'•S 
^ 

1 
to. 

OT  '   « 

:«  :  :J5    ^S 

S                    '  i-i  es 

S 
1 

V- 

CO  Ol>-  f. 

.penitentiary  sen 

Csi 

o 

11* 

2SS2-SS 

^              -<fi  CO  CS 

-|S-§5S-|S- 

O5 

PARISO1 

*m 

;aped. 
entenced 

ir 

^E.  ^  •  "^ 

S 

S 

^j^g^ 

•< 

I 

« 

IPI^I 

TO 

o 
o 

.0 

**  o 

•fo 

! 

'§ 

A|| 

«,,  =  „    » 

"'2-    -    - 

^^      :      J^S 

S 

sgs 

w  "*+* 

|S"2 

i^T3  rt 

•-s 

I 

H  CT*" 

sS-s 

t3  w  to 

'^ 

p 

i 

s-«  |  ss 

S5§    -S8- 

&>  ~&        OJ  »O        «O  ^J 

O5 

m* 

w  ®,2 

SSI 
ell 

! 

li 

SSS2«?!  = 

CO  O  CO  «O  CO  •«<  O5 
i-l  JH  i-H         CO         i-l 

CO(NOO^f«COOOi-l'*"*«C 

i 

lO  O  ^O  O* 

w  ^ 
9 

"g 
'S 

t 

05 

in 

88S«-«- 

O3OOOCOt-»(M<N«C 
CMCOt^rrcoOOOOO 

ag*«§a-8r 

co" 

oooco 

iQ  C^  ^H 

oco  co 

S     ri 
•3     g 

w       t*> 

"ABLE 

1 

ilii 

O5  O  •&  t~  CO  t^  CO 

OJ  CO  t-  CO  OJ  00       •* 

cmo«o^r-it^     o 

CO*"1       W            IH  i-l 

! 

llsj 

•is 

S3      g 
P.     ^ 

I 

H^ 

RSS««S8S« 

S2    2=Sg« 

CO                                   W 

CO 

5  oo§ 

!  I 
1=5 

J 

Mfi  _ 

'S'         COCS               rH 

(NCO         ^HCO         OS 

00 

*m 

ble  does  not 
s  1  fine  at  Ml 
s  1  penilenti 

S 

S  ?  ."a  o  'C  ^3  F3  c 
•S^^iJ^ooj^J; 

•§  i"g  I.Q  >  |  |t 

2  :  :'So  ;  :g  ;; 

5^jj  §;^5  CS^-S  S  C 

£3£ifS»!!l 

i 

I 

Total  1913  
Total  1912  
Total  1911  
Total  1900.... 

3-S.S 

•a  .2  3 

X5  o  o 

fr'.S.S 
*  ~  eT 

It" 


.iS     3     O  "-i^     »- 
CO    ?    rt    O 

pip 

llj-8 

*  t£@  J»  9i 

J?  CO  •*-•    v» 


ffili 

!-il.il 

lliil 


154 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


*-*oio<NO30o 


t  >*  - 


ig  !§  !  ii  ! 


^  O  ^  O  O 


~T 


l§ 

*3 


1 


•2  I 


11 


;i~ 


§8    88 


i» 


ifj-^fll   -        : 

I 


B    ^ 


T 


3   ..- 


COMMISSIONEK  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


155 


I  is 


00  O>O  IOI 


II 


111 


« 


00 
o  «o 
<c^ 


ill 

•<=» 


III 


ri« 


Sg 

05  o 


asggsg 


O  »-H  OO  C 
GO  C4  Oi  Oi  CD 


CO  O  O  O  O  I 
r-l  i— <  G  iO  i— I 


SB 


o  o  o  es  o  o 


1C  ICO  IOO  rH 


00- 


3 


"TFI 


-<=: 


Sit  ,-  SI  .,g£31ai>3  , 


i23  1  gl  |5*= 

gSII  "  ll  II 


Ei|  fji  ..HI  illll^ 

titltLfl       cSia     oS^aiS       cL    ^.oSKeeQ 


filijll   « 

•<  K-»  S  QQ  QQ  IS 


63556—14 11 


156 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


.§» 

£ 


ractors  or  per- 
mittees. 


P 


i 


s-" 


s 


5T 


o  TJ- 


s  as 


sill 


o  TJ.  10 

-"   N 


CO  O  O>  -^f  «O 

1"1 


-S3 


Pi 

en 


ill  ji 

Q      ^ 


-111 


ll 


CO  -<t  O  OC  O  t2 
<MGO»OOCO 

OOO        CO  CO  rH 


ill 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

IS 


157 


3  ': 


«r  : 


:«r 


:S< 


of 


g 


S* 


' 


!  jl 

"S«|^s      UJ   -o 

• LT  03  C  .3  -H  J       -3  . .         S 


fiyti  1  illl-s8  as  i 

'>-SM-S^^       P        to  >,^  0*7,10  O  S        «H 

-        «  e3  CD  o,  ^  S  H'3 

8WWjJtf        1 


158 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  21. — Cost  of,  core,  and  protection  of  timber,  permanent  improvements  built  to 
date,  and  acreage  per  employee  for  protection,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914. 


States  and  reser- 
vations. 

Cost  of,  care,  and  protection  of  timber  during  year. 

Permanent  improvements 
built  to  date. 

Employees. 

V 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting. 

If 

Total. 

Acreage 
per  em- 
ployee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Special. 

Forest 
guards. 

Miles 
of 
roads. 

Miles 
of  tele- 
phone 
lines. 

Miles 
of 
trails. 

Cabins. 

No. 

Sala- 
ries. 

No. 

Sala- 
ries. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

2 
10 
3 

$450 
3,855 
750 

$450.  00 
6,659.50 
2,  150.  00 

11,250 

r.'uiuo 

107,500 

Fort  Apache  

1 
1 

$1,300 
1,400 

$1,504.50 

235 

153 
47 
9 
156 

600 

5 
1 

Navajo  . 

Pima 

220 

San  Carlos 

6 
1 
1 

4,240 
792 
675 

4,  240.  00 
792  00 
675.  00 

18,  500 
32,000 

20 

3 

1 

Truxton  Canon 

Western  Navajo  .  . 

Total     ' 

2 

2,700 

23 

3 
1 
1 
3 
3 

10,762 

1,900 
375 
900 
650 
1,050 

1,504  50 

14,966.50 

455 
20 

370 

—•:-..-•-...:. 

47 

620 

..—  ;=.-T-.:r 

10 

California: 
Hoopa  Valley 

33,333 
200 
3,000 
166 
16,000 

1,900.00 
375.  00 
918  00 
650.00 
1,050.00 

Pala    

Round  Valley 

18.00 

1 
5 

26 

30 

4 
5 

Soboba  

Tule  River 

12 

32 

Total  

11 

-_^j 

1 
2 

4,875 

18.00 

4,  893.  00 

52 

89 
8 

41 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  

==== 

- 

— 

750 
1,920 

750.  00 
3,020.00 

28,  450 
9,333 

Fort  Lapwai  

1 

1,100 

2 

4 

Total  

1 

1,100 

3 

4 
2 
4 

2,670 

3,770.00 

8 

2 

4 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage 

1 

1,700 

844 

600 
1,800 

35.00 

2,579.00 
600.00 
1,800.00 
490.  50 
2,500.25 
4,200.00 

2,400 
20,500 
25,  479 
26,  145 

25,785 
88 

10 
30 

1 

Leech  Lake  

109 

7 

Nett  Lake  

2 
3 

7 

480 
1,080 
1,500 

10  50 
370.  25 

1 

Red  Lake... 

1 
2 

1,050 
2,700 

58 
50 

White  Earth  
Total  

4 

5,450 

22 

2 
2 
10 

s 

6,304 

1,050 
400 
5,430 
2,425 

415.  75 

12,  169.  75 

116 
35 

148 

2 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

1,OEO.OO 
400.  00 
6,865.50 
2,425.00 

5,000 
6,400 
19,818 
23,333 

=== 

Crow      .     .    .. 

Flathead 

1 

1,164 

271.  50 

10 
1 

110 

20 

2 

Tongue  River  

Total  

1 

I,lf4 

1,300 
1,000 

17 

9,305 

271.  50 

10,740.50 

46 

110 

20 

2 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla  

50,0f3 
175,  000 

1 
1 

8 
1 

4,200 
450 

69.30 

5,569.30 
1,450.00 

26 
175 
20 

52 

85 

4 
1 

Mes'  alero 

300 

San  Juan  

Santa  Fe  Pueblos. 
Total  

1 

600 

600.  00 

10.000 

25 

18 

4 

2 

1 
1 

2,300 

10 

5,250 

69.30 

7,  619.  30 

7,  631.  50 
312  00 
450.  00 
1,000  00 
2,  100.  00 



246 

137 

318 

9 

Oregon: 
Klamath  

1,500 
312 

9 

6,012 

119.50 

79,000 
180,000 
1.300 
3,020 
33,285 

77 

180 

45 

11 

Roseburg  

Siletz... 

3 

1 

450 
1,000 

3 

Uma  ilia  

1 
1 

Warm  Springs.... 

7 

2,100 

33 

120 

130 

Total  

2 

1,812 

20 

9,562 

_ 

119.  50 

•__--- 

10.  00 

11,493.50 

110 

300 

178 

13 

South  Dakota: 
Crow  Creek  

10  00 
1,  620  00 
880.  00 

Pine  Ridge  

2 
1 

1,620 
880 

38,100 

124 

1,500 

2 

Rosebud  

To+al  



3 
3 

2,500  !        10.00     2,510.00 
1,080    1,080.00 

124 

40 

1  500 

2 

Utah:    Uintahand 
Ouray  

2,220 

i 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


159 


TABLE  21. — Cost  of,  care,  and  protection  of  timber,  permanent  improvements  built  to 
date,  and  acreage  per  employee  for  protection,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1914. — Contd. 


States  and  reser- 
vations. 

Cost  of,  care,  and  protection  of  timber  during  year. 

Permanent  improvements 
built  to  date. 

Employees. 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting. 

Total. 

Acreage 
per  em- 
ployee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Special. 

Forest 
guards. 

Miles 
of 
roads. 

Miles 
of  tele- 
phone 
lines. 

Miles 
of 
trails. 

Cabins. 

No. 

Sala- 
ries. 

No. 

8 
3 
3 
1 

Sala- 
ries. 

Washington: 
Col  vi  lie         

$3,625 
900 
1,750 
1,125 

$175.  00 

$3,800.00 
900.00 
1,771  25 
1,  125  00 
5,437.62 

82,4^3 
75,310 
37,000 
19,  120 
48,560 

30 
5 
171 

183 
30 
47 

22 
20 
11 

6 

Cushman 

Spokane  

21.25 

3 

Tulalip 

Yakima  

1 
1 

$1,400 

8 

3,580 

447.62 

87 

88 

4 

6 

Total 

1,400 

23 

10,990 

643.  87 

13,033.87 

293 

348 

57 

15 

Wisconsin: 
Hay  ward  

1 

1,080 

2 
3 
4 
4 

500 

2,160 
1,170 
1,680 

1,580.00 
2,  671.60 
2,370  00 
2,  71  0.  00 
900.  00 

6,880 
50,327 
4,723 
22,747 
8,000 

Keshena 

511.50 

202 

62 
5 
20 
10 

128 

Lac  du  Flambeau 
La  Pointe 

1 
1 

1,200 
1,080 

38 
3 

Red  Cliff 

1 

900 

5 

Total 

3 

3,360 

14 
2 

6,410 
1,900 

511.  50 

10,281  50 
1,90000 

243 
24 

97 

78 

133 
100 

2,969 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 
Grand  total... 

22,080 

16 

19,  286 

151 

71,608 

3,563.92   94,467.92 

1,749 

1,686 

57 

160 


.6 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


te- 
e. 


te- 
e. 


00^0; 

••ooTw, 


g      „ 

oi 


£8    S    ^o£c?K! 
o  >n   oo    •*  0510  »c  cc  ( 


§3  SS 
S  g! 


§  : 


ec  t^  o  < 

O2IM  00  < 


10-! 
O  1—  1 


as 

»oeo" 


ge  now 
project 


:5  : 


O  «O  lO  1C  CO  t~- 


°8 


tfMO  ««•  (M  eO 
CCOr-lr-!^ 


Oi     •      .« 

r-    <    •< 

ocT  •    • 


S8 

)0!N 


-ooco 


CO  O  OOi  (N  5O 


:g  :  : 


i 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


161 


|Sc8&o|S£ 
O  «— '  I>-  »-H  C^  1  *  O 


:8 


s 


[SSS2! 

)r-|l002( 


OOOrt" 


S3 


- 


§8 


oT  c  r^  "^ 


^  JH  10  en  Ci 


I 


go; 


s  s 


o  c 
55  -^- 


If)          ^H 

«o      t^ 


>  I*-  »O 

>01«5 

:  «OOO 


ss 


c  o  c  o  c  oo 
>a  CM  co  o  61  Tf  ^- 


C<N        0 


O     -O 
CM      •£! 


II2 


| 


• 


JSfc^3 

l^es 

J    O   CS    0) 

B-?5fl 


P" 


»j  3  J  Jill  i  i  IN  ill  i 

trra    £    g^g^^^ts    iS    jiEei€fcg£3l    H    fil^ltsl?    S 


f  ^ilillllll  ^  Sis, 

5OOfe^H<S^^^  fe"^^' 

;  S 


162 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


T»? 

3 

i 

§  s 

§  § 
§  - 

w 

S 
t 

s' 

gss 
•s£ 

s 

o 

0-J 

s7 

:££ 

J5§ 

t-(M 

Eg 

i 

SS5§ 

las 
a^'l 

CM 

o  ! 
il 

*        " 

t>T     to 

§      ^ 

8 

§ 

2 
8 

-S  v 

S     : 

2   i 

a 
5 

is 

JS 

s 
is 

£3 

ft 

s 

•  o 

ii 

o 

i 

8 

S 

^ 

s 
i-» 

S 

;CO 

CO 

& 

t^- 

•1 

| 

1C 

i 

Expenditures. 

£ 

jj 

2    3 

i  ~ 

M 

8 

1 
3 

8£3 
»^  •*  iv 

§"£ 

g 

S 

« 

a 

r~ 

8 

s 

sss§ 
III 

3^'S" 

U5 

ro 
1 

i 

g    S 

CC        >^5 

58    S 

S           Tf 

2 

i 

5 

cT 

S 

Mainte- 
nance. 

3    i 

S 

^ 

i  i 

§£ 

NW 

T-KM 
COO 

in 

>o 

je 

:S 

:3 

•  oo 

J5g 

S 

i 

S! 

>o 

i 

10" 

S8 
S 

During  fiscal 

~f 

Jo     § 

ec     3 

A 

100,  919.  67 

8 

§ 

s 

1C 

ff 

to~ 

§ 

3 

(0 

§5S 
g^S 

<N  TTO 
CJ^H«0 

§ 

i 

00 

2 

2    S 

qi      06 

M        CO 

gf   S 

S 

irj 
fe 

?•§! 

§co 
S 

CO 

1 

1 

Ifl 

8 

8 

1  1 

1 

1 

1 

^  S  8 

"3C^I 

t» 

S§ 

i 

lO 

IO 

T-l             t^ 

8 

& 

1 

1 

I 

i 

>> 

rg    (J 

oe 

isS 

1 

1 

1 

g^8 

E 

S  8 

i 

5 

g 

11 
S'? 

fen  CL 

H 

II 

35 

8ii 

s  i  i 

s 

gg 

2 

i 

§ 

g" 

B 

•< 

- 

N 

o"  j    '• 

s" 

1 

1 

So 

~f 

Io 

So" 

s  I 

g 

g 

§ 

0 

o 

•s 

0> 

I 

g«9« 

1 

£ 

3 

O  1^-* 

gp8 

s 

i 

8 

§  1 

S  g 

B 

2~ 

CO 

S 

S" 

to 

S 

s 

t§ 

II 

1 

>> 

T)  2 

sS 

^  tX) 
03 

gss 

1 

of 

of 

Ot^Q 
*"       § 

eo~ 

£ 

i^ 

CO" 

S  1 

S 

1 

lO 

e5 
oT 

s-g 

a* 

i-d 
§-2 

III 

1 

:gl 

o 

1     i 

1 

S 

1 

i 

D^ 

S~     i 

s 

;    ; 

•     e<i 

(M 

Tj< 

•* 

i 

<< 

h 

ill 

o 

I      8 

1 

i  i 

f 

10 

1  1 

c 

i 

1 

<*" 

OiCIN 

J5 

S3 

g 

w 

& 

So 

&   S 

(M 

| 

S 

M 

I 

j 

:1 

'•S 

il 

.s 

: 

: 

;i 

•  > 

i 

; 

a     '- 

:-3 

-S 
d 

; 

&     : 

:^ 

States  and  supen 

Oregon: 
Klamath  
Umatilla  
Warm  Springs  

I 

South  Dakota: 
Pierre  
Pine  Ridge  
Rosebud  

H 

Utah: 
Salt  Lake,  special  i 
Shivwits  
Uintah  and  Ouray 

1 

Washington: 
Colville  
Cushman  
Yakima  

1 

Wyoming:  Shoshone.. 
Administration,  spec 
etc  

Grand  total  

1 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


163 


OSt*-OiOiO 

co  co  ^H  3  12 


C*  CO  <N  .-1 


>O  O  QO 
1*-  l-~  O  CO 
OCO  C^l  i—  < 


IO  »-t  CO  iO  «O  t-  • 


ndians 
gaged 


OOOO5OCOIOO 
CM  O  »O        O  fM        CO 


ICU3O 
t>-TT  O 


O        O        COO        OO 


Is 


i 


C'lCOiOO 


i     . 


CO        t-H  "   <N        CO 


l>    • 


^H  O      •  rH 

^  to    • 


I 


I  111 


Total 

rado: 
Navajo  Springs 
Southern  Ute 


164 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 

-a 

.§ 

1 

11111 

CO 

1     11§ 

1 

11  :§    1 

1 

1, 

|II 

I25 

0 

g2S|S°° 

* 

ae°a 

* 

iOf-<     1-1      co 

0 

i 

1 

Sj 

g: 

t-t 

^^v 

S 

cof2^  cs  *"* 

I 

O  CO  O  OO  gO 

CO 

1S111I 

CO 

•i 

c^  o 

IM  >f 

B 

cc. 

T^  iO  '^r  Ci  CO 

1 

§§111!! 

1 

ISSS  3 

1 

s 

^1 

oo 

00 

•^fW 

1. 

NO        »CCO  Oi  CO 

00 

S««8£5 

i 

^ 
1 

1 

CQ  fcC 

I! 

i 

1 

88S§e 

1 

88&333S 

1 

isslll 

f 

! 

•3 

CN 

O 

§|||8 

g 

11-      HI 

1 

000000 

8 

i 

1 

* 

* 

" 

icooic  t-  1-< 

si 

M 

" 

1-1          "5      ^ 

i 

««, 

I 

8, 

"o      >• 

O'O  0 

£ 

££ 

£ 

8          i 

j 

«c~ 

§ 

'•c 

1 

fe 

"«  <» 

J! 

1 
^ 

S§|J! 

oc 

yii! 

cT 

CO 

1 

Allotted. 

0 

o 

!!!s 

n 

oo" 

11       1 

1 

i   I 

1 

^ 

"E" 

*%i 

1 

1 

O  CO 

g 

:        :g 

s 

; 

1 

1 

all 

* 

3 

: 

1 

f 

IM 

! 

§ 

-lip 

i 

CO 

O  O  00  ~-<  O  >O  I- 

1 

OO  »O  CM  O  CN  O 

SO 

^ 
1 

r>« 

4i-2 

l-a 

1 

OJ 

KII 

1 

i§p  § 

s 

1'   I 

CO 

s 

c 

n  reserva- 
>n. 

C3 

f 

0 

gS|8« 

i 

S      ^"c?^^ 

s 

OO<N                  O 
0>                            CO 

1 

*ts 

^ 

1 

Ditches  o 
ti< 

I 

1" 

9 

sgss" 

g 

^t-       COOOO, 

£ 

t^-  i-H  -^          O  O 

1 

1 

?^' 

J 

: 

w 

i 

4 

- 

T3 

s 

s 



•g       J 

States  and  super 

Idaho: 
Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lanwai  .  .  . 

1 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  
Crow  
Flathead  
FortBelknap... 
Tongue  River.  .  . 

1 

Nevada: 
Fallon  
Fort  McDerrnitt 
Lovelocks  
Moapa  River... 
Nevada  
Walker  River... 
Western  Shoshor 

I 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  Pu 
Jicarilla  i.. 
Mescalero  
San  Juan  
Santa  Fe  Pueblo 
Zuni  

1 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


165 


if 
? 

3 

i" 

§0 
i 

fa- 

1 

§ 

S3 

II 

I 

t- 

11 

ll 

O  t^  C^ 

1 

§8 

11 

§ 

w 

» 

CO 

* 

* 

CO 

eSS 

oo 

I 

•*r  o  CM 

S? 

00 

2S 

05 

c" 

'  S 

3 

eo  05 

CX  CM 

& 

co" 

O  iC 

CO  O 

8 

12 

i 

00 

oT 

1 

8 

I 

O  O  !>• 

CO  I-  O5 

cs      o> 

a 

IS 

oo 

S 

« 

" 

~ 

1C 

CO 

CM  to 

O5OO 

S 

1     •     • 

§ 

p, 

p 

* 

1 

S 

1 

8 

8 

1  1 

B 

OCM 

|| 

£ 

" 

oo 

S 

"5 

CO 

<NO 

oooo 

§ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

i 

Si 

1 

05 

oi 

CM 

CM  •<!• 
CM 

s 

s 

S. 

11 

S 

Is 

O  CM 

od~ 

cc 

1 

r 

1 

CM 

0 

*I 

ss 

1 

c 

C4 

2 

s^S 

E 

CM 

II 

5 

_s 

0 

SM- 

to  co  PO 

S 

ss 

*s 

S 

,C 
"I 

0 

Umatilla  

Total  

South  Dakota:  Pine  Ridge  

Utah: 
Salt  Lake,  special  agent  
Shivwits  
Uintah  and  Ouray  

1 

Washington: 
Colville.  .  . 
Yakima  

Total  
Wyoming:  Shoshone  

1 
o 

I 


. 


166 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  24. — Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  80, 
1914,  and  made  in  the  field.     Many  of  the  latter  were  not  approved  during  the  year. 


States  and  tribes  or  reservations. 

Approved  by  the 
department. 

Made  in  the  field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number 

Acreage. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

499 

4,989 

GilaRher  

1,661 

16,632 

Salt  River  

804 

24,  404 

Total  

1,303 

29,  393 

1,661 

16,632 

California: 
Pala  

162 

797 

1,276 
8,000 

"Vuma 

Total     .  . 

959 

9,276 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall  

1,863 

338,910 

Minnesota: 
Boi  eFort  

24 
3 

1,944 
233 

Leech  Lake  . 

Total  

27 

2,177 

Montana: 
Blackfeet    .  . 

2 
3 

2 
547 

638 
480 
710 
79,049 

2,621 

880,  650 

Flathead  

Fort  Peck  

7 

2,562 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  .  .                ... 

Total 

554 
4 

80,877 
40 

2,628 

883,212 

Nevada:  Paiute  (Fallen)  

New  Mexico:  Laguna  Pueblo  Band  

521 

23,469 

North  Dakota: 
Standing  Rock 

83 
24 

13,240 
3,418 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain) 

Total  

i 

107 

16,  658 

Oregon: 
Umatilla 

2 

160 
325 

Warm  Springs 

Total 

3 

485 

South  Dakota: 
Chevenne  River  

2 
1,304 

329 
313,476 

Pine  Ridge  

Rosebud  

180 

28,800 

Total     . 

1,306 

313,  805 

180 

28,800 

Washington: 
Colville 

294 
1,119 

38,743 
120,966 

Yakima  

Total....  

1,413 
255 

159,709 
24,312 

Wyoming:  Wind  River 

Public  domain:  Tobacco  enters  in  Montana  

2 

199 

Grand  total 

4,  265 

452.  910 

8,521 

1,475,044 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  167 

TABLE  25. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1914. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales.1 

Inherited  land  sales.1 

Number 
of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Number 
of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

California: 
Bishop  

1 

40.00 

$800.00 

Fort  Bid  well. 

1 

10.00 

$20.00 

Total  

1 
2 
12 

10.00 
240.00 
458.  45 

20.00 
925.  50 
28,004.40 

1 
2 
9 

40.00 
161.00 
295.  60 

800.00 
705.00 
13,291.00 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute 

Idaho:  Fort  Lapwai  

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  

2 

17 

95.21 
923.00 

1,700.00 
30,048.00 

1 
10 

80.00 
870.00 

3,011.00 
32,702.00 

Potawatomi 

Total     . 

19 

4 

1,015.21 
240.00 

31,748.00 
2,518.50 

11 

6 

950.00 
396.14 

35,713.00 
3,545.00 

Michigan:  Mackinac  

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  

1 
4 
1 

80.00 
240.  00 
80.00 

2,044.00 
1,711.00 
7,771.50 

Leech  Lake 

2 

75.00 

758.00 

Nett  Lake  

White  Earth. 

4 

440.00 

8,640.00 

Total  

6 

515.00 

9,398.00 

6 

400.00 

11,576.50 

Montana: 
Crow  . 

7 
11 

956.91 
940.00 

7,860.60 
31,098.53 

25 
11 

3,699.93 
846.31 

24,817.00 
38,713.00 

Flathead 

Total 

18 

1,896.91 

38,959.13 

36 

4,546.24 

£3,530.00 

Nebraska: 
Omaha  

4 
15 
5 

160.00 
1,109.48 
158.85 

14,464.00 
35,667.30 
10,645.37 

13 
6 
17 

975.97 
520.  00 
748.64 

78,640.90 
17,152.00 
57,785.20 

Santee 

Winnebago 

Total 

24 

1,428.33 

60,776.67 

36 

2,244.61 

153,578.10 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  

4 
20 
5 

7 

382.  71 
1,706.88 
966.00 
755.  90 

4,220.00 
23,450.05 
11,821.00 
11,126.00 

Fort  Totten 

17 
3 
2 

1,660.05 
640.00 
371.  99 

25,310.89 
6,665.00 
6,200.00 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain 

Total  

36 

3,811.49 

50,617.05 

22 

2,672.04 

38,175.89 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment.  . 

25 
14 

3,146.94 
1,279.48 

29,032.50 
21,392.60 

7 
6 
1 
1 
6 
1 
17 
4 
3 
1 
20 
6 

1,105.66 
796.45 
1.00 
160.  00 
480.  00 
40.00 
1,759.43 
17.04 
167.54 
160.00 
990.  49 
353.07 

9,149.00 
14,785.25 
150.00 
1,325.00 
6,328.00 
650.00 
33,828.00 
985.00 
1,811.00 
2,010.00 
24,290.00 
16,157.68 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  . 

Kiowa  ..    .  . 

Osage."  

1 

32 
9 
41 
16 
2 
8 
1 
2 

120.00 
2,525.18 
619.00 
2,  116.  73 
245.  88 
80.00 
390.21 
48.00 
81.00 

1,216.00 
25,150.45 
10,695.40 
53,039.60 
6,779.00 
2,740.00 
6,933.00 
900.00 
1,305.00 

Otoe  

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Red  Moon 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger.  .  . 

Seneca  

Shawnee  . 

Total  

Oregon: 
Klamath  

151 

10,652.42 

159,  183.  55 

73 

6,030.68 

===== 

4,205.71 
3,236.06 
301.  50 
191.  53 

111,468.93 

20,549.00 
18,694.15 
4,955.55 
17,250.00 

3 

48 

2 

459.  58 
6,848.65 
21.00 

2,500.00 
69,793.50 
600.00 

22 
23 
6 
2 

Rose  burg 

Siletz.  .  . 

Umatilla  

Total 

| 

7,329.23 

72,893.50 

53 

7,934.80 

61,448.70 

1  Under  act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1018),  modified  by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444), 
June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.  L..  85,5-856),  and  Feb.  14, 1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

»  Under  act  of  May  27, 1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245-275),  modified  by  acts  of  May  8, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  May  29, 
1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14, 1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 


168  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  25.— Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1914— Con. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales. 

Inherited  land  sales. 

Number 
of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Number 
of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

South  Dakota: 
Crow  Creek. 

4 

785.50 

$5,687.50 

8 

1 

1,169.14 
160.00 

$13,158.50 
1,612.00 

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridge... 

1 
33 
59 
23 

160.00 
6,413.60 
4,172.24 
1,520.99 

701.00 
74,.  584.  75 
102,943.63 
60,216.50 

Rosebud 

47 
10 
17 

11,100.61 
1,118.18 
914.  56 

104,722.35 
26,209.00 
41,043.10 

Sisseton  

Yank  ton 

Total..  . 

120 
20 

13,052.33 
1,200.52 

244,133.38 
22,848.99 

83 
15 

14,462.49 
756.  52 

186,  744.  95 
12,009.90 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington: 
Coeur  d'Alene  

6 
1 
1 
6 

720.00 
160.  00 
28.  50 
166.  38 

12,664.00 
1,500.00 
1,575.00 
8,409.00 

3 

1 
2 
5 

419.  92 
77.90 
115.40 
382.  35 

6,  566.  30 
945.  00 
10,104.00 
17,685.00 

Colville 

Cushman  

Yakinia 

Total     . 

14 

1,074.88 

24,148.00 

11 

995.  57 

35,300.30 

Wisconsin: 
La  Pointe 

4 
15 
1 

294.97 
360.  45 
79.07 

4,397.00 
6,767.14 
1,000.00 

Oneida.. 

24 

754.95 

15,909.00 

Red  el  iff 

Wittenberg  

1 

65.10 

5C7.00 

Total  

20 
29 

734.49 
1,867.05 

12,164.14 
21,187.33 

25 

29 

820.  05 
2,536.25 

16,470.00 
28,945.89 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

Grand  tutal 

529 

45,526.31 

779,526.14 

418 

45,241.99 

773,309.16 

SUMMARY  OF  SALES  BY  FISCAL  YEARS  SINCE  1903. 


1903 

(i) 

44,493.99 

$757,173.25 

1914 

1  236 

122  222  52 

2,057,4(4.50 

19)5 

978 

9),  2lJ.  97 

1,393,131.52 

19  Hi 

6  3 

64  4^7  67 

9m  43  t  &7 

19)7 

82) 

1  6.359.25 

1,218,793.34 

19  >*  

92 

7,990.88 

$159,318.81 

768 

91,302.57 

1,3  2,508.94 

19:  9  »  ...     . 

255 

34.060.33 

442,762.85 

753 

102,  70S.  00 

1,321,258.72 

191)3 

52  J 

82,655.80 

1  245,639.96 

873 

129,359.61 

1,956,315.92 

1911  3   .. 

494 

50,197.98 

978,588.27 

638 

79,665.66 

1,503,960.38 

1912 

321 

34  391.  11 

568  880.75 

392 

43,652.27 

889,285.02 

1913     

208 

2),  778.  80 

407,315.56 

109 

10,797.94 

285,097.72 

1914 

529 

45  526.31 

779,526.14 

418 

45,241.99 

773,309.16 

Total     . 

2  402 

281  601.21 

4,582,032.34 

7,628 

930,466.44 

14,469,729.34 

1  Unknown. 

*  Includes  sales  of  lands  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 

» Includes  sales  of  lands  of  Kaw,  Osaga,  and  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


169 


TABLE  26. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L..  182],  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}. 


States  and  superintenden- 
cics. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1U14. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee 
during  fiscal  year  ended  June 
30,  1914. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Arizona'  San  Xavier 

1 

40.00 

1 

12.40 

California: 
Bishop  

2 
1 
15 
2 

240.00 
80.00 
838.00 
15.00 

Greenville 

Hoopa  Valley 

1 

1 

40.00 

Round  Valley    . 

1 

10.00 

Total  

20 

37 
29 

1,173.00 

==^== 

5,  767.  82 
1,619.89 

1 

—rr~  "——    -  _- 

4 
42 

10.00 

627.65 
1,995.94 

1 

1 

40.00 

1,373.98 
1,019.81 

Idaho: 
Cceur  d'Alene 

10 
16 

10 
11 

Fort  Lapwai  

5 

Total  

66 

37 
50 

7,387.71 

2,391.71 
4,007.03 

46 

30 

20 

2,623.59 

2,652.84 
1,610.00 

26 

2 
41 

5 

21 

2.393.79 

40.00 
2,  767.  03 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  . 

1 
9 

1 
32 

Pntawatom  i 

Total 

87 
12 

6,398.74 
937.  28 

50 

4,262.84 

43 

10 

33 

2,807.03 

Michigan:  Chippewa,  Lake 
Superior 

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage 

17 
7 
21 
5 
3.573 

1,317.50 
640.00 
1,582.24 
425.  48 
285.840.00 

3 

160.00 

5 
4 
8 
3 

1 
2 
1 
1 

4 
2 

7 
2 

197.  50 
240.00 
480.64 
164.88 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake 

2 

1,520 

160.00 
121,  600.  00 

White  Earth  
Total 

3,623 

289.805.22 

1.525 

121,920.00 

20 

5 

15 

1,083.02 

724.34 
8,622.98 
1,300.00 

Montana: 
Crow  

35 
271 
6 

7,017.34 
24,785.23 
1,380.00 

207 
28 

25,  129.  48 
2,327.14 
200.00 

4 
122 

7 

4 
99 

4 

Flathead 

23 
3 

Fort  Peck  

Total  

312 

33.182.57 

36,318.44 

17,208.54 
8,835.89 

236 

171 
252 
30 

27,656.62 

23,531.00 
17,110.00 
2.  158.  92 

133 

54 
24 
21 

26 

107 

10,647.32 

Nebraska: 
Omaha 

561 
234 
155 

36 
9 
10 

18 
15 
11 

1,639.44 
1,398.54 
686.37 

Santee  

W  innebago 

Total  . 

950 
3 

62,362.87 
360.  00 

453 

42,  799.  92 

99 

55 

44 

3,724.35 

Nevada'  Carson 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  

11 
32 

164 
372 

1,222.94 
2,  854.  69 
52,  598.  98 
53,451.08 

2 
26 
37 
36 

164.00 
2,231.30 
7,202.21 
5,327.55 

7 
7 
11 
304 

7 
6 
9 
286 

751.  19 
570.30 
2.266.69 
42,043.01 

Fort  Totten 

1 
2 

18 

Standing  Rock..    . 

Turtle  Mountain 

Total  .    . 

579 

110,  127.  69 

101 

14,925.06 

1.120.00 
2.184.59 
3,040.00 

329 

25 
39 
6 

21 

308 

45.631.19 

1,746.00 
2,654.52 
680.00 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment  

45 
130 
154 
20 
63 
44 
58 
92 
30 
537 
483 

6,385.47 
16,951.48 
19,600.07 
10.  000.  00 
7,  760.  23 
4,525.17 
3.825.01 
9,687.81 
3.277.27 
32.827.64 
39,  629.  30 

7 
11 
19 

14 
13 

11 
26 
6 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 
Kiowa 

Osage 

Otoe 

"'5 
9 
24 
19 
1 
174 
19 

740.00 
797.  93 
2,  863.  36 
2,  567.  07 
40.00 
11,453.00 
2.130.00 

22 

20 
.  18 
4 
9 
11 
26 

5 

17 
20 
16 

4 
8 
11 
18 

2,  105.  20 
1.805.20 
2,  102.  20 
312.  67 
1,037.27 
1,322.64 
1,  160.  74 

Pawnee 

Pon^a 

2 

"i 
""a 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger 

Seneca  

Shawnee  . 

Total  

1.656 

154,469.45 

288 

26,935.95 

180 

43 

137 

14,926.44 

170 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


TABLE  26.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  St'it.  L.,  182],  as  modified 
by  acts  of  Miy  29, 1908(35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  Jane  25,  1910  (36  S tit.  L.,  855)— Con. 


States  and  superintend  en- 
cies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1914. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee 
during  fiscal  year  ended  June 
30,  1914. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived . 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

961 
13 
18 
216 
3 

62,980.90 
1,987.09 
1,360.06 
12,  716.  99 
360.00 

5 
9 
2 
39 
5 

800.00 
1,351.29 
162.  72 
2,926.89 
760.  00 

10 
6 
20 
22 
1 

1 
..... 

6 

9 
6 
18 
16 

1,444.93 
791.  68 
1,402.78 
1,117.37 
120.00 

Roseburg  

Siletz 

Umatilla  
Warm  Springs  

Total  

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  
Crow  Creek  
Lower  Brule  
Pine  Ridge  
Rosebud 

1,211 

79,405.04 

60 

11 
8 
3 
21 
51 
3 
9 

6,000.90 

59 

9 

50 

4,876.76 

6,574.12 
1,920.86 
1,510.04 
23,992.95 
19,975.47 
5,238.24 
1,803.12 

68 
44 
58 
306 
349 
120 
230 

16,  532.  38 
6,962.06 
16,371.89 
62,347.34 
78,4)5.25 
11,397.79 
29,117.40 

1,760.00 
1,  280.  00 
570.00 
4,067.85 
8,511.30 
409.44 
890.  00 

33 
17 
8 
131 
116 
58 
36 

3 
5 
2 
13 

8 

30 
12 
6 
118 
108 
58 
21 

Sisseton  

Yankton 

15 

Total 

1,175 
3 

221,  134.  11 
200.00 

3,  629.  95 
371.00 
1,356.95 
1,417-66 
7,  827.  43 

106 

17,488.59 

399 

46 

353 

61,014.80 

Utah-  Uintah 

Washington: 
Colville  
Cushman  

45 
4 
14 
9 
112 

3 

i 

253 

80.00 
153.  90 

11 

7 
7 
9 
10 

11 
1 

7 
8 
5 

844.40 
80.00 
576.  95 
927.  45 
400.00 

6 

Tulalip.... 

163  85 
20,248.26 

1 

5 

Yakima  
Total  

Wisconsin: 
Hayward 

184 

14,602.99 

258  |     20,646.01 

44 

12 

32 
1 

2,828.80 

2 

5 
7 
999 
1 

133.  04 

428.  15 
560.  16 
39,663.49 
80.00 

2 

1 

80.00 

Lac  du  Flambeau  
La  Pointe 

2 
164 
1 

159.  97 
8,106.00 
80.00 

2 
37 

2 

37 

159.97 
1,301.97 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff  . 

Total  
Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Grand  total  

1,014 
19 

40,  814.  84 
2,  290.  00 

167 
36 

8,345.97 
2,241.65 

41 

8 

1 
1 

40 

7 

1,541.94 
890.  CO 

10,915 

1,024,741.51 

3,328 

295,869.50 

1,382 

234 

1,148   152,405.44 

SUMMARY  OF  PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8,  1906. 


Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907 

889 

92,  132.  50 

1908..   .   .                                                                 

1,987 

153,  991.  78 

1909. 

1,166 

133,331.79 

1910  

955 

99,339.10 

1911..   .       .                                                                         

1,011 

115,575.37 

1912 

344 

45,  529.  49 

1913  

520 

67,477.49 

1914. 

1,148 

152,405.44 

Total  

8,020 

859,  782.  96 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  27. — Removals  of  restrictions. 


171 


Fiscal  year. 

Quapaw  (Seneca) 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.* 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

1000... 

1.R65 
1.470 
9.V 
652 
956 
1,106 

52,  761.  09 
88,070.34 
84,679.34 
45.075.51 
60,532,64 
81,034.72 

1910  

215 
68 
53 
37 
72 

10,170.25 
4,  101.91 
3,  218.  28 
1,5)30.00 
3.889.35 

•Pit 

lur* 

1913 

iyi4 

Total 

445 

23,312.79 

7,002 

412,153.64 

1  Act  of  Mar.  3.  1<>09  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

2  Act  of  May  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

Act  of  Congress  dared  May  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  T..,  312\  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  intermarried 
whites,  freedmen.  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands,  except  homesteads,  of 
Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove  restric- 
tions from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 

TABLE  28. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1914,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Mackinac  Mich 

1 

80  00 

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich  

] 

40  00 

Benera  Okla 

g 

1  0^0  (52 

Absentee  Wvandot,  Oreg. 

10 

'soo  oo 

Tulalip,  Wa^h 

g 

1  600  00 

La  Poiiitp,  Wis  

5 

400  00 

Total 

33 

3  950  62 

SUMMARY. 


1911 

42 

3  809  58 

1912  

25 

1  917  05 

1913 

23 

1  600  00 

1914  

33 

3  950  62 

Total  

123 

11,277.25 

TABLE  29. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


K 

aw.i 

OS 

age.» 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

1906.  .  . 

1 

400 

1907 

6 

2  400 

1908  

6 

2,400 

1909 

20 

8,000 

19 

9  310 

1U10 

293 

143  570 

1911.... 

84 

41*  160 

1912 

1 

480 

22 

10  8!>0 

1913... 

1 

400 

23 

10,  890 

Itfl4 

12 

1,904 

4 

1  960 

Total    .                                                     

47 

15,984 

445 

217  780 

i  Act  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat  L.,  636). 
63556—14 12 


»  Act  June  28,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539). 


172 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1=11 


rJ-OO 


»OrH         tOtH 


icS 


05  gj 


TfC^       t'-OO 


•  • 


••-j    •    -w 

'  '         ' 


ll  ill 


ooocoooc 


s 


o 

jf'a  §  « 

fills 

lisas 

33 

oo 


- 

'  •*-*  ^  ^^"c3 


wrf 


Oil  (barrels) 
Coal  (tons) 
Miscellaneou 
Oil  s  (barrels) 


2^ 

°fl 
5?  {3 


MCO 

22 

$3 
id  °* 

22 
ES 

O  o 

££ 


l« 

&a 


3 

T3 

I  i 

EH      O 


£2 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  173 

TABLE  31. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914- 


States  and  superintendences. 


Improvement. 


Cost. 


Arizona: 

Colorado  River 
Moqui 
Do 
Moqui,  Polacca  School 


Phoenix          .................... 

Do  ........................... 

Phoenix,  East  Farm  Sanatorium. 
California: 

Campo  ........................... 

Fort  Bidwell  ..................... 

Likely  day  school  ............ 

Fort  Yuma  ...................... 

Greenville  ....................... 

Do  ........................... 

Round  Valley  ................... 

Tu^e  River.  Auberry  day  school.. 
Colorado:  Southern  Ute... 
Idaho: 

Coeur  d'  Alene  ...................  . 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium  ........  . 

Do... 


Iowa: 

Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium. 

Do 

Do 

Do 

Minnesota: 

Cass  Lake 

Fett  Lake 

Red  Lake  School 

Red  Lake  Agency      

White  Earth... 


Do... 
Montana: 
Blackfeet. 
Crow 


Crow,  San  Xavier 

Fort  Peck 

Tongue  River 

Nebraska: 

Genoa 

Do 

Nevada:  Fa  Ion 

New  Mexico: 

Albuquerque  School 

Albuquerque     Pueblos,     Paguate 
day  school. 

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Juan 

Santa    Fe,    Santo    Domingo    day 
school. 

Zuni 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee 

North  Dakota: 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock 

Wahpeton 

Oklahoma: 

Cantonment 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Chiloeco 

Five  Civilized  Tribes— 

1  'uyaka  boarding  school 

Old  Goodland  School 

Do 

Tuskahoma  Female  Academy.. 
Kiowa— 

Riverside  School 

Do 

Pawnee 

Do 

Seger 

Oregon: 

Salem 

Do 

Do 

Warm  Springs. 


2  frame  cottages 

Stone  hospital 

Stone  domestic  science  building . 

Stone  schoo.house 

Frame  mess  hall 

Brick  office  building 

Steel  tank  and  tower 

Steel  tower... 


Frame  warehouse 

Water,  sewer,  and  lighting  systems. 

Frame  schoo.house 

Frame  farmhouse  and  barn 

Concrete  septic  tank 

Frame  workshop 

Frame  employees'  quarters 

Frame  schoo  house 

Tank  and  towers  ... 


'.  "ew  agency  plant 

Remodeling  dormitory 

Plumbing   and   heating   installation    in   present 
buildings. 


2  frame  cottages 

Screened  porches 

Remodeling  dairy  barn. 
Septic  tank 


Frame  barn  and  2  cottages. 
Frame  schoo.house. . . 


1  frame  cottage 

2  frame  cottages 

Brick  dormitory  and  dining  hall  and  extension  of 

gas  lighting  system. 
Frame  cottage 


Brick  schoolhouse 

Steel  highway  bridge  over  Little  Big  Horn  River, 
Crow  Reservation. 

Frame  quarters 

Brick  hospital 

Frame  employees'  quarters 

Brick  dormitories 

Frame  employees'  mess  building 

Frame  cottage 


Brick  bake  oven 

Adobe  schooihouse  and  quarters. 


Brick  schoolhouse 

1  frame  cottage 

Adobe  schooihouse  and  quarters. 


Stone  hospital.. 
Frame  quarters. 


Frame  hospital . . . 
Concrete  reservoir. 
Brick  hospital 


Water  system 

Brick  dining  hall 

Frame  and  concrete  dairy  barn . 


Frame  school  building 

Addition  to  main  building. 

Frame  schoolhouse 

...do... 


Brick  dormitory 

Electric  lighting  installation 

Stone  schoolhouse 

Remodeling  office  building 

Steam  heating  girls'  and  boys'  dormitories . 


Brick  industrial  building 

Concrete  silo 

Steam  line 

Steel  bridge  over  Deschutes  River,  Warm  Springs 
Reservation. 


$1,920.00 
13,600.00 
2,200.00 
1,800.00 
9,200.00 
6,377.00 
4,650.00 
2,150.00 

479.00 

12,300.00 

4,875.00 

791.25 
1,995.00 
1,850.00 
7,143.00 
1.200.00 
3,030.00 

31,251.10 
8,510.00 
3, 205. 97 


5,350.00 

5,000.00 

2,868.00 

980. 00 

3,363.00 
3,145.00 
1,500.00 
3,000.00 
42,600.00 

1,558.00 

16,254.65 
5,000.00 

2,600.00 
9,864.00 
4,000.00 

48,000.00 
1,200.00 
1,838.00 

637.00 
12,300.00 

10, 150. 00 
1,200.00 
12,000.00 

5,903.00 
6,000.00 

3,500.00 
2,600.00 
17,960.00 

2,000.00 
8,842.66 
6,500.00 

3,954.00 
2,050.00 
3,664.00 
3,769.00 

17,304.22 
2,147.00 
8,980.00 
885.00 
3,000.00 

4,645.00 

1,244.00 

557.00 

12,450.00 


174  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AEFAIKS. 

TABLE  31.— Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1914— Contd. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Insane  Asylum    . 

Tank  and  tower             

$2,  713.  00 

Crow  Creek 

Central  heating  and  lighting  plants  and  2  frame 

21  000  00 

Flandreau           

cottages. 
Brick  gymnasium  building              

8,000.00 

Lower  Brule 

Central  heating  plant 

6  370  00 

Pierre    

Screened  porches  

3,9til.OO 

Do 

Remodeling  main  building 

2  294  00 

Pine  Ridge           

Brick  hospital  and  additions  to  laundry,  mess  hall, 

25,  200.  00 

Do  .. 

and  2  dormitories. 
Office  quarters  and  commissary  at  new  substation 

3  000  00 

Yankton  

Frame  dormitory        

8,997.00 

Do  .. 

Concrete  laundry 

1  937  00 

Washington: 
Cushman          

Superintendent's  quarters             

4.300.00 

Do 

1  frame  4-flat  building 

4  500  00 

Colville        

lx*ew  agency  plant             

43,019.00 

Tulalip 

Addition  to  frame  schoolhouse 

9  273  00 

Do  

Extension  to  water  system  

7,200.00 

Wisconsin:  Hay  ward 

Addition  to  boys'  dormitory 

17  8ti5  00 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone          

Frame  quarters      

6,000.00 

Do 

Stone  office  (agency) 

8  000  00 

Do  

Saw  and  grist  mill          

14,  000.  00 

Do 

Frame  barn 

3  950  00 

Total            

632  4G8.85 

TABLE  32. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1914. 


States  and  superintendences. 


Arizona: 

Fort  Apache 

Navaio — 

Chin  Lee  School 

Luki  Chuki  day  school. 

Tohatchi  School 

Navajo  Agency 

San  Carlos 


Western  Navajo..., 

Do 

Western  Navajo,  Marsh  Pass  day.. 
California:  Bishop,  Pine  Creek  day. ... 
Idaho:  Coeur   d'Alene,  Kalispel,  arid 
Kootenai  day  schools. 

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant 

Montana:  Flathead 

Nebraska: 

Genoa 

Do 

New  Mexico: 

Albuquerque  pueblos  (Laguna  San- 
atorium). 

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Juan 


Santa  Fe 

North  Dakota:  Fort  Berthold 

Oklahoma:  Kiowa,  Fort  Sill 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

South  Dakota: 

Canton  Insane  Asylum 

Pierre 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud 

Wisconsin: 

Keshena... 


Tomah. 
Total. 


Improvement. 


Frame  dormitory . 


Additions  to  stone  dormitory 

Stone  sehoolhouse  and  quarters 

Frame  hospital 

Frame  sanatorium 

2  steel  highway  bridges  over  Gila  and  San  Car- 
los Rivers,  White  Mountain  Reservation. 

Additions  to  stone  dormitory 

Frame  barn 

Frame  day  school  buildings 

Combination  frame  schoolhouse  and  quarters 

Combination  frame  school  houses,  and  quarters, 
wells,  and  outhouses. 

Central  vacuum  heating  system 

New  agency  plant 


Superintendent's  cottage  (brick) . 
Cement  septic  tank , 


Frame  sanatorium . 


3  brick  cottage-dormitories 

Steel  highway  bridge  over  San  Juan  River,  Navajo 
Reservation. 

Addition  to  brick  dormitory 

Frame  employees'  quarters 

Brick  hospital 

Wiring  buildings , 


Brick  hospital 

Brick  employees'  quarters.. 
Frame  employees'  quarters. 
Brick  schoolhouse. . . 


Brick  dormitory,  schoolhouse,  and  lavatory  build- 
ings. 
Central  steam  heating  plant 


Cost. 


$18,000.00 

i  18,186.00 
19,712.00 
i  2, 431. 28 
i  2, 150. 00 
53,600.00 

21,500.00 
4,999.36 
5,937.25 
4, 707. 28 
7,600.00 

7,232.72 
117,415.95 

5, 469. 65 
655.00 

12,990.00 

29,740.00 
114,725.00 

16,228.00 
3,99.5.00 

37,280.00 
1,500.60 

31,149.00 

12, 742. 00 

3,650.00 

22,595.00 

44,846.00 
10,000.00 


421,037.09 


1  Cost  to  June  30,  1914. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


175 


0 


PP! 


!8    8S8K 


i  Tt<          ^H  «  r- ^  os  »o  i«  « 


2    S3 

o      •* 


50          ^ 


;  ^-i  10  »o  o  o  10 
>  cc  i  -  10 10  <o  •* 
:  CD  CM  ^H  o  i^  (N 


"Tl 


t>- 1-<  t^  «c  10 


'3  :  :  :s 


CO  O  C_  u;  ^-i  ( 


11 


§8! 


OO        Ot^-iOO        < 

OO        O  i— '  cC  O        < 


iQ     •     •  C4  C4 


i$£S3 


i  O  O  CO  O  •«•'-'  O 

•  ^*  o  t^  oc  o  cc  10 
eo  co  ic  cc  to  •* 


1  I 


1 


176 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 

S 

* 

tl 

le 

g  i 

CO    | 

lO  lO      • 

•8 

,00 

CO  <N 

co 

iO     ( 

S  j 

i    i 

:     :  :«  : 

5 

s» 

"3 
% 

3^ 

g 

S3 

UJ  r-i 

CO  iO 

88 

1 

'4 

:     : 

i^l^i 

"8 

1 

•3 

1 

co" 

s 

,-HO 

•j 

•3« 

8S 

2 

OOCOO 

iO  O 

1 

g 

linn 

JO 

1 

O  ""^ 

s- 

« 

lO       O 

«  co 

W 

** 

2    N    2^ 

S 

1 

i 

Aojg 

|SS 

PS 

S 

S 

8    S    g!2 

S 

1 

$ 

sg| 

3 

« 

Ci 

S 

1 

o 

\ 

•i 

3  ^« 

M 

S 

8 

" 

"•" 

f 

1 

|5 

\i^i 

*• 

** 

N 

ss 

-    S- 

g 

'i 

•o 

« 

003« 

| 

fi 

^ 

ilil 

8 

8 

"\ 

" 

CO     • 

" 

"s 

^ 

<« 

I'; 

^W 

a. 

R 

3« 

S 

£s 

S^2^0rt 

8 

^  . 

C3T3 
?>    0> 

*e  ^ 

I'-S 

„  fl 

£ 

to 

p 

S 

1 

ooo 
«o"od 

gg 

i' 

§  8 

5 

O  •»—  i.  QO  GC  tO  O 

(JO 

8 

13 

11 

llfit 

§1 

R 

|i/_ 

il 

oo" 

oToT 

S 

s  ! 

CM' 

§1 

S* 

5:1  a 

g| 

1 

ss 

gs 

1        ' 

0 

^ 

&5QT) 

.5  V 
Is5  § 

I 
j. 

0 

be 

•*** 

CO 

•     :     : 

*"5 

*o 

"3 

S" 

-t1 

2§ 

2^ 

•"- 

« 

Ha§ 

CO 

u 

PQ 

<w 

1 

0 

o> 
53 

3 

02 

S 

g 

211 

CO 

§1 

e 

OCOCO  O 

~r  "s 

S 

a 

I 

III 
5§| 

§3 

s 

co" 

1 

coco 

S 

-   § 

X 

8eSS3§ 

o 

CO 

00 

1 

02 

*5 

a 

III 

S- 

_ 

cc 

§§ 

CO  Tf 

S 

j 

|    S  —  S 

S 

^ 

1 

1 

*S 

2 

eS 

s 

CO  O 

re 

i 

" 

^  sag! 

1 

1 

: 

w 

il 

s 

IE| 

|S 
0- 

to  10 

g 

* 

t- 

•MPW 

« 

1 

B  : 

;  :  : 

H 

; 

; 

•  05 

1 

^ 

8  . 

H 

$ 

<J 
EH 

1 

Colorado: 

Navajo  Sprin 
'Southern  Ute 

I 
i 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alen* 
Fort  Hall.... 
Fort  Lapwai. 

^1 
|| 

o 

Kansas: 
Kickapoo  — 
Potawatomi. 

I 

S 

| 

if  i  :  -s 

^"3^^% 

i 

COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

!§i§    §8    S          iljoli  ijl    §  '  S 


177 


II 


KS8  :S 

coSS    .!* 


<N        W--1^        1-1 


*a 

1! 
11 

S3 


•^f  O  tO 


>CO  »C  O  1C  O  O 

!SES«33 


I    1 

i  ^ 


s 


ill 


- 


1-11 


i  lO  >O 

j  T— i  ^N     r-- 


" 


CO  CO  <C  <N  rH  CO 


§    8 


S§| 

co'i-Tod" 


..s  jcspiHg  3  «58§  3     g^a'isBo 

cs^^^ig  H  ill*  H  sl€'isl'«i8l 

-S^Sfe^H            |I^^  l^^l^^^tf 

-^  I 


North  DaVota: 
Fort  Berth 
Fort  Totte 
Standing  R 
Turtle  Mou 


178 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

1^ 


1! 


I   s 


I'M 


0-43 

I 


lite 

O  to  £,  P<~  o 


rxl 
$„•; 
«RJ 


s 


s  s 


iceo      co  ^-i 


;§     oo  8  So  < 

<^  CO  CO 


1-1  -r*  CO  C4  Ol  C« 


*-  ^ 


o 


—  c  o 


O  C<»  iO  lOQ 


° 


^  10  o 


a 

§ 


^feai^      ^  Eo>Z2c3C      ^      /^>-&c>c- 

Si'S5   ^    g^J^e^   H   Skills, 


1 


33 


Si 

o»oo~ 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS 

S£ 


179 


§^-l 


1C  ^H  ICO 


ilS 


i 

eo~^-T 


:°S2 


o  o  >o  »o  oo  o 


ssssg 


N       <0        O 


C® 

-3§-* 


TT  ZC          TT  r-    V^  -j          ^  T-,. 

JS     H         ll^l    H      B. 

I*.    |< 


a.  cs 


|  ° 


2K3 

CMUSOS 


•-H  •—  COCS  if 


la  s  2  s 


eo  CM  -H 


1111 


mules 
th  hors 
th  cows 


nclud 
nclud 


| 

o 

o      w 

11 

I  § 

III 

o~SJ3 


3  « 

H 
§^ 

li 

£8,; 
£«§ 


•§ls 


l!I1 


180  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  34. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1914. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Arizona: 
Camp  Verde 

$5 

$3  870 

$3  875 

Colorado  River  
Fort  Apache 

$5,420 
30,303 

300 
4,500 

$231 

$36,657 

$5,617 
13,581 

$3 
16,800 

84,896 
93,212 

133,124 
158  396 

Fort  Mojave  

1,806 

6,715 

2,570 

95,007 

106,098 

Havasupai 

765 

12 

2,033 

*7,637 

10,447 

Kaibab 

330 

102 

2,085 

3  720 

6  237 

Leupp  .  .  . 

14,457 

6,565 

-    2,005 

3,718 

52,  688 

79,433 

Moqui 

14,810 

21,540 

2,738 

98  608 

140  696 

Navajo 

53,535 

20  550 

8  900 

3  204 

259  324 

345  513 

Phoenix  

1  30,  725 

4LO  304 

461  019 

Pima 

6,909 

6,835 

835 

33,069 

111  156 

158  804 

Rice  Station  

4,650 

83,100 

87,750 

Salt  River 

5.715 

225 

7,743 

24  063 

37  746 

San  Carlos  

156,205 

8,210 

13,337 

13,275 

25,606 

216,633 

San  Xavier  

2,435 

850 

35 

4,005 

10  060 

17  385 

Truxton  (_  anon  

6,600 

500 

7,000 

23,C60 

108,100 

145,260 

Western  Navajo  .  .  . 

4,570 

6,950 

36,195 

105  236 

152  951 

Total  

296,495 

129,087 

231 

40,044 

142,591 

56,342 

1,596,587 

2  261  377 

California: 
Bishop.          

27  503 

27  503 

Campo 

2,385 

170 

90 

7  149 

9  794 

Digger  

4,968 

4  968 

Fort  Bid  well. 

4,325 

150 

109  255 

113  730 

Fort  Yuma  

75  049 

75  049 

Greenville 

3,955 

755 

37  804 

49  5x4 

Hoopa  Valley... 

7,949 

1,940 

9,400 

4,100 

35  850 

59,239 

Malki 

9,875 

8,725 

7,260 

1  478 

27  338 

Pala  

4,895 

1,025 

6,593 

17,060 

29  573 

Round  Valley  

3,  155 

800 

65 

3  910 

74  436 

82  366 

Sherman  Institute 

1  24  115 

i  54  008 

285  424 

363  547 

Soboba  

6,462 

1,295 

9,000 

1,223 

33  305 

51  285 

Tule  River 

453 

13  328 

13  781 

Total 

39,689 

37,625 

150 

17,790 

79  329 

8  463 

717  641 

900  687 

Colorado: 
Navajo  Springs.  .  .  . 

5,325 

1,150 

1,950 

325 

8,750 

Southern  Ute  

23,619 

350 

1,900 

47,  870 

73,739 

Total  

28,944 

1,500 

1,900 

1,950 

48  195 

82  489 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'  Alene  

45,030 

1,385 

455 

250 

47  120 

Fort  Hall  . 

27,563 

12  470 

14  957 

16  571 

151  059 

229  620 

Fort  Lapwai  

634 

1  040 

28  329 

30  003 

Fort  Lapwai  Sana- 
torium   

36,190 

59,985 

29  560 

125  735 

Total 

72,  593 

50  679 

14  957 

76  556 

1  495 

2C9  198 

425  478 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

6,383 

6,798 

Kansas: 
Haskell  Institute..  . 

1  22,  638 

418,  560 

441,198 

Kickapoo... 

275 

51  227 

18  881 

70  383 

Potawatomi  

9,020 

5  719 

14  739 

Total  

9,020 

22,913 

51,227 

443,160 

526,320 

Michigan: 
Bay  Mills  

2  400 

2  400 

Chippewa,   Lake 
Superior  

275 

1,800 

2  075 

Mount  Pleasant.... 

1  11,600 

1  31,546 

158  856 

202  002 

Total  

275 

11,600 

31,516 

163,056 

206,477 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake  

18  Oil 

18  Oil 

Fond  du  Lac... 

7,495 

500 

4  160 

12  155 

Grand  Portage  

7,920 

250 

8  170 

Leech  Lake  

30,958 

1  636 

6  363 

1  410 

52  798 

93  165 

Nett  Lake  

14,  750 

15  369 

30  119 

Firestone  

5,925 

136*350 

142  275 

Red  Lake  

19,318 

740 

8  712 

4  205 

84  836 

117  811 

Vermilion  Lake    . 

350 

55  310 

55  660 

White  Earth  

41,056 

26,755 

9,164 

141,782 

218,757 

Total  

121,497 

36,156 

25,239 

5,615 

508,616 

696,123 

» 1913  report. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  181 

TABLE  34. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  SO,  1914 — Contd. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

$33,867 

$3,236 

$i,095 

$98,529 

$139,727 

Crow  . 

108,626 

11,630 

$19,588 

33,025 

$990 

92,411 

316,270 

Flathead  

23,719 

1,075 

141,946 

700 

11,853 

11,170 

190,460 

Fort  Belknap  
Fort  Peck 

30,360 
61,510 

1,050 
6,341 

$1,432 

4,580 

40,092 
13,953 

54,047 
68,426 

130,129 
151,662 

Tongue  River  

35,385 

2,295 

1,400 

9,200 

3,290 

78,295 

129,865 

Total  

293,467 

25,627 

1,432 

217,514 

101,065 

16,130 

402,878 

1,058,113 

Nebraska: 
Genoa  

5,  570 

306,241 

311,811 

Omaha 

22,  815 

22,815 

Santee  

31,320 

435 

230 

31,985 

Winnebago 

64,825 

12,365 

77,190 

Total  

96,145 

6,005 

341,651 

443,801 

Nevada: 
Carson 

106,946 

106,946 

Fallon  

14,200 

14,200 

Fort  McDermitt 

2,190 

770 

193 

3,021 

8,180 

14,351 

Moa^a  River 

75 

188 

3,865 

4,128 

Nevada  

9,850 

67,598 

77,448 

Walter  River 

334 

845 

8,260 

9,439 

Western  R  nosh  one 

7,910 

3,785 

700 

16,370 

47,077 

75,842 

Reno,  special  agent 

900 

'        900 

Total 

20,  853 

4  964 

1,923 

19,391 

256,126 

303,254 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque 

10  100 

8  725 

31,  203 

184,830 

234,858 

Albuquerque 
Pueblos 

1,078 

8,007 

9,020 

37,  666 

55,771 

Jicarilla  

18,030 

5,647 

190 

7,173 

5,005 

86,  435 

122,480 

Mescalero 

16,  140 

2,835 

14,315 

7,700 

86,335 

127,325 

Pueblo  Bonito 

17  525 

1  431 

50,  354 

69,310 

San  Juan 

22,376 

11.351 

30,  452 

1,800 

158,  648 

224,627 

Santa  Fe 

6  975 

2  250 

231,456 

240.681 

Zuni  

7,703 

16,  745 

30.890 

350 

91,856 

147,544 

Total  

92,224 

47.  949 

16,  935 

123,053 

14,855 

927,580 

1,222,596 

New  York  Agency 

150 

300 

450 

North  Carolina:  Chero- 
kee   

350 

100,433 

100,  783 

North  Dakota: 
Bismarck 

225 

88,775 

89,000 

Fort  Berthold  

19,  146 

1,455 

342 

22,  749 

8,640 

52,332 

Fort  Totten 

1,810 

5,910 

1  6,  169 

184,  620 

198,509 

Standin1"  Rock 

84  431 

7  605 

1  410 

35,024 

184,  674 

313.144 

Turtle  Mountain 

27  210 

4  005 

1  895 

27,  159 

60,269 

Wahpeton 

6  180 

18  330 

30,  198 

149,  750 

204,  458 

Total  

138,  777 

37,530 

1,752 

96,035 

643,  618 

917,712 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

1  325 

400 

100 

62,  325 

123,070 

87,220 

Cheyenne  and 
Arapaho 

23  324 

3,272 

90,401 

249,636 

366,  633 

657,707 

657,707 

Kiowa 

38  091 

•  4  085 

42,668 

354,  381 

439,225 

Osaee 

33*745 

i  i  275 

7,457 

141,030 

183,  507 

Otoe 

6,880 

550 

6,415 

56,043 

69,888 

22  082 

325 

105,  893 

128,  300 

18  320 

300 

76,289 

94,  909 

Red  Moon 

'960 

64 

68,  545 

69,  569 

13  462 

953 

41,013 

55,428 

Seger 

970 

2,235 

7,400 

85,060 

95,665 

28,562 

28,  562 

Shawnee  

6,935 

150 

94,485 

101,570 

Totals  

166,094 

13,609 

100 

216,666 

1,981,714 

2,378,183 

Overestimated  last  year. 


*  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


182  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  34. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30,  1914 — Contd. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming 

For- 
estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Oklahoma—  Con  tinu3d 
Five    Civilized 
Tribes- 
Union  Agency. 

$12,916 

$12  916 

Cherokee    Na- 
tion —  Chero- 
kee   Orphan 
School 

$373 

$28  217 

28  590 

Chickasaw  Na- 
tion— 
Bloomfield 
Seminary 

1,000 

1,875 

$6,688 

i  9  563 

Collins  In- 
stitute 

150 

15  700 

15  850 

Choctaw     Na- 
tion- 
Armstrong 
Male 
Academy 

51  211 

51  211 

Jones  Male 
Academy 

50 

29  853 

29  903 

Tuskahoma 
Academy 

27  220 

27  220 

Wheelo  c  k 
Academy 

27,611 

27  611 

Creek  Nation— 
B  n  c  h  e  e 

Boarding 
School 

280 

10,  135 

37,  777 

48  192 

E  uian  la 
Boarding 
School 

110 

3,535 

27,  177 

30  822 

Nu  y  aka 
Boarding 
School 

100 

25  115 

25  215 

Tallahassee 
Boarding 
School 

10,  589 

10,  589 

Seminole    Na- 
tion— Meku- 
sukey  Acad- 
emv 

55  052 

55  052 

Total,    Five 
Civilized 
Tribes 

13,  916 

2,938 

20,  358 

335,  522 

372  734 

Total,  Okla- 
homa   

180,010 

16,547 

$100 

237.024 

2.317,236 

2.750,917 

Oregon: 

Klamath 

4  470 

2  825 

$14  327 

19  677 

$19  235 

78  704 

139  238 

Roseburg 

1,900 

30 

50 

1,980 

Salem 

3.200 

23  850 

91,575 

231  665 

350  290 

Siletz  

11,811 

235 

33,  775 

45  8*>1 

Umatiila 

785 

114  486 

115  271 

Warm  Springs 

2,550 

2,455 

2,950 

5,640 

63,857 

77,  452 

Total  

23,931 

29,  365 

30 

14,327 

114.202 

25,710 

522.  487 

730,  052 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

25,920 

101,  400 

416,588 

543  908 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum 

106  634 

106  634 

Cheyenne  River  
Crow  Creek  

165.067 
31.987 

4,915 
2,530 

5,525 
225 

1,200 

43,042 
8,556 

11,385 

110,547 
70,  085 

341.681 
119,383 

Flandreau 

767 

247  970 

248  737 

Lower  Brule... 

44,712 

5,615 

500 

29.  950 

80,  777 

Pierre  

4,450 

215 

25,800 

44,765 

134  370 

209,600 

Pine  Ridge 

8  4  14,  835 

12  975 

2  005 

8  1  875 

50 

249  270 

674  010 

Rapid  Citv  

4,  500 

5,500 

57.  572 

186,278 

253,850 

Rosebud  4  

420.  64-1 

7,110 

182  790 

610  544 

Sisseton 

19  425 

1  610 

60  514 

81  549 

Spring  ^eld... 

33,464 

33.464 

Yankton  

40,825 

2,240 

53  027 

96  092 

I 

Total 

1  147  212 

149  344 

7  755 

27  500 

155  810 

11  435 

1*357  265 

2  856  321 

1 

1  Decrease  due  to  ftre. 

8  Inclu  l3s  timber  reserve;  1913  report. 


s  Overestimated  last  year 
<  1913  report. 


COMMISSIONEB  INDIAN  AFFAIKS.  183 

TABLE  34. — Distribution  of  Government  property  -valuations,  June  SO,  1914 — Contd. 


States  and  superin- 
tendeucies. 

Gereral 
admiLis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

For- 

estry. 

School. 

Total 
value. 

Utah: 
Shivwits 

$305 
136,  945 

$310 
2,730 

$7,800 
42,470 

5,531 

$8,415 
224,646 

5,531 

Uintahand  Ouray. 
Salt  Lake,  special 

$29,451 

$8,550 

$4,500 

Total 

137.250 

3,040 

29,451 

8,550 

4,500 

55,801 

689,775 
463,059 
5,475 
15.615 
175,838 
63,833 

238,592 

826,857 
489,  7BO 
10,200 
26,001 
212,046 
131,742 

Washington: 
Colville 

69.  107 
14,783 
3.240 
3.951 
29,258 
30,300 

5,425 
11,575 
210 
1,035 
6,950 
4,325 

$4,630 

23,532 

34,388 
343 

Cushman 

Ncah  Bay 

1,335 

5,400 

Tulalip 

Yakima  

Total 

2,185 

19,038 

6,824 

5,237 

150,639 

29.  520 

6,815 

19,  OS'S 

31,691 

45,3f>8 

1,413,595 

1,696,666 

Wisconsin: 
Carter    

1,850 

1,850 
118,237 
836,  645 
82,603 
7,817 
67,  134 
3,362 
152,  753 
59,190 

Hayward 

1.861 
39,200 

5,  150 
7,185 
1,300 
100 
1,450 
190 
4,677 

19,205 

28 
744,  199 

91,993 
46.061 
81,303 
100 
65,684 
562 
148,076 
59,190 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

La  Pointe 

7,182 

373 

60 

Oneida      

Red  Cliff 

590 

960 

1,060 

Tomah    

Wittenberg 

Total 

50.683 
134,  006 

3,034,457 

20.052 
7,285 

693,358 

20  540 

745,347 
27,280 

902.540 

492,  969 
168,681 

13,109,744 

1,329.591 
370,093 

19,668,598 

Wyoming:  Shoshone... 
State  totals 

27,516 
428.895 

4,725 
1,421,339" 

18,265 

Miscellaneous: 
Warehouses  

2.884 

2,884 
650 
8,984 
11,207,004 
39,000 

30,927,120 

Liquor  su  ppression. 
Allotting  service.  .  . 

650 

8,984 

Irrigat  ion  service 

1  1  .  207.  004 

Indian  Office     

39,000 

1     ' 

Grand  total  

3,076,991 

693,358 

27,249  j  11,  635,  899 

1,421,339 

962,540 



13,  109,  744 

184 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 


1 

t 

a 


K 

g-9 


oo  o  os  <N  o>   I-H   CD  10  -i  o  co  >o  ^  t-  <N  10  oo 

'— I  TT  Oi  •'t1  •**<    CO  I   00  O  OO  1O  CD  CO  r- *  Tf  *— I  O  1O 
00  1C  I--  rH  O   O5    <M  t-  iO  r-l  OO  -*  "T  <M  O5  t^  CO 


f— (OO^OOOO 


>  co  CD  i— f  co  r^  co  c 

)  IM  05  f  05  10  CD  ; 
)  t^  1C  O5  CO  O  TT  s 


:g  :  :  :§ 


til 


an-iooo 
>o  co  O  I-H 

1*  Tf  Tf 


t^co^iMOOcO 
"   ?$f 


<-<  •*•  00          t^- 


iOi-HO 

m  oo  10 


—I        CO  <N  IM 

i— i      r-~Tfi—i 
to  to  o 


iiOOOirsOC^ICOO 


?-  •*F*&>       £CC'ltr-SOttC 

O          CO  S        »0  10  CO  t-  t-  10 


OOOOOOOOOON< 


§o  o  < 
00< 


QOi-H          CD  ^  O  CO  CO  CO  !>•  CC 


8  :  :  :  :  :  :§  :§ 


Bf:  :  i  i  i  :§f  :9 

CO f-     -<M 


•  •   -T3  g> 

^     3    ..-2.1     3* 

g  J3  g  Wi+j  4J  ?^vs  as  S  9  o>       O     O 


SCOOO  Tf<  O 

OOCN  CO  CO 

•71        OOO    I          O  T 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN    AFFAIRS 

3S38S    IS 

*o  oo  "«*  ^      o 


185 


o      to 

tOSl         OCO 

*f         eo  oo" 


•   CO   ^J1    T 

I  ^H  COC 


«r 


i— I  CO  1O 
1M  CO  "5 


5  t^-  CO 

>  00  O  C 


;  I-  0>  TC_  00  10 


CO  CO  O5  CO 
iU50>0005( 


S3 


O  t--  Oi  C^  O  10  i 

GO  O3  ^f  -rf"  O  Oi  < 
CD  OOO  CD  00  CO  l 


.^H  10  •*  O4  O 

)  1C  *^  CO  10  »— < 

•TTrHOOOlM 


!3£ 

I  CO  CO 


t^.  T)I  ^H  CO  10  (N 

CO  O5  OO  O  1O  CO 


!>.  TfCO 

co1*— <  10^ 


O  -H  O  O  O  O 
1O  CO  O  00  COM 


C<«         rr 

S    S5 


COO  CO  (N  i 


§11  s°. 


§00 
O  -H 


«O  O     •  b- 


SS8  : 


Mhfigc®a 

^5§^ 

.Z'Sja^'SMa 


r.i 


i«0 


a£cM££( 


o$H 


186 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


c 


!-i  10  »c  ••&  c 


>  r-  co  >o  or.  <M  •* 

i  m  o  jh  cc  10  IM 

3  00  COO---*  CM 


I 


I 


alance  of 
funds  in 
Treasury. 


Lands, 
exclusive 
of  timber. 


Lands, 
exclusiv 
of  timbe 


S8S 

co"t^irT 

l>-  CO  O 


>  o:  o:  ic  ic  -H 
er:  ^H  r--  r-  -*  < 

i—  '  »-<  QC  O5  C^4 


ISS 


S  is 


O  O>  " 
1C  CO 


<M  i-"  3  OO  O1  <M 


-r  oo  o 

O3  ICO 


Ol  C^  C^  C5 


O  C-l  f  ?O  "0  CO 


lil 


g||S 


0^^000  -0 


::::»:: 


§88 


co  r^  o  <c  <N  > 


ISIS 


-  CC  W  1-1  i-i  ?1<N 


rs 


oo 


c  o  o  »c 

ilil 


8" 


8I  i  llillll 


187 


is  s 


8s 

8 


:ii!!S; 


1-1 1^      ••* 

O  1C        *C 


00 


8  : 


«0  iH         <0«0 


OO  O  O5  1C  ( 


:  :  :S 


S 


o    o 

li 


•  t--  r~o  co oo  t 

5  00  T(<  10  CN  OC  < 


fl    ! 


O 
?||Jjf      £ 

s 


-  iipff 

I  |5fg|8i 


^S  :SJ  i  i 

>g«  :S^fl'g 

^s®^-Sfe®rt^3- 

,S  -2  >>te  2  §•  fc  ®  ®  ®"3       O 

fi§5 Illll S 11    § 

6000fe^dHPHtf'!»^ 


63556—14 13 


188 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


II 

ll 


fid 


ir 


itf 


131 


[£&£ 

>w§js 


ill"! 


(N 


O>O  O  •* 


PI 

cT 


:£ 


:>Nf 


I  i-H  *— *  IO  00  CO  C<l  I 

'^Sw^J    SI 


s"sf 


1 1 

%S8zn&><       8c 
*  i* 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  36.— Miscellaneous  field  employees  June  SO,  1914. 


189 


Designation. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Total. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force. 
Inspection  

1 
1 
1 
1 

1 

1 
1 

1 
1 
10 

1 
1 

$3,500 
2,000 
3.000 
3,000 
3,000 

3,000 
2,000 

2,250 
2,000 
20,000 
2,000 
1,500 

15 
19 
3 
23 

$32,300 
23,  620 
5,400 
27,060 

16 
20 
4 
24 
1 

3 
2 

6 
20 
22 
1 
1 

$35,800 
25,620 
8,400 
30,060 
3,000 

5,700 
3,200 

13,500 
24,060 
29,175 
2,000 
1,500 

Liquor 

Construction  

Health 

Schools  

Industries: 
Farming 

2 

1 

5 
19 
12 

2,700 
1,200 

11,250 
22,060 
9,175 

Employment    

Forestry: 
Field  supervising  officers  

Menominee 

Special  agents  

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  Indians.. 
Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians  

Total 

21 

47,250 

99 

134,765 

120 

182,015 

Field  irrigation  service. 
Chief  inspector    

1 
6 

4,000 
13,650 

1 

2,500 

2 
6 

6,500 
13,650 

Superintendents  of  irrigation 

Total    .  . 

7 
1 

17,650 
2,000 

1 

22 

2,500 
33,920 

8 
23 

20,  150 
35,920 

Arizona  and  New  Mexico:  Albuquerque  

Arizona: 
Pima  

1 
1 
1 

1,200 
1,200 
720 

2 

2,220 

3 
1 

1 

3,420 
1,200 
720 

Salt  River 

San  Xavier      .                                .  . 

Total  

3 
1 
1 
1 

• 

1 
1 
1 

3,120 
2,000 
720 
1,500 

2 

174 

2,220 
64,371 

5 
75 
1 
10 

—    —     . 

9 

5 
2 

5,340 
66,371 
720 
6,995 

9,295 
4,640 
2,100 

California*  Miscellaneous  work 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute    ..         

Idaho*  Fort  Hall 

9 

8 
4 

1 

5,495 

7,695 
3,140 
900 

Montana: 
Crow  

1,600 
1,500 
1,200 

Fort  Belknap 

Tongue  River  

Total 

3 

4,300 

13 

M 
1 
2 

11,735 

'  "      '      ' 

1,560 
1,500 
1,740 

16 

^-  "-—  

4 
2 
3 

16,035 

1,560 
2,700 
3,240 

Nevada: 
Moapa  River  

Walker  River 

1 

1,200 
1,500 

Western  Shoshone  

Total 

2 
1 

1 
1 
1 

2,700 
2,000 
2,000 
2,100 
2,100 

42,  190 

1  "•  -"    i-!-_r'-_- 

2,500 

7 

8  If 

<20 
«32 
«20 

217~ 

1  J    ~T    _•-•—— 

«9 
•  3 
M 

4,800 
17,929 
17,860 
29,945 
15,  190 

205,965 

-"    '    ---.  - 

8,883 
2,700 
2,040 

9 
18 
21 
33 
21 

240~ 

10 
3 
4 

7,500 
19,929 
19,860 
32,045 
17,290 

248,  155 

11,383 
2,700 
2,040 

Oregon*  Klamath                                  

Utah'  Uintah 

Washington'  Yakima                      

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Grand  total 

23 

===== 

1 

Field  allotment  service. 
Special  allotting  agents                

Arizona:  Pima  

North  Dakota: 

M 

*10 

1 

2,635 
2,700 
900 

4 
10 
1 

2,635 
2,700 
900 

Turtle  Mountain  

Total 

15 

6,235 

15 

6,235 

_ 

__—_•_       .-..—.. 

i 39  were  temporary  positions. 

8  Temporary. 

*  5  were  temporary  positions. 


« 16  were  temporary  positions. 
»  9  were  temporary  positions. 
•  6  were  temporary  positions. 


190  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  36.— Miscellaneous  field  employees  June  30,  1914— Continued. 


Designation. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Total. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  allotment  service—  Continued. 

Oregon: 
Klamath 

il 

$990 

1 

7 

$990 
1,480 

Roseburg 

7 

$1,480 

Total 

1 

990 

7 

1,480 

8 

2,470 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

a  i 
11 

1 
il 

432 

288 
2,160 
360 

13 
3 
4 
3 

480 
384 
3,740 
500 

4 
4 
5 
4 

912 

672 
5,900 
860 

Crow  Creek.  . 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud 

Total  

4 

3,240 

13 

5,104 

17 

8,344 

Washington: 
Colville 

215 

«8 

14.530 
4,260 

15 
9 

14,530 
6,000 

Yakima  

U 

1,740 

Total 

1 

1,740 

23 
5 

18,790 
5,100 

50,332 
10,800 

24 
5 

86 
24 
8 

32 
10 
6 
12 
5 

20,530 
5,100 

Wyoming:  Phoshone               .              

Grand  total    

7 
«12 

<8 

1 

8,470 
22,200 
20,000 

2,200 
(6) 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 

79 
12 

58,802 
33,000 
20,000 

21,920 
8,300 
5,440 
6,835 
6,520 

Inheritance  examiners 

Probate  attorneys  

•WAREHOUSES. 

Chicago    ..  . 

531 

no 
15 
11 

84 

19,720 
8,300 
3,440 
4,835 
4,520 

New  York 

Omaha 

1 
1 
1 

St.  Louis  

San  Francisco 

Total    ..          

4 

8,200 

61 

40,815 

65 

49,015 

i  Temporary.                                                                 6  20  were  temporary  positions. 
*  8  were  temporary  positions.                                       6  Clerk  in  charge. 
»  4  were  temporary  positions.                                        7  2  were  temporary  positions. 
«  Positions  established  during  fiscal  year.                   8  6  were  temporary  positions. 

TABLE  37.  —  Recapitulation  of  all  Indian  Service  employees. 

Designation. 

Number. 

Salary. 

School  i 

22,796 
22,250 
120 
240 
86 
24 
8 
65 
245 

$1,864,254 
1.  454,  279 
182,015 
248,  155 
58,802 
33,000 
20,000 
49,015 
233,  710 

Agency  *      .  .                                         

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force 

Irrigation  service       

Allotment  service 

Inheritance  examiners  

Probate  attorneys 

Warehouses 

Indian  Office  employees,  exclusive  of  commissioner  and  assistant  commissioner.  .  . 

Total  

5,834 

4,  143,  230 

1 1913  report. 

•School  and  agency  includes  2,319  Indians  earning  $810,950,  as  reported  by  superintendents. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


191 


TABLE  38. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1914,  with  unexpended  balances. 


Title  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1914. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1914. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1914. 

General  provisions. 

Court  costs,  etc.,  in  suits  involving  lands 
allotted  to  Indians  

$2,000.00 

$186.  40 

$1,813.60 

Determining    heirs    of    deceased    Indian 
allottees 

50  000  00 

35,670  89 

14  329.  11 

Expenses  of  Indian  commissioners 

4,  000.  00 

3,  955.  35 

44.65 

General  expenses  Indian  Service 

105  000  00 

94  509  22 

10  490.78 

Indian  schools  support 

1,420.000.00 

1,349,304.64 

70,695.36 

Indian  school  and  agency  buildings 

400  000  00 

334  016.34 

65  983.66 

Indian  school  transportation           .      ... 

82,  000.  00 

74,119.54 

7,  880.  46 

Industrial  work  and  care  of  timber 

400  000.00 

360  114.01 

39  885.99 

Industry  among  Indians,  reimbursable  
Irrigation  Indian  reservations 

114,503.95 
125  068  68 

100,000.00 
345  700.00 

33,210.19 
327  264.60 

81,293.76 
143  504.08 

Judgments,  Indian  depredation  claims  
Pay  of  Indian  police 

97,450.44 

22,145.00 
200  000.00 

24,027.00 
194  432.37 

95',  568.  44 
5  567.63 

Pay  of  judges,  Indian  courts  

8,  000.  00 

7,  470.  77 

529.  23 

Purchase  and   transportation   of  Indian 
supplies 

300,  000.  00 

167,202.46 

132,797.54 

Relieving  distress  and  prevention,  etc.,  of 

200  000  00 

168  308.78 

31  691.22 

Statement  of  affairs  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes 

10,000.00 

10,000.00 

Suppressing  liquor  traffic  among  Indians.  .  . 

100,000.00 

94,222.86 

5,  777.  14 

Surveying  and  allotting  Indian  reserva- 

82  966  48 

200  000  00 

206  645.76 

76  320.72 

Telegraphing    and    telephoning,    Indian 
Service 

9,000.00 

7,  769.  12 

1,230.88 

Fulfilling  treaties  with— 
Choctaws  Oklahoma 

10  520  00 

10,  520.  00 

21,  040.  00 

Crows  Montana             

10,  536.  07 

6,000.00 

5,510.00 

11,026.07 

Navajoes  Schools  Arizona 

100  000.00 

36,  517.  95 

63,482.05 

Pawnees  Oklahoma      

7,714.41 

30,000.00 

31,014.45 

6,699.96 

Senecas  of  New  York 

2  676.02 

6  000.00 

6,161.34 

2,514.68 

Six  Nations  of  New  York 

905  05 

4  500  00 

770.27 

Support  of  — 

5  000  00 

4,  368.  34 

631.  66 

Cheyennes  and  Arapahoes  Oklahoma 

35,000.00 

33,270.08 

1,729.92 

Chippewas  of  Lake  Superio'r  Wisconsin 

7  000.00 

6,  772.  66 

227.  34 

Chippewas  of  the  Mississippi,  Minnesota 

4,000.00 

3,957.78 

42.22 

Chippewas,   Turtle  Mountain   Band, 
North  Dakota 

11,000.00 

10,752.83 

247.  17 

3  000.00 

3,000.00 

Confederated  Bands  of  Utes,  employ- 

23,  740.  00 

23,  174.  34 

565.66 

Confederated  Bands  of  Utes,  subsist- 

30,  000.  00 

20,  521.  09 

9,478.91 

D'Wamish  and  other  allied  tribes  in 

7,000.00 

6,  445.  42 

554.58 

Support  of  Indians  in— 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico 

330,000.00 

300,808.32 

29,191.68 

California                     

57,000.00 

53,890.24 

3,  109.  76 

Nevada 

18,500.00 

17,774.52 

725.  48 

Utah                       

10,000.00 

8,863.53 

1,136.47 

Support  of  Indians  of— 
Blackfeet  Agency  Mont 

15,000.00 

7,761.47 

7,238.53 

Colville  and   Puyallup  agencies  and 
Joseph's  Band  of  Nez  Perces,  Wash-  ' 
ington                                

13,000.00 

12,971.13 

28.87 

Flathead  Agency  Mont 

12,000.00 

8,591.37 

3,408.63 

20,000.00 

19,857.15 

142.85 

Fort  Berthold  Agency 

15.000.00 

14,685.74 

314.26 

30,000.00 

27,  339.  70 

2,660.30 

35,000.00 

28,430.05 

6,569.95 

Grand  Ronde  and  Siletz  Agencies  Oreg 

4,000.00 

3,992.66 

7.34 

6,000.00 

5,601.83 

398.  17 

4,000.00 

3,898.63 

101.  37 

Support  of— 

1,500.00 

1,  122.  19 

377.81 

2,000.00 

1,646.60 

353.40 

Makahs  Washington                   

2,000.00 

1,354.01 

645.99 

Northern  Cheyennes  and  Arapahoes, 

85,  000.  00 

76,  239.  24 

8,  760.  76 

6,600.00 

6,  463.  86 

136.  14 

500.00 

500.00 

Pawnees,  schools.  Oklahoma.  .  . 

10,  000.  00 

9,  389.  76 

610.24 

192 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  38.— Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  ike  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1914,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1914. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1914. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1914. 

General  provisions—  Continued. 

Support  of—  Continued. 
Poncas,  Oklahoma 

J8,  000.  00 

$7,  550.  08 

$449.  92 

Pottawatomies  Wisconsin 

7,  000.  00 

6,190  22 

809.  78 

Quapaws,  education  Oklahoma 

1,000.00 

838.17 

161.83 

Quapaws  employees  etc    Oklahoma 

500.  00 

499.  94 

.06 

Quinaielts  and  Quillenutes',  Washington 

1,  000.  00 

639.26 

360.74 

Sacs  and  Foxes  of  the  Missouri  Kansas 

200.00 

200.00 

Shoshones,  employees,  etc.,  Wyoming 

6,  000.  00 

5,  770.  00 

230.00 

Shoshones'in  Wyoming 

15,  000.  00 

13,  475.  41 

1,524.59 

Sioux  of  Devils  Lake  N  Dak 

5  000.00 

4  992  85 

7.15 

Sioux  of  different  tribes,  employees, 
etc    South  Dakota 

107,  000.  00 

97,514.81 

9,  485.  19 

Sioux  of  different  tribes,  subsistence 
and  civilization  South  Dakota 

200,000.00 

193,  881.  71 

6,  118.  29 

Sioux,  Yankton  Tribe  South  Dakota 

14,  000.  00 

13,  880.  84 

119.  16 

Spokanes  Washington 

1,  000.  00 

1,000.00 

Walla  Walla,  Cayuse,  and  Umatffla 
Tribes,  Oregon 

3,000.00 

2,  940.  00 

60.00 

Wichitas  and  affiliated  bands,  Okla- 
homa 

5,  000.  00 

4,  362.  29 

637.71 

Yakimas,  and  other  Indians,  Washing- 
ton        

3,  000.  00 

2,  804.  64 

195.  36 

Indian  schools: 
Albuquerque,  N.  Mex 

73,  600.  00 

69,430.90 

4,  169.  10 

Albuquerque,  N.  Mex.,  buildings  

J50.41 

15,000.00 

5,529.14 

9,521.27 

Bismarck,  N.  Dak 

23,  200.  00 

17,  416.  97 

5,  783.  03 

Carlisle  Pa 

162,  000.  00 

150,525.12 

11,474  88 

Carson  City.  Nev  

56,  100.  00 

53,  894.  88 

2,205.12 

Cherokee,  N  C 

36,000.00 

31,851.01 

4,  148.  99 

Cherokee    Orphan    Training    School, 
Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma  
Chilocco,  Okla  



30,000.00 
90,500.00 

27,314.40 
86,  131.  80 

2,  685.  60 
4,368.20 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  Oklahoma 

300,  000.  00 

299,442.29 

557.  71 

Flandreau,  S.  Dak  .  .  '. 

66,500.00 

63,  691.  74 

2,808.26 

Fort  Bidwell,  Cal 

20,  000.  00 

18,  285.  85 

1,  714.  15 

Fort  Mojave  Ariz 

38,900  00 

37,231  87 

1,  668.  13 

Fort  Totten,  N.  Dak.  .. 

74,  500.  00 

74,248.61 

251.39 

Fort  Totten,  N.  Dak.,  buildings  

3,050.22 

15,000.00 

16,  594.  08 

1,456.14 

Genoa,  Nebr  

72,  300.  00 

62,  049.  02 

10,  250.  98 

Greenville,  Cal.  . 

20,  000.  00 

17,  189.  63 

2,  810.  37 

Greenville,  Cal.,  buildings.  . 

10,  000.  00 

10,  000.  00 

Hay  ward,  Wis... 

40,  670.  00 

38,030  92 

2,  639.  08 

Kickapoo'  Reservation  Elans 

17  860  00 

16  268  54 

1,591  46 

Lawrence,  Kans  

138,  750.  00 

129,  344.  89 

9,  405.  11 

Mount  Pleasant  Mich 

71,275  00 

65  064  53 

6,210  47 

Phoenix,  Ariz  

131,400.00 

128,  026.  95 

3,  373.  05 

Phoenix,  Ariz.,  buildings 

15  000  00 

15  000.00 

Pierre,  S.  Dak  

42,000.00 

41,  694.  71 

305.29 

Pierre,  S.  Dak.,  buildings 

6,480.64 

15,  000.  00 

248  51 

21,  232.  13 

Pipestone,  Minn  

45,  875.  00 

45,  000.  62 

874.  38 

Rapid  City,  S.  Dak. 

53,500.00 

52,  760.  16 

739.84 

Riverside,  Cal 

104  350  00 

101  267  75 

3,082  25 

Salem,  Oreg  

114,000.00 

111.212.14 

2,787.86 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex 

59  500  00 

58  265  00 

1,235.00 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  buildings     

18,000.00 

112.  07 

17,  887.  93 

Shoshone  Reservation  Wyo 

37  025.00 

36,794  43 

230.57 

Tacoma,  Wash 

50  000  00 

45  927  23 

4  072  77 

Truxton  Canon,  Ariz  

21,200.00 

20,301.55 

898.45 

Toman,  Wis 

63  450  00 

60  850  76 

2,599  24 

Wahpeton,  N.  Dak  

43,  700.  00 

Miscellaneous: 
Administration  of  affairs  of  Five  Civi- 
lized Tribes,  Oklahoma          .  . 

250,  000.  00 

248,583  02 

1,  416.  98 

Asylum  for  Insane  Indians,  Canton. 
S.  Dak 

30  000  00 

27  469  03 

2  530  97 

Award  to  attorney  for  certain  minor 
allottees,  Cascade  Band,  Yakima  Res- 
ervation, Wash  (reimbursable) 

1  900  00 

1  900  00 

Bridge  across  the  Colorado  River,  Yuma 
Reservation,  California  and  Arizona.  . 
Bridge  across  Gila  River,  San  Carlos 
Reservation,  Ariz,  (reimbursable)  

1,000.00 

25,000.00 
45,500.00 

89.69 
19.10 

25,910.31 
45,480.90 

COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


193 


TABLE  38. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1914,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1913. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1914. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1914. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1914. 

Oeneral  provisions  —  Continued. 

Miscellaneous—  Continued. 
Bridge  across  San  Carlos  River,  San 
Carlos  Reservation,  Ariz,  (reimbursa- 
ble).   .            .                      .... 

$19  800  00 

$14  84 

$19  785  16 

Bridge  across  the  San  Juan  River  at 
Shiprock,   Navaio   Reservation,   N. 
Mex  (reimbursable) 

$925  00 

16  500  00 

33  34 

17  391  66 

Bridge,  Western  Navajo  Reservation, 

1  000  00 

50  00 

950  00 

Costs,  etc.,  in  suits  against  John  H. 
Scriven,  allotting  agent,  South 
Dakota 

780  70 

780  70 

Counsel  for  Pueblo  Indians  in  New 
Mexico 

2  000  00 

2  000  00 

Education,  Sioux  Nation,  South  Dakota 
Enrollment    of    Chippewa    allottees, 
White  Earth  Reservation,  Minn  

93,456.09 

200,000.00 
5,000  00 

260,  669!  14 
1,563  97 

32,786.95 

at 

3,436  03 

Examination  of  land,  Sully's  Hill  Park, 
N  Dak 

500  00 

500  00 

Ganado  irrigation  project,  Navajo  Res- 
ervation Ariz 

22  780  16 

25  100  00 

32  417  91 

15  462  25 

Indemnity  to  certain  Chickasaw  In- 
dians for  losses 

14  050  00 

14  050  00 

Irrigating  allotments,  Yuma  and  Colo- 
rado River  Reservations.  California 
and  Arizona  (reimbursable)  

40,000  00 

40,000  00 

Irrigation- 
Colorado  River  Reservation,  Ariz, 
(reimbursable)           .  .             .  . 

1,735  64 

25,000  00 

24,891  90 

m 

1,843  74 

San  Carlos  Reservation,  Ariz  

208.  47 

10,000.00 

9,801  32 

407.15 

Yakima  Reservation,  Wash,  (reim- 
bursable) 

820  45 

15  000  00 

14  487  51 

1  332  94 

Irrigation  systems— 
Blackfeet  Reservation,  Mont,  (reim- 
bursable)      

71,834.93 

150,000.00 

149,846  66 

71,988.27 

Flathead  Reservation,  Mont,  (reim- 
bursable)         

152,291.03 

325,000  00 

214,521.90 

262,769.13 

Fort  Peck  Reservation,  Mont,  (re- 
imbursable)   

79,  772.  43 

150,000.00 

117,116.17 

112,656.26 

Klamath   Reservation,  Oreg.  (re- 
imbursable)   

129,191.41 

105,000.00 

200,  151.  85 

34,039.56 

Milk  River.  Fort  Belknap  Reserva- 
vation  Mont  (reimbursable) 

15  000  00 

14,791  45 

208  55 

Wind  River  Diminished  Reserva- 
tion Wyo  (reimbursable) 

35,509  86 

50,000  00 

25,696  80 

59,813  06 

Land  for  tribal  ourial  ground,  Skagit 
Indians  Washington 

250  00 

250.00 

Line  riders,  Northern  Cheyenne  Reser- 
vation Mont 

1,500.00 

1,440.00 

60.00 

Maintenance  and  operation,  Fort  Hall 
irrigation  system  Idaho      .             ... 

20,000.00 

19,975.28 

24.72 

Maintenance  of  irrigation  system,  Pima 
Indian  lands,  Arizona      .  .             ... 

5,000.00 

4,211.84 

788.  16 

Pay  of  employees: 

2,200  00 

2,200  00 

Mackinac  Agency  Mich 

2,000.00 

2,000.00 

New  York  Agency 

2,250  00 

1,767  08 

482  92 

Sac  and  Fox  Agency,  Iowa 

1,080.00 

645.00 

435.00 

Sac  and  Fox  Agency  Okla 

2,060.00 

2,060  00 

1  500  00 

1  500  00 

Shawnee  Agency  Okla 

900.00 

890.00 

10.00 

4,040.00 

4,025.00 

15.00 

Pay   of  physician,   Shivwits   School, 
Utah 

500.00 

500  00 

Payment  of  drainage  assessments  on 
Creek  allotted  lands,  Oklahoma  (re- 

20,000.00 

11,573.81 

8,426.19 

Payments  to- 

736.  88 

736  88 

Confederated  Bands  of  Ut'es  (reimbursa- 
ble) 

100,000.00 

89,016.55 

10,983.45 

161.25 

161  25 

D.  C.  Tillotson.'Toneka,  Kans... 

4,010.75 

4,010.75 

194 


COMMISSIONER   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  38. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1914,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriations. 

Balance  in 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30. 
1913. 

Appropria- 

fiscal  year 
1914. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1914. 

Balance  in 
United  States 
Treasury  and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1914. 

General  provisions—  Continued. 

Purchase  of  allotments  for  Wisconsin  Band 
of  Pottawatomies,  Wisconsin  and  Michi- 
gan (reimbursable)  

$150,000  00 

$13,839.56 

$136,  160.  44 

Reimbursement  to  — 
Eugene  H  Baldwin  South  Dakota 

39  69 

39  69 

Frank  Philbrick,  South  Dakota  .     .  . 

318  25 

318  25 

Clara  D  True 

50  15 

50  15 

Colville  Indians  for  certain  lands,  Wash- 
ington 

500  00 

500  00 

Relief  and  settlement  of  Apache  Indians 
held  as  prisoners  of  war  at  Fort  Sill,  Okla. 
Repairing  bridge,  Niobrara  River,  Nebr.  .  .  . 

1173,251.75 

100,000.00 
1,200  00 

121,644.61 
1,197.10 

151,607.14 
2.90 

Repairs,  Fort  Wakashie,  Wind  River  Res- 
ervation Wyo 

1  427  00 

1  427  00 

Roads  and  bridges,  Red  Cliff  Reservation, 
Wis 

8  600  00 

8  595  39 

4  61 

Sale  of  unallotted  lands,   Five  Civilized 
Tribes  (reimbursable) 

474  64 

40  000  00 

39  987  68 

486  % 

Surveying  and  allotting   Standing   Rock 
Reservation,  S.  Dak.  and  N.  Dak.  (reim- 
bursable)   

10,000  00 

4,963  50 

5,036.50 

Wagon  road.  Hoopa  Valley  Reservation. 
Cal 

5  000  00 

4  675  87 

324  13 

Water  supply: 
Navajo  Indians,  Arizona  

15,000  00 

13,783.31 

1,  216.  69 

Nomadic  Papago  Indians,  Arizona 

5,000  00 

4,983  40 

16  60 

Total  

1,125,174  23 

9,508,014  67 

8,401,801  84 

2  231,387  06 

TABLE  39. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914. 

[Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner,  are  received 
in  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guaranties  for  rights  of  way  across  Indian 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.  For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
as  required  by  section  3622,  Revised  Statutes.] 

On  hand  July  1, 1913 ...  .    $22, 139. 99 

Receipts: 

July,  1913 $8, 537. 48 

August,  1913 973. 09 

September,  1913 7, 203. 08 

October,  1913 31. 05 

November,  1913 5, 187. 57 

December,  1913 20, 779. 38 

January,  1914 50, 902. 22 

February,  1914 79. 42 

March,  1914 832.00 

April,  1914 314. 13 

May,  1914 22, 026. 69 

June,1914 27,865.52 

144,731.63 


Total  on  hand  and  received 166, 871. 62 

Disbursed  and  deposited  during  year: 

July,  1913 553. 12 

August,  1913 39.57 

September,  1913 • 20.  70 

October,  1913 7, 200. 90 

November,  1913 471. 55 

December,  1913 68. 16 

January,  1914 39, 105. 21 

February,  1914 856. 70 

March,  1914 , 56. 33 

April,  1914 

May,  1914 924.00 

June,  1914 33,263.59 


Balance  June  30, 1914 84, 311. 79 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 


195 


Classified  statement  of  total  receipts  and  disbursements  of  the  Indian  Service 

~  Indian  moneys.) 


TABLE  40. 

for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914  (exclusive  of  individual 


In  Treasury 
and  hands  of 
disbursing 
officers  June 
30,1913. 

Received 
during  fiscal 
year  1914. 

Total  on 
hand  and 
received. 

Disbursed 
during  fiscal 
year  1914. 

In  Treasury 
and  hands  of 
disbursing 
officers  June 
30,  1914. 

General  provisions 

$555,  607.  52 

$2,055,845.00 

$2,611,452.52 

$1,981,258.56 

$630,193.96 

Fulfilling  treaty  stipulations  
Supports  (gratuities)  . 

500,  163.  76 
149,644.58 

630,560.00 
814,497.91 

1,130,723.76 
964,  142.  49 

748,695.46 
839,022.55 

382,028.30 
125,119.94 

Schools  and  school  buildings  
Trust  funds  and  interest.    .  .  . 

886,299.72 
40,078,146.36 

4,088,155.00 
4,638,941.15 

4,974,454.72 
44,  717,  087.  51 

4.448,823.10 
5,350,720.25 

525,631.62 
39,366,367.28 

Indian    moneys,    proceeds    of 
labor  

3,684,372.02 

4,667,820.33 

8,352,192.35 

13,233,104.03 

5,119,088.32 

Miscellaneous 

5,  635,  933.  14 

3,600,968.50 

9,  236,  901.  64 

3,607,425.63 

2  5,  629,  476.  01 

Total 

51,490,167.10 

20,496,787.89 

71,986,954.99 

a20,209,049.58 

51,777,905.41 

1  The  $3,233,104.03  disbursed  as  "  Indian  moneys,  proceeds  of  labor,"  includes  $698,800  placed  in  Oklahoma 
banks,  under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  Congress  approved  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070). 

2  Includes  judgments  of  Court  of  Claims,  $11,309.17;  proceeds  of  sale  of  lands,  $3,369,429.51;  irrigation 
funds,  $800,625.43;  surveying  and  allotting,  $60,482.93;   payments  to  Indians  for  lands,  $595,359.79;  and 
other  miscellaneous  funds,  $792,269.18;  total,  $5  629,476.01. 

»  The  total  amount  disbursed  during  the  fiscal  year  1914  includes  reimbursements  to  the  United  States  on 
account  of  reimbursable  appropriations,  surplus  fund  items,  transfers,  and  disbursements  for  obligations 
incurred  during  the  fiscal  year  1914  and  former  years. 


196 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


8 


£      5  §8888  3 

r4        c$    eooo 

55      3  £i  o 


:s  $ 


10        ^JSSg    SS      5J      £2    2222 

3      ocSS  3    £    8  S& 

§ 

«? 


S3  S  8 


ill! 


S       g     g! 


53 


18    8 


S 


§"*¥  a" 


SS    8 


00   fH   £J 

^-t   Is-   00 


o   coco     01     55 
35   icoS     eo     25 

1  si"  ^  i 


B  S  53 


§5  85  f? 

rH  iH  CO 


Itlllllllllllltllllll  I  I 


1 1  1 1  iw 

a  3    Eall3 


B  »   I 

§  a  K 


i  i  i  ii  ii 


•S    :    : 


i 


!i 


III  111 

'l|5  §  IllHI85i|fi 

111  1  Ii"-ll211is65 


II 1 1 

§  2  8 

11^  M 


*PM«  ri 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


197 


sss^as  ^"s  ^s  a 

"^  CC  ^H  i—* 


85  eC  a"  s 


ir-i     "  eft 

Si-^  t>* 

O  i-l  O> 


"•  £*-      8 


IS 


os  oo  t-t  I-H 


5  3 


s  ss  a 


10     TJ<     e><     co     to     o 
rn     eo     o     «o     o     25 

sigii 

g    8"   Sf   ^   5f   rf 


*J» 


;OQ 


•43  > 


iigJairl 


!pj!jjiiiffl|!|!  1 

illiJlftffjJjlll 


1 1 

•8    I 
111 


198 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


I 


i 


'•SJIII  l^'|.l|§l     l|| §"11 

^IPl!          I1!1"*! 


S3 
|ll 
til 

•o   !g 


:  o 


SP, 


•^j 


111  -: 

?»3J 
l5il 


.3° 

M   rfX 

PI 


•"511 


5  o      o      o 

Bfl    A    fl 


5® 


3«:r  03 

)1M, 


°*M  « 


&  g  s  ® 

.a.2«^ 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


a  *  I 

" 

!    l» 

«T            «o 

Estimated,  art  9,  treat 

Estimated,  art  15,  trea 
Art.  12,  treaty  of  Mar.  i 

1  111 

i   lit 

1    III 

I    ill 
1    liff 

|     i|^! 

i|}^ 

ii-  i 

200  COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  43.— Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 


States  and  superin  tendencies. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average 
pro  rata 
share. 

Amount 
paid. 

Sac  and  Fox  

13 

(1,134.30 

$14,745.98 

Kansas: 

Potawatomi 

14 

244.10 

3,417.41 

Kickapoo  

Kickapoo  

10 

629.24 

6,292.45 

Total 

24 

9,  709.  86 

Nebraska*  Santee 

Ponca        .     ............... 

35 

77.79 

2,722.84 

New  York-  New  York    

10 

179.83 

1,798.36 

North  Dakota:  Standing  Eock  

Sioux  

196 

167.27 

32,785.95 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment                          . 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  ..... 

93 

f    33,255.85 

...do...                  

91 

1     32,615.06 

Red  Moon  

do  
do  

34 
30 

358.  22 

12,218.42 
10,749.67 

Kiowa                        .  .  ........  .. 

Apache  and  Comanche  

182 

27,519.30 

Fonca 

Ponca          

263 

20,756.09 

Osage 

297 

697,  387.  22 

Pawnee 

Pawnee    

44 

26,579.09 

Sac  and  Fox           .  . 

48 

53,  077.  93 

Total  

982 

914,  158.  63 

Oregon: 

Klftmftth 

Klamath 

36 

264.65 

9,  527.  71 

Umatilla                 .    .    ...... 

Umatilla,  Cayuse,  etc  

157 

284.99 

44,  744.  63 

Total  

193 

54,272.34 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River    .............  ... 

Sioux... 

822 

137.  47 

113,005.28 

...do... 

121 

183.66 

22,223.55 

..  do  

4 

186.  65 

746.  62 

Pine  Ridge  

...do... 

1,001 

132.  40 

132,538.00 

Yankton         

do  

72 

250.31 

18,022.48 

Rosebud  

do  

19 

134.  15 

2,548.98 

Total                          

2,039 

289,  084.  89 

Ute  

26 

242.13 

6,295.38 

Wisconsin"  Keshena      *.  .  ............ 

Menominee  

167 

96.36 

16,  093.  44 

3,685 

1,341,667.67 

i  Five  per  cent. 
TABLE  44. — Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  national  banks.1 


Tribes. 

On  deposit  June  30,  1914. 

Interest. 

Principal. 

Interest. 

Total. 

Paid  into 
the  United 
States 
Treasury. 

Total  paid 
and  due. 

$2,618,478.02 
1,054,089.82 
306,628.70 
1,082,150.00 
26,771.30 

$205,392.16 
75,044.82 
23,890.37 
80,  156.  45 
2,097.38 

$2,823,870.18 
1,  129,  134.  64 
330,519.07 
1,162,306.45 
28,868.68 

$26,767.22 
11,187.98 
5,646.61 
9,828.40 
587.81 

$232,159.38 
86,232.80 
29,536.98 
89,984.85 
2,685.19 

Chickasaw.  .  ....................... 

Cherokee 

Creek  

Sftmfnolfl  .   . 

Total  

5,088,117.84 

386,581.18 

5,474,699.02 

54,018.02 

440,599.20 

i  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  245  banks.    The  rates 
of  interest  are  from  4  to  6  per  cent. 


COMMISSIONER  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  201 

TABLE   45. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO, 


Warehouses. 

Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago  

147,519 
9,624 
63.570 
35,945 
31,695 

Pounds. 
40,019,417 
1,027,545 
7,025,240 
8,616,181 
3,300,248 

$694,953.18 
284,921.07 
275,877.19 
218,510.58 
84,659.69 

1 

Pounds. 
163 

$19.50 

New  York  

4 

209 

112.38 

St.  Louis  

San  Francisco 

Total  

288,353 

59,988,631 

1,558,921.71 

5 

372 

131.88 

Warehouses. 

Packages  mailed. 

Requisitions  issued. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Con- 
tract. 

Open 
market. 

Total. 

Chicago  

2,864 
1,866 
666 
684 
257 

Pounds. 
10,899 
8,727 
2,077 
2,273 
2,359 

$6,550.83 
6,179.06 
1,371.50 
1,551.03 
793.42 

44 
345 
215 

527 
45 

2,053 
155 
380 
631 
184 

2,097 
500 
595 
1,158 
229 

New  York 

St.  Louis             

San  Francisco 

Total         ... 

6,337 

26,335 

16,445.84 

1,176 

3,403 

4,579 

Total  number  of  shipments 294,696 

Total  weight  (pounds) 60,015,338 

Total  value $1,575,499.43 

TABLE  46. — Expense  at  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1914> 


Warehouses. 

Bent. 

Light 
and  fuel. 

Amount 
paid  regu- 
lar em- 
ployees. 

Amount 
paid  irreg- 
ular em- 
ployees. 

Inspec- 
tion and 
miscella- 
neous. 

Total. 

Chicago 

$4,  500.  00 

$120.  32 

$12,  972.  78 

$5,682.50 

$3,  302.  88 

$26,578.48 

3,499.98 

226.42 

7,097.52 

765.00 

834.40 

12,423.32 

Omaha  

1,600.00 

14.73 

5,140.00 

401.00 

1,600.35 

8,758.08 

St  .Louis           

1,500  00 

111.37 

6,535.58 

528.29 

8,675.24 

San  Francisco 

1  135  00 

5  824  98 

470  30 

255  15 

7  685.43 

Total  

12,234.98 

472.84 

37,570.88 

7,318.80 

6,521.07 

64,118.55 

DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


REPORT 


OF  THE 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 


TO  THE 


SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


FOR  THE  FISCAL  YEAR 
ENDED  JUNE  30 

1915 


WASHINGTON  :   GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  :  1915 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 

Introduction 7 

Education 7 

Vocational  training . 8 

Indian  children  in  public  schools 8 

School  facilities  for  Papago  Indians,  Arizona 9 

Navajo  school  facilities 9 

Industrial  work  for  girls 9 

Public  schools  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes 10 

Returned  students'  associations 10 

Indian  employment 11 

Native  industries u 

Lace  making 12 

The  menacing  use  of  liquor 12 

Health : 16 

Improved  home  conditions 18 

Employees 19 

Reimbursable  funds— 21 

Farming  by  Indians 22 

School  farms 24 

Sacaton   experimentation   farm 26 

Fort  Berthold  demonstration  farm 27 

Experimentation 27 

Stock  raising 28 

The  Competency  Commission 29 

Allotments . 29 

Allotment  of  Fort  Sill  Apaches L 29 

Landless  Indians  in  California 29 

Patents  in  fee 30 

Sale  of  Indian  land 30 

Purchases  of  lands  for  certain  Indians 81 

Mission    land 31 

Osage  oil  and  gas  leases 81 

Oil  and  gas,  Five  Civilized  Tribes 33 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 1 35 

Probate  work  in  Oklahoma 36 

Enrollments  with  Indian  tribes,  La  Pointe  or  Bad  River,  Wis 39 

Purification  of  White  Earth  (Minn.)  rolls 39 

White  Earth  land-fraud  cases - 89 

Indian  forests 40 

Menominee    reservation 41 

Inheritance  cases 42 

Court  decisions 42 

Exhibition  Indians .  44 

3 


4  CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Debts  of  Indians 46 

Indian  traders 46 

Individual  Indian  moneys . —  47 

Purchase  of  supplies — 47 

Irrigation 48 

Irrigation  construction 48 

Utilization  of  water 49 

Cooperative  irrigation 50 

Water-rights  protection 50 

Leasing  tribal  lands  for  grazing 51 

Field  improvements . 52 

Tongue  River  Reservation ^ 52 

Osage 54 

New  York  Indians 54 

Rocky  Boy's.  Band  of  Chippewa 54 

Gambling 55 

Marital  relations 55 

Dances 55 

Two  criminal  cases  of  importance 55 

Historical  work 56 

Ute^judgment  fund ' 56 

Indian  exhibits  at  Panama-Pacific  Exposition 58 

Conclusion 63 

Statistical  tables  (for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915,  unless  otherwise  * 
noted) : 

Table  1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 65 

2.  Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  1915 65 

3.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted —  7{4 

4.  Marriages,  missionaries,  churches,  language,  dress,  citizen- 

ship, crimes,  misdemeanors 78 

Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 83 

6.  Allotments  by  reservations 86 

7.  Reservations,  authority  for  establishing 93 

8.  Lands  set  aside  temporarily  for  mission  organizations 112 

9.  Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations 113 

10.  Incomes  of  Indians 114 

Use  of  agricultural  lands ;  farming,  leasing 119 

* — 12.  Use  of  grazing  lands ;  stock  raising,  leasing 124 

13.  Comparative  statement  of  industrial  pursuits  by  Indians 129 

14.  Employment  of  Indians 134 

15.  Vital  statistics,  housing  and  disease 137 

16.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria 142 

17.  Indians,   self-supporting,  and  those  receiving  rations  and 

miscellaneous  supplies  issued  _' 145 

18.  School  population,  number  in  school,  capacity . 149 

19.  Schools,  location,  enrollment,  attendance 156 

20.  School  libraries 165 

21.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876 168 

22.  Demonstration  farms 169 

23.  Experimentation  farms : 169 

24.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 170 

25.  Timber  on  reservations,  sawmills,  timber  cut 171 

26.  Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber 174 


CONTENTS.  5 

Statistical  tables — Continued.  Page. 

Table  27.  Areas  irrigable  and  under  projects,  expenditures 176 

28.  Miles  of  ditches,  use  of  irrigated  areas 179 

29.  Allotments  approved  and  made 182 

30.  Lands  purchased  for  Indians  in  California 182 

31.  Sales  of  allotted  lands 183 

32.  Patents  in  fee  issued 185 

33.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land <  187 

34.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25, 1910-  187 

35.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians.  187 

36.  Lands  leased  for  mining,  production  of  minerals,  and  roy- 

alty  ,__  188 

37.  Buildings  erected 189 

38.  Buildings  under  construction 191 

39.  Live  stock  belonging  to  Indians  sold  and  slaughtered 193 

40.  Government  property  valuations  classified 198 

41.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 202 

42.  Employees  in  Indian  school  and  agency  service 206 

43.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field ~. 208 

44.  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 209 

45.  Appropriations  and  disbursements  for  Indian  Service 209 

46.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 213 

47.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements 214 

48.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians 216 

49.  Receipts  and  disbursements  of  the  Indian  Service 217 

50.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled 218 

51.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks 218 

52.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 219 

53.  Expense  at  warehouses 219 


REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR, 
OFFICE  OF  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 

Washington,  September  1, 1915. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  the  eighty-fourth  an- 
nual report  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1915. 

The  progressive  tendency  of  the  present  day  is  reflected  in  the 
vigorous  activity  of  the  Indian  Service,  dealing  with  the  intricate 
complexities  involved  in  the  lives  of  more  than  300,000  members  of 
this  race,  both  as  to  the  individual  and  to  every  phase  of  social  and 
industrial  functions.  Being  thoroughly  convinced  that  their  ma- 
terial and  industrial  prosperity  is  more  closely  attached  to  their 
landed  interests,  the  development  of  agriculture  and  stock  raising 
has  been  given  an  impetus  never  before  undertaken.  Not  only  their 
own  moneys  but  reimbursable  funds  made  available  from  appropria- 
tions by  Congress  have  been  invested  in  thousands  of  cattle  and  other 
live  stock.  The  Indians  are  being  taught  how  to  make  the  best  use 
of  this  wonderful  asset,  and  rapidly  are  realizing  that  from  the  farm 
and  the  range  their  material  salvation  must  be  obtained.  A  happy 
correlation  of  the  instruction  given  in  the  schools  is  being  made  with 
the  future  environment  of  the  boy  and  girl.  The  mere  acquisition 
of  knowledge  is  subordinated  to  the  practical  teaching  of  facts  and 
laws  which  bear  directly  on  everyday  life  on  the  farm  and  in  the 
home. 

Poverty  or  dependence  on  others  saps  the  energies  of  any  man. 
The  Indian  is  no  exception,  and  I  have  placed  the  greatest  work  of 
this  office  on  his  material  advancement.  As  his  herds  increase  and 
his  lands  produce  the  Indian  becomes  better  prepared  to  assimilate 
the  knowledge  which  comes  from  the  study  of  books.  Love  of  home 
and  domestic  happiness  follow  as  a  natural  sequence. 

How  all  the  functions  of  this  office  are  coordinated  for  the  ulti- 
mate end  of  the  Indians'  material  and  social  prosperity  the  following 
brief  resume  will  indicate. 

EDUCATION. 

During  the  last  year  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  reorganize  the 
Carlisle  School  so  as  to  improve  its  standards  and  develop  the  high- 
est type  of  school  work.  With  the  beginning  of  the  next  school  term 

7 


8  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

an  entirely  new  course  of  study  will  be  introduced  in  harmony  with 
a  comprehensive  plan  of  industrial  and  vocational  training  for  In- 
dian youth.  Its  features  will  be  systematic  three-year  courses  in 
agriculture,  mechanic  arts  and  home  economics.  Special  instruction 
given  in  connection  with  the  industrial  work  will  be  organized  and 
correlated  With  the  literary  courses. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  whereby  19  boys,  under  the  outing 
system,  are  receiving  training  as  apprentices  in  the  shops  of  the  Ford 
Motor  Co.  at  Detroit,  Mich.,  and  others  are  working  as  apprentices 
in  the  shops  of  the  General  Electric  Co.  at  Lynn,  Mass.  Twelve  boys 
and  girls  are  attending  the  summer  school  at  the  State  normal  school 
at  Millersville,  Pa. 

VOCATIONAL   TRAINING. 

The  development  of  the  plan  of  improved  vocational  training 
along  lines  of  practical  endeavor  will  be  extended  to  all  Indian 
schools  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Before  an  Indian  boy  or  girl  goes 
to  his  or  her  home  a  thorough  grounding  of  how  to  work  to  the  best 
advantage  should  be  made  in  our  schools.  This  should  be  a  practical 
education  which,  in  the  great  majority  of  returned  students,  in  a 
few  years  will  be  translated  into  comfortable  homes  and  productive 
farms. 

The  majority  of  pupils  in  the  schools  will  eventually  return  to 
their  homes,  and  if  there  is  an  adequate  acreage  of  land  adaptable 
to  agriculture  awaiting  them  the  educational  training  received  dur- 
ing their  student  days  should  be  developed,  and  a  desire  and  knowl- 
edge of  how  best  to  reap  the  advantages  due  to  the  owner  of  a  farm 
should  be  carefully  instilled.  Home  and  farm  economics  must  be 
emphasized  and  correct  habits  of  right  living  made  a  part  of  every- 
day life. 

The  aim  at  our  Indian  schools  is  not  the  perfect  farmer  or  the 
perfect  housewife,  but  the  development  of  character  and  sufficient 
industrial  efficiency  to  enable  the  returned  boy  or  girl  to  derive  hap- 
piness and  comfort  from  a  home  created  by  individual  efforts.  This 
is  attempted  by  thorough  instruction  in  the  agricultural,  mechanical, 
and  domestic  arts,  and  an  adequate  balance  of  practical  field  and 
shop  work.  This  will  involve  a  somewhat  radical  change  in  the 
course  of  study,  on  vocational  lines,  which  is  now  being  formulated 
and  will  be  established  at  many  of  the  schools  during  the  next  school 
year. 

INDIAN   CHILDREN  IN  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 

In  the  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  August  1,  1914,  was  a 
provision  allowing  the  expenditure  of  not  to  exceed  $20,000  for 
tuition  of  Indian  children  enrolled  in  public  schools.  This  was  to 
enable  the  Government  to  encourage  attendance  of  these  children  in 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  9 

public  schools  in  certain  localities  where  school  districts  were  not 
financially  prosperous,  even  though  in  some  cases  they  were  legally 
entitled  to  attend,  as  their  parents  were  citizens  of  the  State,  though 
not  necessarily  taxpayers. 

Contracts  for  tuition  have  formerly  been  based  upon  quarterly 
enrollment  and  attendance,  but  it  has  been  found  more  advantageous 
to  provide  that  such  payments  to  the  school  districts  shall  be  made 
at  a  given  rate  per  pupil  per  day  of  actual  attendance. 

The  larger  number  of  children  are  being  educated  in  the  public 
schools  of  the  several  States  where  no  payment  is  required.  This 
public-school  training  for  the  Indian  children  is  a  very  valuable  aid 
in  their  civilization. 

SCHOOL  FACILITIES  FOB  PAP  AGO   INDIANS,   ARIZONA. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  of  August  1,  1914,  provided  the  sum 
of  $50,000  to  be  used  to  supply  school  facilities  for  the  children  of 
the  Papago  Tribe  of  Indians  in  Arizona.  There  are  nearly  6,000  of 
these  Indians,  of  whom  about  290  have  received  allotments  on  the 
San  Xavier  Reservation,  but  the  larger  number  have  been  for  more 
than  200  years  scattered  over  the  public  domain  in  southern  Arizona. 
Some  of  them  have  filed  claims  thereon  under  the  general  laws  re- 
lating to  homesteads.  They  have  been  self-supporting  in  this  very 
arid  country  and  have  indicated  an  unusual  interest  in  and  capacity 
for  whatever  educational  opportunities  the  Government  may  offer. 

This  appropriation  has  provided  several  day  schools,  each  with  a 
capacity  of  30  pupils,  which  are  located  at  the  Indian  villages  of 
Indian  Oasis,  Santa  Rosa,  Gila  Bend,  Chiu  Cfyuischu,  and  Cockle- 
burr,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Pima  and  San  Xavier  Indian 
schools.  These  schools  will  be  opened  in  the  fall  of  1915. 

NAVAJO   SCHOOL  FACILITIES. 

To  carry  into  effect  the  provisions  of  the  sixth  article  of  the  treaty 
of  June  8,  1868,  between  the  United  States  and  the  Navajo  Nation 
there  was  provided  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  current 
year  $100,000  for  establishing  or  enlarging  day  or  industrial  schools 
"for  these  people.  A  part  of  this  appropriation  has  been  used  to  in- 
crease the  capacity  of  schools  on  these  reservations:  Navajo,  100 
pupils;  Western  Navajo,  20  pupils;  San  Juan,  26  pupils;  Pueblo 
Bonito,  60  pupils;  total,  206  pupils.  These  figures  represent  largely 
boarding-school  capacity,  as  day  schools  are  available  only  to  a 
limited  extent  by  reason  of  the  nomadic  habits  of  this  tribe. 

INDUSTRIAL  WORK  FOR  GIRLS. 

All  that  may  be  done  to  better  the  industrial  condition  of  the  In- 
dians will  be  largely  wasted  if  the  living  conditions  of  the  families 
are  not  right.  The  prospor'nis  Indian  farmer  or  stockman  must  have 


10  COM  .MISSIONED  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

a  sanitary  dwelling  and  proper  food,  and  this  comes  within  the 
province  of  the  Indian  woman,  wTho  must  be  trained  in  household 
duties  as  carefully  as  the  Indian  boy  is  for  his  especial  work.  In- 
stitutional work,  while  necessary  to  ihe  school  and  giving  general 
training  in  orderliness  and  system,  can  not  usually  fit  the  Indian  girl 
for  the  duties  of  home  making.  To  meet  this  need  a  small  three  or 
four  room  cottage,  similar  to  the  home  of  an  average  family,  has 
been  constructed  at  several  of  the  larger  schools,  where  the  domestic- 
science  teacher  or  housekeeper  instructs  a  few  girls  at  a  time  in 
practical  household  economy  suitable  to  the  average  home.  Several 
girls  live  at  the  cottage  for  two  or  three  weeks  under  ordinary  home 
conditions.  They  make  their  own  beds,  cook  their  own  meals,  do 
their  mending  and  sewing,  the  cleaning,  and  their  laundry  work. 
At  other  schools  it  has  been  found  that  larger  results  may  be  had  by 
having  the  students  visit  the  cottages  in  classes.  The  girls  are  taught 
to  make  their  own  clothing  and  ornament  it  with  handwork,  to  can 
fruit  and  vegetables,  keep  poultry  and  raise  a  kitchen  garden,  and, 
in  fact,  to  do  all  the  little  household  acts  which  make  a  well-ordered 
home  attractive. 

Employees  having  charge  of  industrial  work  in  the  smaller  board- 
ing schools  and  the  day  schools  are  required  to  give  the  girls  assigned 
to  them  30  minutes'  instruction  each  day  before  undertaking  produc- 
tive work.  In  this  way  the  instructors  come  into  closer  touch  with 
the  pupils  and  approximate  the  work  done  in  the  domestic  cottages. 
The  noonday  luncheon  of  the  day  school  affords  an  opportunity  for 
teaching  proper  food  preparation  to  the  girls. 

PUBLIC   SCHOOLS   AMONG   THE  FIVE   CIVILIZED   TRIBES. 

Congress  appropriated  for  the  fiscal  year  1915  $275,000  to  aid  the 
common  schools  in  the  Cherokee,  Creek,  Choctaw,  Chickasaw,  Semi- 
nole,  and  Osage  Nations,  and  in  the  Quapaw  Reservations  in  Okla- 
homa. As  the  territory  in  which  these  Indians  are  situated  has  large 
areas  of  nontaxable  lands,  this  appropriation  is  used  for  supple- 
menting that  of  the  State.  Out  of  this  fund  2,219  school  districts, 
having  13,745  pupils,  were  aided  during  the  current  fiscal  year. 

RETURNED  STUDENTS'  ASSOCIATIONS. 

The  returned  student  is  becoming  a  factor  in  the  life  of  his  people. 
Eight  of  the  larger  schools  have  alumni  associations,  which  foster 
this  activity  by  maintaining  a  creditable  interest  in  school  ideals. 
At  several  meetings  this  year  Indians  from  nearly  every  walk  of  life 
and  ordinary  avocation  and  trade  were  present.  Some  of  those  who 
did  not  attend  reported  that  it  was  because  they  were  at  work  and 
could  not  get  away  from  their  regular  duties. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  11 

One  Indian  school  sent  representatives  to  the  Association  of  Alumni 
Secretaries  of  the  United  States  at  New  York  City,  November  2, 
1914,  and  a  delegate  will  represent  the  alumni  association  of  one  of 
the  largest  Indian  schools  at  the  San  Francisco  meeting  of  that 
association. 

A  member  of  the  alumni  association  of  one  school  went  to  San 
Francisco  as  a  delegate  to  the  international  council  of  nurses,  before 
which  organization  she  read  a  paper  which  was  commented  upon  in 
the  newspapers  of  California  as  the  best  paper  read  before  the  con- 
vention. Another  association  has  raised  a  fund  whereby  a  few 
ambitious  students  have  been  assisted  pecuniarily  in  pursuing  their 
studies  after  completing  the  course  at  Indian  schools. 

Return  students'  organizations  are  maintained  at  32  schools  and 
agencies.  Every  reservation  in  the  United  States  has  organizations 
composed  of  ex-students  and  nonstudents;  local  churches  have  or- 
ganized Y.  M.  C.  A.,  Y.  W.  C.  A.,  and  C.  E.  organizations,  the  Broth- 
erhood of  St.  Andrew,  the  Daughters  of  the  King,  and  the  Holy 
Name  Society,  while  the  Indians  conduct  agricultural  fairs,  stock 
exhibits,  farmers'  improvement  associations,  athletic  associations, 
and  musical  organizations  for  personal  pleasure. 

INDIAN  EMPLOYMENT. 

Over  300  boys  from  schools  in  the  Southwest  have  been  placed  on 
ranches,  and  with  sugar-beet  and  melon  growers,  in  Colorado  and 
Kansas  for  agricultural  work  during  a  portion  of  the  summer. 
Many  of  the  pupils  of  the  nonreservation  schools  are  placed  in  fami- 
lies in  the  vicinity  for  farm  and  household  experience.  This  brings 
the  training  of  the  school  into  actual  contact  with  the  practical  work 
of  life  and  enables  the  pupils  gradually  to  comprehend  the  purpose 
of  vocational  training. 

Remunerative  employment  has  been  found  for  many  boys  and 
girls  who  have  been  graduated  from  Indian  schools. 

NATIVE  INDUSTRIES. 

Baskets,  pottery,  and  bead  work  are  still  made  by  Indians,  but 
the  most  comprehensive  and  remunerative  industry  is  the  native 
manufacture  of  Navajo  blankets.  As  the  Indians  work  in  a  very 
desultory  way  in  fashioning  articles  of  their  own  handicraft,  the 
instability  of  the  supply  prevents  a  systematic  marketing  of  their 
products.  In  a  sense  this  may  not  be  a  complete  disadvantage,  as 
the  work  of  the  Indian  partakes  largely  of  the  sentimental,  which  is 
lost  when  the  craftsman  commercializes  his  output  along  conven- 
tional lines.  Many  good  baskets  and  excellent  blankets  are  still 
made. 


12  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

The  Navajo  blankets  obtained  through  a  contest  at  the  San  Juan 
Indian  Fair  last  year  are  on  exhibition  at  the  San  Francisco  Panama- 
Pacific  Exposition,  and  as  the  public  is  manifesting  considerable 
interest  in  these  specimens  of  native  handiwork  their  real  worth 
will  become  better  known. 

LACE  MAKING. 

Superintendents  have  been  directed  to  cooperate  with  associa- 
tions engaged  in  the  teaching  of  lace  making,  and  to  take  advantage 
of  every  means  and  opportunity  to  advance  this  important  and  re- 
fining industry  among  those  Indian  women  and  children  whose 
physical  condition  warrants  their  engagement  therein.  The  mis- 
sion reservations  in  California  have  been  divided  into  districts,  and 
two  lace  teachers  have  been  employed  to  teach  lace  making,  one  of 
whom  is  located  at  the  Pala  School  and  the  other  at  Soboba.  The 
Sybil  Carter  Association  maintains  teachers  of  lace  making  at  a 
number  of  the  Indian  reservations,  paying  their  salaries,  furnishing 
the  supplies,  and  marketing  the  finished  product.  Mrs.  Cordelia  S. 
Sterling,  of  Redlands,  Cal.,  is  also  giving  the  Indian  Bureau  gen- 
erous and  intelligent  cooperation. 

THE  MENACING  USE  OF  LIQUOR. 

The  destructive  force  of  intoxicants  to  the  mental,  moral,  and 
physical  fiber  of  a  great  race  has  for  many  years  been  the  greatest 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  advancement  of  the  Indians.  Natural 
impulses  and  the  greed  of  surrounding  whites  were  rapidly  bringing 
destruction  to  this  proud  race.  Through  the  influence  of  the  better 
elements  of  the  tribes  and  an  awakening  sense  of  the  moral  respon- 
sibility of  the  country,  I  have  been  able  to  break  the  power  of  the 
liquor  interests  in  its  unholy  traffic. 

With  substantial  appropriations  by  Congress,  a  sincere  cooperation 
on  the  part  of  the  field  force,  and  intelligent  enforcement  by  the 
officers  specially  engaged  in  this  work,  marked  progress  is  apparent 
throughout  the  Indian  country.  These  results  have  been  accom- 
plished through  persistent  efforts  physically  and  in  the  courts.  In 
the  discharge  of  their  duties  several  officers  were  killed  and  others 
wounded  by  malefactors  they  were  attempting  to  arrest.  Unfortu- 
nately, in  some  cases  local  sentiment  failed  to  respond  and  the  per- 
petrators of  the  crimes  against  the  Indians  and  the  dignity  of  the 
law's  enforcement  were  unpunished  by  the  courts  and  juries. 

The  sale  by  licensed  traders  of  lemon  and  vanilla  extracts  and 
proprietary  medicines  with  alcoholic  content,  on  which  Indians  were 
becoming  intoxicated,  has  been  discontinued  and  traders  warned  that 
repetition  of  such  sales  will  cause  a  revocation  of  their  license  and 
prosecution. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  13 

Permanent  results  in  the  individual  are  best  secured  when  his 
own  will  power  is  enlisted  as  an  aid  to  temperance.  A  pledge-sign- 
ing campaign  has  been  inaugurated  among  the  Indians  with  gratify- 
ing results.  The  Vermillion  Lake  Indians  celebrated  with  great 
joy  the  first  anniversary  of  a  general  signing  of  the  temperance 
pledge,  and  even  the  women  demanded  the  right  to  affix  their  names. 
At  La  Pointe  Agency,  Wis.,  about  60  per  cent  of  the  Indians  signed 
the  pledge  to  abstain  from  the  use  of  intoxicants.  These  instances 
are  cited  as  evidence  of  a  remarkable  change  in  sentiment,  as  it  has 
occurred  in  a  territory  where  intemperance  among  the  Indians  by 
reason  of  local  conditions  was  probably  as  flagrant  as  anywhere  in 
the  country. 

As  an  educational  side  to  the  evils  of  the  use  of  alcohol  a  spirited 
essay  contest  was  promoted  in  the  schools,  the  children  of  the  third, 
fourth,  and  fifth  grades  writing  on  the  topic  "  What  do  I  know  about 
alcohol  ? "  and  the  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  higher  grades  on  "Alco- 
hol and  my  future."  This  method  of  acquainting  the  youth  with  the 
danger  of  indulgence  was  very  successful,  as  shown  in  the  thought- 
fulness  with  which  the  essays  were  prepared.  In  many  instances 
the  home  life  of  the  writer  was  drawn  upon  for  vivid  illustrations. 

On  June  22,  1915,  I  addressed  the  following  letter  to  739  pupils 
in  the  Indian  schools  making  prize  awards : 

MY  FEIEND:  I  take  pleasure  in  presenting  to  you  the  prize  which  has  been 
awarded  under  the  terms  of  the  essay  contest  on  alcoholism. 

It  is  gratifying  to  me  that  you  have  so  good  an  understanding  of  the  evil 
effects  of 'alcohol  and  the  importance  of  preventing  its  introduction,  sale,  or 
use  among  Indians. 

It  has  now  come  about  that  there  is  a  world-wide  campaign  against  the 
liquor  traffic  not  only  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  but  in  recent  years  it  has 
become  essentially  an  economic  question,  and  its  banishment  is  advocated  from 
the  business  office  as  strenuously  as  from  the  pulpit.  More  recently  the  use 
of  intoxicants  has  been  officially  denounced  by  many  of  the  great  European 
Governments  as  destructive  to  military  discipline  and  efficiency. 

Generally  throughout  the  Indian  country  there  has  been  splendid  cooperation 
in  our  efforts  to  free  the  Indian  from  the  malign  influence  and  destructive 
effects  of  whisky. 

I  am  greatly  pleased  with  the  helpful  spirit  manifested  among  adult  Indians 
and  for  the  intelligent  and  sympathetic  response  from  the  Indian  schools,  as 
exemplified  in  this  contest. 

Annuity  payments  in  the  past  have  been  frequently  described  as 
orgies  of  drunkenness.  I  have  taken  radical  steps  never  before  un- 
dertaken to  eliminate  this  condition.  Invoking  the  aid  of  the  law 
(sec.  2078,  E.  S.),  I  directed  for  the  Osage  payment  that  no  money 
be  paid  the  Indians  while  they  were  under  the  influence  of  intoxi- 
cants, nor  while  it  was  evident  to  the  officer  making  the  payment 
that  intoxicants  were  within  convenient  reach  of  the  Indians,  or  until 
the  chiefs  and  head  men  of  the  tribe  should  have  pledged  themselves 


14  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

to  use  all  their  influence  and  make  all  proper  exertions  to  prevent 
liquors  being  used  at  the  time. 

Failing  to  receive  satisfactory  assurances,  I  postponed  the  pay- 
ment, whereupon  the  Indian  council,  the  county  and  municipal 
authorities,  and  business  men,  confronted  with  our  unyielding  deter- 
mination to  enforce  the  law,  hastened  to  express  their  intention  to 
cooperate.  The  payment  was  made,  and  it  was  the  "  driest "  one  on 
which  a  distribution  of  money  had  ever  been  made  in  that  nation. 

This  law  was  invoked  with  good  results  at  the  payments  to  the 
Kiowa,  Sac  and  Fox,  Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Pawnee,  and  other 
Indians,  and  will  be  applied  hereafter  at  all  such  payments. 

The  awakening  sentiment  among  Indians  has  been  shown  during 
the  year  in  a  number  of  striking  instances  where  no  liquor  was  to 
be  had  at  large  gatherings  of  these  people.  At  Flathead  the  chiefs 
were  deeply  interested  and  prior  to  and  during  a  celebration  talked 
to  the  Indians  on  temperance. 

On  May  6,  1914,  under  written  orders  from  the  superintendent  of 
the  Fort  Lapwai  (Idaho)  Agency  to  ascertain  whether  liquor  was 
being  brought  on  the  reservation,  while  attempting  to  search  a  party 
of  Indians  returning  home,  Samuel  Tilden,  an  Indian  policeman, 
shot  and  killed  William  Jackson,  an  Indian.  Tilden  was  indicted 
in  the  State  courts.  At  the  trial  Tilden  was  convicted,  but  on  ap- 
peal the  State  supreme  court  remanded  the  case  for  a  new  trial 
because  of  certain  record  errors.  The  case  is  still  pending. 

Two  persons  were  indicted  for  introducing  liquor  into  the  Indian 
country,  and  on  their  plea  of  guilty  were  sentenced  by  the  United 
States  district  court  of  Oklahoma  to  two  years  in  the  penitentiary 
and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $500.  On  reaching  the  penitentiary  an  applica- 
tion was  made  to  the  United  States  district  court  of  Kansas  for  a 
writ  of  habeas  corpus  on  the  grounds  that  the  act  of  January  30, 
1897,  provided  only  a  minimum  punishment  of  60  days  and  fine 
of  $100,  and  that  the  court  was  without  authority  to  impose  any- 
thing except  that  minimum.  The  writ  was  granted,  but  on  appeal 
by  the  Government  the  district  court  was  reversed  by  the  circuit  court 
of  appeals. 

Tulapai,  or  tiswin,  is  an  intoxicating  drink  made  by  fermenting 
sprouting  corn,  and  is  used  by  the  Apache  and  some  other  south- 
western Indians.  Its  simplicity  of  manufacture  is  only  equaled  by 
the  resultant  debauch.  Superintendents  of  reservations  where  it  is 
usually  made  and  consumed  are  cooperating  with  the  Indian  Office 
in  stamping  it  out.  As  it  is  not  imported  into  the  reservation,  but 
brewed  where  consumed,  the  task  of  breaking  up  the  practice  is 
difficult. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  15 

Peyote  buttons,  as  they  are  commonly  called,  are  the  dried  crowns 
of  a  cactus  which  grows  on  the  rocky,  arid  lands  of  northern  Mexico 
and  are  classed  with  intoxicants.  Their  use  appears  to  be  on  the 
increase.  Under  an  order  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  its 
importation  into  the  United  States  has  been  prohibited.  It  is  too 
early  to  ascertain  the  effectiveness  of  this  exclusion  order.  Appro- 
priate legislation  is  being  agitated  to  give  the  Indian  Office  en- 
larged powers  for  the  suppression  of  peyote. 

Legislation  by  several  States  where  Indians  reside  has  been  of 
material  assistance  to  this  office  in  its  campaign  against  the  liquor 
traffic. 

The  Cherokee  Indians  of  North  Carolina  have  been  greatly  bene- 
fited by  the  enactment  of  a  State  law  prohibiting  the  manufacture, 
sale,  or  disposition  of  spirituous,  vinous,  or  malt  liquors  or  intoxi- 
cating bitters  within  the  county  of  Swain,  in  which  these  Indians 
are  located.  The  law  further  provides  that  the  place  of  delivery  shall 
be  construed  to  mean  the  place  of  sale,  etc. 

The  Legislature  of  Nevada  enacted  two  laws  of  importance  to  the 
Indians.  One  makes  it  an  offense  for  an  Indian  to  solicit  any  person 
to  purchase  intoxicating  liquors,  and  the  other  makes  it  an  offense 
for  any  person  to  furnish  an  Indian  with  yenshee,  which  is  the 
residue  scraped  from  opium  pipes. 

In  California,  under  the  law  of  the  State, as  it  stood,  it  was  doubt- 
ful whether  the  sale  of  liquor  to  Indians  of  less  than  the  full  blood 
was  an  offense.  To  remove  this  doubt  the  legislature  specifically 
covered  the  question  in  a  recent  law  effective  August  15,  1915,  by 
including  Indians  of  the  whole  or  mixed  blood,  or  any  person  who 
is  commonly  known  to,  live  and  associate  with  Indians. 

The  prohibition  amendment  to  the  constitution  of  Arizona,  which 
became  effective  on  January  1  of  this  calendar  year,  has  been  very 
far  reaching  in  its  effect  upon  the  liquor  traffic  among  the  Indians 
of  that  State  and  has  materially  lessened  our  difficulties. 

In  the  States  of  Washington,  Oregon,  Idaho,  Iowa,  and  Colorado 
constitutional  prohibition  amendments  have  been  adopted,  or  the 
legislatures  have  enacted  laws,  effective  January  1,  1916,  which 
should  have  a  very  beneficial  effect  for  the  Indians  in  these  States. 

In  Minnesota  a  county  local-option  law  enacted  by  the  State 
legislature  resulted  in  driving  the  saloon  out  of  many  localities 
known  as  Indian  country,  and  has  been  very  helpful  in  the  enforce- 
ment of  treaties  and  Federal  statutes. 

The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  in  Johnson  v.  Gearlds 
(234  U.  S.,  422),  in  denying  the  application  for  rehearing,  left  in 
full  force  a  decision  of  that  court  rendered  on  June  8,  1914,  enabling 
the  enforcement  of  various  treaties  prohibiting  the  introduction  or 


16  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

sale  of  liquor  in  northern  Minnesota,  since  which  time  activities  have 
been  resumed  and  the  law  enforced. 

On  December  8,  1914,  application  made  in  the  State  court  for  a 
restraining  order  against  the  officers  of  this  service  to  prevent  them 
from  interfering  with  the  business  of  the  Bemidji  Brewing  Co.  was 
dismissed,  and  on  March  2,  1915,  745  barrels  of  beer  were  destroyed. 

This  enlargement  of  territory  and  other  sections  demanding  atten- 
tion makes  necessary  a  substantial  increase  in  the  appropriation 
for  the  suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic  among  the  Indians. 

The  liquor  situation  as  a  whole  is  constantly  improving  and  the 
sentiment  among  the  people  is  strongly  in  sympathy  with  our  work, 
regardless  of  the  attitude  of  the  individual  on  the  question  of 
prohibition  as  it  is  understood  in  white  communities. 

HEALTH. 

The  maintenance  of  good  health  is  a  prime  requisite  in  the  process 
of  civilizing  the  Indian  and  placing  him  upon  a  self-supporting 
basis.  Large  sums  of  money  and  much  scientific  thought  have  been 
given  to  the  improvement  of  sanitary  conditions  among  these  people. 
Kesults  indicate  that  there  has  been  wonderful  improvement. 

Epidemics  of  whooping  cough,  measles,  scarlet  fever,  diphtheria, 
smallpox,  and  pneumonia  have  been  met  and  dealt  with  as  promptly 
and  as  consistently  as  available  funds  would  permit.  Cases  of  Rocky 
Mountain  spotted  fever  appeared  at  Warm  Springs,  Oreg.,  and 
Fort  Apache,  Ariz.,  but  epidemics  of  these  diseases  were  successfully 
averted. 

Tuberculosis  among  the  Indians  exceeds  that  among  the  white  race 
and  its  prevention  is  a  most  important  problem.  Trachoma,  with  its 
resultant  damaged  vision,  is  a  serious  drawback  to  the  Indian  in  his 
progress  toward  civilization. 

The  medical  force  working  in  the  field  consists  of  1  medical  super- 
visor, 1  assistant  medical  supervisor,  1  special  supervisor,  7  special 
physicians,  7  field  dentists,  6  field  nurses,  121  regular  and  61  con- 
tract physicians,  81  nurses,  and  78  field  matrons.  Supervisors  are 
required  to  keep  in  touch  with  the  rapidly  increasing  knowledge  of 
appropriate  prophylactic  measures  to  check  the  spread  of  disease, 
and  after  studying  the  local  conditions  at  each  school  and  on  each 
reservation  to  suggest  ways  and  means  for  improving  the  health  and 
sanitary  conditions  of  the  Indians. 

The  vital  truth  of  right  living,  preservation  of  health,  and  pre- 
vention of  disease  are  being  taught  in  the  schools.  An  essay  contest 
on  the  subject  of  tuberculosis  has  demonstrated  that  the  Indian 
pupils  have  gained  a  considerable  knowledge  of  its  setiology.  The 
traveling  medical  officials  carry  stereopticon  slides  illustrating  the 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  17 

habitations  of  careless  Indians  and  the  pleasant,  healthy  homes  of 
Indians  who  have  taken  advantage  of  the  opportunities  the  Govern- 
ment has  given,  and  give  appropriate  lectures  at  the  agencies  they 
visit.  Resident  physicians  at  the  agencies  give  talks  to  the  pupils 
and  reservation  Indians  on  subjects  connected  with  sanitation,  care 
of  the  sick,  prevention  of  infant  mortality,  and  first  aid  to  the  in- 
jured. Clean-up  days  have  been  instituted  and  found  of  inestimable 
value  in  arousing  enthusiasm. 

The  homes  of  adult  Indians  are  visited  by  about  78  field  matrons, 
who  teach  the  Indian  women  domestic  arts  and  proper  care  of  home, 
person,  and  children. 

With  prophylactic  measures  must  be  taught  the  elimination  of  the 
foci  of  diseases  which  may  be  in  existence.  The  work  done  has  been 
fraught  Avith  difficulties,  which  are  gradually  being  overcome.  The 
old  Indians'  dependence  upon  the  medicine  man  is  still  strong  in 
many  places,  and  the  constant  changes  in  the  personnel  of  the  agency 
physicians,  due  to  the  small  salaries  paid  many  of  them,  is  not  con- 
ducive to  the  development  of  confidence  in  the  white  man's  methods, 
for  he,  like  the  white  man,  gives  his  confidence  only  after  it  is  earned. 
It  is  believed  that  the  influence  of  the  Indian  medicine  man,  how- 
ever, is  gradually  giving  way.  The  number  of  cases  treated  by  the 
physicians  is  gradually  increasing  and  hospital  treatment  is  more 
often  sought. 

The  demand  for  hospitals,  which  are  being  constructed  as  fast  as 
funds  become  available,  indicates  the  growing  popularity  of  this 
branch  of  the  work.  At  the  close  of  this  fiscal  year  there  were  52 
hospitals  and  4  sanatoria,  with  a  combined  capacity  of  1,567.  Under 
construction  are  4  hospitals  and  6  sanatoria,  with  a  combined  capacity 
of  265. 

In  many  of  the  Indian  boarding  schools  trachoma  is  no  longer  a 
problem,  as  experience  has  shown  that  where  control  can  be  had  over 
the  children  and  where  careful  and  persistent  work  is  done  the  dis- 
ease can  be  prevented  or  cured.  This  is  being  done.  Among  the 
camp  Indians,  however,  conditions  with  respect  to  the  disease  are 
not  good.  No  chance  is,  of  course,  lost  to  constantly  exploit  the 
value  of  operation  and  treatment  of  trachoma,  and  many  Indians  are 
taking  advantage  of  the  opportunities  offered.  The  long  duration 
and  the  painful  nature  of  the  treatment  necessary  before  a  cure  is 
effected  are,  perhaps,  the  most  important  causes  for  the  slow  progress 
made. 

The  problems  to  be  solved  in  connection  with  tuberculosis  are  simi- 
lar to  those  among  the  poorer  classes  of  whites.  It  means  a  cam- 
paign of  education  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the  disease  and  the 
endeavor  to  arrest  it  in  those  cases  with  active  lesions.  The  sana- 
toria already  in  use  at  Phoenix,  Fort  Lapwai,  Sac  and  Fox,  and 
8340—15 2 


18  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Laguna  show  that  this  method  of  treating  active  cases  is  of  increas- 
ing value.  The  capacity  of  the  Laguna  Sanitorium  has  been  in- 
creased to  34  and  Sac  and  Fox  to  88.  The  East  Farm  Sanitorium 
at  Phoenix  and  the  one  at  Fort  Lapwai  care  for  100  each.  During 
the  fiscal  year  1915  arrangements  were  effected  for  the  erection  of 
sanatoria  at  the  Carson,  Blackfeet,  Turtle  Mountain,  Cheyenne  and 
Arapaho,  Pima,  and  Mescalero  Reservations. 

In  line  with  the  above,  a  part  of  available  funds  were  used  in 
the  purchase  of  material  for  the  correction  of  defects  in  sanitation 
in  the  Indian  homes.  Especial  attention  is  being  given  to  better 
disposal  of  sewage  and  protection  of  water  supplies  from  contami- 
nation. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  with  the  United  States  Public 
Health  Service  for  the  examination  of  pathologic  specimens  by  the 
laboratories  of  that  bureau  which  may  be  received  from  medical  offi- 
cers in  the  Indian  Service.  This  courtesy  will  facilitate  diagnosis. 

The  relation  between  diseased  teeth  and  the  development  of  sys- 
temic disease  was  recognized  by  the  field  dentists  and  led  to  a  cam- 
paign for  better  methods  of  caring  for  the  teeth  and  the  elimination 
of  oral  sepsis.  Pyorrhoea  (Rigg's  disease)  was  found  to  be  prevalent 
and  measures  were  at  once  instituted  directed  toward  the  correction 
of  this  condition. 

The  insane  asylum  for  Indians  is  located  in  Canton,  S.  Dak.,  and 
has  51  patients,  the  limit  of  its  capacity.  Under  present  conditions 
no  more  can  be  accommodated  and  the  most  deserving  for  whom 
applications  are  made  are  placed  in  State  asylums. 

IMPROVED  HOME  CONDITIONS. 

The  mere  increase  in  the  number  of  Indians  farming  and  in  the 
total  acreage  cultivated  by  them,  with  the  consequent  production  of 
a  greater  quantity  and  value  of  crops,  is  not  of  itself  the  final  end 
to  be  achieved,  but  only  a  means  to  the  ultimate  goal  of  independent 
self-supporting  citizenship  for  the  Indians  on  the  same  basis  as  the 
whites,  with  all  that  this  involves  in  the  way  of  civilization,  improved 
living  conditions,  etc.  The  work  of  bringing  about  better  housing 
and  sanitary  conditions  among  the  Indians  has  made  progress  during 
the  year,  and  it  is  intended  to  especially  emphasize  this  feature  of  the 
work  during  the  ensuing  fiscal  year,  to  the  end  that  a  systematic 
campaign  may  be  formulated  and  carried  out  on  every  reservation, 
having  in  view  the  greatest  possible  improvement  in  this  respect. 
This  problem,  likewise,  resolves  itself  into  two  factors— (1)  implant- 
ing in  the  Indian  the  desire  and  ambition  for  better  homes,  and  (2) 
devising  physical  ways  and  means  to  bring  about  this  result. 

(1)  Advantage  is  taken  of  every  possible  opportunity  to  stimulate 
in  the  Indians  an  interest  in  home  development  along  modern  and 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN   AFFAIBS.  19 

sanitary  lines,  by  precept  and  example,  such  as  the  discussion  of 
these  topics  at  community-social  meetings,  illustrated  stereopticon 
lectures,  the  work  of  the  physicians,  field  matrons,  etc. 

(2)  Where  an  Indian  has  individual  funds  to  his  credit  he  is  en- 
couraged to  use  them  in  improving  his  home,  or  erecting  a  new  one, 
if  necessary,  and  the  regulations  have  recently  been  made  much  more 
liberal  in  this  respect,  vesting  greater  authority  in  the  superintendent 
with  respect  to  expenditures  for  such  purposes.  Where  an  Indian 
lacks  sufficient  funds  to  purchase  the  necessary  material,  aid  is  ex- 
tended from  the  reimbursable  fund,  or  such  material  is  issued  in  re- 
turn for  labor. 

At  Tongue  Kiver  the  sawmills,  which  for  a  long  time  past  and 
until  last  fall  had  been  standing  idle,  were  put  into  active  operation 
and  a  plan  devised  by  which  the  Indians  cut  and  haul  the  logs  to  the 
mill,  where  they  are  cut  into  lumber  for  a  small  toll ;  the  hardware, 
mill  work  (doors,  windows,  etc.),  and  paint  are  furnished  from  the 
reimbursable  fund  or  in  return  for  labor.  It  is  planned  to  extend 
this  policy  to  other  reservations  where  similar  conditions  prevail  as 
far  as  may  be  practicable. 

EMPLOYEES. 

The  efficiency  of  the  more  than  5,000  employees  of  the  Indian  Serv- 
ice has  been  maintained  with  gratifying  results.  The  example  these 
people  set  before  the  Indians  they  are  to  lead  and  teach  is  a  strong 
factor  for  their  advancement.  Earnest  men  and  women  with  high 
character  and  right  living  teach  as  much  by  example  as  by  precept. 
In  the  main  this  large  corps  is  of  that  type  and  are  earnestly  striving 
to  be  exemplars  of  our  best  civilization. 

To  determine  as  far  as  possible  the  qualifications  of  persons  seeking 
employment  among  the  Indians,  I  have  given  special  attention  to  pro- 
bational  appointments  from  the  registers  of  the  Civil  Service  Com- 
mission. Before  making  such  appointments  inquiries  are  made  of 
persons  who  have  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  equipment  of  the 
eligibles  certified,  not  only  with  reference  to  their  qualifications  for 
the  line  of  work  for  which  they  were  examined,  but  also  concerning 
their  moral  standing  and  general  reputation  in  the  community  in 
which  they  reside. 

At  the  time  I  assumed  office  there  was  a  constant  shifting  of  em- 
ployees from  place  to  place.  Many  of  the  changes  were  made  to 
meet  the  personal  wishes  of  employees,  without  benefit  to  the  service. 
Frequently  employees  did  not  remain  at  one  point  sufficiently  long 
to  become  acquainted  with  the  pupils  or  adult  Indians,  and  I  am  en- 
deavoring to  eliminate  this  practice  as  far  as  can  be  done  consistently 
with  good  administration.  It  is  particularly  essential  that  employees 


20  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

be  personally  acquainted  with  the  Indians  with  whom  they  are  asso- 
ciated, and  that  they  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  their  home  life 
and  needs.  The  best  results  can  be  obtained  only  through  long-con- 
tinued service  at  one  place.  While  it  is  not  practicable  to  eliminate 
transfers  entirely,  the  number  has  been  reduced  to  a  mere  fraction 
of  what  it  has  been  in  the  past. 

A  careful  study  of  each  employee  is  made  with  a  view  to  determin- 
ing the  line  of  work  for  which  he  is  best  qualified.  Sometimes  an 
employee  enters  the  service  through  competitive  examination,  but  is 
not  qualified  for  the  work  covered  by  the  examination.  Having 
sufficient  technical  training  to  pass  the  examination,  frequently  he 
is  not  fitted  by  temperament  or  other  cause  for  the  duties  of  the 
position  obtained,  but  his  training  and  experience  does  enable  him 
to  render  valuable  service  in  some  other  line  of  work.  The  special 
effort  that  has  been  made  to  assign  employees  to  positions  for  which 
they  are  best  fitted,  and  the  elimination  of  those  who  have  made  a 
failure  after  a  full  and  fair  trial,  have,  during  the  last  two  years, 
resulted  in  a  material  increase  in  the  efficiency  of  the  personnel. 

Particular  attention  has  been  given  to  a  readjustment  of  positions 
and  salaries  and  at  the  same  time  reduce  the  total  amount  allowed 
for  salaries  to  the  lowest  possible  minimum  without  a  sacrifice  of 
efficiency.  While  positions  have  been  dropped  here  and  there,  aggre- 
gating approximately  $85,000  during  the  last  fiscal  year,  the  most 
notable  reduction  has  been  in  connection  with  the  administration  of 
the  affairs  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  where,  in  accordance  with 
the  provisions  of  the  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  August  1, 
1914,  abolishing  the  offices  of  the  commissioner  to  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  and  superintendent  for  the  Union  Agency,  and  creating  the 
office  of  superintendent  for  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  a  thorough 
reorganization  has  been  effected.  Notwithstanding  a  material  reduc- 
tion in  the  force,  all  of  the  field  offices  have  been  maintained  and  the 
work  handled  with  efficiency  and  at  a  saving  of  approximately 
$75,000  a  year,  altogether  about  $160,000. 

An  important  circular  was  issued  to  the  Indian  Service  employees 
early  in  the  year  directing  their  attention  to  the  fact  that  their 
example  is  a  potent  factor  in  the  uplift  of  this  race.  It  was  insisted 
that  their  intercourse  with  those  among  whom  they  are  placed  as 
educators  and  administrators  should  be  of  an  elevating  and  helpful 
character.  They  were  admonished  to  teach  the  Indian  self-respect 
and  imbue  him  with  the  feeling  that  his  race  is  no  bar  to  his  advance- 
ment socially  or  otherwise  if  he  measures  up  to  the  standard  we 
placed  before  him.  All  epithets,  relics  of  the  days  when  there  was 
less  of  charity  and  consideration  in  the  white  man's  dealings  with 
the  Indians,  must  not  be  applied  to  them,  and  those  words  which 
are  offensive,  as  "  buck,"  "  squaw,"  "  redskin,"  etc.,  should  no  more 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  21 

be  used  in  conversation  than  would  similar  terms  be  with  ladies  and 
gentlemen  of  other  races.  I  have  not  found  it  expedient  or  necessary 
to  lay  down  specific  rules  on  this  subject,  as  the  high  sense  of  integrity 
and  dignity  in  the  splendid  corps  of  field  workers  does  not  require  it. 

REIMBURSABLE  FUNDS. 

The  reimbursable  appropriations,  amounting  to  $1,495,000,  made 
by  Congress  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  industry  and  self-support 
among  Indians  has  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  office  an  instrument 
by  means  of  which  thousands  of  Indians  have  been  given  an  oppor- 
tunity to  become  self-supporting.  While  in  the  past  the  Indians  have 
manifested  some  reluctance  in  requesting  this  money,  and  some  still 
do,  the  majority,  who  understand  the  purpose  of  the  Government  in 
affording  them  reimbursable  aid,  are  now  studying  their  own  needs 
and  asking  to  be  supplied  with  appropriate  equipment.  There  are 
some  Indians,  as  among  whites,  who  do  not  measure  their  credit  by 
their  needs  and  their  ability  to  pay,  but  this  plan  will  teach  them 
financial  integrity  and  inculcate  square  business  morals,  with  the 
result  that  they  will  be  cautious  in  their  requests  for  assistance  and 
take  better  care  of  what  they  obtain  through  the  use  of  reimbursable 
money  than  they  heretofore  have  of  property  issued  to  them  gratui- 
tously, knowing  that  the  amount  loaned  must  be  returned.  Many 
Indians  have  been  given  reimbursable  assistance  and  have  used  the 
loans  chiefly  in  the  purchase  of  live  stock,  agricultural  implements, 
seeds,  wagons,  harness,  sewing  machines,  lumber,  doors  and  windows 
for  the  improvement  of  houses,  wire  for  fencing,  and  wells.  In  a 
few  instances  rations  have  been  purchased  and  sold  to  Indians  for 
consumption  during  the  period  when  they  were  preparing  their 
lands  for  cultivating  and  planting  their  crops. 

As  a  rule  the  Indians  are  very  conscientious  in  regard  to  their 
accounts  and  make  payments  promptly.  In  a  number  of  cases  cer- 
tain Indians  have  settled  their  accounts  before  they  were  due,  and 
still  others  have  made  partial  payments  prior  to  the  dates  agreed 
upon.  There  have  been  cases  where,  by  reason  of  crop  failures,  sick- 
ness, or  some  other  unavoidable  cause,  some  Indians  found  it  difficult 
to  make  payments  on  the  dates  agreed  upon.  In  all  meritorious  cases 
I  have  been  lenient  with  the  debtors  and  have  extended  the  time  for 
payment,  so  that  they  might  not  become  discouraged.  Where  the 
failure  to  return  the  money  is  not  meritorious,  and  these  have  been 
very  few,  the  property  was  taken  and  resold  to  other  Indians.  In 
such  cases  the  Indians  from  whom  the  property  was  taken  have  been 
required  to  make  good  the  deficiency  which  resulted  during  the  time 
it  remained  in  their  possession,  and  the  Indians  to  whom  the  property 
was  resold  were  charged  with  the  appraised  value  at  the  time  of  ite 


22  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

delivery  to  them.  There  have  been  several  deaths  of  Indians  who 
received  property  from  the  reimbursable  fund,  and  in  such  cases, 
where  the  remainder  of  the  family  desired  to  keep  and  pay  for  the 
property,  they  were  permitted  to  do  so.  If  the  heirs  did  not  want 
the  property  it  was  resold. 

The  benefits  which  the  Indians  have  derived  from  the  expenditure 
of  this  money  in  the  purchase  of  live  stock  and  equipment  for  their 
use  have  been  far-reaching.  Many  allotments  which  in  previous 
years  have  not  been  cultivated  are  now  producing.  Indians  who  pre- 
viously had  a  team,  but  no  means  with  which  to  purchase  harness  and 
a  wagon,  have  been  provided  with  suitable  equipment  to  enable  them 
to  engage  in  freighting,  which  at  many  reservations  distant  from 
railroads  is  a  profitable  employment.  Others  have  been  provided 
with  cattle,  so  that  they  might  get  started  in  the  cattle  industry.  The 
women  in  the  home  have  been  furnished  with  sewing  machines,  and 
they  are  now  more  and  more  making  wearing  apparel  at  a  saving  in 
cost.  The  crude  and  oftentimes  insanitary  method  of  cooking  over 
campfires  is  also  finding  a  remedy  through  the  use  of  reimbursable 
money.  Floor  less  and  often  windowless  houses  are  being  improved 
through  the  purchase  of  flooring,  doors,  and  windows.  "Tribal  herds 
of  cattle  have  been  purchased  at  a  number  of  places  from  these  funds, 
as  stated  under  the  heading  of  "  Stock  raising."  Agricultural  equip- 
ment too  large  or  high  priced  for  one  individual  to  purchase  was  also 
bought  for  tribal  use,  reimbursement  therefor  to  be  made  from  tribal 
funds  which  may  hereafter  accrue. 

No  interest  or  profit  has  been  charged  to  the  Indians  participating 
in  the  use  of  this  money.  They  are  required  to  return  only  the 
principal. 

As  the  appropriations  made  by  Congress  have  not  been  adequate 
to  meet  the  demands  of  the  various  reservations,  at  a  few  places 
where  tribal  funds  were  available  they  have  been  drawn  upon  under 
the  same  conditions  as  public  funds. 

At  Keshena  the  Indians,  when  they  gave  permission  to  use  their 
money  under  the  reimburseable  plan,  requested  that  interest  be 
charged,  as  the  fund  in  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  drew 
interest.  At  Cheyenne  Kiver  interest  is  charged  for  the  same  reason. 

FARMING  BY  INDIANS. 

During  the  past  year  the  acreage  farmed  by  Indians  has  been 
greatly  increased,  and  the  seed  furnished  them  was  approximately 
three  times  as  much  as  in  any  preceding  year. 

In  the  development  of  agricultural  activities  among  the  Indians 
two  factors  must  be  considered,  one  psychological,  the  other  admin- 
istrative— (1)  stimulating  the  interest  and  ambition  of  the  Indians 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  23 

to  farm,  to  adopt  modern  methods,  etc.,  and  (2)  providing  the  nec- 
essary equipment  and  facilities  to  this  end. 

The  spirit  of  rivalry  and  object  lesson  is  a  strong  incentive  to 
success,  and  one  of  the  best  agencies  in  developing  the  agricultural 
enthusiasm  of  the  Indians  has  been  the  Indian  fair.  Fairs  were  held 
in  the  fall  of  1914  on  38  reservations. 

As  the  Indian  is  ultimately  to  be  absorbed  into  the  body  of  Ameri- 
can citizenship,  the  next  logical  step  after  the  strictly  Indian  fair  on 
the  reservation  is  participation  by  the  Indians  in  conveniently  lo- 
cated county  and  State  fairs.  Accordingly,  Indian  exhibits  from 
many  of  the  reservations  have  been  shown  at  county  fairs  in  direct 
competition  with  the  products  of  white  farmers,  a  number  of  prizes 
having  been  won.  Wherever  a  State  or  county  fair  is  held  near  an 
Indian  reservation,  it  is  planned  to  arrange  an  exhibit  of  Indian 
products. 

The  first  systematic  effort  to  have  an  Indian  exhibit  at  these  insti- 
tutions on  an  extensive  scale  was  at  the  Oklahoma  State  fair  last  fall. 
About  30  different  schools  and  tribes  were  represented  at  this  exhibit, 
which  was  shown  in  a  building  set  apart  for  the  purpose  by  the  fair 
association  and  which  proved  to  be  one  of  the  most-  attractive  fea- 
tures, being  visited  by  about  75,000  persons  and  attracting  much 
favorable  comment  from  them.  Indian  exhibits  were  also  shown  at 
the  Arizona,  Nevada,  and  Wisconsin  State  fairs  on  a  small  scale. 

The  officers  of  the  State  and  county  fair  associations  have,  in  each 
instance,  responded  enthusiastically  to  the  suggestion  for  Indian  ex- 
hibits, and  have  promised  their  hearty  support  and  cooperation  to 
this  end. 

We  confidently  expect  to  make  a  notable  showing  of  fair  exhibits 
in  the  fall  of  1915. 

Advantage  has  been  taken  of  other  methods  of  arousing  the  inter- 
est of  the  Indians  in  farming,  such  as  the  organization  of  Indian 
farmer  clubs,  the  inauguration  of  boys'  and  girls'  clubs  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  Federal  and  State  agricultural  departments  under  the 
provisions  of  the  Smith-Lever  Act  for  cooperative  agricultural  ex- 
tension work,  and  plans  are  also  being  formulated  for  cooperation 
between  the  county  agricultural  agents  appointed  under  that  act  and 
the  farmers  of  this  service  in  behalf  of  the  Indians.  Schools  of  in- 
struction in  modern  canning  methods,  domestic  economy,  etc.,  are 
held  all  over  the  country  as  another  feature  of  this  cooperative  work. 
Representatives  of  the  Cherokee  and  Wahpeton  Indian  schools  re- 
cently attended  such  schools,  under  detail  of  this  office,  and  it  is 
planned  to  extend  this  work  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

The  first  prize  in  the  1914  Arizona  Boys'  Corn  Club  contest  (con- 
sisting of  a  $100  scholarship  in  the  State  university)  was  won  by  Victor 
Bail,  a  Papago  Indian  boy  from  the  San  Xavier  Reservation,  near 


24  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

Tucson,  with  a  yield  of  51.37  bushels  of  shelled  corn  on  a  measured 
acre,  grading  94.70  per  cent,  which  sold  for  $82.35.  The  cost  of 
production  was  $16.95,  making  a  net  profit  of  $65.40.  Victor  Bail, 
the  winner,  will  take  a  two-years'  course  at  the  Phoenix  Indian 
School  in  order  to  fit  himself  for  the  two-years'  agricultural  course 
at  the  State  university. 

The  second  prize  in  this  contest,  consisting  of  a  Duroc  Jersey  pig, 
was  also  won  by  an  Indian  boy  named  Alonzo  Flores. 

About  250  farmers  are  employed  to  instruct  the  Indians  and 
supervise  their  agricultural  work,  the  district  plan  inaugurated  sev- 
eral years  ago  being  still  further  developed  with  very  successful 
results.  It  involves  the  division  of  each  reservation  into  districts, 
in  each  of  which  a  farmer  is  located  so  that  he  may  be  near  the 
Indians. 

Advantage  is  taken  of  every  available  facility  with  the  view  of 
maintaining  the  interest  of  the  Indians  in  farming,  most  of  whom 
have  perhaps  not  yet  reached  that  state  of  development  charac- 
terized by  fixity  of  purpose,  and  hence  require  constant  advice,  en- 
couragement, and  supervision. 

The  second  problem  in  promoting  agricultural  work  among  the 
Indians  is  an  administrative  one  and  has  to  do  with  furnishing  the 
necessary  equipment,  such  as  teams,  implements,  harness,  etc.,  for  this 
purpose,  which  are  usually  provided  by  three  methods — (1)  pur- 
chase from  individual  trust  funds  when  available;  (2)  issue  in  re- 
turn for  labor;  or  (3)  purchase  under  the  reimbursable  regulations 
of  October  6,  1914,  to  be  paid  for  without  interest  in  small  pay- 
ments extending  over  a  period  of  years. 

SCHOOL  FARMS. 

With  the  view  of  developing  school  farms  to  the  extent  of  their 
possibilities  as  object  lessons  for  the  Indians  and  in  the  the  produc- 
tion of  vegetables  and  forage  for  the  schools,  the  following  circular 
was  sent  out  by  me  on  August  10,  1914: 

To  all  superintendents: 

I  am  not  satisfied  that  we  are  making  the  greatest  use  of  our  school  farms. 
They  usually  consist  of  large  tracts  of  fertile  land  capable  of  raising  every 
crop  that  the  climate  in  which  the  school  is  located  will  permit.  In  some  cases 
these  farms  are  well  irrigated. 

In  every  case  the  schools  have  been  or  can  be  furnished  with  all  the  equip- 
ment necessary  to  till  their  farms  to  the  fullest  extent,  and  they  can  be 
furnished  with  stock  with  which  to  make  a  substantial  showing  in  stock 
raising. 

The  agricultural  training  of  the  boy  pupils  in  our  schools  furnishes  ample 
opportunity  for  intensive  farming.  If  this  training  is  to  be  of  real  value  and 
be  effective  in  accomplishing  its  purpose,  the  farming  operations  should  be 
financially  successful  and  at  the  same  time  conducted  in  accordance  with 
modern  method.-;. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  25 

I  am  convinced  that  there  is  a  large  field  for  improvement  in  the  handling  of 
these  farms,  and  I  want  every  field  officer  who  has  charge  of  such  a  farm  to 
see  that  its  management  is  of  such  a  nature  as  will  insure  its  development  to 
the  highest  degree  of  productiveness,  practical  usefulness,  and  as  an  object 
lesson. 

The  constantly  increasing  demands  on  the  various  appropriations  for  the 
Indian  Service  make  it  necessary  not  only  to  exercise  the  most  careful  economy 
consistent  with  the  end  sought  and  at  the  same  time  to  see  that  every  resource 
in  connection  with  Indian  education  and  industry  is  developed  to  the  highest 
obtainable  degree. 

See  that  employees  in  charge  of  your  farms  are  men  capable  of  rendering 
proper  and  efficient  service ;  carefully  determine  the  suitable  crops  for  the  par- 
ticular soil  of  the  tillable  land  of  your  farm,  giving  the  best  attention  to  the 
raising  and  use  of  these  crops. 

Our  farms  should  grow  corn,  oats,  wheat,  and  raise  alfalfa,  clover,  timothy, 
etc.  You  should  raise  all  the  potatoes  and  other  vegetables  consumed.  We 
should  not  be  satisfied  with  raising  feed  for  the  school  live  stock,  but  we  should 
raise  everything  the  farm,  garden,  and  orchard  will  produce. 

I  want  you  to  raise  live  stock  to  the  fullest  of  your  capacity ;  raise  colts  from 
the  school  mares ;  let  your  calves  grow  into  beef  for  your  school.  Grow  a  good 
herd  of  hogs  to  follow  the  cattle  that  you  feed  and  use  the  waste  from  the  table 
at  the  school.  Make  your  dairy  amply  large  and  of  such  kind  that  there  will 
be  plenty  of  milk,  cream,  and  butter.  Feed  the  skim  milk  to  the  hogs  and 
grow  your  pork  meat.  Where  practicable  cure  your  own  bacon  and  ham,  make 
your  own  sausage,  and  dry  and  corn  your  own  beef. 

Give  careful  consideration  to  chicken  raising.  You  should  establish  chicken 
houses  and  place  girls  in  charge  of  the  chickens.  This  would  furnish  poultry 
and  eggs  for  your  needs  and  at  the  same  time  train  your  girls  in  an  industry 
which  will  be  of  value  to  them  in  their  future  homes. 

Under  some  conditions  it  may  be  practicable  to  have  a  few  swarms  of  bees. 
Start  an  apiary  and  teach  bee  culture,  while  at  the  same  time  obtaining  a 
supply  of  honey  for  table  use. 

We  should  have  orchards  and  vines  to  grow  fruit  at  our  schools  which  are 
best  adapted  to  the  locations  and  climates.  The  care  of  these  orchards  and 
the  raising  of  small  fruits  will  give  important  training  to  the  boys  and  girls. 

Each  school  should  have  a  truck  garden  to  produce  the  green  stuff  necessary 
for  its  own  table.  Under  proper  climatic  conditions  enough  potatoes,  corn, 
onions,  cabbage,  tomatoes,  beans,  etc.,  should  be  grown  not  only  to  supply  the 
school  with  fresh  vegetables  but  to  furnish  a  good  supply  for  winter  use.  The 
canning  of  vegetables  and  fruits  is  highly  important. 

I  fully  appreciate  the  fact  that  at  some  of  our  schools,  because  of  climatic 
conditions,  diversified  farming  is  impracticable,  but  there  are  very  few  Indian 
schools  which  do  not  have  farms  peculiarly  adapted  to  certain  lines  of  agricul- 
tural and  horticultural  development.  Where  diversified  farming  is  impracticable 
the  natural  resources  of  the  farm  should  be  fully  developed.  If  you  can  raise 
nothing  but  wheat,  see  to  it  that  every  acre  of  available  land  is  used  for  wheat. 
Grow  the  best  wheat  and  produce  the  maximum  yield  per  acre  for  your  locality. 
If  your  school  is  located  in  a  stock-raising  section  of  the  country  and  you  have 
a  large  acreage  of  grazing  land,  you  should  raise  beef  not  only  for  your  own 
use  but  to  supply  other  schools. 

A  school  in  a  locality  where  vegetables  and  fruits  are  easily  raised  should 
can  or  preserve  a  surplus  of  these  products  for  sale  to  schools  not  so  fortunately 
located. 


26  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

I  believe  there  is  a  splendid  chance  for  increased  efficiency  of  our  school 
service  by  special  efforts  and  cooperation  along  the  lines  indicated.  I  must 
insist  that  you  give  the  development  of  the  school  farm  your  most  careful 
attention,  to  the  end  that  the  highest  degree  of  efficiency  and  results  be  accom- 
plished. There  is  absolutely  no  excuse  for  a  waste  acre  or  overlooked  oppor- 
tunity on  a  school  farm.  We  need  all  they  will  produce,  and  can  not  justify 
the  purchase  of  anything  we  can  raise.  It  is  inconsistent  and  indefensible  for 
us  to  expect  Indian  boys  and  girls  to  return  home  from  their  schools  and  do 
more  than  they  have  witnessed  their  teachers  doing  for  them  when  they  are 
supposed  to  be  qualifying  themselves  for  industrial  equipment  and  self-support. 

Superintendents,  inspectors,  supervisors,  and  special  agents  are  directed  to 
give  this  matter  their  prompt  and  most  careful  attention  and  fully  advise  me  of 
the  steps  taken  by  field  officers  to  make  effective  these  suggestions. 

SACATON  EXPERIMENTATION  FARM. 

The  demonstration  farm  at  Sacaton,  Ariz.,  conducted  coopera- 
tively with  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  has  given  satisfactory 
results. 

A  special  study  has  been  made  of  the  grade  Egyptian  cotton  which 
has  been  under  observation  there  for  several  years.  The  land  in 
which  the  staple  was  planted  was  regraded  so  that  it  might  be  irri- 
gated more  scientifically,  with  the  result  that  it  has  made  the  largest 
yield  of  cotton  ever  obtained  at  this  farm,  although  the  land  already 
had  grown  from  five  to  seven  consecutive  crops  of  cotton.  A  4- acre 
plat  of  cotton  produced  an  average  of  890  pounds  of  lint  per 
acre.  This  is  the  largest  average  yield  of  long  staple  Egyptian  cot- 
ton ever  produced  in  the  State  of  Arizona.  Approximately  10,935 
pounds  of  lint  were  produced  on  15  acres;  90  pounds  of  lint  from 
progeny  rows  of  the  "Pima,"  the  name  given  to  the  new,  type  of 
long  staple  cotton,  were  shipped  to  the  Manchester  Fine  Goods 
Spinners'  Assocation,  England,  for  spinning  tests,  and  1,074  pounds 
of  "  Pima  "  from  "  Phelp's  "  seed  were  sent  to  New  England  spinners 
for  the  same  purpose.  The  cotton  grown  during  the  calendar  year 
1914,  with  the  exceptions  noted  above,  has  not  yet  been  sold  on  ac- 
-count  of  prevailing  low  price. 

There  is  also  on  hand  at  the  farm  about  30,000  pounds  of  seed 
which  could  not  be  hauled  to  Salt  Eiver  Valley  points  on  account 
of  the  high  water  in  the  Gila  River.  About  10,890  pounds  of  seed 
were  distributed  to  the  school  and  reservation  farmers  for  planting 
during  the  season  of  1915.  While  the  Indians  last  season  planted 
only  296  acres,  the  reports  indicate  that  their  interest  in  the  growing 
of  cotton  is  commendable,  as  over  the  southern  cotton  section  there 
was  discouragement  on  account  of  low  prices. 

The  surrounding  communities  have,  equally  with  the  Indians,  re- 
ceived the  benefits  of  this  farm,  as  last  year  white  ranchers  of  the 
.Salt  River  Valley  produced  6,421  bales  of  cotton,  which,  at  an  average 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  27 

of  16  cents  per  pound,  would  aggregate  for  the  crop  of  lint  cotton 
approximately  $589,469.  Counting  the  value  of  the  seed  after  being 
converted  into  cake  and  oil,  it  is  estimated  the  net  value  of  the  crop 
to  the  Indians  and  white  people  would  amount  to  nearly  $1,000,000 
for  the  year.  When  it  is  remembered  that  seven  years  ago  scarcely 
any  one  thought  that  Arizona  would  produce  cotton  at  all,  this 
is  a  phenomenal  development.  In  addition  to  experimentation  with 
cotton,  experiments  were  also  made  with  varieties  of  corn,  alfalfa, 
sorghum  cane,  ribbon  cane,  beans,  grapes,  nuts,  fruits,  berries,  and 
garden  stuffs. 

FORT  BERTHOLD  DEMONSTRATION  FARM. 

The  demonstration  farm  at  Fort  Berthold  Eeservation  contains 
five  fields  of  approximately  155  acres  which  were  planted  to  oats, 
wheat,  rye,  corn,  flax,  and  potatoes,  all  of  which  proved  profitable. 
It  is  estimated  that  the  net  profit  of  the  farm  amounted  approxi- 
mately to  $1,100.  A  very  high  grade  of  cattle  and  horses  is  being 
raised  on  the  farm,  and  when  they  reach  the  proper  age  the  males 
are  turned  over  to  the  reservation  for  breeding  among  the  Indian 
stock. 

EXPERIMENTATION. 

The  work  of  experimenting  with  various  crops  under  the  different 
soil  and  climatic  conditions  existing  on  the  widely  scattered  Indian 
reservations  has  been  continued  through  the  year  with  a  large  meas- 
ure of  success,  particularly  at  Malki  and  San  Juan.  Formerly  this 
work  consisted  of  experiments  with  fruit  (particularly,  apricots  and 
grapefruit)  and  the  date  palm,  both  of  which  promise  to  be  remuner- 
ative industries  for  the  Indians.  At  this  place  1^},000  fruit  trees  were 
set  out  during  the  year.  At  San  Juan  experiments  were  conducted 
with  several  varieties  of  wheat  and  other  grains,  which  proved  to  be 
well  adapted  to  a  number  of  the  reservations  where  similar  soil  and 
climatic  conditions  prevail,  and  the  results  of  these  experiments 
were  communicated  to  the  superintendents  with  the  view  of  extending 
the  production  of  such  varieties. 

Several  years  ago  the  Agricultural  Department  imported  from 
Egypt  the  seed  of  a  very  hardy  and  prolific  drouth-resisting  forage 
plant,  which  has  been  designated  "  Sudan  grass,"  from  the  country 
of  its  origin.  Seed  of  this  grass  was  sent  to  a  number  of  reservations 
in  the  semiarid  regions  of  the  Southwest. 

Experiments  are  also  being  conducted  with  the  "  Tepary  bean," 
which  has  been  grown,  on  a  limited  scale,  by  the  Papago  Indians  for 
generations,  and  while  it  is  too  early  to  report  definitely  as  to  the  re- 
sults, yet  the  indications  are  that  this  bean  will  prove  to  be  a  very 


28  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

successful  and  remunerative  crop  in  that  section  of  the  country. 
This  bean  is  their  creation  and  should  be  called  the  "  Pap  ago  bean." 

STOCK  RAISING. 

The  utilization  of  the  natural  resources  of  the  various  Indian  res- 
ervations for  the  benefit  of  the  Indians  has  been  extended  during  the 
last  year  by  the  purchase  of  tribal  herds  and  the  improvement  and 
development  of  the  live-stock  interests  of  the  individual  Indians. 
The  success  met  with  in  handling  the  tribal  herds  is  largely  due  to 
the  provision  which  was  made  to  shelter  and  feed  the  animals  during 
the  winter  months.  The  loss  in  the  Crow  tribal  herd  of  about  7,000 
heifers  and  2,000  steers  was  less  than  1  per  cent  during  the  winter 
of  1914-15.  There  were  approximately  3,000  calves  belonging  to  this 
herd  branded  at  the  spring  round-up,  and  it  is  probable  that  the 
total  number  of  calves  produced  for  the  first  year  this  herd  was  on 
the  range  will  be  nearly  4,000  head. 

In  October,  1914,  3,800  ewes  and  199  rams  were  placed  on  the 
range  in  the  southern  addition  to  the  Jicarilla  Reservation.  This 
flock  now  comprises  a  total  of  6,796  rams,  ewes,  and  lambs.  The  clip 
of  wool  from  this  flock,  amounting  to  16,660  pounds,  was  sold,  deliv- 
ered at  the  agency,  for  $3,581.90.  A  tribal  herd  of  1,000  heifers  and 
42  bulls  has  also  been  placed  on  this  reservation. 

The  number  of  tribal  herds  on  the  various  Indian  reservations 
were  increased  by  the  purchase  of  cattle  as  follows:  For  Blackfeet 
Reservation,  60  bulls,  1,800  heifers;  for  Cheyenne  River  Reserva- 
tion, 80  bulls,  1,800  heifers;  for  Fort  Apache  Reservation,  50  bulls; 
for  Fort  Belknap  Reservation,  60  bulls,  1,800  heifers;  for  Jicarilla 
Reservation,  .42  bulls,  100  heifers;  for  Klamath  Reservation,  40 
bulls;  for  Mescalero  Reservation,  68  bulls,  1,200  heifers;  for  Moqui 
Reservation,  10  bulls;  for  Rosebud  Reservation,  50  bulls,  300  heifers; 
for  San  Carlos  Reservation,  80  bulls,  972  heifers ;  for  Standing  Rock 
Reservation,  100  bulls,  1,800  heifers;  for  Tongue  River  Reservation, 
25  bulls,  500  heifers;  for  Ute  Mountain  Reservation,  75  bulls,  1,500 
heifers;  for  Walker  River  Reservation,  20  bulls,  500  heifers;  for 
Warm  Springs  Reservation,  30  bulls,  533  heifers;  for  Western  Sho- 
shone  Reservation,  100  heifers ;  and  for  the  Walapai  Reservation,  510 
cows  and  20  bulls.  A  large  number  of  heifers  were  purchased  for  the 
Cheyenne  River,  Colville,  Rosebud,  Standing  Rock,  and  Warm 
Springs  Reservations,  and  will  be  sold  to  individual  Indians  under 
the  reimbursable  plan. 

A  considerable  amount  of  stock  was  during  the  year  19 14-1 5  dis- 
tributed to  individual  Indians,  and  it  is  our  purpose  to  extend  this 
procedure  as  rapidly  as  good  administration  justifies.  Indian  stock 
has  been  so  successfully  managed  since  the  policy  of  increasing 
stock  raising  among  the  Indians  was  inaugurated  some  two  years 


COMMISSIONEK   OF   IXDIAN   AFFAIRS.  29 

ago  as  to  fully  justify  the  undertaking.  Our  personal  inspections 
and  reports  show  the  tribal  herds  and  individually  owned  cattle, 
horses,  and  sheep  to  be  rapidly  improving  in  breed,  increasing  in 
number,  and  showing  a  gratifying  profit  on  the  investment.  Where 
the  climate  requires,  vigilant  efforts  are  being  made  to  insure  ample 
feed  to  prevent  winter  loss. 

There  is  now  every  indication  that  the  Indian-owned  stock  will 
soon  become  a  substantial  factor  in  the  world's  supply. 

THE  COMPETENCY  COMMISSION. 

The  competency  commission  appointed  by  you  has  entered  on  its 
duties.  The  personnel  of  the  commission,  consisting  of  Maj.  James 
McLaughlin,  an  inspector  of  the  department,  and  Mr.  F.  A.  Thackery, 
superintendent  of  the  Pima  School,  each  of  whom  has  had  large  and 
varied  intimacy  with  the  Indians,  is  a  guarantee  that  its  purpose  will 
be  carried  out  with  a  sincere  determination  to  make  its  findings  de- 
pendable. In  connection  with  the  superintendent  of  the  reservation 
on  which  its  sittings  are  being  held,  it  will  carefully  consider  the 
qualifications  of  each  Indian  who  may  apply  for  a  severance  of  tribal 
relations,  or  who,  in  its  judgment,  has  arrived  at  the  degree  of  busi- 
ness competency  that  he  should  assume  the  duties  of  citizenship.  I 
am  hopeful,  from  the  wide  experience  of  the  members  of  the  commis- 
sion, that  permanent  good  not  only  to  the  individual  but  fo  the  tribe 
as  well  will  result  from  its  labors. 

ALLOTMENTS. 

During  the  past  year  but  one  special  allotting  agent  has  been  em- 
ployed, on  the  Gila  River  Reservation,  Ariz.,  where  a  large  area  of 
irrigable  land  was  available  for  allotment.  A  comparatively  limited 
number  of  allotments  have  been  made  on  various  reservations  by 
the  respective  superintendents  in  charge,  but  as  a  general  rule  activ- 
ity along  this  line  has  been  much  lessened. 

ALLOTMENT  OF  FORT  SILL  APACHES. 

Of  the  survivors  and  descendants  of  Geronimo's  Band  of  Apaches, 
formerly  held  as  prisoners  of  war  at  Fort  Sill,  Okla!,  187  removed  to 
the  Mescalero  Reservation,  N.  Mex.,  and  84  stayed  in  Oklahoma, 
where  suitable  tracts  of  from  80  to  160  acres  have  been  purchased 
for  69  of  them.  This  leaves  15  yet  to  be  provided  for  when  additional 
funds  have  been  procured  for  this  purpose. 

LANDLESS  INDIANS  IN  CALIFORNIA. 

Reports  indicate  that  there  are  about  19,000  Indians  in  California 
located  in  55  of  the  59  counties  in  that  State.  Of  this  number  ap- 


30  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

proximately  15,000  are  in  northern  California,  1,800  being  on  In- 
dian reservations.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  from  3,500  to  4,500 
Indians  who  are  unprovided  with  reservation  lands,  allotments  on 
the  public  domain,  or  otherwise.  Forty-three  purchases  have  been 
made  for  the  benefit  of  these  Indians,  placing  title  to  approximately 
6,600  acres  in  the  United  States,  at  a  cost  of  $144,470.45.  About  2,500 
of  these  Indians  have  been  provided  with  homes.  These  purchases 
were  made  mainly  from  appropriations  in  the  acts  of  June  21,  1906 
(34  Stat.  L.,  325-333),  and  April  30,  1908  (37  Stat.  L.,  70-76), 
which  were  supplemented  by  succeeding  appropriation  acts.  The 
Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  past  year  specifically  appropriated 
$10,000  for  the  purchase  of  land  for  landless  Indians  in  California, 
and  the  same  amount  was  made  available  by  joint  resolution  of  March 
4,  1915.  continuing  the  Indian  appropriations  for  the  present  year. 
A  list  of  the  43  purchases  showing  the  number  of  Indians,  acreage, 
and  amount  paid  will  be  found  in  Table  30  of  this  report. 

PATENTS   IN  FEE. 

Patents  in  fee  are  issued  to  Indian  allottees,  and  the  heirs  of  de- 
ceased allottees,  under  the  provisions  of  the  acts  of  May  8,  1906  (34 
Stats.  L.,  182),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855).  During  the 
year  patents  in  fee  were  issued  under  said  acts  covering  an  area  of 
124,116.36  acres,  of  which  61,114.47  acres,  or  about  50  per  cent,  covers 
land  allotted  to  Turtle  Mountain  and  Pine  Ridge  Indians.  The  Tur- 
tle Mountain  Indians  are  allotted  partly  in  North  Dakota  and  partly 
on  the  public  domain  in  the  State  of  Montana. 

SALE  OF  INDIAN  LAND. 

The  sale  of  allotted  and  inherited  Indian  land  is  authorized  by  the 
acts  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245),  March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1015),  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L., 
855),  and  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678). 

The  act  last  mentioned  extended  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June 
25,  1910,  to  Oklahoma,  with  the  exception  of  lands  belonging  to  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osages,  so  that  since  the  passage  of  this 
act  patents  in  fee  simple  can  be  issued  to  purchasers  of  Indian  lands 
in  Oklahoma,  with  the  exceptions  noted. 

During  the  year  1915  sales  have  been  made  covering  an  area  of 
102,675.54  acres,  involving  a  consideration  of  $1,300,303.08.  The 
average  price  for  which  the  land  sold  was  $12.66  per  acre.  The  year 
previous  the  office  sold  947  tracts,  involving  90,768.30  acres,  for  $652,- 
815.50,  or  a  little  over  $17  per  acre.  A  great  amount  of  land  was  sold 
on  reservations  where  the  average  price  was  about  $5  per  acre,  which 
reduced  the  general  average. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  31 

PURCHASES  OF  LANDS  FOR  CERTAIN  INDIANS. 

Under  the  provisions  of  the -Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
August  1,  1914,  there  have  been  purchased  for  allotment  to  indi- 
vidual members  of  the  Wisconsin  Band  of  Potawatomi  Indians  re- 
'siding  in  Wisconsin  and  Michigan  14,036.18  acres  at  a  cost  of  $136r 
205.12,  and  the  title  to  these  lands  is  now  vested  in  the  United  States. 

Transactions  involving  960  acres  of  additional  land,  at  a  cost  of 
$9,340,  are  still  uncompleted,  pending  the  curing  of  objections  to  the 
title. 

The  act  of  August  1,  1914,  supra,  contained  also  an  item  of  $40,000 
for  the  purchase  of  lands  for  homeless,  nonremoval  Mille  Lacs  In- 
dians to  whom  allotments  have  not  heretofore  been  made,  with  which 
760.41  acres  have  been  purchased,  at  a  cost  of  $17,714.30.  Trans- 
actions involving  1,437  additional  acres,  at  a  cost  of  $21,617,  are  in 
process  of  negotiation. 

!  A  suitable  240-acre  tract,  including  rights  in  an  irrigation  ditch 
sufficient  to  irrigate  150  acres  thereof,  was  bought,  at  a  cost  of  $13,000, 
for  the  Camp  Yerde  Indians  in  Arizona,  under  an  appropriation  of 
$20,000  made  therefor  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  1915. 

MISSION  LAND. 

A  number  of  treaties  wherein  Indian  lands  were  ceded  and  reser- 
vations established  contained  %  provisions  granting  to  religious  de- 
nominations then  conducting  missions  among  the  Indians  (the  organ- 
izations being  specifically  named)  the  right  to  occupy  a  stated  num- 
ber of  acres  of  land  required  for  church  and  mission  buildings  and 
for  cemeteries  in  connection  with  Indian  churches.  In  some  cases 
title  to  the  land  was  granted  outright  by  the  treaties ;  but  there  was 
no  general  provision  applicable  everywhere. 

It  has  been  customary  in  the  last  10  years,  in  the  various  acts  ac- 
cepting cessions  and  authorizing  a  sale  of  surplus  Indian  lands,  to 
include  provision  for  the  setting  apart  of  lands  required  for  mission 
purposes  and  for  the  patenting  of  such  tracts.  Lands  set  apart  for 
such  purpose  in  the  last  five  years  are  as  follows: 

Acres. 
1911 1,  282.  68 

1912 154.5 

1913 139.23 

1914 241.8208 

1915__  296. 9375 


2, 115. 1683 
OSAGE  OIL  AND  GAS  LEASES. 

On  March  16, 1896,  the  Osage  Indians,  through  their  tribal  council, 
made  a  lease  to  Edwin  B.  Foster  covering  the  entire  Osage  Reserva- 
tion, about  1,500,000  acres,  for  oil  and  gas  mining  purposes  for  the 


32  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

term  of  10  years.  The  act  of  March  3,  1905  (33  Stat.  L.,  1061),  ex- 
tended the  lease  for  the  period  of  10  years  from  March  16,  1906,  but 
reduced  the  area  to  680,000  acres,  and  operations  have  been  conducted 
with  more  or  less  success  by  the  Indian  Territory  Illuminating  Oil 
Co.,  which  succeeded  by  assignment  to  the  rights  of  Edwin  B.  Foster, 
and  by  the  sublessees  of  that  company. 

About  two  years  ago  the  Indian  Territory  Illuminating  Oil  Co. 
and  its  sublessees  applied  for  a  renewal  of  the  lease  or  for  a  new  lease 
on  the  lands,  to  take  effect  upon  the  expiration  of  the  existing  lease. 
Since  the  application  was  submitted  the  question  has  been  discussed 
and  various  investigations  conducted  with  a  view  to  ascertaining 
the  extent  of  the  development  work  and  the  conditions  upon  which 
new  leases  might  be  made.  On  March  8  to  11,  inclusive,  a  series  of 
hearings  was  held  at  which  the  interested  persons  were  given  an  op- 
portunity to  present  their  reasons  for  requesting  new  leases,  as  well 
as  to  submit  plans  for  the  leasing  of  these  lands  upon  the  expiration 
of  the  present  lease.  These  hearings  were  continued  on  March  22 
and  23,  with  the  Osage  tribal  council  present. 

The  council,  after  10  days'  deliberation,  on  June  IT,  1915,  adopted 
resolutions,  which  were  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior 
on  the  same  date. 

1.  That  the  Congress  of  the  United   States  be  asked  to  extend  the  trust 
period  which,  under  existing  law,  will  expire  on  April  8,  1931. 

2.  In  all  oil  leases  provision  shall  be  made  for  the  Government  to  have  the 
option  to  purchase  the  oil  or  any  part  thereof  at  the  highest  posted  market 
price  on  the  date  of  sale. 

3.  The  Indian  Territory  Illuminating  Oil  Co.  shall  be  eliminated  as  an  in- 
termediary. 

4.  Oil  and  gas  rights  shall  be  leased  separately,  and  oil  leases  shall  be  made 
for  a  term  of  five  years  from  date  of  approval  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior 
and  as  much  longer  thereafter  as  oil  is  found  in  paying  quantities,  but  the 
term  of  leases  shall  not  extend  beyond  the  time  the  title  to  the  minerals 
remains  in  the  Osage  Tribe. 

5.  Oil  leases  shall  be  made  direct  to  the  present  sublessees  covering  their 
present  holdings  in  quarter-section  units  not  exceeding  4,800  acres  each  in  the 
aggregate,  except  such  quarter-section  units  the  producing  wells  of  which  are 
capable  of  averaging  25  or  more  barrels  per  day  on  July  1,  1915,  which  units 
shall  be  retained  by  the  tribe  and  offered  for  lease  at  public  auction  to  the 
highest  bidder,  subject  to  the  approval  of  and  under  such  rules  and  regulations 
as  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  prescribe;  the  average  daily  production 
to  be  ascertained  under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior. 

6.  The  rate  (^royalty  on  oil  to  be  1/6,  except  where  the  average  daily  pro- 
duction of  producing  wells  on  any  quarter-section  unit  shall  equal  or  exceed 
100  barrels  for  calendar  month  periods,  the  royalty  on  such  wells  to  be  1/5. 

7.  Oil  lessees  shall,  within  12  months  after  the  approval  of  a  lease  by  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior,  drill  a  well  on  each  nonproducing  quarter-section 
unit  or  pay  in  lieu  thereof  a  rental  of  $1  per  acre  per  year. 

8.  All  producing  lands   not  leased   to  present  lessees  shall  be  offered  for 
lease  to  highest  bidders  upon  the  expiration  of  present  leases  and  under  such 
rules  and  regulations  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior. 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  33 

9.  Gas  leases  shall  be  made  by  the  tribal  council  to  the  present  gas  lessees 
covering  all  or  part  of  their  present  holdings  and  for  such  periods  as  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Interior  may  determine,  provided  that  applications  made  prior  to 
this  date  for  leases  of  gas  may  be  granted  in  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior. 

10.  The  royalty  on  gas  shall  be  1/6,  and  all  contracts  for  the  sale  or  use  of 
gas  shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.     Such  con- 
tracts shall  be  transmitted  to  the  superintendent  of  the  Osage  Agency,  who 
.shall  forward  same  without  recommendation  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 
through  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs.     Before  any  contract  is  approved, 
the  superintendent  shall  be   notified  of  the  terms  which  the   Secretary   will 
approve,  and  the  superintendent  will  thereupon  notify  the  principal  chief,  who 
will  then  convene  the  tribal  council  and  inform  the  members  of  the  terms  of 
the  proposed  contract.     The  council  may,  within  10  days  from  the  receipt  of 
such  notice  by  the  superintendent,  communicate  to  the  Secretary,  through  the 
superintendent  and  the  commissioner,  their  views  with  reference  to  the  said 
contract. 

11.  The  present  sublessees  will  be  notified  of  the  terms  upon  which  new  leases 
may  be  made,  and  they  shall  file  with  the  superintendent,  not  later  than  August 
1,  1915,  their  acceptance.     Should  any  sublessee  neglect  or  decline  to  file  his 
acceptance  on  or  before  August  1,  1915,  all  lands  he  might  acquire  under  new 
leases  shall,  on  the  expiration  of  the  present  lease,  be  offered  to  the  highest 
bidder,  in  the  discretion  of  and  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior. 

The  above  plan  provides  for  new  oil  leases  to  the  present  sublessees  covering 
an  aggregate  area  of  about  70,000  acres  of  producing  territory  and  approxi- 
mately 165,000  acres  of  nonproducing  territory,  the  latter  being  subject  to  a 
rental  of  $1  per  acre  per  annum  in  lieu  of  development. 

Such  quarter-section  units  as  are  capable  of  an  average  daily  well  pro- 
duction of  25  barrels  or  more,  together  with  about  16,000  acres  of  additional 
producing  territory,  shall  be  leased  at  public  auction  to  the  highest  bidder, 
under  such  rules  and  regulations  as  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  prescribe. 

The  remaining  430,000  acres  of  nonproducing  territory  shall  be  leased  at  such 
times  and  under  such  rules  and  regulations  as  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior 
may  prescribe. 

OIL  AND  GAS,  FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

The  conditions  of  the  oil  industry  in  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes, 
Oklahoma,  during  the  fiscal  year  1915  have  been  somewhat  demoral- 
ized and  for  various  reasons  the  price  of  oil  declined  from  $1.05  per 
barrel  to  40  cents  per  barrel. 

Owing  to  the  unprecedented  production  in  the  Gushing  field  and 
the  lack  of  transportation  facilities,  permission  was  granted  in  many 
instances  for  the  storage  of  oil  off  the  premises  from  which  produced, 
the  oil  to  be  guaged  at  the  time  of  removal  and  royalty  paid  thereon 
when  actually  sold.  In  this  way  the  royalty  interest  of  the  Indians 
does  not  suffer  from  shrinkage,  evaporation,  or  other  losses  incident 
to  the  storage  of  oil. 

On  March  12,  1915,  the  department  fixed  the  minimum  price  basis 
for  the  settlement  of  royalty  on  oil  at  the  actual  price  for  which  the  oil 
is  sold,  provided  such  price  is  not  less  than  the  highest  posted  price  in 
8340—15 3 


34  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

the  mid-continent  field  on  the  day  of  the  sale.  During  the  last  year 
several  thousand  nonproducing  leases  have  been  canceled,  evidently  be- 
cause of  the  depressed  condition  of  the  industry.  Wells  to  the  number 
of  4,161  have  been  drilled,  of  which  3,243  were  productive  of  oil,  322 
of  gas,  and  596  were  dry.  The  Lawton  and  southwestern  Oklahoma 
fields  appear  now  to  be  clearly  defined,  owing  to  the  large  number  of 
dry  holes  surrounding  them.  With  the  exception  of  the  Gushing 
field  there  has  been  a  material  decrease  in  drilling  operations.  New 
developments  were  confined,  principally  to  a  small  oil  field  known  as 
the  Boynton-Haskell  field,  northwest  of  Boynton,  Okla.,  and  the  Ada- 
Loco  gas  field.  In  the  Boynton-Haskell  field,  which  is  very  irregular 
and  uncertain,  76  wells  produced  an  average  of  4,617  barrels  per  day. 
The  gas  fields  in  the  vicinity  of  Ada  and  Loco,  Okla.,  are  very  prom- 
ising in  the  way  of  gas  production. 

The  most  important  discovery  in  unproven  territory  is  the  Paden 
well,  in  section  8,  T.  12  N.,  E.  7  E.,  drilled  to  the  top  of  the  oil 
sand  2,800  feet  November  10,  1914,  with  a  showing  of  about  2,000,000 
cubic  feet  of  gas,  and  some  oil.  The  well  was  shut  in  by  the  Prairie 
Oil  &  Gas  Co.  November  15,  1914,  owing  to  the  already  congested 
condition  of  the  oil  market.  The  land  for  miles  around  this  well 
has  been  leased,  and  approximately  $200,000  in  bonuses  has  been 
procured  for  the  Indian  owners. 

A  careful  inspection  and  supervision  is  being  given  to  the  physical 
operation  of  oil  and  gas  leases  on  restricted  Indian  lands  by  the  in- 
spectors employed  under  existing  law.  This  inspection  has  undoubt- 
edly resulted  in  saving  considerable  money  and  property  to  the 
Indian  lessors.  With  regard  to  the  waste  of  oil  and  gas  in  the  mid- 
continent  field,  the  Bureau  of  Mines  and  this  office  are  receiving  the 
hearty  cooperation  of  practically  all  of  the  operators  in  the  field. 

Everything  points  to  a  speedy  recovery  in  market  conditions.  The 
rapid  decline  in  production  from  the  Gushing  field,  efforts  on  the 
part  of  the  pipe-line  companies  to  buy  up  storage  oil,  and  the  increase 
in  the  capacity  of  independent  refineries  in  Oklahoma  and  Kansas 
have  been  factors  in  strengthening  the  oil  market. 

Transportation  facilities  have  been  greatly  increased  by  reason  of 
the  building  of  new  pipe  lines  and  extensions  of  old  ones.  It  is  ex- 
pected that  the  pipe  lines  will  soon  be  taking  the  entire  production 
of  the  oil  and  gas,  which,  of  course,  will  mean  increased  activity  and 
renewed  energy  in  all  departments  of  the  oil  and  gas  industry. 

Oil  and  gas  mining  operations  in  Oklahoma  on  allotted  Indian 
lands  outside  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osage  Reservation 
,have  remained  practically  at  a  standstill  during  the  last  year,  al- 
though there  has  been  considerable  activity  in  the  leasing  department. 
A  few  promising  wells  have  been  brought  in. 

The  magnitude  of  the  oil  industry  to  the  Indians  of  Oklahoma, 
which  includes  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  Osage  Nation,  may  be 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  35 

appreciated  in  the  statement  that  34,654,645  barrels  of  oil  were  pro- 
duced during  the  year. 

FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

The  offices  of  commissioner  to  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  super- 
intendent of  Union  Agency,  Muskogee,  Okla.,  were  abolished  by  sec- 
tion 17  of  the  act  of  Congress  approved  August  1,  1914  (38  Stats.  L., 
598),  and  in  lieu  thereof  a  superintendent  for  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes  was  appointed  by  the  President  at  a  salary  of  $5,000  per 
annum,  effective  September  1,  1914.  However,  the  superintendent 
was  not  appointed  until  December  22,  1914. 

Since  1898  the  supervision  and  handling  of  the  restricted  indi- 
vidual Indian  affairs  after  allotment  of  tribal  lands  in  severalty, 
the  receiving  of  and  accounting  for  large  sums  of  money  realized 
from  lands  leased  for  oil,  gas,  and  other  purposes,  and  for  proceeds 
of  sale  of  restricted  allotted  lands  and  other  work  connected  there- 
with, has  made  this  superintendency  the  largest  in  the  Indian  Service. 

The  enrollment  of  members  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  began  un- 
der the  act  of  June  10,  1896  (29  Stats.  L.,  321),  and  closed  on  March 
4,  1907,  by  section  2  of  the  act  of  Congress  approved  April  26,  1906 
(34  Stat.  L.,  137),  with  a  total  enrollment  membership  of  101,209, 
to  which  was  added  312  members  authorized  to  be  enrolled  and  paid 
money  in  lieu  of  allotment  by  the  act  of  Congress  approved  August 
1,  1914  (38  Stats.  L.,  600),  making  a  total  membership  to  date  of 
101,521  .for  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes.  Every  40-acre  tract  contained 
in  the  19,525,966  acres  belonging  to  these  Five  Civilized  Tribes  has 
been  classified  and  appraised — 15,794,400  acres  have  been  allotted  in 
severalty  to  individual  Indians,  2,549,959  acres  unallotted  were  sold, 
leaving  1,042,405  acres  still  unsold,  which  amount  (1,042,405  acres) 
includes  823,521  acres  of  timber  lands  and  184,757  acres  of  surface  of 
segregated  coal  and  asphalt  land  area  belonging  to  the  Choctaw  and 
Chickasaw  Tribes  authorized  to  be  sold. 

From  July  1,  1898,  to  June  30,  1915,  there  was  collected  and  de- 
posited as  tribal  money  an  aggregate  of  approximately  $19,500,000, 
which  amount  was  derived  from  sale  of  town  lots,  coal  and  asphalt 
royalties,  sales  of  unallotted  and  other  tribal  properties.  There  is 
still  due  on  unallotted  land  sold  about  $7,050,000.  It  is  estimated 
that  the  remaining  tribal  lands  will  bring  from  $4,000,000  to 
$5,000,000,  and  in  addition  thereto  the  coal  and  asphalt  deposits 
underlying  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  lands  will  bring  when 
authorized  to  be  sold  by  Congress  an  additional  $12,000,000  (the 
lowest  estimate).  An  aggregate  of  309  towns,  and  subsequently 
various  additions  thereto,  were  platted,  appraised,  and  sold. 

All  the  Cherokee  tribal  property  except  an  80-acre  tract  involved 
in  litigation  and  another  226-acre  tract  known  as  "  Big  Lake,"  the 


36  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

title  to  which  is  in  dispute,  has  been  disposed  of.  and  the  Cherokee 
tribal  government  was  abolished  on  June  30,  1914,  with  the  exception 
of  the  principal  chief,  who  was  continued  at  a  nominal  salary  to  sign 
deeds. 

The  Creek  tribal  property  has  been  disposed  of  except  2,495  acres 
of  unallotted  land,  47  town  lots  in  the  town  of  Lee,  121  lots  in  Mus- 
kogee  and  Tulso  recovered  for  the  Creek  Tribe  in  town-lot  litigation, 
the  Creek,  capitol  building  and  lot  at  Okmulgee,  valued  at  $60,000, 
the  investigation  of  alleged  duplicate  or  erroneous  and  fraudulent 
enrollment  and  allotment  of  land  in  the  Gushing  oil  field,  notably 
the  Barney  Thlocco  (deceased),  Thomas  Atkins,  and  Emma  Coker 
allotments,  valued  at  several  million  dollars,  toward  recovery  of 
which 'suit  has  been  instituted  for  the  Creek  Tribe.  There  also 
remain  500  Creek  tribal  deeds  to  be  delivered,  which  were  returned 
unclaimed  or  refused,  and  five  boarding  schools  are  to  be  disposed  of. 

The  Seminole  tribal  affairs  are  practically  completed  except  the 
delivery  of  500  tribal  deeds  to  allottees,  the  distribution  per  capita 
to  3,127  members  of  the  Seminole  tribal  funds  in  United  States 
Treasury,  amounting  to  $1,517,894.70  on  July  1,  1915.  The  Emahaka 
Academy  is  in  litigation. 

The  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  tribal  affairs  will  be  the  last  to  be 
closed  up,  inasmuch  as  approximately  $7.400,000  remain  unpaid  on 
the  sale  of  20,000  tracts  of  unallotted  land  heretofore  sold,  and  the 
time  for  payment  has  already  been  extended  until  March,  1916,  on 
deferred  payments  falling  due,  and  pleas  for  further  continuance  are 
being  daily  received  from  purchasers  who  allege  inability  to  pay,  on 
account  of  poor  crops,  low  price  for  cotton,  and  depressed  con- 
dition of  the  money  market.  Regulations  for  the  sale  of  the  remain- 
ing 31,700  acres  of  unallotted  lands  and  184,800  acres  of  the  surface 
of  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  land  area  have  been  submitted 
for  approval  for  the  sale  of  said  lands,  to  commence  January  3, 
1916.  The  sale  of  the  coal  and  asphalt  underlying  the  surface  of 
431,080  acres  of  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  land  area  can  not 
be  made  without  an  act  of  Congress  authorizing  it.  Thirty-five  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  fifty-six  and  ninety-nine  one-hundredths  acres 
of  said  surface  have  been  classified  as  suitable  for  town-site  pur- 
poses and  appraised  at  $195,917,  to  be  sold  as  town  lots  in  tracts  of 
from  1  to  40  acres  each. 

PROBATE  WORK  IN  OKLAHOMA. 

The  system  of  handling  the  probate  work  in  the  Five  Civilized 
Tribes,  which  was  instituted  and  organized  under  my  supervision  in 
-January,  1914,  has,  during  the  present  fiscal  year,  accomplished  re- 
sults which  justify  its  establishment. 

In  my  last  report  I  described  the  conditions  affecting  minor  and 
other  incompetent  Indians  that  induced  me  to  give  special  attention 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  37 

to  this  work,  and  to  devise  plans  for  putting  it  upon  a  practical  and 
effective  working  basis.  Those  plans  comprehended,  among  other 
things,  two  principal  objects,  both  of  which  were  accomplished:  (1) 
The  adoption  of  a  set  of  probate  rules  that  would  be  adequate,  prop- 
erly administered,  for  the  protection  of  helpless  and  dependent  peo- 
ple, and  (2)  the  organization  of  a  corps  of  probate  attorneys,  to  rep- 
resent such  Indians,  under  the  direction  of  this  office,  in  the  courts 
of  Oklahoma. 

The  work  of  last  year  was  largely  pioneer  in  character.  The  coun- 
ties constituting  the  territory  previously  belonging  to  the  Five  Civi- 
lized Tribes  were  divided  into  districts,  embracing  from  one  to  six 
counties  each,  according  to  location  and  the  number  of  pending  pro- 
bate cases,  and  these  districts  were  assigned  to  the  several  attorneys. 
When  this  was  accomplished,  each  attorney  was  required  to  make  a 
complete  inventory  of  the  cases  in  his  district  and  familiarize  himself 
therewith,  and  to  follow  up  such  preliminary  work  with  proper  suits 
in  the  courts  when  the  law  and  the  facts  made  it  necessary  for  him  to 
do  so. 

The  results  have  proved  highly  beneficial,  the  direct  and  imme- 
diate benefits  being  equaled,  perhaps,  by  the  unseen  but  ever  present 
force  for  good  that  wras  implanted  in  the  judicial  system  of  the 
State  by  the  institution  of  the  probate  system. 

The  work  is  now  progressing,  under  the  perfected  organization, 
in  a  regular  and  systematic  manner.  The  men  have  become  familiar 
with  their  duties  and  are  in  a  position  to  attend  to  each  matter  in  a 
prompt  and  efficient  manner.  In  this,  as  in  other  lines  of  work,  one 
duty  performed  may  lead  to  a  situation  creating  other  duties.  To 
illustrate:  It  frequently  occurs  that  a  probate  attorney  is  able  in  a 
civil  suit  to  thwart  the  trickery  of  a  corrupt  guardian  and  to  save  to 
a  minor  a  considerable  sum  of  money.  Having  gone  thus  far,  the 
further  duty  arises  of  finding  some  way  to  conserve,  for  the  perma- 
nent benefit  of  the  ward,  the  funds  thus  saved  to  him ;  and  sometimes 
it  becomes  necessary  to  institute  proceedings  for  the  prosecution  of 
an  embezzling  guardian. 

These  references  will  serve  to  show  some  of  the  duties  devolving 
upon  the  probate  attorneys,  but  the  nature,  extent,  and  importance 
of  their  work  can  be  better  understood  by  an  examination  of  the 
appended  table,  which  covers  the  period  between  January  1  and  July 
1,  1915. 

The  extent  of  the  work  will  be  noted  from  the  fact  that  at  the 
beginning  of  the  calendar  year  there  was  a  total  of  53,433  cases 
pending  in  the  counties  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes.  Gratifying  as 
the  accomplished  results  are,  it  is  apparent  that  there  is  a  vast  amount 
of  unfinished  work. 


38  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

I  think  it  worthy  of  special  mention  that  during  the  last  six 
months  37  new  criminal  actions  were  instituted  and  69  such  actions 
were  finally  determined  at  the  instance  or  with  the  assistance  of  the 
probate  attorneys. 

It  is  also  noteworthy  that  during  the  same  period  they  caused  213 
new  civil  actions  to  be  instituted  and  116  such  actions  to  be  finally 
determined,  and  that  the  amounts  involved  in  the  new  suits  aggre- 
gate $1,525,377. 

The  efforts  to  protect  the  financial  interests  of  minors  and  other 
dependent  Indians  are  specially  worthy  of  attention,  e.  g.,  in  the 
last  six  months  of  the  fiscal  year  there  was  saved  to  these  wards  of 
the  Government  the  sum  of  $462,100  by  checking  guardians'  reports 
and  taking  necessary  exceptions,  and  in  order  to  insure  greater  safety 
of  Indian  funds  the  probate  attorneys  caused  new  bonds  to  be  filed  in 
the  amount  of  $687,500.  During  the  same  time  conservation  of  In- 
dian funds  was  effected  through  bank  deposits  and  investments  in  the 
amount  of  nearly  $1,000,000. 

Much  of  the  success  of  the  probate  work  may  be  justly  credited 
to  the  county  judges,  who  have  cooperated  in  a  conscientious  and 
effective  way  with  the  probate  attorneys  to  secure  a  harmonious  ad- 
ministration of  the  Federal  and  State  laws  affecting  such  work. 

The  following  table  shows  in  concise  form  the  condition  of  the 
probate  work  and  the  principal  results  accomplished  during  the  six 
months  ended  July  1,  1915: 

Summary  of  Probate  Work,  Five  Civilized  Tribes,   Oklahoma,  January  1   to 

July  1,  1915. 

Cases  pending  January  1,  1915 53,  433 

Cases  pending  July  1,  1915 52,  045 

Regular  cases  in  which  attorneys  appeared 10,  426 

Civil  actions  instituted 213 

Amount  involved  in  such  civil  actions _• $1,  525,  377 

Civil  actions  finally  determined 116 

Criminal  actions  instituted 37 

Criminal  actions  finally  determined 69 

New  bonds  filed 713 

Amount  covered  by  new  bonds $687,  500 

Guardians  removed  or  discharged 602 

Conservation  of  funds: 

(a)  Bank  deposits $330,454 

(&)   Investments $644,  740 

Amount  saved  to  minors  and  others $462, 100 

Inherited  land  sales 415 

Minor  allotment  sales 151 

Citations  issued r -----  1>  680 

Quitclaim  deeds  obtained 43 

Official  letters  and  reports 28, 105 

Conferences  with  alottees  and  others  (approximately) 22,935 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  39 

ENROLLMENTS  WITH  INDIAN  TRIBES,  LA  POINTE  OR  BAD 

RIVER,  WIS. 

By  the  act  of  August  1,  1914  (38  Stats.  L.,  582-605),  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior  was  directed  to  prepare  and  complete,  within  90 
days,  a  roll  of  the  unallotted  members  of  the  La  Pointe  or  Bad  River 
Band  of  Chippewa  Indians,  Wisconsin,  such  roll  to  be  made  with 
the  assistance  of  a  committee  of  five  Indians,  to  be  chosen  in  council 
by  the  band. 

A  council,  held  August  17,  1914,  elected  the  required  Indian  com- 
mittee, which,  with  a  representative  of  this  office,  prepared  a  roll 
containing  the  names  of  523  Indians  found  entitled  to  allotments  on 
the  Bad  River  Reservation.  Between  1,200  and  1,400  persons  were 
denied  enrollment,  many  of  them  belonging  to  other  Chippewa  reser- 
vations in  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin. 

Following  the  approval  of  the  roll,  October  26,  1914,  on  a  com- 
plaint made  by  a  number  of  the  rejected  applicants  that  they  had 
not  been  afforded  an  opportunity  to  present  their  cases  for  review,  a 
committee  of  three  officials  reopened  the  case,  in  connection  with  the 
original  Indian  committee  of  five,  and  recommended  the  roll  ap- 
proved October  26,  1914,  be  amended  by  adding  the  names  of  31 
persons  and  striking  therefrom  the  names  of  9  persons. 

PURIFICATION  OF  WHITE  EARTH    (MINN.)   ROLLS. 

In  1911  complaint  was  made  by  16  Indians  of  the  White  Earth 
Reservation  that  86  mixed-blood  Chippewa  of  Lake  Superior  were 
fraudulently  enrolled  and  receiving  benefits  with  their  band.  The 
tribe  was  requested  to  furnish  proper  evidence  to  support  this  charge, 
and  due  notice  was  served  on  the  contestees,  consisting  of  the  Beau- 
lieu  and  Fairbanks  families  and  their  descendents,  to  show  cause 
why  their  names  should  not  be  dropped  from  the  White  Earth  tribal 
rolls  and  refund  made  to  the  Government  of  moneys  alleged  to  have 
been  wrongfully  paid  to  them. 

Special  Attorney  Thomas  G.  Shearman,  of  the  Interior  Depart- 
ment, investigated  the  charges  in  the  field.  His  report  sustaining 
the  charges  and  finding  against  contestants  was  submitted  to  the 
Court  of  Claims  February  28,  1913.  By  decisions  of  June  6,  and 
December  21,  1914,  the  court  held  that  it  had  "no  jurisdiction  of 
said  claim  or  matter."  April  8,  1915,  a  hearing  was  granted  to  the 
attorneys  representing  the  respondents,  and  the  case  is  now  pending 
before  the  department  for  decision. 

WHITE  EARTH  LAND=FRAUD  CASES  . 

The  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  325-353),  permitted  only 
adult  mixed  bloods  of  the  White  Earth  Reservation,  Minn.,  to  alien- 
ate their  allotments.  In  1909  it  was  learned  that  gross  frauds  had 


40  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

been  and  were  being  perpetrated — mainly  by  whites — on  full-blood 
allottees  holding  restricted  lands,  and  that  the  lands  of  minor  mixed 
bloods  were  being  purchased,  encumbered,  and  denuded  of  timber. 

Through  the  Department  of  Justice  suits  were  instituted  to  cancel 
and  set  aside  these  fraudulent  conveyances,  and  as  a  basis  for  investi- 
gating these  fraud  cases  a  roll  of  5,093  allottees  of  the  reservation 
was  prepared,  showing  the  degree  of  Indian  blood.  On  June  8, 
1914,  the  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  First 
National  Bank  (234  U.  S.,  245),  held  that  the  term  "mixed  blood," 
found  in  the  act  of  June  21,  1906,  meant  that  any  identifiable 
quantum  of  blood  other  than  Indian  blood  relieves  the  allotments 
of  the  adult  Chippewas  from  all  restrictions  upon  alienation. 

Since  inaugurating  this  work  1,299  suits  have  been  instituted  by 
the  Government  to  recover,  approximately,  103,920  acres  of  land 
alleged  to  have  been  illegally  alienated,  and  for  accounting  by  various 
defendants  for  timber  cut  and  removed  therefrom.  Three  bills  have 
been  filed  in  equity  to  clear  title  to  288  allotments,  aggregating  23,040 
acres,  and  170  cases  of  alleged  fraudulent  conveyance  have  been  pre- 
pared and  reported  for  suit.  Decrees  and  orders  in  favor  of  the 
United  States  were  obtained  in  45  cases,  by  which  4,906.82  acres  were 
recovered  to  the  Indians;  $700  paid  in  fines;  and  $13,000  paid  for 
land  sold,  representing  a  total  of  $86,602.30.  There  was  collected 
from  timber  trespass  and  depredations  $45,000;  7  claims  were  set- 
tled out  of  court,  representing  $29,333.86;  22  quit-claim  deeds  were 
obtained,  clearing  title  to  1,760  acres;  and  $25,000  was  collected  as 
additional  compensation  for  minors'  lands.  The  net  result  is  that 
there  has  been  collected  in  cash,  recovered  in  land  values,  and  for 
timber  settlements  and  trespass,  more  than  $200,000. 

Four  suits  have  also  been  instituted  by  the  Government  to  restrain 
the  county  officials  of  Becker,  Mahnoman,  and  Clearwater  Counties, 
in  which  the  White  Earth  Reservation  is  located,  from  wrongfully 
taxing  trust  lands  still  held  by  allottees,  whether  full  blood  or  mixed. 
These  tax  cases  involve  lands  aggregating  69,204.11  acres. 

INDIAN  FORESTS. 

The  spring  and  summer  of  1914  were  exceptionally  dry  throughout 
the  Northwestern  States,  where  our  most  extensive  Indian  timber 
holdings  are  located.  Superintendents  of  the  Colville  and  Yakima 
Reservations  reported  a  drought  more  marked  than  even  in  the 
year  1910,  which  was  noted  for  exceptionally  disastrous  forest  fires. 
Although  the  calendar  year  1914  showed  an  increase  over  1913  in 
both  the  number  of  fires  and  the  damage  done,  the  loss  was  very 
small  in  comparison  to  the  value  of  the  timber  and  forest  resources 
which  the  Indian  Service  undertakes  to  protect  with  a  very  limited 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  41 

force.  The  334  fires  reported  burned  over  138,989  acres,  and 
$10,816.15  was  expended  for  labor  and  supplies,  in  addition  to  the 
salaries  of  the  regular  forest  employees.  The  amount  of  standing 
timber  injured  was  estimated  at  12,633,000  feet  board  measure,  and 
the  total  damage  done  to  timber,  reproduction,  forage,  and  improve- 
ments was  estimated  at  $66,956.85.  Of  this  estimated  amount, 
$40,446.50  was  for  damage  to  reproduction  and  $10,352.85  for  loss 
of  forage. 

At  the  sale  of  Choctaw  tribal  timber  land  held  in  November,  1914, 
to  which  reference  was  made  on  page  39  of  my  last  annual  report, 
145,118.55  acres  were  sold  for  $468,847.04.  This  amount  was  $33,- 
336.19  in  excess  of  the  appraised  value  of  the  lands  sold.  Approxi- 
mately 824,000  acres  of  these  lands  remain  unsold. 

Logging  operations  were  continued  during  the  winter  of  1914-15 
on  the  Bad  River,  Lac  Courte  Oreille,  and  Leech  Lake  Reservations. 

The  amount  cut  on  each  reservation  is  shown  in  the  statistical 
appendix  accompanying  this  report.  There  were  no  logging  opera- 
tions on  the  Fond  du  Lac  and  Lac  du  Flambeau  Reservations.-  On 
the  Red  Lake  Reservations  over  a  million  feet  were  cut  by  the  In- 
dians. Minor  operations  were  conducted  on  the  White  Earth  and 
Mackinac  Agencies  under  contracts  approved  in  previous  years. 

As  soon  as  the  weather  would  permit  in  April,  1915,  a  crew  of  12 
men  was  started  on  a  cruise  of  the  timber  within  the  Quinaielt  Indian 
Reservation,  Wash.  This  cruise  is  being  conducted  primarily  by  the 
strip-valuation  method ;  but  other  methods  have  been  used  as  checks 
to  provide  against  errors  to  which  that  system  may  lead  when  em- 
ployed exclusively.  This  reservation  contains  over  200.000  acres, 
most  of  which  is  timbered.  Data  are  being  obtained  for  the  prepara- 
tion of  a  contour  map,  and  notes  are  being  taken  as  to  soil  and  other 
features.  It  is  expected  that  about  one-half  of  the  reservation  can  be 
examined  during  the  working  season  of  1915. 

MENOMINEE  RESERVATION. 

In  September,  1914,  work  was  begun  on  a  thorough  examination  of 
land  and  an  estimate  of  the  timber  on  the  Menominee  Indian  Reser- 
vation. The  autumn  and  early  winter  were  very  favorable  to  the 
prosecution  of  this  work  because  of  the  light  precipitation.  Early 
in  April,  1915,  the  work  was  resumed,  and  will  be  completed  about 
November  1,  1915.  Although  the  act  of  March  28,  1908  (35  Stat.  L., 
51),  under  authority  of  which  the  Neopit  project  was  established, 
contemplated  a  management  of  the  Menominee  forests  in  accordance 
with  forestry  principles,  no  comprehensive  estimate  of  the  timber  on 
the  reservation  has  been  undertaken  previous  to  the  examination  now 
in  progress.  This  cruise  will  furnish  definite  and  detailed  informa- 


42  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

tion  both  as  to  the  amount  of  timber  by  species  and  the  character  of 
the  land  in  each  40  acres,  and  will  also  afford  the  necessary  informa- 
tion for  a  contour  map  and  the  future  management  of  the  timber 
operations  on  a  scientific  and  efficient  basis. 

INHERITANCE  CASES. 

The  work  of  determining  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees  under 
the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  for 
the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1915,  progressed  very  satisfactorily,  the 
Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  year  having  allowed  $80,000  for 
the  employment  of  examiners  of  inheritance  and  necessary  clerical 
help  in  the  field  and  $20,000  for  employment  of  clerks  in  this  office. 

During  the  year  about  14,000  cases  were  received  in  the  office,  on 
which  17,527  letters  were  written.  The  estates  of  6,140  deceased 
Indians  who  held  allotments  under  trust  patents,  and  the  estates  of 
566  deceased  Indians  holding  allotments  under  restricted  fee,  or  hav- 
ing only  an  inheritable  interest  in  trust  property,  received  final  con- 
sideration. Approximately  $92,100  was  collected,  or  is  due,  under  the 
provisions  of  laAv  requiring  that  $15  shall  be  collected  to  cover  the 
cost  of  determining  the  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees  in  each 
case.  In  addition  thereto  7,637  miscellaneous  cases  were  disposed  of. 
The  wills  of  132  Indians  were  approved. 

During  the  year  the  heirship  work  at  the  following  agencies  was 
brought  up  to  date : 

Cantonment,  Okla.  Sac  and  Fox,  Okla. 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Okla.  Shawnee,  Okla. 

Crow,  Mont.  Southern  Ute,  Colo. 

Otoe,  Okla.  Tomah,  Wis. 

Pawnee,  Okla.  Umatilla,  Oreg. 
Potawatomi,  Kans. 

There  are  now  employed  in  the  field  17  examiners  of  inheritance 
and  1  clerk  authorized  to  determine  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allottees. 
This  force  is  engaged  in  conducting  hearings  on  30  of  the  reserva- 
tions, and  without  doubt  will,  by  the  end  of  the  year,  very  materially 
reduce  the  number  of  undetermined  heirship  cases. 

It  is  intended  during  the  fiscal  year  1916  to  make  special  effort  to 
close  up  all  undetermined  Indian  heirship  cases  on  the  public  domain, 
as  well  as  to  ascertain  the  heirs  of  Indian  homesteaders  whose  prop- 
erty is  still  under  restrictions. 

COURT  DECISIONS. 

The  following  are  the  most  important  cases  involving  Indian 
affairs  decided  by  the  courts  during  the  last  year : 

United  States  v.  Bartlett  (235  L7.  £.,  72).— This  was  a  suit  to  can- 
cel two  deeds  of  surplus  lands  allotted  to  a  Creek  citizen  of  three- 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  43 


fourths  Indian  blood.  It  was  decided  that  Congress  did  not  intend 
to  reimpose  restrictions  on  these  lands  by  the  act  of  May  27,  1908 
(35  Stat.  L.,  312),  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the  supplemental 
Creek  agreement  of  June  30,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  500),  having  expired 
by  limitation  of  time.  This  case  is  important  because  the  doctrine 
was  advanced  for  the  first  time  before  the  Supreme  Court  that  Con- 
gress had  the  power  to  reimpose  restrictions  which  had  expired. 
The  court,  however,  being  of  opinion  that  Congress  did  not  intend 
to  reimpose  restrictions,  found  it  unnecessary  to  discuss  the  consti- 
tutional question. 

Missouri,  Kansas  &  Texas  Railway  Co.  v.  United  States  (235  U.  $., 
37) . — This  was  a  case  of  considerable  importance.  It  was  held  that 
a  statute  granting  public  lands,  or  Indian  lands  which  may  become 
public  lands,  will  not  be  construed  as  including  Indian  lands  after- 
wards allotted  in  severalty  under  a  treaty  made  immediately  before 
the  enactment  of  the  statute,  as  to  do  so  would  impute  bad  faith  on 
the  part  of  the  Government  toward  the  Indians. 

Skelton  v.  Dill  (235  U.  £.,  206)  and  AdMns  v.  Arnold  (235  U.  £., 
417). — In  these  cases  it  was  held  that  restrictions  upon  alienation  of 
allotments  to  Creek  citizens  made  under  the  acts  of  March  1,  1901 
(31  Stat.  L.,  861),  and  June  30,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  500),  apply  only 
to  allotments  made  to  citizens  in  their  own  right  and  do  not  apply  to 
those  made  on  behalf  of  deceased  members  of  the  tribe. 

Truskett  v.  Closser  (decided  Feb.  23,  1915).— The  Supreme  Court 
held  that  the  Oklahoma  district  court  could  not  confer  rights  of 
majority  conformably  to  a  State  statute  on  a  minor  Indian  allottee, 
notwithstanding  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  by  Indian 
allottees  made  by  the  act  of  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312). 

Joplin  Mercantile  Co.  v.  United  States  (decided  by  the  Supreme 
Court  Feb.  23,  1915). — It  was  held  that  pending  the  continuance 
under  section  3  of  the  Oklahoma  enabling  act  of  June  16,  1906  .(34 
Stat.  L.,  267),  of  the  prohibition  under  State  laws  of  the  sale  of 
liquors  in  the  former  Indian  Territory  and  their  introduction  into 
that  Territory  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  1, 1895  (28  Stat.  L., 
693),  against  the  introduction  of  liquors  are  not  enforceable  as  in- 
trastate  transactions. 

Henry  Henkel  et  al.  v.  United  States  (Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States;  decided  Apr.  5,  1915). — In  this  case  the  practice  of  obtaining 
relinquishments  signed  by  natural  guardians  of  minors,  which  has 
obtained  in  the  department,  was  upheld  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

Ash  Sheep  Co.  (221  Fed.,  582}.— It  was  held  by  a  divided  court 
that  under  the  act  of  April  27,  1904  (33  Stat.  L.,  352),  whereby  the 
United  States  agreed  to  dispose  of  the  ceded  lands  for  the  Crow  In- 
dians and  expressly  provided  that  the  Government  should  not  be 
bound  to  purchase  any  of  the  lands  or  to  find  purchasers  therefor, 


44  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

it  was  the  intent  only  that  the  Government  should  act  as  trustee  for 
the  Indians,  to  dispose  of  their  lands,  and,  consequently,  that  the 
lands  so  ceded  did  not  become  public  lands,  upon  which  the  free 
grazing  of  sheep  was  permitted. 

United  States  ex  rel.  Julia  Mickadiet  and  Alma  La  Mere  Tiebault 
v.  Franklin  K.  Lane,  Secretary  of  the  Interior. — The  Court  of  Ap- 
peals, reversing  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  in 
a  petition  for  injunction  to  restrain  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  from 
assuming  further  jurisdiction  in  the  estate  of  a  deceased  Winnebago 
allottee  whose  heirs  had  been  found  by  the  department  under  the 
provisions  of  the  act  of  June  25.  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  held  that 
the  action  of  the  department  was  final  and  conclusive  and  that  the 
Secretary  was  without  jurisdiction  to  reopen  the  case  or  in  any  way 
to  readjudicate  it,  and  that  the  decree  of  adoption  under  which  the 
plaintiffs  claimed  was  valid,  and  that  the  plaintiffs  Avere  the  sole  heirs 
of  the  decedent. 

EXHIBITION  INDIANS. 

The  commercializing  of  aboriginal  Indian  life  by  means  of  exhibi- 
tions and  shows  in  which  the  real  modern  Indian  assumes  the  past  is 
in  every  way  discouraged.  While  there  is  much  of  his  old  life  worth 
preserving,  it  is  not  the  part  which  is  desired  by  moving-picture  com- 
panies or  the  Wild  West  show.  The  Indians  who  leave  their  homes, 
whether  on  or  off  the  reservation,  to  go  with  these  exhibitions  obtain 
a  false  ideal  of  the  civilization  we  desire  them  to  emulate,  and 
frequently  permit  the  indulgence  of  their  appetite  for  liquor  or  other 
depraved  customs.  A  rigid  censorship  is  exercised  over  contracts 
made  for  exhibition  purposes,  so  that  the  interests  of  the  Indians 
financially,  morally,  and  otherwise  will  be  protected. 

On  May  29,  1915,  I  addressed  the  following  letter  to  Hon.  J.  M. 
Kennedy,  State  commissioner  of  agriculture,  Billings,  Mont. : 

Receipt  is  acknowledged  of  your  telegram  of  May  18,  1915,  in  which  you 
recommend  that  Hon.  Charles  Harris  be  permitted  to  take  100  Indians  from  the 
Crow  Reservation  to  participate  in  a  Wild  West  show  in  connection  with  the 
Fourth  of  July  celebration  to  be  held  at  Billings. 

During  October  last  I  visited  the  Crow  Reservation  and  spent  something  like 
two  weeks  studying  and  investigating  conditions  from  every  point  of  view, 
covering  the  entire  reservation. 

It  is  generally  believed  that  the  Crow  Indians  have  not  made  as  great  progress 
as  might  under  proper  circumstances  have  been  acquired,  and  while  to  some 
extent,  I  share  in  this  belief,  I  attribute  much  of  this  condition  to  the  manage- 
ment of  tlieir  affairs  rather  than  wholly  to  the  Indians  themselves. 

I  am  fully  persuaded  that  under  different  circumstances  they  will  respond  and 
accomplish  things  for  themselves  far  beyond  either  the  general  opinion  con- 
cerning them  or  their  own  heretofore  realization  of  their  capacity  and  pos- 
sibilities. 

About  a  year  ago  a  new  superintendent  was  placed  in  charge  of  this  reserva- 
tion, in  whose  capacity  and  earnestness  of  purpose  I  have  great  confidence,  and 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  45 

recently  a  complete  reorganization  of  the  reservation  employees  has  been 
effected.  It  is  my  conviction  that  Supt.  Estep  has  the  situation  well  in  hand 
and  that  he  is  developing  such  a  change  as  will  soon  bring  about  a  revolution 
in  the  moral,  educational,  and  industrial  condition  of  the  Crow  Indians. 

I  found  a  splendid  spirit  of  cooperation  among  the  Crows  and  an  apparent 
desire  on  their  part  to  take  advantage  of  their  opportunities  in  such  a  serious 
way  as  to  encourage  me  in  believing  that  they  really  desire  to  in  all  respects 
raise  their  standards. 

This  is  clearly  exemplified  in  the  fact  that  last  summer  with  aggressive 
encouragement  they  cut  and  stacked  several  thousand  tons  of  hay  for  the  new 
tribal  herd ;  that  last  fall  they  plowed  the  ground  and  put  in  a  great  deal  larger 
acreage  of  fall  wheat  than  in  any  previous  year ;  and  that  this  spring  they  have 
asked  for  and  sowed  more  than  3  carloads  of  seed  wheat. 

The  Indian  fair  held  at  the  agency  last  year  was  a  splendid  success,  free 
from  degrading  influences  or  conduct,  altogether  representative  of  a  happy, 
industrious,  and  prosperous  agricultural  people.  Such  an  exhibition  and  oppor- 
tunity for  enjoyment  is  greatly  to  be  encouraged,  and  it  is  the  intention,  as  it  is 
the  prospect,  that  at  the  coming  fall  the  Crow  Indians  shall  have  another  agri- 
cultural fair  which  will  surpass  the  one  of  last  year  and  be  a  real  indication 
of  their  progress  and  a  source  of  pride  to  their  race. 

The  agency  farmers,  stock  men,  and  other  industrial  employees  on  the  reserva- 
tion have  found  a  new  spirit  among  the  Crows.  I  am  recently  in  receipt  of  an 
extended  and  detailed  report  from  Supt.  Estep  which  shows  that  the  efforts 
now  being  made  to  improve  general  conditions  on  the  reservation  are  meeting 
with  very  gratifying  success. 

It  is  felt  that  the  Crow  Indians  are  now  at  a  stage  in  their  development  where, 
with  proper  sympathy  and  encouragement,  the  entire  tribe  will  make  rapid 
strides  in  all  that  goes  to  develop  independent,  self-respecting,  and  self-support- 
ing citizens. 

This  condition  makes  it  urgent  that  no  step  be  taken  which  might  in  any 
manner  interfere  with  their  progress. 

Anything  which  encourages  the  Indians  to  array  themselves  in  warlike  cos- 
tumes of  the  past,  to  participate  in  old-time  dances,  so-called  Wild  West  shows 
and  the  like,  must  tend  to  emphasize  the  habits  and  customs  of  long  ago  which, 
if  the  Indian  is  to  assume  the  burden  and  enjoy  the  privileges  of  citizenship, 
must  disappear. 

Such  exhibitions  likewise  tend  to  give  the  public  a  wrong  idea  of  the  present 
condition  existing  among  them  by  giving  prominence  to  the  Indian  who  delights 
in  the  atmosphere  and  exhibitions  of  the  Wild  West  show  at  the  expense  and 
in  discouragement  of  the  progressive  and  industrious  Indian  whose  children 
are  in  school,  whose  wife  is  a  good  housekeeper,  and  who  is  applying  himself 
to  industrial  accomplishments  in  harmony  with  the  new  life  which  should  be 
involved  in  the  white  man's  civilizing  influence. 

Everything  considered,  I  am  quite  of  the  opinion  that  the  best  interests  of 
the  Crow  Indians  demand  that  they  be  permitted  to  remain  undisturbed  rather 
than  that  they  attend  celebrations  in  near-by  towns  with  injurious  results  to 
themselves,  disaster  to  their  crops,  stock,  and  home  interests,  and  thereby 
to  some  extent  justify  the  frequent  charge  that  they  are  not  progressive  and 
contribute  nothing  to  the  world's  production  or  our  advancing  civilization. 

For  these  and  other  reasons  I  am  not  in  favor  of  the  practice  of  permitting 
Indians  to  participate  in  the  type  of  exhibitions  ordinarily  given  in  connec- 
tion with  Wild  West  shows.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  present  policy  of  the 
Indian  Bureau. 


46  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

DEBTS  OF  INDIANS. 

A  serious  drawback  to  the  commercial  independence  of  the  average 
Indian  is  the  greed  and  rapacity  of  the  "  money  shark."  who  stands 
ever  ready  to  get  his  willing  victim  into  his  debt.  Without  any 
inherited  traits  of  economy,  his  ready  desire  for  present  gratifica- 
tion of  his  wants  makes  him  the  easy  prey  of  the  unscrupulous. 
Knowing  the  natural  tendency  of  the  Indian  to  be  honest  in  pay- 
ment of  a  debt,  the  avaricious  money  lender  eagerly  embraces  every 
opportunity  for  loaning  him  money  or  selling  to  him  on  credit. 

These  loans  were  frequently  made  at  such  usurious  rates  that 
the  knowledge  came  as  a  shock  to  the  public  when  they  were  dis- 
closed in  a  recent  investigation  of  the  Osage  Eeservation.  This  curse 
is  a  corollary  of  their  wealth  which  continually  presents  a  shining 
lure  to  the  unscrupulous. 

When  their  debts  are  paid  off  with  trust  funds  they  usually  re- 
mortgage,  and  continue  the  almost  endless  cycle  of  borrowing  and 
mortgaging.  The  superintendent,  however,  is  protecting,  as  far  as 
practicable,  property  which  has  been  freed  of  incumbrance  with 
trust  moneys  by  taking  a  Government  bill  of  sale.  This  is  expected 
to  accomplish  good  results. 

The  vast  estate  of  the  Osage  Indians  is  such  a  temptation  that 
only  the  most  watchful  care  can  prevent  its  dissipation.  The  schools 
on  the  reservations  and  all  other  forces  which  will  work  for  right 
living  are  engaged  in  impressing  these  people  with  their  danger, 
and  urging  them  to  avoid  debt  by  living  within  their  incomes. 

The  debt  problem  outside  of  the  Osage  Tribe  is  not  so  serious,  as 
the  Osages  are  much  richer  than  any  other  tribe.  In  1909  the  de- 
partment, in  order  to  relieve  the  Indians  of  embarrassment  on  ac- 
count of  their  increasing  debts,  forbade  assistance  being  rendered 
their  creditors  in  the  collection  of  these  debts.  An  effort  was  then 
made  to  effect  settlement  of  outstanding  debts  which  had  been  in- 
curred prior  to  December  17,  1909,  the  date  of  the  order. 

As  warnings  have  been  issued  to  traders  since  1904  that  credit  ex- 
tended was  at  their  own  risk,  no  liability  attaches  to  the  Indian  Office 
in  connection  with  the  Indians'  indebtedness.  However,  reasonable 
efforts  are  being  made  to  impress  upon  the  Indians  their  obligations 
to  settle  their  just  debts,  but  the  traders  may  lose  a  proportion  of 
their  claims  on  account  of  the  methods  used  in  extending  credit. 

INDIAN  TRADERS. 

Realizing  that  those  persons  holding  licenses  to  trade  with  Indians 
are  in  a  position  to  serve  as  an  example  to  the  Indians,  and  in  line 
with  other  work  to  suppress  liquor  traffic,  extraordinary  efforts  have 
been  made  to  insure  that  all  traders  keep  their  pledges  not  to  use  in- 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES.  47 

toxicants  as  a  beverage  while  engaged  in  business  on  the  reservations. 
Superintendents  are  required  to  make  a  personal  investigation  of 
their  habits  in  this  respect  and  report  any  incidents  occurring  either 
on  or  off  the  reservation  which  might  disqualify  them  for  traders' 
licenses. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

Proper  handling  of  his  own  moneys  is  a  liberal  economic  education 
to  the  Indian.  To  impress  this  on  the  average  individual  is  a  serious 
problem,  as  "  money "  was  such  an  unknown  quantity  among  the 
aborigines  of  the  continent  that  no  word  corresponding  to  this  im- 
portant function  of  our  commercial  life  was  found  in  their  vocabu- 
laries. As  a  fundamental  idea  of  values  becomes  more  deeply  im- 
planted in  the  individual,  a  more  liberal  policy  in  handling  his  own 
funds  is  permitted. 

The  number  of  complaints  by  reason  of  this  has  been  greatly  re- 
duced. The  responsibilities  of  the  superintendent,  while  consider- 
ably increased,  have  yet  enabled  him  to  give  more  careful  and  intelli- 
gent supervision  of  the  Indians  and  their  interests  than  heretofore 
without  destroying  their  individualism  or  fostering  the  time-worn 
paternalism.  The  careful  use  of  his  own  money,  teaching  him  intel- 
ligent thrift,  is  the  ultimate  purpose  of  permitting  the  largest  use 
practicable  by  the  Indian  of  his  own  moneys. 

PURCHASE  OF  SUPPLIES. 

The  office  has  effected  radical  changes  in  its  methods  of  handling 
the  purchase  of  supplies,  involving  a  reorganization  of  the  purchase 
division,  with  a  view  to  educating  certain  units  of  the  office  force 
in  a  more  expeditious  and  intelligent  handling  of  the  purchase  of 
supplies  for  the  service,  and  a  marked  improvement  has  already  been 
accomplished,  both  as  to  the  expedition  of  purchases  and  the  procur- 
ing of  the  best  obtainable  prices.  This  subject  is  being  studied  from 
all  angles,  and  it  is  expected  that  there  will  be  evolved  as  perfect 
a  system  as  can  possibly  be  used  under  the  restrictions  imposed  by 
Congress  and  the  regulations  necessary  to  insure  honesty  and 
efficiency. 

The  permanent  warehouses  at  New  York  and  Omaha  were  closed 
during  the  fiscal  year  as  required  by  law.  There  are  at  present  three 
permanent  warehouses,  one  each  at  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  San 
Francisco.  In  order  to  receive  and  forward  supplies  which  were 
purchased  for  delivery  at  New  York  and  Omaha,  temporary  head- 
quarters were  located  at  these  two  points,  and  are  conducted  partly 
by  detail  from  the  office  and  the  field  at  a  nominal  cost  compared  to 
charges  incurred  by  the  maintenance  of  permanent  warehouses. 


48  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

IRRIGATION. 

A  very  large  proportion  of  all  Indians  live  upon  reservations 
having  rainfall  insufficient  to  carry  on  successful  agricultural  pur- 
suits. In  the  reclamation  of  these  areas  approximately  403,000  acres 
are  now  irrigable  through  completed  works  constructed  under  the 
direct  supervision  of  this  bureau.  Upon  the  60  reservations  where 
these  projects  are  located  are  more  than  80,000  Indians,  so  it  is  evi- 
dent that  much  more  land  must  be  eventually  provided  with  water. 
To  this  end  surveys  and  investigations  both  as  to  the  possibility  and 
desirability  of  enlarging  present  irrigation  projects  and  the  initia- 
tion of  new  projects  have  been  made. 

On  the  Colville  Reservation  in  Washington  several  areas  were 
mapped  and  plans  prepared  for  irrigation  works  where  the  water 
supply  can  be  obtained  at  a  reasonable  cost.  It  is  especially  desirable 
to  undertake  these  projects  in  the  near  future. 

The  Papago  country,  in  southern  Arizona,  was  covered  by  a  recon- 
noissance  survey  of  sufficient  accuracy  to  determine  water  supplies 
sufficient  to  provide  for  stock  and  domestic  use,  which  seems  to  be 
the  limit  of  water  possibility  in  this  very  arid  country.  On  the 
Gila  River  the  extensive  survey  to  determine  the  legal  and  physical 
availability  of  the  supply  of  water  for  the  Pima  Indians,  as  pro- 
vided for  in  the  appropriation  act  of  August  1,  1914,  has  been  com- 
pleted. Investigations  have  also  been  made  on  the  Southern  Ute, 
Western  Shoshone,  Taos,  Fort  Apache,  Klamath,  Wind  River,  Owens 
Valley,  CaL,  and  upon  various  other  reservations. 

The  character  of  the  soil  and  the  climate  and  water  supply  on  sev- 
eral reservations  is  of  such  a  nature  that  stock  raising  seems  to  be 
the  most  remunerative  occupation  for  the  Indians.  The  development 
of  water  to  increase  the  value  of  the  grazing  areas  has  been  continued, 
especially  in  the  Navajo  and  Papago  countries.  A  total  of  53  wells 
were  drilled  during  the  past  year,  with  varying  results. 

Upon  the  northern  reservations  the  limit  of  stock  raising  is  deter- 
mined by  the  amount  of  winter  feed  which  may  be  obtained. 

IRRIGATION   CONSTRUCTION. 

Among  the  more  important  operations  were  the  following:  Con- 
struction of  the  Sprague  River  diversion  dam  of  the  Modoc  Point 
project,  Klamath  Reservation,  Oreg.,  was  completed  during  the  year, 
and  also  all  the  canal  system  except  some  laterals  with  their  neces- 
sary structures.  On  the  ceded  portion  of  the  Wind  River  Reserva- 
tion, Wyo.,  arrangements  were  made  to  construct,  in  cooperation  with 
white  settlers,  an  enlarged  Le  Clair  Canal,  covering  more  than  7,000 
acres  of  Indian  allotments,  which  lie  too  widely  separated  to  have 
been  economically  irrigated  without  this  cooperation.  On  the  Gila 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  49 

River  Reservation,  Ariz.,  several  old  Indian  canals  were  rebuilt  on 
proper  engineering  lines  to  insure  a  more  reliable  water  supply.  On 
some  reservations  many  of  the  timber  structures  erected  in  the 
early  days  of  difficult  transportation  for  irrigation  construction  are 
now  being  replaced  with  more  enduring  material.  On  the  Crow 
Reservation  several  large  steel  flumes  were  substituted  for  the 
former  defective  timber  ones.  Similar  work  was  done  for  other 
structures  on  Crow  and  Fort  Belknap,  Mont.,  and  Wind  River,  Wyo., 
and  other  reservations.  The  principal  work  on  Uinta,  Fort  Hall, 
Yakima,  and  Walker  River  has  been  the  maintenance  and  opera- 
tion of  the  systems  and  extensions  of  laterals  as  needed.  The  diffi- 
culties arising  in  the  Hogback  Canal  on  the  San  Juan  Reservation, 
Ariz.,  due  to  the  porous,  shifting  character  of  the  material  through 
which  it  passes,  have  been  overcome  and  water  carried  throughout 
its  length.  The  three  largest  irrigation  projects  for  the  Mission 
Indians  in  southern  California,  Pala,  Morongo,  and  Rincon,  were 
practically  completed  and  a  commendable  increase  in  cultivated 
acreage  made  by  these  Indians.  Considerable  work  increasing  the 
water  available  and  improving  irrigation  systems  was  done  for  the 
New  Mexico  Pueblos. 

UTILIZATION  OF  WAITER. 

The  ultimate  results  which  should  be  derived  from  irrigation  work 
have  received  much  study,  so  that  the  greatest  benefits  may  be  se- 
cured from  the  expenditures  made.  Among  many  tribes  irrigation 
agriculture  is  little  known,  and  to  induce  the  individual  Indians  to 
take  advantage  of  their  opportunity  to  become  self-supporting  various 
plans  have  been  devised  and  are  being  carried  out. 

In  many  instances  the  rights  of  the  Indians  to  the  continued  and 
undisputed  possession  of  water  for  irrigation  are  aided  by  the  actual 
beneficial  use  thereof,  so  that  my  efforts  to  increase  the  area  being 
farmed  under  the  various  projects  are  not  only  for  the  primary 
object  of  making  a  larger  number  of  Indians  self-supporting,  but 
also  to  prevent  as  far  as  possible  litigation  which  might  jeopardize 
the  valuable  water  rights  upon  which  the  success  of  the  various  irri- 
gation projects  depends. 

At  Crow  Reservation,  Mont.,  there  has  been  an  increase  of  more 
than  12,000  acres  during  the  past  year.  The  Yuma  Reservation, 
Ariz.,  has  more  than  quadrupled  its  farmed  area.  The  additional 
area  prepared  for  irrigation  at  Uintah  is  about  20,000  acres.  The 
Indians  have  taken  hold  of  agriculture  at  Klamath  with  unexpected 
energy,  and  nearly  all  the  able-bodied  men  are  engaged  in  farming 
their  allotments.  At  Wind  River,  Fort  Hall,  and  Fort  Belknap 
Reservations  several  thousand  acres  of  new  land  is  being  irrigated 
at  each  place. 

8340—15 4 


50  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

The  foregoing  are  all  Indians  who  are  not  naturally  agricultur- 
ists. Among  the  Pima,  Zuni,  New  Mexico  Pueblos,  and  other  agri- 
cultural tribes  there  has  been  also  marked  advance  with  the  new 
works  and  extensions  provided  for  the  irrigation  of  their  lands. 

At  Yakima  (Wash.)  Keservation  practically  all  the  land  which 
can  be  supplied  by  the  present  canal  system  is  being  farmed.  The 
total  is  more  than  40,000  acres.  Additional  acres  would  be  rapidly 
brought  under  cultivation  if  funds  were  made  available  for  the  con- 
struction of  the  necessary  diversion  dam  and  enlarged  and  extended 
canal  system. 

COOPERATIVE  IRRIGATION. 

The  requirements  of  the  four  reservations  where  the  irrigation 
work  is  under  the  Reclamation  Service  have  been  carefully  kept  in 
view.  At  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  1915  about  65,000  acres  of  Indian 
allotments  were  provided  with  means  of  irrigation  on  these  reser- 
vations, to  which  are  attached  nearly  8,000  Indians.  With  respect 
to  the  three  Montana  reservations — Blackfeet,  Flathead,  and  Fort 
Peck — a  report  covering  present  conditions  and  making  recommenda- 
tions for  future  methods  of  cooperation  of  this  bureau  with  the 
Reclamation  Service  has  been  prepared.  These  plans  are  being 
carried  forward  and  arrangements  perfected  to  benefit  as  much  as 
possible  the  Indians  of  these  reservations.  The  Yuma  Reservation, 
similarly  irrigated  by  works  constructed  by  the  Reclamation  Service, 
has  also  been  the  subject  of  investigations  and  reports  as  to  the 
changes  that  were  found  desirable  in  the  methods  of  operation  of 
the  Indian  unit  as  compared  to  those  in  force  upon  the  remainder 
of  the  Reclamation  project. 

WATER-RIGHTS  PROTECTION. 

The  legal  aspect  of  the  protection  of  Indian  water  rights  received 
special  attention  on  several  reservations.  These  include  Salt  River, 
Pima,  Papago,  Yakima,  Uintah,  Pah-Utes  in  California,  Wind 
River,  and  others. 

The  ownership  and  use  of  water  differs  from  that  of  nearly  any 
other  property,  on  account  of  the  ever-present  possibility  of  interfer- 
ence with  that  use,  especially  of  water  in  flowing  streams,  by  other 
irrigators  at  considerable  distances,  even  in  some  instances  in  other 
States,  and  operating  under  various  laws  and  practices. 

The  cooperation  and  harmonizing  of  the  various  activities  of  the 
Indian  Service,  which  I  have  continually  endeavored  to  bring  about, 
was  aided  by  a  conference  at  Washington,  to  which  the  five  district 
superintendents  of  irrigation  were  called,  in  December,  during  the 
period  of  comparative  inactivity  in  irrigation  work.  Aside  from  the 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  51 


technical  and  engineering  subjects,  including  discussions  relative  to 
the  adopting  of  the  improved  method  of  accounting  for  irrigation 
work  now  being  undertaken  by  this  bureau,  other  matters  of  impor- 
tance were  discussed. 

Careful  consideration  of  the  rights  of  the  Flathead,  Blackfeet,  and 
Fort  Peck  Indians  has  convinced  me  that  the  conditions  under  which 
the  cooperative  irrigation  work  on  these  reservations  has  been  done  in 
the  past  is  not  for  their  best  interest,  and  that  its  continuance  would 
be  a  great  injustice  to  the  Indians;  accordingly  the  Congress  at  its 
coming  session  will  be  requested  to  enact  remedial  legislation  which 
will  relieve  the  Indians  from  continuing  to  finance  these  projects  in  a 
manner  which  has  heretofore  been  inimicable  to  the  accomplishment 
of  their  prosperity  and  self-support. 

It  is  believed  that  their  property  and  the  funds  received  from  the 
sale  of  their  lands  should  be  released  from  the  lien  now  imposed  upon 
same  for  the  total  expense  of  constructing  these  projects,  and  that  the 
cost  of  construction  shall  be  imposed  upon  water  users,  Indian  and 
white  men  alike,  without  discrimination,  according  to  the  benefits 
received  by  each. 


LEASING  TRIBAL  LANDS  FOR  GRAZING. 


The  grazing  areas  on  the  public  domain  have  been  constantly 
diminishing.  Many  of  the  big  privately  owned  pastures  of  Texas 
and  elsewhere  have  been  broken  up  into  smaller  tracts  for  stock  graz- 
ing or  farms.  The  increase  in  the  number  of  Indian-owned  stock  has 
correspondingly  decreased  the  area  of  grazing  ranges  for  lease. 
These  conditions,  together  with  the  advanced  price  of  beef,  mutton, 
and  wool  and  the  great  demand  for  horses  and  mules,  have  mate- 
rially increased  the  number  of  bidders  for  Indian  reservation  leases, 
with  uniformly  better  prices  for  same. 

It  is  our  purpose  to  use  good  business  judgment  in  making  this 
readjustment,  and  accordingly  I  am  having  the  acreage  and  carrying 
capacity  of  many  of  the  big  reservation  ranges  reestimated  by  de- 
pendable and  largely  experienced  stockmen.  Water  supply,  fencing, 
winter  protection,  and  every  factor  essential  to  securing  the  best 
results  obtainable  are  being  industriously  undertaken  and  accom- 
plished. 

The  added  income  to  the  Indians  from  the  better  prices  has  been 
utilized  for  their  advancement,  and,  altogether,  the  results  secured 
are  very  gratifying. 

On  some  reservations  there  is  a  practice  for  intermarried  white 
men  and  some  Indians  with  considerable  white  blood  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  tribe  as  a  whole,  and  particularly  of  the  full  bloods, 


52  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

by  purchasing  their  stock  for  inadequate  prices,  thus  greatly  in- 
creasing their  own  herds  and  so  diminishing  the  ownership  of  the 
average  Indian  as  to  in  many  instances  insure  poverty.  When  privi- 
leged to  do  so,  they  use  grazing  opportunities  to  a  very  large  and 
constantly  increasing  extent,  and  in  some  instances  almost  monop- 
olize a  reservation  without  compensation  to  the  tribe. 

This  situation  is  so  apparently  unjust  and  harmful  that  I  shall 
urge  legislation  which  will  prevent  the  further  carrying  on  of  the 
nefarious  practice  of  concentration  of  ownership  of  stock  among 
Indians  through  purchases  for  less  than  their  value,  and  as  an  offset 
to  the  practice  of  monopolizing  pasture  privileges  a  charge  is  now 
made  for  Indian  stock  grazed  in  excess  of  500  sheep  and  goats  or  100 
horses  and  cattle  per  family.  Very  few  Indians  have  stock  in  excess 
of  these  numbers,  and  this  regulation  will  affect  only  those  who 
are  capable  of  paying  the  tribe  for  grazing  excess  stock. 

FIELD  IMPROVEMENTS. 

We  are  making  a  special  and  determined  effort  to  reorganize  and 
improve  conditions  in  the  Indian  schools  and  on  the  reservations.  It 
has  been  our  purpose  to  so  adjust  superintendencies  and  the  employee 
force  as  to  insure  the  best  results  obtainable.  To  this  end  we  have 
placed  service  employees  in  positions  with  work  where  they  have 
demonstrated  their  capacity  to  make  good.  This  has  been  done  in 
the  interest  of  the  service  and  not  otherwise.  We  have  exerted  our- 
selves to  bring  about  a  closer  relation  between  the  Washington  office, 
the  field  force,  and  the  Indians.  We  have  earnestly  endeavored  to 
extend  encouragement  and  sympathy  to  Indians  throughout  the  en- 
tire country,  and  there  is  widespread  evidence  of  appreciation  and 
response. 

I  have  personally  visited  a  number  of  schools  and  reservations  dur- 
ing the  year,  giving  liberally  of  time  to  each.  It  is  my  experience 
that  personal  contact  with  field  conditions  is  the  best  means  of  secur- 
ing reliable  information,  and  it  is  my  intention  to  make  numerous 
further  visits  as  fast  as  other  duties  will  permit. 

TONGUE  RIVER  RESERVATION. 

The  following  editorial  from  Clay,  Robinson  &  Co.'s  Chicago  Live- 
Stock  Report  concerning  the  Tongue  River  Reservation  indicates 
something  of  our  efforts  on  numerous  Indian  reservations : 

Our  sales  of  western  range  cattle  at  Chicago  on  Monday  of  this  week  in- 
cluded 17  carloads  of  fine  steers  from  the  Tongue  River  Indian  Reservation, 
Lame  Deer,  Mont. 

These  Indian  cattle  were  of  notably  good  quality.  One  hundred  and  seventy- 
eight  head  were  fed  hay  last  winter.  The  balance,  of  same  age  and  quality, 
had  not  been  winter  fed,  but  were  in  good  condition.  Four  loads  brought  $8.95, 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  53 

seven  loads  $8.90,  and  about  four  loads  $8.50.  The  first  two  bunches  averaged 
1,350  pounds  and  the  latter  1,327  pounds. 

The  Tongue  Itiver  Indian  Reservation  is  classed  as  the  best  cattle  range  in 
the  Northwest.  The  reservation  is  rough,  but  much  of  it  is  a  natural  meadow, 
having  numerous  springs  and  small  streams. 

The  fine  grass,  springs  which  never  go  dry  or  freeze  up  in  winter,  and  the 
excellent  natural  protection  from  storms  make  this  reservation  ideal  for  stock 
raising. 

There  are  1,450  Northern  Cheyenne  Indians  living  on  the  reservation  at  this 
time.  The  nearest  railroad  station  is  55  miles  from  the  agency. 

The  needy  condition  of  the  Indians  of  this  section  of  the  country,  where  the 
natural  resources  appear  to  be  so  good,  caused  Hon.  Cato  Sells,  Commissioner 
of  Indian  Affairs,  to  visit  the  reservation  in  the  fall  of  1914.  Mr.  Sells  made 
a  complete  personal  inspection  of  every  part  of  the  reservation.  The  com- 
missioner  is  not  only  deeply  versed  in  law  and  the  banking  business  but  is  also 
thoroughly  informed  upon  stock-raising  and  farming  activities. 

In  the  narrow  fertile  valley  and  on  some  choice  upland  hay,  winter  wheat, 
oats,  alfalfa,  and  certain  garden  vegetables  produce  excellent  results.  Under 
the  conditions  which  Mr.  Sells  found  on  the  reservation  wheat  could  not  be 
ground  into  flour  nor  the  surplus  farm  products  raised  by  the  Indians  mar- 
keted for  the  reason  that  many  of  the  Indians  lived  on  the  reservation  60  or 
70  miles  from  the  nearest  railroad. 

As  a  result  of  Mr.  Sells's  visit  to  the  Tongue  River  Reservation  the  industrial 
program  was  completely  changed.  He  immediately  authorized  the  erection  of 
an  excellent  flour  mill,  which  will  enable  the  Indians  to  have  their  wheat  ground 
into  flour,  from  which  they  will  secure  their  bread.  In  order  to  provide  a 
market  for  their  surplus  hay  and  other  surplus  farm  products  which  the  In- 
dians could  not  sell  on  account  of  being  so  far  from  a  railroad  these  products 
were  purchased  and  fed  to  a  large  number  of  weak  cattle  and  280  head  of 
steers.  The  surplus  was  fed  to  these  cattle  at  a  large  profit.  The  result  of  the 
experiment  in  feeding  the  steers  on  hay  throughout  the  winter  can  best  be 
determined  by  the  following  comparisons  of  the  prices  of  steers  fed,  with  the 
class,  age,  and  grade  of  steers  permitted  to  run  on  the  range  without  feed : 
Average  price  received  for  steers  fed  hay  during  winter,  $126;  average  price 
received  for  steers  of  the  same  age  and  grade  that  were  not  fed  hay  during 
winter,  $108. 

While  the  result  of  the  cattle  feeding  has  been  gratifying  and  profitable  to 
the  Indian  Department  and  the  Indians,  the  providing  of  a  market  for  the 
surplus  farm  products  has  resulted  in  much  more  good.  The  commissioner's 
plan  has  fully  demonstrated  that  stock  raising  and  agricultural  pursuits  go 
hand  in  hand. 

The  providing  of  a  market  for  the  Indians'  surplus  farm  products  and  the 
erection  of  a  flour  mill  have  within  the  past  six  months  induced  the  Indians  to 
more  than  double  their  farm  activities. 

Encouraged  by  the  market  provided  for  the  sale  of  their  hay,  the  Indians 
have  recently  purchased  40  new  mowing  machines  and  20  hayrakes  and  are 
putting  forth  unusual  efforts  to  harvest  a  large  hay  crop. 

It  is  believed  by  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  Northern  Cheyenne  In- 
dians and  their  country  that  if  the  present  plan  of  increasing  and  feeding  their 
stock  is  continued,  and  the  Government  continues  to  aid  them  in  providing  a 
market  for  their  surplus  farm  products,  their  hard  times  are  past,  and  the  tribe 
will  soon  be  rapidly  traveling  the  road  to  civilization,  self-support,  and  prosper- 
ity. The  results  speak  for  themselves. 


54  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

OSAGE. 

Comparatively  few  of  the  Osage  Indians  live  on  their  allotments 
or  farm  the  land  themselves,  many  residing  in  the  villages  set  aside 
by  act  of  Congress  for  their  use.  To  remedy  this  condition  three 
Government  farmers  have  been  assigned  to  this  agency,  and  every 
effort  possible  is  being  made  to  get  the  Indians  to  live  on  their 
allotments.  It  is  estimated  that  about  190,000  acres  of  agricultural 
land  and  600,000  acres  of  grazing  land,  allotted  to  the  Osage  Indians, 
are  leased,  and  it  has  been  customary  in  the  past  for  the  allottees  to 
lease  their  land  for  farming  and  grazing  purposes  without  submitting 
the  lease  for  approval.  In  some  instances  lease  brokers  have  built 
up  an  extensive  business  in  leasing  allotted  lands,  without  depart- 
mental approval ;  this  practice  will  be  discontinued,  and  persons  now 
holding  land  without  an  approved  lease  are  requested  to  submit  their 
leases  for  approval  at  once  or  they  will  be  subject  to  removal  as 
trespassers.  The  total  area  leased  for  oil  and  gas  purposes  aggre- 
gates 714,673  acres.  The  total  receipts  from  oil  and  gas  during  the 
year  aggregated  $560,155.62.  The  total  amount  of  oil  run  during  that 
period  aggregated  7,476,209  barrels.  We  are  making  a  strenuous 
effort  to  better  conditions  generally  at  Osage. 

NEW  YORK  INDIANS. 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  calendar  year  1914  a  specific  investi- 
gation was  made  into  the  present  condition  of  these  Indians  and  the 
status  of  their  title  to  the  lands  now  occupied  by  them,  with  the  view 
of  evolving  some  suitable  and  effective  plan  for  straightening  out 
the  tangled  affairs  of  these  people.  The  report  of  the  investigating 
officer,  an  interesting  and  instructive  paper,  was  submitted  under 
date  of  December  26,  1914.  His  report,  with  other  data  relating  to 
the  Seneca  and  other  Indians  of  the  Five  Nations  of  New  York,  was 
printed  as  House  Document  1590,  Sixty-third  Congress,  third  session. 

ROCKY  BOY'S  BAND  OF  CHIPPEWA. 

For  several  years  this  band  of  Indians  has  presented  a  difficult 
problem  to  the  Indian  Office.  A  few  of  them  were  allotted  on  the 
most  undesirable  part  of  the  Blackfeet  Reservation,  which  they  re- 
fused to  accept,  and  have  been  in  the  habit  of  wandering  about  from 
place  to  place  over  the  country  thereabouts,  sometimes  in  search  of 
work,  but  generally  subsisting  upon  charity. 

Several  months  ago  permission  was  granted  for  these  Indians  to 
locate  temporarily  upon  the  southern  part  of  the  Fort  Assiniboine 
Reserve  and  to  use  the  land  for  gardens  and  pasture  for  their  stock. 
Implements  have  been  purchased  and  a  farmer  appointed  to  assist 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  55 

them,  and  from  present  indications  they  will  produce  a  fair  supply 
of  vegetables. 

Congress  should  make  provision  for  land  on  which  these  Indians 
may  establish  permanent  homes  and  give  them  an  opportunity  to 
become  self-supporting. 

GAMBLING. 

Gambling  is  one  of  the  most  pernicious  evils  in  which  the  Indians 
indulge.  On  some  reservations  the  Indians  have  been  persuaded  to 
give  up  this  vicious  practice,  and  on  others  they  have  been  required 
to  do  so.  Substantial  progress  in  the  elimination  of  this  practice  is 
being  made  throughout  the  entire  Indian  country. 

MARITAL  RELATIONS. 

The  legislature  of  Arizona  has  passed  an  act  empowering  all 
bonded  superintendents  or  agents  of  Indian  schools  or  agencies  to 
issue  marriage  licenses,  under  the  direction  of  the  clerk  of  the  su- 
perior court  of  the  county  in  which  the  school  or  agency  is  located, 
and  to  perform  marriage  ceremonies.  A  similar  law  in  all  States 
in  which  there  are  Indian  reservations  would  help  materially  to 
break  up  the  loose  marital  customs  of  many  tribes  and  improve 
the  moral  standard  of  individuals,  as  well  as  be  of  assistance  in  the 
determination  of  heirs  and  the  settlement  of  estates.  It  is  proper  to 
say  in  this  connection  that  there  is  a  general  tendency  to>  comply 
with  the  statutory  marriage  requirements  in  the  States  where  Indians 
live,  and  the  increase  of  lawful  marriages  is  apparent.  Unquestion- 
ably the  heirship  work  now  being  carried  6n  has  been  a  material 
factor  in  impressing  upon  the  minds  of  Indians  the  importance  of 
lawful  marriages  and  the  certain  relationship  of  parents  and 
children. 

DANCES. 

A  distinction  is  recognized  between  the  barbarous  dances  of  the 
Indian's  wild  days  and  those  indulged  in  at  the  present  time.  The 
influence  of  the  surrounding  whites,  of  returned  students,  and  a  more 
enlightened  spirit  among  the  younger  Indians  has  strongly  tended  to 
break  up  the  ancient  rites  with  their  brutality  and  degrading  features. 

TWO  CRIMINAL  CASES  OF  IMPORTANCE. 

Two  cases  of  a  criminal  nature  which  were  exploited  largely  in  the 
public  press  were  tried  during  the  year. 

John  Ashley,  a  white  man,  murdered  De  Soto  Tiger,  a  Seminole 
Indian,  to  obtain  valuable  otter  hides.  The  murderer  successfully 
eluded  the  State  officers,  but  on  April  27,  1914,  he  was  captured  by 


56  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Thomas  E.  Brents,  a  special  officer  of  our  service,  whom  I  had  de- 
tailed to  assist  in  the  search.  On  his  first  trial  the  jury  disagreed. 
While  again  being  tried  in  November,  1914,  Ashley  escaped  from  the 
custody  of  the  deputy  sheriff.  He  was  retaken  by  the  same  special 
officer  February  24,  1915,  and  on  April  4  was  found  guilty  of  murder 
and  sentenced  to  be  hanged  by  a  judge  presiding  over  the  State  dis- 
trict court  at  Miami,  Fla.  In  this  trial,  for  the  first  time  in  the 
history  of  the  Florida  Seminoles  a  member  of  that  tribe  appeared  as 
a  witness  in  the  white  man's  court.  The  Seminole  Indians  are  now 
said  to  have  more  confidence  in  the  friendship  of  the  Government 
than  ever  before. 

The  other  case  was  that  of  Juan  Chacon,  a  Mexican  herdsman,  who 
on  March  30,  1914,  was  found  murdered  on  the  Ute  Mountain  Reser- 
vation in  Colorado.  Everett  Hatch,  or  Tse-ne-gat,  was  arrested  on  a 
United  States  warrant  charged  with  the  commission  of  the  crime. 
Being  supported  by  his  father,  Old  Polk,  and  a  number  of  other 
Indians,  he  declined  to  surrender  and  fled  to  Utah.  Much  excitement 
prevailed  in  that  section  of  the  country  when,  after  arming  them- 
selves, they  fled  into  a  canyon  and  defied  the  authorities.  During  the 
conflict  several  white  men  and  Indians  were  killed.  Seeking  to  bring 
about  a  peaceful  surrender,  Maj.  Gen.  Hugh  L.  Scott,  United  States 
Army,  was  requested  to  act  as  an  intermediary.  Gen.  Scott  arrived 
at  Bluff,  Colo.,  on  March  11,  and  10  days  later  Tse-ne-gat  and  his 
associates  surrendered.  The  officers  of  the  Federal  court  released 
all  of  the  Indians  except  Tse-ne-gat,  who  was  put  upon  trial  for 
murder  and  acquitted. 

HISTORICAL  WORK. 

The  historical  societies  of  Illinois  and  Wisconsin  have  in  the  past 
half  year  taken  photostatic  copies  of  over  14,000  papers  from  our 
old  files,  embracing  the  period  from  1797  to  1841,  inclusive.  Later 
periods  will  be  taken  up  during  the  winter.  The  valuable  old  files 
have  also  been  consulted  by  historic  investigators  from  the  Central 
and  South  West  States  and  from  North  Carolina  and  Louisiana. 

UTE  JUDGMENT  FUND. 

Systematic  plans  were  formulated  during  the  year  for  the  expendi- 
ture of  the  interest  and  a  part  of  the  principal  of  the  $3,000,000 
"Ute  judgment  fund,"  as  appropriated  each  year  by  Congress,  for 
the  benefit  of  the  Indians  under  the  three  Ute  jurisdictions,  par- 
ticularly at  Uintah  and  Ouray,  where  the  situation  with  respect  to 
the  water  rights  demanded  immediate  attention.  This  situation 
was  brought  about  by  the  fact  that  the  State  laws  have  been  made 
applicable  to  the  operation  of  the  irrigation  project  on  that  reserva- 


COMMISSIONER  OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  57 

tion,  which  was  constructed  at  an  estimated  cost  of  $862,260.78,  about 
82,112  acres  of  land  being  under  ditch.  Up  to  December  1,  1914, 
the  Indians  had  brought  under  cultivation  6,147  acres  and  lessees 
had  cultivated  8,113  acres,  or  a  total  of  13,260  acres,  thus  leaving 
63,852  acres  of  land  actually  under  ditch  but  not  cultivated.  Under 
the  State  laws  this  land  must  be  brought  under  cultivation  and 
beneficial  use  made  of  the  water  by  July,  1919,  under  penalty  of 
forfeiture  of  the  water  rights. 

After  a  careful  investigation  the  conclusion  was  reached  that  the 
best  solution  of  the  difficulty  was  by  leasing  to  white  settlers  on  such 
terms  as  to  accomplish  the  desired  results.  On  March  24,  1915,  a 
comprehensive  plan  was  announced  involving  the  leasing  of  this  land 
for  five  years  and  such  liberal  terms  as  to  invite  white  tenants.  While 
detailed  figures  are  not  yet  at  hand,  preliminary  reports  show  that 
this  plan  has  produced  the  most  gratifying  results,  and  that  approxi- 
mately 20,000  acres  of  the  lands  under  this  jurisdiction  have  been 
leased  or  otherwise  placed  under  cultivation,  and  the  water  rights 
thereby  saved. 

Continuance  of  work  approaching  the  progress  now  being  made 
will  insure  full  protection  to  the  water  rights  of  the  Uintah  Reserva- 
tion Utes,  and  it  is  our  purpose  to  make  every  possible  effort  to  accom- 
plish the  best  results  obtainable. 

As  an  indication  of  what  we  are  doing  and  hope  to  do  in  an  indus- 
trial way  for  all  of  the  Utes,  the  following  editorial  from  the  Ignacio 
(Colo.)  Chieftain  is  here  reproduced: 

UTES  ARE  PROGRESSING. 

It  seems  that  at  last  the  Indian  is  coming  to  understand  the  truth  of  the  say- 
ing, "  By  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  thou  shall  eat  bread,"  and  are  taking  hold  of 
their  farm  work  this  season  with  a  vim  and  energy  that  is  astonishing  to  the 
white  brethren  who  have  known  the  red  man  mainly  for  his  laziness.  It  is  in- 
deed surprising  to  one  to  get  out  for  a  day  and  cover  as  much  of  the  valley  as 
possible  to  see  just  what  they  have  accomplished  in  the  brief  time  since  spring 
opened. 

To  get  the  Indians  on  a  self-supporting  footing  is  the  end  toward  which  the 
Government  officials  and  employees  in  the  service  are  now  working.  Heretofore, 
either  because  of  lax  and  inefficient  administration  of  affairs  or  the  lack  of  neces- 
sary incentive,  but  few  of  them  have  made  more  than  a  desultory,  half-hearted 
attempt  at  farming,  and  a  scattering  few  have  gone  into  stock  rising  on  a  small 
scale,  and  as  to  actually  earning  a  living  on  an  allotment,  those  who  attained 
this  state  of  civilization  could  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  The 
allotted  Indian  land  comprises  nearly  all  of  the  best  farming  land  in  the  Pine 
River  Valley,  and  for  this  to  lie  in  waste  has  been  shameful.  So  the  change  is 
surely  a  welcome  one. 

More  than  700  acres  of  new  land  have  been  cleared  and  put  into  various  crops, 
nearly  double  the  acreage  farmed  previously ;  1,500  acres  have  been  fenced  and 
400  acres  more  will  be  fenced  this  summer  and  fall;  several  new  houses  have 
been  built  and  many  other  improvements  are  under  way. 


58  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

The  total  acreage  in  crops  farmed  by  the  Southern  Utes  this  year  runs  well 
toward  2,000  acres,  and  the  alfalfa,  wheat,  oats,  beans,  and  potatoes  growing 
thereon  look  well,  indeed,  considering  the  haphazard  system  that  has  ruled 
previously. 

In  addition  to  increasing  the  acreage  farmed,  32  more  Indians  have  gone  on 
their  allotments  who  never  before  as  much  as  made  a  pretense  at  farming 
anywhere. 

An  elaborate  irrigation  system  has  just  been  completed  at  a  cost  of  many 
thousands  of  dollars,  and  now  nearly  all  the  Indian  land  on  Pine  River  is  under 
ditch. 

Up  the  valley,  north  of  Ignacio,  on  a  fertile  mesa  that  never  before  had  a  plow 
put  on  it,  a  fair  idea  may  be  gained  of  what  is  being  done.  New  fences  line 
on  each  side  of  the  road  and  growing  crops  have  taken  the  place  of  rank  sage- 
brush, which  was  all  there  was  on  the  ground  but  a  few  weeks  ago.  The  same 
transformations  have  been  made  in  all  parts  of  the  valley — on  the  Durango 
road  west  of  town,  south  toward  La  Boca,  on  either  side  of  the  river,  and  east 
on  Spring  Creek  the  transformation  and  the  work  that  has  been  done  in  such  a 
short  time  after  so  many  years  of  lethargy  is  remarkable. 

Annuity  payments  that  heretofore  were  spent  mostly  for  trumpery,  bright- 
colored  blankets,  gewgaws,  at  gambling  or  for  fire  water,  are  now  placed  on 
deposit  and  can  be  drawn  only  with  a  check  signed  by  the  Indian  himself  and 
the  superintendent.  Under  this  system  the  money  paid  by  the  Government  is 
spent  only  for  the  things  that  will  do  the  Indian  the  most  good. 

Standard  makes  of  wagons,  harness,  machinery,  and  implements  are  sold  to 
the  Indian  farmers  at  prices  lower  than  local  dealers  can  buy  at  wholesale. 
McCormick  mowing  machines  are  sold  them  at  $45,  binders  $100,  3-inch  Stude- 
baker  wagons  at  $65,  galvanized  barbed  wire  at  $2.50  per  hundredweight,  and 
other  things  in  proportion  at  actual  cost  to  the  Government.  On  account  of  a 
reduced  freight  rate  this  cost  is  much  lower  than  the  average  person  would 
suppose. 

Forty-eight  head  of  horses  have  been  bought  this  year  for  the  Indians  at 
prices  ranging  from  $75  to  $100,  and  24  sets  of  harness  have  been  sold  also. 

The  policy  of  Supt.  West  is  to  establish  all  the  Indians  on  land  as  near  the 
agency  as  possible,  where  they  will  be  more  directly  under  the  supervision  of  the 
superintendent  and  the  farmers  who  are  employed  especially  to  direct  their 
work.  To  this  end  nine  real  estate  transfers  have  been  made  since  last  fall,  land 
at  a  distance  being  sold  to  white  men  and  tracts  bought  for  the  Indians  nearer 
the  agency.  In  time  this  entire  division  of  the  Southern  Utes— now  numbering 
360 — will  be  brought  to  farms  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Ignacio. 

If  the  present  policy  of  dealing  with  the  Ute  is  continued,  in  a  few  years  this 
valley  will  be  hard  to  recognize  as  the  same  country.  As  we  said  before,  they 
have  the  best  land ;  and  with  the  advantages  they  have  over  the  white  farmer, 
if  properly  instructed  and  encouraged,  there  is  no  reason  they  should  not  have 
the  best  farms. 

We  can  now  look  forward  to  the  time  when  we  will  point  with  pride  to  the 
many  well-kept  farms  of  our  Ute  neighbors  and  when  we  wTill  be  able  to  consider 
these  people  as  citizens  and  assets  to  our  community  from  any  standpoint. 

INDIAN  EXHIBITS  AT  PANAMA=PACIFIC  EXPOSITION. 

To  demonstrate  the  advancement  of  the  American  Indian  an 
exhibit  was  made  at  the  Panama-Pacific  Exposition  which  awakened 
much  interest.  The  progress  of  the  race  was  faithfully  depicted 
in  those  lines  of  endeavor  on  which  the  educational  forces  of  the  field 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  59 

service  have  been  exercised.  These  exhibits  show  the  amenability  of 
the  individuals  of  the  race  to  the  civilizing  influences  which  have 
been  thrown  around  them.  Beginning  with  the  first  step  in  their 
education,  there  were  displayed  the  courses  of  study  in  schoolrooms 
and  shops  by  means  of  classroom  papers  and  articles  manufactured 
by  pupils.  Specimens  of  printing  and  magazine  work  executed  by 
Indian  apprentices  were  revelations  of  a  latent  artistic  temperament. 
The  teaching  of  grades  from  the  elementary  manual  training  to 
electrical  engineering  was  exemplified.  Exhibits  of  furniture  and 
model  houses  made  by  Indian'  boys  and  the  products  of  the  domestic- 
science  departments,  represented  by  canned  fruits  and  vegetables, 
needlework,  and  tailor-made  suits  attracted  attention.  The  agricul- 
tural exhibit  was  both  creditable  and  instructive. 

Native  Indian  arts  were  not  overlooked,  and  fine  specimens  of 
blanket  weaving,  basketry,  pottery,  willowware,  bead,  leather,  and 
bark  designs  illustrated  the  innate  ingenuity  and  deft  workmanship 
of  the  Indians  in  their  original  state,  as  well  as  the  value,  artistic 
and  intrinsic,  of  the  skill  which  they  bring  with  them  into  their  latter- 
day  life. 

Four  blankets  were  especially  worthy  of  mention.  These  were  the 
prize  winners  in  a  contest  open  to  all  the  Navajos,  and  were  mar- 
velous products  of  the  skill  of  the  workers  in  their  proportion,  color- 
ing, and  technical  execution.  They  served  their  purpose  here,  as  well 
as  setting  a  standard  for  the  Navajos,  of  showing  a  discriminating 
public  the  wonderful  difference,  intrinsically  and  artistically,  between 
the  loosely  woven  analine-dyed  rugs  woven  for  a  quick  sale  and  the 
finished  article,  into  which  the  Navajo  woman  has  placed  months  of 
toil  and  interlaced  the  mysterious  cult  of  the  old  religions. 

Pictures  showing  comparative  scenes  illustrative  of  the  Indians' 
health  condition  and  the  forceful  care  which  is  being  taken  to  pre- 
vent the  spread  of  diseases  were  objects  of  deep  interest. 

The  supervising  jury  of  the  international  exposition  awarded  to 
the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  the  medal  of  honor  for  its  collective 
exhibit  in  the  educational  group.  There  were  35  Indian  schools 
named  as  participants  in  this  honor. 

A  gold  medal  was  also  awarded  to  the  bureau  for  the  betterment 
of  social  and  economic  conditions  of  the  Indians. 

The  following  condensed  summary  of  the  extemporaneous  address 
made  by  me  at  the  conference  of  employees,  returned  students,  and 
others,  held  during  the  San  Francisco  Exposition,  is  here  reproduced 
as  reported  by  Edgar  A.  Allen,  superintendent  of  the  Chilocco  In- 
dian School: 

I  am  greatly  pleased  to  participate  in  this  great  conference  of  employees, 
returned  students,  and  others,  whom  I  may  properly  assume  are  deeply  inter- 
ested in  Indian  welfare. 


60  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

For  a  long  time  I  have  desired  to  visit  the  Indians  of  the  Southwest  that  I 
might  closely  study  their  problems.  I  have  spent  the  last  several  weeks  among 
the  Apaches,  Pimas,  Papagos,  and  the  Indians  along  the  Colorado  River.  About 
a  week  of  this  time  was  given  to  the  Papago  country.  For  many  reasons  I  am 
convinced  that  the  Papago  Indians  are  among  the  most  deserving  of  any  people 
I  have  ever  known.  Their  home 'for  more  than  200  years  has  been  in  the  driest 
desert  of  the  United  States.  No  branch  of  the  Caucasian  race  could  exist  under 
such  conditions,  and  I  doubt  if  there  is  another  Indian  tribe  that  would  do  so. 
Under  these  circumstances  they  have  demonstrated  that  the  genius  of  necessity 
works  out  wonderful  things.  The  Papagos  have  made  their  struggle  unassisted, 
and  their  accomplishments,  in  view  of  their  tremendous  obstacles,  are  marvelous. 
Altogether  they  are  entitled  to  more  kindly  consideration  than  they  have  re- 
ceived, and  it  is  my  firm  purpose  to  show  the  Papagos  that  we  are  willing  to 
help  those  who  have  so  valiantly  helped  themselves.  In  this  connection  I  should 
say  that  their  neighbors,  the  Pimas,  are  an  industrious  and  deserving  people. 
During  my  visit  among  them  I  found  the  warm  side  of  the  Apaches.  I  am 
persuaded  that  they,  too,  respond  to  the  hand  of  friendship  and  that  their  rapid 
advancement  is  assured  with  sympathetic  cooperation.  There  are  important 
and  pressing  problems  demanding  administrative  action  for  the  several  tribes 
and  bands  of  Indians  along  the  Colorado  River.  All  of  the  tribes  recently  vis- 
ited by  me  will  have  the  earnest  and  best  attention  of  which  I  am  capable. 

In  our  labors  with  these  primitive  people  we  are  too  prone  to  become  impa- 
tient. There  is  a  disposition  to  expect  a  revolution  rather  than  an  evolution 
such  as  has  come  about  in  2,000  years  of  the  white  man's  civilization.  It  is 
unfair,  it  is  unjust,  to  expect  more  rapid  progress  from  the  Indian  than  is 
shown  in  the  development  of  the  white  race.  If  I  were  called  upon  to  indi- 
cate the  one-important  word  in  our  relations  with  the  Red  Man,  it  would  be 
patience. 

In  this  splendid  audience  of  service  employees  and  friends  of  the  Indian  there 
are  a  large  number  of  returned  students.  Let  me  briefly  address  myself  espe- 
cially to  the  products  of  our  Indian  schools. 

I  find  among  returned  students  on  the  reservations  something  of  unrest — a 
more  general  tendency  to  want  a  job  in  the  service  than  is  best  for  their  own 
future.  The  real  genius  of  our  Indian  schools  is  industrial  in  its  purpose  and 
should  be  in  its  accomplishments.  There  are  but  few,  if  any,  educated  In- 
dians who  can  not  return  to  their  allotments  and  soon  become  self-supporting 
in  agricultural  and  stock-raising  pursuits,  and  especially  is  this  true  when, 
under  proper  circumstances  to  extend  it,  advantage  is  taken  of  the  reimburs- 
able fund.  There  are  thousands  of  white  tenant  farmers  struggling  to  pay  off 
their  annually  given  crop  mortgage  who  would  be  thankful  for  the  opportunity 
of  the  Indian,  who  has  an  allotment  and  the  privilege  of  a  reimbursable  non- 
interest-bearing  loan.  A  job  as  policeman  or  a  clerkship  is  menial  in  compari- 
son to  the  dignity  and  prosperity  to  be  attained  by  independent  effort  with 
such  advantages. 

"  The  Lord  helps  those  who  help  themselves."  Let  me  give  you  an  illustra- 
tion :  I  have  a  son,  a  junior  in  the  University  of  Chicago.  School  is  now  in  va- 
cation. Is  he  spending  the  summer  as  an  idler,  indolently  waiting  for  the 
opening  of  the  new  year?  No;  he  is  this  summer  spending  every  working 
hour  earning  money  to  help  him  through  the  next  school  year.  When  he  fails 
to  do  this  he  will  not  go  back.  This  treatment  is  not  chastisement ;  it  is  train- 
ing. I  take  this  course  because  I.  love  him,  and  he  willingly  responds.  It  is 
because  I  am  the  Indian's  friend  that  I  speak  plainly.  The  best  friend  is  the 
one  who  tells  the  truth  and  does  not  deal  in  circumvention  or  deception. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  61 

The  responsibility  resting  upon  the  Indian  youth  of  to-day  is  greater  than 
has  ever  fallen  upon  the  young  men  and  women  of  any  race  in  the  history  of 
the  world.  Your  success  or  failure  will  largely  determine  the  future  of  the 
Red  Man  of  America.  The  eyes  of  the  Caucasian  race  are  upon  you.  If  you 
demonstrate  your  capacity  to  take  on  the  education  offered  in  Indian  schools; 
if  you  utilize  the  equipment  thus  acquired  and  affirm  your  capacity  for  advance- 
ment and  self-support;  if  you  rise  to  the  occasion  and  give  living  evidence  of 
the  progress  of  your  people,  the  expenditures  in  your  behalf  will  have  been 
justified;  then  you  and  your  friends  who  are  earnestly  undertaking  to  work 
out  a  future  for  you  and  perpetuate  your  race  will  be  equipped  with  armor  to 
make  a  successful  defense  of  your  people  and  their  property;  insure  the  perma- 
nent establishment  of  your  schools ;  and  all  that  goes  to  justify  the  denial  that 
the  Indian  is  a  "  vanishing  race."  If  you  do  not  measure  up  to  your  oppor- 
tunities, you  fail  at  your  peril.  Whether  you  are  able  to  meet  these  demands 
depends  upon  you.  If  you  fail  there  are  those  who  will  use  it  as  an  argument 
in  support  of  their  aggressions  upon  your  people  and  their  property  and  thus 
endanger  the  possibility  of  the  next  generation  having  similar  opportunities. 
I  have  faith  in  you  and  believe  you  will  make  good. 

Speaking  now  more  generally,  I  repudiate  the  suggestion  that  the  Indian  is  a 
"  vanishing  race."  He  should  march  side  by  side  with  white  men  during  all 
the  years  to  come.  It  is  our  chief  duty  to  protect  the  Indian's  health  and  to 
save  him  from  premature  death.  Before  we  educate  him,  before  we  conserve 
his  property,  we  should  save  his  life.  If  he  is  to  be  perpetuated,  we  must 
care  for  the  children.  We  must  stop  the  tendency  of  the  Indian  to  diminish 
in  number  and  restore  a  condition  that  will  insure  his  increase.  Every  Indian 
hospital  bed  not  necessarily  occupied  with  those  suffering  from  diseases  or 
injury  should  be  available  for  the  mother  in  childbirth.  It  is  of  first  im- 
portance that  we  begin  by  reestablishing  the  health  and  constitution  of  Indian 
children.  Education  and  protection  of  property  are  highly  important,  but 
everything  is  secondary  to  the  basic  condition  which  makes  for  the  perpetuation 
of  the  race. 

I  am  told  that  there  was  a  time  in  the  history  of  the  Indian  Service  when 
approximately  50  per  cent  of  the  employees  were  transferred  annually.  I 
have  heard  of  those  who  have  changed  the  location  of  their  service  as  many 
as  seven  times  in  five  years.  Alt  requests  for  transfers  now  invite  investiga- 
tion, both  of  the  reason  given  and  the  service  record  of  the  applicant,  with 
such  action  as  developments  justify.  The  transfer  may  be  granted ;  a  promo- 
tion is  not  impossible.  However,  the  disclosures  thus  acquired  may  suggest 
demotion  or  even  separation  from  the  service.  Employee  tramps  are  a  menace 
to  the  service.  The  best  test  of  efficiency  is  long  and  satisfactory  service  in 
the  same  place.  The  number  of  transfers  during  the  last  year  has  been 
greatly  reduced  as  compared  with  preceding  years,  and  you  may  be  sure  of 
a  very  substantial  reduction  in  the  future. 

The  student  tramp  is  for  many  reasons  to  be  discouraged.  It  is  my  informa- 
tion that  in  practically  all  of  the  nonreservation  boarding  schools  there  are 
Indian  boys  and  girls  who  have  been  transported  at  Government  expense  long 
distances  from  their  homes,  passing  other  schools  more  accessible  and  having 
as  good  facilities.  This  condition  is  ordinarily  inexcusable  and  should  not 
continue.  It  makes  a  large  and  unnecessary  expense  for  transportation,  en- 
courages unrest,  has  a  demoralizing  influence  on  the  student  body,  in  many 
instances  places  pupils  in  schools  wholly  foreign  to  their  after-life  residence, 
limits  desirable  acquaintance  with  those  with  whom  they  will  mingle  thereafter, 
and  in  an  industrial  way,  particularly  agricultural,  gives  but  little  oppor- 
tunity for  acquiring  knowledge  of  conditions  prevailing  in  their  respective 


62  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

home  localities.  Another  important  factor  is  that  the  nomadic  student  ac- 
quires no  lasting  interest  in  the  institution  where  he  attends  school;  he  is 
thus  robbed  of  that  beautiful  relationship  which  should  maintain  and  ought 
to  engender  a  life-long  pride  in  the  school  where  he  received  his  education. 

No  industrial  Indian  boarding  school  should  buy  its  butter,  eggs,  chickens,  fruit, 
or  vegetables.  No  Indian  reservation  with  farm  facilities  should  purchase  hay  and 
feed  for  the  horses  and  school  dairy  herd,  or  beef  and  flour  for  school,  agency, 
and  issue  purposes.  How  can  we  expect  a  boy  or  girl  to  learn  industrial  effi- 
ciency when  he  has  been  educated  at  a  nonreservation  or  reservation  board- 
ing school  where  the  methods,  if  adopted  in  private  business,  would  promptly 
lead  to  bankruptcy?  During  the  last  two  years  we  have  industriously  under- 
taken to  work  out  a  program  which  will  make  such  things  impossible  in  the 
future. 

It  is  indefensible  for  an  Indian  school  or  reservation  to  purchase  anything, 
soil  and  climate  considered,  that  can  be  produced.  It  is  of  the  highest  impor- 
tance that  the  Indian  boy  arid  girl  be  made  to  realize  and  fully  understand  the 
importance  of  economy,  production,  and  self-support.  They  should  have  a  con- 
tinuous object  lesson  justifying  the  expenditure  for  their  education. 

The  time  must  come  quickly  when  the  Indians  are  producers  rather  than 
altogether  consumers.  In  this  connection  it  is  gratifying  to  announce  that 
our  agricultural  and  stock-raising  efforts  are  meeting  with  general  and  splendid 
success.  The  Indians  on  numerous  reservations  are  demonstrating  their  capac- 
ity for  stock  raising ;  they  are  increasing  their  crop  acreage  rapidly,  as  indicated 
by  the  fact  that  this  year  they  used  several  times  as  much  seed  as  during  any 
previous  year,  and  that  their  cattle,  horses,  and  sheep  are  being  upbred,  in- 
creased, and  cared  for  in  a  businesslike  and  profitable  manner. 

I  firmly  believe  that  if  the  industrial  pi-ogress  of  the  last  2  years  is  continued 
for  10  years  our  Indians  will  be  practically  self-supporting,  with  correspondingly 
reduced  congressional  appropriations. 

The  use  of  the  term  "  surplus  land  "  as  applied  to  Indian  reservations  some- 
times makes  me  impatient.  It  too  often  means  that  the  lands  remaining  after 
the  Indians  of  a  tribe  have  been  allotted  shall  be  separated  from  them  without 
sufficiently  taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  many  times  such  allotments 
are  wholly  unfit  for  agricultural  purposes  or  insufficient  to  insure  a  subsistence 
when  no  additional  provision  is  made  for  grazing  and  stock-raising  opportunities. 
I  know  of  many  allotments  depending  entirely  upon  which  an  Indian  family 
would  starve  to  death  and  \vhere  no  white  family  could  be  induced  to  attempt  to 
make  a  living,  and  yet  under  these  circumstances  an  unsuccessful  Indian  farmer 
is  apt  to  be  declared  a  failure.  There  are  thousands  of  acres  of  land  on  Indian 
reservations  where  100  hundred  acres  would  not  feed  a  rabbit.  I  suggest  that 
hereafter  we  photograph  the  "  painted  desert "  more  frequently  and  less  often 
the  small  alfalfa  patch  on  a  great  reservation.  We  should  at  least  tell  the  whole 
truth.  It  is  prejudicial  to  the  Indian  to  emphasize  the  small  part  of  their  pos- 
sessions that  are  productive  and  withhold  from  the  public  the  very  large  un- 
productive portion.  In  this  wise  it  becomes  wrongfully  understood  that  they 
have  vast  and  valuable  possessions  unused  by  them  which  should  be  otherwise 
utilized. 

A  few  words  on  the  moral  side  of  our  service.  Every  employee  in  the  Indian 
Service  should  be  a  constant  object  lesson  of  sobriety,  that  the  Indian  may  by 
comparison  understand  the  demoralizing  and  disastrous  effects  of  the  use  of  in- 
toxicants by  whatever  name  they  are  known.  After  I  addressed  my  letter  to 
the  employees  of  the  Indian  Bureau  pronouncing  liquor  the  greatest  menace  to 
the  American  Indian  "I  received  a  communication  from  the  Hon.  Joseph  H. 
Choate  warmly  commending  the  sentiment  and  saying :  "  You  are  absolutely 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  63 


right  in  your  position  that  if  we  can  save  the  American  Indian  from  the  curse 
of  whisky  we  can  save  him  from  pretty  much  all  the  other  ills  that  threaten 
him."  No  better  proof  of  the  evils  attending  the  use  of  liquor  can  be  given  than 
to  cite  the  attitude  of  the  present  war  lords  of  the  Old  World.  Liquor  is  the 
instrument  commonly  used  by  the  unscrupulous  who  reach  out  to  get  the  Red 
Man.  Every  effort  within  the  power  of  all  the  employees  in  the  Indian  Service 
should  be  made  to  save  the  Indian  from  the  curse  of  the  liquor  traffic. 

I  have  never  announced  a  policy,  but  if  I  were  to  declare  one  to-day  it  would 
be  in  these  few  words:  In  dealing  with  Indians  and  Indian  problems,  under 
like  conditions,  treat  all  questions  practically  the  same  as  if  white  people  alone 
were  involved. 

Sometimes  it  occurs  to  me  that  I  take  my  job  too  seriously ;  but,  after  all,  do 
you  think  it  possible  to  take  too  seriously  responsibility  involving  the  health, 
education,  property,  and  in  some  measure  the  destiny  of  a  human  race?  The 
Indian  Office  deals  with  a  people  numbering  approximately  325,000  souls.  We 
have  virtually  a  government  within  a  government.  Our  bureau  deals  with 
every  social,  educational,  economic,  and  contractual  relationship.  It  has  some 
feature  of  nearly  every  other  bureau  or  department  in  Washington.  It  is 
original  in  its  operation,  constructive  in  its  action,  and  frequently  without 
precedent.  A  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  might  to  advantage  be  a  lawyer, 
doctor,  teacher,  farmer,  stockman,  lumberman,  oil  expert,  and  mining  engineer — 
have  practically  all  of  the  equipment  within  the  range  of  human  affairs.  There 
is  no  phase  of  life  upon  which  he  does  not  have  to  act  practically  every  day. 
In  addition  to  his  activities  in  connection  with  the  life  of  the  Indians,  he  has 
to  deal  with  the  varied  relationships  of  almost  6,000  employees,  and  there  are 
numerous  perplexing  and  constantly  arising  conditions  which  require  courage 
and  faithful,  unbending  adherence  to  duty. 

In  closing,  let  me  say  that  I  believe  the  employees  of  the  Indian  Service  as 
a  whole  are  the  most  capable  of  all  employees  in  the  Government  service,  and 
that  their  average  compensation  is  not  in  proportion  to  their  worth  and  accom- 
plishments. In  the  performance  of  my  duties  as  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs, 
I  have  had  no  greater  satisfaction  than  my  association  in  the  office  and  the  field 
with  those  devoted  employees  who  in  many  instances  are  making  sacrifices 
and  who  are  rendering  the  most  faithful  and  efficient  service. 

My  pilgrimage  across  the  continent  to  meet  you  in  this  splendid  conference 
is  not  only  to  express  to  you  something  of  my  views  on  Indian  administration, 
but  that  we  may  consult  with  one  another,  strengthen  our  appreciation  of  duty 
to  the  Indian  race,  and  so  execute  our  respective  responsibilities  as  to  insure 
enlargement  of  vision,  to  the  end  that  the  white  and  red  races  shall,  through 
our  efforts,  become  more  and  more  integral  parts  of  our  civilization  and  together 
march  side  by  side  in  peace,  prosperity,  and  happiness. 

CONCLUSION. 

No  one  can  be  connected  for  any  appreciable  length  of  time  with 
the  Indian  Service  without  becoming  deeply  interested  in  the  Indian, 
his  problems,  and  the  plans  for  their  solution.  It  has  been  so  with 
me,  and  I  have  found  among  the  employees  of  the  office  and  in  the 
field  many  who  are  rendering  most  excellent  and  devoted  service.  In 
closing  this  report  on  the  activities  of  the  bureau,  I  wish  to  express 
my  appreciation  of  these  loyal-to-duty  associates.  That  their  efforts 
and  mine  have  not  been  in  vain  is  evidenced  by  the  recent  marked 


64  COMMISSIONED   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

progress  of  the  Indian  individually  and  collectively.  They  are  in 
increasing  numbers  being  given  a  free  hand  in  the  management  of 
their  own  affairs  and  placed  on  an  equality  with  other  citizens  of 
the  country.  This  achievement  is  not  so  readily  realized  by  those 
not  closely  associated  with  the  endeavors  of  the  Government  in  that 
direction,  but  to  those  who  are  part  of  the  organization  and  under- 
stand the  earnest  efforts  which  are  being  employed  to  bring  about 
this  change  progress  is  very  apparent. 

The  accomplishments  in  the  improvement  of  health,  morals,  edu- 
cation, and  industry  are  to  some  extent  reflected  in  this  report,  but 
the  responsiveness  of  the  Indian  to  the  agencies  exerted  in  his  behalf 
can  only  be  fully  appreciated  by  personal  contact,  with  knowledge 
of  the  reports  from  the  field,  personal  talks  with  those  visiting  the 
office,  and  from  field  officers  and  those  having  business  and  other  rela- 
tions with  the  Indians. 

I  am  more  than  encouraged  by  the  success  thus  far  attained;  the 

prospect  for  betterments  was  never  so  bright.    The  successes  acquired 

and  the  promises  for  the  future  are  well  worthy  of  the  sincere  interest 

you  have  shown  during  my  incumbency  in  the  welfare  of  the  Indians. 

Sincerely,  yours, 

CATO  SELLS, 
Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  or  THE  INTERIOR. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES.1 

TABLE  1. — Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  Affairs  since  1899 . 


Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received. 

Increase 
over  pre- 
ceding 
year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(-)  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

'1899  .. 

59.  707 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 
215 
260 

Per  cent. 

1900 

62',  601 
67,  376 
79,237 
79,  115 
8fi,  588 
98,322 
106.  533 
117,556 
152,995 
176,765 
194,241 
197,637 
222,187 
275,  452 
2.80,  744 
298,  240 

4.84 
7.62 
17.60 
.22 
9.03 
13.55 
8.35 
10.34 
30.14 
15.53 
9.88 
1.74 
12.37 
23.97 
1.92 
6.23 

+13.86 
+  3.48 
4-10.92 
-    .75 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
-  2.68 
+  10.34 
+11.&7 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+11.82 
-  1.32 
+  5.80 
+  3.37 
+  6.12 

1901  

1902     

1903 

1904  

1905 

1906 

1907  

1908 

1909  

1910  

1911 

1912  

1913 

1914  

1915  

Per  cent. 

Increase  in  work,  19'15  over  1899 399. 51 

Increase  in  force,  1915  over  1899 "  ]  157.  43 


TABLE  2.— Indian  population  of  the   United  [Stales,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1915. 

{Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 
census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  representative  is  located.] 

Grand  total 333, 010 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  whites 101.  521 

By  blood 75,  534 

By  intermarriage 2,  582 

Freedmen 23,  405 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes 231, 489 

INDIAN   POPULATION    BY   STATES   AND   TERRITORIES. 


Alabama 909 

Arizona , 42,  336 

Arkansas 460 

California 15,  034 


Idaho 4,  200 

Illinois 188 

Indiana 279 

Iowa 364 

Kansas 1, 375 

Kentucky 234 

Louisiana 780 

Maine 892 

Maryland 55 

Massachusetts 688 

1  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  and  scattered  Indians  under  Government  jurisdic- 
tion, except  where  indicated. 


Colorado. 

Connecticut 

Delaware 

District  of  Columbia. 

Florida 

Georgia 


890 
152 
5 

68 
578 

95 


8340—15 5 


65 


66 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Michigan 7,  514 

Minnesota 11,  723 

Mississippi. 1,  253 

Missouri 313 

Montana 11,  329 

Nebraska 3,917 

Nevada 7,  819 

New  Hampshire 34 

New  Jersey 168 

New  Mexico 22, 007 

New  York 6,185 

North  Carolina 8, 047 

North  Dakota 8,  710 

Ohio..  127 


Oklahoma 1 118, 358 

Oregon 6, 481 

Rhode  Island 284 

South  Carolina 331 

South  Dakota 21, 082 

Tennessee '.  216 

Texas 702 

Utah 3, 210 

Vermont 26 

Virginia : 539 

Washington 11,  423 

West  Virginia 36 

Wisconsin 9,  889 

Wyoming 1,  705 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States, "exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1915. 


States,  superin  tendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
latura. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Total  population  2 

333,010 
8909 

104,796 

102,987 

86,452 

107,416 

173,  747 

48,372 

60,973 

Alabama*  Not  under  agent 

Arizona 

42,336 
42T 

21,522 

20,814 

16,  817 

23,519 

42,012 

178 

146 

Camp  Verde  School  ... 

216 

205 

185 

236 

404 

17 

Mohave  —  Apache  

265 
156 

135 
81 

130 

75 

122 
63 

143 
93 

257 
147 

8 
9 

Tonto  —  Apache 

Colorado  River  

61 

477          277 

200 

199 

278 

398 

18 

Chemehue  v  i 

69 
1 

402 
5 

40 

29 
1 
168 
2 

|      199 

278 

1,198 
491 

398 

18 

61 

Cocopa  

Mohave 

234 
3 

Mohave  —  Apache  

Fort  Apache  School—  White  Moun- 
tain Apache    

2.388 
763 

1.177 
423 

1,211 
340 

1,190 
272 

2,304 
763 

11 

73 

Fort  Mojave  School 

Chemehuevi  

148 
615 

170~ 
98 
1,700 

75 
348 

73 

267 

68 
204 

80 
411 

148 
615 

Mohave 

Havasupai  School—  Ha  vasupai  
Kaibab  School—  Kaibab—  Painte... 
Leupp  School—  Navaho  

92 
57 
889 

78 
41 
811 

67 
38 
433 

103 
60 
1,267 

2,038 

170 
98 
1,700 

4,193 

Moqui  School 

4,193 

2,207 

1,986 

2,155 

Moqui  (Hopi) 

2,193 
2,000 

1,160 
1,047 

5,400 
3,195 

1,033 
953 

_ 

4,600 
3,101 

1,014 
1,141 

3,800 
1,890 

1,179 
859 

6,200 
2,406 

2,193 
2,000 

Navaho        < 

Navajo  School  —  Navaho  < 

^J^_^^Z^-L: 

90 
8 

= 

10,000 
6,296 

9,910 

6,288 

Pima  School  

Maricopa 

279 
4,017 
2,000 

136 
2,059 
1,000 

143 
1,958 
1,000 

129 

1,761 
(5) 

150 
2,256 
(5) 

279 
4,009 
2,000 

1,206 

Pima 

8 

Gila  Bend  Reservation,  Papago.. 
Salt  River  School  

2~ 

1,208 

598 

610 

587 

621 

Maricopa    . 

84 
236 

888 

44 
128 
426 

40 
108 
462 

34 
92 
461 

50 
144 
427 

84 
234 

888 

Mohave  Apache.  .  . 

2 

Pima  

San  Carlos  School  6  

iT 

2,608 

1,331 

1,277 

1,170 

1,438 

2,597 

Coyotero  —  Apache 

604 
69 
1,223 
712 

320 
33 
613 
365 

284 
36 
610 
347 

282 
35 
538 
315 

322 
34 
685 
397 

602 
69 
1,216 
710 

2 

Mohave  —  Apache 

San  Carlos  —  Apache  . 

7 
2 

Tonto  —  Apache  .  .  . 



1  Includes  23,405  freedmen  and  2,58?  intermarried  whites.  °  Unknown. 

2  Correct  as  reported  by  superintendents.  8 1914  report, 
s  1910  census. 

«  Includes  Indians  in  New  Mexico  under  this  school. 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


67 


TABLE  2\ — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1915 — • 

Continued . 


Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Arizona  —  Continued. 
San  Xavier  School  —  Papago 

4  990 

2  400 

2  590 

1.800 

3,190 

4,967 

11 

12 

Truxton  Canon  School    Walapai 

474 

260 

214 

192 

282 

464 

10 

6  550 

3  000 

3  550 

2  839 

3  711 

6  550 

Moqui  (Hopi) 

262 

133 

129 

138 

124 

262 

Navaho  

6.098 

2,787 

3,311 

2,621 

3,477 

6,098 

Paiute 

190 

80 

110 

80 

110 

190 

Arkansas  :  Not  under  agent  

1460 

California 

15  034 

7  143 

6  891 

3,300 

5,262 

8,744 

3  457 

1  361 

Bishop  School  —  Paiute,  Shoshoni, 
and  Moache 

1  345 

685 

660 

459 

886 

1,076 

158 

111 

Campo  School  

228 

115 

113 

82 

146 

210 

17 

1 

Mission  Indians  at  Campo 

137 

77 

60 

47 

90 

131 

6 

Cuvapaipe  

8 

4 

4 

8 

8 

Laguna     

7 

3 

4 

1 

6 

7 

La  Posta 

6 

2 

4 

2 

4 

6 

Manzanita  

70 

29 

41 

32 

38 

58 

11 

""i 

Digger  Agency  Digger 

53 

25 

28 

22 

31 

27 

21 

g 

Fort  Bidwell  School  

715 

340 

375 

264 

451 

688 

18 

g 

Digger 

14 

7 

7 

2 

12 

3 

2 

9 

(      Paiute  

200 

112 

88 

93 

107 

191 

9 

Pit  River  

501 

221 

280 

169 

332 

494 

7 

Fort  Yuma  School  —  Yuma  

788 

416 

372 

283 

505 

758 

—  --"     -T1    —  " 

23 

7 

Greenville     School  —  Digger     and 
Washo  

1,000 

(2) 

(2) 

(3) 

(a) 

(2) 

(2) 

(8) 

Hoopa  Valley  School  

1,245 

609 

636 

569 

676 

610 

527 

108 

Hupa 

435 

211 

224 

166 

269 

187 

230 

18 

Klamath    

546 

284 

262 

300 

246 

288 

200 

58 

Lower  Klamath 

264 

114 

150 

103 

161 

135 

97 

32 

Malki  School 

612 

333 

279 

220 

392 

548 

30 

34 

Mission  Indians  at  Augustine  

18 

10 

8 

7 

11 

18 

Cabazon 

38 

22 

16 

14 

24 

38 

Martinez 

114 

67 

47 

32 

82 

106 

g 

Mission  Creek  

16 

10 

6 

6 

10 

16 

Morongo 

233 

121 

112 

97 

136 

177 

22 

34 

Palm  Springs  

52 

29 

23 

14 

38 

52 

San  Manuel  

56 

30 

26 

13 

43 

56 

Torres  

85 

44 

41 

37 

48 

85 

Pala  School  

936 

461 

475 

331 

605 

828 

101 

~7 

Mission  Indians  at— 
Capitan  Grande      ..  

130 

67 

63 

53 

77 

114 

16 

La  Jolla 

246 

124 

122 

89 

157 

242 

4 

Pala  

196 

89 

107 

69 

127 

153 

41 

2f 

Pauma               .... 

50 

23 

27 

19 

31 

49 

1 

Pechanga 

202 

99 

103 

56 

146 

194 

g 

Rincon  

61 

32 

29 

21 

40 

33 

23 

5 

San  Pascual          ... 

4 

1 

3 

2 

2 

1 

3 

Syquan  

47 

26 

21 

22 

25 

42 

5 

Roseburg  (Oreg.)  School—  Scattered 
Wichumni;   Kawia,    Pit   River, 
and  others  in  northern  California.  . 
Round  Valley  School  —  Concow  and 
other  tribes 

5,000 
1,550 

2,500 

786 

2,500 

764 

(2) 
633 

(8) 
917 

;,= 

82,500 
3  560 

31,875 
3  590 

»625 
*  400 

Soboba  School               

938 

528 

410 

367 

571 

799 

85~ 

54 

Mission  Indians  at  Cahuilla  

137 

73 

64 

41 

96 

137 

Inaja.  .                

35 

18 

17 

13 

22 

35 

Los  Coyotes 

126 

77 

49 

47 

79 

126 

Mesa  Grande  

194 

115 

79 

85 

109 

140 

54 

San  (.a  R,osa  

64 

38 

26 

10 

54 

64 

1 1910  census. 


2  Unknown. 


3  Estimated. 


68 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1915 

Continued. 


Total 

Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

California—  Continued. 
Soboba  School—  Continued. 
Sauta  Ynez 

71 

38 

33 

01 

Soboba... 
Volcan  

136 
175 

73 
96- 

63 

79 

47 
93 

89 
82 

121 

lyc 

15 

54 

Tule  River  School  

624~ 

345 

279~ 

70 

82 

140 

12~ 

= 

Tule  River  
Outlying  districts  

152 
472 

89 
256 

63 
216 

70 
n\ 

82 

140 

12 

Colorado 

890 

460 

XOf) 

(.  ) 

(  ) 

C1) 

C1) 

9 

8 

Southern  Ute  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute 

366 

177 

IRQ 

! 

Ute  Mountain  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute  ;.  

524 

283 

241 

293 

231 

349 

524 

9 

8 

Connecticut:  Not  under  agent  
Delaware:  Not  under  agent  

2152 
25 

District  of  Columbia:  Not  under  agent 
Florida:  Seminole  
Georgia:  Not  under  agent  

268 
578 
»95 

358 

220 

217 

361 

563 

14 

1 

Idaho  

4  200 

2  076 

2124 

314 

Coeur  d'Alene  School  

834 

416 

418 

qoo 





80 

Coeur  d'Alene    . 

601 

ono 

Kalispel  

101 

55 

46 

39 

356 
62 

434 
101 

87 

80 

Kootenai  

132 

58 

74 

49 

83 

114 

18 



Fort  Hall  School—  Bannock  and 
Shoshoni 

1  794 

914 

I 

Fort  Lapwai  School—  Nez  Perce.... 
Illinois:  Not  under  agent  

1^572 
2188- 

746 

826 

583 

1,132 
989 

1,491 
1,195 

234 
212 

69 
165 

Indiana:  Not  under  agent—  Miami 
and  others  

*279 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  School—  Sac  and 
Fox  

364 

190 

174 

142 

222 

oc4 

Kansas  

1  375 

734 

fi41 

7R1 

748 

318 

309 

Kickapoo  School  

616 

323 

293 



=^ 

188 

211 

Iowa    

303 

150 

Kickapoo  

216 

126 

90 

131 

133 
85 

16 

187 

76 
29 

211 

Sac  and  Fox  

97 

47 

50 

48 

49 

14 

83 

Potawatomi    School—  Prairie 
Band  of  Potawatomi 

759 

411 

040 

Kentucky:  Not  under  agent  
Louisiana:  Not  under  agent  

2234 
2780 

531 

130. 

98 

Maryland:  Not  under  agent  
Massachusetts:  Not  under  agent  . 

255 
2688 

Michigan  

7  514 

690 

CE7 

209 

521 

617 

Bay  Mills  School—  Chippewa  
Mackinac  Agency—  L'Anse,  Vieux 
Desert,  and  Ontonagon  Bands  of 
Chippewa  

250 
1  097 

125 
565 

125 

COO 

102 

148 

9 

121 

120 

Not  under  agent—  Scattered  Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa,  Potawatomi.  and 
others  

2  6,  167 

400 

497 

Minnesota  

11  723 

5  874 

3,397 

4,146 

2,694 

Fond  du  Lac  School—  Chippewa 
Grand  Portage  School—  Chippewa.. 

1,020 
318 

522 
140 

498 
178 

516 
139 

504 
179 

86 

532 
318 

402 

=== 

• 

- 

= 



1  Unknown. 


2 1910  census. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


69 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1915 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Leech  Lake  School 

1,754 

904 

850 

785 

969 

993 

697 

64 

Cass  and  Winibigoshish  

457 
805 

492 
625 

221 
412 

271 

236 
393 

221 

215 
351 

219 

242 

454 

273 

310 
462 

221 

~407~ 

141 
330 

226 

6 
13 

45 

-,„-,.  -----.1^ 

56 

Leech  Lake  Pillager 

White  Oak  Point  (Miss.)  Chip- 
pewa                                 

Nett  Lake  School 

291 

334 

292 

333 

162 

Chippewa  (Bois  Fort) 

530 
95 

1,486 
6,217 

240 
51 

742 
3,114 

290 
44 

744 
3,103 

238 
54 

292 
41 

329 

78 

148 
14 

53 
3 

Vermiilion  Lake  Indians  ' 

Red  Lake  School—  Red  Lake  and 
Pembina  Chippewa    

741 

2,985 

745 
3,232 

(2) 
1,719 

(2) 
2,348 

(2) 
2,150 

White  Earth  School 

White  Earth  (Miss.)  Chippewa..  . 
Mille  Lac  (removal) 

2,359 
1,174 
811 
440 
284 
415 
272 
291 
110 
61 

303 

3  1,  253 
^313 

11,329 

1,206 
570 
405 
218 
133 
222 
122 
140 
63 
•     35 

1,153 
604 
406 
222 
151 
193 
150 
151 
47 
26 

.2,985 

3,232 

1,719 

2,348 

2,  150 

Otter  Tail  Pillager  

Gull  Lake  (Miss  )             

Mille  Lac  (nonremoval)  
Pembina-Pillager           

Leech  Lake  (removal) 

White  Oak  Point  (removal)  
Fond  du  Lac  (removal)        

Cass  and  WinibicToshish 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley)  Mdewa- 
kanton   and    Wapaguta,    Sioux 
and  Sisseton,  and  Wahpeton  

161 

142 

93 

210 

192 

89 

22 

Missouri*1  Not  under  agent 

Montana                              

5,659 

5,670 

5,225 

1,422 
690 

955 
500 

6,104 

1,302 
1,009 

1,347 
705~ 

6,560 

2,845 

1,924 

Blackfeet  School    Blackfeet 

2,724 
1,699 

2,302 
"  1,205 

1,356 
850 

1,154 
62T 

1,368 
849 

1,148 

is!" 

1,222 
1,889 

714 

1,147 
234 

715 
255^ 

355 
196 

873 

Crow  Agency  —  Crow                  .  . 

Flathead      School  —  Confederated 
Flathead  

Fort  Belknap  School 

836 

114 

Assiniboin 

634 
571 

326 
295 

308 
276 

237 
263 

•     397 
308 

446 
390 

101 
154 

87 
27 

Grosventre  

Fort  Peck  School—  Fort  Peck  Sioux. 
Tongue    River    School—  Northern 
Cheyenne 

1,943 
1,456 
3,917 

969 
709 
1,948 

974 
747 
1,969 

1,022 
636 
1,895 

921 
820 
2,022 

1,141 
1,378 
1,721 

453 
41 
970 

349 
37 
1,226 

Nebraska  

Omaha  School    Omaha 

1,313 
1,508 

674 
741 

639 
767 

660 
763 

653 
745 

1,020 
591 

116 

454 

177 
463 

Santee  School                           

Ponca 

329 
1,179 

1,096 
7,819 
437~ 

154 
587 

53T 
3,971 
216~ 

175 
592 

204 
559 

125 
620 

89 
502 

138 
316 

102 
361 

586 
213 
13 

Santee  Sioux  

Winnebago  School—  Winnebago  
Nevada                                      

563 
3,848 
22T 

472 
2,328 
132 

624 
5,491 

sol" 

110 
7,030 
412~ 

400 
576 
12~ 

Fallon  School  

Paiute  at  Fallon 

324 
113 

163 
53 

173 

61 
266 

161 
60 

96 
36 

228 

77 

319 
93 

5 

7 

r.  " 

14 
5 

4 

Lovelocks  

13 

—  _._T 

344 
123 
606 

i  

171 
62 
340 

133 
45 
203 

'   —  TT7T- 

211           330 
78          118 
403          602 

Nevada  School—  Paiute  

—  — 

1 1914  report. 


t  Unknown. 


» 1910  census. 


70 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1915 — 

Continued . 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Axixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Nevada—  Continued. 
Walker  River  School       

707 

333 

374 

323 

'384 

636 

71 

Paiute... 

566 
141 

267 
66 

299 
75 

|      323 

384 

>  636 

71 

Paiute  (Mason  Valley)  

Western  Shoshone  School  . 

602 

322 

280 

272 

330 

532 

70 

Paiute  

293 
309 

158 
164 

135 

145 

128 
144 

1,220 

165 
165 

3,780 

}      532 

70 

Shoshoni 

200 

K  eno  ,  special  agent 

i  5,  000 

2,600 

2,400 

4,400 

400 

Digger  (scattered  California  tribes) 
Paiute 

2,000 
1,400 
1,000 
600 

234 
2168 

22,007 
642~ 

3626 
2,715 

8,421 

1,030 
725 
525 
320 

970 
675 
475 
280 

1  1,220 

3,780 

4,400 

400 

200 

Shoshoni.  . 

Washo  

New  Hampshire:  Not  under  agent.  .  . 
New  Jersey:  Not  under  agent 

M 
New  Mexico  

11,  159 

10,848 

11,331 
275~ 

274 
1,357 

~~3,  778 

10,  676 

21,579 
642 

598 
2,715 

347 

81 

Jicarilla  School—  Jicarilla  Apache..  . 
Mescalero  School—  Mescalero  Apa- 
che 

339 

302 
1,325 

4,378 

303 

324 
1,390 

4,043 

367 

352 
1,358 

4,643 

17 

11 

Pueblo  Bonito  School—  Navaho  
Pueblo  Day  Schools 

8,021 

330 

70 

Navaho 

358 
8,063 

18,000 
1,603 

6,185 
5,825~ 

174 
4,204 

4,000 
815 

3,011 
3,011 

184 
3,859 

4,000~ 
788 

2,814 

174 

3,604 

5,000 
647 

2,616 

~27616~ 

184 
4,459 

358 
7,663 

Pueblo 

330 

70 

San  Juan  School  —  Navaho 

3,000 
956 

3,209 
3,209 

8,000 
1,603 

5,825 
5,825 

Zuni  School  —  Pueblo 

NewYork  

New  York  Agency  

2,814 

Cayuga.  . 

182 
243 
549 
920 
1,317 
500 

11,509 
355 
130 
120 
1200 

83 
123 

277 
462 
670 
275 

800 
196 
15 
10 
100 

99 
120 

272 
458 
647 
225 

709 
159 
15 
10 
100 

80 

87 
210 
461 

578 
205 

754 
116 
15 
10 
100 

102 
156 
339 
459 
739 
295 

755 
239 
15 
10 
100 

182 
243 
549 
920 
1,317 
500 

1,509 
355 
30 
20 
200 

Oneida  

Onondaga 

Seneca  (Allegany) 

Seneca  (Cattaraugus).. 

Seneca  (Tonawanda). 

St.  Regis  (not  a  part  of  Six  Na- 
tions)                          .... 

Tuscarora  

Montauk.  . 

Poospatuck  

Shinnecock.  . 

Not  under  agent 



- 

*  360 

North  Carolina  

8,047 

1,182 
1,182 

1,029 

1,147 
1,147 

1,064 
1,064 

1,328 
1,328 

355 

355 

528 

Cherokee  School—  Eastern  Chero- 
kee   

2,211 
5,836 

8,710 
1,154 

1,029 

528 

Not  under  agent 

North  Dakota 

4,348 

4,362 

4,072 

4,638 

4,736 

3,666 

308 

Fort  Berthold  School 

580 

574 

540 

614 

831 

296 

27 

Arikara  

409 
483 
262 

203 
240 
137 

206 
243 
125 

197 
223 
120 

212 
260 
142 

256 
360 
215 

141 
109 
46 

12 
14 
1 

Grosventre 

Mandan  

1  Estimated. 
2 1910  census. 


3  Includes  183  Apache;  1913  Fort  Sill  removal. 

4  1910  census,  minus  250  Montauk,  Poospatuck,  and  Shinnecock. 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


71 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  vf  Alaska,  June  SO,  1915 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female 

Minors 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

North  Dakota—  Continued. 
Fort  Totten  School—  Sisseton,Wah- 
peton,     and      Cuthead     Sioux 
(known  as  Devils  Lake  Sioux)  .  .  . 
Standing  Rock  School—  Sioux  
Turtle    Mountain    School—  Turtle 
Mountain  Chippewa 

999 
3,434 

3,123 

2127 
118,358 

502 
1,708 

1,558 

497 
1,726 

1,565 

429 
1,396 

1,707 

570 
2,038 

1,416 

999 
2,735 

171 

C1) 

418 

2,952 

C1) 

281 

Ohio:  Not  under  agent.     .  . 

Oklahoma 

8,429 

8,408 
363~ 

7,950 
339~ 

8,887 
44T 

35,  952 
729~ 

15,366 
37 

44,635 
16 

Cantonment  School 

782 

419 

Arapaho  

240 
542 

129 
290 

111 
252 

623~ 

107 
232 

ssT 

133 
310 

719 

230 
499 

933 

10 
27 

Cheyenne  

16 
99 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School  
Arapaho  .  . 

1,253 

630 

221 

521 
732 

4,410 

259 
371 

2,162 

262 
361 

2,248 

240 
294 

2,199 

281 
438 
= 
2,211 

397 
536 

71 
150 

53 
46 

389 

Cheyenne  

Kiowa  School  

3,213 

808 

Apache 

177 
1,523 
1,500 
1,123 
87 

2,195 
476 
679 
1,010 

81 
762 
712 
559 

48 

1,136 
245 
322 
515 

96 
761 
788 
564 
39 

1,059 
231 
357 
495 

\  2,  199 

2,211 

1,386 
222 
335 
411 

3,213 

83T 
426 
526 
397 

808 

1,357 
41 
120 
406 

389 

Comanche  

Kiowa 

Wichita  and  Caddo 

Apache  prisoners  

Osage  School  —  Osage 

809 
254 
344 
599 

Otoe  School  —  Oto  and  Missouri  
Pawnee  School—  Pawnee  

9 
33 

207 

Ponca  School 

Kaw  

3338 
622 
50 

183 
306 
26 

155 
316 
24 

257 
321 
21 

81 
301 
29 

104 
250 
43 

27 
372 

7 

207 

Ponca 

Tonkawa..   .. 

Red  Moon  School  —  Cheyenne 

155 

687 

80 
334 

75 
353 

50 
364 

105 
323 

155 
411 

Sac  and  Fox  School  

142 

134 

Iowa  

87 
600 

39 

295 

4S 
305 

38 
326 

49 
274 

46 
365 

41 
101 

—.,  —    -  —  ,.-. 

18 

Sac  and  Fox  

134 

:     '            =: 

42 

Seger  School  . 

593 

280 

313 

252 

341 

533 

Arapaho 

148 
445 

65 
215 

83 
230 

67 
185 

81 
260 

131 

402 

7 
11 

509 

10 
32 

1,349 

Cheyenne  

Seneca  School 

1,998 

979 

1,019 

1,049 

71 
153 
170 
210 
215 
230 

949 

140 

Eastern  Shawnee   . 

131 
273 
331 
415 
455 
393 

54 
147 
159 
202 
236 
181 

77 
126 
172 
213 
219 
212 

70 
120 
151 
205 
240 
163 

5 
4 
94 
18 
1 
18 

65 

44 
24 
274 
28 
74 

61 
225 
213 
123 
426 
301 

Ottawa 

Quapaw  

Seneca 

Wyandot  

Peoria-Miami  4  (citizen)  

Shawnee  School.    . 

2,599 

1,327 

1>25~ 
927 
175 

1,272 

1,157 

1,442 

862 

1,314 

423 

Absentee  Shawnee. 

455 
1,796 

348 

01,521 

230 
869 
173 

172 
921 
64 

283 
875 
284 

410 
110 
342 

38 
1,270 
6 

7 
416 

Citizen  Potawatomi 

Mexican  Kickapoo  

Five  Civilized  Tribes  »  

26,  789 

10,393 

41,934 

1  Included  in  full  blood. 
2 1910  census. 

3  Increase  due  to  revision  of  Kaw  consus. 

4  1914  report:  now  citizens,  no  longer  under  jurisdiction  of  Quapaw  Agency. 

5  Increased  roll  due  to  act  of  Congress,  Aug.  1,  1914. 


72 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  Slates,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1915 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
fotion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Oklahoma—  Continued  . 
Five  Civilized  Tribes—  Continued. 
Cherokee  Nation  

41,824 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

By  blood 

36,432 
286 
187 
4,919 

I 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

By  intermarriage  

Dela  wares.  . 

j 

Freedmen  

Chickasaw  Nation 

10,966 

1,515 

966 

3,823 

By  blood  

5,659 
645 
4,662 

I 

1,515 

966 

'3,  823 

Bv  intermarriage  
Freedmen  

/  

Choctaw  Nation  

8,444 

26,828 

2,  473 

10,  882 

By  blood 

17,488 
1,651 
1,660 
6,029 

1 

8,444 

2,473 

10,882 

By  intermarriage  

Mississippi  Choctaw 

I 

Freedmen  

Creek  Nation 

18,  776 

-            ' 

'•  •'• 

6,  873 

1,698 

3,396 

By  blood  

11,967 

6,873 

1,698 

3,396- 

Freedmen  

6,809 

Seminole  Nation  

3,127 

^WJ._- 

j  -  -  • 

~1,254 

478 

409- 

By  blood 

j 

2  141 

1,254 

478 

409 

Freedmen  

98G 
6,481 
1,  145 
3,000 

425 
1,152 

759 
2284 

2331 
21,082 

Oregon. 

3,151 
545" 
1,500 

226 
539 
341 

3,330 
600~ 
1,500 

199 
613 
418 

1,451 

= 
467 

0) 

195 
476 
313 

2,030 

3,884 

1,665 

932 

Klamath  School 

678 
0) 

230 
676 
446 

872 
1,500 

200 
581 
731 

254 
1,125 

208 
50 

28 

19 
375- 

17 
521 

Roseburg    School—  Scattered    In- 
dians on  public  domain 

Siletz  School—  Clackamas,   Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Siletz    (confed- 
erated), Umpqua,  Hapat?  Lake, 
andYamhill  

Umatilla    School—  Cayuse,    Uma- 
tilla,  and  Walla  Walla  

Warm     Springs     School—  Wasco, 
Tenino,  and  Paiute  

Rhode  Island:  Not  under  agent  
South  Carolina:  Not  under  agent— 
Catawbas,  Cherokee,  Oneida,  and 
others. 

South  Dakota 

10,511 

10,  571 

9,615 

—  _—  .  •    ,-.  ..— 

1,248 
367 
96 

226 
3,418 
2,482 

867 
911 

11,467 

—  -~L  -LL-  •__; 

1,460 

588 
186 

255 

3.822 
3,037 

1,186 
933 

12,  562 

1,755 
702 
233 

246 
4,732 
3,148 

867 
879 

5,590 

469 
210 
49 

200 
1,572 
1,600 

876 
614 

2,930- 

484 
4$ 

Cheyenne  River  School—  Blackfeet, 
Miniconjou,  Sans  Arc,  and  Two 
Kettle  Sioux  

2,708 
955 
282 

481 
7,240 
5,519 

2,  053 
1,844 

2216 
702 

1,349 

457 
149 

243 

3,639 
2,763 

1,041 
870 

1,359 
498 
133 

238 
3,601 
2,756 

1,012 
974 

Crow  Creek  School—  Lower  Yank- 
tonai  Sioux 

Flandreau     School  —  Flandreau 
Sioux  

Lower  Brule  School—  Lower  Brule 
Sioux  

35 
936- 
771 

310 
351 

Pine  Ridge  School—  Oglala  Sioux... 
Rosebud  School—  Rosebud  Sioux.  . 
Sisseton  School—  Sisse  ton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux 

Yankton  School—  Yankton  Sioux.  . 
Tennessee:  Not  under  agent  

Texas:  Not  under  agent 

Alabama  

3192 

2/nn 

Koosati,    Seminole,    Isleta,    and 
others 

1  Unknown.                     *  1910  census.                      3  Special  agent's  report,  1910. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


73 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1915 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Utah 

3,210 

878 

916 

69~ 

578 

509 

48~ 
461 

785 

85~ 
700 

1,693 

m~ 

1,060 

80 

— 

21 

— 

Shivwits  School  —  Paiute  

133 

1,161 

64 
583 

Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency 

80 

21 

Uinta  Ute  

440 
439 

282 

500 
21,416 

202 
216 
165 

231 

238 
223 
117 

269 

461 

= 

P) 

700 

= 

0) 

1,060 
500 

80 

21 

Uncompahgre  Ute 

Whitenver  Ute  

Salt  Lake— 
Under  special  agent—  Paiute  and 
others  

Not   under   agent—  Paiute   and 
others  

Vermont:  Not  under  agent  

226 
2539 

11,423 

2,468 
2,330 

Virginia:  Not  under  agent  

Washington 

5,549 

1,196 
1,164 

5,781 

1,272 
1,166 

4,204 

1,124 
255 

5,426 

= 

1,344 
375 

7,566 

~  -     ~-™"  ~~ 

1,482 
1,421 

2,516 

' 

455 
684 

1,248 

531 
225 

Colville  School—  Confederated  Col- 
ville  

Cushman  School  

Chehalis  

99 
161 
83 
210 

77 

58 
73 
47 
95 
41- 

850~ 

41 
88 
36 
115 
36 

850~ 

42 
62 
25 
90 
36 

"-•^-'-  -V_^! 

57 
99 
58 
120 
41 

•     '-•     '     "--  —  - 

68 
127 
53 
133 
40 

1,000 

31 
33 
20 
69 
31 

500* 

Muckleshoot 

1 
10 
8 
6 

200 

Nisqualli 

Skokomish  

Squaxon  Island 

Unattached  

1,700 

Cowlitz  

490 
537 
372 
301 

240 
301 
190 
119 

250 
236 
182 
182 

1,000 

500 

200 

Clallam  

Puyallup  

Various  other  Indians  

Neah  Bay  School  

702 

370 

332 

309 

393 

656 

46 

Hoh 

50 
408 
17 
227 

6lT 
800 

eT 

26 
209 
8 
127 

293~ 
393 

34~ 

24 
199 
9 
100 

If 

sT 

17 
198 

33 
210 
17 
133 

===== 
350 
497 

48~ 

50 
364 
17 
225 

== 
410 
549 

67 

Makah  

44 

Ozette 

Quileute  

94 

26T 
303 

20~ 

2 

57 
232 

1 

Spokane  School  —  Spokan 

144 
19 

Taholah  School  

Queets  River  Reservation  

Quileute 

24 
43 
1 

732" 
1,273 

11 
22 
1 

359~ 

13 
21 

3 

17 

21 
26 
1 

449~ 
667~ 

482~ 
857~ 

1 

Quinaielt  

Snoqualmie                   

19 

57 

Quinaielt  Reservation—  Quinaielt 
Tulalip  School 

37T 
633~ 

28JF 
606~ 

231 
359~ 

640 

Lummi 

469 
168 
207 

429 

240 
85 
102 

213 

1,493 

229 
83 
105 

216 
1,653 

606 

667 

857 
2,191 

359 
683 

57 
272 

Susquamish 

Swinomish.          .                

Tulalip  (remnants  of  many  tribes 
and  bands)  

Yakima  School—  Confederated 
Yakima  

3,146 
236 

1,346 

1,800 

Not  under  agent 

West  Virginia:  Not  under  agent.  .. 

1  Unknown. 


2 1910  census. 


74 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1915- 

Con  tinned. 


States,  superintendences,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Wisconsin  

9,889 
309~ 

1,259 
2,336 

5,082 

4,807 

3,854 

4,792 

1,817 

4,952 

1,271 

Carter  Agency  —  Potawatomi 

174 

625 
1,237 

135 

634 
1,099 

77 

555 
1,052 

232 

704 

1,284 

309 

562 
433 

Hayward  School—  Chippewa,  Lac 
Courte  Oreille 

651 
865 

46 
432 

Keshena  School  

Menominee 

1,730 
606 

706 

31,040 
2,491 
505 

1,243 
1,705 
1,705 

922 
315 

808 
291 

368 

509 
1,195 
237 

630 

834 

•    •      — 
834 

778 
274 

952 
332 

433 

(2) 

....     = 

460 
50 

865 
(») 

150 

400 
2,491 
395 

(2) 
250 
250~ 

432 

(2) 

96 
590 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  »  

Lac  du  Flambeau  School—  Chip- 
pewa 

338 

531 

1,296 
268 

613 

871 
•    •  -  — 
871 

258 

462 
1,197 
253 

(2) 
789 
789" 

448 

578 
1,294 
252 

(2) 
916 
9lF 

La  Pointe   School-^-Chippewa  at 
Bad  River 

Oneida  School  —  Oneida 

Red  Cliff  School—  Chippewa 

3 
(2) 
1,219 

107 
(2) 
206 
206 

Tomah  School—  Wisconsin  Band  of 
Winnebago  

Wyoming 

Shoshone  School 

1,249 

Arapaho     . 

871 
834 

442 
429 

429 
405 

414 
375 

457 
459 

765 
484 

97 
153 

9 
197 

Shoshoni 

1  Now  citizens. 


2  Unknown. 


3  As  reported. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 

patents,  June  30,  1915. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Total.  1915.. 

309,911 
307,  891 
307,  433 
300,  930 
296,  320 
247,  522 

182,289 
1X0,60.5 
183,  742 
177,626 
164,215 
61,853 

68,980 
69,  944 
72,411 
103,417 

88,  182 

2,623 
1.643 
1,420 
1,926 

110,686 
109,018 
109,911 
70,904 
176,033 

</126,379 
124,  797 
121,233 
120,876 
120,  780 

1914 

1913 

1912 

1911 

19012  

18902 

230,  437 
~  42,  336 

15,  166 

Arizona  

36,365 

5,971 

5,971 

Camp  Verde 

421 

421 

Colorado  River  

Fort  Apache 

477 

2  388 

477 

477 

2,388 

Fcrt  Mojave  

763 
170 
98 
],700 

763 

763 

Havasupai  

, 

170 
98 
1,700 
4,193 
10,000 
5,151 
409 
2,608 
2,200 
474 
6,550 

7,121 

Kaibab 

Leupp  

Moqui  

4,193 

Kavaio 

10  000 



Pima  

6,296 
1,208 
2  608 

1,142 
799 

1,142 

799 

Salt  River.  

San  Carlos  3 

San  Xaviei  

4,990 
474 
6,  550 

10,031 

2,790 

2,790 

Truxton  Canon  

Western  Navajc 

California 

2,913 

2,140 

1 

772 

Bishop 

1,315 
228 
E3 

236 

231 

2 

1,109 
228 
53 

Campo 

Digger... 

1  Includes  fee  patents  for  part  of  their  allotment. 


Only  items  reported. 


1914  report. 


KEPORT    COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


75 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

California—  Continued  . 
Fort  Bidwell  

715 
788 
1,000 
1,245 
612 
938 
1,550 
938 
624 

S90 

366 
524 

578 

171 
720 

171 

544 
68 
850 
435 
612 
662 
998 
938 
624 

695 

Fort  Yuma 

720 

Greenville 

150 
810 

150 
799 

Hoopa  Valley  

11 

Malki 

_ 

Pala  

274 
552 

236 

550 

38 
1 

Round  Valley       

1 

Soboba 

Tule  River  

Colorado 

195 

195 

Southern  Ute     

195 

195 

171 
524 

578 
1,079 

Ute  Mountain 

Florida*  Seminole 

Idaho                

4,200 

3,121 

2,919 

79 

123 

CoBur  d'Alene 

834 
1.794 

560 
1,683 
878 

485 
1,683 
751 

41 

31 

274 
111 
694 

Fort  Hall                 

Fort  Lapwai 

1,572 

38 

89 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

364 
1,375 

364 
625 

ICansas      .             

750 

630 

51 

69 

Kickapoo  

616 
759 

1,347 

305 
445 

323 

261 
369 

323 

11 
40 

33 

36 

311 

314 

1,024 

Potawatomi          ... 

Michigan  

Bay  Mills 

250 
»     1,097 

11,  723 

250 
73 

5,026 

250 
73 

1,869 

1,024 
6,697 

Minnesota  

8 

3,149 

Fond  du  Lac  

1,020 
318 
1,  754 
625 
303 
1.486 
6,217 

268 
318 
950 
299 

84 

250 
307 
930 
298 
84 

3 

15 
11 
16 

752 

Grand  Portage  

Leech  Lake 

4 
1 

804 
326 
219 
1,486 
3,110 

3,899 

Nett  Lake 

Pipe?tone  (Birch  Cooley)  *      .   . 

Red  Lake 

White  Earth    .  .     .  .             

23,107 

23,107 

320 

Montana  

11,329 

7,430 

7,072 

38 

Blackfeet 

2,724 
1,699 
2,302 
1,205 

22,426 
1,319 
1,929 

22,424 
1,275 
1,620 

1 

6 

28 

1 

38 
281 

298 
380 
373 
1,205 
187 
1,456 

2,476 

Ciow  

Flathead 

Fort  Belknap  

Fort  Peck 

1,943 
1,456 

1,756 

1,753 

3 

Tongue  River  

Nebraska                                      

3,917 

1,441 

745 

50 

646 

Omaha  

1,313 

1,508 
1,096 

7,819 

617 
448 
376 

1,466 

308 
208 
229 

1,463 

18 
20 
12 

3 

291 
220 
135 

696 
1,060 
720 

6,353 

Santee                                             

Winnebae;o 

Nevada                                              

Fallen 

437 
344 
123 
606 

707 
602 
5,000 

324 
91 
110 

324 

113 
253 
13 
606 
356 
602 
4,410 

Fort  McDermitt 

91 

110 

Moapa  River 

Walker  River 

351 

351 

Western  Shoshone 

Reno.  sDecial  acent.  .  . 

590 

587 

3 

1 1914  report. 


2  Overestimated  last  year. 


76 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

New  Mexico 

22,007 

•      534 

534 

21,473 

Jicarilla  

642 
626 
2,715 
8,421 
8,000 

534 

534 

108 
626 
2,715 
8,421 
8,000 
1,603 

5,825 
2,211 

999 

Mescal  ero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

0) 

Pueblo  day  school. 

San  Juan  

Zuni 

1,603 
5,825 

New  York:  New  York  Agency  

North.  Carolina:  Cherokee 

2,211 
8,710 

North  Dakota    .  . 

7,711 

6,872 

224 

615 

Fort  Berthold  . 

1,154 
999 
3,434 
3,123 

117,  965 

980 
508 
3,399 

2,824 

111,331 

964 
468 
3,242 
2,198 

7,807 

15 
25 
92 
92 

899 

1 
15 
65 
534 

102,625 

174 
491 
35 
299 

6,63 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain 

Oklahoma  . 

Cantonment  

782 
1,253 
101,521 
4,410 
2,195 
476 
679 

31,010 

155 
687 
593 
«  1,605 
2,599 

11,481 

409 
655 
101,521 
3,160 
1,920 
321 
310 
632 
103 
267 
341 
791 
901 

3,772 

368 
525 

3 

62 

38 
68 
2  101,  521 
114 

373 

598 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho. 

Five  Civilized  Tribes..  . 

Kiowa  

2,987 
1,491 
179 
268 
573 
102 
180 
311 
159 
664 

3,454 

59 
429 
122 
19 
56 

43 
12 

1,250 
275 
155 
369 
378 
52 
420 
252 
814 
1,698 

7,709 

Osage 

Otoe  

20 
23 
3 

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Red  Moon 

Sac  and  Fox  

44 
18 
632 
144 

310 

Seger 

Seneca  

Shawnee  .. 

93 

8 

Oregon  

Klamath 

1,145 
58,000 
425 
1,152 
759 

21,082 

596 
2,000 
213 
540 
423 

17,839 

576 
1,986 
111 
361 
420 

16,230 

20 
14 
94 
179 
3 

488 

549 
6,000 
212 
612 
336 

3,243 

Roseburg  

Siletz 

8 

Umatilla  

Warm  Springs 

South  Dakota  

1,121 

Cheyenne  River  

2,708 
955 
282 
481 
7,240 
5,519 
2,053 
1,844 

1,794 

2,512 
955 

2,441 
915 

35 
5 

36 
35 

196 

Crow  Creek 

Flandreau  

282 

Lower  Brule  

481 
6,562 
5,484 
996 

849 

662 

424 
6,003 
5,150 
588 
709 

659 

8 
506 
92 
342 
133 

1 

49 
53 

242 
66 

7 

2 

Pine  Ridge 

678 
35 
1,057 
995 

1,132 

Rosebud 

Sisseton 

Yankton 

Utah  .  .. 

Shivwits  

133 
1,161 
500 

133 
499 
500 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

«662 

659 

1 

2 

Salt  Lake,  special  agent.  .  . 

1 2,370  erroneously  reported  last  year. 

2  37,182  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation. 

8  Increase  due  to  revision  of  Kaw  census. 

<  Decrease  due  to  393  Peoria-Miami  Indians  becoming  citizens. 

6  Includes  5,000  in  California. 

6  Overestimated  last  year. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


77 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision —  Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  80,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. ' 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Washington  

11,330 

17,266 

7,088 

53 

125 

4,064 

Colville  

2.468 
2,330 
702 
611 
800 
1,273 
3,146 

9,889 

2,348 
171 
295 
511 
606 
202 
3,133 

3,061 

2,329 
163 
295 
472 
606 
189 
3,034 

1,553 

19 
4 

120 
2,159 
407 
100 
194 
1,071 
13 

5,585 

Cushman  2 

4 

Neah  Bay 

Spokane  

4 

35 

Taholah 

Tulalip  

1 
25 

85 

12 

74 

1,423 

Yakima. 

Wisconsin  

Carter  

309 
1,259 
2.336 
706 
1,040 
2,491 
505 
1,243 

1,705 

309 
707 
1,730 
346 
535 
1,579 
379 
(6) 

228 

Hayward  (Lac  Courte  Oreille) 

»552 
<606 
360 
505 
912 
126 
(5) 

1,477 

550 

2 

Keshena 

2606 
10 
46 
761 

Lac  du  Flambeau  

350 
458 
75 
120 
(5) 

1,456 

La  Pointe 

1 

76 
6 

(6) 

2 

Oneida... 

Red  Cliff  . 

Tomah  

(B) 
19 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

1 1,700  erroneously  reported  as  allotted  under  Cushman  last  year. 
2  Formerly  included  Indians  under  Taholah. 
8  Overestimated  last  year. 

4  Stockbridge  and  Munsee  Indians  now  citizens. 

5  Unknown. 


78 


EEPOET   COMMISSIONED    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


ho  — 


•SJ910A  9i  v 


JO     SU9ZT^IO    9JV 


usijSug; 


(M  (N  iO 


c^  »o  ^'•  co  o     t~ 


OOOi 


O^fO-^OOOO       i-H 


Prof 
Ind 


!6§k     :    ||3 


?SS3 


>  Tt<  Oi      •  CO  >O  <N  OO 


Missionari 
working 
among 
Indians. 


CS|  T-J  to 
CC  .CO  <M 


•sa^iqAV 


CO  «0  »0  50 


•strerpui 


833£ 

T-I  OCO  CO 


'SI6I  ' 


-oid 


O  to  ^  ^t1  t 

S  .-5  oo  •*  r 
IN  10  ^  >rt  T 


A*g; 


icO  to  O2 
.  Oi  »—  I  t-~ 


to  CT>  t-  co  I-H 


-U  I 


•simp 


PUB      sump 


<  CO  d  i—  I 

S  55  53 


1!141 


:  :  i  i  ijt 

:  :  '.  :  ^'§5 

;    ;  fe  |SWS5 

B'fi  ci«SiSli 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

s  :|     :    § 


79 


>TS<        O        0( 


SSSSSgS 

F- 1~-  c5  CM  «o  05 10 


i  r-  o      CM      o 

i  ,_!  |-_          ^H  lO 


CM      o 


3         S 


1  ^H  CO  CO  CO        ^  Cl        CM 


^1  .CO«>tM 


CM     •        CM      •  CO 


!5« 


o    •     oo 


S    S 

>  ^ 


CO  O5         t^- 


O  iO       O 

cc  co      ?J 


1   a 


I  CO  S  CO  CO  C  CO  00        S  •*£ 


£ 

~> 


OOCMOO     I-H      «c 


I*  g  &2 


ll  I 


O        CM  OO  OO        »O>-i  OC 


^     :  t 


i  IN  j 

r— *  :         03 

a       s  s 


j — ^.  -3 

•      ®  B 


.  .    S5 
:  :  5g 


- 


If  I  &S.§ 

WPH         ^ 

.2 

a 


80 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

S 


;o 


PUB 


(N  rH  01  1-H  rH  rH  CO 


10" 


Cs  O4         CS1 


O  O     - 


^**  ^O       ^ 
05CO        CO 


•sueipui  SUOUIB  saqoonqo 


rH  to  oq  if     «o 


88    2 


COINCOOOIN 


•««<        C>» 


i-H  COCO        •*»< 


Arrests  for 
drunken- 
ness. 


OlOrH 


I 


tH  »O  CO 


r-l         rH         If) 


•S16I  '08  9Uti£ 
Surjsrxe    S92e.tj.reui 


-OjJ 


•eonpao 


OO  CO  i-H  CO  i-l  i-l         1C 
-HCO^H          CO  0 


•*  <N  JO 


•rao; 


PUB 


>O       t^ 


ipi 

liiiii 


III 


JicarUla 
Mescalero 
Pueblo  Boni 
Pueblo  day 
San  Juan 
Zuni 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


81 


o  p  d  tp  to 

XJ<  Cj         uSrH 

rtCN      ^H^i 


t^  IO 

'O'V 


ICM        00 

es     10- 


•  t—  CNOSU3     .t 


ilil 

rtVc-f-T 


i  § 


1O  CN       00 


i-*     con 


io-~ 


of- 


O>       O 

Ti-T    cxT 


~      ef 


CO  i-l        .-( 


•  JOiOCNOO 


»C  10  CO  <N  <N  rH  fH  i-l  ^H 


^    §3 


•  »O  iH      •      •  1-4 


8-  ^ 


S    3 


I-H  co  o  o>  c» 


S    8 


OrJilO 


OrJilOOOWOJi-HOOOO 


>>  '. 


^, 

jSo 

II I 

III 

*s  i 

«  o      o 

£fc   ^ 


Isai 

Si|s 

ME-i^® 

felll 
^f^raH 


- 


t,    fi 


JS.  C  ®  a^  ®  *3 
III  111 


8340—15 6 


82 


ho  — 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

g'-grSS    g 


jo   su9zi;ro  ejy 


•stTBtpui  Suouvs  seqoonqo 


Missionaries 
working 
among 
Indians. 


Arrests 
drunk 


•suBtpuj  .£3 


Supsixg 


*ST6T  ' 


-oad    1^391 


•sireip 


•59^1  qM. 
PUB     SUBJP 


<xT 


2E 


HI    | 


§S8 


^^      CD 


of  ef  T-Tco"     oT 


O  CO  t^     •  1-1 


^    a 


JiO^       «O 


>  co  TH      c<i 


1 1*»  t>-  o  ^  «5  ci     t>« 


2||||||8 


"  -r      of 


I 


i-H  Tti  •*  CO  CO  »0  TMN        1C 


U3  CO  < 


rtj  »o  oo  eo  IM 


CO  «O  <D  !O  CO  C<I  <O       O 


h    ;s  : 


l 

' 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


83 


TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  SO,  1915. 
[This  table  excludes  all  canceled  allotments.] 


States  and  reservations. 

Number 
allotments. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Grand  total                 ....                    .  . 

224,  713 

34,768,430 

33,334,261 

68,  102,  691 

Total  reservations  

217,243 
7,470 

33,  691,  173 
1,077,257 

33,334,261 

67,025,434 
1,077,257 

Total  public  domain 

Arizona                        

1,668 

80,739 

16,343,588 

16,424,327 

Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River)  

24,971 
235,  570 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
366,309 
518 
730,880 
138,240 
2,472,320 
8,680,397 
114,348 
22,  316 
1,834,240 

430,  136 

24,971 
240,699 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
266,309 
518 
730,880 
138,240 
2,472,320 
8,689,997 
155,  954 
46,720 
1,834,240 

512,298 

Colorado  River               

513 

5,129 

Fort  Apache 

Fort  Mojave          ".  

GilaBend(Pima) 

Gila  River  (Pima) 

Havasupai  (  Suppai)          

Hualapai  (Walapai) 

Kaibab          

Moqui  (Hopi) 

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico  and  Utah)  

60 
291 
804 

9,600 
41,606 
24,404 

Papago                           

Salt  River 

San  Carlos        .        

California 

2,592 

82,  162 

D  igger 

370 
99,051 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,  880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,  680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
3,084 
3,896 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
15,042 
5,461 
370 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,  746 

370 
128,  142 

.     7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,640 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
1,920 
11,069 
4,480 
5,195 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
15,042 
5,461 
640 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,  746 
42,106 
48,551 
39,386 

468,794 
23,542 

682,939 

Hoopa  Valley            

639 

29,  091 

Mission— 
Agua  Caliente  (Malki) 

Augustine  (Malki)                                   

Cabazon  (Malki) 

Cahuilla  (Soboba)             

Campo 

Capitan  Grande  (Pala)  

Cuyapipa  (Campo) 

Inaja  (Soboba) 

Laguna  (Campo)                                   

La  Posta  (Campo) 

Los  Coyotes  (Soboba)        

Manzanita  (Campo) 

Martinez  (Malki) 

Mission  Creek  (Malki)                                    .  .  . 

Morongo  (Malki) 

Pala                                             

177 

85 

1,396 
1,299 

Perchanga  or  Temecula  (Pala) 

Potrero  (Pala)        .           

Ramona  (  Soboba) 

Rincon  (Pala) 

San  Manuel  (Malki)                            

San  Pascual  (Pala) 

Santa  Rosa  (  Soboba)                          

Santa  Ysabel  (Soboba) 

Soboba                                

Syquan  (Soboba)                                     

17 

270 

Torres  (Malki)                  

Tuolumne                                        

Twenty-nine  Palms  (Malki)                           .... 

Paiute                                              

Round  Valley                                             

877 

42,106 

Tule  River 

48,551 
31,386 

396,  143 
23,542 

54,841 

Yuma                                                       

797 
371 

8,000 
72,651 

Colorado'  Ute                                          

Idaho  

4,377 

628,098 

Coeur  d'  Alene 

638 
1,863 
1,876 

104,077 
345,209 
178,812 

104,077 
366,472 
212,390 

3,251 
272,359 

Fort  Hall                                                   

21,263 
33,578 

3,251 

Lapwai  (Nez  Pcrce)                                          

3,078 

272,359 

100 
143 
3  350 
2,363 
122 

4,195 
11,769 
27,  531 
220,  785 
8,079 

4,195 
11,769 
27,531 
220,785 
8,079 

Sac  and  Fox  (Kickapoo)  ...                         

84  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indiayi  lands,  June  30, 1915 — Continued. 


Number 

, 

\reainacres 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Michigan                                             

2,646 

153,  107 

803 

153,910 

Isabella 

1.943 

98,  395 

191 

98,  586 

L'Anse       .                              

668 

52,  161 

612 

52,  773 

Ontonagon 

35 

2,551 

2,551 

Minnesota                                              

8,308 

950,208 

546,932 

1,497,140 

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

712 

56,  782 

56,  782 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)                        

4 

296 

296 

Forty!  du  Lac 

551 

33,  386 

33.  386 

Grand  Portage 

304 

24  191 

24,  191 

I  eecli  Lake 

622 

47,  772 

47,  772 

Mdewakanton 

135 

12  582 

12,  582 

Red  Lake 

543,  528 

543,  528 

Vermillion  Lake 

1,080 

1,080 

White  Earth  

5,154 

710,  466 

i  2,  324 

712,  790 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake) 

826 

64,  733 

64,  733 

Montana    

6,899 

1,  432,  109 

4,  312,  452 

5,  744,  561 

Blackfeet  

7 

2,220 

1,491,167 

1,493,387 

Crow  

2  438 

479,028 

1,  834,  185 

2,313.213 

Fort  Belknap 

497  600 

497  600 

Fort  Peck  

2,026 

722,  453 

722,  453 

Jocko  (Flathead) 

2  428 

228  408 

228,  408 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River) 

« 

489,500 

489,  500 

Nebraska 

4  032 

352  743 

6  159 

358,  902 

Omaha        ...  . 

1  460 

130  642 

4,380 

135,022 

Ponca  (Santee) 

168 

27  236 

27  236 

Santee  (Niobrara)  . 

846 

72  611 

72,611 

Sioux  (additional) 

640 

640 

Winnebago          

1  558 

2  122  254 

1,139 

2  123,  393 

Nevada  

969 

13  978 

686,  219 

700,  197 

Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone).  .  . 

321,920 

321,920 

Moapa  River. 

117 

605 

523 

1  128 

Paiute  (Fallon)  

362 

3  610 

1,030 

4,640 

Pvramid  Lake  (Nevada) 

322  000 

322  000 

Walker  River  

490 

9  763 

40,  746 

50,509 

New  Mexico  

2,800 

673,  175 

3,870,517 

4,  543,  692 

Jicarilla  Apache  . 

796 

353  812 

407  300 

761  112 

Mescalero  Apache  

474,  240 

474,  240 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  Utah)  

2,004 

319  363 

1,980,637 

2,300,000 

Pueblo— 
Acoma  (Albuquerque)  .  . 

95,  792 

95,  792 

24  256 

24  256 

Isleta  (Albuquerque)... 

110,  080 

110,080 

Jemez.  . 

40  550 

40  550 

Laguna  (Albuquerque).    .  . 

154,  025 

154,025 

Nambe.  .  .  . 

13  586 

13  586 

Pecos  .  .  . 

18,  7^3 

18,  763 

Picuris.  .  .  . 

17  401 

17  461 

Pojoaque  

13,  520 

13,520 

San  Dia  (Albuquerque)  

24,187 

24,187 

San  Juan  

17,545 

17,545 

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque) 

34  767 

34  767 

Santa  Ana  (Albuquerque)  .  .  . 

17,361 

17,361 

Santa  Clara  

49  369 

49  369 

Santo  Domingo  .  .  . 

92,  398 

92,398 

Sia  

17  515 

17,515 

San  Ildefonso 

17  293 

17  293 

Taos     . 

17  361 

17  361 

Tesuque.  .  . 



17  471 

17,471 

zuni....q  :.:.:.:::';•':  

215,040 

215,040 

New  York  

87  677 

87,677 

Alleghany  

30  4C9 

30,469 

Cattaraugus  

21  680 

21  680 

Oil  Spring  

640 

640 

350 

350 

1  Superintendent's  report. 


2  Includes  12,348  acres  purchased  from  the  Omaha  Indians. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  85 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  reservations. 

Number 
allotments. 

Area  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted 

Total. 

New  York  —  Continued. 

6,100 
14,  640 
7,549 
6,249 

63,  211 
100,  000 

6,100 
14,640 
7,549 
6,249 

63,211 

1,898,690 

St  Regis                                                        

North  Dakota                                                             .  . 

7,391 

1,  798,  690 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)                                 .  .  .  - 

1,189 
1,378 
4,498 
326 

127,658 

137,381 
229,  554 
1,387,935 
43,  820 

19,548,930 

137,381 
329,  554 
1,387,935 
43,820 

19,555,136 

I'ort  Berthold 

100,000 

Standing  Rock                                                     

Turtle  Mountain 

Oklahoma                                                                   ... 

6,206 

Cherokee                                                            .  ... 

40,193 
110,955 
37,678 
18,712 
3,119 
62 
3,331 
108 
247 
280 
3,451 
68 
73 
2,230 
514 
160 
820 
218 
782 
2,108 
248 
548 
435 
117 
957 
244 

4,244 

4,346,203 
3,800,350 
4,291,036 
2,997,114 
359,  697 
4,949 
528,  789 
8,605 
99,644 
22,650 
547,  236 
3,966 
11,456 
1,465,350 
128,  351 
12,995 
112,  701 
43,334 
100,  745 
291,616 
56,245 
87,684 
41,813 
12,  745 
152,  714 
20,942 

507,392 

40 
3,285 

4,346,243 
3,803,635 
4,291,036 
2,  {,99,608 
359,  697 
4,949 
528,  789 
8,605 
99,644 
22,650 
547,236 
3,966 
11,456 
1,465,350 
128,351 
12,995 
112,701 
43,334 
101,132 
291,616 
56,  245 
87,684 
41,813 
12,745 
152,  714 
20,942 

1,716,196 

Chickasaw  

Choctaw                                                      

Creek        

2,494 

Seminole 

Cherokee  Outlet                                    

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Kansa  (Kaw) 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee) 

Kiowa  Comanche  and  Apache 

Modoc'(  Seneca) 

Oakland  (Ponca).              .         

Osage 

Otoe  

Ottawa  (Seneca) 

Pawnee  .                                    

Peoria  (Seneca) 

Ponca                                                

387 

Potawatomi  (Shawnee)  

Quapaw  (Seneca) 

Sac  and  Fox..                   ,  

Seneca 

Shawnee  

Wichita  (Kiowa) 

Wyandot  (Seneca)             

Oregon  

1,208,804 

Grande  Ronde 

269 
1,345 
551 
1,113 
966 

24,590 

32,983 
207,374 
44,459 
82,444 
140,  132 

5,767,804 

32.983 
1,019.176 
44,459 
156,  774 
462,804 

6,398,699 

Klamath 

811,802 

Siletz 

Umatilla 

74,330 
322,672 

630,895 

Warm  Springs  .  .             

South  Dakota 

Cheyenne  River 

3,243 
1,460 
2,006 
111 
7,297 
7,194 
2,613 

1,367 

920,750 
272,560 
308,838 
187,356 
2,  167,  148 
1,642,889 
268,263 

111,  947 

290,053 
16,345 

1,210.830 
288,905 
308  838 
239,511 
2,367,148 
1,715,231 
268,263' 

1,618,970 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago  

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton) 

Lower  Brule     .  .          .             

52,  155 
200,000 
72,342 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud..                                

Yankton 

Utah... 

1,506,960 

Goshute  and  Deep  Creek         

34,500 
600,000 
600,000 
23,040 
80 
249,340 

34,500 
600,000 
600,000 
23,040 
80 
288,900 
72,327 

m 

2,896,636 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  New  Mexico) 

Paiute  (Navajo)                                          .  .  .  .... 

Shivwits 

Skull  Valley     . 

Uintah  Valley 

111 
590 

7,697 

39,620 
72,327 

737,464 

Uncompahgre                                                       .  .. 

Washington  .            

2,  159,  172 

Chehalis  (Cushman) 

236 
35 

2Hon 

3,799 
22,618 

lesteads. 

3.  70^ 
22,r,I3 

Columbia  (Colville)                        

1  1914  report. 

86  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

TABEL  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands,  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Number 

j 

Lrea  in  acres 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Colville                                             

660 

51,653 

1  296,336 

1,347.989 

Hoh  River  (Neah  Bay)                                        

640 

640 

Kalispel     .                              

4,629 

4,629 

Lummi  (Tulalip)                                        

109 

12  561 

12,  561 

Makah  (Neah  Bay)  

373 

3,728 

19,  312 

23,040 

Muckleshoot  (Cushman)                          

43 

3  491 

3  491 

Nisqualli  (Cushman) 

30 

4  717 

4  717 

Ozette  (Neah  Bay)                               

640 

'640 

Port  Madison  (Tulalip) 

51 

7  219 

65 

7  284 

Puyallup  (Cushman)         

167 

17,463 

17,463 

Quileute  (Neah  Bay) 

837 

837 

Quinaielt  (Taholah)  

690 

54,990 

168,  553 

223,  543 

Shoalwater 

335 

335 

Skokomish  (Cushman)  

134 

7,803 

7,803 

Snohomish  (Tulalip) 

164 

22  166 

324 

22,490 

Spokane  

626 

64,  794 

82,  648 

147,442 

Squaxon  Island  (Cushman) 

23 

1,494 

1,494 

Swinomish  (Tulalip)  

71 

7,359 

7,359 

4,485 

451  609 

584,  853 

1,036,462 

Wisconsin  

4,403 

285,785 

288,  116 

573,901 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Hayward) 

876 

68  511 

403 

68  914 

Lac  du  Flambeau                                   .      .      .  . 

589 

44,877 

26,153 

71,030 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

1,063 

83,871 

39,  880 

123,  751 

Mflnoininofl 

231,  680 

231,680 

Oneida 

1  503 

65  440 

65  440 

Red  Cliff 

205 

14,  166 

14  166 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  

167 

8,920 

8,920 

Wyoming;  Win.d  River  (Shoshoiic) 

2  153 

221  832 

608,  637 

830,469 

Public  domain  

7,470 

1,077,257 

1,077,257 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31,  1914,  by  calendar  years. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River  

1913 

488 

Acres. 
4,  878.  74 

1914 

13 

130.00 

501 

5  008  74 

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico) 

1911 

60 

9.600.00 

Papago 

1891 

291 

41,  605.  62 

Salt  River  .                                     .  .            

1913 

804 

24,  403.  74 

Public  domain   „ 

674 

104,  700.  00 

Total...                 .                 .            .              

2,330 

185,318.10 

California: 
Hoopa  Valley.                                                  

1893 

161 

9,  761.  79 

1910 

478 

19,328.95 

639 

29,  090.  74 

Pala                                                               » 

1895 

15 

119  99 

1913 

162 

1,276.28 

177 

1,396.27 

Pechanga 

1897 

85 

1,299.00 

Round  Valley                                                                .  . 

1895 

622 

5,  408.  33 

1910 
1910 

1255 
»  359 

36,697.23 

877 

42  105  56 

Syquan  

1895 

17 

270.  24 

Yuma 

'   1913 

797 

8,000  00 

Public  domain 

1  786 

242  183  99 

Total  

4  378 

324,345  80 

Original. 


» Additional. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  87 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31,  1914,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Colorado: 
Southern  Ute  

1896 

371 

Acres. 
72  650  65 

Public  domain 

8 

1  200  86 

Total  

379 

73  851  51 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  

1909 

637 

103  911  53 

1910 

1 

'160.00 

638 

104  071  53 

Fort  Hall 

1902 

79 

6  298  72 

1914 

1,784 

338',  909!  95 

1  863 

345,208  67 

Nez  Perce  (Lapwai)  ... 

1895 

1  942 

178  811  78 

Public  domain 

58 

4  731  52 

Total  

4  501 

632  823  50 

Kansas: 
Chippewa  and  Munsee. 

1860 

100 

4  195  31 

lowal  

1893 

143 

11*  769  49 

Kickapoo. 

i  iggg 

109 

8  312  14 

1895 
1905 
1907 

163 
74 
4 

12,'  984!  13 
5,920.00 
315.00 

350 

27,531  27 

Potawatomi  

1868 

411 

43  399  88 

1869 
1870 
1871 
1892 
1893 
1894 
1895 
1906 

669 
232 
242 
115 
150 
116 
322 
106 

57,54L40 
22,584.11 
20,879.73 
12,154.88 
16,075.36 
9,220.76 
30,448.52 
8,  480.  59 

2  363 

220  785  23 

Sac  and  Fox. 

1892 

76 

6  407  63 

1898 
1907 

9 
37 

'710!  67 
960.91 

122 

8  079  21 

Total  

3  078 

272  360  51 

Michigan: 
Isabella 

1883 

112 

6  148  05 

Saginaw,  Swan  Creek 

1891 
1871 

126 
1  037 

5'  046!  83 
57  8%  ^3 

1872 

668 

29^  304.'  20 

1  943 

98  395  31 

L'Anse  

1875 

302 

23  575  47 

1885 
1894 
1901 
1903 
1908 
1910 

93 
176 
15 
55 
7 
18 

7,  366.  82 
13,861.20 
1,  160.  56 
4,237.07 
520.00 
1,320.00 

666 

52  041  12 

Ontonagon 

i  1903 

33 

2  'VSI  ^l 

1911 

2 

160.00 

35 

2  711  35 

Public  domain  

51 

3  614  51 

Total...  

2  695 

156  762  29 

Prior  to. 


88  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31, 1914,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Minnesota: 
Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

1897 

684 

Acres. 
54  523  54 

1913 
1914 

11 
13 

880.00 
1,  063.  20 

708 

56  466  74 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)                

1897 

4 

'295.55 

Fon  du  Lac                               

1884 

40 

3,074.98 

1896 
1905 
1910 

349 
14 
5 

23,114.85 

1.  123.  78 
323.  75 

408 

27,  637.  36 

Grand  Portage  

1896 

304 

24,191.31 

Leech  Lake  (Cass  Lake)     

1897 

17 

1  381  20 

Leech  Lake  

1903 

48 

3,749.41 

1905 
1906 
1910 
1911 
1913 

3 
546 
1 
3 
3 

240.00 
41,780.97 
80.00 
221.20 
233.  45 

621 

47  686  23 

White  Oak  Point  »  

1896 

174 

13,909.75 

1897 
1899 
1900 
1903 
1905 
1909 

203 
381 
2 
57 
8 
1 

16,331.19 
29,065.45 
160.00 
4,558.94 
626.02 
81.50 

826 

64  732  85 

Mdewakanton  

1904 

135 

12,582.46 

Red  Lake  (public  domain)  

1905 

3 

320  15 

WhiteEarth  

1901 

4  372 

361  005  97 

1907 
1909 
1913 
1914 

505 
216 
60 
1 

40,  190.  89 
16,810.29 
4,302.32 
160.00 
2  287  996  92 

5  154 

710  466  39 

Public  domain  

41 

3,118.94 

Total.....  

8,204 

947,497.98 

Montana: 
Blackfeet  

1910 

2 

640.  00 

1912 
1914 

3 
2 

960.00 
638.  36 

7 

2,  238.  36 

Crow  

1905 

343 

60  992  99 

1906 
1907 
1909 
1910 
1911 
1913 

114 
1,929 
40 
11 

1 

19,540.94 
387,875.93 
8,051.91 
2,242.16 
320.  00 
160.  00 

2,439 

479,183.93 

Flathead  (Jocko)  

1908 

2  369 

222  544  28 

1909 
1913 

56 
3 

5,602.61 
480.00 

2,428 

228  626  89 

Fort  Peck  

1913 

2  026 

722  453  47 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain) 

1  484 

237  464  04 

Publicdomain  

'120 

16,681.63 

Total  

8  504 

1  706  648  32 

i  Under  Leech  Lake  Agency,  including  Winibigoshish  and  Cass  Lake  Pillager. 
» Prior;  additional  allotments. 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  89 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31, 1914,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Nebraska: 
Niobrara  (Santee) 

1885 

1884 
1900 
1901 
1904 

846 

Acres. 
72,638.75 

963 
467 
12 
16 

78,016.64 
49,926.06 
1,283.29 
1,295.99 

1,458 
168 

130,521.98 
27,235.90 

1890 

1871 
1876 
1883 
1893 
1901 

235 
66 
9 
956 
292 

18,407.42 
4,090.41 
619.03 
81,066.23 
18,071.11 

Total 

1,558 

122,254.20 

4,030 

352,650.83 

Nevada: 
Paiute     

1910 
1911 
1912 

354 
4 
4 

3,540.00 
40.00 
30.00 

Truckee  Carson    . 

362 
5 
4 
490 
608 

3,610.00 
40.00 
40.00 
9,763.27 
74,552.22 

1913 
1914 
1906 

Walker  River 

Public   domain 

Total  

1,469 

88,005.49 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla 

1909 

1908 
1909 
1910 

796 

353,811.50 

Navajo    

468 
473 
1,063 

74.875.96 
75,680.00 
168,807.25 

Public  domain 

2,004 
949 

319,363.21 
151,627.84 

Total  

3,749 

824,802.55 

North  Dakota: 
Devils  Lake  (Fort 

Fort  Berthold  . 

Totten)  

1892 
1897 
1904 
1907 
1910 

872 
244 
61 
11 
1 

101,378.15 
28,339.51 
6,  196.  54 
1,336.49 
130.  00 

1,189 

948~ 
359 
1507 
72 

137,380.69 

80,  526.  55 
35,686.93 

1900 
1910 
1910 
1912 

1907 
1908 
1909 
1910 
1910 
1910 
1910 
1912 
1913 
1914 

Standing  Rock 

113,420.43 

1,379 

229,633.91 

867 
1,620 
1,271 
12,486 
2125 

32 

253 
49 
145 
212 

297,674.51 
553,  790.  97 
360,  304.  72 
11,137.83 
558.  70 
3  320.  00 
349,392.83 
40,842.76 
24,879.13 
35,  707.  88 

Standing  Rock,  S. 
Turtle  Mountain 

Dak                                   

4,417 
326 
532 
.20 

1,374,609.31 
43,  820.  14 
82,356.68 
2,  512.  49 

1907 

Turtle  Mountain  « 
Public  domain 

Total 

7,863 

1,870,313.22 

1  Additional. 

2  Additional;  timber. 


a  Partly  in  South  Dakota. 

*  Public  domain;  see  Montana  and  South  Dakota  also. 


90  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31, 1914,  by  calendar  years — 'Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 


Year. 


Number  of 
allotments. 


Oklahoma 

Cherokee  Outlet 1893  62 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 1892  3,331 

Iowa 1891  108 

Kansas(Kaw) 1903  247 

Kickapoo 1894  280 

Kiowa  (Comanche  and  Apache) 1901  2,758 

1906  517 

1910  169 

3,444 

Modoc 

Osage 1908  2,230 

Otoe 1899  441 

1906  73 

1907  1 371 

514 

Ottawa 1892  160 

Pawnee 1893 

Peoria 1890  218 

Ponca 1895  626 

1905  156 

1905  i  195 

782 

Potawatomi 1891  2,107 

Quapaw 1896  248 

1896  (i) 

248 

SaukandFox 1891  548 

Seneca 1892  301 

1902  134 

435 

Shawnee 1890  72 

1892  12 

1902  33 

117 

Tonkawa 1893  73 

Wichita 1901  957 

Wyandot 1892  244 

Public  domain2 16 

Totals 

Oregon: 

1891 

Klamath 1900  951 

1911  394 

1,345 

Siletz 1874  551 

Umatilla 1893  1,045 

1902  64 

\                                       1911  3 

1913  1 

1914  1 

1,114 

WannSprings 1896    "  '     965 

1914  2 

967 

Public  domain '.'.'.'.'.'.'.'.  342 

Total ~==4,88& 


Additional. 


2  Indian  Territory. 


3  Exclusive  Five  Tribes. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  91 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31, 1914,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River.  

1906 
1909 
1910 
1912 
1913 
1914 

1,757 
969 
6 
408 
3 
10 

Acres. 
601,576.99 
245,842.98 
1,585.21 
83,244.09 
640.68 
1,904.84 

Crow  Creek 

3,153 

934,794.79 

1895 
1912 
1913 

842 
477 
31 

172,211.81 

77,838.77 
4,926.24 

Lower  Brule  

1,350 

254,976.82 

1901 
1909 
1912 

555 
151 
71 

151,823.78 
24,259.18 
11,273.09 

* 
Pine  Ridge  

777 

187,356.05 

1906 
1907 
1908 
1909 
1910 
1911 
1912 
1913 
1914 

1,128 
647 
829 
965 
869 
1,006 
549 
657 
647 

385,429.49 
215,760.05 
253,535.08 
338,415.36 
256,452.09 
278,493.85 
125,586.52 
179,307.74 
134,167.85 

Rosebud  

7,297   2,167,148.03 

1898 
1900 
1902 
1903 
1907 
1908 
1910 
1911 
1912 
1913 

344 

2,759 
887 
665 
252 
803 
682 
421 
349 
33 

72,171.88 
770,778.87 
216,719.79 
139,407.32 
63,600.93 
132,503.61 
113,435.85 
71,296.31 
55,473.48 
7,660.76 

Sisseton  (Lake  Traverse)  

7,195 

1,643,048.80 

1888 
1892 

f         1,316 
\          1644 
690 

123,888.93 

Yankton  

184,949.31 

2,006 

308,  838.  24 

1890 
1894 

1,471 
1,142 

166,764.44 
101,499.00 

2,613 
9 
7 

268,263.44 
1,440.00 
957.36 

Public  domain..  J7  .'.  

Total  

24,407 

5,766,823.17 

Utah: 
Uintah  

1905 
1913 

776 
1 

39,580.05 
40.00 

777 
590 

39,620.05 
72,327.29 

1905 

Total  

1,367 

111,947.34 

Washington: 
Chehalis                                                                    .  ...  . 

»36 
35 

651 
9 

3,798.59 
22,618.12 

~~50,937.55 
715.86 

1911 

1900 
1901 

Colville  

660 

51,653.41 

i  Additional. 


2  Homesteads. 


92  REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 

TABLE  6.— Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  31, 1914,  by  calendar  years— Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Lummi                            .                 

1884 

72 

Acres. 
10  494  98 

1906 
1913 

9 
28 

1,091.96 
974.00 

109 

12  560  94 

Makah    .                      

1910 

373 

3  727  60 

Muckleshoot  

1904 

38 

3  053  22 

1909 
1910 

4 
1 

298.75 
138.  75 

43 

3  490  72 

Nisqualli  

1884 

30 

4  717  26 

Port  Madison 

1886 

35 

5  289  48 

1905 
1910 

4 
12 

640.  00 
1,289.50 

51 

7  218  98 

Puvallut) 

1884 

167 

17  462  82 

Quinaielt 

1907 

119 

9  535  84 

1908 
1910 

349 
222 

27,587.90 
17,865.8 

690 

54  989  55 

/ 

Skokomish  '.  '.  

1881 

45 

2  820  37 

1885 
1906 

47 
42 

3,893.36 
1,089.66 

134 

7  803  39 

1884 

96 

13  721  12 

1902 
1904 

7 
61 

1,135.41 
7.309.17 

164 

22  165  70 

Spokane  

1909 

626 

64  794  48 

Squaxon  Island 

1884 

23- 

1  494  15 

Swinomlsh      

1885 

49 

5  628  02 

1897 
1902 
1905 
1906 

6 
7 
8 
1 

'269!  30 
830.  65 
590.55 
40.00 

71 

7  358  52 

Yakima  .  ..      . 

1897 

1  840 

174  129  63 

1899 
1906 
1909 
1914 

'613 
680 

1,119 

53,232.89 
68,724.92 
320.00 
120,966.00 

4  256 

417  373  44 

Public  domain  

364 

41  942  09 

Total  

7  832 

745  169  76 

Wisconsin  : 
Lac  Courte  Oreille  

1881 

186 

14  774  65 

1883 
1883 
1885 
1889 
1890 
1894 
1896 
1903 
1910 

18 
79 
196 
47 
29 
118 
89 
112 
2 

1,452.83 
6,  203.  19 
15,423.15 
3,  792.  24 
2,092.99 
9,186.17 
6,800.55 
8,705.84 
79.40 

876 

68  511  01 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  93 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  by  reservations  to  Dec.  81, 1914,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


By  States  and  reservations  or  tribes. 

Year. 

Number  of 
allotments. 

Area. 

Wisconsin—  Continued. 
Lac  du  Flambeau  

1886 

22 

Acres. 
1  775  48 

1887 
1888 
1894 
1895 
1898 
1903 
1907 

29 
38 
101 
126 
153 
115 
5 

2,  318.  48 
2,991.65 
8,045.97 
10,116.47 
12,116.15 
7,310.42 
201.98 

589 

44,876.60 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)     

1867 

46 

3.022.03 

1881 
1882 
1884 
1885 
1888 
1894 
1898 
1901 
1902 
1903 
1907 

138 
32 
32 
55 
48 
122 
183 
357 
35 
4 
11 

10,779.05 
2,518.83 
2,555.14 
4,387.62 
3.705.98 
9,793.29 
14,642.19 
28,  452.  64 
2,815.87 
318.04 
880.00 

1.063 

83,  870.  68 

Oneida  

1891 

1  503 

65  440  49 

Red  Cliff  

1877 

2(T 

1,642.21 

1881 
1887 
1896 
1900 

14 
1 
1C9 
1 

838.35 
55.35 
11,566.90 
63.20 

205 

14  166  01 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee 

1910 

167 

8  920  00 

Public  domain  

67 

4  676.48 

Total 

4  470 

29()  461  27 

Wyoming: 
'  Wind  River  (Shoshone)  ,  

1906 

368 

34  017.79 

1907 

1,786 

189,217.93 

Total  

2  154 

223  235.72 

Total  reservations  

113.007 

18,886,579.89 

Total  public  domain             

7  136 

1  026  161  47 

Grand  total  

120  143 

19  912  741  36 

TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

ARIZONA. 

Camp  McDowell  

Acres. 
24,971 

Executive  order,  Sept.  15,  1903;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol  33, 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribe:  Mohave  Apache. 
Colorado  River  l 

2  8  235  570 

p.  211.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1905,  p.  98.) 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1865,  vol.  13,  p.  559;  Executive  orders,  Nov  22 

(Under     Colorado      River 
School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Ka- 
wia,  Cocopa,4  Mohave. 

Fort  Apache 

2  1  681  920 

1873,  Nov.  16,  1874,  and  May  15,  1876.    (See  sec.  25,  Indian 
appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  224.) 
Act  Apr.  30,  1908  (35  Stat.,  77);  act  Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat., 
273);  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1063);  act  Aug.  24,  1912  (37 
Stat.,  523).    516  Indians  allotted  5,160  acres. 
Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  July  21,  1874,  Apr  27   1S76, 

(Under    Fort    Apache 
School.) 
Tribes:   Chilion,   Chirica- 
hua,     Coyotero,     Mim- 
breno,     and     Mogolon 
Apache. 

Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31,  1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p. 
469;  agreement  made  Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June 
10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p.  358.     (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30, 
p.  64.) 

Partly  in  California.         *  Outboundaries  surveyed.         3  Surveyed.         *  Not  on  reservation. 


94 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1915— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  lyeaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

ARIZONA  —  continued. 
Fort  Mojave   

Acres. 
31,328 

»  10,  231 
1366,309 

2  518 
2,472,320 

138,240 
11,887,793 

U14.348 

22,317 
21,834,240 

730,940 

Executive  orders,  Dec.  1,  1910  and  Feb.  2,  1911.    Sec.  11,  act 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  855-858).     (See  18579-1910.)    Area 
original  military  reservation,  14,000  acres. 
Executive  orders,  Dec.  12,  1882,  and  Jan.  17,  1909.    (See  4106, 
1909.)       • 

Act  of  Feb.  28,  1859,  vol.  11,  p.  401;  Executive  orders,  Aug.  31, 
1876,  Jan.  10,  1879,  June  14,  1879.  May  5,  1882,  and  Nov.  15, 
1883;  Mar.  22,  May  8,  July  31,  1911;  Dec.  16,  1911;  and  June  2, 
1913. 
Executive  orders,  June  8  and  Nov.  23,  1880,  and  Mar.  31,  1882. 

Executive  order,  Dec.  16,  1882.    Act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat. 
L.,  1021.    (See  45096-1910.) 

Secretary's   withdrawal,    Oct.    15,    1907.    (See    73684-1907.) 
Executive  order,  June  11,  1913. 

Treaty  of  June  1,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  667,  and  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  29,  1878,  Jan.  6,  1880,  two  of  May  17,  1884,  and  Nov.  19, 
1892.    1,769,600  acres  in  Arizona  and  967,680  acres  in  Utah 
were  added  to  this  reservation  by  Executive  order  of  May 
17,  1884,  and  46,080.  acres  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  public 
domain,  but  again  reserved  by  Executive  orders.  Apr.  24, 
1886,  Jan.  8,  1900,  and  Nov.  14,  1901.    By  Executive  orders 
of  Mar.  10  and  May  15,  1905,  61,523  acres  were  added  to  res- 
ervation and  bv  Executive  order  of  Nov.  9,  1907,  as  amended 
by  Executive  "order  of  Jan.  28,  1908,  2,972,160  acres  were 
added.    2,064  Indians  have  been  allotted  328,963  acres  under 
the  act  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  as  amended.    By 
Executive  orders  of  Dec.  30,  1908,  and  Jan.  16,  1911,  the  sur- 
plus lands,  approximately  1,64  1.180  acres,  in  that  part  of  the 
extension  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  the  public  domain. 
(See  35  Stat.  L.,457  and  787.)    (See  1277-9.)    Act  of  Mav  27, 
1902  (32  Stat.,  264).    Executive  orders  May  24,  1911,  Feb. 
17,  1912  (2),  Feb.  10,  1913  (2),  and  May  6,  1913. 
Executive  order,  July  1,  1874,  and  act  of  Aug.  5.  1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  291.    41,603  acres  allotted  to  291  Indians,  and  14  acres 
reserved  for  school  site,  the  residue,  27,583  acres,  unallotted. 
(See  letter  book  208,  p.  408.)    Executive  orders  June  16,  1911. 
and  May  28,  1912. 
Executive  orders,  June  14,  1879,  and  Oct.  20,  1910;  Sept.  28  and 
Oct.  23,  1911.    (See  26731-1910.)    (See  Senate  Doc.  90,  58th 
Cong.,  2d  sess.)    804  Indians  allotted  24,403  acres  under 
general  allotment  act. 
Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  Dec.  14,  1872,  Aug.  5,  1873, 
July  21,  1874,  Apr.  27  and  Oct.  30,  1876,  Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31, 
1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  469;  agreement  made 
Feb.  25,  189o,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p. 
358.    (For  fuller  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doc.,  vol.  39,  p. 
35910.)    (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  64;  act  of  Mar.  2, 
1901,  vol.  31,  p.  952.)    Executive  order  of  Dec.  22,  1902. 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  4,  1883,  Dec.  22,  1898,  May  14,  1900, 
June  2,  1911,  May  29,  1912,  and  July  18,  1913. 

Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stats.,  612),  provides  for  purchase  of 
330  acres;  not  allotted.    40  acres  were  reserved  bv  order 
of  the  Secretaiy  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  28,  1908,  for  Digger 
Indians.    (See  46597-1907,  71811-1908,  39245-1909.) 
Act  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39;  Executive  orders,  June  23, 
1876,  and  Oct.  16,  1891.    There  have  been  allotted  to  639 
Indians  29,143.38  acres,  reserved  to  3  villages  68.74  acres, 
and  opened  to  settlement  under  act  of  .lime  17.  1892  (27 
Stats.,  p.  52),  15,096.11  acres  of  land  ('formerly  Klamath 
River  Reservation).    (Letter  book  263,  p.  96;  o82,  p.  480; 
383,  p.  170.) 

(Under  Fort  Mojave  School.) 
Tribe:  Apache. 
Gila  Bend 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 
Gila  River 

(Under  Pima  School.') 
Tribes:  Maricopa  and 
Pima. 
Havasupai  (Supai)  

(Under  Havasupai  School.) 
Tribe:  Havasupai. 
Hopi  (Moqui)  

(Under  Moqui  School.) 
Tribe:  Hopi  (Moqui)  and 
Navajo. 
Kaibab 

(Under  Kaibab  School.) 
Tribes:  Kaibab  and  San 
Juan  Paiute. 
Navajo3    

(Under     Leupp,     Navajo, 
Western    Navajo,    San 
Juan  and  Pueblo  Bonito 
Schools.) 
Tribe:  Navajo. 

Papago 

(Under  San  Xavier  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 

Salt  River  

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribes:  Maricopa  and 
Pima. 
San  Carlos 

(Under  San  Carlos  School.) 
Tribes:  Arivaipa,  Chilion, 
Chiricahua,     Coyotero, 
Mimbrefio,      Mogollon, 
Mohave,  Pinal.  San  Car- 
los, Tonto,  and  Yuma 
Apache. 
Walapai 

(Under   '  Truxton     Canon 
School.) 
Tribe:  Walapai. 

Total 

19,551,045 

CALIFORNIA. 

Digger 

370 
2*99,051 

(Under  a  farmer.) 
Tribe:  Digger. 

Hoopa  Valley  

(Under  Hoopa  Valley 
School.) 
Tribes:   Hunsatung,  Hu- 
pa,     Klamath     River, 
Miskut,        .  Redwood, 
Saiaz,    Sermaltpn,    and 
Tishtanatan. 

Surveyed.    2  Outboundaries  surveyed.    3  Partly  in  New  Mexico.  (See  Table  5.)    4  Partly  surveyed 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


95 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

CALIFORNIA — continued. 

Mission  (28  reserves) 

(Under  Martinez,  Soboba, 
Pec  hang  a,  Malki, 
Campo  and  Volcan 
Schools.) 

Tribes:  Diegueno,  Kawia, 
San  Luis  Rey,  Setranos, 
and  Temecula. 


Acres. 
181,524 


Morongo . 
Paiute... 


Pala 

(Formerly  Warner's  Ranch 
Indians.) 


Round  Valley 

(Under  Round  Valley 

School.) 

Tribes:  Clear  Lake,  Con- 
cow,  Little  Lake,  No- 
melaki,  Pit  River,  Pot- 
ter Valley,  Redwood 
Wailaki,  andYuki. 


Tule  River 

(Under  Tule  River  School.) 
Tribes:     Kawia,a     Kings 
River,  Moache,  Tenon, 
Tule,  and  Wichumni.s 

Yuma 

(Under  Fort  Yuma  School.) 
Tribe:  Yuma-Apache. 


i  75, 746 


Total. 


COLORADO. 


2  48, 551 


30,969 


436, 211 


Ute< 

(Under  Navajo  Springs 
and  Southern  Ute 
Schools.) 

Tribes:   Capote,   Moache, 
and  Wiminuche  Ute. 


375,960 


Total. 


375, 960 


Executive  orders,  Jan.  31,  1870,  Dec.  27,  1875,  May  15,  1876, 
May  3,  Aug.  25,  Sept.  29, 1877,  Jan.  17,  1880,  Mar.  2,  Mar.  9. 
188i,  June  27,  July  24,  1882,  Feb.  5,  June  19,  1883,  Jan.  25, 
Mar.  22, 1885,  Jan.  29,  Mar.  14, 1887,  and  May  6, 1889.  270.24 
acres  allotted  to  17  Indians  and  for  church  and  cemetery 
purposes  on  Syquan  Reseive  (letter  book  303,  p.  297),  and 
1,299.47  acres  allotted  to  85  Temecula  Indians,  2.70  acres 
reserved  for  school  purposes  (letter  book  351,  p.  312).  Proc- 
lamations of  President  of  Apr.  16, 1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1970,  and 
May  29,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2005;  act  of  Feb.  11,  1903,  vol.  32,  p. 
822.  174,936.73  acres  patented  by  the  Government  to 
various  bands  under  acts  of  Jan.  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712), 
and  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1022).  (See  misc.  tract 
book  36.) 

Proclamation  of  Nov.  12,  1913,  paitly  canceling  Executive 
order  withdrawal. 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  11,  1912,  May  9,  1912,  Sept.  7,  1912, 
Sept.  16. 1912,  and  Feb.  14, 1913 

119.99  acre's  allotted  to  15  Indians  (letter  book  303,  p.  57).  162 
allotments  of  approximately  2  acres  of  irrigable  land  and  6 
acres  of  grazing  lands  approved  and  patented  under  act  of 
Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.  388),  as  amended.  Lands  reserved 
under  authority  of  acts  of  Jan.  12, 1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712),  and 
Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1022),  and  bought  under  act  of  May 
8, 1902  (32  Stat.  L. ,  257).  See  authority  7971  and  letter  book 
580,  p.  113.  Deed  recorded  in  Miscellaneous  Record  Book 
No.  5,  p.  193. 

Acts  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39,  and  Mar.  3,  1873,  vol.  17, 
p.  634;  Executive  orders,  Mar.  30,  1870,  Apr.  8,  1873,  May 
18,  1875,  and  July  26, 1876;  act  of  Oct.  1,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  658. 
42,105.56  acres  allotted  to  1,034  Indians.  1.110  acres  reserved 
for  school  and  agency  purposes  (72088-1907,  letter  books 
298,  p.  17,  and  395,  p.  260).  (See  act  of  Feb.  8,  1905,  pro- 
viding for  a  reduction  of  area  of  reservation,  vol.  33,  p  706.) 
36,692.23  acres  additional  allotments  made  to  619  Indians 
and  740  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes. 

Executive  orders  Jan.  9  and  Oct.  3,  1873,  and  Aug.  3,  1878. 


Executive  order,  Jan.  9,  1884;  agreement,  Dec.  4,  1893,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  332.    (See  sec.  25,  In- 
dian appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
?.  224.)    7,756.54  acres  irrigable  land  opened  under  act  of 
une  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stats., 
1063).    8,000  acres  allotted  to  809  Indians. 


Treaties  of  Oct.  7,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  673,  and  Mar.  2,  1868,  voL 
15,  p.  619,  act  of  Apr.  29,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  36;  Executive  or- 
ders, Nov.  22,  1875,  Aug.  17,  1876,  Feb.  7,  1879,  and  Aug.  4, 
1882.  and  act  of  Congress  approved  June  15,  1880,  vol.  21. 
p.  199,  and  July  28, 1882,  vol.  22,  p.  178,  May  14,  1884,  vol.  23, 
p.  22,  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  337,  Feb.  20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p. 
677.  72,651  acres  allotted  to  371  Indians  and  360  acres  re- 
served for  use  of  Government  (letter  book  321,  p.  86);  also 
7,360.32  acres  allotted  to  39  Indians  (letter  book  331,  p.  395). 
523,079  acres  opened  to  settlement  by  President's  proclama- 
tion dated  Apr.  13,  1899  (31  Stats.,  1947).  The  residue, 
375,960  acres,  retained  as  a  reservation  for  the  Wiminuche 
Utes.  Act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  82),  exchange  of  lands 
with  Indians. 


1  Partly  in  Nevada. 

2  Odtboundaries  surveyed. 


s  Not  on  reservation. 
4  Partly  in  New  Mexico. 


96 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


FLORIDA. 


Seminole 

(Under  special  agent.) 


Acres. 
i  26, 741 


Total 

IDAHO. 


Coeur  d' Alene 

(Under   Coeur   d'Alene 

Tribes:  Coeur  d'Alene  Ku- 
tenai,2  Fend  d'Oreille,2 
and  Spokan. 


Fort  Hall 1 21 , 263 

(Under  Fort  Hall  School.)     I 
Tribes:  Bannock  and 
Shoshoni. 


26, 741 


Lapwai 

(Under   Fort   Laowai 

School.) 
Tribe:  Nez  Perce. 


34, 190 


Lemhi . 


Total . 


Sauk  and  Fox 

(Under  Sac  and 


Fox 


Tribes:  Potawatomi,  Sauk 
and  Fox  of  the  Missis- 
sippi and  Winnebago. 

Total... 


KANSAS. 


Chippewa  and  Munsee , 

(Under     Potawatomi 

School.) 

Tribes:  Chippewa  and 
Munsee. 


55,453 


3,480 


1  Surveyed. 


Acts  Aug.  15,  1894  (28  Stats.,  303),  Mar.  2,  1895  (28  Stat.,  892), 
June  10,  1896  (29  Stat.,  337),  June  7,  1897  (30  Stat.,  78), 
Mar.  1,  1899  (30  Stat.,  938),  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  302), 
Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat.,  274).  23,061.72  acres  purchased  for 
Seminole  Indians  in  Florida  under  acts  mentioned  (see 
Annual  Report  for  1900,  p.  101).  3,680  acres  reserved  by 
Executive  order  of  June  28, 1911.  (See  20817-1909.) 


Executive  orders,  June  14,  1867,  and  Nov.  8,  1873;  agree- 
ments made  Mar.  26,  1887,  and  Sept.  9,  1889,  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol. 
26,  pp.  1026,  1029.  Agreement,  Feb.  7,  1894,  ratified  by 
act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  322.  638  Indians  have  been 
allotted  104,077  acres  and  1,906.99  acres  have  been  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  church  purposes  and  for  mill  sites. 
(See  86950-1908,  and  acts  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L., 
325-355),  Mar.  3,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  1026-1029),  Aug.  15,  1894 
(28  Stat.  L.,  322),  Mar.  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  56),  Apr.  30, 
1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  78).  (President's  proclamation  issued 
May  22, 1909,  opening  224,210  acres  surplus  lands  to  settle- 
ment. (37  L.  D.,  698.) 

Treaty  of  July  3, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  Executive  orders,  June 
14,  1867,  and  July  30,  1869;  agreement  with  Indians  made 
July  18,  1881,  and  approved  by  Congress  July  3,  1882,  vol. 
22,  p.  148;  agreement  of  May  27,  1887,  ratified  by  acts  of 
Sept.  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  452,  Feb.  23,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687, 
and  Mar.  3, 1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1011.  Agreement  made  Feb.  5, 
1898,  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  672,  ceding 
416,000  acres,  of  which  6,298.72  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
79  Indians  (sse  letter  book  527,  p.  478);  remainder  of  ceded 
tract  opened  to  S3ttlement  June  17,  1902  (President's  proc- 
lamation of  May  7, 1902,  vol.  32,  p.  1997),  act  of  Mar.  30, 1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  153,  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (36  Stat.,  1064);  1,863  allot- 
ments, covering  338,909  acres,  approved  Oct.  28,  1914 
(37106-13). 

Treaty  of  June  9, 1863,  vol.  14,  p.  647;  agreement,  May  1, 1893, 
ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15, 1894,  vol.  28,  p.  326.  178,812  acres 
allotted  to  1,876  Indians,  2,170.47  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  mission,  and  cemetery  purposes,  and  32,020  acres  of 
timberland  reserved  for  the  tribe;  the  remainder  restored  to 
public  settlement.  (President's  proclamation,  Nov.  8, 
1895,  29  Stats.,  873.) 

Unratified  treaty  of  Sept.  24, 1868,  and  Executive  order,  Feb. 
12,  1875;  agreement  of  May  14,  1880,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb. 
23, 1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687.  (See  34  Stat.  L. ,  335,  and  agreement 
executed  Dec.  28,  1905,  approved  by  President  Jan.  27, 
1906.)  Act  of  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat.,  334),  about  64,000  acres 
opened  in  1909.  (See  36809-1909.) 


By  purchase.  (See  act  of  Mar.  2,1867,  vol.  14,  p.  507.)  Deeds 
1857,  1865,  1867,  1868,  1869,  1876,  1880,  1882,  1883,  1888,  June, 
July,  and  Oct.  1892-1896.  (See  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26, 
p.  749.)  (See  Ann.  Tvepts.,  1891,  p.  681;  1898,  p.  81.)  Deeds 
recorded,  vol.  6.  (See  95856-1907.) 


Treaty  of  July  16,  1859,  vol.  12, p.  1105.  4,195.31  acres  allotted 
to  100  Indians;  the  residue,  200  acres,  allotted  for  missionary 
and  school  purposes.  Patents  issued  to  allottees:  balance 
of  allotments  sold  and  proceeds  paid  to  heirs.  (See  ninth 
section  of  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  92;  L.  B..  332, 
p.  63.) 

2  Not  on  reservation. 


BEPOET    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


97 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

KANSAS  —  continued. 
Iowa  * 

Acres. 

Treaties  of  May  17,  18-54,  vol.  10,  p.  1069.  and  of  Mar.  6,  1861, 
vol.  12,  p.  1171.    11,768.77  acres  of  land  allotted  to  143 
Indians:  162  acres  reserved  for  school  and  cemetery  pur- 
poses.   (Letter  book  266,  p.  86.)    Acts  Mar.  3,  1885  (23  Stat., 
352),  and  Jan.  2P,  1887  (24  Stat.,  367). 
Treaty  of  Jum  28,  1862,  vol.  13,  p.  623.    27,531.27  acres  allotted 
to  350  Indians;  245  acres  reserved  for  church  and  school; 
the  residue,  398.87  acres,  unallotted  (letter  books  304,  p.  480, 
and  772,  p.  54).    (Acts  of  Feb.  28,  1899,  vol.  30,  p.  909,  and 
Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1007.) 
Treaties  of  June  5,  1846,  vol.  9,  p.  853;  of  Nov.  15,  1861,  vol.  12, 
p.  1191;.  treaty  of  relinquishment,  Feb.  27,  1867,  vol.  15, 
p.  531.    220,785  acres  allotted  to  2,363  Indians;  319  acres 
reserved  for  school  and  agencv,  and  1  acre  for  church.    (Acts 
of  Feb.  28,  1899,  vol.  30,  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p. 
1007.)    980  acres  surplus  tribal  land  sold  under  act  Feb.  28, 
1899. 
Treaties  of  May  18,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1074,  and  of  Mar.  6,  1861, 
vol.  12,  p.  1171;  acts  of  June  10,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391,  and 
Aug.  15,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  208.    2,843.97  acres  in  Kansas, 
4,194.33  acres  in  Nebraska,  aggregating  7,038.30  acres,  allot- 
ted to  84  Indians,  and  under  act  June  21,  1908  (34  Stats., 
324-349),  960.91  acres  were  allotted  to  37  Indians,  leaving  57 
acres  unallotted.    (Letter  books  233,  p.  361;  383,  p.  37;  and 
512,  p.  110.) 

Executive  order,  May  14,  1855;  treaties  of  Aug.  2,  1855,  vol' 
11,  p.  633,  and  of  Oct.  18,  1864,  vol.  14,  p.  657.    98,395  acres 
allotted  to  1,943  Indians. 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.    52,  121  acres  allotted 
to  668  Indians.    Payment  for  lands  in  sec.  16,  see  93879- 
1907.    Unappropriated  tracts,  see  10293-1915. 

Sixth  clause,  second  article,  treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10, 
p.  1109;   Executive  ordar,  Sept.  25,  1855.     2,561.35  acres 
allotted  to  35  Indians. 

Treaty  July  31,  1855.    (11  Stat.,  621.)    120,470  acres  allotted 
to  1,  818  Indians. 

Treatv  of  Apr.  7,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  765;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol. 
25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess., 
p.  63.)    56.467.20  acres  allotted  to  721  Indians  and  434.63 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.,  purposes.    (L.  B.  359,382); 
residue,  51,863  acres,  opened  to  public  settlement. 
Executive  order,  June  30,  1883;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 
642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247.  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
63.)    295.55  acres  allotted  to  4  Indians;  residue,  22,744  acres, 
opened  to  public  settlement.    (Executive  order  of  Dec.  21. 
1858.) 
Treatv  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10.  p.  1109;  act  of  May  26,  1872, 
vol.  17,  p.  190.    33,385.18  acres  allotted  to  551  Indians;  act  of 
Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.    (See  IT.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p.  60.)    The  residue,  76,837  acres,  re- 
stored to  settlement.    Agreement  of  Nov.  21.  1889.    (See 
act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.)    Act  June  30,  1913  (Pub- 
lic No.  4). 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889, 
vol.  25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  p.  59.)    24,191.31  acres  allotted  to  304  Indians;  208.24 
acres  reserved  for  agency  and  wood  purposes;  residue, 
16,041.97  acres,  opened  to  public  settlement. 

(Under  Kiokapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Iowa. 

Kiokapoo 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Kickapoo. 

Potawatomi 

(Under     Potawatomi 
School.) 
Tribe:    Prairie   Band    of 
Potawatomi. 

Sauk  and  Fox  *  

57 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Sauk  and  Fox  of 
the  Missouri. 

Total  

57 

MICHIGAN. 

Isabella  2. 

191 

Tribe:  Ghippewa  of  Sagi- 
naw,    Swan    Creek,    and 
Black  River. 
L'Anse  

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:  L'Anse  and  Vioux 
Desert  Bands  of  Chip- 
pewa  of  Lake  Superior. 
Ontonagon  

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:   Ontonagon   Band 
of  Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 
Ottawa  and  Chippewa 

Total.  .  . 

191 

MINNESOTA. 

Bois  Fort 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 

Deer  Creek 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 

Fond  du  Lac.  . 

(Under  Fond  du  Lac  School.; 
Tribe:  Fond  du  Lao  Band 
of  Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

Grand  Portage  (Pigeon 
River). 
(Under  Grand  Portage 
agency.) 
Tribe:  Grand  Portage 
Band  of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 

1  In  Kansas  and  Nebraska. 
8340—15 7 


Agency  abolished  June  30,  1889. 


98 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tnbes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authonty  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


MINNESOTA— continued. 


Leech  Lake 

(Under  Leech  Lake  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Cass   Lake,    Pil- 
lager, and  Lake  Wini- 
bigoshish  bands  of  Chip- 
pewa. 


Mdewakanton 

(Under  Birch  Cooley  School.) 
Tribe:  Mdewakanton 
Sioux. 


MilleLac 

(Under  White  Earth 

School.) 

Tribe:  Mille  Lac  and 
Snake  River  bands  of 
Chippewa. 


Red  Lake 

(Under  Red  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Red    Lake    and 
Pembina  Chippewa. 


Lake 


Vermillion  Lake 

(Under     Vermillion 

School.) 

Tribe:     Bois  Fort  Chip- 
pewa. 

White  Earth 

(Under  White  Earth  School.) 

Tribes:    Chippewa  of  the 

Mississippi,     Pembina, 

and  Pillager  Chippewa. 


White  Oak  Point  and  Chip- 
pewa. 

(Under  Leech  Lake  Agen- 
cy.) 

Tribes:  Lake  Winibigo- 
shish  and  Pillager 

-  bands  of  Chippewa  and 
White  Oak  Point  band 
of  Mississippi  Chip- 
pewa. 

Total... 


Acres. 


Treaty  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165;  Executive  orders, 
Nov.  4,  1873,  and  May  26,  1874;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.  (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
49.)  47,  837.  75  acres  allotted  to  622  Indians  and  321.60  acres 
reserved  for  agency  and  school  purposes.  (Act  of  June  27, 
1902,  voL  32.  p.  402.)  Minnesota  National  Forest  act,  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.,  268). 

By  purchase.  (See  acts  of  July  4,  1884,  Mar.  3.  1885,  May  15, 
1886,  June  29,  1888  (25  Stat.,  228);  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.,  992), 
and  Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  349).  339.70  acres  deeded  to  47 
Indians;  12,242.76  acres  allotted  to  88  Indians  and  held  in 
trust  by  the  United  States,  8.90  acres  reserved  for  school. 
(See  Ann.  Rpt.,  1891,  pp.  Ill  and  179,  and  schedule  ap- 
proved Nov.  21,  1904.)  ' 

Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  article  12,  of  May 
7,  1864,  vol.  13,  pp.  693,  695;  act  of  Jan.  14,  18S9,  vol.  25,  p". 


,         ,        .      ,       .        ,  .      ,         ,        .      , 

642.  (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
45.)  Joint  resolution  (No.  5),  Dec.  19,  1893,  vol.  28,  p.  576, 
and  joint  resolution  (No.  40)  approved  May  17,  1898,  vol. 


543, 528 


30,  p.  745.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1890, 
of  land  act  of  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat., 


p.  38-43.)    Purchase 
*1). 


Treaty  of  Oct.  2,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  667;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol. 
25,  p.  642.  (See  agreement  July  8,  1889,  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No. 
247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  27  and  32),  and  Executive 
order,  Nov.  21,  1892.  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1009, 
and  act  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  ratifying  agreement  made  Mar.  10, 
1902,  vol.  33,  p.  46,  for  sale  of  256,152  acres.  Act  of  Feb.  8, 
1905,  vol.  33,  p.  708,  granting  320  acres  as  right  of  way  for  the 
Minneapolis,  Red  Lake  &  Manitoba  Ry.  Co. 
*  1,080  Executive  order,  Dec.  20,  1881,  act  of  Jan.  14.  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 
642. 


2,324  j  Treaty  of  Mar.  19,  1867,  vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders, 


14,  1889  (25  Stat.,  642),  428,401.05  acres  have  been  allotted 
to  5,152  Indians,  ana  1,899.61  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  and  religious  purposes  and  under  act  of  Apr.  28, 
1904  (33  Stat.,  539),  244,585. 4fl  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
2,794  Mississippi  and  Otter  Tail  Pillager  Chippewa,  being 
additional  allot  ments  to  a  part  of  the  allottees  under  act  of 
Jan.  14,  1889,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  29,736 
acres.  Act  June  21 ,  1906  (34  Stat.,  353.) 
Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  of  Mar.  19, 1867, 
vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders,  Oct.  29,  1873,  and  May  26, 
1874;  act  oi  Jan.  14,  1889,' vol.  25,  p.  742.  (See  H.  Ex.  Doc. 
No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  42,  49.)  64,732  acres 
allotted  to  826  Indians;  the  residue  opened  to  public  settle- 
ment; 240  acres  reserved  for  ball  park.  (See  289-1908.) 


546,932  i 


MONTANA. 


Blackfeet 

(Under  Blackfeet  School.) 
Tribes:   Blackfeet,  Blood, 
and  Piegan. 


1,491,805  Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18, 1866,  and  of  July  13,  and  15  and  Sept.  1, 1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19, 1874;  act  of  Apr.  15. 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Feb.  11,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  129;  agreement  made 
Sept.  26,  1895  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29, 
p.  353;  act  of  Feb.  27,  1905,  confirming  grant  of  356.11  acres 
of  land  and  120  acres  of  unsurveyed  land.  (See  vol.  33X 
p.  816.)  Act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stats.,  1035).  Five  Indians 
allotted  l,fiOO  acres.  44,240.07  acres  timber  reserved. 
(See  4021-1913.) 

1  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


99 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


MONTANA— continued. 


Crow 

(Under  Crow  School.) 
Tribes:      Mountain,    and 
River  Crow. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
U,834,511 


Fort  Belknap I     2  497, 

(Under  Fort  Belknap  School.) 
Tribes:     Grosventre  and 
Assiniboin. 


Fort  Peck  ..................... 

(Under  Fort  Peck  School.) 
Tribes:  Assiniboin,  Brule, 
Santee,    Teton,    Hunk- 
pa,    and    Yanktonai 
ioux. 


pa 
Sio 


Flathead 

(Under  Flathead  School.) 
Tribes:  Bitter  Root,  Car- 
los Band,  Flathead, 
Kutenai,  Lower  Kalis- 
pel,  and  Pend  d'Oreille. 


Northern  Cheyenne 

(Under  Tongue  River 

School.) 

Tribe:     Northern    Chey- 
enne. 


Total. 


NEBRASKA. 


Niobrara 

(Under  Santee  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Santee  Sioux. 


3489,500 


4,313,416 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


Treaty  of  May  7,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  649;  agreement  made  June 
12,  1880,  and  approved  by  Congress  Apr.  11,  1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  42,  and  agreement  made  Aug.  22,  1881,  approved  by 
Congress  July  10,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  157;  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  20,  1875,  Mar.  8,  1876,  Dec.  7,  1886;  agreement  made 
Dec.  8, 1890;  ratified  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation 


act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1039-1040;  agree  ment 
made  Aug.  27,  1892.  (See  Ann.  Kept.,  1892,  p.  748;  also 
President's  proclamation,  Oct.  15,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1034.) 


Act  of  Apr.  27.  ll>04,  vol.  33,  p.  352,  to  amend  and  ratify 
agreement  of  Aug.  14,  1899.  Under  act  Feb.  8,  1887  (24 
Stat.,  388),  and  act  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stat.,  794),  and  Execu- 
tive order,  June  8,  1901  (modifying  Executive  order  of 
Mar.  25,  1901),  479,182.07  acres  have  been  allotted  to  2,439 
Indians,  and  1,822.61  acres  reserved  for  administration, 
church,  and  cemetery  purposes,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  1.834,511  acres.  14,711.96  acres  on  ceded  part 
have  been  allotted  to  81  Indians.  (See  L.  B.  743,  p.  50; 
852,  p.  160,  and  956,  p.  416.)  37  Indians  (Schedule  A)  have 
been  allotted  7,429.55  acres  under  acts  of  Apr.  11,  1882  (22 
Stat.,  42),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.,  388),  and  amendments 
thereto.  President's  proclamation,  May  24,  1906  (34  Stat., 
3200). 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855.  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratifled  treaties  of 
July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  Sept.  1, 1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15. 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Jan.  21,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  124;  agreement  made, 
Oct.  9,  1895,  approved  by  act,  of  June  10, 1896?  vol.  29,  p.  350. 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  \ol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18.  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  of  Sept.  1,  1868; 
Executive  orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of 
Apr.  15,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875, 
and  July  13,  1880;  and  agreement  made  Dec.  28,  1886,  ap- 
proved by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  113,  act  May  30, 
1908  (35  Stat.,  558),  2,032  Indians  allotted  724,695.77  acres; 
1,225,849  acres  surplus  land  opened  to  settlement  and  entry 
by  President's  proclamation  July  25,  1913.  (See  42  L.  D.. 
264.)  1,032.84  acres  reserved  for  town  site,  religious,  and 
administrative  purposes.  Act  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  593), 
allotments  to  children. 

Treaty  of  July  16, 1855,  vol.  12,  p.  975.  Under  acts  of  Apr.  23. 
1904  (33  Stats.,  302),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  3,88),  and  Feb. 
28,1891  (26  Stats.,  791),  2,431  Indians  have  been  allotted 
227,113  acres,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  2,524.70  acres 
have  been  resen  ed  for  tril.al  uses,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23, 
1904,  as  amended  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1905  (33  Stats.,  1049-1080), 
6,774.92  acres  have  been  reserved  for  agency  purposes, 
18,521.35  a^res  reserved  for  Bison  Range  under  acts  of  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  267),  and  Mar.  4,  1909  (35  Stats.,  927). 
See  51019- 1908.  May  22, 1909,  pr aclamation  issued  by  Presi- 
dent opening  surplus  lands.  Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats., 
795).  45,711  acres  reserved  for  power  ana  reservoir  sites, 
act  Apr,  12,  1910  (36  Stats.,  863).  Executive  order  Jan.  14, 
1913.  Act  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  863). 

Executive  orders,  Nov.  26, 1884,  and  Mar.  19, 1900,  act  of  Mar. 
3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1000. 


Act  of  Mar.  3,  1863,  vol.  12,  p.  819,  4th  paragraph,  art.  6; 
treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  637;  Executive  orders, 
Feb.  27,  July  20,  1866,  Nov.  16,  1867,  Aug.  31,  1869,  Dec.  31, 
1873,  and  Feb.  9,  1885.  32.875.75  acres  selected  as  home- 
steads, 38,9")1.71  acres  selected  as  allotments,  and  1,087 
acres  selected  for  agency,  school,  and  mission  purposes;  un- 
ratified  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification,  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624.  For  text,  see  misc.  Indian  doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.) 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted. 

*  Outboundaries  surveyed;  partly  surveyed.  *  Surveyed.  » Partly  surveyed. 


100 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


NEBRASKA— continued. 


Omaha 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency. 
Tribe:  Omaha. 


Ponca 

(Under  Santee  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 


Sioux  (additional) 

(Under  Pine  "Ridge  School.) 

Tribe:  Oglala  Sioux. 
Winnebago 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency. 
Tribe:  Winnebago. 


Total. 


NEVADA. 


Duck  Vallev 

(Unler  Western  Shosbonc 

School.) 

Tribes:  Paiuto  and  West- 
ern Shoshoai. 

Moaioa  River 

(Un  ler  MmaRiver School.) 
Tribes:  CheTi3huevi,Kai- 
bab,    Pa-yioit,   Paiute, 
and  Shivwits. 


Paiute 

(Under  Fallon  School.) 


Pyramid  Lake 

(Un  ler  Neva  la  School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 


Walker  River 

(Under  Walker  River 

School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 


Total 

NEW  MEXICO. 


Jlcarilla  Apache. . . 
(Unler  Jicarilla  School.) 
Tribe:  Jicarilla  Apache. 


Mescalero  Apache 

(Under  Mescalero  School.) 

;      Tribes:    Mescalero      and 

Mimbreno  Apache. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
4,420 


640 


1,139 


6,199 


1321,920 
1,128 

940 

322,000 
41,201 


687, 192 


407,300 


474,240 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


Treaty  of  Mar.  16, 1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1043;  selection  by  Indians 
with  President's  approval,  May  11,  1855;  treaty  of  Mar  6 
1865,  vol.  14,  p.  667;  acts  of  June  10,1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391, and 
of  June  22, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  to  Winnebago  Indians 
dated  July  31,  1874;  act  of  Aug.  7,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  341;  act 
of  Mar.  -3,  1893  (27  Stats.,  p.  612);  130,602  acres  allotted  to 
1,460  Indians;  the  residue,  4,420  acres,  unallotted;  act  May 
11,  1912  (37  Stats.,  Ill),  sale  of  surplus  land. 

Treaty  of  Mar.  12,  1858,  vol.  12,  p.  997,  and  supplemental 
treaty,  Mar.  10,  1865,  vol.  14,  p.  675;  act  of  Mar.  2, 1889,  sec. 

13,  vol.  25,  p.  892.    27,236  acres  albtted  to  168  Indians;  160 
acres  reserved  and  occupied  by  agency  and  school  build- 
ings.   (See  letter  book  205,  p.  339;  also  President's  procla- 
mation, Oct.  23,  1890,  vol.  ?6,  p.  1559.) 

Executive  order,  Jan.  24, 1882. 

Act  of  Feb.  21, 1863,  vol.  12,  p.  658;  treaty  of  Mar.  8, 1865,  vol. 

14,  p.  671;  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  from 
Omaha  Indians,  dated  July  31,  1874.    (See  vol.  6,  Indian 
deeds, p.  215.)    122,254.20  acres  allotted  to  1,5,58  Indians;  180 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.;  610.10  acres  sold;  act  July4. 
1888;  the  residue,  1,139  acres,  unallotted. 


Executive  orders,  Apr.  16, 1877,  May  4, 1886,  and  July  1, 1910. 


Executive  orders.  Mar.  12, 1873,  and  Feb.  12, 1874;  act  of  Mar. 
13,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  445,  selection  approved  by  Secretary  of 
tho  Interior,  July  3,  1875;  Executive  orders  of  June  28, 1875, 
July  3,  1875,  July  31,  1903,  Oct.  28,  1912,  and  Nov.  26,  1912. 
601.52  acres  of  irrigable  land  allotted  to  117  Indians  under 
general  allotment  act. 

7\  sections  (4,640  acres)  reserved  under  second  form  with- 
drawal, reclamation  act  June  17, 1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  for  re- 
allotment  to  In  lians;  3,690  acres  have  been  allotted  to  369 
Paiute  In  lians  and  10  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes 
(see  76082-1907);  910  acres  unallotted  and  unreserved. 

Executive  orler,  Mar.  23,  1874.  Act  July  1,  1898  (30  Stats., 
594).  (See  sec.  26,  In  Han  appropriation  act  approved  Apr. 
21,  190 1,  vol.  33,  p.  225.)  ^xecative  order  Sept.  4,  1913, 
creating  bird  reserve  out  of  Anaho  Island. 

Executive  order,  Mar.  19,  1874;  joint  resolution  of  June  19, 
1902,  vol.  32,  o.  744;  act  of  Mav27,  190'2  (32  Stats.,  pp.  245- 
260);  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  op.  982-997;  act  of  June  21, 

1905,  vol.  34,  p.  325;  proclamation  of  President,  Sept.  26, 

1906,  ooening   ceded   part   to   settlement.    It   contained 
268,005.84  acres.    Allotted  to  490  Indians,  9,763.27  acres;  re- 
served for  agency  and  school,  80  acres;  reserved  for  cemetery, 
40  acres;  reserved  for  grazing,  37,848.29  acres;  reserved  for 
timber,  3,355.62  acres:  reserved  for  church  purposes,  160 
acres.    (L.  B.  885,  p.  187.) 


Executive  orders,  Mar.  25,  1874,  July  18,  1876,  Sept.  21,  1880, 
May  15,  1884,  and  Feb.  11,  1887;  129,313.35  acres  allotted  to 
845'  Indians  and  280.44  acres  reserved  for  mission,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.  (L.  B.  335,  p.  323.)  Executive  or- 
ders of  Nov.  11,  1907,  and  Jan.  28,  1P08.  The  above-men- 
tione'1  845  allotments  have  been  canceled:  reallolment.s 
have  been  ma-'e  under  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  If07  (34  Stat.  L., 
1413).  (See  64513-1909.)  (Allotments  to  797 Indians  cover- 

•  ing  3o4,294  acres  approved  Aug.  28,  1809.) 

Executive  orders,  May,  29,  1873,  Feb.  2,  1874,  Oct.  20,  1875, 
Mav  19,  1882,  and  Mar.  24,  1883.  (See  25961.  48680,  75169, 
75(69-1908,  and  14203,  26542-1909,  and  Senate  bill  5C02,  60th 
Cong.,  Istsess.) 


Surveyed:  partly  in  Idaho. 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER    OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


101 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

NEW  MEXICO— continued. 

Pueblo: 

(Under  Santa  Fe  and  Albu- 
querque Schools.; 
Tribe:  Pueblo— 

Jemez 

A  coma 

San  Juan 

Picuris 

San  Felice 

Pecos 

Cochiti 

Santo  Domingo 

Taos 

Santa  Clara 

Tesuque 

San  Ildefonso 

Projoaque 

Sia 

SanDia 

Isleta 

Nambe 

Laiuna 

Santa  Ana 


Area  (unal- 
!     lotted). 


Zufii 

(Under  Zuni  School.) 
Tribe:  /uni  Pueblo. 

Total... 


/  NEW  YORK. 


Alleghany 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondaga    and 
Seneca. 

Cattaraugus 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga,  Ononda- 
ga, and  Seneca. 

Oil  Spring 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  " 


Oneida 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 

Onondaga 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Trib?s:  Oneida,  Ononda- 
ga, and  St.  Regis. 

St.  Regis 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  St.  Regis. 

Tonawanda 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga  and  Tona- 
wanda Bands  of  Seneca. 


Tuscarora.. 
(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondaga    and 
Tuscarora. 


Total. 


NORTH  CAROLINA. 

Qualla  boundary  and  other 

lands. 
(Under    Eastern    Cherokee 

School.) 

Tribe:    Eastern  Band  of 
Cherokee. 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


Acres. 

i  40, 550  I 

i  95, 792 

i  17,545 

i  17,461 

i  34, 767 

1  18, 76o 

124,256 

i  92, 398 

17,361 

49,369 

17,471 

17,233 

13,520 

17,515 

124,187 

i  110.080 

i  13, 586 

i  154,025 

U7,361 

1215,040 


1,889,880 


230,469 


2  21,  680 


2350 
6,100 

14,640 
3  7,  549 

6,249 


87,677 


348,000 
315,211 


Total 63,211 

Outboundaries  surveyed. 


Confirmed  by  United  States  patents  in  1864,  under  old  Span- 
ish grants;  acts  of  Dec.  22,  1858,  vol.  11,  p.  374,  and  June  21, 
1860,  vol.  12,  p.  71.  (See  General  Land  Office  Report  for 
1876,  p.  212,  and  for  1880,  p.  658.)  See  Kxecutive  orders  of 
June  13  and  Sept.  4,  1902,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for 
San  Felij  e  and  Nambe  Pueblos,  and  Executive  order  of 
July  29,1905,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for  Santa  Clara 
Pueblo.  (See  60806-1C05.)  Approximately  32,000  acres 
added.  Area  original  Santa  Clara  Pueblo,  17,368.52.  Ex- 
ecutive orders,  Dec.  19,  U;06,  and  Sept.  1, 1911,  withdrawing 
23,040  acres  for  Jemez  Indians.  Area  of  original  Spanish 
grant,  17,510  acres.  Executive  order,  July  1,  1910,  28,800 
acres.  Area  of  Pueblo  proper,  125,225.  (See  55714-1910.) 
Total  area  Pueblos,  including  Zuni  and  Executive  order 
res'n,  1,008,346.  Resurveys  33149-14. 


Executive  orders,  Mar.  16, 1877,  May  1. 1883,  and  Mar.  3, 1885, 
Irrigable  lands  surveyed.  (Area  of  original  Spanish  grant 
17,581.25  acres.) 


Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  of  May  20,  1842, 
vol.  7,  p.  587. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601;  June  30,  1802,  vol.  7, 
p.  70,  and  of  May  20,  1842,  vol.  7,  p.  587.  (See  Ann.  Rept., 
1877,  p.  164.) 

By  arrangement  with  the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann. 

Kept.,  1877,  p.  166.)    Seneca  agreement  of  Jan.  3,  1893, 

ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20, 1893,  vol.  27,  p.  470;  act  of  June  7, 

1897,  vol.  30,  p.  89. 
Treaty  of  Nov.  11,  17?4,  vol.  7,  p.  44,  and  arrangement  with 

the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  168.) 

Do. 


Treaty  of  May  13,  1796,  vol.  7,  p.  55.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877, 
p.  168.)    They  hold  about  24,250  acres  in  Canada. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  Nov.  5, 1857,  vol. 

12,  p.  991;  purchased  by  the  Indians  and  held  in  trust  by 

the  comptroller  of  New  York;   deed  dated  Feb.  14,  1862. 

(See  also  Ann.  Rept.,  LS77,  p.  165.) 
Treaty  of  Jan.  15,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  551,  and  arrangement  (grant 

and  purchase)  between  the  Indians  and  the  Holland  Land 

Co.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  167.) 


Held  by  deed  to  Indians  under  decision  of  U.  S.  circuit  court 
for  western  district  of  North  Carolina,  entered  at  November 
term,  1874,  confirming  the  award  of  Rufus  Barringer  and 
others,  dated  Oct.  23, 1874,  and  acts  of  Aug.  14,  1876,  vol.  19, 
p.  139,  and  Aug.  23, 1894,  vol.  28,  p.  441 ,  and  deeds  to  Indians 
from  Johnston  and  others,  dated  Oct.  9  1876,  and  Aug.  14, 
1880.  (See  also  H .  Ex.  Docs.  No.  196,  47th  Cong.,  1st  sess.. 
and  No.  128,  53d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)  Now  held  in  fee  by  Indi- 
ans, who  are  incorporated.  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p. 
1000.  (See  Opinions  of  Asst.  Atty.  Gen.,  Mar.  14, 1894,  and 
Feb.  3,  1904.)  35,000  acres  of  the  98,211  acres  sold.  Deeds 
dated  Oct.  4,  1906;  approved  Dec.  12,  1906. 


2  Partly  surveyed. 


3  Surveyed. 


102 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

NOETH  DAKOTA. 

Devils  Lake 

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  19   1867,  vol   15  p  505  agreement  Sept  20 

(Under  FortTotten  School.) 
Tribes:    Assiniboin,  Cut- 
head,  Saotee,  Sisseton, 
\ankton,  and  Wahpe- 
ton  Sioux. 

Fort  Berthold 

100  000 

1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June 
22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.    (See  pp.  328-337  Comp.  Indian 
Laws.)    137,381  acres  allotted  to  1,189  Indians;  727.83  acres 
reserved,  for  church  and  193.61  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes.    Act  of  Apr.  27,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  319,  to 
amend  and  ratify  agreement,  made  Nov.  2,  1901.    Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  June  2,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2368. 
Unratifled  agreement  of  Sept  IV    1851   and  July  27   1866  (see 

(Under  Fort  Berthold 
School.) 
Tribes:     Arikara,     Gros- 
ventre,  and  Mandan. 

• 
StandinglRock  

Laws  relating  to  Indian  Affairs,  Department  of  Interior, 
1883),  pp.  317  and  322;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  12,  1870,  July 
13,  1880,  and  June  17,  1892;  agreement  Dec.  14,  1886,  ratified 
by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1032.    (See  Pres.  proc. 
May  20,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  9<G.)    226,634.91  acres  allotted  to 
1,379  Indians  (see  letter  book  445,  p.  311).    Under  acts  of 
Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1042),  and  June  1,  1910  (36  Stat.  L 
455),  532  allotments,  aggregating  35,687  acres,  were  approved 
Aug.  15,  1910,  and  579  allotments,  aggregating  112,544  acres, 
were  approved  Apr.  5.  1912.    (See  61502-1910,  proclamation 
June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  151),  227,504  acres  open;  see  IT.  J. 
Res.  Apr.  3,  1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  631),  and  proclamation  of 
Sept.  17,  1915,  opening  surface  of  lands  classified  as  coal  to 
homestead  entry,  authorized  by  act  of  Aug.  3,  1914  (38  Stat. 
L.,681). 
Treatv  of  Apr.  29,  186S,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders 

(Under  Standin'g  Rock 
School.) 
Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Hunk- 
papa,  Upper  and  Lower 
Yanktonai  Sioux. 

Turtle  mountain  

Jan.  11-Mar.  16,  1875.  and  Nov.  28,  1876.    Agreement  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and  Executive 
orders  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884  (1,520,640  acres  in 
South  Dakota);  unratified  agreement  of  Oct.   17,   1882. 
(For  modification  see  sundry  civil  appropriation  act  ap- 
proved Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22,  p.  624:  for  text  see  Misc.  In- 
dian Doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)    Act  of  Congress  of  Apr.  30, 
1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.    Act  of  Congress,  Mar.  2, 
1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.     President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 
1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    Under  acts  Mar.  2,  1889,  supra, 
Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1041),  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L., 
451-460),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675).  4,714  Indians 
have  been  allotted  1,387,970  acres.    Under  President's  proc- 
lamation of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.  I/.,  2500),  1,001,500  acres 
were  opened  to  settlement.    Remainder  of  lands  opened 
to  settlement  by  proclamation  Mar.  15,  1915,  as  authorized 
by  act  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675,  680). 
Executive  orders  Dec.  21,  1882,  Mar.  29  and  June  3,  1884. 

(Under    Turtle    Mountain 
Agency.) 
Tribe:   Pembina  Chip- 
pewa. 

Agreement  made  Oct.  2,  1892,  amended   by  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  and  ratified  Arr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
p.  194.    43,820  acres  allotted  to  326  Indians  and  186  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  school  purposes  under  the  above- 
named  act.    Allotments  to  2,577  members  of  this  band  on 
public  domain  aggregating  370,704  acres  have  been  ap- 
proved. 

Total 

100  000 

OKLAHOMA. 

Apache  

Formerly  Fort  Sill.    (See  Executive  order  Feb.  26,  1897.) 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 
Cherokee...  . 

i  308 

Act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173);  act  June  28,  1902  (32  Stat., 
467).    Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong.,  2d  sess.,  act  Aug.  24, 
1912  (37  Stat,,  534);  act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  92).    Lands 
to  be  purchased  for  those  members  of  this  hand,  some  80 
in  number,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma. 
Treaty  with  Westernrherokeesatcity  of  Washington,  Mav6, 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes.) 

Cherokee  Outlet 

1828  (7  Stat.,  311),  as  amended  by  the  treaty  at  Fort  Gibson 
of   Feb.  14,  1833  (7  Stat.,  414);  referred  to  in  treaty  with 
Cherokees  at  New  Fchota.  Ga.,  Dec.  29,  1^35  (7  Stat.,  478); 
July  19,  1866  (14  Stat.,  799),  as  supplemented  bv  treatv  of 
Apr.  27,  1868  (16  Stat.,  727).    Agreement  of  July  1,  1902  (32 
Stat.,  716).    Approximatfly  41,824  Cherokees,  including 
4,919  freedmen,  were  allotted  an  average  of  110  acres,  40 
acres  of  which  vas  a  homestead  to  be  nontaxable  while 
held   by  the   original  allottee.    Total  acreage  allotted, 
4,340,203;  sold,  50,905;  unsold,  308. 
Agreement  of  Dec  19,  1891'  ratified  sec  10  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 

1893  (27  Stat.,  640),  unoccupied  part  of  Cherokee  Outlet, 
not  included  in  Territory  of  Oklahoma  (26  Stat.,  81).    62 
Indians  allotted  4,949.45  acres  under  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893. 

»  Surveyed. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


103 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Acres. 

Executive  order  Aug.  10,  1869;  unratified  agreement  with 

(Under  Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho, Cantonment,  and 
Seger  Schools.) 
Tribes:  Southern  Arapaho 
and   Northern   and 
Southern  Cheyenne. 

Chickasaw  

Wichita,  Caddo,  and  others,   Oct.  19,  1872.    (See  Ann. 
Kept.,  1872,  p.  101.)    Executive  orders  of  Apr.  18,  1882, 
and  Jan.  17,  18S3,  relative  to  Fort  Supply  Military  Eeserve 
(relinquished  for  disposal  under  act  of  Congress  of  July  5, 
1894,  bv  authority  of  Executive  order  of  Nov.  5,  1894;  see 
General  Land  Office  Report,  1899,  T).  158).    Executive  order 
of  July  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Reno  Military  Reserve. 
Agreement  made  October,  1890,  and  ratified  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26, 
pp.   1022-1026.    528,789  acres  allotted   to  3,331    Indians; 
231,828.55  acres  for  Oklahoma  school  lands;  32,343.93  acres 
reserved  for  military,  agency,  mission,  etc.,  purposes;  the 
residue,   3,500,562.05  acres,   opened   to   settlement.    (See 
Pros.  proc.  Apr.  12,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1018.)    Executive  order, 
July  12,  1895.    President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  12,  1903, 
vol.  33,  p.  2317.    Act  June  17,  1910  (36  Stat.,  533).  57,637-10. 
Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611;  agreement  of  Apr.  23, 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Choctaw  

1  3  285 

1897,  ratified  by  act  of  June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  505;  act  of 
July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  641,  ratifying  agreement  of  Mar.  21, 
1902;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  209;  act  of  Apr.  28.  1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  544.    10,966  Indians  have  been  allotted  3,800,350 
acres;  sold,  865,453  acres;  unallotted  area,  3.285  acres,  not 
including  7,839.43  acres  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  lands. 
Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611.    Same  as  Chickasaw. 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Creek 

2  495 

Approximately  26,828  Indians  have  been  allotted  4,291,036 
acres;  sold,  1,565,908  acres;  unsold.  1,036,545  acres,  which 
includes  823,521  acres  of  timber  and  184,757  acres  of  segregated 
coal  and  asphalt  land  belonging  to  the  Choctaw  and  Chicka- 
saw Nations  jointly. 
Treaties  of  Feb    14,  1883,  vol.  7,  p.  417,  and  June  14,  1866, 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Iowa 

vol.  14,  p.  785,  and  the  deficiency  appropriation  act  of  Aug.  5, 
1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1882,  p.  LIV.)    Agree- 
ment of  Jan.  19,  1889,  ratified  by  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1889, 
vol.  25,  p.  757;  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  23,  1889,  vol. 
26,  p.  1544;  agreement  of  Sept.  27,  1897,  ratified  by  act  of 
June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  514;  agreement  of  Mar.  8,  1900, 
ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  1,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  861;  President's 
proclamation  of  June  25,  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1971;  supplemental 
agreement  of  June  30,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  500;  President's  proc- 
lamation of  Aug.  8,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2021.    (See  act  of  May 
27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  258;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  204.) 
Approximately  18,776  Indians  have  been  allotted  2,997,114 
acres;  sold,  63,470  acres. 
Executive  order  Aug  15,  1883;  agreement  May  20,  1890,  rati- 

(Under Sac  and  Fox  School.) 
Tribes:  Iowa  and  Tonka- 
wa. 

Kfirisa  or  Kaw  . 

fied  by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  753.    8,605  acres 
allotted  to  10S  Indians;  20  acres  held  in  common  for  church, 
school,  etc.;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement.    Proclama- 
tion of  President  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  989.    (See  Ann. 
Rept,  1891,  p.  677,  and  letter  book  222,  p.  364.) 
Act  of  June  5,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.    260  acres  reserved  for  ceme- 

(Under Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Ivansa  or  Kaw. 

tery,   school,   and  town  site.     Remainder,   99,644  acres, 
allotted  to  247  Indians;  act  of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  636, 

Kickapoo 

ratifying  agreement,  not  dated.  Act  Mar.  3,  1909.   (35  Stat., 
778.) 
Executive  order,  Aug.  15,  1883;  agreement  June  21,  1891;  rati- 

(Under Shawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Mexican  Kickapoo. 

fied  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  557.     22,650  acres 
allotted  to  280  Indians;  479.72  acres  reserved  for  mission, 
agency,  and  school  purposes;  residue  opened  to  settlement 
by  proclamation  of  the  President  May  18,  1895,  vol.  29,  p. 
868;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1001.    June  21,  1906.    (34 
Stat.,  362.) 

Partly  surveyed. 


104 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OKLAHOMA— continued. 


Kiowa  and  Comanche 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Apache,   Coman- 
che,     Delaware,      and 
Kiowa. 


Fort  Sill  Apaches 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 


Modoc 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Modoc. 


Oakland 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribes:  Tonkawa  and 
Lipan. 


Osage 

(Under  Osage  School.) 
Tribes:  Great  and  Little 


Otoe 

(Under  Otoe  School.) 
Tribes:  Oto  and  Missouri. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted)., 


Acres. 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


Treaty  of  Oct.  21,  1867,  vol.  15,  pp.  581  and  589;  agreement 
made  Oct.  6,  1892;  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31, 
p.  676,  ceding  2,488,893  acres,  of  which  445,000  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  3,444  Indians;  11,972  acres  reserved  for 


vol.  32,  p.  1975;  June  23,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2007;  Sept.  4,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  2026;  and  Mar.  29,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.  Of  the 
480,000  acres  grazing  land  set  apart  under  act  of  June  6, 
1900,  1,841.92  acres  were  reserved  for  town  sites  under  act 
Mar.  20,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  801),  82,059.52  acres  were  allotted 
to  513  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  213), 
and  480  a^res  allotted  to  3  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  as 
amended  by  act  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1018).  The  Gen- 
eral Land  Office  reports  the  sale  and  entry  of  approximately 
401,465.92  acres  under  act  of  June  5,  and  of  21.251.75  acres 
under  act  of  June  28, 1906,  to  June  30, 1911.  (See  874C 4-1909.) 
(See  75344-1908.)  Under  act  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.,  471), 
and  act  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.,  861),  20,498  acres  allotted  to 
169  Indians.  Sale  of  unused,  unreserved  lands,  act  Mar.  3, 
1911  (36  Stat.,  1069).  Act  Mar.  4,  1915,  Department  of 
Agriculture  experiment  station.  Sale  of  school  and  agencv 
reserves,  act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  92). 

Formerly  prisoners  of  war,  remnants  and  descendants  of 
Chisf  Geronimo's  Band.  6,149  acres  of  inherited  Kiowa, 
Comanche,  and  Apache  lands  were  purchased  by  the 
United  States  for  reallotment  to  81  Indians  and  3  whites 
of  this  band,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma.  (187 
of  the  band  removed  to  Mescalero.  See  Ann.  Kept.  1913.) 
These  lands  were  purchased  under  the  acts  of  June  25, 
1910  (36  Stat.,  855),  Aug.  24,  1912  (37  Stat.,  534),  appro- 
priating $2CO,000;  June  30, 1913  (38  Stat..  94),  appropriating 
$100,000;  and  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.,  587).  See  Executive 
order  Feb.  26,  1897,  act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173);  act 
June  28,  1902  (32  Stat.,  467);  Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong., 
2d  sess. 

Agreement  with  Eastern  Shawnees  made  June  23,  1874  (see 
Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  271),  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18.  p.  447.  Lands 
all  allotted— 3,966  acres  allotted  to  68  Indians,  8  acres  re- 
served for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  2  acres  for  school, 
and  24  acres  for  timber.  (Letter  book  220,  p.  102.)  Act 
Mar.  3,  1909.  (35  Stat.,  752.) 

Act  of  May  27, 1878,  vol.  20,  p.  84.  (See  Ann.  Kept,  for  1882, 
p.  Lxn).  (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee, 
vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  476.)  (See  deed  from  Nez  Perce, 
May  22,  1885,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  504.)  11,456  acres 
allotted  to  73  Indians;  160.50  acres  reserved  for  Government 
and  school  purposes.  The  residue,  79,276.60  acres,  opened 
to  settlement.  (Letter  took,  257,  p.  240.)  Agreement  made 
Oct.  21, 1891,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  3. 1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.  (For  text,  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1893, 
p.  524.) 

Article  16,  Cherokee  treaty  of  July  19,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  804; 
order  of  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  27, 1871;  act  of  June 
5, 1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.  (See  deed  dated  June  14, 1883,  from 
Cherokee,  vol.6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  482.)  (See  act  of  June  28, 
1906  (34  Stats.,  539),  act  of  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stats.,  787),  and 
Public  Resolution  No.  51,  approved  Feb.  28,  1909.)  2,230 
Indians  have  been  allotted  1,065,134.31  acres  (3  selections). 
Since  July  1,  1909,  these  2,230  Indians  have  been  allotted 
1,465,350  acres  from  surplus  lands,  and  5,178.53  acres  have 
been  reserved  for  church,  town-site,  and  railroad  purposes. 
Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.,  778). 

Act  of  Mar.  3,  1881,  vol.  21,  p.  381;  order  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  June  25,  1881.  (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883, 
from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  479.)  Under  acts 
of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794), 
and  Apr.  21, 1904  (33  Stats.,  189),  128,251  acres  were  allotted 

•  to  514  Indians  (885  allotments— see  letter  book  929,  p.  326), 
720  acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  cem- 
i  etery  purposes,  and  640  acres  set  aside  for  tribal  uses. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


105 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Ottawa..                     

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513;    12,995  acres  were 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:    Ottawa     of 
Blanch  ards    Fork    and 
Roche  de  Boeuf. 

Pawnee 

allotted  to  160  Indians;  557.95  acres  were  authorized  to  be 
sold  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891  (vol.  26,  p.  989).    The  residue, 
1,587.25  acres,  sold.    Letter  book  229,  p.  115,  and  act  Mar.  3, 
1909(35Stat.,752). 

Act  of  Apr  10,  1876,  vol.  19,  p  29     Of  this  230  014  acres  are 

(Under  Pawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Pawnee. 

Peoria. 

Cherokee  and  53,006  acres  are  Creek  lands.    (See  deed  dated 
June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  470.) 
112,701  acres  allotted  to  820  Indians;  840  acres  were  reserved 
for  school,  agencv,  and  cemeterv  purposes:   the  residue, 
169.320acres.  opened  to  settlen  enf.  (letter  locks  261.  p.  288, 
and  263,  p.  5.)    Agreement  made  Nov.  23,  1892,  ratif  ed  by 
act  of  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27.  p.  644.   (For  text  see  Ann.  Kept.. 
1893,  p.  526.) 
Treaty  of  Feb   23,  1867,  vol  15,  p  513     43,334  acres  allctted 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:    Kaskaskia,    Mi- 
ami,   Peoria,    Pianka- 
shaw,  and  Wea. 
Ponca 

1  387 

to  218  Indians.    The  residue,  6.313.27  acres,  sold  under  act 
of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  245). 

Acts  of  A  ug  15,  1876,  vol.  19,  p.  192-   Mar  3  1877  vol   19  p 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 

Potawatomi 

287;  May  27,  1878,  vol.20,  p.  76;  and  Mar.  3,  1881,  vol.  21,  p. 
422.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherckee,  vol.  6, 
Indian  Deeds,  p.  473.)    There  have  leen  allotted  to  782 
Indians  100,734  acres,  and  reserved  for  afency,  school,  mis- 
sion, and  cemetery  purposes  f23.,r6  acres,  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  387  acres.    (Letter  locks  c02,  p.  311,  and 
813  p.  401.)    Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  217.     (See  38067-1915.) 
Treatv  of  Feb   27   1867  vol   15   p  531-   act  of  May  23   1872 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribes:  Absentee    Shaw- 
nee  and  Potawatomi. 

Quapaw 

vol.  17,  p.  159.    (222.716  acres  are  Creek  ceded  lands;  ?6£  ,851 
acres  are  Seminrle  lands.)    Agreenents  with  citiien  Pot- 
awatomi Jr.ne  25  and  Absentee  Frawnees  June  $6,  1££0: 
ratif  ed  and  confrmed  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26.  pp.  1016-1021.    215,679.42  acres  allotted 
to  1,489  Potawatomi,  and  70,791.47  acres  allotted  to  £63 
Absentee  Shawnees,  and  510.63  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settleirent  bv  the 
President's  proclamation  of  Sept.  18,  18S1,  vol.  27,  p.  989. 
(See  letter  book  222,  pp.  442,  444,  and  Ann.  Eept.  for  1891, 
p.  677.) 
Treaties  of  May  13   1833  vol   7  p  424   and  of  Feb   23   1867 

(Under     Seneca     School.) 
Tribe:  Quapaw. 

Sauk  and  Fox 

vol.  15,  p.  513.    (56,245.21  acres  allotted  to  248  Indians,  400 
acres  reserved  for  school  and  40  acres  for  church  purposes. 
(Letter  book  335,  p.  326.)    Agreeirent  of  Mer.  2?,  1893, 
ratif  ed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  2,  1895, 
vol.  28,  p.  907.    Agreement  of  Jan.  2,  1899,  ratif  ed  in  Indian 
appropriation  act  approved  Far.  3,  KOI,  vol.  31,  p.  1067. 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997. 
Treaty  of  Feb   18   1867   vol   15  p   495'   agreement  June  12 

(Under     Sac      and     Fox 
School.) 
Tribes:  Ottawa,  Sauk  and 
Fox  of  the  Mississippi. 

Seminole 

18SO;  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  749.    87,683.46 
acres  allotted  to  548  Indians,  and  800  acros  rosprvcd  for 
school  and  agency  purposes:  the  residue  opened  to  settle- 
ment bv  the  President's  proclamation  Fept.  18,  1891,  vol. 
27,  p.  989.    (Fee  letter  book  222,  p.  169,  and  Ann.  Kept, 
for  1891,  p.  -377.) 
Treaties  of  Mar.  21,  1866,  vol.  14.  p.  755.    (See  Creek  agree- 

(Under superintendent  Five  | 
Civilized  Tribes,  Muskogee, 
Okla.) 

Seneca  .... 

ment  of  Feb.  14,  1881,  Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  54,  and  defi- 
ciency act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.)    Agreement  of 
Mar.  16,  1889.    (See  Indian  appropriate  n  act  approved 
Mar.  2,  1889.)    Agreement  recorded  in  the  treaty  book,  vol. 
3,  p.  35;  agreement  made  Dec.  16,  1897,  ratif  od  by  the  act 
of  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  567;  agreement  of  Cot.  7,  189P,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  June  2,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  250.    Approximately 
3,127  Indians  have  been  allotted  359,697  acres;  sold,  4,223.74 
acres. 
Treaties  of  Feb.  28,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  348;  of  Dec.  29,  1832  vol 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Seneca. 

7,  p.  411,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.    41,813  acres 
allotted  to  435  Indians;   104.22  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment, church,  and  school  purposes.    ^\  greement  of  Dec.  2. 
1901,  ratified  by  act  of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262. 

i  Surveyed. 

106 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  far  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  80,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


OKLAHOMA— continued. 


Shawnee 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:  Seneca  and  East- 
ern Shawnee. 


Wichita 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:  loni.  Caddo,  Co- 
manche,  Delaware,  To- 
w  a  k  o  n  i   Waco,   and 
Wichita. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 


Wyandot 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Wyandot. 

Total... 


6,475 


Grande  Ronde 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Kalapuya,  llack- 
amas,  Cow  Creek,  Lak- 
miut,  Marys  River,  Mo- 
lala,  Nestucca,  Rogue 
River,  Santiam.  Shasta, 
Turawater,  Umpqua, 
Wapato,  and  Yamhill. 

Klamath 

(Under  Klamath  School.) 
Tribes:  Klamath.  Modoc, 
P.aiute,  Pit  lliver,  Wal- 
pape,  and  Yahooskin 
Band  of  Snake  (Sho- 
shoni). 


1  811, 802 


Siletz 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Alsea,  Coquille, 
Kusan,  Kwatami, 
Rogue  River,  Skoton, 
Shasta.  Saiustkea,  Siu- 
slaw,Tututni,Umpqua, 
and  13  others. 


TJmatilla 

(Under  Umatilla  School.) 
Tribes:  Cavuse,  Umatilla. 
and  Wallawalla. 


Warm  Springs 

(Under      Warm      Springs 

School.) 

Tribes:  Des  Chutes,  John 
Day,  Paiute,  Tenino. 
Warm  Springs,  and 
Wasco. 


Total.. 


274,232 


'322,435 


1,208,469 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 


Treaties  of  July  20,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  351;  of  Dec.  29,  1832,  vol. 
7,  p.  411;  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513,  and  agreement 
with  Modocs,  made  June  23,  1874  (see  Ann.  Dept.,  1S82, 
p.  271),  confirmed  by  Congress  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.  12,745  acres 
allotted"  to  117  Indians;  86  acres  reserved  for  agency  pur- 
poses (letter  books  208,  p.  266,  and  233,  p.  207);  the  residue. 
2,543  acres,  sold  (agreement  of  Dec.  2,  1901,  ratified  by  act 
of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262). 

(See  treaty  of  July  4,  1866,  with  Delawares,  art.  4,  vol.  14,  p. 
794.)  Unratified  agreement,  Oct.  19,  1872.  (See  Ann. 
Rent.,  1872,  p.  101.)  Agreement  made  June  4,  1891,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  2,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  895.  152,714  acres 
allotted  to  957  Indians;  4,151  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.  The  residue,  586,468 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  book  4^0,  p.  90).  Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  July  4.  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1975. 

Unoccupied  Chickasaw  and  Choctaw  leased  lands  west  of 
the  North  Fork  of  the  Red  River.  Act  of  May  4,  1896,  vol. 
29,  p.  113.  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  16, 1896,  vol.  29, 
p.  878.  Act  of  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  680). 

Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1X67,  vol.  15,  p.  513.  20,942  acres  allotted 
to  2'44  Indians,  16  acres  to  churches,  etc..  leaving  534.72 
acres  unallotted  (letter  book  228,  p.  332).  Unallotted  land 
sold,  act  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.,  752). 


Treaties  of  Jan.  22, 1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1143,  and  of  Dec.  21, 1855, 
vol.  12,  p.  982:  Executive  order  June  30,  1857.  440  acres 
reserved  for  Government  use  and  32.983  acres  allotted  to 
269  Indians.  (See  letter  book  210,  p.  328.)  Act  of  Apr.  28, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  567,  amending  and  ratifying  agreement  of 
June  27, 1901  (33  L.  D.,  586). 


Treaty  of  Oct.  14,  1864,  vol.  16,  p.  707.  Act  June  10,  1896  (29 
Stat.,  321).  Act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.,  260).  207,373 
acres  allotted  to  1,345  Indians;  6,094.77  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  and  church  purposes.  Indian  appropria- 
tion act  approved  Apr.  21, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  202:  act  of  Mar.  3, 
1905,  vol.  33,  p.  1033,  and  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  367). 
(See  act  of  Mar.  3. 1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  752),  removal  of  Modocs 
in  Oklahoma  to  Klamath  and  allotments  thereto.)  Bound<- 
ary  dispute  (see  9881-1911). 

Unratified  treaty,  Aug.  11,  1855;  Executive  orders  Nov.  9, 
1855,  and  Dec.  21, 1865,  and  act  of  Mar.  3, 1875,  vol.  18,  p.  446. 
Agreement  Oct.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  323.  44,459  acres  allotted  to  551  Indians.  Resi- 
due, 177,563.66  acres  (except  5  sections),  ceded  to  United 
States.  (See  letter  book  281,  p.  358.)  President's  proclama- 
tion, May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  866.  Acts  of  May  31,  1900, 
vol.  31,  p.  233,  and  Mar.  3, 1901,  vol.  31,  p.  1085.  Act  of  May 
13, 1910  (36  Stat.,  367). 

Treaty  of  June  9,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  945,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882. 
vol.  22,  p.  297:  Mar.  3,  1885,  vol.  23.  p.  340.  and  sec.  8  of  act 
of  Oct.  17,  1888,  vol  25,  p.  559.  (See  orders  Secretary  of 
Interior.  Dec.  4,  1888,  Ann.  Rept.,  1891,  p.  682.)  82,542.15 
acres  allotted  to  1,116  Indians,  980  acres  reserved  for  school 
and  mission  purposes.  (See  letter  book  255,  p.  132.)  Act 
of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  730. 

Treaty  of  June  25,  1855,  vol  12,  p.  963.  140,3C9  acres  allotted 
to  9!'.7  Indians,  and  1,195  acres  reserved  for  church,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.  The  residue,  322.108  acres,  unallotted 
and  unreserved  (letter  book  334,  p.  295). 


Outboundaries  surveyed. 


1  Surveyed. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


107 


TABLE  7.8 — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

SOUTH  DAKOTA. 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winne- 

baao. 

(Under  Crow  Creek  School.) 

Tribes:  Lo '  er  Yanktonai, 

Lower  Brule,  Minicon- 

jou,   and    Two    Kettle 

Sioux. 


Lake  Traverse 

(Under  Sisseton  School.) 
Tribes:  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux. 


Cheyenne  River.l , 

(Under     Cheyenne     River 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Mini- 
conjou.  Sans  Arcs,  and 
Two  Kettle  Sioux. 


Louver  Brule 

(Under  Lower  Brule  School.) 

Tribes:  Lower  Brule  and 

Lower  Yanktonai  Sioux. 


Acres. 
1 11, 203  ! 


290,053 


152,159 


Order  of  department,  July  1,  18C3  (see  Ann.  Kept.,  1863,  p. 
318);  treaty  of  Apr.  29,  18C8,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive 
order,  Feb.  27, 1885  (see  President's  proclamation  of  Apr.  17, 
1885, annulling  Executive  order  of  Feb.  27. 1885;  Ann.  Kept., 
1885,  p.  51);  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888;  President's 
proclamations,  Feb.  10,1890,  vol.26,  p.  1554.  There  have 
been  allotted  to  1,461  .Indians  272,720  acres,  and  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes  1,076.90  acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  19,  18C7,  vol.  15,  p.  505;  agreement,  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337,  Comp.  In- 
dian La  s.)  Agreement,  Dec.  12,  1889,  ratified  by  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1035-1038.  308,838  acres  allotted 
to  2,00o  Indians,  32,840.25  acres  reserved  for  State  school  pur- 
poses, 1,347.01  acres  for  church  and  agency  purposes;  the 
residue,  574,678.40  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  Apr.  11,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1017.) 
Trust  period  extended  10  years,  Executive  order  of  Apr.  16, 
1914. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 18R8,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624,  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20,  1896,  vol .  29,  p.  10.) 
President's  proclamations  of  Feb.  7,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  2035, 
and  Mar.  30, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.    981,474.34  acres  have  been 
allotted  to  3,441  Indians.    (See  L.  B.  828,  p.  321.)    Act  of 
May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  460).    Under  President's  procla- 
mation of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.,  2500),  1,158,010  acres  were 
opened  to  settlement,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved 
290,053  acres. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 18G8,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  voi.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10. 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29.  p.  10.) 
Agreement  made  Mar.  1, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3. 1899, 
vol.  30,  p.  1362,  ceding  120,000  acres  to  the  United  States. 
187,356  acres  allotted  to  777  Indians,  and  964.06  acres  re* 
served  for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes,  leaving 
unallotted  and  unreserved  175,470.76  acres.    (See  letter 
book  498,  p.  336.)    (See  act  of  Apr.  21, 1906. 34  Stats.,  124  and 
1048,  and  President's  proclamations  of  Aug.  12, 1^07,  and 
Sept.  24, 1913.) 

i  Surveyed. 


108 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


SOUTH  DAKOTA — continued. 


Pine  Ridge 

(Under  Pine  Ridge  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Brule  Sioux, 
Northern  Cheyenne, 
and  Oglalla  Sioux. 


Area  (unal 
lotted). 


Acres. 
200,000 


Rosebud  ..................... 

(Under  Rosebud  School.) 
Tribes:   Loafer,   Minicon- 


jou,  Northern  O  g  1  a  1  a, 
Two    Kettle,    Uppe 
Brule,    and   Wazhazh 


Yankton 

(Under  Yankton  School.) 
Tribe:  Yankton  Sioux. 


Total. 


Goshute  and  scattering  bands 
Pangnitch 

Shivwits... 


72, 342 


623,757 


34,500 


223,040 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


J  Surveyed. 


Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3, 1883,  22  Stats., 
624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  "05. )  Act  of 
Apr.  30,  1888  (25  Stats.,  94),  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 
1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 
1880,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  29  Stats.,  10.) 
A  tract  of  32,000  acres  in  Nebraska  was  set  apart  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Jan.  24,  1882,  and  was  restored  to  the  public 
domain  by  Executive  order  of  Jan.  25, 19.04;  and  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  640  acres  of  this  land  was  set 
apart  for  Indian  school  purposes  and  is  called  the  Sioux 
additional  tract.  (See  Nebraska.)  Act  of  Mar.  2,  18S9 
(25  Stats.,  888),  authority  of  President  of  July  29,  1904. 
2,032,980  acres  have  been  allotted  to  7,308  Indians,  and 
11,333.68  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school,  and  church 
purposes,  aggregating  866,323.19,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  251,161  acres.  Lands  still  in  process  of  allot- 
ment under  acts  of  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.  L.,  888),  Mar.J. 
1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1048),  and  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451). 
Act  May  27,  1910  (36  Stat.,  440),  40,960  acres  State  school 
land;  22,434  acres  timber  reserved.  President's  proclama- 
tion, June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  169,592  acres 
May  1, 1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876:  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305. ^ 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of 
Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of 
Feb.  10, 1800,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol. 

29,  p.  10.)    1,643,048.80  acres  allotted  to  7.195  Sioux  Indians, 
416,000  acres  opened   to  settlement,  29,392.01  reserved  for 
Government    purposes,    churches,    cemeteries,    etc.    The 
residue,  436,151  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved.    Agree- 
ment made  Mar.  10, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899,  vol. 

30,  p.  1364.    Act  of  Apr.  23,  1S04,  vol.  33,  p.  254,  ratifying 
agreement  made  Sept.  14,  1P01.    President's  proclamation 
of  May  16,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2354.    Act  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat., 
1048);  act  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stat.,  1230);  act  May  29.  1908  (35 
Stat.,  451);  act  May  30,  1910  (36  Stat.,  448);  President's 
proclamation,  Aug.  24,  1608  (35  Stat.,  2203),  opening  838,000 
acres  in  Tripp  County.    President's  proclamation,  June 
29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  300,000  acres  in  Mellette 
and  Washabadgh  Counties,  43,520  acres  State  school  land 
Executive  order,  July  6,  1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  19,  1858',  vol.  11,  p.  744.  268,263  acres  allotted 
to  2,613  Indians  and  1,252.89  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
church,  and  school  purposes.  (See  letter  book  207,  p.  1.) 
Agreement  Dec.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  314.  The  residue  open  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  865.) 


Executive  order,  Mar.  23, 1914. 

136.52  acres  in  Garfield  County,  Utah,  purchased  Nov.  1, 1903. 

About  1  township  in  Washington  County,  Utah,  withdrawn 
by  departmental  order  based  on  office  recommendation  of 
Sept.  28,  1891  (L.  B.,  223,  p.  270).  Rights  of  squatters  in 
withdrawal  purchased  by  United  States.  (See  also  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  26  Stat.  L.,  989-1005). 

2  Unsurveved. 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


109 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


UTAH — continued. 


Area  (unal-. 
lotted). 


Uintah  Valley 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Gosiute,  Pavant, 
Uinta,  Yampa,  Grand 
River  uncompahgre 
and  White  River  Ute. 


Uncompahgre 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 

Agency.) 
Tribe:  Tabaquache  Ute. 


Total 

WASHINGTON. 


Chehalis 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Chinook  (Tsinuk), 
Clatsop,  and  Chehalis. 


Columbia , 

(Under  Colville  School.) 
Tribe:    Columbia    (Moses 
band.) 


Colville 

(Under  Colville  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Coeur  d'Alene, 
Colville,  Kalispel,  Okin- 
agan,  Lake,  Methow, 
Xespelim,  Fend  d' 
Oreille,  Sanpoil,  and 
Spokan. 


Acres. 
i  249, 340 


306,880 


11,297,009 


Hoh  River 

(Under  Teah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Hoh.     ' 

Kalispel I 

(Under       Coeur       d'Alene 
Agency,  Idaho.) 

Klickitat 

(1'onreservation;  Roseburg, 

Oreg.) 
Lummi 


640 


4,629 


(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:   Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 

Makah , 

(Under :  ~eah  Bay  School.) 
Tribes:  Makah  and  Qui- 
leute. 

Muckleshoot 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribe:  Muckleshoot. 


219,312 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


1  Partly  surveyed. 


Executive  orders,  Oct.  3,  1861;  act  of  June  18,  1878  (2  Stats., 
165);  acts  of  May  5,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  63,  and  May  24,  1888, 
vol.  25,  p.  157;  joint  resolution  of  June  19,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
744;  act  of  Mar.  3, 1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997;  Indian  appropriation 
act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  207;  President's 
proclamations  of  July  14,  1905,  setting  aside  1,010,000  acres 
as  a  .forest  reserve,  2, 100  acres  as  town  sites.  1,004,285  acres 
opened  to  homestead  entry,  2,140  acres  in  mining  claims; 
under  act  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  263),  99,407  acres  allotted 
to  1,284  Indians,  and  60,160  acres  under  reclamation,  the 
residue,  179,194.65  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved.  (See 
letter  book  75,  p.  398.) 

Executive  order,  Jan.  5,  1882.  (See  act  of  June  15,  1880,  rati- 
fying the  agreement  of  Mar.  6,  1880,  vol.  21,  p.  199.)  12,540 
acres  allotted  to  83  Indians,  remainder  of  reservation  re- 
stored to  public  domain,  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  62. 
(Letter  book  403,  p.  115.)  Joint  resolution  of  June  19, 1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  744. 


Order  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  July  8, 1864;  Executive 
order,  Oct.  1,  1886.  471  acres  set  aside  for  school  purposes. 
The  residue,  3,753.63  acres,  restored  to  the  public  domain 
for  Indian  homestead  entry.  36  Indians  made  homestead 
selections,  covering  all  the  land.  (See  letter  book  152,  p. 
201,  and  153,  p.  45.) 

Executive  orders,  Apr.  19,  1879,  Mar.  6,  1880,  and  Feb.  23, 
1883.  (See  Indian  appropriation  act  of  July  4. 1884,  vol.  23, 
p.  79.)  Agreement  made  July  7,  1883,  ratified  by  act  of 
July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79.  Executive  order,  May  1,  1886; 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  9,  1894;  department  orders  of 
Apr.  11,  1894,  and  Apr.  20,  1894,  and  Executive  order  of 
Jan.  19,  18S5.  26,218  acres  allotted  to  35  Indians  (see 
Executive  order  of  May  21,  1886,  and  act  of  Mar.  8, 1906,  34 
Stats.,  55). 

Executive  orders,  Apr.  9  and  July  2,  1872;  agreement  made 
July  7,  1883,  ratified  by  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79. 
Act  of  July  1,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  62.  (See  acts  of  Feb.  20, 
1896,  vol.  29,  p.  9,  and  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30.  p.  593.)  51,653 
acres  in  north  half  allotted  to  660  Indians  (see  letter  book 
428,  p.  100);  remainder  of  north  half,  estimated  at  1,449,268 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  Oct.  10,  1900  (see  proclamation 
of  the  President,  dated  Apr.  10,  1900,  31  Stats.,  p.  1963). 
240  acres  have  been  reserved  for  town  sites.  2,750.82  acres 
temporarily  withdrawn  for  town  sites.  The  residue, 
1,297,009  acres  (estimated),  unallotted.  Act  of  Feb.  7, 
1903,  vol.  32,  p.  803.  Allotments  to  be  made  under  act  of 
Mar.  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  80),  and  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36 
Stat.,  863).  Lands  now  being  allotted. 

Executive  order,  Sept.  11, 1893. 


Executive  order,  Mar.  23, 1914. 


6  townships  in  Gilliam  County,  Wash.,  set  aside  for  allotment 
selection  by  about  200  Indians  under  sec.  4,  act  Feb.  8, 1887 
(24  Stat.,  388),  as  amended.  (See  80088-1912.) 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22, 1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Executive 
order,  "ov.  22, 1873.  Allotted  12,560.94  acres  to  109  Indians; 
school  conducted  on  2-acre  tract  purchased  from  John 
Martin. 


Treaty  of  reah  Bay,  Jan.  31, 1855,  vol.  12,  p.  939;  Executive 
orders,  Oct.  26,  1872,  Jan.  2  and  Oct.  21,  1873.  3,727  acres 
allotted  to  373  Indians.  (See  letter  book  960,  228  and  37679 
1907.) 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  Apr.  9, 1874.  44  Indians 
have  been  allotted  3,532.72  acres. 

2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


110 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  far  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

WASHINGTON—  continued. 
Nisqualli  

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  Exec 
utive  order,  Jan.  20,  1857.    Land  all  allotted.    4,718  acres  to 
30  Indians. 

Executive  order,  Apr.  12,  1893. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  order  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  21,  1864.    7,219  acres 
allotted  to  51  Indians;  the  residue,  65  acres,  unallotted. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  Ex- 
ecutive orders,  Jan.  20,   1857,  and  Sept.  6,  1873.    17,463 
acres  allotted  to  167  Indians.    Agreement  made  Nov.  21, 
1876,  ratified  by  act  ol  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  464.    (For 
text  see  annual  report  1893,  p.  518.)    The  residue,  599  acres 
laid  out  as  an  addition  to  the  city  of  Tacoma,  has  been  sold, 
with  the  exception  of  39.79  acres  reserved  lor  school,  and 
19.43  acres  for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  under  acts  of 
Mar.  3.  1893  (27  Stat.,  633,  June  7.  1897)  (30  Stats.,  62),  and 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  377). 
Executive  order,  Feb.  19,  1889. 

Treaties  of  Olympia,  July  1,  1855,  and  Jan.  25,  1856,  vol.  12, 
p.  971;  Executive  orden,  Nov.  4,  1873.    Under  acts  of  Feb. 
8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  and  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  690 
Indians  have  been  allotted  54,989.80  acres  and  456.56  have 
been  reserved  for  agency,  lighthouse,  and  other  purposes, 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  158,784  acres.    Act  Mar. 
4,  191  f  (36  Stat.,  1545). 
Executive  order,  Sept.  22,  1866,  55,535-7-1909. 

Treaty  of  Point  No  Point,  Jan.  26.  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  933;  Ex- 
ecutive order,  Feb.  25,  1874.    Allotted  in  treaty  reserve 
4,990  acres:  residue,  none.    (See  L.  B.,  895,  p.  268.)    Allot- 
ted in  Executive  order  addition,  known  as  the  Fisher  ad- 
dition, 814  acres;  residue,  none.    (L.  B.,  895,  p.  285.)    62 
allotments. 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 
tive  order,   Dec.   23,    1873.    22,166   acres  allotted   to   164 
Indians. 

Executive  order,  Jan.  18,  1881.    Agreement  made  Mar.  18, 
1887,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  July 
13,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  139.    (For  text  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1892, 
p.  743.)    Joint  resolution  of  Congress  of  June  19,  1902,  vol. 
32,  p.  744.    Under  act  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  458), 
approximately  626  Indians  have  been  allotted  64,794  acres, 
and  1,247.30  acres  set  aside  for  church,  school,  agency,  and 
town-site  purposes.    By  proclamation  of  May  22,  1909,  the 
President  opened  the  surplus  lands  to  settlement.    5,781 
acres  classified  as  agricultural  land,  82,647.50  acres  classi- 
fied as  timber  reserved  for  tribal  use. 
Treatv  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  land 
all  allotted,  1,494.15  acres,  to  23  Indians. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 
tive order,  Sept.  9,  1873.    Allotted,  7,359  acres  to  71  Indians; 
reserved  for  school,  89.80  acres. 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:          Muckleshoot, 
Fisqualli,       Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 
Ozette 

640 
165 

(Under  r  eah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Ozette. 
Port  Madison 

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,    Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Puyallup             

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:     Muckleshoct, 
Nisqualli,  Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 

Quileute 

2837 
*  158,  784 

1335 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Quileute. 
Quinaielt 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Quaitso  and  Quin- 
aielt. 

Shoal  water 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Shoalwater    and 
Chehalis. 
Skokomish 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Clallam,    Skoko- 
mish, and  Twana. 

Snohomish  or  Tulalip  
(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,     Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Spokan 

1324 
82,  647 

(Under  Spokane  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Spokan. 

Squaxon  Island  (Klahchemin) 
(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Nisqualli,  Puyal- 
lup,    Skwawksnamish, 
Stailakoom,  and  5  others. 
Swinomish  (Perrys  Island)  

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:   Dwamish,   Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 

Surveyed. 


2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ill 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribe  ? 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


WASHINGTON— continued,     j 

A  ores. 

Yakima I      1 584 . 853 

(Under  Yakima  School.) 
Tribes:   Klikitat,   Paloos, 
Topnish.    Wasco.    and 
Yakima. 


Total. 


WISCONSIN. 


3, 150. 075 


Lac  Court  Oreille 

(Under  Hayward  School.)     I 
Tribe:  Lac  Court  Oreille 
Band   of  Chippewa   of  j 
Lave  Superior. 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

(Under  Lac  du  Flambeau 

School.) 

Tribe:  Lac  du  Flambeau 
Band  of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 


La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

(Under  La  Pointe  Agency.) 
Tribe:  La    Pointe    Band 
of   Chippewa  of    Lake 
Superior. 


Red  Cliff. 


(Under  Red  Cliff  Agency.) 
Tribe:  La    Pointe    Band 
(Buffalo  Chief)  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 


Menominee 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 

Tribe:  Menominee. 
Oneida 

(Under  Oneida  School.) 

Tribe:  Oneida. 
Stockbridge , 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribes:  Stockbridge    and 
Munsee. 


Total. 


25,313 


46,613 


3231,680 


303,606 


Date  of  treaty,  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 


Treaty  of  Walla  Walla,  June  9.  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  951.  Agree- 
ment made  Jan.  13,  1885,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  631.  (For  texts  see 
Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  41,  p.  227;  see  also  Ann.  Rept.. 
1893,  pp.  520-521,  and  S.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  21,  49th  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  and  No.  45,  50th  Cong.,  1st  sess.)  Executive  order, 
Nov.  28,  1892.  Agreement,  Jan.  8,  1894,  ratified  by  act  of 
Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  320.  296,407  acres  allotted  to  3,137 
Indians,  and  1,020.24  acres  reserved  for  agency,  church,  and 
school  purposes.  (See  letter  books  354,  p.  419;  416,  p.  263, 
and  879,  p.  243.)  Act  of  Dec.  21, 1904  (33  Stats.,  595),  recog- 
nising claim  of  Indians  to  293,837  acres  additional  land,  sub- 
ject to  the  right  ol  bona  fide  settlers  or  purchasers,  acquired 
prior  to  Mar.  5,  1904.  (See  39848,  1909.)  Act  Mar.  6,  1906 
(34  Stat.,  53),  and  act  May  6,  1910  (36  Stat,  348),  under 
which  157,202  acres  were  allotted  to  1,364  children.  (See 
9262-14.) 


Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  lands  withdrawn  by 
General  Land  Office,  Nov.  22,  1860,  Apr.  4,  1865.  (See  re- 
port by  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  1  .  1873.)  Act  of  May 
29,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  190.  68,511  acres  allotted  to  876  Indians. 
Act  of  Feb.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  795. 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109,  lands  selected  by 
Indians.  (See  report  of  Supt.  Thompson,  Nov.  14,  1863, 
and  report  to  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  June  22,  1866.  Pe- 
partment  order  of  June  26,  186<>.  Act  of  May  29,  1872, 
vol.  17,  p.  190.  44,877  acres  allotted  to  589  Indians:  act 
of  Feb.  3,  1903  (32  Stats.,  795),  leaving  unallotted  26,153.40 
acres. 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.  368.91  acres  patented 
under  art.  10;  195.71  acres  fishing  ground.  83,871  acres  allot- 
ted to  1,063  Indians.  (See  letter  to  General  Land  Office. 
Sept.  17,  1859,  and  letter  boo1'  381,  p.  49.)  Acts  of  Feb. 
11,  1901  (31  Stats.,  766),  and  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stats.,  1217), 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  40,613  acres. 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854.  vol.  10,  p.  1109;  Executive  order, 
Feb.  21,  1&56.  (See  Indian  Office  letters  of  Sept.  3,  1858,  and 
May  25,  1863,  and  General  Land  Office  letter  of  May  27, 
1863.  "See  Executive  orders.  Fee  report  of  Supt.  Thomp- 
son, May  7,  1863.  Lands  withdrawn  by  General  Land 
Office  May  8  and  June  3,  1863.)  2,535.91  acres  allotted 
to  35  Indians  under  treaty;  of  the  residue  11,566.60  acres 
were  allotted  to  169  Indians  under  joint  resolution  of  Feb. 
20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  970,  and  40.10  acres  were  reserved  for 
school  purposes. 

Treaties  of  Oct.  18,  1848:  vol.  9,  p.  952;  of  May  12,  1854,  vol. 
10,  p.  1064,  and  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  3,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  566.  65,402.13  acres  allotted 
to  1,501  Indians;  remainder,  84.08  acres,  reserved  for  school 
purposes. 

Treaties  of  Nov.  24,  1848,  vol.  9,  p.  136;  Feb.  5,  1856,  vol.  11, 
.  663,  and  of  Feb.  11,  ia56,  vol.  11,  p.  679;  act  of  Feb.  6, 
871,  vol.  16,  p.  404.  (For  area,  see  act  of  June  22,  1R74,  vol. 
18,  p.  174.)  167  Indians  allotted  8,920  acres.  Patents  in 
fee,  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  382).  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27 
Stat.,  744). 


p. 

18 


i  Partly  surveyed. 


2  Surveyed. 


«  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


112 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  7. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Date  of  treaty  law,  or  other  authority  establishing 
reserve. 

WYOMING. 

Wind  River... 

Acres. 
1608.526 

Treatv  of  Julv  3.  1868.  vol.  15.  T).  673:  acts  of  June  22.  1874.  vol. 

(Under  Shoshone  School.) 
Tribes:  Northern     Arap- 
aho  and  Eastern  Band 
of  Shoshoni. 


18,  p.  166,  and  Dec.  15, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  291;  Executive  order. 
May  21,  1887.  Agreement  made  Apr.  21,  1896,  amended 
and  accepted  by  act  of  June  7, 1836  (vol.  30,  p.  93);  amend- 
ment accented  by  Indians  July  10,  1897.  (See  Land  Tiv. 
letter  boo"^  359,  p.  468.)  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1905,  ratifying  and 
amending  agreement  with  Indians  of  Apr.  21,  1904.  (See 
vol.  33',  p.  1016.)  President's  proclamation  June  2,  1906, 
opening  ceded  part  to  settlement.  It  contained  1,472,844.15 
acres.  (See  letter  booV  866,  p.  157.)  Reserved  for  Mail 
Camp,  120  acres;  reserved  for  Mail  Camp  ParV(  40  acres; 
reserved  for  bridge  purposes.  40  acres.  Subject  to  disposi- 
tion under  President's  proclamation,  1,438,633.66  acres. 
223.236  acres  were  allotted  to  2,154  Indians,  and  1,792.05 
acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  ceme- 
tery purposes,  under  acts  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388), 
as  amended  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  and 
treaty  of  July  3,  1868  (15  Stats.,  673),  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  608,526.06  acres. 


Total. 


Grand  total 


..    33,353.433 


i  Partly  surveyed. 

TABLE  8.— Lands  set  apart  during  fiscal  years  ended  June  30,  1914  and  1915,  for  temporary 
use  and  occupation  by  mission  organizations. 

[1914  designated  by  *.] 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act  and  cita- 
tion. 

War- 
rant for 
action. 

Acre- 
age. 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River*  

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

Policy 

10  00 

NaATaio 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America, 
do 

do 

Moqui*  

General  Conference  of  Mennonites  of 

...do.. 

12.19 

Pima-Cockleburr  Vil^a^e 

North  America. 
Franciscan  Fathers  of  Arizona 

do 

10  00 

(Papago;. 
San  Juan*  (Navajb) 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

do 

5  33 

Western  Navajo* 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America. 
.  .  do 

do 

1  00 

Western  Navaio  

do  

..  do.. 

.94 

Florida:  Seminole* 

Protestant  Episcopal  Bishop  of  Southern 

do 

160  00 

Montana: 
Fort  Peck  * 

Florida. 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-Day 

May  30  1908 

do 

40  00 

Fort  Peck 

Saints. 
Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

(35 Stat.,558) 
do 

do 

40.00 

New  Mexico: 
Jicarilla 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America. 

Women's  Board  of  Domestic  Missions 

do 

10  00 

Mescal  ero 

Reformed  Church  in  America. 
....do             

do 

15.25 

Navajo  (Pueblo  Bonito) 

Christian  Reformed  Church 

do 

10  00 

Navajo  *  (San  Juan) 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

do 

.50 

South  Dakota: 
Pine  Ridge 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America. 

Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary  So- 

do 

112.77 

Pine  Ridge  . 

ciety    of    the    Protestent    Episcopal 
Church  in  the  United  States. 
Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions 

do 

94.50 

Washington:  Taholah  

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

do.. 

.30 

Wisconsin:  Lac  du  Flambeau 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America.- 
....do                   

do.. 

2.43 

Wyoming:  Shoshone*  

Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions 

do 

1.00 

Arapaho  subagency*  

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

do.. 

11.81 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States  of 
America. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


113 


TABLE  9. — Patents  in  fee  i 


to  mission  organizations  during  fiscal  years  ended  June 
30,  1914  and  1915. 

[1914  designated  by  *.] 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act. 

Citation. 

Acre- 
age. 

Arizona: 
Salt  River* 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the 

Mar.     3,  1909 

35  Stat  ,  814 

4.53 

Yuma* 

Presbyterian    Church    in    the 
United  States  of  America. 
Woman's  Home  Missionary  So- 

June 25,1910 

36  Stat  ,  829 

6.00 

California: 
Morongo  (Malki)  

ciety  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church. 

The  Society  of  the  United  Breth- 

Mar.   3,1909 

35  Stat.,  814 

10.00 

Torres  (Malki)      

ren  for  Propagating  the  Gospel 
Among  the  Heathen  (Moravian 
Church). 
do 

.  do 

do 

5.00 

Kansas:  Kickapoo  

Presbytery  of  Highland  Synod  of 

do  

do  

5.00 

Nebraska:  Santee* 

Kansas. 
American  Missionary  Association 

do 

do 

200.00 

North  Dakota: 
Fort  Berthold  

..  do 

..  do 

do 

45.00 

Standing  Rock 

do 

May   29,1908 

35  Stat    461 

330  00 

Turtle  Mountain*  

Diocese  of  Fargo  

Apr.  21,1904 

33  Stat.,  189- 

9.38 

Oklahoma: 
Ottawa  (Seneca)  

Trustees    First    Ottawa    Indian 

Mar.     3,1909 

194. 

35  Stat  ,  751 

15.00 

Seneca  *  

Baptist  Church. 
Trustees  for  the  Associated  Execu- 

  do  ..     .. 

35  Stat.,  814 

44.22 

Oregon:  Warm  Springs  

tive  Committee  of  Friends  on 
Indian  Affairs. 
The  Women's  General  Missionary 

....  do 

do 

40.00 

South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River*    

Society  of  the  United  Presbv- 
terian  Church  of  North  America. 

(Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary 
Society  of  the  Protestant  Epis- 

[May   29,1908 

35  Stat.,  461. 

|  891.85 

Chevenne  River*  

1    copal   Church   in   the    United 
States  of  America. 
American  Missionary  Association 

[Mar.     3,  1909 
do 

35  Stat.,  814. 
do 

863.  17 

Pine  Ridge* 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the 

May   27,1910 

36  Stat    440 

11  81 

Pine  Ridge 

Presbvterian    Church    in    the 
United  States  of  America. 

do 

/Mar.     3,1909 

35  Stat.,  814. 

309.72 

Pine  Ridge* 

Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Mis- 

\May 27,1910 
do 

36  Stat.,  440. 
do 

90.00 
160  00 

Pine  Ridge  . 

sions, 
do 

Mar.     3,  1909 

35  Stat    814 

206  30 

Pine  Ridge 

Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary 

do 

do 

60  00 

Rosebud*    . 

Society  of  the  Protestent  Episco- 
pal Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America. 

American  Missionary  Association 

f  Mar.     3,  1909 

35  Stat.,  814. 

}  612  00 

Rosebud  

...do  .. 

\May  30,1910 
..  do 

36  Stat.,  448. 
35  Stat    448 

164  28 

Standing  Rock 

do 

May   29,1908 

35  Stat    461 

396  30 

Washington:  Cushman*  

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the 

Mar.     3,  1909 

35  Stat    814 

1.43 

Presbyterian    Church    in    the 
United  States  of  America. 

8340—15- 


114 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


II- 


•  <°32gg883§8Esi 


o  o  OJ  oo 


as-2 


>  OJ  Oi  CO  C< 

PO^T— Tr^»^ 

1  ^  rH  OC  t^ 


•31:18 


10  CO  .-H 


:2S 


8  :  : 


S**    •  IO*    •        OO* 
.  ,— !        .  T— I 


§^2 
•d9 


:»°  FS 


00  Oi  C?  W5  I-H 
- 


(M  (M  r-COOO 

c^  10 1^  I-H  r* 

rf  (NCOtN^H 


owcoor  OpcoqiTt- 


i «o .-ir^ o  i« o 


ill ; ;  i 


ill 


iOi-(  ex        ii     cs 


1  IO  OO  CO  O  O5  ^* 
1  00  O  W  >0  O  I- 


)iS(NiO        « 
•  OO  l^  O       U5 


*-H  iO  ^O  O  OO  <-O  C 


t- 

1-1  i-(  CO  (M  00  i-H  rH 


<N  OC  OI>CO  t^       O 
CM       rH  10       T-I       »O 


10  »o  o »— ' 


11 


•  t^-        i— ( 

-oo      <N 

•  *-*      oo 


•  cc    .10    •  10 o t>< 


>>   • 

.ill 


O   CO   O5    OC    O    CC    1^- 

0  CO  CO  (N  J-  00  O 

01  O  C^  i-O  tC  O  O 
l^-  O  O  C<1  C3  Tf  1C 

^-^v.vr 


5  O  O       O  »O  O       LQ 

)  CM  CN!  36  GO  O  I 


)  O5O 
1  i— (  O 
' 


CO  CTC  >C  ( 
O  [^  (M  < 

c^ri-<"  co"- 

rH  -<f  CO' 


o  o  o  CM  i 

I  rj'  CO  CM  CM  I 
CO  O5  CO  IO  ' 


*t-*oocooooocoo    -ocoooo-^o      ^ 

"TtiCOl^rH        l'~rHO      -CNCNCCOTriO        O 


P<  i-i  Tt1  O     •  O  I-H  <N  rf       CO       O 


1O  •*  CO  (M  rH  i 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


115 


a  >-H 
POS 


116 


KEPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


t'-^COOSO    ^O 

coo  co  co  co   oc 


>o  codec   o» 


IM  OO  OO^H 


S  8 


o  • 


838 

ffgfs" 


CO  OO  Oi  CD  C^  O 


O'^f^f 


O  CO  1C  t>-  O        O 
COi-Hrt  COCO        CO 


to  1-1  o  eo   >o 


Hi 

>** 


;  oc  "C  CM  d  ti      oo  < 

5C  CO  <N  CO         CO  I 
oo  r-  o  d      I-H  i 


.  o  oo  10  -H  <r  o  o 


o  o  o  »o 


t-  i-H   O 

CO 


£"•0 

x^/CO 


:  :§ 


O  O  O  O  t 

ioW     tC< 


s 

•3*c 

CQ  «> 


'  CO  tH  1C  CO  OC  O         Tfi 

^•tncfeo"     g 


d  1C 


t~05 


iO  O  O   O 
<N  C^  O   cC 

CO  O  00    CO 


§~  00  CO    CC 
iO  >O    CO 


o  10  t-  oo 


CO  t>-  'U'  1C  CO 


<N  CO  »O  IM  -<r<  OC  >O  i-H    O 

Oi'Or-  <codi—  i-^t^-   o 


10  00  "O  dCC  OO 


-^t^- 

O  t^ 


C^  00  Tf  -^"  CO  C^ 

•*  <N  -<f  05  05  OC 
CO  t^  CO   CO  i-4 


«O  CO  IO  d  -H  CO  CO  CO         >O 
t-H  •*!  IM  d  CO  CS 


T  d  (N  10  co  co      r~ 

05  d  o  o  •*  10      1-4 

(N^Tofr-T^H'rt'        CO*" 


•  !N  CO  iC^-i  O 

cs'oo'oo" 


•3  • 


'.     rt  >>  1 

O  03      . 

<„    -SKfi  d  cs" 

S=2  ®  ^r.S^ 


! 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


117 


2    3S8§3    §    g 


S-H  lO^H  C5 

" 


•  <M  C 


CO 


in       CO 


i  05  Is- 

CO  t- 

CO  CO 


2    SS 

io      .-  os  » 


^H        to  t^  00  W 

§§      ^S^JcS 


O         CO  O  CO 


»—  f        t^cOCOiC 


r^tOcOiOOOOOOcCi 

c«TT<Tri-i<NcoOcojr;o< 


>  OC  2;  co  co  co  t—  O  < 


CO  r-  CO  < 

cTcTcTi 


C*l        "0  CO 


ooe^ 


TflN  1-1 


CO  Is-       i—  t 


-Too" 


::::«: 

:^'  :^'5  : 


;.u  s  i 


s  ;*5 


^    '>  :2; 


£  :^^ 


aw  Nat 
a)  ion 
le  Nat 


(H  ^     g^S 

g)      StfM'S 


5  g 


1.18 


SS  0-5-3  a 

wa  «-«s 


EEPOET   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


iflJtfiri 


to    . 


o 
I 


a  s 


iO  »O 
1C  O 

r^T-T 


S  5 

10    J- 


usr^  <N< 

SSS3S 


IO  T»«  »O 

1~  *r  00 


$3i 


111 


MO>O  O 

CO          1-H  f-1 


00^(10    £J 


OIJO    eg 


SS^SwSS  S 

to'-T    -T    -TrtT  -T 


§iO  OC  O  cc  c 
.  (NCO'T  ?-< 


o'o     o 


§§!§ 


(N  -H  -*  <M  O  10  O     -ii 


£1 


:OOOi— ip     f     O  gOWOCS  O>  00  ( 


I  i-H  OfOCO 

)  »—  O  1^-  TT 


ISSSSS 


INN  -HM 


a  5  :  :« 


i  §sc 

ft   c& 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


119 


ssii 


u 
of 
m 


s^s.5 

*0:§g 
fc     -,§ 


i 


*O  Tf« 

r*  oo  c 


»-££££££ 


CO  >H  O  i—  *  O5  1C  Tt< 

S5SS5S8S 


S3SS8S 

^^¥c€?f 


Cultivated 
Indians. 


,snu 

Ms¥s 


T^rHOt^OOOOOOt^COiOi 


^"ooo  o  o 

000004003 


10  ^  eo 

O  OS  S 


1S 


fi«r^ 


SS 


i  i  §1* 

Llilf 


s?s 


Cx     -S     *' 


1111 


o  p< 

il 

MO 


120 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


.  o> 

.  1? 

l-j 

\  :{2 

g 

S 

53 

CO 

TJ<   K,   O            C 

MC^CO      2 

!  i 

^H  (N 

|| 

M0' 

(N 

2^g     * 

s 

33 

• 

1 

•) 

^fl 

: 

S 

i 

1 

§ 

5 

1 

•S 

2  ; 

9 

fc3 

: 

ii 

s  § 

! 

o 

<ti 

!^  0 

i 

d 

iS 

OO 

00 

00 

<N  C^  CO 

S? 

1-H  (M 

1-5 

*•/ 

>       * 

S" 

S^S 

tf 

Af 

* 

:g 

g 

S 

£ 

^C  OO  to 

0 

^  O 

CO  CO 

•s 

8 

ii 

§ 

Tt<             O 

cf 

5gf 

1 

^ 

; 

3 

|A^ 

:  :« 

CO 

CO 

n 

O500  >C 

oo 

00 

131 

rf 

(M        O 

«^ 

5?  °G 

; 

; 

|| 

y 

:g 

CO 

CO 

1 

lsi 

i 

(M  CO 

M 

Number 
of 
Indians 

larming. 

00  if 

1-1  1> 

5 

;|i 

)  co  -^<  i<- 

'J:10? 

S 

;00 
t^- 

ICC- 

Tt 

oc 

"^ 

CO  "C  (N        Cv 

g 

OO  O»        C 
£00         c- 

) 

8 

§|i; 

i 

3| 

[ 

|| 

>  rH  00  ••* 

S  Oi  CO  C, 

v: 

00 

2 

gg 

Cf 

S 

I 

(N  r-i  t~-       ir 

•-<  O5  1C         C 

CS  Tfi  ^H       »= 

M 

RS'I 

co  c; 

• 

•a 

C^  i' 

CO         C 

c 

^ 

j; 

o 

0        0       C 

£ 

|| 

I" 

CN    S 

S     c 

"i-T        !»• 

? 

M 

"3 

^ 

1 

IN 

1 

?  * 

— 

^ 

1 

t^-  CO 

1C 
0 

0 

2 

§IS 

R 

3  CO        CO 

1 

° 

| 

^ 

CO 

CO 

S 

"" 

00 

00  O 

CO 

g« 

S     i 

c 

« 

:-r 

c 

000       C 

; 

:  : 

,^ 

•w"^ 

??f- 

S      c 

7^ 

IM 

•^ 

TH 

oSS       ?r 

. 

ii 

1 

•-H  ^ 

I-H      e*: 

e<i 

S            T-T 

cTco"?^    05 

i 

p£ 

0 

i 

s 

w    1 

i 

8 

CO  OO 
t^  CO 

1 

1 

1 

111 

i 

t^co      o 

SI 

•Sj 

1 

^  * 

c^  ^c 

CO 

i 

•^i  00  CO 
CO  CO  CO 

00 

C<1  CO 

A 

i 

:  :  : 

States  and  reser\ 
tions. 

California—  Contini 
Digger  
Fort.  Ri.lwfil! 

T 
£ 

T 
c 

PI- 

| 
> 

Ii 

1—  f" 

2i 

ill 

£«« 

? 
5 
C 

1 

Colorado  

Southern  Uie. 
Ute  Mountain. 

Florida:  Seminole. 

2 

Coaur  d'  Alene 
Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lapwai.  . 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Kansas  

Kickapoo  

Potawatomi.  .  . 

Michigan... 

Bay  Mills  
Mackinac  

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


121 


lO 

CO 

8 

3  ! 

i! 

1 

|!l  s 

s 

"  Rental  and  number  of  leases  not  reported, 
•eported.  t2  Includes  grazing. 

:  :  :  :  : 

I 

! 

1 

i 

!    I    i    ' 

I 

s 

* 

g 

s 

0        CD 
iO        1s* 

gg 

£ 

1 

HI  s 
§fs 

s 

° 

sl 

|| 

ri 

s 

285    ° 

r-l  CO  •* 

o 

"•f 

as 

1 

s 

g°"S 

s 

05 

03        00 

C<1  CD 

cooo 

(NCO 

£ 

1 

gs;  - 

" 

1 

T3 

a 

tM 

-  i 

>a 

g 

<M 

ISS^ 

c, 

nVnown. 
o  a^ricultura 

1 

••J-H  i 

•0050000        JO 

Hi  E 

5       co" 

^8g§8  |K 

! 

Tt4  C5  CC  00  CO  I>-        OO 

00  O>-i  OO5  O       '9' 

iO  O  CO  »O  t^  CO       O 

co  •*  to  M  coco     O3 

1111 

rt"      CO" 

S2JIJ  ,     1 

5*1      t      g 

i 

•        o              *O 

•          ^s     o* 

'    •  co"     co" 

co" 

SS1-  1 

•  O  O  O  O  O       C 

S.SS88    § 

f  g 

1 

p. 
o 

S 

r-(  IO  »—  '  O 
GO         lOCO 

1  i 

SIS  1     1 

o  o  o     oo 

O-^1  CO       t^- 

Hi 

Iff 

8 

tj 

<M         r-H 

*5g         05                g 

CO  1-1  O        CO 

§ 

1 
I 

c 

?    § 

1  II  il  1 

1-2    1 

coo      c 
? 

31     § 

2 

§li 

o     oo        "S 

3V~'      C4 

"  r  r  ' 

a 

•* 

03 

00    88      | 

s 

O        <N  <N        S        *O 

§§l  i     i 

SIB  § 

11 

•( 

CO"        r-T        CO* 

1 

II 

S 

2£~   1  | 

t>Tcn  co      co          "s" 

2 

ggg  s 

o  <3 

jLj    Jig     j    1 

|l| 

•^Ss 

bio  Bonito  13.  . 
bio  day  schools 
Juan.  .  . 

f  is 

.  «5£ 

cl 
14 
ot 
o  r 


j 

^  5^ 


2  I? 

"!i! 

^2-^S 


g 

(3  5» 

•B  « 

?r  ^ 

£C  flj 

"n  a 

*  -s 


2  a  B 


S|§§i 

KjafiftS 


122 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


5? 


Num 
of  lea 


CO  O  C5  O 

5^  O  O5CO 


^H  to        "5 


tO  OO5  iO 

W  OS  O5  to 


Tf  O 

-  to  t^  < 


o"     oo" 


»O       T-I       (N 


.  C5  00  00  1-H  i 


sls§sll 


O  iOC« 


co      So 


OiOCOtM  r-l 


I 


llSSSsSjSSSSjg 


S883 


&      13  8 

fc  fia 


=1 


-icoia 

i-H  i-H  OO 


r-i  <M  IQIM  eo  <M 


gsssg 

co-         oTeo- 


uo  <M  OC 

3  "S 


ils 


1^ 


5      1 


•a  P3^^^ 

s  Sill  1 

S3     g  3 

fc       52;  O 


Klamath 
Rosebui- 
Siletz 
Umatilla 
Warm  S 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


ef 


<N  0  0        10 


33°. 


s  s 


Pco"    !^H"< 


S8 


-s 


O  OO     • 

ill  : 


83 


i  in 

6       UUPH^PirtcQKH 


§Pc 


IHtll'l 

OO^ra6-'^>< 


1115 


124 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 

I 


OS  ^H  OC  00  U3  CO 

SSo-SaS 

I 

11s  :S  :  i  i  i  is  :l  i    1 

:  i  :1  i  i  :  :S 

1.1 

coV-To  ir?W'*' 

•*»<  t~  O  CO  CO  OS 

" 

*     :     j  j  j  :  j8  j     : 

:  :  ;     :  :  :  : 

Income. 

S—  ^ 

s" 

^nsniNiji  8 

I 

j 

OO  CM  OO  i-l  KO  ift 
.o-SS^co'SSo1 

1 

::::::::: 

1 

* 

^-lllls 

cl 

-  i  i*  i  i  i  1  r  j- 

i 

®  g 

^9 

"^Jr8,2 

i-Tco'co'co' 

--  :  :      :  :  :  :  :      : 

* 

I 

3_  _ 

i 

•      -OS      

!  i  !8  i  i  i  is 

1 

8      * 

Ocoggg 

OS 

:  :  :^  :  :  :  :0 

i 

^  CO  OC  O   35   !M  Clx 

i  i  is  i  i  i  i 

1-H  <N  CO^CS  (N 

®-gcr- 

£SS£3g 

:  :  :  :      ::::::::       0 

.'    !    I    !    I    i    !    !  o 

||l 

l| 

^  O 

i 

:  :*   :      ::::::::       2 

,      .      .OS      .      .      .      i0* 

E3  4V  C 

S  &AC 

u 

gllll 

s 

SgSSS||§|ii|||    g 

ss-ss^i 

II! 

1 

^sss^^ 

^ 

i-l  CM  CO  i-l                r-l         <N         r-l 

i 

1 

oo  o  ^  oo  TJ< 

g 

O  CC         S  OJ  CO  O  O  CM  OO  COlO         O         O 

SS  iillS8 

g 

£ 

a 

^  00  COCO  COt^^^ 

;g 

"§     "iilcS^I^  1  3 

co         ..oacoj;^ 

csSSSS 

a 

i-H  •*                                    CO 

* 

« 

1C  CO  I>-  C^1  CD 

1 

OC             »O        O     •  CO  -^ 

i 

I 

!i§jjP5 

1 

CD          1-H       •          OS 
CO                   |         CO 

o 

53 

i 

..-SliiS 

0 

0 

OCM        CSiCcOOONOOiOcC-^CO        <N 

sgg  ;§§ggs 

•o 

i 

a 

B 

^o:osmo'^v~' 
o  oTeTi-lvr 

CO  CM  CO  CO  (N 

s 

CO               i-l  or.  00  C:  CO         OC  ^  Tf  O         i^-l 

S^H               j^^CM^" 

o 

•5 

t- 

s 

•    •  o    •    •        •    •  o  tx      o              oo 

1    i  §  11 

5 

i 

10      5   ^   "^ 

— 

_ 

CO~  CO  CNi  OS  CO 

»     1           II           II                   "* 

1 

O  5  O3  OS  OS  05 

liMy 

States  and  i 

i 

Arizona  

^?"S"C>:2z:g<>g^flp;s"S      '3 

oPHP^WMi-5S!2;AHM!MK£H^    5 
o 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


125 


"3       CO 

S 

- 

o" 

CM 

-x  c 

^ 

c 

CS 

§        1 

8 

3So 
"jrooS 

oo'VTeT 

1       1 

! 

1 

! 

3 

oo"-^c-r 

§       1 

s 

i 

|g|         | 

O        C 

c: 
Jv 

i 

sga"    I 

CM 

^"     •    • 

CO         CO 

C' 

« 

: 

g 

ooior^     g  gj^ 

111 

o 

S 

CM 

S 

§S 

| 

!= 

g 

S 

r-^      CM 

<s.S  s 

Oi            tr         3 

1 

gn 

r* 

ir 

- 

CO 

^  111 

s 

tt 

1 

1^ 

1 

| 

i 

0 

— 

-H           O 

£§  0>S3 

S 

oc 

-y 

B 

t--  ^H 

s 

§^ 

J 

| 

c 

^ 

r* 

CO         "O 

I9 

! 

c;  -r 
5| 
o> 

i 

C^ 

i 

? 

lO 

r 

2  1 

S2 

•s  1 

£ 

1 

5 

1 

II 

i     1 

S 

r- 

: 

i 

g 

g 

c^ 

C' 

§ 

7^ 

g 

1 

5 

IT 

i 

r- 

c^ 
c 

;s   | 

<D     t.    00 

:§  § 

1 

i 

K 

si 

o- 

1 

i 

§00 
CO 
CO 

§§§ 

•3  g 

c 
?• 

CM 

Sir 

-? 

1 

W 

1 

1 

S 

g 

S| 

9 

. 

I 

' 
i 

1 

r 

c 

T 

i 

C 

-J 

0 

j 

oo 

i 

I 

1  i 

HI 

CS 

s 

o- 

n 

O 

r- 

^ 

^ 

- 

c 

i  i 

^<°                                            | 

i  § 

1 

c^ 

1 

R 

SI 

)         O- 
3           ^ 

S 

I 

G 

II  1 

III                 |f           1 

£    2 

c 
p 

Cv 

^ 

CM 

I 

1" 

* 

'        CO 

a 

i 

;~  1 

^J?                 J|           | 

1 

I 

1 

S 

^r 

o  - 

1 

T 

1 

C 

5 

> 

c 

s 

J- 

i  " 

;  g 

i 

I 

i 

1-H          t-- 

HI        lllll 

8 

? 

cc 

g 

!' 

4 

£ 

1 

OC 

IT 

8 

?  s 

-gllgTi 

Tule  River  
orado  

\ 

£. 

4 

1 

I 
i 

|;l 

M 

I 

la 

j 

<• 
^ 
t. 

_i 

1: 

!        ^ 

I    1 

3         « 

M 

•(        e( 

i 

0 

i 

j 

i 

G 

i 

jx 

:l 

fi 

PL 

( 
i 

j, 

-/ 

E 
7 

c 
PC 

1 
'j_ 

1 

— 

1 

1 

p. 

! 

t- 

c 

G. 

1 

i 

cc 

1 

i 

i 

a 

White  Earth.... 
mtana  

1    1 

§  g    2 


126 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


N 
of 


.g 


fes 


CCCO 


4$ 


IS 

-ToT 


a 


pj  S  o  w> 

C3  btO  fl 


iOO       1C 


C^  1C 


8 


SSIS 


ts 

^ 


s     ss 


CD  t>» 

O  CO 


, 

lll  !  Ill 


i 


- 

1 


II 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


127 


ST 


sis  s 

I-HOO         °0 


CMCO      oo 

i—  1  CO        IO 


_s  s 


=: 


°8    S 

t^S      R 


iS    S? 


COC^OC^iOC^JiO 


00  O  O  OJ  C^  O>  T  » 
C"-  U7  O  I**-  *O*O*  i— T 


assss 


cooooocooc 


CO  CO  CM 


oo      »o 


i  i 
s  s 


cRcococr.  coo 


KJ 

^ 
J3S 

II 

OQH 


•V  t--  <N  r-i  IO  ^  O5         1-H 


^-,  i-l  00  OC-  >0 


!^^^ 


i-"  o  o  oc  oo     oo 


Fs'sfss"  e 


:§ 


CO        *4« 


1  <N  06  es  eo 


CM  CM  O  CO  X  ( 

t^  o  oc  CM"  co  i 


(N  «O  CO  OO  —  10  C^        O 
COOCCNOOlt^-^        CM 


II*. 


s 


„_.        cr  ^j 


"I 


<J 

4*fl 


a'i  ;^^  I  ll»f'Ss:i 
I  wig  g  Ulllll 


&tt«5 

L72  O  o. 


2  = 


»a 

11 
s Sft 

p 


128 


KEPOKT    COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


I 

I 


, 

15 


Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 


ilt 


55    S 

i—  (  O  C^> 


O  CO  O  O  O  Oi  O 

co^cTcov^r  10*1— r 


:S    S 
:SS    § 

•XO         CN 


OO  O  I-H  O5 
T-I  O  TJ<  OC  i-( 
(N  O  O  CM  CT> 


5O  O  CO  -<J<  IM  rH  00          <M 


I  sa 


I  3 


•H    •§ 


-a 


111 


ORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


129 


~   ro 

2§ 

5?  £ 

tu  #3 

a  a 


^g 


I!2 


I! 


It*.  Tj<          O  C^l  iC  *— (  t-*  r- <  O 
S  rH  CN  £1  03  05  CO 


1-HOl-H  ~  C-J 


>j'co''i-T         T-T     M"     i-T 


to  O  OC  r- *  O  O  O        O    IcOO 
i— '  »-^  t~  C^  C1!  c5  O        I-H        CMrHC 


r-t  T-I  CO     »Oi-i  TF  M    GC  -^ 


M  ^H  ec  t-  > 

i^  -^  CO  T— ( 


SgRS    5S 


3!   '  °S 
*|* 

Si- 


BJB 


s  a 

s  ii 


00" 


•*  C3Q  Q  O 


;§38888£S§gS  R 

C-l  (M  (M  O  O  i-i  00  TT  rr        O       t^ 

^SS*"*    -    12 


isessss  ^ 

)  l-H  O3  Tf  •*  O          IO 


§iC>OOO3OiCt^t^-Oc 
i-l         CO  «C  rr  OO  CC  COOt 

i-T         i-T     r-Ti-T^T-T'co" 


)  ^^i-H  S  C-)  O  O  O  »C  M  -?  O  CM  O         (N 


co  >o  cS  oo  c^i  c^i  i 
i-H^c^T 


•^C^iCT— ' 

COIN       t>t 


£ttra^Ujii& 


«»5J 


fissbiffl 


>    £ 


I 


8340—15 9 


130 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


fe§38    S 


WO 


O  1C  O 


3    8    SS    8 


0  l> 

S       S 


^x    S    S 


-r      oo 


s 


s  i 


j|  g    | 

"t^co"    i-T 


!>•  OO  CO         ^O 


CO       CO        .-H        O        Or*    '.   r* 


~Z    2 


S3 


s 


SS 


llii  1 


1C          t^.  O          r-< 


cf        ef 


SC^i  t^-iO  O  O        O 
CO  <N  -^  O  O        » 


mi 


J>-  CO  C^l  CO  »O  O 


1C  CO  O51O 


c<i  o 


^^^T 
1-1  co  „ 


t**  T—  1    O 

O  OCM 
1-H  COCO 


sss 


CO  i-H  O 

51O  Oi  O5 


§OO  Mi  1O  CO  ts- 
!-<  S  (N  00  r-t 
CO  t^  CO  ^f  C<l 

^T        rn""        r-Tco" 


the 
M 


wai.. 
d  Fox 


eurd'A 
rt  Hall 
rt  Lap 

Sac  an 


''S 

to     2    £££ 


icka 
o 


A  g 


ackfee 
w 
thead 
Bel 


Io 
K 


WPH    3    fi! 
.2 


gggS'Sg     g      ^0^- 
feOt^^PHP     •£     Wof^^ 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


131 


o  o      o 

O  *>•          i— I 


rH          tO  rtrHNrH 


»o  o     »o 

££     53 


(MrHINrH  (M 


§1    i 


00 


CO  to  ^t1  t^-  t— I 

(M  O  CO  CO  CD 

C^rCO"~r-TrH"art--rC^         «T 


>  rH  8      ooio  oo  co  <N  > 


,corHco 


3*   ^  8 


!S£8    °-    P-SP-S! 

t>-  i-H  i— <  I-*-  < 


gsf  2^  ^s"a  g 

rH  CO         rH          rH 


l  CO  rH  CO  <N  (M  • 


o  o  o      co 


C<1  •<*  CO  O  rH  rH  CO 


J  -rtH  CO 

OO^H 


rH          CO  »O<M 


s«: 

<N""^T( 


>  o  o  o  o  o 

>  C^l  O  O  g  O 

i-T     tfTto"^ 


I  CO  CO  >O 
1 1~  a5  t~- 


O  O  rH(M -*        0<N 


/  O  O  O  O  O 
)  to  C>-1  CD  00  O 


^gsg 
rco"-^  C^TCO" 


)  CO  to  O  -rh  O  O        *M 

i^gigtooo     o 


eo'i-o      o 


'""g"«f5 


iSoo      S 

ICMrH          CO 


:gSK83 


SO  CO< 
oco  < 


•  O5  OS 


(NOiOOfNCOO        t~ 

ooooc^ooo^o      T-H 


ior^  oic  oo 


8P- 


00  (N  tO  Q  CO  COO 

85  o»  c*  o  35  <-H  o 


t-I^OtOOO        00 


O  QrH  Ca 
rH  S  Tfl  l>- 
OC  O  00  M 


III 

^fw1 


)  CO  CO  CO  to  OO  O 

!  £i  r^  t£  c8  ?q  o 


eoco      t- 
S!5     g 

»H-rH"      CO" 


COOC'  CO       O5 


IM  tO  IO 

^r  (M  'i-l  ( 


i-H          CO  CO          CO 


•-23  :  :    5 


•   Q        '       ' 

.'  fe  >  : 

:(SSj-fl«  o 

£*«uP  ^ 

iMlll 


!I8 


:§c8§a 


132 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


eo  CM  CO  (M  CM 


O  t-       O  ' 

CO  T-H  O    t 

•*  CM  C^-*  < 


>  oo  into  oo( 


I, 
1 


li 


i  T-H  O  O        iO  O  O        *O 


fiS'S 


§8~«    *" 


>  OiO  CM  >O  O  00  O       CM 

>  1-1  rH  ?--  Q  CO  •«*  O       CO 

>050>CM®  (NOJrH         itf 


*     « 


co'co'    i-T^Teo'to*^''    <o~ 


>  K      oo 
Peo"     o" 


eceo      i-iot-coo 


i  00  O  iO  1-1  O  O  «5 

>  t~-  <N  r~  1-1  o  «o  oo 


£ 


O  C5CCO»H 

o  t-*  oc  »— <  T— i 

C^  OC        00(N 

o         ^cf 


CO  t~-        Cj| 

JHCO      eo 


2i§ 


ooo      c; 

(N        O 


1 1O  O  O  i— f  O  iO  O  t^- 
i  CM  CM  O5-*  O  (M  t~  i-l 
I  CM  !>•  t^  CM  CM  CM 


i-          r-co 


fi      ¥ 


•jdgi  :  : 

^  cfe®'!®' 


\s 


II  I  iKlfi 

±0     cf    ^'is^^J 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


133 


~H  j  O  »H  O  O        Q  O 

co  j  S^i^^r      oo  co 

oT  i>T<N~co'cr^"i-r  ~ 

3J  I         CO        rt<^^H  1.0 


52  o  co  ( 

•T  S  CM  < 


CO  C5  <XJ 


CO  ^<  O  ^O  »O 


134  REPORT   COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  14. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


States  and  superintenden- 
ces. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num-  Earn- 
ber.      ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Total  1915  

25,681 
23,440 
22,  793 
22,  424 
11,781 
2,901 

$2,304,339 
2,127,403 
2,065,124 
1,940,414 
1,  861,  630 
953,  573 

2,533 
2,319 
2,271 
2,516 
1,995 
2,094 

320 

$940,013 
810,950 
762,  264 
732,526 
687,039 
749,  148 

13,968 
13,218 
12,  290 
12,  420 
6,582 
(2) 

3,206 

$414,422 
505,  492 
414,  706 
432,  470 
582,  919 
(2) 

95,  731 

6,899 
5,  553 
5,585 
5.113 
3,204 
(2) 

$828,218 
689,517 
778,  117 
673,  289 
591,672 
177,  169 

151,  159 

2,281 
2,  350 
2,647 
2,375 

w 

807 
571 

$121.686 
121,444 
110,  037 
102,  129 
0) 
27,  256 

48,  549 

1914 

1913  

1912  

1911 

1900  .. 

Arizona 

5,651 

440,  705 

145,  266 

1,554 

Camp  Verde  
Colorado  River  

113 
188 
903 
303 
39 
85 
281 
60 
366 
166 
856 
117 

16,340 
30,  692 
27,  443 
48,008 
2,820 
2,770 
8,763 
10.  259 
6?;  224 
22,287 
47,  730 
5  798 

3 
14 
33 
11 

1 

21 
27 
62 
15 
31 
10 
10 
32 
14 

28 
120 

720 
7,420 
14,  168 
5,137 
300 
220 
4,518 
8,276 
54,  436 
6,260 
14,  030 
5,558 
2,604 
12,395 
3,228 
1,440 
4,556 

41,  789 

I 

105 
51 

15,525 
20,050 

5 
16 

95 
389 

107 
87C 
163 
12 
67 
123 
33 
228 
10 
624 
107 
209 
3500 
21 
33 
99 

351 

2,833 
13,275 
7,489 
300 
1,950 
1,884 
1,983 
9,  320 
905 
19,300 
1,240 
2,415 
29,049 
1,224 
1,045 
1,519 

Fort  Apache 

FortMojave  

88 
26 
15 
85 

32,  530 
2,220 
800 
500 

41 

2,852 

Havasupai 

Kaibab 

Leupp  .  .  . 

52 

1,861 

Moqui 

Navajo  

76 
141 

3,468 
15,122 
4,100 

Phoenix  . 

Pima 

126 

10,300 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River...  

447 
694 
719 
170 
144 

2,355 

15,963 
65,388 
29,330 
32,  185 
6,705 

262,586 

228 
158 
552 
120 

10,944 
23,  890 
17,  600 
3  17,  000 

San  Carlos. 

4 
132 
12 
17 

598 

54 
7,278 
12,700 
630 

24,526 

San  Xavier  

Truxton  Canon 

Western  Navajo  

California. 

12,069 

1,280 

184,202 

Bishop 

26 
30 
26 
185 
475 

2 

83 
401 
153 
112 

480 
258 
124 

153 

1,829 
3.331 
1,493 
24,  140 
69,  181 
311 
11,139 
53,  670 
13,  733 
16,000 
18,  980 
45,  269 
3,480 

15,359 

5 

1,700 
1,361 

21 

129 

Campo 

27 
26 
150 
352 

32,000 
1,493 
20,  6CO 
58,388 

Digger... 

FortBidwell  

20 

1,080 
2,580 

41 
2 

41 
116 
24 
25 

""i,"333 
311 
851 
4,450 
1,016 
421 

32 

53 

2,  460 
6,880 

Fort  Yuma  . 

Greenville  * 

Hoopa  Valley 

22 

10 
15 
7 
15 
18 
2 

10 

7,388 
9,940 
3,  896 
2,079 
6,029 
5,286 
450 

6,810 

20 
245 
99 

80 

2,900 
37,  810 
8,056 
13,500 

Malki 

30 
15 

1,470 

765 

Pala  

Round  Valley 

Sherman  Institute 

465 

12,951 

Soboba.  . 

29 
52 

137 

2,628 
930 

8  549 

211 

70 

37  355 

Tule  River  

2,100 

Colorado 

Southern  Ute 

101 
52 

50 
329 

5,779 
9,580 

3,600 
31,442 

9 

7 

4,230 
2,580 

92 
45 

1  549 

Ute  Mountain  

7,000 

Florida:  Seminole  

50 

47 

3,600 
8,660 

Idaho  

42 

14,986 

240 

7,796 

Coeur  d'Alene 

84 
193 
52 

88 
126 

13,  794 
12,087 
5,561 

6,850 
14,827 

10 
22 
10 

3 

18 

4,184 
6,292 
4,510 

900 
9,085 

27 
171 

42 

950 
5,795 
1,051 

47 

8,660 

Fort  Hall 

Fort  Lapwai. 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

585 
3 

55,950 

1,200 

98 

3,609 

Kansas  

7 

333 

Haskell  Institute 

106 
14 

6 

28 

9,  469 
3,258 
2,100 

6,856 

8 
8 
2 

24 

5,860 
3,225 
600 

6,585 

98 

3,609 

Kickapoo 

6 
1 

4 

33 
300 

271 

Potawatomi  

3 

1,200 

Michigan 

Bay  Mills  . 

3 
4 
21 

1,050 
271 
5.535 

3 

1,050 

Mackinac 

4 

271 

(«) 

(0 

Mount  Pleasant.  .  . 

21 

5.535 

1  Included  with  adults  by  private  parties. 

2  No  data  available. 

3  Estimated. 


« As  reported. 
s  1914  report, 
e  Not  reported. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  135 

TABLE  14. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superintenden- 
cies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Mini"ifi<'f>t3, 

2,403 

$140,697 

158 

|  $51,564 

828 

$27,  728 

417 

$51,405 

Fond  du  Lac 

150 
154 
310 
183 
27 
278 
11 
220 

1,544 

16,  815 
14,560 
39,822 
6,023 
10,  440 
28,744 
3,010 
21,283 

160,  083 

r> 

2 
41 
7 
11 
33 
6 
52 

230 

2,700 
960 
15,867 
2,400 
6,120 
13,008 
2,850 
17,  659 

74,882 

50       1,850 
56       1,300 
157       6,235 
156       3,623 

94 
96 
112 

12,  265 
12,300 
17,  720 

Grand  Portage 

Leech.  Lake  .  . 

Nett  Lake 

Pipestone 

16 
9 

4,320 
4,800 

Red  Lake 

236 
5 

168 

1,072 

10,936 
160 
3,624 

42,361 

VermJllion  Lake 

White  Earth 

Montana  

242 

42,840 

Blackfeet  

168 
473 
300 
213 
70 
320 

163 

32,913 
30,  888 
13,  159 
15,186 
37,862 
30,  075 

30,903 

57 
78 
18 
18 
28 
33 

33 

19,  163 
17,778 
5,528 
6,568 
11,162 
14,683 

14,  108 

80 
395 
115 
195 

0) 

287 
46 

1,810 
13,110 
1,181 
8,618 
2,250 
15,392 

695 

31 

11,940 

Crow 

Flathead  

167 

6,450 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck 

44 

0 

74 

24,  450 
(0 

15,100 

Tongue  River 

Nebraska  

10 

$1,000 

Genoa  

11 

4 
85 
63 

1,169 

6,040 
1,920 
10,  075 
12,868 

145,537 

11 

4 

1 

3 

6,040 
1,920 

3,280 
2,868 

12,313 

Omaha 

Santee  

46 

695 

24 
50 

708 

5,100 
10,000 

120,832 

10 

1,000 

Winnebago 

Nevada 

323 

8,196 

99 

4,196 

Carson  .  . 

99 
186 
202 
45 
84 
443 
110 

1,651 

5,592 
12,400 
33,441 
3,102 
4,646 
75,547 
10,809 

171,512 

1( 
1 
206 

2,514 
900 
674 
552 
3,264 
984 
3,  425 

74,089 

21 

882 

73 

2,196 

Fallen 

184 
150 
17 

11,500 
30,300 
2,250 

Fort  McDermitt  

23 
25 
74 
162 
18 

1,003 

467 
300 
1,382 
5,013 
152 

27,371 

26 

2,000 

Moapa  River 

Nevada  

Walker  River 

277 
80 

224 

69,550 
7,232 

58,493 

Western  Shoshone  

New  Mexico 

218 

11,559 

Albuouerque 

114 
346 
236 
23 
281 
374 
109 
168 

3 
117 

2,668 

9,669 
20.632 
8,233 
5,948 
71,  805 
33,  762 
10,  529 
10,934 

138 
9,766 

99,779 

1 
48 
19 
11 
42 
44 
17 
10 

6,061 
10,578 
4,714 
4,648 
13,294 
22,364 
7,770 
4,660 

29 
234 
217 
12 
74 
300 

132 

3 
51 

2,490 

1,579 
5,570 
3,519 
1,300 
1,833 
9,309 
187 
4,074 

138 
1,236 

32,455 

70 
12 

2,029 
279 

Jicarilla  

52 

(2) 

4,205 
(2) 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

Pueblo  day  schools  
San  Juan  

146 

(2) 

52,088 
(2) 

19 
30 
87 

4,590 
2,089 
2,572 

Santa  Fe 

Zuni  

26 

2,200 

New     York:    New     York 
Agency  

North  Carolina:  Cherokee... 
North  Dakota.  . 

11 
170 

4,980 
67,324 

45 
8 

3,450 

10 

100 

Bismarck  

13 
423 
71 
2,146 
10 
5 

632 

3,655 
13,  148 
11,607 
65,909 
2,880 
2,580 

153,538 

11 
24 

24 
96 
10 
5 

304 

3,296 
9,168 
10,637 
38.  763 
2,880 
2,580 

144,578 

391 
47 
2,050 

359 
3,980 
970 
27,  146 

Fort  Berthold 

8 

(2) 

Fort  Totten  

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

Wahpeton  

Oklahoma  

283 

6,614 

25 

1,596 

20 

750 

Cantonmen  t 

87 
48 
39 
61 
143 
19 
1 
13 
2 

7,421 
13,237 
10,246 
49,  181 
24,246 
2,115 
420 
6,330 
1,200 

15 
23 
19 
61 
85 
15 
1 
9 
2 

6,583 
12,750 
9,496 
49,  181 
23,427 
1,760 
420 
4,340 
1,200 

49 
25 

502 
487 

23 

336 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  . 
Chilocco 

20 

750 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.... 
Kiowa... 

58 
4 

sig 

355 

Osage 

Otoe  

Pawnee  . 

2 

730 

2 

1,260 

Ponca... 

i  Not  reported. 


2  Unknown. 


136  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  14. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superintenden- 
cies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
R  ed  Moon  

35 
30 
74 
10 
24 

46 
345 

$930 
6,350 
5,356 
5,900 
11,060 

9,546 
37,639 

3 
25 
10 
10 
13 

13 

78 

$500 
6,101 
4,440 
5,900 
9,960 

8,520 
28,602 

32 
5 
64 

$430 
249 
916 

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger  

Seneca 

Shawnee  

11 
33 

267 

1,100 
1,026 
9,037 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
schools 

Oregon 

Klamath 

162 
39 
9 
13 
122 

638 
2,521 

9,661 
8,911 
3.180 
3,822 
12,065 

28,699 
221,  120 

18 
27 

\ 

!5 
25 
449 

7,546 
8,798 
3,180 
3,784 
5,294 

6,613 
120,694 

144 
12 

2,115 
113 

Salem.  .  . 

Siletz  

Umatilla 

4 
107 

96 
1,612 

38 
6,771 

1,478 
49,077 

Warm  Springs  

Pennsylvania'  Carlisle 

517 
24 

$20,608 

.  i    -! 
1,289 

South  Dakota  

436 

$oO,060 

Canton  Asylum 

1 
305 
184 
77 
81 
23 
932 
31 
779 
65 
4 
39 

172 

478 
33,729 
9,833 
10,451 
10,276 
2,088 
90,226 
5,332 
40,947 
10,  497 
1,740 
5,523 

12,867 

52 
41 
17 

'1 

171 
23 

78 
35 
4 
12 

35 

478 
19,522 
8,656 
7.736 
6,520 
1.608 
35,867 
5,262 
19,047 
8,997 
1,740 
5,261 

10,415 

253 
143 
37 
70 
18 
391 
8 
635 
30 

14,207 
1,177 
1,516 
3,756 
390 
11,  199 
70 
15,000 
1,500 

Crow  Creek 

Flandreau  

23 

1,199 

Lower  Brule 

Pierre  

1 

90 

Pine  Ridge 

370 

43,  160 

Rapid  City  

R  osebud  . 

66 

6,900 

Sisseton  

Springfield 

Yankton  

27 
111 

262 

1,812 

Utah 

19 

520 

7 

120 

Shivwits 

58 
114 

1,241 

1,389 
11,478 

87,251 

2 
33 

89 

324 
10,091 

32,  730 

30 
81 

797 

425 
1,387 

26,213 

19 

520 

7 

120 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington 

354 

28,228 

1 

80 

Colville 

3291        18,966 
180!        16,  875 
92          6,339 
429         12,643 
52          4,663 
80         12,661 
79         15,  104 

1,956[      153,963 

18 
9 
6 
8 
8 
22 
18 

132 

5,628 
4,100 
858 
1,803 
1,769 
8,804 
9,768 

50,615 

311 
25 
25 
315 
6 
54 
61 

457 

13,338 
1,175 
330 
3,480 
117 
2,437 
5,336 

8,898 

Cushman  

146 
60 
106 
38 
4 

11,600 
5,071 
7,360 
2,777 
1,420 

Neah  Bay. 

1           80 

Spokane 

Taholah... 

Tulalip 

Yakima  

Wisconsin 

1,260 

89,300 

107 

5,150 

Carter 

683 
428 
32 
578 
45 
164 
12 
9 

678 

1,420 
41,477 
21,  994 
5,519 
38,017 
6.869 
31,392 
3,355 
3,920 

68,622 

18 
55 
8 
7 
16 
6 
12 
9 

25 

720 
9,870 
16,  124 
4,920 
2,285 
6,281 
3,140 
3,355 
3,920 

10,485 

""is 

368 
24 
10 
29 
11 

""i.'io? 

5,570 
599 
932 
588 
102 

543 

700 
25,350 
1300 

Hay  ward  

107 

5,150 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau.  .  .  . 

La  Pointe 

561 

34,800 

Oneida... 

Red  Cliff  

147 

28,150 

Tomah  

Wittenberg  

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

584 

46,364 

68 

11,623 

' 

1150 

i  Estimated. 


BEPOBT   COMMISSIONER   OP  INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


137 


g 


o£§, 

KA  £! 


CO  »O      •  O  O  >O  1C  O5  C^J  -"^  I 

rH  •  ^  O  CC  »^  t>-  T—  i 


*      a 


PH 


OOOO  O 


i- 


l>OOO5t>->O 


00  O  --4  O   CO 
r}.  fO  M  00    rH 


i  iil 


rji  r-(  ^  1C  CO  !>•  CO  CO 
i-H    t>  i-H  ^H  CO  rH 


-if 


s^  s 


ootj<e<«io^t<t^coooi-iGOoo 


jjjJJf  ?;;?;! 


* 


«p ;  a  JB 

1 


138 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


W  ft  ' 

U 

3 

5    s 

1=1  r  S 

COCO        i-( 
COC1        00 

*8  1 

i?ll-| 

\ 

10 

OiCO       TP       "5 

iio  :   oo     : 

'        S3 

•     -COCN            10 

i 

.5 

bo 

If* 

i  i      1 

:  : 

I 

1 

3 

Perma- 
nent 
houses. 

- 

!        6 

t^  o  o     t~      co 

cN  v4  CO       rt         CO 

SSI 

pf 

»H«S| 

1 

&| 

o 

1 

11      3 

*8*  8  I 

•^f              00 

ef 

0     1     «H 

H 

11 

8 

8°°            | 

&s-  s  & 

ION       CO 

coco     g 

31  sg§ 

i 

.| 

*l 

1 

II      « 

s"^  s  s 

s    *• 

<-g 

«.3*?a 

1 

II 

^ 

S 

sss  s 

CO 

eoco     ^H 

s-§-^^| 

1 

l£l 

g 

88         | 

^ggg       0       CO 

S     1 

oo     g 

t^  IO  GO  rH  00  CO  >O 

1 

ill 

c>f 

•^ 

^ 

§i| 

•<* 

OO>»O       CO       CN 

O*              CO 

i-l  N       CM 

t^ 

<«s  -^ 

d  deaths. 

P 

Under  3 
years. 

^       ^    8 

^JNO       0       0 

s 

—s—  aa 

w 
W 

1 

00 

i-H                               CO 

t^-  TP  t^-     oo      10 

C0i0rj<        ,-H        CO 

XX  ' 

*     i 

..co^^cos 

OT 
S 

« 

ss  a  § 

00  1^  >O       O       "5 

CM  CO  10       r-t       rt> 

"2 

-     1 

C^J 

|| 

§ 

O  <N        l>-        O 

GO  t>-  »O         CO        CO 

CO  t^        CO 

II  | 

§00  -^  >o  i—  *  co  t*- 
!=J5«5«»E! 
CO  t^  CO  r-l  -^  C<l 

1 

:  :  ;  :fe?  :  : 

1 

1 
GQ 

5 

Southern  Ute  
Ute  Mountain  

Florida:  Seminole  
Idaho  

Coeur  d'Alene.  .. 
Fort  Hall  
Fort  Lapwai  

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  
Kansas  

Kickapoo  
Potawatomi  

Michigan  

Bay  Mills  
Mackinac  

Minnesota  

Fond  du  Lac  
Grand  Portage  
Leech  Lake  
Nett  Lake  
Pipestone  (Birch  Coole 
Red  Lake  
White  Earth  

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


139 


1C  ^  G>  O  CO  IO 
i-l  •f  iO  O3  TJI  -^i 


CO  O  O  O  O         CO 


O  COOOCO         i-H 


CO  OO  O        O 


CO        1C  1O        CO        W3        *O  O        O        C^-  O  O  Oi 
g       ->*        «       «       £%       3        «8££ 


«« 


a 


co  ^H  co  to  oo 


co  to 
CM- 


NOOOOPJOO 


•<»<•«<  ^H  CO  •*  00 


CO  "3  ir^  CO  0  T(J  0 


t^  rfi  CO  < 


oo     co 


ci-'H      r- 


ON  OQO 

1  co  e<i  o»  o  co 


52    § 


"5        OOI^-       O 


cToo'oo't-?' 


»OI-H      o 


salS 


i  ^r<  co  c^ 


oo  o 


^pTr-T       CO 


cooo.0 


3ISS  3 


88 


9 
18 


IS 

11 

11 


£1 


*J  I  if 

^1  -a  »fr*a. 


lilii! !  Ill ,  I  HI  1 1  111!  1 1!    1 1!  I ! 

w5££££    g  o^^    «  £hS^^!?K  fr  ssfipkoSS  C5  5  fe^Se  -3  o 

>  !>  EMM  r-! 


140 


EEPOKT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


iClCt^iClOCOtCOO        CO 
OO  i-*  i-l  N         i-H  .-1  ,-1  CO        l~- 

m          c* 


«s 


OO 


iCOlOCDrH 


C0-l<05         rH 


OOiO 

roio  1 


co-»i<  co      o 


^H  >o  <M  -^  os  *n  co     •* 


O  CN  O  O  O  O  O        CO 

o     loooOco     10 


gg^ggg 


t-  CO  i-l  >O  O  CO  O  O        r-l 
O  00       CMOOOOCOOJ        00 


'VOO        O 

t—  1C  O        •>»" 

51C  CO  •f         Is- 


1 

I 
I 


COCON        O  ^-t 


TP  O^H       0510  00       CO 
•<*<  <N  >C  CD  IM  i-H       .-! 


SSIS^SSSS    § 


i-H  CO  O 
CQ  CO 


CO        i-H  CO  O  CO  T        1C 


1C  CM  *H  O  O3 


:•§•*:,; 

j  P  8>  ;    •   '• 

•«ssg-s 


31 

73  M 

a'9I 

113 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


I  2iilllS     « 


I  rf  T-I  l>-  1C  C<5  CO        -*i 

)  Tf    1— I  T— (  -^f    O  O  ^f 

i  r-(  (N  <N  (N  CO  00         05 


oc^oo 


ss  s 


IM  CO  rH  00  O 


C«  *-«n 


»O  TI< 
I-HO 


OOlM  OO        CO 


'    I 

1 

* 


ss 


If 


?  3 


gll 


fig 


111 


sf   i 


ill  III 

a  <3  fe        .£3  a?  fe 


141 


142 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


«.s' 


llas 


Ca«5l>  O 


oom 

•^  O5 


IrHQOrH        Lf3 


""8        2 


i-H  C^tN  lO-^fl         ^H 
IOO  CO  rH  CO        O 


S  I 


SS?    58 


•S^ 


feo 


S 


te 


"5  ^  CO  (N  rH 


5  e 


Fort  Bidwell 
FortYuma 
Greenville  5 
Hoopa  Valley 
Sherman  Inst 


5 
um 


Fort  Hall 
Fort  Lapw 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  S 
Kansas:  Haskell  Inst 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


143 


g  3 


i  i 


ss 


•§§!•§•§ 


' 


S 
A 


ool 


a  3 

Q,       S 

u 


1 


.  a 


:*1(3 

a  osi  .2  Sc3~  o  o  3  o**1   •" 

|«J  g  §1111    p  -2 -a 

^     PH  1.  <!KSP-iP-icQ     oa  N 


144 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


*f- 

I  sr  <D,4 
i^§2 

I.HT 


So 


•tf'tf'foo 

O5  OO  CD  ^ 


.9^  r. 


a,®  i 

itli 

I.CJH-S 


JOO        jg 


1|I|^1^^        I 


42 
c 

I 

t§ 


ill 

ill-s 


.. 

2 


.. 

T 


|*lg 

?|a| 

^'-§45  S, 

llll 


Civ 
a  2 


gj  !|  S  §1 

II  3    ll 


BrtiS 

^•a^B 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


145 


ooosoo      >o 


III 


13 


SEH 


I 


fj  .1 

li  1 


8340—1? 


-10 


lue  of 
pplies. 


Value  o 
supplies 


Value  o 
supplies 


•, 

!§• 

Pn  "i 


Valu 
ratio 


Receivin 
rations. 


CO  GO  CD  CO 

O5  i— *  -X  ^ 

r^c^c^T^^T 

COCOCOi-H 


g 


ISSS 


SSSi 


i^2 


f^  TfH  O  C75  C*" 


OO  -*  t^  CD  IO  I-- 


(M  CO  0  **  (M 


COOrH- 
Tt<iO»C( 


O  t»  1C 
COIMCO 


TH  ® 


;r  t 

:  :     o 


lO  •*  CO  -M  i-l  ! 

O  O5  O5  C3  O3  ( 


146 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  17.—  Indians  self-supporting  and  Indians  receiving  rations  and  miscellaneous  supplies  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  19  1  5—  Continued. 

1 

1 

E 

1 
I 

i 
0 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
supplies. 

2            8 

3£         %%% 

S 

8 

O 

! 

• 

(M 

1 

1 

5 

§ 

s 

CVfl                    -CO         05 

1 

1< 

s 

rH                            _                 •* 

eo 

:  :  : 



^1 

In  return  for  labor. 

Value  of 
supplies. 

P 

£| 

i 

9       8-88    g 

$ 

J 

| 

1 

1—  1 

CO 

*"* 

Number. 

p-  a 

R 

(M              O        CO 

9 

I 

Value  of 
supplies. 

If!  ! 

OOt-       g       Q^COO. 

CN 

0 

« 

4 

N 

ro" 

IN" 

,v 

a 
11 

«  s 

t>-                      CN 

«-  §  ,-,- 

i 

S 

~- 

Indians  receiving  rations. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
rations. 

S 

1 

5 

cT 

--£ 

5 

ir 

— 

r- 
"»r 

r     a- 

00 

SoOtSSo        S^NO 
r-T                      10" 

Disabled. 

(N 

18 

1 

35-S*  J388S5    g 

Si 

i 

o 

s 

r-*    •  ^  r^-      ^  c*!  »—  ' 

rH      .  OC  C^              CM  "O 

?! 

j 

j 

S 

:<oco    g-*  :  :  : 

:  :    ^ 

8 

gsa- 

• 

1 

:                :  :  : 

n  return  for  labor 

„  Value  o 
r-  rations. 

O 

1  1 

S-*         s 

* 

:  :     :  :  :  :  : 

•  i 

• 

I 

eo 

lO        CO 

1 

Value  of  , 
rations. 

cT 

Ol 

1 

i 

o" 

r 
i- 

\z 
~< 

3     ^ 
a" 

rH        (N 

jo"    oT 

rH~r-T                      1C" 

Receiving 
rations. 

**       * 

2"2S*S2"""    § 

rH  (N 

S         05 

S"^S         "Si 

lift 

si 

!l§ 

n"      C 

!-! 

8 

CO* 

.       .       .       .f-       .       .       . 

is 

Arizona—  Continued 
San  Carlos  
San  Xavier  
Truxton  Canon. 

"nTnvtnr-n  Mo^Toin 

'            •  •  '  ^  g1*       [*  •      • 

^•9  ^:  =      Ji  =  =»  •  U: 

i  1  1  iiiii 
'  n  i  "" 

1            •       .    .    ;I2  S>           ^    •         ; 

=    S    Illlllllll    1 
1                                     S 

REPORT    COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


147 


t-l         t>         O5         O5 


Tt<         CO 

I-H        CO 


oo  •*  co 


o     ^>co     «     co 


Oi-H  1C 

ocgoo 


030*         rH 


10  25  o  >o 


sls§ 


£1        ^Hi 


§  s 

co"     co" 


OJO)         rH 


O4  O  LO  O  ^H  r-l  IO 

CO  00  O  *O  C-5         1>-         1C 
0          tHrHCO  (N 


r^-  cs  c>  a 
OC'  0  0  0 
CO  C^  C^  *"•< 


C<1  Ol        CO 

T  co" 


i 


1 


s 

| 

? 

1 


111! 


148 


REPOB'J.    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


| 

"ft 
Pi 

g 

1 

M 

i 

i 
e 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
supplies. 

S 

1 

cT 

§" 

kg 

*  g 

§  =        3 

Disabled. 

"•* 

••* 

CO 

O        CO 

2  °°         ^ 

Able- 
bodied. 

! 

| 

1     " 

£ 

u- 

>                    ;      ^ 

:  :  :  :  :    g 

In  return  for  labor. 

It 

; 

::::::    ^ 

S 

S 

S? 

: 

CO 

I 

Value  of 
supplies. 

«* 

cT 

cT 

OO<N 
iM  CO 

i 

s  § 

I  S         1 

Receiving 
supplies. 

I 

OO 

3  * 

s- 

s  s 

*.-    i 

Indians  receiving  rations. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
rations. 

O  O  1C        00 

00~        r-T 

^  1§  £5  **  jo  CO        Cl 

CO  00  -^  1C  1^        CO 

Disabled. 

coSco 

38 

^°°S;SS^    g 

SS8&"    g 

Able- 
bodied. 

0  1C             CO 

o  i~-          o 

i  - 

:            SS 

1 
fe 

2 

H-  1 

Value  of 
rations. 

3s    ;          jc 

0»     '              CO 

s     § 

i    §§ 

1 

Number. 

!N                      CO 

Tf                    1C 

CO              O 

o 

** 

i 

Value  of 
rations. 

If    1 

oo"  c^r 

S28*§1  1 

co*                oT 

Receiving 
rations. 

»O  CO  CO         CO 

rftfff 

>ii 

CO  00  <N  00  00  1C        1C 

(M  CO  >C  t~  00        <M 
CO  CO  (M  (N              l^ 

|I»S 

S3    g 

00  IM  CO  CO  1C  1C        »C 

Cs 

ggg§§        ^ 
CO  1C  (N  -"-H        CM 

States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

^      ;   ; 

:  :  g     ;    J 

South  Dakota—  Coi 
Pine  it  idge  
Rosebud*  
Vankt.nn 

o   :   i  ;  ;  ;  ;  : 

1 

c 

Hay  ward  
Keshena  
Lac  du  Flambe 
LaPointe  
Red  Cliff  

Wyoming:  Shoshor 

ll  I             * 
11  I             1 

I  ^  1  '^  1 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


149 


P 


CO  10  CO  GO      «O      »O 

*       rH  S  ?5        '  55       •  S  < 


S  : 


:   s 
2 


s  ag 


i-H^HCC?a      'H      o  i>-  OD  <N  oo  cc  I-H  W  """"      10 


O        50        O5O     • 
OO     -00        (Ni-c      • 


-O 
-«O 


3  " 


•t<O5iO<t1O<IC5*OOOC^T—  lOOOOOCO       »—  ( 
O  <M  CO  1-1  CO  i-t  <M  to  O  00  n<  to  rH  t-H  IM  i-H        CO 


& 


<3  P<Cc3?5oi;-Jo3o3'— ll~'r^W-iS-i-5>        <          o  ft  o> '    •  •      wp. 

e  I  1 


150 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


3S8S 


11 

ia 


SSSS 


g 


1*8 

il 


oo      t^ 


Mission  a 
private. 


8& 


Ili 


S    g 


(  O  t^  i«  t>.  to 

*  cs  co  o  co  t^ 

CM  CO  N  I-H  N 


sg  2  g 


asi  s  s 


I 
s 

"•s 

! 


SS8    S    S 


e°§ 

s*i' 


1 


383    ff 
CN»N       r- 


l 


in  i  m 


u 
te 

a: 


iifl 

3g|  o 

"S3 1 


^ 
li 


ill !  i  an  i  *; 


F 
I 


Iowa 
Kan 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


151 


3  is 


:g 


fO  CO  (N  CO  rH  Tf  t>- 


lg         CO 


^iOC^Jt^-CO^ 
5  TP  CO  CO  Tt^  CO 


SSS 


§§  i  |S  g» 

!  i     If 

—  g  a. 

TP  iCOCNOO      O  fe  ' 

M£J2K:     C^r 


5a  tjll 


'^*         Oi 
<C         t^ 

rH         00 


rH  t"»  CM  O 
rH         <N"5 


CO  iO  O  CO 


^ 


ill 

3  O  CJ 


II  SSI 

iliiiia  i  in 

f  in 


152 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


ission  and 
private. 


S 


T-I  CO  "5  i-l 


SSSSSS 


. 
l 


« 

.S9 


and 


Mission 
private 


CMO3coTro^ococooc4t^ 


i-i    •!-( 

00         * 


"S  o.S 


--    g 


a 


r^     r- 

-rH         05 


i 


ss 


2 


zed 


Total 
ive  Ci 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


153 


3  S 

oT  co* 


ocT  «    nn 


i>-iOi—  ii-HiCc^r 


5S 


•«•  T  C5  Q  «C  O  T~I 
T!-  rc  "l  ci  l>  O  cc 
ic  ic  -^  c<  co 


82S  :  : 

i— <  CO  ^-i       '      ' 


g  :S 


S  :S    3 


g  SB 


.-I  us  O5  r^  oo 


r-ICOCN^CCt^ 


'.    '.tc  <o  e 
•    .86*. 


kO     O     lO 

3  S  3 


t^lO  O  CO  CO  IO 


§   S    ooco 
«T  of  mm 


:    § 


ssss- 


:  :  :s 


SSSSSSiSS 


OOCi       TO    I   IN- 


.22 

!•  J? 

1 


• 


3 


gss 


2282338    § 


I-H  r^-  co  t>-  •*          co 


)  OO  -f  UO  O  r-H  T}<  (M 
I  -T  C5  t^  1O  00  Ol  O 
>  O4  i— I  rH  i— t  7C  GO 


•*  O 

'« 


CO     O»O  CO 


a  s 


85     S 


M 

;»ii 

^&5 


1  .i  IJ 

?  Ill 

1  m 

•§  §11 

j^  ^!  2,  S 
O  oooa 


s'l  l«  5 

Q  |iiialli: 

0«g&^l  5  §5s3fitfs^« 


13 

^§-s 


111  I 


154 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


•s- 


ty  of  schools. 

Mission  and 
private.  Total 
capac- 

C3"0 

n 

S 

£ 

i 

^  . 
|l 

«N 
g 

s 

3 

^H  CO  i-*  Q  •*  C<»  to            •*# 
(N         CO»CCCIO  «31               tl 

:  :  :  :S  :  :      8 
:S    8    S  :      8 

•  t^ 

In  school.  Capaci 

Eligible  Government, 
chil- 

1 

Uitt 

Iffi 

1.S-3 

|l| 

£'S1 

1 

C^l 

CO 

s 

ci' 

£g    §    S  :  :    S 
:R^    5  :  :  :    £ 

?S  :  :   R  :%      s 

iOCO^f^t^-Ot^-O        O 
iCi-HOiOOOt^-Oit^-        l^- 

C^(NcO^-i<NOJ(NTf<(NOO 

CO 

oo 

% 

L 

o 

1 

>> 

ft 

!>. 

i 

§s 

*—  <CO»—  'O^C^CO      •        ^ 

S     SaScoB'*    .     *<ji 
to    ! 

:::::?§:::     :| 

Government.  M^° 

I* 

z* 

i? 

w 

:§g    225:  :  :    2 
§ 

esiNid-tc^oKN^caoo 

8 

00      • 
CO      • 

I 

I    rl     1 

g 

®-2'§  bi 

Sllf 

" 

A*:  S-6  . 

Illit 

£2«°-S 

ec 
oo 

^^^S|SS|    & 

(Ne<i?Or-<ciO3(N-^e<«oo 

CO 

00 

co 

&ti 

^bC^  <»  g 

S     ts03 

s 
c^r 

co  co  co  ^  cc  cc  o  co  o      o 

(NC^tOi-KNOSC^rtilNOO 

CO 

oo 

CO 

IP!  i 

g 

-^^=;?5??S5     £ 

03 

S=i» 
g||« 

00 

i 

c>r 

O  "^  J^  JO  O  Cfc  CO  ^-  O       t"> 

o<c^Or-ie^aic<>T>ie^co 

CO 

cc 

CO 

States  and  superintendencies. 

i  ill!!  |        S 

i                     is  ^Isl^lsl^S    5 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


155 


s 

o" 

3 
K 

g 

c 

cTt 

1 

£5 

I       ^ 

SI 

M 

3 

^ 

CO* 
^ 

r 

§C 

r>. 

s" 

iO~ 

1 

i 

j 

; 

: 

i 

§ 

SCHOOL. 

JK 

o 
.S 

ITULAr 

to 

II 

8 

p 

I 

I 

i 

P5 

I 

*c 

1 

! 
| 

Indian  children  ineligible  for  school  attendance  because  of  illness,  deformity,  etc.. 

I 
i 

a 
't, 

'i 

1 

P 
<?_ 
^ 
t 

^— 

£ 

INDIAN 

Government  schools: 

T«Jnnrft<?firvat.inTi  hnardin^ 

Reservation  boarding  •.  

jjay  

Mission  schools: 

P.nnt.rant.  hnardrnfr 

Noncontract  — 
Boarding  

r 

t 

| 

1 
! 

1 

V 

1 
1 

1 

° 

: 

Z 

C 

s 

"c 

1 

1 

"c 

I 

Number  eligible  children  not  in  school  

i  Does  not  include  eligible  and  ineligible  < 

156 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 

ended  June  30,  1915. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Grand  total  

33,  022 

33,009 

26,  128.  4 

Arizona  . 

5,050 

5  178 

4  290.4 

Camp  Verde  superintendency  

60 

80 

62.9 

Camp  Verde  

30 

32 

25.1 

Day. 

Clarksdale 

30 

48 

37.8 

Do. 

Colorado  River.  .  . 

80 

89 

77.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Apache  superintendency  

372 

338 

282.1 

Fort  Apache.. 

200 

220 

193.9 

Do. 

Canon 

42 

43 

34  2 

Dav 

Cibecue  

50 

Do. 

East  Fork 

40 

43 

33.0 

Do 

Cibecue  

20 

18 

11.0 

Mission     day;     Evangelical 

East  Fork 

20 

14 

10.0 

Lutheran. 
Do 

Fort  Mohave. 

200 

200 

197.1 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Havasupai  .  .  . 

35 

29 

22.5 

Day. 

Kaibab  

22 

16 

12.7 

Do. 

Leupp  superintendency  

83 

108 

94.4 

Leupp 

63 

84 

72.1 

Reservation  boarding 

Tolchaco  

20 

24 

22.3 

Mission  boarding;  independ- 

ent. 

Moqui  superintendency  .  . 

591 

545 

472.6 

Moqui  

125 

146 

121.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Bacabi 

65 

56 

45.4 

Day. 

Chimopovy 

55 

52 

44.0 

Do 

Oraibi  

156 

105 

90.1 

Do. 

Polacca 

100 

107 

93.2 

Do 

Second  Mesa  

90 

79 

78.4 

Do. 

Navajo  superintendency  

866 

930 

721.9 

Navajo 

300 

294 

255.6 

Reservation  boarding 

Chin  Lee  

166 

107 

100.7 

Tohatchi 

150 

244 

123.0 

Do 

Cornfields  

25 

32 

26.0 

Day. 

Ganado 

35 

31 

28.0 

Mission  day;  Presbyterian. 

Rehoboth 

40 

68 

64.5 

Mission  boarding'  Christian 

St.  Michael's 

150 

154 

124.1 

Reformed. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Phoenix  

700 

794 

658.2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pima  superintendency 

737 

822 

680.6 

Pima 

218 

235 

207.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Blackwater  

36 

35 

21.9 

Day. 

Casa  Blanca.. 

40 

74 

55.3 

Do. 

Gila  Crossing 

40 

35 

16.1 

Do. 

Maricopa  

40 

35 

31.6 

Do. 

Sacaton  (Pima) 

28 

42 

20.0 

Do. 

Santan  

40 

46 

32.9 

Do. 

St.  Ann's  (Guadalupe) 

35 

38 

22.7 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

St.  John's... 

235 

260 

254.5 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Michael's  

25 

22 

17.7 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

Rice  Station 

216 

251 

218.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Salt  River  superintendency  

158 

157 

107.3 

Salt  River 

88 

84 

58.6 

Dav 

Camp  McDowell  .  .  . 

40 

42 

28.0 

Do. 

Lehi... 

30 

31 

20.7 

Do. 

San  Carlos  superintendency  .  . 

125 

152 

116.3 

San  Carlos 

100 

125 

95.5 

Do. 

Rice 

25 

27 

20  8 

Mission     day     Evangelical 

Lutheran. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


157 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal   year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona  —  Continued. 
San  Xavier  superintendency  

410 

357 

299.1 

San  Xavier 

155 

133 

104  7 

Dav 

Tucson  

35 

31 

18.0 

Do. 

Lourdes  . 

30 

24 

17.7 

Mission  day  Catholic 

St.  Anthonv's 

30 

30 

27  0 

Do 

San  Miguel*.  

20 

18 

15.7 

Do. 

Tucson  Mission 

140 

121 

116.0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Truxton  Canon  

140 

97 

91.3 

Reservation  boarding 

Western  Navajo  superintendency  

255 

213 

175.4 

Western  Navajo 

190 

116 

105.5 

Do 

Marsh  Pass  

30 

47 

29.4 

Do. 

Moencopi  

35 

50 

40.5 

Dav 

California 

1  904 

1  748 

1  381  3 

Bishop  superintendency  

140 

138 

104.9 

Bishop. 

60 

67 

48  6 

Do 

Big  Pine 

30 

24 

17  8 

Do 

Independence 

20 

15 

10  0 

Do 

Pine  Creek  

30 

32 

28.5 

Do. 

Campo 

30 

23 

22  6 

Do 

Fort  Bidwell  superintendency 

160 

144 

102.4 

Fort  Bidwell 

98 

80 

68  3 

Alturas  

24 

25 

10.1 

Dav 

Likelv 

20 

18 

12  0 

Do 

Lookout  

18 

21 

12.0 

Do. 

Fort  Yuma 

180 

180 

137  3 

Greenville  

90 

71 

60.5 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Hoopa  Valley 

165 

153 

111  4 

Reservation  boarding 

Malki  superintendency—  St.  Boniface..  . 
Pala  superintendency 

100 

84 

19 
55 

9.0 
41  3 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Pala  

30 

23 

19.8 

Dav 

Capitan  Grande.  .  . 

24 

15 

10.8 

Do. 

La  Jolla  

30 

17 

10.7 

Do. 

Round  Vallev  superintendency 

153 

134 

86.8 

Round  Valley 

80 

56 

40  0 

Do 

Manchester. 

18 

12 

7  0 

Do 

Uldah 

25 

33 

17  4 

Do 

Upper  Lake    

30 

33 

22.4 

Do 

Sherman 

650 

752 

636  8 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Soboba  superintendency  

90 

46 

41  0 

Cahuilla  

30 

12 

10.6 

'Day. 

Mesa  Grande      .  ... 

30 

15 

14  9 

Do 

Volcan 

30 

19 

15  5 

Do 

Tule  River  superintendency 

62 

43 

27  3 

Tule  River  . 

30 

18 

10  5 

Do. 

Auberry 

32 

25 

16  8 

Do 

Colorado  

105 

122 

102  0 

Southern  Ute  superintendency 

80 

85 

81.5 

Southern  Ute  

50 

68 

66.5 

Reservation  boarding 

Allen        .      . 

30 

17 

15  0 

Dav 

Ute  Mountain  ^  

25 

37 

20.5 

Do. 

Idaho 

580 

503 

380  5 

Coeur    d'Alene    superintendency  —  De 
Smet... 

80 

82 

68.1 

Mission  boardine:  Catholic. 

1  Does  not  include  100  from  other  reservations. 


158 


EEPORT   COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc,,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class'of  school. 

Idaho—  Continued. 
Fort  Hall  superintendency 

250 

204 

179.0 

FortlTall  

200 

174 

155.5 

Reservation  boarding 

Good  Shepherd 

30 

22 

17.5 

Mission  boarding*  Episcopal 

Presby  tenan  Mission  

20 

8 

6.0 

Mission  day  Presbyterian   ^ 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium 

100 

138 

92.1 

Reservation  boarding 

Fort  Lapwai  superintendency  

150 

79 

41.3 

Kamiah 

50 

29 

16  8 

Day 

St  Joseph's 

100 

50 

24  5 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Iowa  

150 

128 

103  1 

Sac  and  Fox  superintendency  

150 

128 

103.1 

Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium  .  . 

80 

64 

64.0 

Reservation  boarding 

Fox  

40 

33 

19.5 

Dav 

Mesquakie 

30 

31 

19  6 

bo 

Kftnssvn  ±   .„.,    ,    , 

811 

955 

795.5 

Haskell  

700 

835 

711.9 

Xonreservation  boarding 

Kickapoo  superintendency 

111 

120 

83  6 

Kickapoo  

71 

92 

73.2 

Reservation  boarding 

Great  Nemaha 

40 

•28 

10  4 

Day 

Michigan      

734 

629 

551.8 

Bay  Mills  

32 

42 

30.3 

Dav 

Mackinac  superintendency 

352 

217 

179  4 

Baraga  (Holy  Name)     .  . 

152 

87 

55  1 

Harbor  Springs  (Holy  Childhood).  . 

200 

130 

124.3 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Mount  Pleasant 

350 

370 

342  1 

Minnflsote 

1  451 

1  549 

1  137  1 

Cass  Lake  

40 

45 

36  6 

Fond  du  Lac  superintendency  

74 

48 

26.1 

Fond  du  Lac 

40 

19 

11  6 

Dav 

•   Normantown  

34 

29 

14.5 

Do 

Grand  Portage 

20 

28 

14  6 

Do 

Leech  Lake  superintendency  

128 

145 

89  6 

Leech  Lake 

80 

96 

70  6 

Squaw  Point  

24 

22 

10  0 

Day 

Sugar  Point 

24 

27 

9  0 

Do 

NettLake  1 

60 

62 

38  7 

Do 

Pipestone  superintendency  

248 

232 

199.5 

Pipestone  

212 

208 

184  4 

Birch  Cooley 

36 

24 

15  1 

Dav 

Red  Lake  superintendency 

188 

236 

198  5 

Red  Lake  

75 

86 

74  6 

Cross  Lake  .  .  . 

43 

64 

57  5 

Do 

St  Mary's 

70 

86 

66  4 

Catholic. 

Vermillion  Lake 

110 

143 

117  5 

White  Earth  superintendency 

583 

610 

416  0 

White  Earth 

250 

281 

195  0 

Do 

Pine  Point  

53 

47 

23  0 

Day 

Elbow  Lake 

30 

20 

8  2 

Do 

Round  Lake 

30 

29 

14  4 

Do 

TwinLake  

30 

43 

25  7 

Do 

White  Earth  . 

60 

80 

46  7 

Do 

St.  Benedict's... 

130 

110 

103.0 

Mission  boardin^:  Catholio. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  159 

TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Montana  

1,824 

1,579 

1,  178.  3 

Blackfeet  superintendency  

335 

389 

265.6 

Blac^feet 

144 

219 

137  6 

Reservation  boarding 

Burd 

16 

6 

5  0 

Day 

Old  Agency  day       

30 

35 

21.2 

Do. 

Holy  Family            .  . 

145 

129 

101  8 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Crow  superintendency 

442 

310 

240  7 

Crow    

100 

68 

39.0 

Reservation  boarding 

Pryor  Creek 

47 

50 

43  8 

Do 

Black  Lodge  

30 

21 

18.5 

Day;    American  Missionary- 

Lodge  Grass 

50 

47 

34  9 

Association. 
Mission  day*  Baptist 

Reno  

35 

36 

25.0 

Day    American  Missionary- 

St.  Ann's  

25 

16 

13.6 

Association. 
Mission  day;  Catholic. 

San  Xavier  

125 

55 

52.0 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Wyola 

30 

17 

13  9 

Mission  day*  Baptist 

Flathead  superintendency  —  St.   Igna- 
tius 

300 

145 

138.8 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Belknap  superintendency 

251 

223 

158  6 

Fort  Belknap  

51 

77 

54.8 

Reservation  boarding 

Lodge  Pole. 

40 

41 

20  6 

Day 

St.  Paul's  

160 

105 

83.2 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic 

Fort  Peck  superintendency 

280 

295 

211  9 

Fort  Peck 

120 

124 

94  3 

No.  1 

30 

34 

21  l 

Dav 

No.  2  

30 

25 

14  0 

Do 

No.  3 

30 

13 

10  0 

Do 

No.  4  

30 

31 

24  0 

Do 

Wolf  Point 

40 

68 

48  5 

Presbyterian. 

Tongue  River  superintendency 

216 

217 

162  7 

Tongue  River 

69 

89 

61  7 

Reservation  boarding 

Birney  

47 

45 

32.5 

Dav. 

Lamedeer 

40 

44 

30  0 

Do 

St  Labre's 

60 

39 

38  5 

Nebraska 

652 

612 

547  4 

Catholic. 

Genoa. 

375 

435 

391  4 

Santee  superintendency—  Santee  Nor- 
mal Training. 

125 

120 

105.0 

Mission  boarding  and  day; 
Congregational  . 

Winnebago  superintendency 

152 

57 

51.0 

Decora  

30 

20 

14.0 

Day. 

St.  Augustine 

122 

37 

37.0 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Nevada  

675 

663 

531.9 

Carson  

286 

292 

256.1 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Fallon  superintendency 

•    65 

42 

27.6 

Fallen  

40 

25 

14.0 

Dav. 

Lovelocks 

25 

17 

13  6 

Do 

Fort  McDermitt.   . 

80 

76 

74.8 

Do. 

Moapa  River  

20 

24 

18.4 

Do. 

Xevada  superintendency 

95 

108 

88.7 

Nevada  

70 

91 

77.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wadsworth  . 

25 

17 

11.3 

Day. 

Walker  River  

60 

44 

22.8 

Do. 

Western  Shoshone  superintendency  

69 

77 

43.5 

No.  1.. 

35 

34 

18.0 

Do. 

No.  2... 

34 

43 

25.5 

Do. 

160 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER    OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

New  Mexico 

2,526 

2,776 

2,  342.  3 

Albuquerque  

400 

441 

426.5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Jicarilla 

108 

136 

109.5 

Reservation  boarding    ° 

Mescalero  

100 

116 

105.2 

Do. 

Pueblo  Bonito  

80 

129 

90.4 

Day. 

Pueblo  day  schools  superintendency  .  .  . 

1,132 

1,088 

836.9 

Albuquerque  — 
Acomita 

32 

71 

37  4 

Do 

Encinal  

30 

26 

20.0 

Do. 

Isleta 

120 

99 

70  0 

Do. 

Laguna  

34 

52 

43.5 

Do. 

McCarty 

38 

38 

27.0 

Do. 

Mesita 

38 

33 

30  0 

Do 

Paguate          .                

60 

66 

52.0 

Do. 

Paraje 

20 

32 

29  4 

Do. 

San  Felipe  

60 

50 

41.0 

Do. 

Seama 

28 

35 

30.0 

Do. 

Bernalillo  

125 

106 

98.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Santa  Fe— 
Cochiti 

28 

27 

18.2 

Day 

Jemez  

120 

82 

50.4 

Do. 

Picuris 

24 

26 

18.0 

Do. 

San  Ildefonso  

40 

20 

12.0 

Do. 

San  Juan 

70 

55 

50.0 

Do. 

Santa  Clara  

40 

43 

32.0 

Do. 

Santo  Domingo   .  . 

50 

58 

42.0 

Do. 

30 

17 

14.0 

Do. 

Taos  

70 

87 

57.0 

Do. 

St  Catherine's 

75 

65 

65.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Santa  Fe 

350 

380 

354.2 

Xonreservation  boarding. 

San  Juan  superintendency  

180 

216 

189.3 

San  Juan    

150 

200 

173.7 

Reservation  boarding. 

Toadlena 

30 

16 

15.6 

Do. 

Zuni  superintendency 

176 

270 

230.3 

Zuni  .  .                     

80 

110 

107.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Zuni 

66 

123 

95  0 

Fay. 

Christian  Reformed  

30 

37 

28.3 

Mission  day;  Christian  Re- 

North Carolina 

310 

338 

206.0 

formed. 

Cherokee  superin  tendency 

310 

338 

206.0 

Cherokee                        .  .      .  . 

160 

228 

155.  0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Big  Cove 

40 

29 

9  7 

Day. 

Birdtown  .  .                     

40 

38 

18.2 

Do.         • 

Little  Snow  Bird 

30 

19 

9.6 

Do. 

Snow  Bird  Gap  

40 

24 

13.5 

Do. 

North  Dakota     

1,473 

1,717 

1,345.0 

Bismarck  

60 

111 

89.9 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Fort  Berthold  superintendency  .... 

184 

158 

109.9 

Fort  Berthold 

75 

65 

37.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

No  1 

30 

35 

25.0 

Day. 

No.  2 

36 

22 

17.6 

Do. 

No.  3 

30 

24 

20.0 

Do. 

Congregational  

13 

12 

10.0 

Mission  boarding. 

Fort  Totten 

323 

394 

350.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Standing  Rock  superintendency 

546 

569 

456.8 

Standing  Rock  

202 

253 

205.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Martin  Kenel  

100 

106 

91.3 

Do. 

Bullhead  

40 

39 

33.3 

Day. 

Cannon  Ball  

40 

27 

19.2 

DO. 

Grand  River 

30 

20 

13.7 

Do. 

Little  Oak  Creek  

40 

22 

15.2 

Do. 

Porcupine 

24 

19 

14.7 

Do. 

No.l  

20 

14 

8.5 

Do. 

St.  Elizabeth's  . 

50 

69 

55.5 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal  . 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


161 


TABLE  19.— Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

North  Dakota—  Continued. 
Turtle  Mountain  superintendency 

160 

253 

135  0 

No  1 

40 

47 

27  4 

Dav 

No.  2       

30 

59 

25  2 

yDo 

No  3 

30 

39 

19  0 

Do 

No.  4  

30 

68 

48.3 

Do 

No.  5 

30 

40 

15  1 

Do 

Wahpeton  

200 

232 

202  5 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Oklahoma 

4  123 

4  491 

3  625  1 

Cantonment 

90 

115 

76  5 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  superintendency 

195 

197 

180.4 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

150 

165 

152  5 

Do 

St.  Luke's  

45 

32 

27  9 

Mission  day  Episcopal 

Chilocco  

500 

653 

543.8 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kiowa  superintendency 

683 

643 

549  1 

Anadarko  

110 

123 

109  0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Sill 

160 

173 

146  0 

Do 

Rainy  Mountain  

155 

180 

162  2 

Do 

Riverside   .  . 

168 

129 

104  3 

Do 

Cache  Creek 

50 

15 

12  2 

Red  Stone 

40 

23 

15  4 

Presbyterian. 

Osage  superintendency 

190 

168 

115  6 

Osage  . 

115 

119 

79  3 

Reservation  boarding 

St  Louis' 

75 

49 

36  3 

Catholic. 

Otoe 

80 

65 

65  0 

Pawnee  . 

100 

75 

67  5 

Ponca  

90 

114 

100.4 

Do. 

Red  Moon            .                

65 

28 

18  0 

Day 

Sac  and  Fox 

80 

131 

80  1 

Seger  

79 

84 

71.7 

Do 

Seneca  superintendency 

100 

175 

155  9 

Seneca  . 

100 

135 

124  6 

Do 

St.  Mary's  

40 

31.3 

Contract  Mission  boarding; 

Catholic. 

Shawnee  superintendency  

310 

275 

221.4 

Shawnee 

110 

143 

106  8 

Reservation  boarding 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Benedict's)  

100 

55 

38.1 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic  . 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Mary's)  

100 

77 

76.5 

Do. 

Total 

2,562 

2,723 

2,245  4 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 

1,561 

1,768 

1,379.7 

Cherokee  Nation—  Cherokee  Orphan 
School 

60 

95 

67.2 

Tribal  boarding. 

Creek  Nation  

304 

381 

289.3 

Euchee  

100 

127 

97.5 

Do. 

Eufaula  . 

112 

126 

110.3 

Do. 

Nuyaka 

92 

128 

81.5 

Do 

Chickasaw  Nation 

87 

112 

71.4 

Collins  Institute 

52 

97 

57.4 

Do. 

El  Meta  Bond  College  

35 

15 

14.0 

Contract  private  boarding. 

Choctaw  Nation 

550 

659 

553.  9 

Armstrong  Male  Academy  
Jones  Male  Academy  

120 
100 

137 
123 

133.  4 
102.9 

Tribal  boarding. 
To. 

Tuskahoma  Academy         .  ... 

110 

128 

107.0 

Do. 

Wheelock  Academy 

100 

126 

95.0 

Do. 

Old  Goodland  

80 

86 

72.0 

Contract  mission    boarding; 

St.  Agnes  Mission  

40 

59 

43.6 

Presbyterian. 
Contract  mission  boarding; 

Catholic. 

8340°— 


162 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19.— Location, 


ity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
*  June  30,  1915— Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

O  klahoma  —  C  ontinued  . 
Five  Civilized  Tribes—  Continued. 
Chickasaw  and  Choctaw  Nations.  .  . 

460 

404 

302.9 

Murray  School  of  Agriculture.  .  . 
Oklahoma  Presbyterian  Cchege 

St.  Agnes  Academy 

150 
50 

160- 

SO 
56 

158 

62.1 

46.7 

115.  3 

Contract  private  boarding. 
Contract   mission  boarding; 
Presbyter  iaa. 
Contract  mission  boarding 

St.  Elizabeth's... 

70 

74 

52.5 

Catholic. 
Do. 

St.  Joseph's  

30 

36 

26.3 

Do. 

Seminole  Nation  —  Mekusukey 

100 

117 

95  0 

Tribal  boarding 

Oregon  

1,355 

1,411 

998.8 

Klamath  superintendence"  

262~ 

~^6~ 

158.  0 

Klamath 

112 

111 

83  3 

Reservation  boarding 

Modoc  Point... 

30 

23 

13.8 

Day. 

Yainax.. 

30 

39 

14  6 

Do 

No.  1 

30 

23 

16  0 

Do 

No.  2... 

30 

12 

9.6 

Do. 

No.  3... 

30 

28 

20  7 

Do 

Salem  

650 

776 

544  3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Siletz  superintendency 

70 

43 

30  4 

Siletz  

50 

35 

20  1 

Day. 

Upper  Farm 

20 

13 

10  3 

Do 

Umatilla  superintendency  . 

243 

229 

171  9 

Umatilla  

93 

125 

96.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

St.  Andrew's  (Kate  Drexel) 

150 

104 

75  6 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Warm  Springs  superintendency 

130 

122 

94  2 

Warm  Springs  

100 

97 

79.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Simnasho  

30 

25 

15  2 

Day. 

.Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  

757 

911 

513.3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

South  Dakota 

4  107 

3  832 

3  058  4 

Cheyenne  River  superintendency 

202 

121 

99  6 

Chevenne  River.  .  . 

180 

97 

83  3 

Reservation  boarding. 

No/7... 

22 

24 

16  3 

Dav 

Crow  Creek  superintendency 

157 

177 

138  0 

Crow  Creek  

82 

117 

88.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Immaculate  Conception 

75 

60 

49  5 

Contract  mission  boarding; 

Catholic. 

Flandreau  

330 

384 

341  1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Lower  Brule 

111 

50 

45  3 

Reservation  boarding 

Pierre 

250 

251 

195  4 

Pine  Ridge  superintendency 

1  273 

1  149 

861  7 

Pine  Ridge 

210 

250 

210  3 

No.  1... 

25 

29 

18  5 

Dav 

No.  3 

23 

18 

12  9 

Do 

No  4 

30 

32 

27  2 

Do 

No.  5.... 

30 

52 

25  8 

Do 

No.  6.... 

30 

34 

25  6 

Do 

No.  7 

33 

39 

25  2 

Do 

No.  8.... 

33 

14 

10  1 

Do 

No.  9  

30 

26 

16  3 

Do 

No.  10 

33 

25 

16  5 

Do 

No.  11... 

30 

13 

10  7 

Do 

No.  12...  . 

30 

13 

8  0 

Do 

No.  13. 

24 

12 

10  0 

Do 

No.  14... 

22 

18 

11  6 

Do 

No.  15  

24 

18 

13  0 

Do 

No.  16...  . 

36 

24 

14  5 

Do 

No.  17 

30 

23 

16  3 

Do 

No.  18.... 

33 

27 

16  2 

Do 

No.  19.... 

30 

26 

17.4 

Do. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFIAIRS. 


163 


TABLE  \§. ^Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South  Dakota—  Continued. 
Pine  Ridge  superintendency  —  Contd. 
No.  20  

24 
30 
27 
30 
33 
30 
30 
20 
23 
30 
20 
240 

25 
15 
27 
24 
26 
26 
26 
19 
17 
11 
20 
220 

13.4 
10.6 
15.6 
16.8 
20.3 
20.3 
23.5 
14.0 
10.2 
6.6 
10.7 
193.6 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
DC. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Contract  mission   boarding: 
Catholic. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Contract  -  mission  boarding; 
Catholic. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Nonreservation  boarding. 
Heservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic; 
Do. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

No.  21  . 

No   22 

No   23 

No.  24.. 

No   25 

No.  26  

No.  27  .. 

No   28 

No.  29  

No.  30 

Holy  Rosary  

Rapid  City  

300 
1,146 

291 
1,057 

253.8 
819.2 

Rosebud  supftrinteiidency 

Rosebud..                .  .  . 

200 
35 
20 
32 
40 
24 
27 
24 
26 
26 
27 
29 
26 
25 
23 
23 
25 
26 
21 
26 
19 
27 
70 
325 

169 
19 
20 
24 
21 
27 
24 
22 
18 
16 
19 
21 
33 
23 
19 
21 
27 
22 
22 
19 
19 
21 
71 
360 

151.6 
15.0 
18.0 
18.3 
14.0 
19.0 
19.0 
20.0 
13.0 
9.0 
18.5 
15.0 
24.0 
21.0 
14.3 
17.0 
20.0 
14.0 
15.0 
13.0 
14.0 
15.0 
65.0 
256.5 

Big  White  River 

Black  Pipe  

Bull  Creek 

Corn  Creek 

Cut  Meat...                  .   . 

He-Dog's  Camp 

Ironwood  

Little  Crow's 

Little  White  River  

Lower  Cut  Meat  . 

Milk's  Camp... 

Oak  Creek  

Pine  Creek. 

Red  Leaf 

Ring  Thunder  

Rosebud 

Spring  Creek  

Upper  Cut  Meat 

Whirl   ind  Soldier 

White  Lake  .                ... 

White  Thunder 

St.  Mary's  

St.  Francis' 

Sisseton 

133 
60 
115 

157 

170 
112 
120 

142 

19 

74 
49 

149.2 
63.  7 
91.4 

110.1 

Springfield  

Yankton 

Utah    ..... 

Shiw  its  

40 
67 
50 

13.3 
62.0 
34.8 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

Salt  Lake,  special  agent  

Deep  Creek 

30 

20 

1,562 

31 

18 

1,570 

20.7 
14.1 

1,178.7 

SkullValley         

Washington  

Colville  superintendency 

380 

323 

212.6 

No.  1 

25 
30 
30 
30 
25 
25 
25 
90 
100 

25 
43 
41 
30 

36 
9 
28 
37 
74 

16.0 
24.0 
23.1 
19.9 
17.3 
3.5 
24.0 
30.5 
54.3 

No.  3.... 

No.  4 

No  5 

No.  6      

No  7 

No.  9  

Sacred  Heart  Academy       

St.  Mary's  

Cushman  superintendency 

515 

566 

439.0 

Cushman     .           .                

350 
40 
30 
25 
70 

382 
.24 
28 
24 
108 

30fi.  4 
15.0 
16.1 
12.7 

88.8 

Skokomish 

Jamestown  

Port  Gamble 

St.  George's  

164 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  average  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal  year 
ended  June  30,  1915 — Continued. 


Reservations  and  names  of  schools. 

Capacity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Nean  Bay  superintendency  

120 

122 

89.9 

Neah  Bay  

60 

72 

51.5 

Day 

Quileute  

eo 

50 

38.4 

Do 

Spokane  superintendency  

90 

89 

52.1 

No.  1 

33 

30 

12  3 

Do 

No.  2.... 

32 

42 

28.0 

Do 

No.  3       ...                    .      . 

25 

17 

11  8 

Do 

Taholah  superintendency  

76 

65 

42  9 

Taholah 

36 

51 

S3  4 

Do 

Queets  River     ..         

40 

14 

9  5 

Do 

Tulalip  superintendency  

250 

250 

214.8 

Tulalip 

180 

186 

176  3 

Ldimmi  

40 

41 

21  0 

Dav 

S"\vinomish 

30 

03 

17  5 

Do 

YftTriTnq. 

131 

155 

127  4 

Wisconsin 

2,416 

1,787 

1  4G6  0 

Hayward  super  intendency 

274 

283 

228.4 

Hayward          

200 

226 

191.0 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

La  Courte  Oreille 

74 

57 

37  4 

Dav 

Keshena  superintendency 

590 

452 

351  1 

Keshena              

170 

113 

89.6 

Reservation  boarding 

Neopit 

80 

38 

23  8 

Dav 

St.  Joseph's         

220 

242 

196.  4 

Contract-mission    boarding: 

St.  Anthony's  

120 

59 

41.3 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

170 

107 

88  8 

Reservation  boarding 

La  Pointe  superintendency  

690 

256 

209.9 

Odanah  ..        ........ 

490 

141 

96.9 

Day. 

Odanah  (St  Mary's) 

200 

115 

113  0 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Oneida  superintendency       

190 

202 

176.0 

Oneida    

140 

169 

141.0 

Re^ervai  ion  boarding. 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

11 

9.0 

Mission  day 

Hobart  Mission  

25 

22 

6.0 

Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Bed  Cliff  superintendency 

117 

87 

67  9 

Red  Cliff 

52 

43 

31.4 

Day 

Bayfield  (Holy  Family)  

65 

44 

36.5 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Tomah 

275 

257 

214  1 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Wittenberg     

110 

143 

129.8 

Do. 

Wyoming  

300 

318 

285.1 

Shoshone  superintendency 

300 

318 

285  1 

Shoshone 

135 

182 

168.  0 

Reservation  boarding 

Arapaho  

25 

26 

17.4 

Dav. 

St.  Stephen's    .  . 

120 

91 

84.5 

Contract-mission    boardingj 

Shoshone  Mission  

20 

19 

15.2 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


165 


TABLE  20.— School  libraries. 
[Schools  not  listed  have  reported  no  library.] 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number   of  books   in 
library  June  30,  1915. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Grand  total  

11,  147 

3,183 

2,205 

73,840 

21.253 
1,361 

11,279 

1,048 

' 

12,  260 

9,414 

?8,983 

Arizona  

1,  248 

53~ 

49 

7,796 

174 

98 

1,132 

Camp  Verde  

Colorado  River 

68 

287 
887 
122 
142 
15 
87 
320- 
35 
136 
135 

0) 

112 

227 

Fort  Apache  

Havasnpsi  

12 

Kaibab 

50 
135 

15 
16 

Leupp  

12 

3 



3 

(') 

Moqui  

Day  schools  

80 

90 

80 

90 

Navaio  

12 
9 
13 
1,049 

Chin  Lee 

4 
5 
760 

Tohatohi  

136 

960 
182 
2,081 
903 
2207 
394 
M65 
242 
60 

2,620 

Phoenix 

30 

40 

830 
63 
27 
4 
27 
22 
11 

640 

Pinia 

80 
10 
1 

Rice  Station 

San  Carlos 

12 
42 
119 
194 
15 

..„. 

14 

...„ 
2 

39 
13 

4 
4 

8 

i 

10 
23 
16 
13 

San  Xavier  

Tucson  

Truxton  Canon  

i 

Western  Navajo  

Marsh  Pass  

California  ... 

545 

114 

288 

1,310 

636 

1,372        315 

395 

Bishop  

225 
76 
59 
39 
56 
49 

12 
14 
8 
9 
22 
13 

510 
186 
303 

72 

59 
56 

7 
4 

321 
80 
54 
9 

44 

8 

189 
99 

Bie  Pine 

Independence 

Pine  Creek 

(?) 

V*, 

Fort  Bidwell  

'"m 

362 
115 

258 
104 

158 
13 
164 
340 
8 
39 
20 
381 

174 

7 
183 
22 
17. 

Fort  Yuma 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Vallev... 

15 

20 

10 

| 

Pala 

8 

Round  Valley  

231 

86 
465 

795 

10 
16 
370 

74 

Dav  schools 

i 

Sherman  Institute  

26 
10 

16 

116 

900 
39 

254 

57 

0) 

12 

Colorado 

Southern  Ute 

10 

95 
3:700 

347 

10 
164 

264 

10 
64 

97 

35 
4 

279 

52 
5 

91 
91 

12 

Ute  Mountain  

Idaho  

47 

49 

43 

130 

Fort  Hall.. 

42 
5 

143 

47 
2 

230 

1 

241 

279 
68 

1,555 

251 
13 

792 

91 

6 

671 

279 

130 

0) 

455 

Fort  Lapwai  

Kansas  

896  i  1,975 

Haskell  Institute 

23 
120 

30 
1,  145 

128 
102 

50 
142 

241 

627 
928 

130 

6,980 

s  1,  850 
84 
200 
271 
205 
«  2,  454 
1.916 

594 
198 

308 
664 

671 

800 
96 

308 
38-) 

1,975 

385 
76 

338 
501 

Kickapoo  3 

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant  
Minnesota.  

200 
108 

308 
414 

308 
425 

Cass  Lake 

173 

34 

42 

10 

58 

55 
50 
42 
5 
30 
126 
103 

Fond  du  Lac 

36 
83 
9 
38 
301 
505 

24 

30 

42 

58 

Leech  Lake  

Pipi-stone  

20 
21 
21 
56 

10 
1 

18 
49 

8) 
60 
176 

272 

90 

55 
200 

10 
15 
40 
273 

30 

Red  Lake 

White  Earth  

60 
277 

Dav  schools  .  .  . 

1  Not  reported. 

2  Overestimated  last  year. 


3  As  reported. 

« Includes  textbooks  used  also. 


166 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  20. — School  libraries — Continued.  , 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number   of  books   in 
library  June  30,  1915. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Montana  

233 

22 

1 

2,667 

911 

315 

236 

55 

$163 

""59 
16 
2 
43 
43 

Blackfeet 

M8 
2 
1 

78 
103 
271 

778 
2  1,  435 

996 

12 
65 
25 
142 
11 
656 

102 

19 
136 
3 

200 

50 

Crow  

11 
19 
2 

103 

98 

38 

..... 

Pryor  Creek 

25 

3 

Fort  Belknap... 

Fort  Peck 

2 
155 

397 

11 

2 

Tongue  River  

1 

22 

Nebraska  .. 

8 

Genoa    

38 

22 

8 

259 

737 

1,042 

99 
3 

253 

383 
14 

37 

(3) 

Winnebago  4  

Nevada 

126 

72 

79 

15 

130 

Carson. 

11 

5 

21 

49 
55 
5 
55 
142 
1 
735 

8,201 

88 
10 
5 
24 

13 

23 
3 

Fallen 

Lovelocks 

1 
15 

Fort  McDermitt  

4 
10 
1 

79 

15 

5 
13 

Nevada  

Walker  River 

Western  Shoshone 

95 

867 

51 

74 

78 

196 

992 

8 
678 

GOO 

227 

86 
453 

New  Mexico  

Albuquerque  

394 
37 
4 

70 

60 
3 

„   876 
342 
122 
130 
1,907 
2  3,  604 
265 

110 
10 
66 
5 
191 
400 

374 
26 
8 
5 
21 
212 

170 
13 
3 

.Ticarifla  

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

Ran  Juan. 

30 
394 

2 

3 

25 

234 

Santa  Fe 

400 
150 
35 
15 

212 

Day  schools 

Zuni 

4 

4 

85 

2 
335 

2 
10 

96 

777 
178 

1,001 

210 

32 

15 

5 
3 

17 

Day  school  
North  Dakota 

694 

305 

257 

25 

Bismarck 

20 

228 

£4 

26 
61 
406 

378 
130 

11,588 

295 
19 
175 
35 

170 

2,606 

25 

54 
84 
2 
140 

1,476 

245 

25 

(3) 

Fort  Totten  

Standing  Rock 

4 
11 

50 

3,  004 

17 

22 

Turtle  Mountain 

12 

2,  439 

1,801 

17 

(3) 

703 

Wahpeton  

Oklahoma 

90 
471 

50 
258 

Cantonment 

4 
31 

308 

5 

84 
(3) 

(3) 
(3) 
(3) 
44 
118 
38 
(3) 

(i)  2 

26 

Chevenne  and  Aranaho.  .  . 
Chilocco  

18 

90 

217 
553 

2524 

2703 
2  471 
21,092 
2  2.  556 
2560 
2525 
81 
152 
308 
53 
21,166 

32 

625 

28 
174 
30 
152 
209 
82 
199 
199 
3 
285 
35 
11 

103 

640 

58 

20 
1,097 

40 
932 

Kiowa  — 
A  nadarko  .  .  . 

2311 
2  o52 
2309 
2666 
201 
85 
147 
25 
3 
24 

28 
3 
28 
1 

187 
19 
3 
12 

Fort  Sill 

Kainy  Mountain  

2 

51 
25 

Riverside  

3 

18 

""si" 
11 

Osage..  . 

Otoe 

Pawnee  

61 
34 
2 

""96" 
29 

Ponca  . 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger  

308 

285 

Seneca 

Shawnee  

Si 

(3) 
317 
386 

Total 

1,257 

544 

2,412 
592 

309 
162 

173 

85 

9,369 
2,219 

2,064 
542 

1,101 
375 

21 

88 
J9 
44 
27 

1,500 
933 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  
Armstrong  

55 
5180 
63 
110 
106 

60 
214 
53 
26 
12 

(3) 
46 
11 
35 
23 

Cherokee  

51 
8 
35 

39 

45 
42 
11 
7 

""e" 

16 

6 

214 
357 

200 

88 

Col!  ins  . 

Euchee 

200 

Eufaula..  . 

1  Donated. 

2  Includes  textbooks  used  also. 
» Not  reported. 


4 1914  report. 

5  1914  report  included  textbooks. 


KEPOKT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 
TABLE  20. — School  libraries — Continued. 


167 


States  and  schools. 

Number  of  books  pur- 
chased during  fiscal 
year. 

Number   of   books   in 
library  June  30,  1915. 

Circulation. 

Amount 
ex- 
pended 
during 
fiscal 
year. 

: 
i    Text 
and 
refer- 
!    ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Text 
and 
refer- 
ence. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Litera- 
ture. 

Fic- 
tion. 

Oklahoma  —  Continued. 
Five   Civilized   Tribes- 
Continued. 
Jones 

123 
377 
i  138 
21,167 

1,855 

29 
56 
16 
76 

855 

18 
3 
43 
112 

804 

150 

200 

Mekusukev  22 

$10 
44 
217 

47 

Nuyaka  .  <  

54 
383 

330 

56 
242 

1 
56 

312 

Wheelcck 

18 
465 

56 
684 

Oregon  
Klamath  

571 
879 
246 
159 

39 
14,093 

170 
465 
149 

71 

3,511 
3,613 

61 
684 
31 
28 

1,041 

1,728 

23 
24 

(3) 
(3) 

(3) 
3,412 

Salem  

TJmatilla 

301. 
21 

8 

14 
1,476 

190 
52 

311 

1 

465 

684 

Warm  Springs  

Pennsylvania'  Carlisle 

96 
613 

6 

184 

2,075 
1,813 

1,722 
1,442 

South  Dakota 

Chevenne  River  

280 

81 

2  5,  335 
278 
228 
23,367 
21,136 
182 
250 
21,338 
238 
100 
197 
188 
21,008 
248 

131 
2,267 

710 
98 
21 
223 
235 
404 
100 
1,124 
117 

""45i" 
66 
.    35 
29 

710 
98 

(8) 

«  i 

1,247 

(1>« 

No.  7 

Crow  Creek 

1 
86 

6 
121 

103 

Flandreau  

606 
104 
13 

Lower  Brule 

Pierre... 

2 

PineRidpe  .      . 

100 

853 
111 
130 
284 
9 
5 
6 

50 
460 
40 
105 
300 

100 
449 
55 
230 
600 

Day  schools  
Day-school  inspector  . 
Rapid  City 

110 
10 

162 

71 

909 

22 

84 

4 

22 

195 
(3) 
90 
18 

Rosebud  (21  day  schools). 
Sisseton  

63 
12 
263 
10 

251 
16 

Springfield 

35 
15 

5 
3 

Yankton  

14 

3 

Utah-  Uintah 

Washington 

179 

160 

69 

1,231 

683 

345 

51 

293 

Colville  Agency... 

2 
1 

17 
24 
4 
10 
30 
2 

41 
27 
8 
13 

1,595 

2 

1 

113 

22 
116 
134 
20 
104 
291 
46 
3i6 
430 
266 
379 

9,545 

49 
34 
87 
50 
111 
53 
31 
46 
318 
161 
288 

1,586 

18 
29 
60 
45 
88 
45 
20 
40 

2 

j 

3 

""12" 

10 
18 

5 
1 
12 
12 
11 
7 
13 
4 
146 
(3) 
70 
12 

782 

~F 

(1)3<5 
172 

(3) 

No.  1 

2 
9 
10 
4 
14 
.      16 
13 
351 
89 
173 
2 

513 

No.  3... 

6 
2 
17 
2 
1 
4 
52 
3 
71 

432 

1 

1 
1 

1 
4 
12 
5 

3?> 
230 

No.  4 

No  5 

No.  6... 

No.  7 

No.  9 

Cushman  

Spokane 

Tulalip... 

Yakima     .  . 

Wisconsin  

477 

99 

Haywai  d 

63 
432 
51 
335 
374 
93 

16 

200 

15 

111 

24,586 
796 
2  2,  101 
'487 
526 

127 
361 
64 
111 
500 
4 

41 
3 

14 
78 
74 
3 

127 

200 
25 
50 
75 

41 
3 

5 
50 

Keshena  

Dav  school 

Lac  du  Flambeau  

25 

40 
37 

Oneida  

Red  Cliff 

Tomah 

1-10 

798 

192 

WittenLuig 

244 
32 

191 
6 

138 
34 

419 
26 

330 

24 

265 

Wyoming  

26 

24 

Shoshone 

32 

6 

4 
30 

192 

26 

24 

26 

24 

(3) 

Arapaho  

1914  report  included  textbooks. 


2  Includes  textbooks  used  also. 


8 Net  reported. 


168 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  21. — School  statistics  for  39  years.1 

INDIAN  SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE  FROM  1877  TO  1915. 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.2 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 

attendance. 

1877 

48 
49 
52 
60 
114 
140 
157 
153 
167 
158 
156 
3170 
3168 
3166 

3  ICO 

102 
119 
107 
109 
86 
106 
125 
154 
145 
227 
227 
242 
230 
233 
228 

150 
168 
159 
169 
200 
246 
282 
307 
312 
385 
383 
412 

399 

388 

3.598 
4,142 
4,448 
4,651 
8,143 
12,  232 
18,188 
21,568 
25,455 
24,945 
23,647 
26,281 
25,830 
26,127 
26,128 

1878 

1879 

1880 

1885 

6,201 
9,865 
15,061 
17,  708 
21,812 
20,  106 
18,774 
20,973 
20,607 
20,858 
20,702 

1,942 
2,367 
3,127 
3,860 
3,643 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5,223 
5,269 
5,'426 

1890  

1895 

1900 

1905  

1910 

1911 

1912  

1913 

1914  

1915                                     .... 

1  For  other  years  see  1913  report. 

2  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 

« Includes  Five  Tribes  boarding  schools. 

APPROPRIATIONS  MADE  FOR  SCHOOLS  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  SINCE  1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877 

$20,  000 

1898 

$2,631,  771 

4  54 

1878 

30  000 

50  00 

1899 

2  638  390 

25 

1879 

60,000 

100.00 

1900  

2,  936,  080 

11.28 

1880 

75,000 

25  00 

1901 

3  080  367 

4  91 

1881 

75  000 

1902 

3  244  250 

5  32 

1882 

135,000 

80.00 

1903 

3,531,250 

8.84 

1883  

487.  200 

260.00 

1904  

3,522,950 

1.23 

1884 

675,  200 

38.00 

1905     

3,880,740 

10.15 

1885 

992  800 

47  00 

1906 

3,777  100 

1  2  67 

1886       

1,100,065 

10.00 

1907  

3,  925,  830 

3.93 

1887 

1,211,415 

10.00 

1908 

4,  105,  715 

4.58 

1888 

1  179  916 

i  2  60 

1909 

4  008  825 

i  2  36 

1889 

1,348,015 

14.00 

1910       

3,757,909 

1  6.26 

1890 

1,364  568 

1  00 

1911 

3,  685  290 

1  1.93 

1891 

1,842,770 

35.00 

1912  

3,757.495 

1.96 

1892 

2,  291,  650 

24.30 

1913 

4,015  720 

6.87 

1893  

2;  315,  612 

1.04 

1914  

2  4,  403,  355 

9.65 

1894 

2,243,497 

1  3.50 

1915 

3  4,  678,  627 

6.25 

1895 

2,  060,  695 

1  8  87 

1916 

4  4  391  155 

6.14 

1896 

2  056  515 

i  2  00 

1897 

2,  517,  265 

22  45 

Total  since  1876  . 

94,  055,  002 

1  Decrease. 

2  Includes  $400,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

3  Includes  $440,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 
<  Includes  $430,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  169 

TABLE  22. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


States  and  schools. 

Acreage. 

Value. 

Value  of 
tools  and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

1,426 

$59,320 

$8,701 

12 

$2,348 

$4,021 

319~ 
119 

$2,  214 

$443 

$1,364 

Arizona:  San  Xavier  
California*  Campo 

'CO 
5 
200 

4 
49 

12,000 
200 
3,270 

40 
530 

780 

2 

720 

126 
119 

139 

54 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall  *...„.. 

Minnesota:  Grand   Por- 
tage 2  

Montana 

742 

1 

80 

215 

215 

Blackfeet  

48 
1 

20 
638 
410 

40 

480 
50 

2,100 
6,380 

32,800 
1,000 

742 

215 

215 

Crow  2 

1 

80 

Nebraska:  Santee  

574 
355 

4,400 
1,850 

215 
3,153 

215 
1,539 

North         Dakota:  Fort 
Berthold  

8 

1,068 

304 

i,3ia 

Oklahoma:      Cheyenne 
and  Arapaho  * 

Oregon:  Klamath 

1 

480 

i  Leased.  2  Only  items  reported. 

TABLE  23. — Experimentation  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


States  and  schools. 

Acreage. 

Value. 

Value  of 
tools  and 
imple- 
ments. 

E  mployees 
engaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

126 

$7,065 

$2,289            91 

$10,097 

$2,949 

$337 

$20 

$2,  592 

Arizona  

60 

5,027 

2,089 

79 

9,152 

2,864 

252 

20 

2,592 

Leupp  l  

10 
50 

1 

57 

27 
5,000. 

10 
1,918 

Pima  

2,089 

79 

9,152 

2,864 

252 

20 

2,592 

Minnesota:  Grand   Por- 
tage !  

New  Mexico  

2 

870 

85 

85 

Pueblo  day  schools.  . 
San  Juan    

47 
10 

8 

418 
1,500 

110 

(2) 

1 
1 

10 

150 
720 

75 

85 

85 

Utah  

200 

Shivwits  

5 
3 

50 

60 

200 

10 

75 

Salt    Lake,    special 
agent  l  

| 

1  Only  items  reported. 


2  School  implements  used. 


170 


ytar  ended  J 


Seiz 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 


1--  !>•  CO  t^-  CO 

SBcSSSS 

?L 


-SSE 


.-i  co  o 
c<)  10  -*< 


SS188 

coveo"r-Tco*'co"x 


8S  :«  :  :  :  ^S  :  i^' 


T—  1  O5  *^ 
COGO'O 


of  liquor 


—  Suppr 


Sal 


II!  II 


o  Oi  eo  c<i  t>-  oc 

•^  rr  O5  CS  -*T  i-H 

CU  TJI  ?C  CO  10  i-l 


(N  O>  i-H 
(N        <N 


SI  ill- 


OOO  «OCO 
l^  "5  C<)  i-H 

oo  cc  eo 


O3O5OOCOOCiOiO 
t>-i-ICOrH        OOi-(i-H 


t^t-iO 
Or-ICO 


g^C 


•  <N     •     -COI> 


i-H        CO  COCO        iO  •  CO  CO 


oOrf<rHt-l 
IO  i-ICO  r-l 


!OOi-lC<100COC<lcOi-icO 

COrH          O^H         tt 


O2  lOOO 
CN  COOO 


1OOO  CO  CO  ti  ( 


liil 


co  o         coco 


>O  •<*•  CO  O5  r-l 


EEPOET   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


171 


by 


g  a    — 


t 

c? 


^§ 

IsS 


c^r    -T 


&3 
fcrt 


iir 


tfltf 


t^o  •*  Jp 


I  :g  :  :| 

S      -"  ^~ 


« 


id  O 

es  os 


IS  :a 


« 


.>  ®    •;;;. 

' 


O^^ 


rn 


-;  43 

:  5 


i-H  O  C<l  ^ 

^§S    ^2 


icoo    ••• 

2£  -d 


'!?85 


*  S- 

5r3, 


i 


o  o  2  o 


Ul 


§     S 


172 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


Ill 

!    Si 


C 


p 


i 


11 


SI 


to  e<» 

T—  (   t^- 


i 


§o   o 
8  % 


CO  CO  rf        CO     <N 


00  (N 

CO  ?5 


sag 


SS  "•  2 


~|g~|f~ 


:  :^6 


ti*W 

«*2  fe-a 


8  1 


:TI 


lilis 
ssfa*' 


j     8    Jl 


II  i 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


173 


U5    I   1C     .... 

CO         CO 


co    •    •    •  10  --O  < 


lOC^QO        JO 

^ 


§3 


00        05 

s  s 


382 


CO 


« 


rH          CO         OO 


i 

8 


i  i  i  I 


!8§    8 

>c5o     o 


1 


?f 
T 


CO  CS)  O       i-l 


00 


SS 


>  O  O  O  CS  00  O        C^ 


O  O  TJ«  C^  OO  CO  f^-        C5 
0(N        C5,-H  (NOO        0 

oo          cooocoi-i      co 


8§S    § 

OCSI-l        C^l 


=  C^l  O  O 
I  i-iOO 


I 


§O^  ^H  O  »O  ^  "^        CO 
COCCO  IOT-H  O          TT 


SSI 


1 2 


III 

E 


fI  1 

lifili  g 

Sllll  6 


!2  1 


174 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber,  acreage  per  employee  for  protection, 
and  permanent  improvements  built  to  date,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber 
during  year. 

Acreage 
per 
employee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Permanent  improvements  built 
to  date. 

Employees  in 
forestry  work. 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting. 

Total. 

Roads. 

Tele- 
phone 
lines. 

Trails. 

Cabins. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salaries. 

Grand  total  

160 

$104,  172 

$9,  522 

$113,  694 

Miles. 
3,091 

Miles. 
2,047 

Miles. 
3,172 

64 

19 

13,  570 

435 

14,005 

837 

570 

625 

10 

Fort  Apache  
Navajo  

10 
2 

7,210 
600 

435 

7,645 
600 

65,  000 
215,000 

252 

153 
152 
70 

166 
5 
24 

137 

600 

5 

1 

Pima 

82 
3 

San  Carlos  

7 

5,760 

5,760 

18,500 

25 

3 
1 

Truxton  Canon. 

Western  Navajo. 
California 

500 
107 

7 

4,  060 

205 

4,265 

97 

5 

Hoopa  Valley.  .  . 
Pal  a 

3 

1,900 

70 

1,970 

33,000 

70 
5 
1 
5 

26 

95 

50 

3 

Round  Valley... 
Soboba 

1 

900 

900 

3,000 

30 

4 
5 
38 

2 

1 

Tule  River  

3 
4 

1,260 
3,770 

135 
482 

1,395 
4,252 

6,666 

12 
8 

1 

4 

Idaho 

Coeurd'Alene... 
Fort  Lapwai  

Minnesota 

1 
3 

20 

750 
3,020 

14,211 

750 
3,502 

14,246 

29,875 
9,300 



8 

482 
35 

2 
5 

4 
1 

128 

118 

Fond  duLac  
Grand  Portage.  . 
Leech  Lake 

3 

2 

2,700 
600 

35 

2,735 
600 

4,000 
20,500 

10 

128 

5 

NettLake  

2 
4 
9 

10 

2,000 
2,280 
6,631 

11,710 

2,000 
2,280 
6,631 

14,486 

26,  106 
25,  785 
.900 

1 

Red  Lake 

58 
50 

190 

White  Earth.... 
Montana 

2,776 

2 

1 

Blackfeet 

2 

1,275 

1,275 
27 
10,004 
1,200 
1,980 

10,617 

Crow  

27 
2,749 

Flathead      .  ... 

5 
1 
2 

14 

7,255 
1,200 
1,980 

10,605 

46,000 
32,XXX) 
35,000 

1 

140 
50 

1 

FortBolknap.... 
Tongue  River.  .. 

New  Mexico.  

1 

314 

12 

87 

430 

9 

Jicarilla 

8 
2 

1 

3 

5,000 
1,450 

600 
3,555 

5,000 
1,462 

600 
3,555 

57,  446 
175,000 

25,360 
1,660 

45 

185 

25 
20 
39 

52 

4 
1 

4 

Mescalero  

12 

300 

18 

Pueblo    day 
schools  

San  Juan 

Zuni 

35 

112 

North         Carolina: 
Cherokee  

1 

840 

840 

48,000 

North  Dakota:  Fort 
Berthold 

330 
570 

45 
347 

Oregon 

23 

11,625 

115 

11,740 

130 

16 

Klamath  

12 

3 
1 

7 

2 
3 

8,700 
450 
375 
2,100 

1,620 
974 

27 

8,727 
450 
375 
2,188 

1,620 
974 

65,850 
1,2PO 
3,020 
50,000 

38,100 
2.220 

500 

190 

50 

13 

Siletz 

Umatilla  

1 
2 

2 

Warm  Springs.  .  . 

South  Dakota:  Pine 
Ridge  

88 

70 
124 

157 

80 
1,500 

Utah:    Uintah    and 
Ourav.  .  . 

KEPOET   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


175 


TABLE  26. — Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber,  acreage  per  employee  for  protection, 
and  permanent  improvements  built  to  date,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915 — Contd. 


States  and  reserva- 
tions. 

Cost  of  care  and  protection  of  timber 
during  year. 

Acreage 
per 
employee 
for  pro- 
tection. 

Permanent  improvements  built 
to  date. 

Employees  in 
forestry  work. 

Cost  of 
fire 
fighting. 

Total. 

Roads. 

Tele- 
phone 
Tines. 

Trails. 

Cabins. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salaries. 

40 

$22,177 

$4,890 

$27,067 

Miles. 
348 

Miles. 
370 

Miles. 
147 

16 

Colville  

10 

3 
16 
3 
8 

14 

8,511 
1,750 
5,771 
1,190 
4,955 

7,300 

2,582 
799 

11,093 
2,549 
5,771 
1,190 
6,464 

7,547 

90,000 
37,000 
18,000 
6,373 
54,660 

60 
171 

7 

213 
29 
40 

86 
26 
30 

7 
3 

Spokane     .  ... 

Taholah 

Tulalip  

Yakima 

1,509 
247 

110 
307 

88 
97 

5 

136 

6 

Wisconsin  

(Hayward 

5 
3 
3 
2 
1 

3 

2,000 
2,  IPO 
1,020 
1,220 
900 

1,710 

2,000 
2,407 
1,020 
1,220 
900 

2,035 

4,100 
41,872 
7,870 
56,868 
8,000 

14,720 

Keshena 

247 

260 
6 
38 
3 

24 

62 
5 
20 
10 

78 

128 

Lac  du  Flambeau 
La  Pointe  ...  . 

Red  Cliff 

8 
100 

Wyoming:  Shoshone. 

325 

176 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

S 


& 

g 

ot 

S* 

i  3 


nstr 
tion 


i-H  O  O  T 

!  O*  cl  «5  b- 


8~- 


cccC'C^o^ioo 

»C  ^  i-)  00  CO  i-H  CO 


:S; 


i 


ss 


000 

I—  1   T-H   f-H 


3    3 


IO  t^ 

-noo 


!    :«, 


OO    !       •  O  CO 


O  cr.  O  O  O       i-H 
O  C:  O  O  O        T 


i-H  «O      •  CO      •      •        CM        CO      •  00 


1S 


^HOC 


ss  s?     "^sss-ss 


:§  :      s? 


S§8  :SJ 


<-l  OO  ^H      •  i-l 


oo  o  t-  >r.>  T 


ooooo»oic  co      oocooooi-ic 

SlO  O  O  CT  O  i— i         O  CM  M1  CO  O  CX>  C^>  C 

CiCoS-HiO  lolcoCO        CC(Mt-OC 

iO*'<N"t>."'a5'       W  C0~   I    -^             rH  00"oTco"c 


53 


and 
den 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


177 


t^  CO  CO        1O 


CS  O  CO 
00  C^  TT 


CO  i—  t  O  CTJ  O 


0 


S 


SSS  :S$i 

-^  CO     •  t^< 


*$    1 


cs  ex;  r*- 
2g  g  2 


uflQ*       C^CO  *O^ 


gs 


•  Miii 

:H  :  :  : 


§Sfe 


S    SfS^S! 


2    HI    |  ||||| 

sf  2  tft^tf-5 


3  o  o  cc 


!  o^ 


M* 


II 


ill 


i-H  CC  CO  CO 


8    2? 
?    2 


s 


??S 

T—  1  CC- 


•*        •  i-H      |     I-H  O 

:        i 


li 


'  C.T3  o 

hH    rn    -^.    ^J 


l-t    ^  T—  *  J 

c  o"^  o       '      o  6  S 

fecc      K      _2      fcifm-5 


8340°— 15- 


I  III 

s 
-12 


•gl  ^^fisa 

&S  :^f^-'p:; 


yfafll  I 

KlJSg8      "       «^o  =  fl 


.ssees^^i 


gsllll 


178 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Constr 
tion. 


SJg 


cc  cc 


oco 

If5r-l 


88 

<=5e 


II 


s  s: 


§1 


SS 


§  s 


8    S 

i  §3 


o  •?-  oo  3     cs     10 


«£  O»l^-<N  OO 

U5  C-l  CO  i-H  CO 

o  '-d  o  06  i> 

t-H  XT'  UD  rH  IO 


o     o 

<*     I    90 


g  s 
sf  s 


SR 


§ 

S'S 

^5 


.S3o 
a-if^W 


S 


S?    ! 


:      :    a 


S  :8  :    2 


§    J  :S  :    S 


§* 
S.  6 


i 

' 


^      t> 
B  i:-** 

O   C    Q^ 

gl5 


* 

I 


EEPOET   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


179 


S  w~ 

«jO 


S|||g       || 

I 


e  of 
s. 


ans 
ged. 


OS'S  2  «3 
R  2  §  5  9  2 

<t  S  PT3  3-" 


Ditches  o 
ervati 


•rt<T)iio 

O>          i-l 


1IS 


-fol1 


r-l  00  O  CO 

iooc^rc-4i 


OO-«<CO       OiO 
r-(OOOl~-       O-^T 


O  O  rp  O       0  1 

i—  f  O  OC  O        O- 


•  ot^ 

:«H 


-89 


iOOOO 


CO  rH 


O5  (N  O  <N  OO 

X)  1C  »— I  r-H  t~ 

t~  CN  <M  -*<  CO 

oo* 


cOOOOOOO 


,  A*J 

co~io~«rTt^Wi 


t~-      ts   i~   »   e- 


O5O  O 
'  O  CM  C 


s; 


?  i  ? 

1  i 

_     ^3      ^ 


.a  - 


5  » 


« 


s 

6  6 


180 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


O        CO 

o       >n 


sillll 


co  irco 


iO  O 


O        CO 


>  CO        O 

S3    S 


Valu 
cro 


ttTw      w^g"     £f 


.2    > 


2    S 

co      co 


I  O  •*  O        O 

iicosco      o 

ICOO-*        o 


fe  r^ 


o"to" 


o  t* 

O  T-* 


« 


:  :       § 


jlfsrsr   «r 


O  t—         JO 


s  on 
atio 


§0         (M 
CO          i-l 

^ 


f 


ssss 


l-COCTXN  <N 


2    « 


i 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


181 


CO  -*  O3 


§       s 


I  ji 


3      a 


-d  o  ® 
S  j-  S 

111 


182 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  29'. — Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1915,  and  made  in  the  field. 


States  and  tribes  or  reservations. 

Approved  by  the 
department. 

Made  in  the 
field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Total  

4,535 

671,546 

6,473 

850,094 

14 

140 

1,492 

14,920 

Colorado  River                                                     

14 

140 

Pima  (Gila  River)                             ".  

1,492 
1 

14,920 
10 

California                       

1 

160 

Yunia'i                                                                      

1 

10 

Eliblic  domain                                      

1 

1,784 
2 

148 

160 

338,910 
120 

6,154 

X3aho:  Fort  Hall 

Michigan*  L'Anse  and  Vieux  Desert                          

Minnesota                                                        

.Ftind^du  Lac                                  

143 
1 
4 

413 

5,748 

Liech  Lake                                                                 

91 
315 

51,342 

Nett  Lake  (B'oise  Fort) 

192 

61,440 

Fort  Peck     

192 

61,440 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)                      

413 
3 

51,342 
164 

Xebraska                                                

2 

1 

117 

278 

120 
44 

605 
46,539 

S&ntee                                                                                •  - 

Nevada*  Moapa  River                                                        -  

Berth  Dakota                                                          

788 

206,  155 

E-ort  Berthold                              

788 

206,155 

Standing  Rock 

213 
65 

7 

1 

403 

36,  165 
10,374 

859 
160 

69,190 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)                           

Oklahoma*  Fort  Sill  Apache                  

South  Dakota 

1,470 

261,093 

Cheyenne  River 

287 
113 

50.  487 
18,063 

Crow  Creek  

Bine  Ridge 

574 
896 

1 
2,291 

117,733 
143,360 

50 
282,615 

Rosebud                  

3 

640 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington 

1,364 

157,203 

Cbtvilte 

2,291 

282,  615 

Yakima    

1,364 

157,203 

Wyoming"  Shoshone 

238 

23,811 

TABLE  30.— Lands  purchased  for  Indians  in  California  to  June  30, 1915. 


Band. 

County. 

Number 
of 
Indians. 

Acres. 

Amount 
paid. 

Total 

3  479 

6  783.51 

$144,470.45 

Sten  Manual     -  -    --     »      .  -  - 

San  Bernardino  . 

56 

5.13 

1,795.50 

Do 

do 

56 

7.fO 

200.  00 

Trinidad      

Humboldt  

43 

60.00 

1,198.40 

Rttrnsey 

Yolo           .  .  . 

48 

75.00 

2,  000.  00 

Pfcehanga,  or  Temecula  

JJos  Coyotes 

Riverside  
San  Diego    

179 
165 

235.  00 
160.  00 

6,  650.  00 
800.  00 

Bootend... 

Mendocino  

120 

630.00 

5,  750.  00 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  183 

TABLE  30. — Lands  purchased  for  Indians  in  California  to  June  30, 1915 — Continued. 


Band. 

County. 

Number 
of 
Indians. 

Acres. 

Amount 
paid. 

Etna  and  Ruffey's                    

Siskiyou  

56 

480.  00 

$2.208.00 

Colus 

Colusa              .... 

63 

40  00 

3  800  00 

Cahto  Laytonville                    

Mendocino  

98 

200.  00 

2.  500.  00 

Blue  Lake  or  Mad  River                                     .... 

Humboldt     .  .... 

45 

26  00 

1  500  00 

Madera 

55 

140  86 

1  500  00 

Cortina                                                              

Colusa      

47 

480.  00 

4'  800.  00 

San  Diego 

165 

720  00 

12  500  00 

Do 

..  do  

165 

160.  00 

'  800.  00 

Do 

do           

165 

160  00 

1  900  00 

Upper  Lake                        

Lake  

285 

143.  00 

5.  000.  00 

Lower  Eel  River                                                        -  - 

Humboldt        .... 

60 

20  00 

3  000.00 

Grindstone                   

Glenn  

56 

80.00 

1.050.00 

Guidiville                                                                

Mendocino  

92 

50.00 

2  000.00 

Coyote  Valley 

do 

48 

100  00 

2  484  80 

Potter  Valley                                     .  .         

.    do  

72 

16.00 

2  000.00 

San  Diego 

66 

1  120 

1  500  00 

Do                                                  

.  .  do  

66 

i  80.  00 

300.  00 

Redwood  Valley  and  Little  River 

Mendocino     .  

51 

80.00 

2  000  00 

Palm  Springs                            

Riverside  

35 

800.  00 

6.000.00 

East  Lake 

Lake 

134 

88  00 

6  600.00 

Mendocino 

84 

65  00 

4  908  75 

San  Joaquin  or  Big  Sandy 

Fresno        

114 

280.  00 

2  800.00 

Alexander  Valley,  or  Wappo      

Sonoma  

74 

24.00 

1,800.00 

Smith  River 

Del  Norte         

163 

163.  00 

7,  200.  00 

Lake 

51 

108  70 

2  650  00 

Sherwood     '                                                      .... 

Mendocino  

92 

230.  72 

5.  750.  00 

Tuolumne 

78 

289  52 

3  500  00 

Bear  River                                                        

Humboldt  

15.00 

1.500.00 

Scotts  Valley 

Lake 

60 

56.68 

2  900  00 

Big  Valley 

..do  

92 

80.00 

12.  000.  00 

Ukiah  or  Pine  Ville 

Mendocino 

130 

95.  28 

8  500.00 

do  

40.00 

600.  00 

Guideville 

do            ... 

34.12 

2,  100.  00 

Bishop                  .  .         

Inyo   

15.00 

1,125.00 

Wappo 

Sonoma 

30.00 

2  500.00 

Crescent  City                                  

Del  Norte  

50 

100.  00 

3,500.00 

i  Improvements  only. 
TABLE  31. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


Noncompetent  sales.1 


Inherited-land  sales.2 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Grand  total  

2,824 

316,030.30 

$5,166,756.90 

8,021 

998,  711.  89 

$15,  185,  297.  86 

Total  1915  

422 

34,429.09 

584,  724.  56 

393 

68,  245.  45 

715,568.52 

1914.                       .  ... 

529 

45,  526.  31 

779,  526.  14 

418 

45,  241.  99 

773.309.16 

1913 

208 

20,  778.  80 

407,  315.  56 

109, 

10,  797.  94 

285,097.72 

1912  

324 

34,391.11 

568,880.75 

392 

43,  652.  27 

889,  285.  02 

1911  3 

494 

55,  197.  98 

978,  588.  27 

638 

79,  665.  66 

1,503,900.38 

1910  3  

520 

82,  655.  80 

1,  245,  630.  96 

873 

129,  359.  61 

1,956,315.92 

1909*...     . 

235 

34,080.33 

442,  762.  85 

753 

102,  708.  00 

1,321,258.72 

1908  

92 

7,  990.  88 

159,  318.  81 

768 

91,302.57 

1,302,508.94 

1907  

820 

106,359.25 

1,248,703.34 

1905 

643 

64,  447.  67 

981,430.87 

1905 

978 

90,  214.  97 

1,3P3,131.52 

1904 

1,236 

122,222.52 

2,a57,464.50 

1903 

(5) 

44,  493.  99 

757,  173.  25 

California    . 

3 

115.  69 

4,520.00 

1 

160.00 

640.00 

Fort  Bid  well     

2 

40.50 

350.  00 

1 

160.00 

640.00 

Hoooa  Vallev... 

1 

75.19 

4,  170.  00 

i  Under  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1018),  modified  by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L,.444), 
June  2.5,  1910  (38  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

*  Un  ler  a-t  of  Miv  27, 1902  (32  Stat.  L..  245-275),  modified  by  acts  of  May  8, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  May  29, 
1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

»  InMu  las  sales  of  laals  of  Ka;v,  Osa^e,  and  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 

<  Includes  sales  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 

6  Unloiown. 


184 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  31. — Sales  of  Indians' allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1915 — Contd . 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales. 

Inherited-land  sales. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage.    ;     Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 

tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Colorado*  Southern  Ute  

1 

5 

14 

40.00  !           $320.00 
322.43           12,520.50 

576.32          23,415.00 

2 

8 

10 

320.  00 

554.  86 

697.23 

$810.00 
14,901.00 

24,  659.  28 

Idaho*  Fort  Lapwai        .         .... 

Kansas        .              

1 
13 

6 
19 

40.00 
536.32 

310.  00 
1,215.35' 

800.00 
22,  615.  00 

3,  065.  00 
24,  103.  30 

2 

8 

4 
8 

159.56 
537.  67 

226.  61 
526.00 

8,658.28 
16,001.00 

4,061.50 
14,071.30 

Potawatomi      

Michigan*  Mackinac 

Mipfipsota 

Fond  du  Lac             

4 

5 

200.00 
302.  00 

3,  462.  00 
4,  669.  30 

1 
4 
2 

80.00 
244.  50 
120.00 

2,044.00 
2,  980.  80 
8,326.50 

Leech  Lake 

Nett  Lake 

Red  Lake 

i 

9 

8 

35.40 
677.  95 

1,163.96 

5,  200.  00 
10,  772.  00 

11,  424.  65 

White  Earth 

1 

50 

81.50 

10,  282.  84 

720.00 
64,305.07 

Montana 

Crow 

3 
5 
12 

682.  37 
481.59 

572.  79 

4,  127.  15 
7,  297.  50 

29,  364.  67 

41 
9 

32 

9,423.16 
859.68 

2,  228.  61 

42,199.07 
22,  106.  00 

105,  132.  40 

Flathead 

Nebraska 

Omaha                

3 

7 
2 

26 

158.  79 
334.  00 
80.00 

2,  955.  75 

14,  335.  27 
12,  825.  00 
2,  204.  40 

23,  803.  40 

8 
8 
16 

20 

680.  00 
798.  60 
750.  01 

2,  172.  94 

40,562.06 
12,895.00 
51,675.34 

21,  415.  67 

Santee 

Winnebago  

North  Dakota 

Fort  Berthold 

1 
11 
14 

160 

160.00 
745.  13 
2,  050.  62 

13,  473.  72 

2,  400.  00 
11,098.40 
10,305.00 

187,557.62 

1 
10 
9 

88 

160.  00 
852.  02 
1,160.92 

12,  832.  29 

i.eoo.oo 

12,  738.  67 
7,  077.  00 

181,028.25 

Fort  Totten  

Turtle  Mountain 

Oklahoma         

Cantonment  

14 
32 

1,497.16 
3,  712.  46 

13,574.30 
47,  802.  25 

10 
17 
1 
6 
6 
8 
11 
2 
1 
25 
1 

55 

1,625.59 
2,  339.  30 
155.  29 
3,  937.  31 
730.00 
619.96 
1,  222.  49 
316.  19 
160.00 
1,  652.  16 
73.40 

6,  713.  92 

10,  773.  70 
47,948.00 
3,  255.  00 
38,538.50 
9,  791.  25 
11,086.00 
32,  082.  80 
5,  540.  00 
2,  003.  00 
19,  060.  00 
950.  00 

87,  708.  10 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Osage 

12 
39 
20 
22 
1 
11 
5 
4 

32 

1,  760.  00 
2,  669.  85 
1.280.29 
1,016.02 
160.00 
961.  21 
275.  73 
141.00 

3,  690.  60 

12,  471.  00 
23,  8P6.  30 
29,  588.  00 
27,359.27 
2.005.00 
20,765.50 
7,  360.  00 
2,  736.  00 

36,  499.  70 

Otoe  

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Red  Moon     

Seger 

Seneca  

Shawnee 

Oregon          

Klamath  

3 
24 

4; 
73 

480.  00 
2,  838.  62 
100.00 
271.  98 

6,  187.  00 

3,  365.  00 
18,554.20 
1,562.50 
13,  018.  00 

154,  492.  84 

13 
30 
1 
11 

36 

1,  603.  00 
4,  117.  06 
5.00 
988.  86 

4,  896.  26 

10,  600.  00 
22,  660.  10 
126.  00 
54,322.00 
79,  603.  11 

Roseburg 

Silet/  

Umatilla 

South  Dakota  

Cheyenne  River 

1 

1 

253.10 
160.  00 

1,9R1.53 
835.00 

4 
6 
2 

753.  75 
847.  80 
400.  00 

5,  940.  00 
7,  455.  34 
3,  160.  80 

Crow  Creek  

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridae 

7 
4 
30 
30 

14 

7 

1,025.00 
800.00 
2,  201.  82 
1,747.08 

753.  98 
481.  16 

5,  250.  00 
5,  064.  00 
56,  956.  70 
84,  425.  61 

14,  398.  88 
18,840.00 

Rosebud 

6 
5 
13 

41 
17 

i,  429.  ie 

560.  85 
904.  70 

24,  040.  47 
1,  413.  67 

13,008.00 
12,  744.  00 
37,  294.  97 

51,967.24 
49,  486.  10 

Sisseton  

Yankton 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington  

Coeur  d'Alene  

1 
2 
2 
1 
1 

15 

80.00 
153.  90 
84.76 
160.00 
2.50 

827.  67 

930.00 
11,  610.  00 
2,  400.  00 
3,  800.  00 
100.00 

17,094.00 

3 
1 
4 
2 

7 

10 

480.00 
80.00 
103.42 
130.  25 
620.00 

391.36 

9,151.00 
1,500.00 
3,  750.  00 
7,  670.  00 
27,  415.  10 

6,  452.  00 

Colville 

Cushman  

Tulalip     .... 

Yakima 

Wisconsin  

Lac  du  Flambeau 

1 
3 

7 
4 

101.  20 
220.  24 
'     255.  48 
250.75 

3,  036.  00 
4,  100.  00 
6,532.00 
3,  426.  00 

La  Pointe  

Oneida 

9 

326.  26 

5,  885.  00 

Red  Cliff  

Wittenberg  

1 
11 

65.10 
788.39 

567.00 
9,327.50 

Wyoming'  Shoshone 

27 

1,  742.  67 

23,  305.  00 

REPOBT    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


185 


TABLE  32.  —Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  5,  1906  (34  8  tat.  L.,  182],  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906.  to 
June  30,  1915. 

Applications   for   patents   in   fee 
during  fiscal  year  ended  June 
30,  1915. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Total 

10,  694 

1,044,874.18 

2,022 

208,353.62 

1,254 

314 

940 

124,114.86 

Arizona:  San  Xavier  
California  

1 
20 

40.00 
1,  173.  00 

1 
1 

12.40 
10.00 

1 

1 

Bishop.  .  . 

2 
1 
15 
2 

85 

240.  00 
80.00 
838.00 
15.00 

9,323.62 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley  

Round  Valley  

1 

53 

10.00 
3,252.18 

1 
33 

1 
7 

Idaho  . 

26 

2,564.50 

Coeur  d'Alene  

46 
39 

101 

6,834.16 
2,489.46 

7,  248.  14 

4 
49 

55 

627.  65 
2,624.53 

5,082.84 

12 
21 

23 

3 

4 

4 

9 
17 

19 

1,066.34 
1,  498.  16 

1,669.40 

Fort  Lapwai  

Kansas  

Kickapoo 

41 
60 

14 

2,551.98 
4,  696.  16 

1,  183.  28 

30 
25 

3 

2,  652.  84 
2,430.00 

142.  24 

7 
16 

5 

3 
1 

4 
15 

5 

160.  27 
1,509.13 

388.24 

Potawatomi 

Michigan:  Mackinacand 
Mount  Pleasant  

Minnesota 

3,640 

291,  103.  51 

10 

640.  00 

28 

6 

22 

1,618.29 

Fond  du  Lac  

18 
12 
28 
9 
3,573 

373 

1,357.50 
1,035.92 
2,035.20 
834.  89 
285,840.00 

39,980.62 

4 
1 
3 
2 

200.00 
80.00 
200.00 
160.  00 

4 
7 
13 
4 

2 
1 
3 

2 

6 
10 

4 

80.00 
475.  92 
652.96 
409.  41 

Grand  Portage  

Leech  Lake  .  .  . 

Nett  Lake 

White  Earth1  

Montana 

248 

29,002.46 

121 

48 

73 

8,144.89 

Blackfeet 

3 

44 
317 
9 

968 

640.97 
8,574.88 
28,401.17 
2,363.60 

63,511.62 

3 
14 
88 
16 

54 

3 
10 
57 
3 

31 

640.  97 
1,876.78 
4,643.54 
983.60 

2,208.60 

Crow 

208 
39 
1 

466 

25,448.72 
3,354.74 
200.  00 

43,859.77 

4 
31 
13 

23 

Flathead. 

Fort  Peck  

Nebraska 

Omaha  

563 
242 
163 

3 

803 

36,438.44 
17,808.69 
9,264.49 

360.00 
140,482.31 

175 
256 
35 

23,931.00 
17,510.00 
2,418.77 

19 
14 
21 

13 
2 
8 

6 
12 
13 

520.00 
1,000.15 
688.45 

Santee 

Winnebago  .... 

Nevad^:  Carson  

North  Dakota 

127 

19,369.10 

268 

33 

235 

34,798.66 

Fort  Berthold 

13 

44 
185 
561 

1,721 

1,652.90 
3,  742.  65 
56,614.53 
78,472.23 

153,853.63 

2 
29 
45 
51 

328 

164.  00 
2,591.30 
8,882.21 
7,731.59 

32,235.02 

2 
17 
44 
205 

221 

2 
15 
29 
189 

125 

429.  96 
1,247.96 
5,695.55 
27,425.19 

14,582.75 

Fort  Totten 

2 
15 
16 

96 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain..... 
Oklahoma 

Cantonment    .  . 

50 

133 
155 
81 
56 
67 
103 
34 
548 
494 

7,  175.  88 

17,251.48 
19,775.14 
9,516.03 
5,781.32 
4,905.01 
10,860.06 
3,  757.  77 
34,441.64 
40,389.30 

26 

12 
20 
8 
12 
25 
21 
1 
184 
19 

3,932.66 

2,333.49 
3,277.86 
1,348.63 
1,200.87 
3,023.36 
2,  887.  07 
40.00 
12,061.08 
2,  130.  00 

68 

23 
2 
21 
16 
14 
13 
16 
27 
21 

44 
19 

24 

4 
2 
21 
15 
10 
13 
4 
21 
11 

3,603.07 

448.90 
412.  93 
2,364.43 
1,659.09 
1,240.00 
1,  492.  25 
480.  00 
2,222.08 
660.  00 

Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho  

Kiowa 

Otoe 

Pawnee  .    . 

1 
4 

Ponca 

Sac  and  Fox 

Seper 

12 
6 
10 

Seneca 

Shawnee... 

i  Restrictions  removed  under  act  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  353). 


186 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  32. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855)— 
Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1915. 

Applications    for   patents    in    fee 
during  fiscal  year   ended   June 
30,  1915. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Oregon 

286 

21,235.13 

65 

6,283.62 

27 

6 

21 

2,109.38 

Klamath 

130 
14 
20 
219 
3 

1,336 

4,552.27 
2,067.09 
1,378.78 
12,  876.  99 
360.  00 

249,  368.  77 

3 

10 
7 
40 
5 

191 

482.  72 
1,511.29 
562.  72 
2,  966.  89 
760.00 

36,030.36 

10 
3 

7 
7 

2 
1 

8 
2 
7 
4 

1,  190.  66 
240.  00 
478.  72 
200.00 

Roseburg  

Siletz 

Umatilla  

3 

Warm  Springs  
South  Dakota  

307 

61 

246 

46,676.43 

Cheyenne  River  

88 
50 
63 
412 
351 
133 
239 

4 
218 

20,952.29 
8.  102.  06 
17,331.89 
82,053.65 
78,725.25 
.   12,596.11 
29,607.52 

240.  00 
17,348.85 

18 
16 
6 
80 
54 
5 
12 

3,  308.  86 
2,638.50 
1,050.00 
18,  050.  82 
9,315.43 
556.  75 
1,  110.  00 

33 

17 
10 
189 
5 
34 
19 

1 

59 

6 
3 
2 
24 

27 
14 
8 
165 
5 
15 
12 

1 

35 

5,968.77 
2,398.50 
1,440.00 
33,689.28 
1,124.13 
1,345.63 
710.  12 

40.00 
2,  826.  86 

Crow  Creek     . 

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridge  

Rosebud 

Sisseton 

19 

7 

Yankton. 

Utah:  Uintahand  Ouray. 
Washington  

259 

20,726.01 

24 

Colville 

49 
6 
34 

'3,950.56 
570.  00 
3,082.50 

3 

80.00 
153.90 

6 
4 
28 
2 
8 
11 

98 

2 
2 
8 
1 
5 
6 

4 

4 
2 
20 
1 
3 
5 

94 

320.  61 
200.00 
1,725.55 
80.00 
260.  70 
240.00 

5,854.33 

Cushman  

Spokane 

Taholah 

1 
1 
253 

179 

80.00 
163.  85 
20,248.26 

9,  465.  97 

Tulalip 

12 
117 

1,095 

1,678.36 
8,067.43 

45,499.17 

Yakima 

Wisconsin 

Hay  ward  .. 

2 
10 
49 
1,029 
5 

26 

133.  04 
711.  14 

3,875.89 
40,520.62 
258.  48 

2,922.53 

Lac  du  Flambeau  — 
La  Pointe.. 

6 
52 
36 

4 

8 

1 
2 

1 

5 
50 
35 
4 

7 

282.  99 
4,115.73 
1,177.13 
278.  48 

632.  53 

9 
169 
1 

36 

959.  97 
8,426.00 
80.00 

2,241.65 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff.. 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

1 

1  Last  year's  report  included  trust  patents. 
SUMMARY  OF  PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8,  1906. 


Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907.. 

889 

92  132  50 

1908 

1  987 

153  991  78 

1909  

1  166 

133,331  79 

1910. 

955 

99  339  10 

1911 

1  Oil 

115  575  37 

1912..  .. 

'344 

45  529  49 

1913. 

520 

67  477  49 

1914  

1,148 

152,  405.  44 

1915. 

940 

124  114  86 

Total  .... 

8  960 

983  897  82 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


187 


TABLE  33. — Removals  of  restrictions . 


Fiscal  year. 

Quapaw  (Seneca), 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.* 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Total                                                                     

470 

24,408.07 

7,788 

462,230.97 

1915                                  

25 
72 
37 
53 
68 
215 

1,095.28 
3.889.35 
1,930.00 
3,218.28 
4,104.91 
10,170.25 

786 
1,106 
'956 
652 
953 
1,470 
1,865 

50,077.33 
81,034.72 
60,532.64 
45,075.51 
84,679.34 
88,070.34 
52,761.09 

1914 

1913                           

19]2                                                                            

1911 

1910                                                                 

1909 

1  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

2  Act  of  May  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

NOTE.— Act  of  Congress  dated  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312),  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  inter- 
married whites,  freedmen,  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands,  except  homesteads 
of  Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove 
restrictions  from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 

TABLE  34. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1915,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
%  as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

188 

16,894 

Total  1915               .              

65 

5,616 

1914                                                                                    

33 

3,951 

1913 

23 

1,600 

1912                                                                                    

25 

1,917 

1911 

42 

3,810 

Mackinac  Mich                                                                                            

1 

62 

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich                                     

1 

40 

Seneca  Okla     '                                                                                   

15 

1,780 

2 

160 

1 

80 

Sisseton,  S   Dak         .                            

1 

160 

2 

160 

3 

246 

La  Pointe  "VVis                                                         .          

36 

2,770 

Red  Cliff,  Wis  .                      

3 

158 

TABLE  35. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


Fiscal  year. 

Kaw.i 

Osage.2 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

52 

16,784 

457 

1915                                                                   

5 
12 

1 
1 

800 
1,904 
400 
480 

12 
4 
23 
22 

84 
293 
19 

5,880 
1,960 
10,890 
10,890 
41,160 
143,570 
9,310 

1914                            

1913                                                                            

1912          

1911                                                                 

1910                                                                                          

1909                                                             

20 
6 
6 
1 

8,000 
2,400 
2,400 
400 

1908                                                                                   

1907                                                                                                  

1906 

Act  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  636). 


2  Act  June  28,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539). 


188 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   O.F   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


i 


> 

e 


0Q        CO 


ll 


Greenville 
New  York  Agency 


«      •  C-4  >O      • 


:SS  '•  '•  '•  '•  '' 
:«8  :  :  :  :  : 


10     .     •' 

i  OS        •        •  ! 


CO     Q  OO     O 

5  SS  S 


1 


^r  Tt^^i>.  oo  ^  <<ji       co 

i-H  1—-  ^/         Gi  O  r-  1 


i-H  CO 

se 


"££3<o<McoiO       o 

•  »O  CS|  i— t        T-H  Cs^        CO 

•  CTJ  C<1  O 


O  ^H 


sf   8 


£ 


oooo  :ooo 


^Twoo^" 

T-H  t^   IO 


a  :  : 


«S 


I    *P 

o      fl  2 

|    oMo    bfifi 

S 

O 


:    851 

§    63" 


aa 

22 


IO  •  CO 


00  iO  ?5     00 

co'i-Tco'  o1 


s  s 


I 

*o 

.3 


II 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


189 


TABLE  37. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  daring  fiscal  year  ended  Jane  30,  1915. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total  

$820  679  79 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache  

Water  main 

1  152  20 

Do              

Fram.3  hospital 

2  000  00 

Fort  Yuma  

Steel  highway  bridge  across  Colorado  River     

170,000.00 

Kaibab         

Frame  office                                                 .                    .  . 

1,200  00 

Navajo                 

Frame  sanatorium 

12  007  14 

Phoenix 

Brick  industrial  building 

14  900  00 

Phoenix,  East  Farm  San- 

Frame lavatory  building 

1  034!  00 

atorium. 
Do 

Frame  barn 

975  00 

Do  

Brick  boiler  house 

1,000.00 

Piraa             

Refrigerating  plant 

2  525  00 

San  Carlos 

2  steel  highway  bridges  across  Gila  and  San  Carlos  Rivers 

54  212  24 

San    Carlos    Bylas    day 

White  Mountain  Reservation. 
Day  school  plant 

9  621  00 

school. 
SanXavier  

Adobe  office  and  quarters  at  Indian  Oasis 

1  350.00 

Western  Navajo          

Additions  to  stone'  dormitory 

21  500  00 

Do 

Steel  bridge  across  Moencopi  Wash  Navajo  Reservation 

5  741  00 

Western    Navajo.    Marsh 

2  frame  day-school  buildings 

e'loo  oo 

Pass  day  school. 
California: 
Bishop        

Addition  to  frame  schoolhouse 

3  695  48 

Bishop,   Pine  Creek  day 

Combined  frame  schoolhouse  and  quarters  

4,  707.  28 

school. 
Campo    

Frame  office  building 

459  27 

Greenville 

Frame  quarters 

5  964  00 

Hoopa  Valley  

Frame  jail 

200  00 

Pala                 

Frame  cottage  and  remodeling  old  cottage 

2  478  20 

Soboba... 

Frame  horse  barn  .... 

875.  00 

Idaho: 
Coeur  d'Alene  .             .  . 

Concrete  driveways  and  walks 

950  00 

Do 

Drilling  well  and  construction  of  pump  house 

4  647  20 

Coeur    d'Alene,    Kalispel 

2  day-school  plants 

8  839  75 

and    K  o  o  t  e  n  a  i  day 
schools. 
Iowa: 
Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium.  . 

Frame  office  building          

2,  038.  41 

Do    

Heating  plant 

5,000  00 

Kansas:  Haskell  Institute  

Stone  shop  buildings  and  boiler  house  

8,000.00 

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant  

Centra!  heacing  system    ...                      .... 

7,  232.  72 

Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake 

Wooden  bridge  over  Mississippi  River 

5  000  00 

Leech  Lake      .  .  ;  

Fram  i  horse  and  dairy  barns              .      .  . 

4,024.75 

Nett  Lake 

Physician's  frame  cottage  and  office 

2  392  50 

Pipestone  

Fram  3  dairy  and  horse  barns  

4,081.04 

Red  Lake— 
Crocs  Lake  School 

Frame  cottage 

1  414  47 

Do  

Fram?  dairv  barn             

1,  200.  00 

Red  Lake  Reservation 

Wooden  bridge  across  Black  Duck  River 

1  000  00 

White  Earth 

Frame  cottage 

1  558  00 

Montana: 
Crow 

Concrete  oil  and  paint  house 

475.  00 

Flathead 

New  agency  plant 

25  483  39 

Fort  Belknap  (irrigation) 

Fram.3  shop  and  coal  shed         . 

463.  25 

Do 

Frams  office  and  mess  hall 

2  798  25 

Fort  Peck  

Frame  dairy  barn  

2,  119.  96 

Nebraska: 
Genoa 

Brick  lavatory  annex 

2  480  32 

Do    

Addition  to  brick  hospital  

3,957.88 

Do 

Superintendent's  brick  cottage 

5,  469  65 

Do 

Septic  tank 

655  00 

Nevada:  Fallon 

Fram"  cottage          

2,  138.  00 

New  Mexico: 
Albuquerque  

Brick  shop  and  domestic-science  buildings  

15,  000.  00 

Albuquerque    Pueblos 

Frame  sanatorium        

12,  990.  00 

(Laguna). 
Albuquerque    San  Felipe 

337  27 

day  school. 
Alququorque    P  a  g  u  a  t  e 

Water  system 

3  775  00 

day  school. 
Jicarilla 

Fram^  cottage  (field  matron)  

450.  00 

Pueblo  Bonito 

8  900  00 

Do 

29  740  00 

Do 

Shop  building  and  barn      

750.  00 

Santa  Fe 

Addition  to  brick  dormitory 

16  228  00 

Do 

1  600  00 

Do 

Fram^  dairy  barn                       

3,  848.  32 

San  Juan  

Steel  highway  bridge  over  San  Juan  River,  Navajo  Reserva- 

16,500.00 

Zuni 

tion. 
Water  system                                 

2.  176.  02 

Do... 

2  frame  cottages  

3,275.00 

Government  appropriation,  825,000. 


190  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  37. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915 — Contd. 


States  and  superintendeneies. 


Improvement. 


North  Dakota: 

Fort  Berthold i  Frame  employees'  quarters 

Do Telephone  towers 

Do Tank  and  tower 

Fort  Berthold  (Shell     Frame  cottage,  barn,  and  outhouse 

Creek). 

Standing  Rock Frame  hospital 

Oklahoma: 

Cantonment Electric  lighting 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho . . . !  Brick  lavatory  building 

Five  Civilized  Tribes- 
Armstrong  Academy. .  j  Drilling  well 

Collins  Institute Frame  schoolhouse 

Euchee   boarding     Wiring  school  buildings 

school. 

Eufaula  boarding     Frame  domestic-science  cottage 

school. 

Jones  Academy Frame  dairy  barn 

Kiowa  (Fort  Sill) Brick  hospital 

Osage Frame  cottage 

Do j  Stone  oil  house , 

Ponca !  Frame  office  building 

Seger Heating  plant 

Shawnee Steel  water  tank ! 

Oregon:  Klamath Frame  cottage  for  forest  supervisor 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle i  Wiring  buildings 

South  Dakota: 

Canton  Insane  Asylum Electric  lighting 

Do i  Brick  hospital 

Cheyenne  River i do 

Crow  Creek '  1  frame  cottage 

Crow  Creek  Reservation... I  Steel  bridre  across  Elm  Creek 

Flandreau 1  Frame  dairy,  meat,  and  ice  buildings 

Lower  Brule !  Frame  dormitory 

Do I  Frame  dairy  barn 

Do Drilling  wells 

Pierre Brick  employees'  quarters 

Pine  Ridge Frame  quarters 

Rosebud Brick  schoolhcuse 

Do Brick  hospital 

Do 2  cottages  for  hospital  employees 

Do Frame  cottage,  barn,  and  outhouses  for  farmer  at  Hamil,  S 

Dak. 

Do I  Frame  barn,  Butte  Creek,  S.  Dak , 

Sisseton Frame  cottage 

Springfield Wagon  shed  and  poultry  house , 

Washington: 

Colville Stallion  barn 

Do Implement  shed,  garage,  and  water,  sewer,  and  lighting 

Do Concrete  oil  house 

Colville  (Inchelium  sub-     Concrete  guardhouse 

agency). 

Cushman Concrete  walks  and  driveways 

Neah  Bay,  Quileute  day  i  Frame  schoolhouse 

school. 

Spokane  ( Wellpinit) 5  frame  cottages,  guardhouse,  office  building,  and  warehouse 

and  water  and  sewer  systems. 
Wisconsin: 

Hay  ward Tank  and  tower 

Keshena Brick  dormitory,  schoolhouse,  and  lavatory  building 

Do Steel  highway  bridge  across  Wolf  River 

Tomah Remodeling  laundry  and  construction  of  pump  house 

Do Central  steam  heating  plant 

Wyoming: 

Shoshone Dairy  barn 

Do Oil  house 

Do Flour  and  saw  mill 

Do 2  steel  bridges 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


191 


TABLE  38. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  or  contract  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1915. 


States  and  superintendences. 


Improvement. 


Cost. 


Total $746,104.58 

Arizona: 

Fort  Apache j  Frame  dormitory 1  9,306. 15 

Uo I  Frame  cottage M  704.20 

Fort  Mojave !  Steel  highway  bridge  across  Colorado  River  near  Topock,  1 274',  450.  oa 

Ariz. 

Moqui 4  cottages 1  4, 573. 55 

Navajo— 

Nayajo  School ^.    Stone  dormitory 19, 344. 88 

Chin  Lee  School Stone  schoolhouse 14, 891. 36 

Luki  Chuki  day  school-    Stone  schoolhouse  and  quarters 14, 517. 28 

Tohatchi  School Frame  hospital 5, 431 . 18 

Phoenix  School  and  East     Sewersystem 22,347.00 

Farm  Sanatorium. 

Pima Frame  sanatorium 1 1 14, 466. 66| 

Pima,  Gila  Bend,  Cockle-    3  adobe  day-school  buildings 16, 800. 00 

burr,  and  Chiu  Chuischui 
day  schools. 

Rice  Station Stone  domestic-science  building j      1, 573. 48 

Salt  River Frame  oilice  building 1, 500. 00 

San  Xavier Frame  sanatorium 1 14, 466. 66J 

San    Xavier,    Comababi,     4  adobe  day-school  buildings 29, 313. 44 

Indian  Oasis,  San  Pe- 
dro, and  Santa  Rosa 
day  schools. 

Western  Navajo Additions  to  stone  dormitory 25, 300. 00 

California,  Hoopa  Valley '  Cement  bakery  building 1, 850. 00 

Idaho: 

Fort  Hall Addition  to  stone  schoolhouse 5, 8-50. 00 

Do Frame  horse  barn |      2,  £00. 00 

Fort  Lapwai Frame  barn , 2, 381. 00 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium . .    B  rick  boiler  house  and  laundry 7, 055. 00 

Do Electric  wiring  buildings 2, 123. 00 

Kansas: 

Haskell  Institute Brick  gymnasium |    20, 075. 94 

Kickapoo Frame  dairy  barn 1 1, 917. 63 

Michigan,  Mount  Pleasant Brick  gymnasium 1 19, 000.  Oft 

Minnesota: 

Fond  du  Lac Frame  hospital 24, 537. 76 

Leech  Lake Addition  to  frame  dormitory 1  2, 995. 24 

Do Remodeling  frame  building  for  hospital l  800. 00 

Nett  Lake Frame  schoolhouse 3, 500. 00 

Pipestone 2  frame  cottages 2, 320. 00 

Do Stone  lavatory  annex 3, 500. 00 

Red  Lake Frame  hospital 20,105.00 

Montana: 

Blackfeet Frame  sanatorium 1 14, 466. 66f 

Crow Frame  hospital 1  2, 761. 81 

Fort  Belknap 2  lavatorv  annexes 6, 494. 00 

Tongue  River Flour  mill 17,640.70 

Nebraska: 

Genoa I  Brick  laundry  building 13, 006. 08 

Do Brick  industrial  building 1  2, 607. 71 

Omaha Remodeling  employees'  building 1,030. 80 

Winnabago Electric  lighting 848.00 

Do Remodeling  building  for  hospital 8, 692. 85 

Do Frame  cottage 1,559.40 

Nevada: 

Carson Frame  sanatorium 1 14, 666. 66f 

Fallon Frame  o:nce  building 450.00 

Do :  Water  system 1,000.00 

New  Mexico: 

Albuquerque j  Brick  assembly  hall  and  gymnasium 1  24, 134.30 

Albuquerque  Pueblos — 

Isleta  day  school |  Adobe  schoolhouse  and  quarters 10, 055. 00 

Lacuna  Sanatorium. . . !  Frame  dairy  and  horse  barns 3, 500. 00 

Mescalero !  Frame  sanatorium 14, 466. 66f 

Pueblo  Bonito I  2  brick  dormitories 19, 600. 00 

Do |  Drilling  well 1,400.00 

Santa  Fe j  Brick  and  frame  dairy  barn 3,848.32 

San  Juan I  Frame  hospital l  6, 000. 00 

San    Juan,    Aneth    day  j  Stone  dormitory  and  repair  of  building 7,000.00 

school. 

San  Juan,  Toadlena  day  j  2  stone  dormitories 18, 000. 00 

school. 

1  Cost  to  June  30, 1915.  2  Government  appropriation,  $25,000. 


192 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  38. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  or  contract  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

SO,  1915— Continued. 


States  and  superintend  encies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee 

Frame  hospital             

$3  030  25 

Do  

Frame  dining  hall,  kitchen  and  bakery,  and  sleeping  porches. 

2,  063.  08 

North  Dakota: 
Standing  Rock 

Cement  sidewalks      

1  990  70 

Turtle  Mountain    

Frame  sanatorium  

1  14.  466.  66g 

Wahpeton 

Extension  of  power  plant,  water  system   and  addition  to 

i  9  750  30 

Oklahoma: 
C  antonmont 

power  house. 
Frame  schoolhouse 

3  735  00 

Do  

2  frame  lavatory  buildings  

1.917.07 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Frame  dairy  barn         .  .              .  . 

1  2  068  81 

Do  

Water  system  

2.333.97 

Do  . 

Central  heating  plant 

1  7  916  36 

Chilocco  

Addition  to  stone  schoolhouse  

11,085.00 

Choctaw  Sanatorium 

Frame  hospital  and  power  house    and  water   sewer   and 

48  954  00 

Five  Civilized  Tribes— 
Nuyaka    boarding 

lighting  systems. 
Converting  schoolhouse  into  dining  room  and  quarters 

2  022  96 

school. 
Do 

Frame  laundry  and  lavatory  building         .  .      .  . 

3  500  00 

Kiowa— 
Fort  Sill  School      .     . 

Annex  to  boys'  dormitory            

3.100.00 

Rainy     Mountain 

Frame  school  building  

10,307.00 

School. 
Do        ... 

Frame  laundry  buildin°r 

2  698.00 

Do  

Annex  to  boys'  dormitory  

4,  065.  00 

Do 

Acetylene  gas  lighting 

1  156.62 

Riverside  School  

Water  system  

3,542.60 

Osage  

Frame  domestic-science  cottage 

1,855.90 

Oregon:  Umatilla  School  

Water  svstem  

2.  832.  75 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

3  frame  cottages                                    

4  432.18 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Insane  Asylum.  . 

Frame  cottage  

3,997.60 

Crow  Cresk 

2  frame  cottages 

3  139  94 

Pierre  

Brick  mess  hall          

16,842.00 

Pine  Rid^e 

Frame  lavatory  buildin^ 

2  700  00 

Yankton  

Water  and  sewer  systems          

1,  866.  32 

Utah:  Uintah 

Water  system 

1  6  272  11 

Washington: 
Spokane  Agency 

Remodeling  building  for  hospital    .        ... 

5,  367.  00 

Tulalip  

Frame  quarters  

2,650.00 

Wisconsin'  Oneida 

Septic  tank 

1,  720.  00 

i  Cost  to  June  30, 1915. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


193 


lS 

02  "*"" 


CC  rP  Tt* 


H      1   2 


(J  <S  o 


!>•  lO  CO 


-  co  o 


OOOO 
COI-O 


«§§"* 


•    -o    •    -ooo    •    •    -oooo 


;§§§  nrm  i 


II  i 


«ilgl 


^?3  :8 

CO  .-H       -  10 


t^. 


:s  s 

10       cq- 


*'B 


<o     fl-d 


8S8t2^ 

S-^OCCIM 


8^88^88 

O'fsioi^-iMoeo 


r^r  N^T« 


^o  £5 


" 


5* 

as  s  5& 

Ba 


1-8 


IO  ^  CO  <N  p 


8340—15 13 


a° 


fe'g.20^; 

I1II1 


s,  es 

^3  -rj  O 

as  J3  ®  _f 

fe  T«  P0 


"Si 

6C^     *S?O' 

SfS  JSSs 


)fe      M 


194 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


28 


co- 


••*«  >o  1-1 

- 


OO  O  > 


§ 


r-ICOt 


S    S    12 


i-H  ^H  CO  ,-1  (N  CO 


II  ° 


eo  ^H  S  cc  <5  ic  c 
•gVco~TjT     f£ 


iO  O  'O  O  CO 
CC*  OO  l^»  "^  CO 
CS-IOJ  CO  CO 


11 


§00  O  C3  »O  i^>  O  O 

Ci  CO  rf  (M  CO  l^  O 

CO  00  CO  CO  CO  CO  -^r1 

cTcj'cr^rao'ccri-r  co" 

co  co  co  co  t^- r^  •*  o> 


1  : 


s'l  1 

III 

111 


M 
kin 

ta 


i 


Kic 
Pot 


Fl 
Id 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


195 


:§S|g 


ililll 


2S8    8    3    Oi°< 

rHCM  CO          •*         C4 

^Cioo     o     oT 


S    %$%    §    S 


2    S 


OO       CO  «5 


sss^^  s 

co  W  i^  oo  »       »-i 


^co     S 


i  ;§  ii    - 


-  sf 


55 


COO         CO 


2    2 

t^        CO 


2    g 

CM      o 

CO       g 


S 

cict^ 

0       00 


cc  oo  oo          oo 


S    8 


§28888 

1000.-H 


p 


113 


rH  CN  CD~  CO 


i  g 


rHCS        0> 


1*23 


in  ill  i 


>O  O  O  O 

jpooocooc 

^^      1  T 


d        CM 


Q  -r  1-1  Os  O5O  C 
O  C"Q  i-H  I--  1C  O  1  - 
iC  IM  Tf  05  (N  i«  0 


V-      c< 


1 

CO          JH 


CC  1C  CMl>. 
COrHlC 


O  OO  iO  1C  Ov  O 

5S5S5KS8 


c 

•^*  i-H  i-l  i-l  t^  i-l 


ISS8 


i-T     t>f     iff 


SS  1 


CO  " 

CC  C 


>^os»oc5C.eo      co 
<  06  c<J  co  rH  ce  ic      co 


1C  O  OO  O 

felgg 


SgggSS 

^ 


IJ  1  * 

0-^5  «a 

E^^*^ 

•2-s-^s 

t$£ 


m 

fi^      So     ej     -S  ® 


IB 


1111 

Ilsl 


:-9 

•o   '"o -2 
"3  d  c  g 

5  Scr  3 


^a3c: 

^       43       tf^S<^ 

•3      o      E  oC3 

tZ      *^      CO  £"•       cj 

5   o    tbSb 


5^^  §  sasss^  i  sd^  |  &&*&&*  ;  a 

5  •§  S  5 

a  !?  r?  * 


196 


BEPOBT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


s^ 

II 


T? 

9*3 

03 


§  | 


"  "* 


ocvTcic-f  cxT 

^J*  CO         rH  O 


- 


&ssil§l 


Oi»C        O»COC^OcCt>-iO 

I-H  •*     10  oo  i^  t^  10  »-i  <M  to 

O  O^COOS  CC  ICIM  CC  CO  O 


COOO^OC^OCOlO 
(MGC»OOOCOCOi—  (OO 
(N  C^  10  05  (N  06  CO  rH 

C^  Tj?        rH  OO  00  CO  (>? 


3g§8£    S 

«3  OCO  O  M         CO 
OCNTHCOTJM         05 


C^C^»O^OOCOCOCO 
r}<  CO  CO  CO  05  •*  00  05 

sr'ssia's 


BEPOKT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


197 


:S  :    83§§§ 

•  oo    •      co  coo  oo  r- 

:*-"  :    2%~    ~ 


S     :  : 


•  Si    !     ooco     '~"CrH^e5 


us 


SS 


O      •  CM  O  Tj< 


^5W~ 


§jf^Mt2SS 


:- 


i^s  s 


N  ^  0  S 

s 


d  O  t^>  »C  O  T—  ( 
(N  t~  IM  t-  0  00 


r-l  O  i-H  CO<M  < 

oo  co^oTc^Tc 

rH  ^r  rH  i-*  ( 


•s 

;°  Q* 

JJU 

||5  IflSllfl  ,s 

3  S  "3    -S  T?  § 

OQpCO 


£1 

if 

111 

Itl 
III 


Poni 
Und 
Incl 
Incl 


d 
d 


Value  repor 
No  record. 
Overestima 
Estimated. 


198  REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  40. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  SO,  1915. 


States  and  supeiin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tiation. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Grand  total... 
Arizona 

$33,357,928 

$3,795,267 

$1.001.232 

$14,289 

$12,398.310 

$1.677,871 

$1,766.933 

$12.704,026 

2,416,870 

295.  283 

158.  920 

877 

42.362|      135,320 

35.  282 

1.748.826 

Camp  Verde 

4  330 

275 
318 
10.480 
6,734 
346 
50 
7.065 
26.  420 
26.514 
50,  473 
2.900 
4.600 

4.055 
85.  309 
131.495 
99,  717 
3,451 
2.810 
57.  161 
^83.700 
320,313 
452.2CO 
128.  860 
82,  975 
24.217 

25,  me 

9.841 
121,085 
115,971 

702,  121 

Colorado  River  
Fort  Apache 

136.  400 
200.  681 
110,  434 
7.241 
6,045 
91.041 
133.  630 
402,065 
502,  733 
158.  785 
87.  575 

730 
27,  298 
1,960 
500 
3,185 
17.387 
19,400 
42,325 

527 

36,657 

12.  583 
12,  881 
2,023 

270 
18,  527 

Fort  Mojave 

Havasupai 

35 

2,909 

Kaibub 

Leupp  . 

4,605 

4.823 
4.110 

Moqui. 

Navajo 

9,709 

3,204 

Phoenix 

Pima 

6,208 

350 

1,065 

19,402 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River 

41,380 
216.  (33 
16.  891 
138,  180 
162,  826 

894,993 

5,915 
156,  2G5 
5,750 
3,850 
4,570 

56.303 

2.200 
8,210 

9.048 

San  Carlos  2 

13.  337 
1,300 

13,275 

San  Xavior 

Truxton  Canon  .  .  . 
Y.'estern  Navajo... 

California  

6,245 
6,090 

33,649 

27,000 
36,  195 

82,392 

150 

12,  675 

7,703 

Bishop.  . 

33.  154 
9,974 
4.824 
104.  470 

767 
3,070 
4,824 

169 
90 

600 

31.618 
6,724 

Campo 

90 

Digger..     . 

Fort  Bidwell 

500 

150 

103,  820 
80.339 
44,  419 
40,415 
1,220 
16,  655 
69,  201 
277,  210 

Fort  Ynma 

81,139 
48.314 
60,190 
21,425 
29,  510 
76,  191 
362,331 
46,190 
13,  281 

89,013 

800 

Greenville 

3,895 

Hoopa  Valley  

4,900 
15,260 
6,  555 
2,835 

1,850 
45 
1,090 
630 
24,215 

9,075 

3,950 

8,900 
3,100 

Pala 

2,110 

Round  Valley  
Sherman  Institute 
Soboba 

3,525 

60,906 

15.  528 
1,764 

38,  923 

1,165 

10,211 

19,  286 
11,214 

43,070 

Tule  River. 

75 

2,225 

228 

Colorado  

1,995 

2,900 

Southern  Ute  
Ute  Mountain  

Idaho  

63,863 
8  25,  250 

461,486 

16,  773 
8  22,  150 

80,133 

1,925 
70 

38,480 

2,225 

42,940 
130 

247,  504 

2,900 

17,342 

76.362 

1,605 

Coeurd'Alene... 
Fort  Hall  . 

64,426 
228.  809 
31,326 

136,  925 
99  253 

49.  470 
30,663 

1,705 
12,610 
1,440 

22,  725 
83,140 

24,488 

1.5C5 
14,  352 

570 

11,116 
153.842 
28,  851 

53,755 

6,698 
362,  745 

17,342 

Fort  Lapwai  
Fort  Lapwai  San- 
itorium    .. 

1,035 

60,445 
415 
131,418 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Kansas 

527,  876 

9,225 



Haskell  Institute.. 
Kickapoo 

443,  189 
70,  314 
14,373 

205,  652 

24,3f>3 
125 

106,  935 

317.  891 
45,  706 
5,148 

193,  862 

24  483 

Potawatomi 

9,225 
310 

Michigan 

11,480 

Bay  Mills 

2  360 

2,  360 
2,075 
189,  427 

496,  648 

Mackinac 

2.  385 
200,  907 

681,901 

310 

Mount  Pleasant.  .  . 
Minnesota  .  .  . 

11,480 

138,114 

31,077 

9,146 

6,916 

Cass  Lake  (Leech 
Lake)... 

17.279 

17,279 
4,160 

Fond  du  Lac  

Grand  Portage  
Leech  Lake 

12.  505 
9,  022 
98.358 
30.  273 
150.  185 
117,  912 
58.535 
*  187.  832 

7.745 
8,872 
33,  303 
13.  572 
5.  925 
18,329 

500 

100 

150 

2,  225 
2,575 

4,736 

58.  094 
13,855 
144,  260 
87,  933 
58.  535 
112,532 

Nett  Lake 

271 

Pipestone  

Red  Lake 

845 

4,310 

6,  495 

Vermillion  Lake. 
White  Earth... 

50.368 

24.  932 

1  Overestimated  last  year. 


2 1914  report. 


s  Increase  due  to  increase  in  stock. 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  199 

TABLE  40. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  SO,  1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendences. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Montana 

$1,061,838 

$346,  316 

$35.  215 

$1,151 

$170,  604 

$104.  968 

$17.355 

$386,  229 

Bliclcfeet 

i  132  436 

31,411 

2  575 

5.920 

92.  530 

Crow 

305.  222 

124,385 

12,  990 

52.017 

25,  970 

970 

88.890 

Flathfad 

195.  76<i 

71.605 

925 

108.  951 

700 

12,  (i85 

2900 

Fort  Bolknap     ... 

144.  872 

21,  757 

2,  450 

8,136 

57.  492 

200 

54.837 

Fort  Pock 

157,  927 

52,  958 

15,  990 

1,151 

14,  736 

73.092 

Tongue  River 

125,  015 

44  200 

285 

1,500 

150 

3,500 

75,980 

Nebraska 

446,  040 

100,  305 

5.815 

16,  175 

323,  745 

316  745 

5  570 

311,175 

24,  000 

7,  825 

16,  175 

30  500 

30  050 

245 

205 

Y.rinnobago 

74,  795 

62,  430 

12,365 

Nevada  

298,838 

43,262 

4,866 

29 

3,414 

29,657 

217,610 

Carson 

100  67G 

1  936 

3  601 

21  053 

74,  086 

Fallon          

12,  125 

12,  125 

FortMcHermitt 

16  045 

3  817 

850 

70 

3  630 

7,678 

Moapa  River...... 

4,  6U8 

90 

173 

4,405 

Nevada 

75,  892 

8  450 

67,442 

"Walker  Itiver 

17  278 

2  075 

15,  203 

Western  Sh.oshone. 

71,425 

28  359 

325 

1,096 

4,974 

36,  671 

Reno  special  agent 

729 

700 

29 

New  Mexico 

1  358  890 

99  499 

51,164 

16,  933 

141,  181 

22,600 

1,027,513 

Albuc|uerqu6.  .... 

258,  805 

9  900 

8,725 

32,  550 

207,630 

Jicarilla 

135  431 

26  483 

5  507 

iss 

13  671 

9  150 

80,  432 

Mescalero     

136,  747 

14,  698 

2,364 

15,  055 

11,650 

92,  980 

Pueblo  Bonito  

136,  725 

18,  000 

825 

8,000 

109,900 

Pueblo  day  schools 

12o,  024 

1,700 

10,  804 

11,718 

95,  802 

San  Juan 

228  072 

28  718 

5,391 

31  037 

1,800 

161,  126 

Santa  Fe  

Zuui 

183,  803 
153  280 

2,750 
8,798 

""i6,"745 

29  ISO 

181,056 
98,587 

New  York  Agency 

710 

135 

575 

North        Carolina: 
Cherokee  

97,  357 

97,357 

North  Dakota 

977  685 

163  691 

61  177 

313 

114  556 

637,948 

Bismarck 

83  379 

83,379 

Fort  Barthold  
Fort  Totten 

80,  296 
200  488 

41,936 
7  978 

1,777 
6  410 

313 

27,993 
4,410 



8,277 
181,690 

Standing  Rock 

336  209 

81  578 

29  900 

48  108 

176,  623 

Turtle  Mountain  . 

60  687 

26  509 

3,755 

2,885 

27,  538 

Wahpeton 

216  626 

5  690 

19  335 

31  160 

160,  441 

Oklahoma 

2  801  268 

187  767 

59  913 

100 

240,904 

2,312,584 

Cantonment 

87  100 

1  325 

400 

100 

62,  791 

22,484 

Cheyenne        and 

366  877 

23  335 

3  037 

90  605 

249.  900 

Chilocco 

660  869 

4  500 

656,369 

Five       Civilized 
Tribes 

15  035 

15  035 

485  894 

32  190 

46  376 

46,  669 

360,  659 

186  234 

35  875 

1  275 

8  675 

140,  409 

Otoe 

66  508 

6  800 

'400 

59,308 

133  775 

29  982 

300 

103,493 

Ponca 

95  856 

17  435 

300 

5,523 

72,  598 

Red  Moon 

69  852 

2  050 

64 

67,  728 

55  120 

14  300 

40  820 

Se^er 

100  074 

2*950 

2,876 

12,996 

81,252 

i  22  000 

22,000 

104  375 

6  48C 

97  895 

Total  »... 

2,449.569 

187,767 

59,528 

100 

227,259 

1.974,915 

1  Overestimated  last  year. 

2  Buildings  included  under  administration, 
a  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 


200  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  40. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations ,  June  30, 1915 — Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Oklahoma—  Contd. 
Five        Civilized 
Tribes  

$351,699 

$38£ 

$13,  64^ 

$337,  669 

Cherokee      Na- 
tion—Chero- 
kee     orphan 
school  . 

33,  197 

33  197 

Chickasaw   Na- 
tion— 
Bloomfleld 
Seminary  

11,  777 

11,777 

Collins   Insti- 
tute   

20,  705 

150 

20,  555 

Choctaw      Na- 
tion — 
Armstrong 
Male  Acad- 
emy   

55,456 

55,  456 

Jones       Male 
Academy.  .  . 

30,823 

30,  823 

Wheelock 
Academy.  .  . 

30,321 

30,  321 

Creek  Nation— 
Euchee  board  - 
ins;  school  .  .  . 

49,  577 

10,  110 

39,467 

Eufaula  board- 
ing school  .  .  . 

34,590 

125 

3,535 

30,  930 

Nuyaka  board- 
ing school  .  .  . 

30,485 

110 

30,375 

Seminole      Na- 
tion— Mekusu- 
key  Academy. 

54,768 

54,768 

Oregon... 

700,  238 

$14,  865 

29  435 

$30 

$14  327 

114  547 

$22  220 

504,  814 

Klamath  1  .  .  . 

139,  238 

4,470 

2  825 

14  327 

19  677 

19  235 

78,  704 

Roseburg  

1,980 

1,900 

30 

'   50 

Salem  

347,  135 

22,  807 

91,820 

232,  508 

Siletz  

2  17.  139 

2  5,  945 

1,653 

9,541 

Umatilla  

120,  775 

635 

120,  140 

Warm  Springs.  .  . 

73,971 

2,550 

2,150 

3,050 

2,300 

63,921 

Pennsylvania:  Car- 
lisle   

South  Dakota 

545,  190 
3  217,021 

885  421 

25,920 

264  576 

1  355 

27  700 

101,400 

291  502 

380  485 

417,  870 
1  365,982 

Canton  Asylum... 

138,  521 

138,521 

Cheyenne  River... 

381,641 

190,  767 

40,  435 

1  200 

43  110 

106,  129 

Crow  Creek  

112.528 

37,  048 

2,375 

225 

8,530 

64,  350 

Flandreau  

247,  9G5 

6,825 

4,300 

55  623 

181,217 

Lower  Brule  

122,352 

57,  942 

6,275 

8,850 

49,  285 

Pierre  

222,  659 

7,175 

26  500 

46,321 

142,  C(i3 

Pine  Ridge  

3  859,  408 

183,  586 

20  290 

730 

20  503 

3  380  485 

253,812 

Rapid  City  

256,  085 

4,415 

4,980 

61,  045 

185,  C45 

Rosebud  

665,  734 

342,  249 

39,  025 

400 

47,  520 

236,  540 

Sisseton  

82.  549 

20,  525 

62,024 

Springfield 

31  426 

31  426 

Yankton  

96,  155 

42,  084 

1,200 

52,891 

Utah.. 

391  300 

291  360 

3  255 

31  818 

7  036 

4  500 

53  331 

........ 

Shivwits  

8,221 

2fiO 

150 

7,811 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

377,  234 

*  291,  100 

3,105 

31,818 

7,036 

4,500 

39,  075 

Salt  Lake,  special 
agent  

5,845 

5,845 

Washington  

1,652  142 

787  970 

47  540 

1  300 

19  038 

37  096 

49  343 

709,  855 

Colville  

6  844,  716 

'•>  722  097 

26  135 

1  300 

31  306 

36  604 

27  274 

Cushman  

424,  977 

11  000 

413,977 

Neah  Bay  

9,080 

7  405 

1  675 

Spokane.  .. 

26,  226 

5,136 

5  400 

15,690 

Taholah  

19,  038 

900 

18,  138 

Tulalip  

210.517 

29,  482 

6,780 

174,  255 

Yakima... 

117,588 

23.  8501 

2.725 

19.  038 

5.790 

7.  339 

58.  846 

1 1914  report. 

2  As  reported. 

3  Includes  timber  reserve. 


<  Includes  supplies  in  storehouse. 

5  Includes  value  land  and  old  Spokane  Sanatorium. 


EEPOET   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  201 

TABLE  40. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1915 — Continued. 


States  and  stiperin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farm- 
ing. 

Forestry. 

School. 

$1,871,914 

$44,  180 

$21,937 

$36,  226 

$1,200,124 

$569,447 

Carter 

1,750 
121,816 
1,379,026 
81,291 
7,  692 
64  589 

1,325 
1,901 
33,  272 

• 

425 
4,990 
8,745 
1,320 



19,280 
15,  646 

27 
11,198,997 

95,618 
122,366 
79,  971 
100 
63,  129 
562 
148,  191 
59,510 

178,  207 

Kes^ona 

Lac  du  Flambeau  . 
La  Pointe 

7,092 

340 

40 

Red  CliJ 

3,362 
152,878 
59,510 

389,045 

590 

4,687 

960 

1,060 

Tomah  

Wittenberg 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 
State  totals... 

165,058 

6,615 

$15,695 

4,670 

18,800 

21,277,620 

3,748,120   1,001,232 

$5,  305 

374,  133 
12,024,177 

1,677,871 

1,766,933 

12,704,026 

12,080,308|        47,147 

8,984 

Warehouses.  . 

2  2,  884 
2650 
28,984 

12,024,177 
43,  613 

2  2,  884 
2650 

Liquor  suppression 
Allotting  ser,  'ice.  . 
Irrigation  service 
(cost)  
Indian  oifice 

i  g  984 

""is'eis 



12,024,177 

i  Includes  saw  mill  plant,  etc. 


2 1914  report. 


202 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

S 


ill 


p 


0 

II I 


:2§£S 

>  oo  i-  3|.«4 


i-H  T-<  O  t^- 

O  TH  (N  ^ 


t-T-r'eo  e^ejT 

CglM  C^l  (M  i-l 


r-4  O  O5 


IIS! 


HKR 


r^-  -^  co  I-H 
t»  oo  <M  »H 


'  CO  O  ^*  O5 

1 1^  CT>  o  c<« 

I  CO  CO  COCO 


I  CO^I  OC 


i  :  i  i  ;§; 


S5S 


cciOicct--      o      o 

CO  1C  O5  O        CO        O 


10  •*  ooeo 


t^ofcT         cT< 


IS  :§ 


>  c3i  r*  < 


O  t»  rt< 


:  CO  COO  -O-  CO 


:ii;i 


111  I 

H'        ft 


CM  —  *—  Oi  — 


N  O>  C<1  CM  1C  ' 


»c  •Q'  COM  T^ 


>?o 


>j. 

G'~ 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


203 


coo 


OO  O  O> 
CO  1C  O 


1C   CO 


55  oo  o  ic  eq 


!  I—  O        O? 

rrn-oo"   j-r 


e§   00 


1C  CO    O    t^ 

c^  oo  co  c< 


oo"(M"co"-*"crr-r 

t—  CC  <N  O  O  t- 

co"co"oo"-^     co" 


CC  OO  1C 
,-!OC<N 


GO  CO  1C  1C  O3  O 

co  cs  oo  t--  oco 
ic  oo  r-  1^  ic  rH 


* 


oo  ic 

3  £8 


CO  O  1C  IO  CO  O         ^f 
C<l  i-H  OO  iO  O5  CO        Cft 

o-^io      COTP      eo 


88 

iC  Oi 


S    S5 


.CO        g 


ss 
sV 


oo" 


*  5 


fe    S 


1C  r-(  t~  OC  CO  ^H         1C 

t^.  er  N  O  I-H  -f        I-H 


II 

II 


s-  g 


oS 


rjTic't^r 

OOrHCO 


r-Tlc"       <N~ 


rH  CM  t~-          rH          1C 

rfco'ic'  eo" 


r^-oo 

O3  CO 


ilSl 


III 


O         CN) 
t-        <N 


13SS83 


.  -  r 

OrHOg         CO 


rH         rH~  CO" 


jj  :_§ 


i  11 
'•  «"§ 

all 
«  ^« 


Ute 
tain 


o  5^ 

•«  n  ®  oj 

g  «*  s  i 

6  S    2 


Coeur  d'Alene 
Fort  Hall 
Fort  Lapwai 

a:  Sac  and  Fox 


mi 


^2  ' 

31  1  S 

«^  1  ^^ 

i 


8      l 


lit!!! 


Om 
San 
Wi 


204 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 


- 


woo 


eoao 


111 


s 


i  O  CM  CO  O  CO  1C 

^          rHCOHCC 


[liiisi 

r»    -?^««f 


;§^; 

I  IO  -f  < 

>cfco< 


ill 


§  i 


3| 


22 


COiO  (N 
J^Tf  CM 


coo  o  f  o  co          ir 

CN  00  IO  >O  O  OO  CO 


o  O 
OJt-iOCN 


CO  OO  IO  IO  IO 


IO  i-l  CN  COTH 


t^  O  »O  CO  » 
•^i  00  CM  cS 


CM  C5  t^  COO5 

>O  00  TP   •«<   Tf< 
lOlO-~t 


<N 


§o  o  o 
o  oo 
o  o  o 


co 


sss 


§:§ 


CO        »O 


cooooooeo          i-i  oo      r-i 


CO  CM  i-H 


O^oc'co"      CN 


»O  O  IQ  1O        >O 


rl  ^-1  IO  - 


£^<M  GC  CO  T 

s!_xO  t^  IN-  CO  T 

00*0^ 


-ti  T—  (  »—  (  ^O  O 
<N  00  'O  i<7  O3 
<C  t^t-  CO  i-l 


t^co^cNcoS 
IO  GC  O  CO>O  O 

co'o  C3i  CN^t--'^ 

r^  co  ^  oc  >o  co 

t^  CO  03  >0  CO  TP 
CO  COodr-Ti-r 


CO  "^  CO  TT 


co  oo  oo 
oc  co  o 


t-H  CO  1C  t^-  »-H  i—  ( 


EH 


"d  (H         >» 

t 


i= 


!     , 

1  *    lllll  £  *  Ills  1 

1  1  rS  *          1 


lll 


KEPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


205- 


gs^i 


i  c  O5  e^>  r-  co 

'  (N  »O  1C  O  t>- 


to  co  o  t-  cs  i 

t^-  i— (  f^  O  O  -* 


g  : 


r>-  TT  Is-  O  • 


i— I  iO  O  O  i— <  Is- 

COO^^-iOCO 
t^-  tO  ^H  i— (  T-H  O 

Cf        T-Ti-H(N*T-H 


o  oo  10  *-<  I-H  ' 
to  »o  x  «o  oo  > 


CO        i-l  i-l  C^  r-C 


Sgfe^g; 

I  iO  Oi  O  i-»  ( 


OOlOi-H  < 
iO  OC  «J  ( 

IO    ^    Tf   < 


§o 
OS 


II  1 


^s  % 

ds?  Kf 


S       2 


S    I 


g§ 


C?rH          g 


I  CO         O 
)  h-       i-H 


rng          § 


SS5 


-»i  <N       b- 

l  -J?  t--        00 
(M05        (O 


I  11  I 


IS    g 


II    I 


!N  -*  O 
C5  t^.  IO 


CO  W  Oi  CO  O4         CO 
lOOC  &=£  CO        CO 


)  iO  OS  OO 

)  rH  OOlO 


?r<?r 

^K 


ills 


l~^  O  O  O 

ooooo 


CM  N 


8       •     t2 

»o  oo 


'_'  -• 

CO  <N~ 


CN  CO  CM  OS        ^f 

SSsSS    §2 


;s?§s  £ 


iiii  i 


>»O  iC  CO        CD 
)  O  T-S  (N        W 


>8SS    8 

>000       05 


O  00  O>O 

r-H  «J  CM  ^H 


^§05         S§          S3 


CN  f  00-^         ?H 


1-4          Tf  OO5  "5 


l<NOOt^.CO         rf  CO  Tf  i 
»O  OO  i-H  OO        C*^  O  O  < 


IO  Ol         CO  OrH          rH         CO  O  O  IO         IO  U3  «5 


li 


>  o      to 

IS    S 


ss 


)CO  CO         S 


of  '•         •* 


>O  C-l  OS  CO  CO 
l^  i-t  <N  <M  t~ 


^  -a 
s  £ 


-IJ 


o-S 
e  a 


888SSSS  ^ 

ocooiococorH    "a ?! 


6=3 


13    § 


.0  (NrH 


ICO'POCrH  Qt:05^ 
lOOCCCOt-  I— IP-,rHI— 1 
TfCOCOlO  o<ot-» 


II 


IIJ  §  IP 

IlS   a>  ?l-s 


. 

IIII 


206 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


ual. 


§.3b 

II 

«'5EH 


* 
*  1 


fc£jj 
t-a® 


-32-e, 

Ifl 


Si 


<N 


*o  i^  ^f  10  co 
*          0500 


10  »HC^  ose^i 


O  O  ^H  10  ic 

>o  oc  >o  t~  t-- 

COlO'™*COCs4? 


gsa 

of 


•  o    •  OO-H    •  o 

*    *^ 


ii 


s* 


1  f 


1  "§ 


mre  o 
aries. 


$3, 


333233    33 


BS 


of 


i-HCOOOOCCOCOi-I 


ii 

° 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


207 


33333    3333333    3333    33333    3333    333333 


>  O  O  O  O  tOCOO       OOOOiCO       O*OOO       O  »O  O  O 

So  oo  c^          »o  GO  c-j  c^i      o  cc  i-~  o  o      oc^fi-n      -^ccc^co 
co  "^  t-->          t^-oc^i^      10 1»  ^«  o;  oo      ooc^Oi      t^<N-^io 

of     co*  «cTo"W         tfTaTt^ccroQ*     t^SST*^1^     i-r^t^Go*     t^ 

»ss^oo       ^^N0o«       t^cog^    sg-^»    ^gS00^    "'^^S!    §S 

c^co     ocpooo     oo^ooooo     oo      o     o o    •    » o        «»«o     o^oo     oo  ® 

>  i— i  CO  t^-AO^HT-H         rHi^i-HCOOiC^  u5* 

0§*      5 

ll 

COOOO        COiOCOOO       »OOOO        OOLOiOO       OiOOO       OOOOOO  .S  • 

l-l  i-l  rH  rH  C<  .    .  _, 

IB 

•}: 

>OO        OCOOO01O       Tt<iOiCCOOiTPt>»       ^ft*-HOOC^        OOC»-Ht^O^        lOOOGCO       Oi' 

scoic      COCMCOIMCS      c^ooor-ccio          cooot^          Cvicccocs«o          oo      co      »-ii 

r1  1-1  i-«N         THN  i-l  CO  r-l  I  _  ^ 

JJ8 

»  ® 

I'- 
ll 

U.O 

il 

I! 

si 

fi 

l! 

s ' 

ill  I  i 

_-     -     .     .     •  *7^ 

^tri      1  i  •  :  ;3 
i  :  2    w-2  _         _  !  ! 
:  : £    •aS-oH       ?  i  ;S£-c  j  is    -5" 

ill  III!  iliiff 

.„..„-,„:?!.  i.is^ 

Illliiihi 

i*    I    "I I 

6       S      i 


208  REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  43. — Miscellaneous  field  employees  June  30, 1915. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force. 
Total 

110 

$177,800 

19 

$43,050 

91 

$134,  750 

Inspection 

24 
2 
30 
11 

1 
2 

6 
20 
9 
1 
1 

267 

8,500 
31,590 
5,500 
47,400 
23,500 

3,000 
2,500 

12,  750 
22,260 
17,300 
2,000 
1,500 

304,295 

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 
1 

8 
1 
1 

20 

3,500 
2,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 

3,000 
2,000 

2,250 
1,800 
16,000 
2,000 
1,500 

40,500 

2 
23 
1 
29 
10 

5,000 
29,590 
2,500 
44,  400 
20,500 

Liquor  

Construction 

Health  . 

Schools  

Industries: 
Farming  

Employment 

1 

5 
19 
1 

500 

10,500 
20,460 
1,300 

Forestry: 
Field  supervising  officers 

Menominee 

Special  agents  

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  Indian 
Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians 

Field  irrigation  service. 
Total  

247 
1 

263,  795 

Chief  inspector  

2 
6 

•   6,500 
13,500 

1 
6 

4,000 
13,500 

2,500 

Superintendents  of  irrigation 

Total  

8 
24 
6 

20,000 
34,920 
6,160 

7 
1 
2 

17,500 
2,000 

2,400 

1 
23 

4 

2,500 
32,920 
3,760 

Arizona  and  New  Mexico:  Miscellaneous  work.  . 
Arizona  

Colorado  River 

1 
4 
1 

85 
1 
11 

13 

1,000 
3,960 
1,200 

77,690 
720 
10,690 

14,405 

1 
3 

1,000 
2,760 

Pima  

1 

1 

2 

1,200 
1,200 

4,000 

Salt  River 

California:  Miscellaneous  work 

183 
1 
10 

11 

73,690 
720 
9,090 

11,405 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute.  .. 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall.... 

1 
2 

1,600 
3,000 

Montana  

Billings  

1 

7 
5 

27 
1 

36 

1,200 
6,860 
6,345 

32,720 
900 

41,270 

1 

6 

4 

26 
1 

34 

1,200 
5,360 
4,845 

30,720 
900 

37,470 

Crow  

1 
1 

1 

1,500 
1,500 

2,000 

Fort  Belknap  

Oregon:  Klamath 

South  Dakota:  Pierre  

Utah  

2 

3,800 

Salt  Lake  City 

17 
19 

40 
15 

14 

21,520 
19,  750 

48,720 
16,  100 

15,535 

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 

1,800 
2,000 

2,100 
2,100 

2,500 

16 
18 

39 
14 

13 

19,  720 
17,  750 

46,  620 
14,000 

13,035 

Uintah  

Washington:  Yakima  

Wyoming:  Shoshone    . 

Field  allotment  service. 
Total  

Special  allotting  agent  

1 
2 

3 

2,500 
1,800 

2,700 

1 

2,500 

Appraising  ftonim.issinnflrs 

22 

3 

1,800 
2,700 

Arizona.  

Leupp  

1 
2 

1 

2 

5 

720 
1,980 

2,160 
1,350 

5,025 

1 

22 

21 

2 

5 

720 
1,980 

2,160 
1,350 

5,025 

Pima  

California:  Round  Valley 

North  Dakota:  Turtle  Mountain 

South  Dakota  

Cheyenne  River  

2 
3 

2,025 
3,000 

22 

23 

2,025 
3,000 

Pine  Ridge.... 

i  Includes  39  temporary  positions;  salaries  not  included. 


2  Temporary. 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  209 

TABLE  43. — Miscellaneous  field  employees  June  30, 1915 — Continued. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  allotment  service—  Continued. 
Inheritance  examiners. 

54 

20 

39 

$61,500 
25,000 

39,  160 

19 
20 

3 

$34.800 
25,000 

6,000 

35 

$26,700 

Probate  attorneys  

Warehouses. 
Total  

36 

33,160 

Chicago 

25 
8 
6 

24,670 
8,020 
6,470 

1 
1 
1 

2,000 
2,000 
2,000 

24 

7 
& 

22,670 
6,020 
4,470 

St.  Louis  

San  Francisco 

TABLE  44. — Recapitulation  of  all  Indian  Service  employees. 


Designation. 


Number. 

Salaries. 

5,939 

$4,403,541 

i  2,  772 
12,403 
110 
267 
14 
54 
20 
39 
260 

1,870,776 
1,552,525 
177,800 
304,295 
15,535 
61,500 
50,000 
39,  160 
2331,950 

Total. 


School 

Agency 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force 

Irrigation  service 

Allotment  service 

Inheritance  examiners 

Probate  attorneys 

Warehouses 

Indian  Office  employees,  exclusive  of  commissioner  and  assistant  commissioner. 


1  School  an-i  agency  includes  2,533  Indians  earning  $940,013,  as  reported  by  superintendents. 

2  1914  report  shows" $233,710,  which  should  have  been  $312,450. 

TABLE  45. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1915,  with  unexpended  balances. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1914. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1915. 

Disburse- 
ments 
for  1915. 

Balance  in 
U.  S.  Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Total  

$547,  336.  17 

$9,  863,  686.  15 

$8,206,968  66 

$2  204  053  66 

General  provisions: 
Court  costs,  etc.,  in  suits  involving  lands 
allotted  to  Indians 

2,000  00 

313  07 

1  686  93 

Determining  heirs  of  deceased  Indian  allot- 
tees.         

• 

100,000.00 

81  595  24 

18  404  76 

Expenses  of  Indian  commissioners  

10,000.00 

9,294.05 

705  95 

General  expenses,  Indian  Service  

135,  000.  00 

126,433.15 

8  566  85 

Indian  schools,  support 

1,500,000.00 

1  368  974  51 

131  025  49 

Indian  school  and  agency  buildings  

440,  000.  00 

301,  870.  96 

138,129  04 

Indian  school  transportation          

72,000.00 

66,200  50 

5  799  50 

Industrial  work  and  care  of  timber 

450,000  00 

407  284  91 

42  715  09 

Industry  amonc  Indians  (reimbursable)  

600,  000.  00 

436,  743.  91 

163'256  09 

Inspectors,  Indian  Service     

30,  000.  00 

3,548.33 

26  451  67 

Irrigation,  Indian  reservations  (reimburs- 
able)   

143,504.08 

345,  700.  00 

364,753.77 

124  450  31 

Judgments,  Indian  depredation  claims  
Pay  of  Indian  police 

95,568.44 

45,829.00 
200,000  00 

42,775.00 
191  920  06 

98,622.44 
8  079  94 

Pay  of  judges,  Indian  courts       

8,000.00 

7,  355.  96 

644  04 

Purchase  and  transportation  of  Indian  sup- 
plies 

300,000  00 

153  267  69 

146  732  31 

Relieving  distress  and  prevention,  etc.,  of 
diseases  among  Indians 

300,  000.  00 

170,336.87 

129  663  13 

Suppressing  liquor  traffic  among  Indians 

100,  000.  00 

97  661  91 

2  338  09 

Surveying  and  allotting  Indian  reservations 
(reimbursable) 

76,320.72 

150,  000.  00 

145,  914.  05 

80  406  67 

Telegraphing    and     telephoning,     Indian 
Service.  .  . 

10,000.00 

7.557.79 

2.442.21 

8340— 15 


210 


REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  45.—  Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  endea 
June  30,  1915,  with  unexpended  balances— Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1914. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1915. 

Disburse- 
ments 
for  1915. 

Balance  in 
U.  S.Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Fulfilling  treaties  with— 
Choctaws  Oklahoma 

$21,040.00 
11,036.07 

$10,520.00 
6,000.00 
100,000.00 
30,  000.  00 
6,000.00 
4,500.00 

5,000.00 
35,000.00 
7,000.00 
4,000.00 

11,000.00 
3,000.00 

23,"  740.  00 
30,000.00 
10,000.00 

7,000.00 

330,000.00 
42,000.00 
18,500.00 
10,  000.  00 

15,000.00 

13,000.00 
12,000.00 
20,000.00 
15,000.00 
30,  000.  00 
30,000.00 
4,  000.  00 
6,000.00 
3,000.00 
4,000.00 
3,000.00 

1,500.00 
2,000.00 
2,  000.  00 

""$5,"  724."  i9~ 
36,598.96 
29,462.22 
5,966.15 
3,926.82 

4,725.00 
30,843.26 
6,553.40 
3,958.33 

10,296.50 
2,863.90 

23,264.26 
21,450.57 
4,  030.  26 

6,762.40 

303,429.78 
39,083.56 
17,512.86 
6,  706.  38 

14,012.99 

9,  699.  99 
10,585.58 
18,092.96 
14,310.96 
29,  267.  23 
29,674.53 
3,  714.  22 
5,  997.  95 
2,940.00 
3,  999.  14 
2,947.38 

1,268.63 
1,892.31 
1,530.43 

73,243.69 

6,304.98 
483.73 
8,590.88 
7,217.02 
6,459.65 

729.00 
498.  14 
817.80 

8,  408.  00 

"  ii,ii7.'59" 

5,561.67 
4,854.82 

104.337.15 
155,623.30 

12,708.78 
1,000.00 
4,587.58 

67,772.78 
4,895.37 
10,049.69 
16,  435.  60 
1,570.36 
122,546.22 
17.373.02 

$31,560.00 
11,311.88 
63,401.04 
7,237.74 
2,548.53 
1,343.45 

275.00 
4,  156.  74 
446.60 
41.67 

703.50 
136.  10 

475.74 
8,549.43 
5,969.74 

237.60 

26,570.22 
2,916.44 
987.  14 
3,293.62 

987.  01 

3,300.01 
1,414.42 
1,907.04 
689.04 
732.  77 
325.47 
285.78 
2.05 
60.00 
.86 
52.62 

231.37 
107.  69 
469.  57 

11,756.31 

295.02 
16.27 
1,409.12 

782.  98 
540.  35 

271.00 
1.86 
182.  20 

1,  592.  00 
200.  00 
3,882.41 
438.33 
145.18 

2,662.85 
44,  376.  70 
1,291.22 

Navajoes  schools,  Arizona                     

Pawnees  Oklahoma 

6,699.96 
2,514.68 
770.27 

Senecas  of  New  York     

Six  Nations  of  New  York                  .        .  . 

Support  of  — 
Bannocks,  employees,  Idaho  

Cheyennes  and  Arapahoes,  Oklahoma 

Chippewas  of  Lake  Superior.  Wisconsin  
Chippewas  of  the  Mississippi,  Minnesota  

Chippewas,  Turtle  Mountain  Band,  North 
Dakota       

Coeur  d'Alenes,  Idaho       

Confederated  Bands  of  Utes— 
Employees  ,  etc  

Subsistence                     .  .     .  .        .     ... 

Seeds  and  implements,  Utah 

D'Wamish  and  other  allied  tribes  in  Wash- 
ington 

Support  of  Indians  in— 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico  

California 

Nevada        

Utah                                 

Support  of  Indians  of— 
Blackfeet  Agency,  Mont  

Colville  and  Puyallup  Agencies  and  Joseph's 
Band  of  Nez  Perces,  Wash  

Flathead  Agency,  Mont  

Fort  Belknap  Agency,  Mont 

Fort  Berthold  Agency,  N.  Dak  

Fort  Hall  Reservation,  Idaho           

Fort  Peck  Agency  Mont 

Grande  Ronde  and  Siletz  Agencies,  Oreg.  .  . 

Klamath  Agency  Oreg 

Umatilla  Agency,  Oreg  

Warm  Springs  Agency,  Oreg    

Yakima  Agency  Wash 

Support  of  — 
Kansas  Indians,  Oklahoma 

Kickapoos  Oklahoma 

Makahs,  Washington         

Northern  Cheyennes  and  Arapahoes,  Mon- 
tana                 

85,000.00 

6,600.00 
500.00 
10,000.00 
8,000.00 
7,000.00 

1,000.00 
500.00 
1,000.00 

10,  000.  00 
200.  00 
15,000.00 
6,000.00 
5,000.00 

107,000.00 
200,  000.  00 
14,000.00 
1,000.00 
5,000.00 

68,600.00 
5,000.00 
,      25,000.00 
18,  200.  00 
2,000.00 
132,  000.  00 
20.000.00 

Pawnees,  Oklahoma  — 
Employees  etc 

Iron,  steel,  etc               

Schools 

Poncas,  Oklahoma    

Pottawatomies,  Wisconsin     .          

Quapaws,  Oklahoma- 
Education            

Employees,  etc                    

Quinaielts  and  Quillehutes  Washington 

Rocky  Boy's  Band  of  Chippewas  and  other 

Sacs  and  Foxes  of  the  Missouri,  Kansas  .  . 

Shoshoni  in  Wyoming 

Employees,  etc               

Sioux  of  Devils  Lake  North  Dakota 

Sioux  of  different  tribes,  South  Dakota- 
Employees  etc 

Subsistence  and  civilization 

Sioux  Yankton  Tribe,  South  Dakota 

Spokanes  Washington 

Wichitas  and  Affiliated  Bands,  Oklahoma  . 
Indian  schools— 

412.42 

927.  22 
104.63 
14,950.31 
1,764.40 
429.  64 
9,453.78 
2.626.98 

Repairs  and  improvements  . 

Assembly  hall  and  gymnasium 

Bismarck  N  Dak 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Carlisle  Pa 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


211 


TABLE  45. — -Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1915,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

• 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1914. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1915. 

Disburse- 
ments 
for  1915. 

Balance  in 
U.  S.Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Indian  schools  —  Continued. 
Carson  City,  Nev                                   

1 

$41,700.00 
8,000.00 
30,000.00 
6,000.00 

35,000.00 
15,000.00 
86,  250.  00 
7,000.00 
275,000.00 
61,500.00 
6,000.00 
10,000.00 
20,500.00 
3,600.00 
35,  100.  00 
3,800.00 
68,500.00 
6,000.00 
5,000.00 

$40,  458.  85 
7,524.76 
26,636.04 
5,794.05 

19,922.34 
5,101.63 
83,317.48 
6,937.49 
270,256.68 
59,087.94 
5,541.31 
7,210.28 
19,762.82 
3,  494.  58 
33,143.95 
2,509.13 
66,376.92 
5,802.78 

$1,241.15 
475.  24 
3,363.96 
205.95 

15,077.66 
9,898.37 
2,932.52 
62.51 
4,743.32 
2,412.06 
458.69 
2,789.72 
737.  18 
105.  42 
1,956.05 
1,290.87 
2,  123.  08 
197.  22 
5,000.00 
1,178.39 
3,246.66 
1,394.29 
993.92 
6,000.00 
2,532.23 
4,464.07 
2,839.40 
167.  50 
836.  69 
103.  20 
6,410.66 
10,467.31 
2,915.64 
5,840.53 
20,000.00 
695.34 
6,660.19 
1,066.29 
31,109.54 
4,  494.  48 
5,811.16 
3,500.00 
908.68 
29,409.91 
2,182.55 
3,  189.  65 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Cherokee,  N.  C                       

Repairs  and  improvements 

Cherokee  Orphan  Training  School,  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma                 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Chilocco  Okla 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  Oklahoma 

Flandreau  S  Dak 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Special  repairs 

Fort  Bidwell  Cal 

Fort  Mojave  Ariz 

Fort  Totten  N  Dak 

Dairy  barn  

Genoa  Nebr 

60,000.00 
11,000.00 
4,000.00 
4,000.00 
6,000.00 
18,  400.  00 
6,000.00 
36,670.00 
5,000.00 
14,860.00 
2,500.00 
127,  750.  00 
25,000.00 
11,000.00 
60,  450.  00 
20,000.00 
5,000.00 
119,400.00 
7,  500.  00 
32,000.00 
43,750.00 
7,000.00 
3,  500  00 
6,000.00 
22,000.00 
39,  175.  00 
9,500.00 
6,500.00 
48,500.00 
5,000.00 
108,  125.  00 
10,000.00 
102,000.00 
10,000.00 
12,000.00 
61,150.00 
6,000.00 
4,000.00 
31,025.00 
6,000.00 
50,000.00 
50,000.00 
18,200.00 
3,000.00 
43,  450.  00 
10,000.00 
6,000.00 
35,200.00 
15,000.00 
3,000.00 

175,  000.  00 
10,  000.  00 

58,821.61 
7,753.34 
2,605.71 
3,006.08 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Industrial  building 

Laundry 

Dairy  barn 

Greenville,  Cal 

15,867.77 
2,135.93 
33,830.60 
4,832.50 
14,023.31 
2,396.80 
121,339.34 
14,532.69 
8,084.36 
54,609.47 

""4,"  364."  66" 
112,739.81 
6,433.71 
890.46 
39,255.52 
1,416.24 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Hay  ward,  Wis 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Kickapoo  Reservation,  Kans 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Lawrence,  Kans 

Gymnasium 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Mount  Pleasant  Mich 

Buildings 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Phoenix,  Ariz.                      .                  ... 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Sewer  system 

Pierre,  S  Dak 

Irrigation  system 

$227.  40 

Land 

Repairs  and  improvements 

5,091.32 
13,824.22 
36,992.45 
6,310.35 
6,500.00 
47,064.12 
3,490.96 
104,226.88 
8,392.23 
98,218.92 
25.00 
11,  829.  85 
59,918.29 
5,702.32 
3,940.50 
30,  131.  69 
2,907.26 
17,229.38 
48,799.42 
15,473.70 
2,  400.  83 
41,692.65 
1.25 
5,491.94 
33,594.34 
1,083.28 
2,738.79 

174,940.99 
2,411.52 

Buildings  

21,234.13 

Pipestone,  Minn. 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Special  repairs  .  . 

Rapid  City,  S   Dak 

1,435.88 
1,509.04 
3,898.12 
1,607.77 
3,781.08 
9,975.00 
170.  15 
1,231.71 
297.68 
59.50 
893.  31 
3,092.74 
32,770.62 
1,200.58 
2,726.30 
599.17 
1,757.35 
9,998.75 
508.06 
1,605.66 
13,916.72 
261.21 

59.01 
7,  588.  48- 

Repairs  and  improvements.  . 

Riverside,  Cal 

Repairs  and  improvements  

Salem,  Oreg 

Assembly  hall  

Repairs  and  improvements 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex  

Repairs  and  improvements 

Dairy  barn  

Shoshone  Reservation,  Wyo 

Repairs  and  improvements  

School  facilities,  Papago  Indians,  Arizona 

Tacoma,  Wash 

Truxton  Canyon,  Ariz  

Repairs  and  improvements 

Tomah,  Wis 

Employees'  building 

Repairs  and  improvements... 



Wahpeton,  N.  Dak.  .  . 

Power  plant  and  water  system  

Repairs  and  improvements 

Miscellaneous: 
Administration  of  affairs  of  Five  Civilized 
Tribes,  Oklahoma.. 

Appraisement,  classification,  etc.,  reserved 
lands,   Fort  Berthold   Reservation,   N. 
Dak.  (reimbursable)  .  .  . 

212 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  45. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1915,  with  unexpended  balances— Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 

Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1914. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1915.      , 

Disburse- 
ments 
for  1915. 

Balance  in 
U.S.  Treasury 
and  hands 
of  disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Miscellaneous—  Continued. 
Asylum  for  insane  Indians,  Canton,  S.  Dak.. 

$37,  500.  00 

$23,  695.  81 

$13  804  19 

Bridge  across  the  Colorado  River,  Topock, 
Arfz                                  

25,  000.  00 

25  000  00 

Bridge,  Western  Navajo  Reservation,  Ariz, 
(reimbursable)              

6,000.00 

4,  650.  93 

1  349  07 

Counsel  for  Pueblo  Indians,  New  Mexico.  .  . 

2,000.00 

1,991.00 

9  OO 

558.  00 

558.  00 

Dike,  Fort  Mojave  Reservation,  Ariz,  (re- 

5  000  00 

120  43 

4  C7Q  c7 

Diking,  etc.,  Bad  River  Reservation,  Wis. 

8  000  00 

7  688  73 

S11  27 

Education— 
Chippewas  of  Minnesota  (reimbursable)  . 

4,000.00 

4  000  00 

Sioux  Nation  South  i-akota          

$30  204  06 

200  000  00 

204  028  72 

2fi     1?T     ^4 

Indemnity  to  certain  Chickasaw  Indians 
for  losses     

8,213.00 

8,  213.  00 

Investigation,  San  Carlos  Irrigation  project, 

50  000  00 

19  730  78 

30  269  22 

Irrigating  allotments,  Yuma  Reservation, 
Cal  (reimbursable)                     

40  000.00 

33  396.00 

6  604  00 

Irrigation,   Colorado   River   Reservation, 
Ariz  (reimbursable)     .             

1  843  74 

15  000.00 

14,  337.  91 

2  505  83 

Irrigation  system— 
Blackfeet  Reservation,  Mont,  (reim- 

50  000  00 

49  233  01 

766  99 

Flathead   Reservation,   Mont,   (reim- 
bursable)                                

5  097  39 

200  000  00 

30  116  43 

174  980  96 

Fort  Peck  Reservation,  Mont,  (reim- 
bursable)                           

6  708  59 

50  000.  00 

46  173  93 

10  534  66 

Uintah  Reservation,  Utah  (reimburs- 
able)                       .  ^  

87  981  74 

10  000.00 

37  051.30 

60  930  44 

Wind  River  Diminished  Reservation, 

34  317  23 

25  000  00 

54  660  15 

4  RV7  08 

Line  riders,  Northern  Cheyenne  Reserva- 
tion Mon  t     

1,500.00 

1,  176.  00 

324  00 

Maintenance,  irrigation  system,  Pima  In- 
dian lands,  Arizona  (reimbursable)  

10,  000.  00 

8,  122.  63 

1  877  37 

Maintenance  and  operation- 
Fort   Hall   irrigation   system,   Idaho 
(reimbursable)          

25  000.00 

23  165.90 

1  834  10 

Milk  River  irrigation  system,  Fort  Bel- 
knap  Reservation,  Mont,  (reimburs- 
able) 

20  000  00 

19  745  21 

254  79 

Modoc  Point  irrigation  system,  Klam- 
ath   Reservation,   Oreg.   (reimburs- 
able) 

4  740  00 

2  430  23 

2  309  77 

Irrigation  system,  Yakima  Reserva- 
tion Wash  (reimbursable)  

15  000  00 

14  849  64 

150  36 

Oil   and    gas   inspectors,    Five   Civilized 
Tribes,  Oklahoma                    .  .           ... 

25  000.00 

11  576  20 

13  423  80 

Payment  of  drainage  assessments— 
On  allotted   lands  in   Pottawatomie 
County  Okla  (reimbursable)  .  . 

21  183.39 

18  256  66 

2  926  73 

Fond  du  Lac  Reservation,  Minn,  (reim- 
bursable)                                      

13  080.00 

13  080  00 

Payment  for  water,  Yakima  Reservation, 
Wash  ....                            

100,  000.  00 

100  000.00 

Payment  to  trustees  of  school  district  No. 
23  Flathead  County  Mont 

471  60 

471  60 

Payment  to  Wm.  Volz,  Oklahoma.  .      .  . 

65.50 

65  50 

Probate  attorneys,  Five  Civilized  Tribes, 
Oklahoma  •  

85,  000.  00 

76,  734.  43 

8  265  57 

Protecting  bridge,  My  ton  Utah 

200  00 

200  00 

Purchase  of  land  for  Camp  Verde  Indians, 
Arizona  

20,  000.  00 

20  000  00 

Purchase  of  Land  for  landless  Indians  in 
California 

2  267  67 

10  000  00 

85  55 

12  182  12 

Purchase  of  stock  for  Northern  Cheyenne 
Indians,  Montana  (reimbursable) 

25  000  00 

25  000  00 

Reimbursement  of  M.  D.  Colgrove,  super- 
intendent, etc.,  Idaho  . 

6  00 

6  00 

Reimbursement  of  Bishop  N.  S.  Thomas, 
Wyoming 

391  84 

391  84 

Relief  of  Jennie  S.  Sherman  or  her  heirs 

1,500  00 

1  500  00 

Relief  of  Benjamin  A.  Sanders  for  injuries.  . 

1.000.00 

1.000.00 

REPORT    COMMISSIONER   OF  'INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


213 


TABLE  45. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1915,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 


Miscellaneous— Continued. 

Relief  of  Mary  Stanley,  widow  of  Will  TI. 
Stanley,    late    superintendent    Soboba 

Indian  School,  Cal 

Repairs,  Fort  Wakashie,  Wind  River  Res- 
ervation, Wyo 

Roads  and  bridges,  Shoshone  Reservation, 

Wyo.  (reimbursable) 

Wagon  road,  Standing  Rock  Reservation, 

S.  Dak 

Water  supply — 

Navajo  Indians,  Arizona  (reimbursable) 

Nomadic  Papago  Indians,  Arizona 

Papago  Indian  villages,  Arizona 


Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands 

of  disbursing 
officers 

June  30, 1914. 


Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  vear 
.915. 


$3,500.00 
1,732.82 

25,000.00 
1,000.00 

25, 000.  00 

5,000.00 

20, 000. 00 


Disburse- 
ments 
for  1915. 


$3, 500. 00 

1,247.71 

23,444.10 


22, 513. 64 
4,772.92 
17,901.73 


Balance  in 
U.S.  Treasury 

and  hands 
of  disbursing 

officers 
June  30, 1915. 


$485. 11 
1,555.90 
1,000.00 

2,486.36 

227. 08 

2, 098. 27 


TABLE  46. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 

[Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner  are  received 
in  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guaranties  for  right  of  way  across  Indian 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.  For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
as  required  by  sec.  3622,  Rev.  Stats.] 

On  hand  July  1, 1914 $84  311. 79 

Received: 

July,  1914 $204.  95 

August,  1914 482. 90 

September,  1914 22, 058. 09 

October,  1914 2. 60 

November,  1914 18. 34 

December,  1914 

January,  1915 3. 65 

February,  1915 92. 30 

March,  1915 .      23638.00 

April,  1915 31. 15 

May,  1915 60, 096. 60 

June,  1915 248. 58 

-    106,877.16 

Total  on  hand  and  received 191, 188. 95 

Disbursed  and  deposited: 

July,  1914 13, 954. 40 

August,  1914 2, 515. 82 

September,  1914 523. 19 

October,  1914 2. 60 

November,  1914 22, 084. 47 

December,  1914 11. 95 

January,  1915 1. 08 

vebruary,  1915 , 99.25 

March,  1915 58, 152. 64 

April,  1915 38. 58 

May,  1915 : 1, 096. 8c 

June,  1915 138. 00 

98,618.83 

Balance  on  hand  June  30, 1915 92, 570. 12 

191,188.95 


214 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


ll 

1^ 

Ill  SI 

SSS     g     8 

1C  CO     O         CO        Oi     OO  C<1 
00  t^     i-H        OO        to     O  to 

;f^  S     ?5        00        O     ^H  C< 
i—  l  tC     »C        CO        ^f     OC  <> 

oo     cs   o   S  c5  ^ 

CO          ^H       Tj!       00  i-H  t- 

5Oi    co    i^«  o  ^ 
CC      O5      CO  ^T1  1^ 

/ 
7 

5c5 

8 

§!5      §     §§S        *-    2  ^^ 

^H                      -*              I-H  i-l  CO                                     CO      1--  i- 

!O        OO     C^     CO  CN  CS 
S                 UO     CO 

' 

^s 

i 

e 

1 

p 

CO          CO          i-H              t^       •* 
>C         CO        O5            l^     CC 

«)       <N       tS          co     t; 

§      §    2  1 

•••^osoo        oi        -n^  r~  0*1    w              i—  ^    to  c^ 

»C  OS  C.O            CO            CO  CO  CO     C*4                     OS     CO  »C 
rHTj<lC              "•»!                      O'C                          CM      tO  CC 

§  5  1  SSI  ! 

t-ToTT}<        r-t            T-H        —  i              oo    06"  Wi      •*      -^    co    oi  cc  co  o  o    • 

CT>                r-i                                Oi     1-1  CO       T-I       i-i     co     1  -             CO  00     • 
1C                                                       1-1           rfi                                     CO 

1 

S    §|    S      2  S2    gg      g 

c<T 

>c    as      to      «> 

S  ^          2 

•^  O                    CO     l^-     CO  ^C      •  fH 
1C  O>                     l^-     CO     i-l  ^      •  "* 

5co  r-               X  '•**{?  S$    '  3 
1^  O>                   CO     00     r^  co     •  CO 
t*~  kC                   CO    O5     OO  O     '  Ci 

cvrcc"             cT  co"  i-Tco"   .  cc 

-               S            ;.C 

00  CO 
^H  C 

•^t1  CN 

<M        CS        t-           C<)     O  CO        t^ 

<yi>       ^          ic                        IM 

|s 

1-5 

>C         rt         S            OOCOOOtOOO            CM            CT>e5-5-<?         00        ^CO?-        00        lCTfiO5l^OiOiCO--H 

££         TJ!         1C            (HcOOOOJCO            1C            <NlCcO<N         i-H         COCOOO         1<         OOCOC5>C^o6oicO 
CT>        ic        Oi           i—  (1^-iCOOO           OO           i-H-^CsO        M1        COO1"        CS        Oi'^f^rC^iCCOOicO 

_LsJ_isl3"i§' 

CO                 CO        C^ 

CO                                     ^T 

co"                   ^^v-, 

•*J                         CD 
C3                       tiO 

Ig,     5 

OSCOOCOiMt^OOIMiCOC 

00<MCgO(MT)icOCO'-<OOcOO5iCp 

;cojj 

(N       r-»ooco<NO5C^*O'*r|Tf 

^^iCCOCOOOCOiOCM 

^             >  § 

ssssa^ss^^s^sssssMss  ;as  a  ssssss? 

;>C  CO 
CO  CO 

0  g 

SSsScSooooSSSSSSSiSoaogqaOoSSi 

1  llli 

c5'°c^^S^(NCM?iw'H 

i-HOtCOicoO>t^-c*" 
CO  i-l  i-l  ^  i-H  IM 

O^ICOCO^^ 

•*  eo"^     O      oTi-H  T-H  r-T    •  <M  co~o"r-< 

3                    CO        (N              (M;-;        (NCOC^ 

IHlUlHI 

1 

s  slll^l 

? 

inm 

t  a  1|^  js 

c 

Title  of  fund. 

* 

3 

c 

2 

* 

£ 

£ 

1 

Apache,  Kiowa,  and  Comanche  4  per  cent  fund  
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  in  Oklahoma  3  per  cent  fund  
Chippewas  in  Minnesota  fund  '  

Cheyenne  River  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  

Cofinr  d'  Alene.  2  ner  pent  fund 

5 

ci 

•  _,_ 

5 

ia 

1 

Fort  Berthold  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund.. 

Kansas  pnn.solidated  fund 

Kiowa  Agency  Hospital  4  per  cent  fund  
Osape  fund 

Pine  Ridge  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  

Pnvallnn  4  ner  pent  sphnol  fund 

Rosebud  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  

Round  Vallev  ppneral  fnnd 

•C 

:-c 

Shoshone  and  Bannock  fund  

Standing  Rock  Reservation  3  per  cent  fun 

Umatilla  general  fund  

Ute,  Confederated  Bands  of,  4  per  cent  fiu 
Payment  to  Indians  of  Klamath  Agency 
Oregon  Land  Co 

Proceeds  of: 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  reserve  lands 

Colville  Reservation,  W7ash  

Crow  ceded  lands  Montana 

Devils  Lake  Reservation,  N.'Dak.... 
Flathead  patented  lands,  Bitter  Root 
Flathead  Reservation,  Mont  
Fort  Peck  Reservation,  Mont  
Irrigable  land,  Yuma  Reservation,  Ca 

REPORT    COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


215 


iC^ffN     t— <     CO  »O  "^  "3"  Oi  T— '  O 
TT  C~  O     CO     <O^-cO»Oi-(i-iO 

oo  o  o    o    coocaot-iio-'r'SSeNS 


3   &   3   S   $   S   ? 

o,^SS5^28 

^H(NS^i-Hi«OOiOt-t 
of        N 


ti 


o  o  ® 

»-5  c  K 


216 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


>il    §11= 


II  i 


.o--^          o 


S    8      - 


'o"o'o<N'o"o-.r'o      d  o  "o 


?>.       Z^OOOl^r^-      IM 
1-t-=".y«n'T2T3  *-' 


0*0       "5  0       "3 


^  <§  t3  t>""H  T3        ^  ri  ,v° 


0>§0 


HO 

I 


8  .S 


i? 


^° 

II 

II 


»^  iT1 

li  JgM 

^2^    5  co  "^  1-1 


^    2< 


•30    |lo° 

-etf  TilititfS 


.9 

T3T3 


S       S 


2  §fe 

I   -SB 

lift 


I  |g    gg 

w    ^       <, 


SI 


^fc£f 

?ISS, 

j'ljli 

ei|«N3 
J8g5ES? 

SiSls 

B'p  OO.'S 

ili^ 

rf-  s  ±  N  § 

llli"1 

tls-g 


^^fe 
iiS^ 


Hi 

**& 

oo-o 

iii 
in 

C3   cj   t- 

11" 

CoiT: 


£||    .o 


II 


fesss 


l^llli 


11 


i  II 


I  11 

•?     f?« 


i  ii 


I  iti 


o£ 

al 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


217 


1       i§     I 

ao'cT         c 
cc          g 

5»                    C^l 

p.           d 

S.          2'c 

"c             "o 

or                oo 
1                | 

i    ^ 

"cs              S  *- 

5     If 

1      ll 

—                        -3  -^i 

c/2                   c/:  (H 

C 

"o 

ill 

1     Ks 

<N     fH     § 

I         ^1  ^ 

J                    -"S  «B  *T 

1     ||i 

i    If 

i  lit 

I     III 

i    IIs 

«p 

siS^  in                    c 

I|I|^         '" 

H 

;a8i58.ssa 

g«s     !  !§§§§il 

III    11 


CO  O  IM  C^  1--  CO  t- 

rH  CO  01  O  10  OC  05 

00  OC  S  CS  t>-  CO  00 
SO  iO  O5  >O  <N  <N  iO 


t-.  o  c 

GC  O 


o  I-H  oc 

cnHO 


oi  <N  ^H  co  ^>  cxj  t^ 

i-H  O  TH  CO  CO  O  Tj< 


I  iC  iO  CO  Oi  O5 
)  Ol  C^  O  i-^  O^ 

oTicT^T 


s   g 


s  .s 


218 


REPORT   COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  50. — Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30 

1915. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average 
pro  rata 
share. 

Amount 
paid. 

Total  

3,092 

$1  104  502  78 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox 

Sac  and  Fox 

3 

$1  112  11 

3  336  33 

Kansas  

13 

4  931  39 

Kickapoo  

Kickapoo  

5 

611  71 

3  058  59 

Potawatomi  .  . 

Potawatomi 

g 

234  10 

1  '  872  80 

Nebraska:  Santee  

Ponca     

47 

76  63 

3  poi  80 

New  York:  New  York 

Tonawanda  (Seneca) 

23 

175  77 

4  042  85 

North  Dakota:  Standing  Rock  

Sioux  

276 

168  17 

46  417  54 

Oklahoma. 

654 

761  952  28 

Cantonment  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

37 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  .  . 

..  do.  .  . 

59 

Red  Moon  

do 

20 

344.  56 

49,  273.  26 

do 

27 

Kiowa  

Apache.    Kiowa     and    Co- 

1  72 

392  44 

28  255  97 

Do  

manche. 
....  do  

2  73 

895  32 

65  358  75 

Ponca  

Ponca 

28 

75  84 

2  123  77 

Osage 

Osage 

291 

3  819  76 

575  146  23 

Pawnee  

Pawnee 

17 

575  18 

9  778  07 

Sac  and  Fox 

Saf  and  Fox 

30 

1  067  20 

32  016  23 

Oregon  

91 

24  062  78 

Klamath 

Klamath 

30 

245  07 

7  352  22 

Umatilla 

Umatilla  Cayuse  etc 

61 

273  94 

16  710  56 

South  Dakota  

1  484 

202  295  40 

Cheyenne  Kiver 

Sioux 

290 

130  09 

37  727  65 

Crow  Creok  . 

do 

102 

175  97 

17  949  52 

Lower  Brule  

do. 

9 

176  77 

1  590  98 

Pine  7\  idge  .  . 

do 

802 

129  72 

104  035  24 

Yankton  

.   .     do... 

38 

233  88 

8  887  56 

Rosebud  

do 

243 

132  11 

32  104  45 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Ute 

36 

240  59 

8  661  24 

Wisconsin  •  Keshena 

M^nominee 

465 

97  20 

45  201  17 

1  5  per  cent. 


2  4  per  cent. 


TABLE  51. —  Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  national  banks  of 

Oklahoma.1 


Tribes. 

On  deposit  June  30,  1915. 

Interest. 

Total. 

Principal. 

Interest. 

Paid  into 
the  U.  S. 
Treasury. 

Total  paid 
and  due. 

Total 

$6,064,141.34 

$5,932,231.43 

$131,909.91 

$557,  780.  20 

$689,690.11 

Choctaw  .  . 

3,765,507.68 
1,151,750.56 
68.39 
1,110,467.17 
36,347.54 

3,686,520.48 
1,126,571.33 

78,987.20 
25,  179.  23 
68.39 
26,  848.  85 
826.  24 

299,302.76 
110,696.89 
31,827.49 
112,  450.  24 
3,502.82 

378,  289.  96 
135,  876.  12 
31,895.88 
139,  299.  09 
4,329.06 

Chickasaw  

Cherokee  

Creek 

1,083,618.32 
35,521.30 

Seminole  

i  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  289  banks.    The  rates  of 
interest  are  from  4  to  6  per  cent. 


REPORT  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  219 

TABLE  52. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915, 


Warehouses. 

Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago 

102,  745 
58.369 
35,855 
8,099 
23,671 

Pounds. 
31,209,633 
34,965,230 
3,396,957 
884,  180 
2,881,043 

1592,665.81 
208,563.45 
145,  767.  89 
242,  055.  84 
145,460.91 

3 

Pounds. 
2,197 

$247.  11 

St.  Louis  .  .          

San  Francisco 

New  York  1  

Omaha  2 

2 

43 

5.26 

Total  

228,  739 

73,337,043 

1,334,513.90 

5 

2,240 

252.  37 

Warehouses. 

Packages  mailed. 

Requisitions  issued. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Contract. 

Open 
market. 

Total. 

Chicago 

4,081 
1,379 
85 
3,402 
358 

Pounds. 
27,  414 
8,415 
1,110 
15,  206 
2,156 

$13,596.60 
3,  187.  70 
1,100.00 
13,227.54 
264.  47 

158 
1,080 
390 
443 
206 

2,167 
872 
276 
146 
398 

2,325 
1,952 
666 
589 
604 

St.  Louis  

San  Francisco  .  . 

New  York  i  

Omaha2  

Total  

9,305 

54,301 

31,376.31 

2,277 

3,859 

6,136 

10  months  only. 


2  9  months  only. 


Total  number  of  shipments 238, 049 

Total  weight  (pounds) 73, 393, 584 

Total  value $1, 366, 142. 58 

TABLE  53. — Expenses  at  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915. 


Warehouses. 

Rent. 

Light 
and 
fuel. 

Amount 
paid 
regular 
employees. 

Amount 
paid 
irregular 
em- 
ployees. 

Miscel- 
laneous. 

Total. 

Chicago 

$4  500  00 

$124  94 

$13  625  41 

$5  812  59 

$2  406  26 

$26  469  20 

St.  Louis  

1,500.00 

93  48 

7  240  00 

(i) 

625  33 

9  458  81 

San  Francisco 

2  400  00 

35 

6  008  31 

1  001  00 

1  595  81 

11  005  47 

New  York  2  

2,916.67 

118.  44 

5  901  66 

'752  50 

1  582  17 

11  271  44 

Omaha  3 

1  199  97 

69  74 

3  855  00 

690  11 

395  36 

6  210*  18 

Total  

12  516  64 

406  95 

36  630  38 

8  256  20 

6  604  93 

64  415  10 

Included  in  amount  paid  regular  employees. 


2 10  months  only.  3  9  months  only. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


REPORT 


OF  THE 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 


TO  THE 


SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


FOR  THE  FISCAL  YEAR 
ENDED  JUNE  30 

1916 


v 


WASHINGTON:  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE:  1916 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Introduction 3 

Health 4 

Education 9 

Outline  of  course  of  study 11 

Navajo  school  facilities - 23 

Papago  schools,  Arizona 24 

Indian  students,  State  public  schools 24 

Tramp  students 24 

Schools,  Five  Civilized  Tribes 25 

Industrial  contests 26 

Agriculture,  stock-raising  activities 27 

Leasing  tribal  lands  for  grazing  purposes 30 

Leasing  for  farming  and  grazing  purposes 30 

Eradication  of  stock  diseases 31 

Experimentation 31 

Cooperative  extension  work 31 

Native  industries 32 

Lace  making 33 

Indian  fairs 33 

Individual  Indian  moneys : 36 

Debts  of  Indians 37 

Reimbursable  funds. 38 

Employment  of  Indians 39 

Exhibition  Indians 40 

Ute  judgment  fund 41 

Irrigation 41 

Extension  of  irrigation 42 

Construction 43 

Utilization  of  water 45 

Water-rights  protection 45 

Miscellaneous  activities 47 

Allotments 48 

Extension  of  trust  periods 48 

Patents  in  fee • 49 

Sale  of  Indian  lands 49 

Homeless  Indians 50 

Mission  lands 50 

A  great  probate  court 51 

Road  construction 51 

Mining  on  restricted  Indian  lands 52 

Forestry 52 

Rocky  Boy's  Band 53 

Papago  Indians -  -  54 

i 


II  CONTEXTS. 

Page. 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 55 

Probate  work  in  Oklahoma 56 

Oil  and  gas 58 

Osage  oil  and  gas  leases 59 

Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 60 

Indian  criminal  offenses 62 

Court  decisions 63 

Fishing  rights ." 66 

Legislation 66 

Purchase  of  goods  and  supplies 69 

New  system  of  bookkeeping 69 

The  eyes  of  the  Indian  Service. 70 

Employees 71 

Conclusion. 72 

Statistical  tables: 

Table  1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 73 

2.  Indian  population  of  the  United  States  ,  1916 73 

3.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted 82 

4.  Marriages,  missionaries,  churches,  language,  dress,  citizenship, 

crimes,  misdemeanors 85 

5.  Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 90 

6.  Allotments  by  calendar  years 93 

7.  Lands  set  aside  temporarily  for  mission  organizations 99 

8.  Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations 99 

9.  Industries  other  than  farming  or  stock  raising 100 

10.  Incomes  of  Indians 107 

11.  Use  of  agricultural  lands,  farming,  leasing 112 

12.  Use  of  grazing  lands,  stock  raising,  leasing 117 

13.  Use  of  agency  and  school  lands,  value  of  products  raised 122 

14.  Employment  of  Indians 127 

15.  Vital  statistics,  housing  and  disease 130 

16.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria 134 

17.  Indians,  self -supporting,  and  those  receiving  rations,  and  miscella- 

neous supplies  issued 137 

18.  School  population,  number  in  school,  capacity 141 

•  19.  Schools,  location,  enrollment,  attendance 148 

20.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876 157 

21.  Demonstration  farms 158 

22.  Experimentation  farms 158 

23.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic 159 

24.  Timber  on  reservations,  sawmills,  timber  cut 160 

25.  Areas  irrigable  and  under  projects,  expenditures 163 

26.  Miles  of  ditches,  use  of  irrigated  areas 166 

27.  Allotments  approved  and  made 168 

28.  Sales  of  allotted  lands 169 

29.  Patents  in  fee  issued 170 

30.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land 172 

31.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25,  1910 173 

32.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians 173 

33.  Lands  leased  for  mining,  production  of  minerals,  and  royalty 174 

34.  Buildings  erected 175 

35.  Buildings  under  construction 177 

36*-  Live  stock  belonging  to  Indians,  sold,  and  slaughtered 178 


CONTENTS.  Ill 

Page. 

Table  37.  Government  property  valuations  classified 184 

38.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 188 

39.  Employees  in  Indian  school  and  agency  service 192 

40.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field 196 

41.  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 197 

42.  Appropriations  and  disbursements  for  Indian  Service 198 

43.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 201 

44.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements. 202 

45.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians ...'... 204 

46.  Receipts  and  disbursements  of  the  Indian  Service 205 

47.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled 206 

48.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks * 206 

49.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 207 

50.  Expense  at  warehouses 207 

Index  to  statistical  tables. .                            209 


REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN 

AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR, 

OFFICE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 
Washington,  October  8, 1916. 

SIR  :  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  this,  the  eighty-first  annual  report 
of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1916. 

Large  sums  have  been  spent  for  hospitals  and  medical  attention, 
and  the  campaign  for  sanitary  and  cleanly  homes  recently  inaugu- 
rated has  been  vigorously  pursued.  To  teach  the  Indian  right  home 
life  gives  him  greater  resistance  to  the  ravages  of  disease  and 
strengthens  his  hold  upon  life.  As  the  battle  for  comfortable  fire- 
sides and  for  hygienic  living  goes  on  in  white  communities,  so  does 
the  Indian  Service  seek  the  same  end  through  every  means,  at  its 
command.  Tuberculosis  takes  an  excessive  toll  from  the  Indian, 
but  an  aggressive  and  unceasing  campaign  against  this  terrible 
menace  is  certainly  checking  its  progress. 

The  conservation  of  Indian  baby  life  has  appealed  splendidly  to 
the  best  efforts  of  every  person  connected  with  the  service  and  the 
response  has  been  notable.  The  Indian  mother  and  father  are  being 
taught  proper  ways  of  protecting  their  young  children  so  that  they 
may  grow  to  strong  physical  manhood  and  womanhood.  The  antip- 
athy of  the  Indian  woman  to  the  white  man's  hospital  is  fast  being 
overcome  and  the  medicine  man  will  soon  be  only  a  memory. 

The  most  radical  departure  from  the  old  plan  for  the  development 
of  the  Indian  was  made  in  the  formation  and  introduction  of  a  new 
and  comprehensive  vocational  course  of  study.  It  adequately  meets 
all  the  Indian's  industrial  and  home-building  needs^  and  is  a  prac- 
tical application  of  the  best  academic  thought  to  the  requirements  of 
a  vocational  education. 

The  last  year  has  been  instructive  and  profitable  for  the  Indians. 
They  have  made  a  remarkable  showing  in  increased  acreage  and 
yield  of  lands  cultivated.  Their  stock  interests,  both  individual  and 
tribal,  have  been  a  wonderful  success.  Tribal  herds  have  been  prop- 
erly cared  for  and  are  rapidly  increasing.  They  have  been  indi- 
vidually taught  to  take  care  of  their  farms,  fences,  stock,  and  imple- 
ments and  have  acquired  valuable  lessons  in  thrift  and  industry. 

3 


4  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

HEALTH. 

A  determined  fight  has  been  made  for  preventive  measures  against 
disease  on  Indian  reservations. 

The  greatest  problems  confronting  us  are  tuberculosis,  trachoma, 
and  a  high  infant  mortality. 

Medical  supervisors  visit  as  frequently  as  possible  each  agency  and 
school,  make  medical  inspections,  and  suggest  remedies  for  unhealth- 
ful  and  insanitary  conditions.  The  special  physicians  are  principally 
engaged  in  eye  work,  all  being  ophthalmologists.  They  are  con- 
stantly on  the  road,  performing  the  various  eye  operations  required, 
instituting  campaigns  against  trachoma,  and  instructing  local  phy- 
sicians in  the  best  treatment  of  that  disease  and  other  eye  affections 
found  among  the  Indians. 

The  field  dentists  visit  the  schools  and  do  the  requisite  dental  work 
for  the  school  children.  They  have  in  many  cases  succeeded  in  doing 
work  among  the  adult  Indians  who  are  beginning  to  realize  the 
importance  of  such  attention. 

The  duties  of  the  school  and  agency  physicians  are  extensive  and 
include  the  general  practice  of  medicine  and  surgery. 

The  field  matrons  are  doing  a  wonderfully  helpful  work ;  they  are 
the  good  Samaritans  of  the  Indian  Service,  and  many  more  than  our 
funds  will  now  permit  could  be  employed  to  great  advantage. 

The  treatment  of  trachoma  is  difficult,  but  the  problem  in  the 
schools  is  now  nearly  solved.  The  number  of  these  cases  has  in  most 
places  been  materially  reduced  by  the  curing  of  disease  in  the  older 
pupils,  yet  the  introduction  of  new  cases  into  the  schools  in  the 
primary  grades  continues  to  some  extent.  This  will  continue  until 
greater  inroads  can  be  made  on  the  foci  of  infection  in  the  homes  of 
the  older  Indians.  Since  the  installation  in  the  schools  of  the 
Pullman  towel  system,  the  segregation  of  acute  trachomatous  cases, 
and  the  institution  of  regular  treatment,  hew  cases  seldom  appear 
except  through  outside  infection. 

Among  the  older  Indians  the  elimination  of  trachoma  has  not  been 
accomplished,  but  progress  is  everywhere  apparent. 

Tuberculosis  is  an  ever  present  problem,  and  the  Indian  has  no 
racial  immunity  to  tubercular  infection.  The  records  show  that  a 
large  per  cent  of  the  Indian  mortality  from  tuberculosis  is  among 
children,  and  evidence  is  accumulating  that  the  primary  infection 
occurs  in  childhood.  Among  young  children  under  2  years  of  age 
the  appearance  of  tuberculosis  is  almost  inevitably  the  precursor  of 
a  fatal  issue.  We  are  therefore  strenuously  exerting  our  efforts  to 
protect  the  infants  and  children,  which  is  being  done  through  a 
campaign  of  education  looking  to  better  methods  of  caring  for 
them. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  5 

In  furtherance  of  our  health  campaign,  on  January  10,  1916,  I 
sent  the  following  letter  to  every  Indian  Service  employee  and  to 
others  known  to  be  interested  or  those  who,  it  was  thought,  might 
be  induced  to  participate,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  health  betterments  among  the  Indians. 

In  an  address  before  the  Congress  on  Indian  Progress  held  at  San  Francisco 
in  August  of  last  year  I  said  : 

"  It  is  our  chief  duty  to  protect  the  Indian's  health  and  to  save  him  from 
premature  death.  Before  we  educate  him,  before  we  conserve  his  property, 
we  should  save  his  life.  If  he  is  to  be  perpetuated,  we  must  care  for  the 
children.  We  must  stop  the  tendency  of  the  Indian  to  diminish  in  number, 
and  restore  a  condition  that  will  insure  his  increase.  Every  Indian  hospital 
bed  not  necessarily  occupied  with  those  suffering  from  disease  or  injury 
should  be  available  for  the  mother  in  childbirth.  It  is  of  first  importance 
that  we  begin  by  reestablishing  the  health  and  constitution  of  Indian  children. 
Education  arid  protection  of  property  are  highly  important,  but  everything  is 
secondary  to  the  basic  condition  which  makes  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  race." 

That  thought  has  deepened  its  hold  upon  my  convictions. 

We  must  guarantee  to  the  Indian  the  first  of  inalienable  rights — the  right  to 
live.  No  race  was  ever  created  for  utter  extinction.  The  chief  concern  of 
all  ethics  and  all  science  and  all  philosophies  is  life. 

The  Indian  has  demonstrated  his  humanity  and  his  capacity  for  intellectual 
and  moral  progress  amid  conditions  not  always  propitious  and  I  am  eager  to 
participate  with  all  the  favoring  forces  that  contribute  to  his  racial  triumph, 
believing  as  I  do  that  when  he  comes  to  himself  as  a  factor  in  the  modern 
world  his  achievements  will  enrich  and  brighten  the  civilization  of  his  native 
land.  % 

I  should  like  to  get  the  feeling  I  have  upon  this  question  into  the  conscience 
and  aspirations  of  every  Indian  Service  employee  until  there  shall  prevail  a 
sort  of  righteous  passion  to  see  that  every  Indian  child  has  a  fair  chance 
to  Live. 

There  is  something  fundamental  here: 

We  can  not  solve  the  Indian  problem  without  Indians.  We  can  not  educate 
their  children  unless  they  are  kept  alive. 

All  our  Indian  schools,  reservations,  individual  allotments,  and  accumulated 
incomes  tend  pathetically  toward  a  wasted  altruism  if  maintained  and  con- 
served for  a  withering,  decadent  people. 

If  we  have  an  Indian  policy  worthy  of  the  name,  its  goal  must  be  an  endur- 
ing and  sturdy  race,  true  to  the  noblest  of  its  original  instincts  and  virtues 
and  loyally  sympathetic  with  our  social  and  national  life;  a  body  of  efficient 
citizens  blending  their  unique  poise  and  powers  with  the  keen  and  sleepless 
vigor  of  the  white  man. 

We  must,  therefore,  renew  daily  ,our  warfare  against  the  arch  foe  of  effi- 
ciency— disease. 

We  must  begin  at  the  right  place — not  only  with  the  infant  at  its  mother's 
breast,  but  with  the  unborn  generation. 

The  new  campaign  for  health  in  which  I  would  enlist  you  is  first  of  all  to 
save  the  babies. 

Statistics  startle  us  with  the  fact  that  approximately  three-fifths  of  the 
Indian  infants  die  before  the  age  of  5  years. 

Of  what  use  to  this  mournful  mortality  are  our  splendidly  equipped 
schools  ? 


6  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

I  earnestly  call  upon  every  Indian  Bureau  employee  to  help  reduce  this 
frightful  percentage.  Superintendents,  teachers,  physicians,  matrons,  nurses, 
everyone  can  do  something  by  instruction  or  example,  the  physician  with  his 
science,  the  nurse  with  her  trained  skill,  the  matron  with  her  motherly  solici- 
tude, all  of  us  by  personal  hygiene,  cleanliness,  and  sobriety. 

With  this  idea  uppermost,  all  employees  whose  duties  bring  them  in  touch 
with  Indian  families  must  work  in  closest  harmony  for  surrounding  the 
expectant  Indian  mother  with  favorable  health  conditions  before  and  after 
childbirth.  The  sanitation  of  the  homes  of  such  women  should  have  special 
attention  and  no  baby  allowed  to  be  born  into  an  environment  germinating 
disease,  if  prevention  is  available. 

The  simplest  rules  of  motherhood  applied  under  intelligent  and  friendly 
direction  would  save  most  of  the  Indian  babies  who  annually  iill  untimely  graves. 

I  want  to  send  this  safety,  as  far  as  possible,  into  every  home  of  an  Indian 
mother,  whether  that  home  be  a  tepee,  a  tent,  a  log  house  with  dirt  floors  or 
a  more  comfortable  abode. 

This  means  work,  hard  work,  but  the  reward  will  be  living  souls. 

I  shall  expect  each  superintendent  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  home  con- 
ditions of  every  Indian  family  on  the  reservation  and  to  adopt  practical  and 
effective  means  for  quick  and  certain  improvement. 

Superintendents  must  organize  such  a  system  of  cooperative  information 
through  their  employees  as  will  enable  them  to  do  this,  exercising,  of  course, 
great  care  and  discretion  in  gathering  the  requisite  information. 

I  shall  consider,  on  the  superintendent's  recommendation,  a  reasonable  use  of 
individual  Indian  moneys  for  the  improvement  of  insanitary  homes,  where  the 
family  has  such  funds.  In  the  absence  of  such  moneys,  every  effort  must  be 
made  to  secure  clean  and  wholesome  conditions  through  the  efforts  of  the 
adult  members  of  the  family.  If  there  are  no  members  physically  able  to  labor, 
expenditure  may  be  recommended  from  the  funds  "  Relieving  distress  and  pre- 
vention, etc.,  of  disease  among  Indians." 

The  crux  of  the  matter  is  this:  We  must,  if  possible,  get  rid  of  the  Intol- 
erable conditions  that  infest  some  of  the  Indian  homes  on  the  reservation, 
creating  an  atmosphere  of  death  instead  of  life. 

It  will  be  the  duty  of  the  field  matron  to  learn  of  conditions  existing  in  Indian 
homes  and  of  cases  requiring  medical  attention  and  report  them  to  the  super- 
intendent. It  will  be  her  duty  to  see  that  the  prospective  mother  knows  what 
equipment  is  necessary  for  the  proper  care  of  her  new-born  babe,  and  the  im- 
portance of  the  provision  which  the  husband  should  make  for  the  health  and 
comfort  of  the  mother  and  child  should  be  early  and  urgently  im'pressed  upon 
him. 

Physicians  must  be  promptly  advised  of  all  cases  of  prospective  motherhood 
and  they  must  see  that  proper  attention  is  given  before  and  after  that  event, 
arranging,  if  practicable,  for  hospital  facilities  where  the  home  surroundings 
are  unfavorable.  Special  effort  should  be  made  to  see  that  the  mother  has 
nourishing  food  before  and  following  childbirth. 

I  am  advised  that  the  death  rate  among  Indian  babies  is  most  excessive  after 
the  nursing  period  when,  through  ignorance  or  carelessness,  they  are  given  im- 
proper food,  such  as  green  fruits,  melons,  or  corn,  made  further  harmful,  per- 
haps, by  the  presence  of  flies,  and  from  the  use  of  which  intestinal  disorders 
are  almost  sure  to  follow. 

There  should  be  vigilant  and  unrelenting  effort  to  impress  upon  parents  the 
great  importance  of  supplying  food  which  will  furnish  proper  nourishment  for 
the  growing  child.  There  should  be  constant  endeavor  to  educate  parents  to 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  7 

an  understanding  of  the  value  of  a  sufficient  supply,  of  cow's  or  goat's  milk,  or 
condensed  milk,  pure  water,  and  suitable  solid  food,  and  to  the  necessity  of 
maintaining  cleanliness  of  person,  cooking  utensils,  and  other  articles  of 
domestic  use. 

It  would  be  worth  \vhile,  it  would  be  great,  if  we  could  lift  the  Indian  out  of 
his  uninformed  condition  and  induce  him  to  see  that  the  natural  and  beautiful 
love  he  has  for  his  children  will  not  keep  them  alive  and  well  and  joyous 
unless  supplemented  by  a  rational  use  of  food,  clothing,  fresh  air,  and  pure 
water. 

If  Government  aid  is  necessary  to  bring  health  out  of  disease  and  squalor,  it 
should  not  be  withheld,  but  good  results,  if  obtained,  will  scarcely  continue 
unless  the  Indian  parents  exchange  indolence  for  industry  and  are  awakened 
to  the  use  and  beauty  of  personal  and  environing  cleanliness. 

This  campaign  for  better  babies,  for  the  rescue  of  a  race,  calls  for  redoubled 
energy  and  zeal  throughout  the  service,  for  it  means  personal  work  and  tire- 
less patience.  It  is  a  well-nigh  stupendous  task,  but  will  be  a  glorious  one  if 
we  can  make  successful  headway. 

I  believe  that  the  high  aspirations  and  missionary  spirit  generally  prevailing 
among  our  field  employees  are  a  guaranty  of  substantial  and  lasting  achieve- 
ments, and  I  hope  and  believe  we  shall  have  the  quickened  cooperation  of  all 
denominational  agencies,  religious  missionaries,  and  mission  schools  having 
special  interest  in  the  Indian's  spiritual  welfare  and  whose  priceless  labors, 
luminant  with  self-sacrifice  and  religious  fervor,  have  done  so  much  for  the 
red  man.  We  shall  all,  I  am  sure,  exert  an  irrestible  union  of  effort. 

The  educational  propaganda  against  disease  must,  of  course,  be  steadily  In- 
creased and  strengthened.  Our  Indian  schools,  where  so  many  of  the  rising 
generations  are  assembled,  are  well  organized  and  should  be  a  mighty  instru- 
mentality for  health  and  higher  ideals  of  life.  In  their  education  of  girls  I 
hope  to  see  added  emphasis  given  to  such  subjects  as  home  nursing,  child  wel- 
fare, and  motherhood,  the  sanitation,  arrangement,  and  management  of  the 
home,  and  that  nothing  reasonable  shall  be  spared  to  fit  every  Indian  girl  for 
intelligent  housekeeping  and  for  attractive  home-making. 

There  is  among  the  Indians  a  marked  and  tender  affection  for  their  children, 
but  too  often  the  wife,  the  mother,  is  regarded  and  treated  as  the  burden  bearer. 
I  wish  we  might  see  this  habit  overcome,  for  it  is  distinctly  barbaric.  I  want 
to  see  developed  and  prevalent  in  every  Indian  school  from  the  least  to  the 
largest  that  modern  and  truly  chivalrous  spirit  that  recognizes  and  respects  the 
sacredness  of  womanhood.  I  should  like  to  have  every  Indian  boy  leave  school 
with  this  lofty  and  just  sentiment  fused  into  his  character  as  the  picture  in 
porcelain,  because  of  the  deep  and  exquisite  power  it  will  have  to  bless  his 
future  home  with  health  and  happiness. 

While,  therefore,  this  appeal  aims  primarily  at  the  safety  and  health  of  the 
child  and  is  intended  to  enforce  the  thought  that  the  future  of  the  Indian  race 
may  depend  vitally  upon  what  we  shall  be  able  to  accomplish  for  its  new  gen- 
eration, it  is  also  a  message  of  reenforcement  to  every  utterance  and  every 
effort  expressed  or  put  forth  within  the  Indian  Service  in  behalf  of  the  adult 
against  tuberculosis,  trachoma,  and  every  other  disease;  against  the  liquor 
curse  and  the  use  of  any  kind  of  enervating  drug  or  dope.  I  look  to  the  schools 
chiefly  to  safeguard  the  boys  and  girls  enrolled  there  against  these  deadly 
scourges,  and  there  must  be  no  abatement  but  rather  renewed  and  continuing 
energies  in  this  direction. 

In  closing,  I  ask  every  employee  to  do  his  or  her  part  in  widening  our  work 
against  disease  until  our  Indian  reservations  become  the  home  of  healthy, 


8  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

happy,  bright-eyed  children  with  a  fair  start  in  life,  and  our  schools  become 
impregnable  defenses  against  every  enemy  to  healthy  and  high-minded  boys 
and  girls. 

The  campaign  thus  started  has  developed  widespread  interest  in 
this  work,  and  almost  unbelievable  results  have  been  secured.  Wom- 
en's meetings  are  held  frequently,  with  lectures  on  various  child- 
welfare  topics  by  the  physicians,  field  matrons,  and  others.  Little- 
mothers'  leagues  have  been  formed  among  the  schoolgirls,  and  nu- 
merous other  activities  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  welfare  of 
the  Indian  baby  have  been  organized  on  the  reservations.  At  non- 
reservation  boarding  schools  special  emphasis  has  been  given  the 
instruction  of  the  older  girls  in  nursing,  hygiene,  sanitation,  and 
the  care  of  children,  it  having  been  demonstrated  that  this  teaching 
is  often  reflected  in  the 'Indian  homes  through  the  returned  girl 
students,  while  the  children,  who  soon  become  the  wives  and  mothers 
of  the  race,  promptly  and  greatly  profit  thereby. 

At  all  Indian  Service  hospitals  every  effort  is  made  to  provide 
for  the  Indian  mother  during  childbirth  and  to  bring  to  the  hos- 
pitals every  such  case  as  may  not  have  proper  home  surroundings. 
To  the  greatest  extent  possible  those  mothers  who  are  not  cared  for 
in  hospitals  are  assisted  by  the  physicians  or  field  matrons,  and,  as 
far  as  facilities  will  permit,  a  systematic  follow-up  system  is  main- 
tained for  the  benefit  of  all  newborn  infants. 

At  many  of  the  Indian  fairs  last  fall  a  baby  show  formed  a 
prominent  feature  of  the  exhibit,  and  it  is  planned  to  have  a  baby 
show  at  every  Indian  fair  to  be  held  this  year.  These  contests  have 
created  much  interest  among  the  Indians,  and  in  a  number  of  in- 
stances at  fairs  where  white  and  Indian  babies  competed  Indian 
babies  won  the  first  award. 

On  the  Blackfeet  Reservation  a  most  aggressive  effort  has  been 
made  to  improve  insanitary  Indian  homes.  A  special  physician  and 
a  woman  supervisor  spent  several  months  there  in  a  house-to-house 
canvass,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  field  matron  and  assistants  have 
"  cleaned  up  "  the  Heart  Butte  district.  The  Indian  homes  there 
have  been  cleaned,  whitewashed,  and  repaired,  and  all  cases  needing 
medical  attention  have  been  placed  under  treatment.  The  Indians 
have  shown  interest  in  this  work,  and  it  is  believed  that  a  permanent 
improvement  has  been  made. 

Homes  of  tubercular  Indians  are  placarded,  and  cases  which  can 
reasonably  be  expected  to  benefit  from  sanitorium  treatment  are  sent 
to  the  several  sanitoria. 

Reports  from  these  sanitoria  are  very  encouraging  and  show  that 
among  Indians,  when  placed  in  a  proper  environment,  the  disease,  in 
a  reasonable  number  of  cases  not  incomparable  to  similar  conditions 
among  whites,  can  be  arrested. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  9 

Hospitals  have  recently  been  completed  or  are  now  in  course  of  con- 
struction at  Carson,  Pima,  Mescalero,  Navajo.  Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho,  Turtle  Mountain,  Blackfeet,  Choctaw-Chickasaw,  Crow  Creek, 
Hoopa  Valley,  Jicarilla,  Spokane,  Cherokee.  San  Juan,  Tohatchi, 
and  additions  at  Genoa  and  Crow. 

Constantly  increasing  correspondence  concerning  health  matters 
shows  the  very  great  interest  which  has  been  aroused.  Educational 
and  publicity  measures  to  keep  up  and  increase  interest  in  sanitation 
have  been  taken.  Press  dispatches  from  the  Public  Health  Service 
and  the  National  Association  for  the  Study  and  Prevention  of  Tuber- 
culosis are  made  use  of  in  the  Indian  school  journals.  Individual 
letters  are  written  to  tubercular  cases  urging  them  to  take  advantage 
of  the  means  offered  for  their  relief,  and  all  employees  of  the  service 
are  urged  to  lose  no  opportunity  to  exploit  the  value  of  preventive 
measures.  Medical  journals  have  been  supplied  to  physicians,  and 
special  medical  pamphlets  have  been  widely  distributed. 

At  all  of  the  institutes  held  during  the  summer  health  matters 
were  especially  emphasized.  Practically  all  of  the  reservation  and 
school  superintendents  attended  these  meetings  and  there  carefully 
prepared  reports  on  vital  statistics  developing  the  startling  fact  that 
on  nearly  all  of  the  reservations  there  had  been  more  births  than 
deaths  during  the  last  year.  These  institute  reports  are  not  available 
for  this  publication,  but  they  have  come  to  me  in  such  way  as  to  be 
dependable. 

EDUCATION. 

The  preparation  and  introduction  of  a  new  and  uniform  course  of 
study  for  all  Indian  schools  marks  a  forward  step  in  the  educational 
system  of  the  Indian  Service.  For  many  years  the  general  country 
has  recognized  a  vital  deficiency  in  its  system  of  education.  There 
has  been  a  chasm,  often  impassable,  between  the  completion  of  a 
course  in  school  and  the  selection  of  a  vocation  in  life.  The  Indian 
Service  has  recognized  a  similar  deficiency,  although  partially  over- 
come in  its  system.  The  new  vocational  course  of  study  for  Indian 
schools  is  believed  to  provide  a  safe  and  substantial  passage  from 
school  life  to  success  in  real  life.  Great  care  has  been  exercised  in  the 
preparation  of  this  course.  In  the  fall  of  1915  a  committee  of  eight 
of  the  experienced  and  strong  men  of  the  service,  representing  the 
various  classes  of  schools  and  reservations,  were  called  to  Washing- 
ton for  the  purpose  of  preparing  a  course  of  study  which  could  and 
should  be  adapted  to  the  demands  of  all  Indian  schools  through- 
out the  United  States.  For  a  year  or  more  much  thought  and  time 
had  been  put  upon  gathering  material  to  bo  utilized  in  connection 
with  the  development  of  the  new  course.  Combes  of  study  were  ob- 


10  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

tained  from  nearly  all  of  the  States,  from  agricultural  schools,  from 
home  economics  schools,  from  trade  schools,  and  from  every  source 
from  which  it  was  thought  practical  suggestions  could  be  gotten. 
The  committee  critically  examined  all  available  material,  selected 
out  of  it  such  parts  as  were  found  to  be  suitable  for  use  in  Indian 
schools,  and  with  this  as  a  foundation  began  the  task  of  developing 
a  practical  course  for  use  in  all  Indian  day,  reservation  boarding, 
and  nonreservation  training  schools  of  the  United  States.  It  was 
thought  advisable  to  thus  tie  the  course  to  typical  public  school 
courses  because  of  the  fact  that  Indian  boys  and  girls  are  rapidly 
going  into  the  public  schools,  and  in  comparatively  a  few  decades 
will  take  their  places  alongside  of  white  boys  and  girls  as  an  integral 
part  of  the  public  school  population.  For  the  present,  however, 
conditions  are  such  as  to  make  it  impracticable  for  this  ideal  to  be 
realized.  Furthermore,  while  the  academic  courses  offered  in  the 
public  schools  are  adaptable  to  Indian  children's  needs,  the  indus* 
trial  courses  of  the  public  schools  are  inadequate  and  unsatisfactory 
for  Indian  schools.  This  was  an  important  factor  in  arriving  at 
the  decision  to  prepare  a  special  course  for  Indian  schools,  and 
while  the  committee  on  course  of  study  thought  it  advisable  to  in- 
corporate many  of  the  ideals  of  public  school  academic  courses  for 
the  reason  already  stated,  it  was  found  necessary  to  blaze  almost  a 
new  trail  in  developing  the  vocational  features  of  the  course  for 
Indian  schools.  Indian  schools  must  train  the  Indian  youth  of 
both  sexes  to  take  upon  themselves  the  duties  and  responsibilities 
of  citizenship.  To  do  this  requires  a  system  of  schools  and  an 
organization  capable  of  preparing  the  Indian  young  people  to  earn 
a  living  either  among  their  own  people  or  away  from  the  reservation 
homes  and  in  competition  with  their  white  brethern.  This  con- 
templates a  practical  system  of  schools  with  an  essentially  vocational 
foundation.  In  other  words,  the  Indian  needs  a  school  that  will 
fit  him  as  fully  as  possible  for  the  life  of  his  immediate  future  and 
the  changing  conditions  that  may  mark  his  remoter  future.  The 
school  should  accomplish  this  as  quickly  as  is  compatible  with  thor- 
oughness. The  economic  needs  of  all  people — of  the  Indian  espe- 
cially— demand  that  the  schools  provide  for  instruction  along  emi- 
nently practical  lines.  Indian  schools  must  provide  that  form  of 
training  and  instruction  which  leads  directly  to  productive  effi- 
ciency and  self-support. 

To  give  those  who  may  be  interested  in  Indian  education  an  idea 
of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  course  of  study,  an  outline  of  it  is 
made  a  part  of  this  report: 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

OUTLINE   OF   COURSE   OF   STUDY. 

PRIMARY   DIVISION. 

BAY  SCHOOLS. 

The  time  assigned  to  a  subject  indicates  its  relative  importance. 
First  Grade: 

General  Exercises JMusic. 

(15  minutes.)  [Manners  and  Right  Conduct. 


11 


Conversational    and    other 
oral  exercises. 


English , 

(90  minutes.) 

Beading. 
Spelling. 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 

(20  minutes.) 
Industrial  Work. 

(60  minutes.) 
Occupation  and  Study. 

(85  minutes.) 
Recreation. 

(90  minutes.) 


Second  Grade: 

General  Exercises. 
(15  minutes.) 


English 

(70  minutes.) 


Conversational    and 

oral  exercises. 
Reading. 
Spelling. 
Numbers. 

(20  minutes). 

Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 
(20  minutes.) 


other 


Personal  experiences  and 

observations. 
Nature  study. 
Health. 
Activities  of  home,  school, 

and  community. 
History. 
Picture  study. 
Reproductions. 
Stories. 

Dramatization. 
Numbers,  etc. 
Memory  work. 


[Music. 

(Manners  and  Right  Conduct. 


Expand  on  work  of  first 

grade. 
Health. 
History. 
Geography. 


12  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Second  Grade — Continued. 


Sanitation. 
Gardening. 
Sewing. 


Industrial  Work.. 

(60  minutes.) 
Occupation  work  and  study. 

(85  minutes.) 
Recreation. 

(90  minutes.) 

Third  Grade: 

Music. 

General  Exercises 
(15  minutes.) 


English 

(70  minutes.) 


Civics. 

Manners  and  Right  Conduct. 


Conversational     and     other 
oral  exercises. 


Continue  work  of  grade  2. 

Health. 

History. 

Geography. 

Gardening. 

School  activities ,  as  games, 

industrial  work,  etc. 
Reading. 
Spelling. 

Language  (written,  and  mechanics). 
Arithmetic. 

(30  minutes.) 

Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 
(20  minutes.) 

Gardening. 
Repair  work. 
Sanitation. 
Sewing. 
Cooking. 
Housekeeping. 
Occupation  work  and  study. 

(105  minutes.) 
Recreation. 

(90  minutes.) 


Industrial  Work1 
(90  minutes.) 


i  All  the  pupils  in  the  first  and  second  grades  who  have  reached  the  age  of  10  years  are  to  be  given 
this  work. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
BOARDING  SCHOOLS. 


13 


The  time  assigned  to  a  subject  indicates  its  relative  importance. 
First  Grade: 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English , 

(110  minutes.) 


Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 
Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 
Current  events,  once  each  week. 
Conversational  and  other  oral  exercises. 
History. 
Health. 
Numbers. 
Nature  study. 

Reading  and  written  exercises. 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 

(20  minutes.) 

Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 

Industrial  Work Small  and  young  pupils  should  not  be  required  to  work 

(240  minutes.)  full  time. 

Physical  Training. 
(60  minutes.) 

Evening  hour Little  folks,  free  play.    Adults,  miscellaneous  exercises. 

(60  minutes.) 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours— 10  hours  for  little  folks.) 
Second  Grade: 

Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 
Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 
Current  events,  once  each  week. 
Conversational  and  other  oral  exercises. 
History. 
Health. 
'«  Reading. 
Nature  study. 

Mechanics  of  language  and  written  exercises. 
Spelling. 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English 

(90  minutes.) 


Arithmetic. 

(20  minutes.) 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate) 

(20  minutes.) 
65333—16 2 


14  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Second  Grade — Continued. 

Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 

Industrial  Work Small  and  young  pupils  should  not  be  required  to  work 

(240  minutes.)  full  time. 

Physical  Training. 
(60  minutes.) 

Evening  hour [Little  folks,  free  play. 

(60  minutes.)  [Adults,  miscellaneous  exercises. 

Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours — 10  hours  for  little  folks.) 
Third  Grade: 

Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 


General  Exercises 

Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 
(25  minutes.) 

Current  events,  once  each  week. 

Civics,  once  each  week. 
Conversational  and  other  oral  exercises. 
History. 

Health. 
English 

<  Reading. 
(80  minutes.) 

Geography 

Mechanics  of  language  and  written  exercises. 
Spelling. 
Arithmetic. 

(30  minutes.) 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 

(20  minutes.) 
Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 
Industrial  Work. 

(240  minutes.) 
Physical  Training. 

(60  minutes.) 
Evening  hour. 

(60  minutes.) 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes. ) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours— 10  hours  for  little  folks.) 


COMMISSIONED    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


15 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English 

(60  minutes.) 


Arithmetic. 

(30  minutes.) 
Geography 


PREVOCATIONAL    DIVISION. 
BOARDING  SCHOOLS. 

The  time  assigned  to  a  subject  indicates  its  relative  importance. 

Fourth  Grade  : 

Assembly,  once  each  week. 

Current  events,  once  each  week. 

Music,  once  each  week. 

Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 

Civics,  once  each  week. 

Review  work  of  previous 

grades. 

Stories  of  travel. 
History. 
Conversational    and    other    Personal  experiences  and 

oral  exercises I   observation  of  the  pupils. 

(Five     20-minute     les-    Dramatization, 
sons  per  week.)  Nature  study. 

Agriculture. 
Games. 

Picture  study. 
Readers. 
Classics. 
History. 
Nature. 


Reading 

(Five     20-minute 
sons  per  week.) 


lea- 


Physiology  and  Hygiene 


Language 

(Two     20-minute     les- 
sons per  week.) 
Spelling. 

(Three  20-minute  lessons  per  week.) 


3  lessons  per  week. 
2  lessons  per  week. 


[Mechanics     of    language 
and  written  exercises. 


(30  minutes.) 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate). 

(25  minutes.) 
Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 

(instruction,  30  minutes. 

Industrial  Work < 

Production.  210  minutes. 

(240  minutes.) 


16 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Fourth  Grade — Continued. 


Physical  Training. 
(60  minutes.) 


Evening  hour. . . . 
(60  minutes.) 


Competitive  group  games,  two  or  three  times  per  week. 
"Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  times  per 
week. 

Study,  at  least  three  nights  each  week. 
Literary   and    debating   so- 

'•{     cieties 

Entertainments 

Religious  instruction 

4 

Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 


Other  nights. 


(9  hours.) 
Fifth  Grade: 

General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English 

(60  minutes.) 


Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Current  events,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 
Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 
Civics,  once  each  week. 
Conversational     and    other 
oral  exercises.  For    outline    see    fourth 

(Five    20-minute     les-       grade, 
sons  per  week.) 

Readers. 

Classics. 

History. 

Nature. 

Mechanics  of  language  and 

written  exercises. 
A  great  deal  of  the  devel- 


Reading 

(Five     20-minute 
sons  per  week.) 


lee- 


Language  

(Two      20-minute 
sons  per  week.) 


opment  of  mechanics  of 
language  is  to  be  taught 
with  oral  exercises. 


Arithmetic. 

(30  minutes.) 
Geography 


Physiology  and  Hygiene 


(30  minutes.) 
Writing  and  Drawing  (alternate) 

(25  minutes.) 
Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 


Spelling. 

(Three    20-minutes 
sons  per  week.) 


3  lessons  per  week. 
2  lessons  per  week. 


les- 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


17 


Fifth  Grade — Continued. 

Industrial  Work 

(240  minutes.) 


Physical  training. 
(60  minutes.) 


Evening  hour. . . 
(60  minutes.) 


|  Instruction,  30  minutes. 
I  Production,  210  minutes. 
Competitive  group  games. 

(Two  or  three  times  per  week.) 
Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  times  per 

week. 

Study,  at  least  three  nights  each  week. 
Literary    and    debating    so- 
cieties. 

Entertainments. 
Religious  instruction. 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 


Other  nights. 


(9  hours.) 
Sixth  Grade: 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English 

(60  minutes.) 


Assembly,  once  each  week. 

Current  events,  once  each  week. 

Music,  once  each  week. 

Manners  and  right  conduct,  once  each  week. 

Civics,  once  each  week. 

Conversational     and     other f For    outline    see    fourth 

oral  exercises 1    grade. 

(Five  20-minute  lessons 

per  week.) 

Headers. 


Beading. 


(Five  20-minute  lessons 
per  week.) 


Language 

(Two  20-minute  lessons 
per  week.) 


Classics. 
History. 
Nature. 


Mechanics  of  language  and 
written  exercises. 

A  great  deal  of  the  devel- 
opment of  mechanics  of 
language  is  to  be  taught 
with  oral  exercises. 


Spelling. 

(Three  20-minute  lessons  per  week.) 
Arithmetic. 

(30  minutes.) 

Geography f  3  lessons  per  week. 

Physiology  and  HygieneJ  2  lessons  per  week. 
(30  minutes.) 


18 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


Sixth  Grade — Continued. 

History f3  lessons  per  week. 

Writing  or  Drawing 1 2  lessons  per  week. 

(25  minutes. ) 

Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 

Instruction,  30  minutes. 
Production,  210  minutes. 


Industrial  Work .  . . 
(240  minutes.) 


Other  nights. 


Competitive  group  games,  two  or  three  times  per  week. 

Physical  Training Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  times  per 

(60  minutes.)  week. 

Study,  at  least  three  nights  each  week. 
Literary     and     debating     so- 
Evening  hour <     cieties. 

(60  minutes.)  Entertainments. 

Religious  instruction., 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours.) 

Industrial  work  for  this  division  is  pre vocational,  except  for  those  who  are  old 
enough  and  who  know  what  occupation  they  wish  to  and  should  follow.  These  pupils 
may  enter  the  regular  industrial  classes  of  the  vocational  division. 

VOCATIONAL  DIVISION. 
BOARDING  SCHOOLS. 

The  time  assigned  to  a  subject  indicates  its  relative  importance. 

First  Year: 

(Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 

General  Exercises Current  events,  once  each  week. 

(25  minutes.)  Penmanship,  once  each  week. 

Civics,  once  each  week. 

Classics. 

Reading 

(25  minutes.) 


English 

(60  minutes.) 


Grammar 

(20  minutes.) 


Health. 

History. 
[Mechanics  of  language. 
I  Composition. 


Spelling. 

(15  minutes.) 
Vocational  Arithemtic. 

(40  minutes.) 

Industrial  Geography  and  Agricultural  Botany. 
(30  minutes.) 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


19 


First  Year — Continued. 
Breathing  Exercises. 
(10  minutes.) 


Industrial  Work. 
(4  hours.) 


Physical  Training. . , 

(60  minutes.) 
Study. 

(60  minutes.) 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours.) 

Second  Year: 


Drafting,  2  hours  per  week. 
Instruction,  1^  hours  per  week. 
Application,  20^  hours  per  week. 

Competitive  group  games,  two  or  three  lessons  per  week. 
Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  lessons  per 
week. 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


English 

(60  minutes.) 


Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 
Current  events,  once  each  week. 
Civics,  once  each  week. 
Penmanship,  once  each  week. 

Business  papers,  first  term . 
Classics. 

Reading <  General  agriculture. 

(25  minutes.)  History,  second  term. 

Health. 

Grammar J  Mechanics  of  language. 

(20  minutes.)  ^Composition. 

Spelling. 

(15  minutes.) 
Vocational  Arithmetic  and  Farm  and  Household  Accounts. 

(40  minutes.) 
History,  first  term. 
Soils  and  Soil  Fertility,  second  term. 

(30  minutes.) 

Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 


Industrial  Work . 

(4  hours.) 


Physical  Training. . 

(60  minutes.) 
Study. 

(60  minutes.) 


Drafting,  2  hours  per  week. 
Instruction,  1£  hours  per  week. 
Application,  20£  hours  per  week. 

Competitive  group  games,  two  or  three  lessons  per  week. 
Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  lessons  per 
week. 


20 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Second  Year — Continued. 

Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours.) 

Third  Year: 

Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 

General  Exercises Current  events,  once  each  week. 

(25  minutes.)  Civics,  once  each  week. 

Miscellaneous,  once  each  week. 

Classics. 

History  of  materials  used 

Heading in  different  vocations. 

Health. 

English History. 

(60  minutes.)  Written. 

Mechanics  of  language. 

Composition Spelling. 

Grammar. 
Rhetoric. 
Farm  and  Household  Physics,  and  Chemistry  (alternate). 

(70  minutes.) 

Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 


Industrial  Work. 
(4  hours.) 


Physical  Training. . 

(60  minutes.) 
Study. 

(60  minutes.) 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes. ) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours.) 


Drafting,  2  hours  per  week. 
Instruction,  1|  hours  per  week. 
Application,  20£  hours  per  week. 

Competitive  group  games,  two  or  three  lessons  per  week. 
Military  and  gymnastic  drills,  two  or  three  lessons  per 
week. 


Fourth  Year: 


General  Exercises. 
(25  minutes.) 


Assembly,  once  each  week. 
Music,  once  each  week. 
Current  events,  once  each  week. 
Civics,  once  each  week. 
Miscellaneous,  once  each  week. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


21 


English , 

(45  minutes.) 


Reading. 


.Composition. 


Fourth  Year — Continued. 

Study  materials — history 
of,     supply,     demand, 
where. 
Classics. 
History. 
Health. 
Written. 

Mechanics  of  language. 
Spelling. 
Grammar. 
Rhetoric. 
Breathing  Exercises. 

(10  minutes.) 
Rural  Economics,  and  Insects  and  Insecticides  (alternate). 

(40  minutes.) 

Field  Crops  and  Plant  Difieases  (alternate). 
(45  minutes.) 

[Instruction,  1£  hours  per  week. 
'[Application,  22£  hours  per  week. 
Competitive  group  games  (two  or  three  lessons  per 

week). 

Military  and  gymnastics  drills  (two  or  three  lessons  per 
week). 


Industrial  Work. . 

(4  hours.) 

Physical  Training . 
(60  minutes.) 


Study. 

(60  minutes.) 
Meals,  free  time,  extra  detail. 

(6  hours  15  minutes.) 
Sleep. 

(9  hours.) 

A  study  of  this  synopsis  shows  that  the  course  of  study  is  sepa- 
rated into  three  divisions — (1)  primary,  (2)  pre vocational,  and  (3) 
vocational.  The  primary  division  includes  the  first  three  grades, 
the  prevocational  division  includes  the  next  three  grades,  and  the 
vocational  division  contemplates  a  four-year  course  above  the  sixth 
grade.  The  first  group  is  the  beginning  stage,  the  second  group  is 
the  finding  stage,  and  the  third  group  is  the  fitting  stage.  In  the  first 
six  years  the  course  parallels  the  public-school  courses  in  the  essen- 
tials of  the  academic  work.  During  this  period  the  principles  are 
to  be  taught  and  the  application  of  them  is  to  be  made  just  as  soon 
after  instruction  as  possible.  The  knowledge  of  industrial  and  do- 
mestic activities  at  this  state  center  more  or  less  around  the  improve- 
ment of  the  rural  home.  This  is  the  period  when  the  boys  and  girls, 
through  trying  out  their  capacities,  are  finding  that  activity  to  which 


22  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

it  is  thought  best  to  apply  themselves  definitely  in  the  vocational 
period.  The  course  has  been  planned  with  the  vocational  aim  very 
clearly  and  positively  dominant,  with  especial  emphasis  on  agricul- 
ture and  home  making.  The  character  and  amount  of  academic 
work  has  been  determined  by  its  relative  value  and  importance  as 
a  means  of  solution  of  the  problems  of  the  farmer,  mechanic,  and 
housewife.  All  effort  is  directed  toward  training  Indian  boys  and 
girls  for  efficient  and  useful  lives  under  the  conditions  which  they 
must  meet  after  leaving  school. 

It  was  thought  best  to  have  the  course  introduced  and  tried  out 
in  the  schools  throughout  the  country  before  having  it  published  in 
permanent  form,  therefore  a  tentative  edition  was  printed  and  gotten 
ready  for  introduction  on  February  1,  1916.  To  aid  in  the  intro- 
duction of  the  course  the  entire  Indian  country  was  divided  into  21 
districts,  and  an  equal  number  of  experienced  superintendents,  one 
from  each  district,  were  chosen  to  visit  the  schools  and  assist  the  local 
superintendents  and  workers  in  the.  introduction  of  the  course.  In 
order  that  these  supervising  superintendents  might  be  better  quali- 
fied for  their  special  assignment,  they  were  brought  to  Washington 
and  spent  a  week  in  conference,  familiarizing  themselves  with  the 
aims  and  purposes,  and  all  of  the  details  of  the  course.  Three  ses- 
sions were  held  each  day  and  every  feature  of  the  course  was  dis- 
cussed. Previous  to  and  during  these  conferences  copies  of  the 
course  of  study  were  submitted  to  leading  educators  of  the  country 
for  criticisms  and  suggestions.  A  number  of  educators  of  national 
reputation  were  invited  to  participate  in  the  conferences.  Such  criti- 
cisms, suggestions,  and  conferences  were  very  helpful  and  resulted 
in  being  able  to  offer  a  course  to  Indian  schools  which  had  the  in- 
dorsement of  leading  educators  from  all  grades  and  classes  of  schools 
and  from  all  sections  of  the  country. 

On  February  1,  1916,  the  course  was  introduced  in  all  Indian 
schools  throughout  the  United  States.  It  was  cordially  received 
everywhere,  as  the  need  of  a  standard  and  uniform  course  iiad  long- 
been  felt.  The  supervising  superintendents  visited  all  of  the  schools 
once  or  twice  between  February  1  and  the  end  of  the  term  in  June 
and  rendered  much  valuable  assistance  in  the  introduction  of  the 
course.  As  a  further  means  of  perfecting  the  course  of  study  and 
aiding  in  its  introduction,  a  series  of  six  summer  institutes,  lasting 
two  weeks  each,  were  planned  and  held  during  the  months  of  June, 
July,  and  August.  One  of  the  principal  purposes  of  these  institute 
meetings  and  of  the  officers  and  employees  was  the  development  of 
a  workable  plan  for  the  successful  introduction  and  better  under- 
standing of  the  new  course  of  study  and  thus  insure  its  intelligent 
and  complete  installation  at  the  beginning  of  the  fall  term  of  the 
fiscal  year  1917.  The  institutes  were  held  at  Haskell  Institute,  Law- 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  23 

rence,  Kans. ;  Santa  Fe.,  N.  Mex. ;  Sherman  Institute,  Riverside, 
Cal. ;  Salem  Indian  School,  Chemawa,  Oreg. ;  Tomah,  Wis. ;  and 
Rapid  City,  S.  Dak.  The  superintendents  of  all  of  the  schools  of  the 
United  States,  except  10,  were  present.  The  total  attendance  was 
approximately  1,600.  Those  present  represented  all  departments  of 
Indian  schools,  industrial  as  well  as  academic,  and  also  all  phases 
of  reservation  work.  In  addition  to  a  varied  program  of  regular 
class  instruction,  in  which  English,  agriculture,  home  economics,  and 
health  were  emphasized,  daily  group  conferences  were  held,  at  which 
all  of  the  details  of  the  course  of  study  were  thoroughly  discussed. 
General  conferences  were  also  held  and  the  aims  and  purposes  of 
the  course,  as  well  as  ways  and  means  of  organizing  the  schools  to 
meet  its  requirements,  were  fully  discussed.  With  the  attendance  at 
these  institutes  being  equal  to  one-half  of  the  entire  Indian  school 
employee  force,  or  to  one-fourth  of  the  whole  number  employed  in 
the  Indian  Service,  the  aims  and  purposes  not  only  of  the  new  course 
of  study  but  of  the  many  and  varied  problems  of  the  Indian  Bureau 
are  undoubtedly  better  understood  and  more  keenly  appreciated  than 
ever  before,  and  thus  indirectly  the  preparation  and  introduction  of 
the  new  course  of  study  has  become  a  means  of  vitalizing  and  unify- 
ing the  work  of  the  entire  service. 

Definite  plans  have  already  been  made  for  the  complete  installa- 
tion of  the  course  in  every  school  of  the  service  during  the  coming 
year.  Some  revision  of  the  course  will  be  made  during  the  year 
and  undoubtedly  will  be  found  advisable  from  time  to  time  in  the 
future,  but  as  a  whole  it  has  been  found  to  be  very  practical  and 
comprehensive. 

As  intimated  at  the  beginning  of  this  section  of  the  report,  it  is 
believed  that  the  preparation  and  introduction  of  the  new  vocational 
course  of  study  marks  an  epoch  in  Indian  education  and  through  the 
emphasis  of  vocational  education  and  training  the  beginning  of  a 
new  era  in  Indian  life  and  accomplishments. 

As  a  corollary  to  the  course  of  study  and  for  the  purpose  of  obtain- 
ing more  efficient  instruction,  I  have  directed  that  the  teachers  of 
the  service  should  hereafter  be  graded  tind  judged  largely  by  their 
success  in  passing  at  least  TO  per  cent  of  the  pupils  of  their  classes. 
It  will  be  necessary,  however,  for  the  pupil  to  actually  accomplish 
the  work  before  being  so  promoted  and  steps  will  be  taken  to  guard 
against  any  promotions  which  are  not  warranted.  This  will  be 
accomplished  by  conducting  uniform  examinations  for  all  Indian 
schools  throughout  the  United  States. 

NAVAJO   SCHOOL  FACILITIES. 

The  school  facilities  for  the  Indians  of  the  several  Navajo  reser- 
vations in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico  have  been  woefully  inadequate, 


24  COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

several  thousand  children  remaining  unprovided  for  in  that  terri- 
tory. Additional  facilities  for  them  are  being  secured  as  rapidly  as 
money  is  available  and  school  plants  can  be  constructed  or  enlarged. 
The  Leupp  Boarding  School  is  being  enlarged  to  provide  for  50  more 
boys  and  45  additional  girls.  At  Western  Navajo  the  boarding  school 
has  been  increased  by  an  additional  capacity  for  118  girls.  The 
boarding  schools  at  Fort  Defiance  and  Pueblo  Bonito  have  been  en- 
larged and  a  new  day  school  has  been  built  and  opened  at  Luki 
Chuki.  Plans  for  providing  additional  school  capacity  at  other 
points  under  the  San  Juan,  Navajo,  and  Pueblo  Bonito  superin- 
tendencies  are  being  definitely  made  and  will  rapidly  be  constructed. 

PAPAGO  SCHOOLS,   ARIZONA. 

Schools  have  been  completed  at  the  Indian  villages  of  Indian 
Oasis,  Santa  Rosa,  Gila  Bend,  Chiu  Chuischu,  and  Cockleburr  con- 
templated for  the  Papago  Indians  in  southern  Arizona  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  San  Xavier  and  Pima  superintendencies.  A 
school  is  being  erected  at  Quajote  and  another  soon  will  be  erected 
at  Vamori.  All  of  these  schools  will  be  opened  in  a  few  months. 
Each  has  a  capacity  of  40  pupils,  or  a  total  of  280  new  pupils  among 
the  Papagos. 

INDIAN   STUDENTS   IN  STATE  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 

Importance  has  been  attached  to  the  education  of  the  Indian  child 
in  the  same  school  and  in  association  with  the  white  child.  In  the 
past  there  has  been  some  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  patrons  of 
white  schools  to  the  presence  of  the  Indian,  but  this  feeling  is  grad- 
ually disappearing,  and  in  nearly  all  of  the  States  and  public-school 
districts  there  is  a  willingness  to  cooperate  with  this  office.  In  many 
places,  however,  where  Indians  are  on  or  adjacent  to  their  reserva- 
tions no  adequate  public  school  system  has  been  established  in  which 
the  Indian  children  can  be  accommodated. 

The  amount,  $20,000,  appropriated  for  this  purpose  was  inade- 
quate. It  was  all  expended  for  tuition  of  the  Indian  children  in  46 
public-school  districts,  and  a  number  of  applications  for  contracts 
were  denied  for  want  of  funds. 

The  price  paid  has  ranged  from  10  to  35  cents  per  pupil  per  day, 
but  the  more  common  rate  has  been  about  15  cents. 

TRAMP  STUDENTS. 

The  term  "tramp  student"  has  been  applied  to  those  students  who 
have  formed  the  habit  of  transferring  from  one  school  to  another, 
not  because  they  required  new  work  which  the  first  school  did  not 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  25 

give  but  because  of  personal  caprice  or  perhaps  dissatisfaction  with 
necessary  or  merited  discipline. 

Often  students  have  been  admitted  to  far-distant  schools  and  their 
transportation  paid  by  the  Government,  the  schools  to  which  they 
made  application  being  without  knowledge  of  their  prior  enroll- 
ments. Again,  pupils  have  deserted  from  one  school  and  have  ap- 
plied later  for  admission  to  another  school.  Instructions  have  been 
issued  to  the  superintendents  for  the  purpose  of  correcting  these 
practices.  A  considerable  saving  in  the  cost  of  transportation  of 
pupils  will  thus  be  effected. 

The  following  expression  on  this  subject  is  an  excerpt  from  an  ad- 
dress delivered  by  me  at  a  conference  held  in  San  Francisco  last  year : 

The  student  tramp  is  for  many  reasons  to  be  discouraged.  It  is  my  informa- 
tion that  in  practically  all  of  the  nonreservation  boarding  schools  there  are 
Indian  boys  and  girls  who  have  been  transported  at  Government  expense  long 
distances  from  their  homes,  passing  other  schools  more  accessible  and  having  as 
good  facilities.  This  condition  is  ordinarily  inexcusable,  and  should  not  con- 
tinue. It  makes  a  large  and  unnecessary  expense  for  transportation,  encourages 
unrest,  has  a  demoralizing  influence  on  the  student  body,  in  many  instances 
places  pupils  in  schools  wholly  foreign  to  their  after-life  residence,  limits  de- 
sirable acquaintance  with  those  with  whom  they  will  mingle  thereafter,  and  in 
an  industrial  way,  particularly  agricultural,  gives  but  little  opportunity  for 
acquiring  knowledge  of  conditions  prevailing  in  their  respective  home  localities. 
Another  important  factor  is  that  the  nomadic  student  acquires  no  lasting  inter- 
est in  the  instituiton  where  he  attends  school;  he  is  thus  robbed  of  that  beau- 
tiful relationship  which  should  maintain  and  ought  to  engender  a  life-long  pride 
in  the  school  where  he  received  his  education. 

SCHOOLS  OF  THE  FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

There  have  been  conducted  heretofore  two  boarding  schools  for  the 
Chickasaw  Nation.  At  Collins  Institute  the  main  building  was  de- 
stroyed by  fire  and  new  buildings  are  to  be  constructed.  At  Bloom- 
field  Seminary  the  school  building  was  burned  in  January,  1914. 
Hargrove  College  property,  at  Ardmore,  has  been  purchased  and 
will  be  opened  as  Bloomfield  Seminary.  Extensive  repairs  and  im- 
provements have  been  made  in  order  to  fit  the  plant  for  its  purpose. 

There  was  appropriated  the  sum  of  $275,000  for  the  purpose  of 
aiding  the  public-school  districts  in  eastern  Oklahoma,  at  the  Qua- 
paw  superintendency  and  in  the  Osage  Nation,  which  had  been  de- 
prived of  school  revenue  because  of  the  nontaxable  Indian  lands 
within  the  districts.  This  amount  has  been  expended  under  regu- 
lations issued  by  the  Secretary  in  assistance  of  approximately  2,400 
school  districts,  on  the  basis  of  the  approximate  amount  of  revenue 
of  which  the  districts  have  been  deprived.  There  have  been  so  edu- 
cated at  the  public  schools  approximately  20,000  children  of  the  Five 
Civilized  Tribes. 


26  COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

INDUSTRIAL  CONTESTS. 

For  several  years  past  contests  have  been  held  in  which  all  students 
of  the  Indian  schools  have  engaged.  Prizes  have  been  awarded  and 
much  interest  and  benefit  found.  This  year  the  contests  were  indus- 
trial, the  students  submitting  articles  of  their  own  handiwork. 

The  following  interview  with  the  commissioner  appeared  in  the 
Sioux  City  (Iowa)  Tribune,  where  he  stopped  en  route  returning  to 
Washington  from,  attendance  at  the  institute  meetings  held  during 
the  summer : 

I  have  just  finished  a  tour  of  nearly  10,000  miles,  during  which  I  have  at- 
tended Indian  Service  employee  institutes  held  at  Lawrence,  Kans.,  Santa  Fe, 
N.  Mex.,  Riverside,  Cal.,  Salem,  Oreg.,  Tomah,  Wis.,  and  Rapid  City,  S.  Dak., 
where  I  met  and  conferred  with  a  large  part  of  the  6,000  employees  of  the 
Indian  Service,  including  all  the  superintendents  of  the  reservations  and 
schools,  except  a  half  dozen  who  were  necessarily  absent. 

Each  of  these  institutes  was  in  session  two  weeks,  and  T  was  at  each 
of  them  two  or  three  days.  They  were  called  for  the  purpose  of  discussing 
administrative  problems  and  to  work  out  the  introduction  of  a  new  system  of 
vocational  education,  which  is  conceded  to  be  the  best  vocational  course  in  the 
United  States.  While  strengthening  the  academic  side,  vocational  education 
is  stressed,  the  prominent  features  being  agriculture,  stock  raising,  domestic 
science,  and  domestic  arts.  We  are  undertaking  to  make  the  Indians  successful 
farmers,  stock  raisers,  and  home  builders,  and  our  accomplishments  in  this 
respect  are  so  gratifying  as  to  be  nlinost  unbelievable.  If  the  Indians  of  the 
United  States  progress  for  the  next  10  years  as  they  have  during  the  last 
3,  they  will  practically  become  self-supporting,  with  a  corresponding  reduc- 
tion in  congressional  appropriations.  It  is  our  purpose  to  make  them  producers 
rather  than  altogether  consumers,  as  in  the  years  gone  by. 

The  Indians  have  advanced  more  rapidly  during  the  last  50  years  than  has 
any  other  race  of  people  within  a  similar  period  in  the  history  of  the  world,  but 
there  is  yet  much  to  be  done.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  the  Indian  to  accom- 
plish as  much  in  50  years  as  the  Caucasian  has  achieved  in  2,0(XK  years.  It 
requires  time  to  transform  a  people  from  buffalo  hunters  into  intensive  farmers. 
If  I  were  called  upon  to  name  the  most  important  word  in  connection  with  the 
administration  of  Indian  affairs,  I  wrould  unhesitatingly  say  "patience"- 
patience  not  only  on  the  part  of  the  administrative  officers  of  the  Government, 
but  among  white  people  who  have  to  do  with  conditions  affecting  the  red  man. 
The  chief  instrument  in  bringing  about  this  new  relationship  has  been  the 
inauguration  of  a  policy  of  cooperative  helpfulness  and  human  sympathy,  inject- 
ing red  blood  into  the  administration  of  Indian  affairs.  The  results  from  such  a 
procedure  have  been  marvel ously  effective. 

I  have  great  pleasure  in  the  announcement  that  the  Indian  is  no  longer  a 
vanishing  race.  Our  dependable  census  statistics  for  1916  disclose  the  fact 
that,  as  a  result  of  the  health  campaign  recently  inaugurated,  there  are  to-day 
more  Indians  in  the  United  States  than  there  were  10  years  ago,  5  years  ago, 
3  years  ago,  1  year  ago,  and  that  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  they  will  con- 
tinue to  increase.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  notable  achievement  of  the  present 
administration  of  Indian  affairs.  While  it  is  important  to  educate  the  children, 
and  to  protect  the  property  of  the  Indian,  it  is  altogether  most  important  that 
we  save  his  life  and  restore  his  constitution. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  27 

A  large  element  in  the  success  of  our  campaign  for  health  betterment  has 
come  from  an  effective  attack  upon  the  liquor  traffic  among  Indians.  Liquor 
has,  beyond  question,  been  the  Indian's  greatest  foe.  It  destroys  his  health, 
lowers  his  morals,  and  makes  him  an  easy  prey  of  the  unscrupulous.  The 
present  Congress  approved  our  antiliquor  campaign  by  increasing  the  appropria- 
tion for  this  work  $50,000.  This  Congress  also  construed  the  word  "  liquor,"  as 
written  in  the  Federal  statutes,  to  include  beer,  and  enacted  a  law  making  the 
possession  of  liquor  in  Indian  country  prima  facia  evidence  of  intent  to  intro- 
duce and  sell.  With  these  added  weapons,  we  will  be  even  more  successful  in 
our  fight  with  the  liquor  demon. 

While  the  advancement  of  the  Indian  has  been  primarily  the  results  of  the 
efforts  of  the  Indian  Bureau,  there  have  been  many  other  elements  of  helpful- 
ness, notable  among  them  being  the  missionary  work  of  the  churches  of  the 
country,  including  practically  every  denomination. 

I  have  been  active  in  a  professional  and  business  way  throughout  my  life. 
I  thought  I  understood  devotion  to  duty,  and  have  always  been  a  hard  worker, 
but  I  would  be  less  than  frank  if  I  failed  to  say  to  my  old-time  friends  that 
until  entering 'the  Indian  Service  I  had  no  such  conception  of  either  as  this 
new  experience  has  developed.  I  have  now  come  to  appreciate  the  satisfaction 
one  enjoys  in  the  personal  sacrifice  involved  in  doing  things  for  the  other  fellow. 
I  am  a  living  example  that  it  is  impossible  to  kill  a  man  with  hard  work. 

My  greatest  present  ambition  is  to  so  administer  this  great  responsibility  as 
to  invite  the  respect  of  our  entire  citizenship,  and  to  secure  the  confidence  of 
the  red  race. 

AGRICULTURE  AND  STOCK-RAISING  ACTIVITIES. 

The  Indians  have  made  continued  progress  during  the  year  in 
farming  and  stock  raising.  Final  reports  are  not  yet  available,  but 
it  is  apparent  that  the  total  cultivated  area  is  much  greater  than  last 
year,  when  a  large  increase  was  made  over  all  previous  years,  with 
consequent  encouraging  advancement  toward  self-support.  While 
getting  the  Indians  firmly  established  in  farming,  it  has  been  cus- 
tomary to  furnish  them  large  quantities  of  seed  in  return  for  labor, 
to  be  paid  for  in  cash  on  the  reimbursable  plan,  or  returned  in  kind 
at  harvest.  Special  attention  has  been  directed  toward  educating  the 
Indians  to  select  and  save  their  own  seed.  A  conspicuous  example  is 
at  Sisseton,  where  only  $7,500  worth  of  seed  was  furnished  the 
Indians  in  1916,  as  compared  with  $11,500  for  1914.  The  importance 
of  seed  selection  and  its  testing  has  been  emphasized.  Many  Ceases  of 
noteworthy  activity  and  industry  by  the  Indians  in  farming  and 
stock  raising  have  come  to  my  notice  during  the  year. 

During  the  year  1915-16  the  number  of  stock  on  various  reserva- 
tions, in  addition  to  the  natural  increase,  was  increased  by  the  pur- 
chase of  the  following  animals :  Blackfeet,  30  bulls ;  Cheyenne  Eiver, 
80  bulls,  1,360  heifers,  49  cows,  12  mares;  Colville,  300  heifers;  Crow, 
140  bulls;  Crow  Creek,  15  bulls,  11  heifers,  25  cows,  29  mares;  Flat- 
head,  3  bulls,  175  heifers  and  cows;  Fort  Belknap,  30  bulls;  Fort 
Hall,  30  bulls,  200  heifers;  Fort  Peck,  6  bulls,  20  heifers,  19  mares; 
Kaibab,  10  bulls,  200  heifers;  Klamath,  80  bulls;  Lower  Brule,  10 


28  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

bulls,  307  heifers;  Moqui,  15  bulls;  Navajo,  25  bulls;  Pine  Ridge,  70 
bulls,  250  heifers,  186  cows,  186  mares;  Pueblo  day  schools,  10  bulls; 
Rosebud,  45  bulls,  1,014  heifers,  356  mares;  Shoshone,  50  bulls; 
Standing  Rock,  25  bulls,  530  heifers,  46  cows,  48  mares,  1,000  steers : 
Tongue  River,  25  bulls;  Uintah  and  Ouray,  12  bulls;  Walapai,  10 
bulls,  150  heifers;  Blackfeet,  700  heifers.  The  purchase  of  250  heifers 
and  25  bulls  for  Camp  McDowell  is  now  pending,  the  superintend- 
ent having  been  instructed  to  procure  bids. 

The  following  interview  with  me  was  published  in  the  Chicago 
Herald  and  other  newspapers  throughout  the  country  immediately 
after  the  shipment  and  sale  of  the  Crow  cattle  mentioned : 

Cato  Sells,  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  has  recently  returned  from  Chi- 
cago, where  he  supervised  the  sale  of  34  carloads  out  of  a  shipment  of  51  cars  of 
Indian  cattle  from  the  Crow  Reservation,  Mont.,  17  carloads  having  been  sold 
at  Omaha  the  day  before.  The  commissioner  spent  most  of  a  day  on  horseback, 
riding  among  the  cattle  in  the  pens  of  the  stockyards,  discussing  the  cattle  and 
prices  with  his  commission  man  and  the  buyers. 

Commissioner  Sells  is  not  only  a  lawyer  and  banker,  but  is  also  a  real-thing 
farmer  and  stockman.  He  knows  the  business  from  every  angle.  In  a  conver- 
sation to-day  with  the  newspaper  men  Commissioner  Sells  said : 

"  Two  years  ago  last  June,  with  funds  derived  from  the  sale  of  part  of  their 
lands,  we  purchased  for  the  Crow  Indians  7,000  2-year-old  heifers,  2,000  yearling 
steers,  and  350  bulls.  Since  then  these  cattle  have  been  handled  under  my  direc- 
tion and  the  immediate  supervision  of  Reservation  Superintendent  Estep  and 
Superintendent  of  Live  Stock  Willcutt,  assisted  by  Indian  stockmen  and  line 
riders. 

"Two  hundred  and  fifty-six  head  have  heretofore  been  sold,  but  this  sale  WHS 
the  first  big  shipment,  when  51  carloads  of  Crow  Indian  cattle  reached  the 
Omaha  and  Chicago  stockyards  and  sold  for  $97,993.42.  All  of  these  steers  were 
range  raised  and  grass  fed,  not  a  pound  of  corn  or  feed  other  than  grass  and 
hay  ever  having  been  fed  to  any  of  them.  Including  the  increase  of  the  herd, 
the  profit  of  the  Crow  Indians  on  the  original  purchase  in  27  months,  after 
paying  all  expenses,  has  been  $350,000.  The  first  year  after  the  purchase  of 
these  cattle,  the  Indians  cut  and  stacked  5,000  tons  of  hay  to  winter  their  herd, 
and  last  winter  cut  and  stacked  nearly  7,000  tons.  The  winter  loss  during  each 
of  these  two  years  has  been  about  2  per  cent,  which  is  considerably  less  than 
the  loss  usually  sustained  by  white  cattlemen  during  the  winters  of  the 
Northwest. 

"  Heretofore  our  conduct  of  the  stock  business  among  the  Indians  has  con- 
sisted largely  of  upbreeding  and  the  development  of  herds.  Everywhere  the 
Indians  have  taken  great  interest  in  their  stock,  both  as  to  tribal  herds  and 
those  individually  owned,  and  the  increase  in  number  and  value  has  been 
such  as  to  insure  a  business  man's  profit.  We  have  sold  wool  and  mutton  arid 
some  horses,  but  we  are  only  now  commencing  to  widely  and  substantially 
realize  on  their  cattle. 

"These  sales  from  the  Crow  Reservation  ar£  the  beginning  of  large  sales 
from  this  and  other  reservations.  It  is  a  demonstration  of  the  wisdom  of  the 
policy  of  utilizing  the  grazing  lands  of  the  reservations  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Indians  and  positive  indication  of  the  responsive  disposition  of  the  Indians 
when  given  opportunity  with  sympathetic  encouragement  to  do  things  for  them- 
selves. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  %  29 

"About  three  and  a  half  years  ago  I  inaugurated,  and  have  since  aggressively 
pursued,  a  policy  of  farm  and  stock-raising  betterments  among  the  Indians,  the 
immediate  purpose  being  to  make  them  producers  rather  than  altogether  con- 
sumers. Shortly  after  becoming  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  I  discovered 
that  the  agricultural  and  grazing  lands  on  Indian  reservations  were  not  being 
utilized  as  they  should  have  been;  that  the  large  part  of  their  grazing  lands 
was  leased  to  white  men  for  a  minumum  rental,  and  likewise  much  of  the 
agricultural  land ;  that  the  Indians  were  not  making  proper  industrial  progress, 
and  that  their  income  from  the  leased  lands  was  much  less  than  should  have 
been  derived  either  when  rented  or  cultivated  by.  themselves;  all  of  which 
meant  lack  of  progress  and  large  appropriations  by  Congress,  neither  of  which 
was  in  any  sense  satisfactory,  and  all  demanding  radical  change.  To  remedy 
this  condition,  the  Indian  Office  has  made  a  vigorous  and  unceasing  campaign, 
with  gratifying  results.  For  example,  three  years  ago  one  reservation  in  the 
Northwest  had  2,800  acres  under  plow;  last  year  there  was  in  cultivation  by 
Indians  on  this  reservation  15,000  acres.  The  advancement  is  not  so  great 
everywhere  as  there,  but  it  is  exemplary  of  the  progress  being  made  by  the 
Indians  as  farmers  on  practically  all  the  reservations. 

"  It  can  not  be  expected  that  all  Indians  shall  advance  from  plainsmen  to 
intensive  farmers  in  one  generation,  but  that  they  are  now  making  tremendous 
progress  is  apparent  throughout  the  entire  country,  many  of  them  being  among 
the  best  and  most  prosperous  farmers  in  the  vicinity  of  their  residence,  fre- 
quently comparing  favorably  with  their  white  neighbors.  As  stockmen  they 
have  been  even  more  successful.  The  Indian  is  a  natural  herdsman.  He  loves 
horses  and  readily  adapts  himself  to  raising  cattle  and  sheep.  During  the  last 
three  years  the  Indian  Bureau  has  purchased  with  funds  of  the  Indians  (not  a 
dollar  of  the  amount  invested  being  gratuity)  more  than  $2,000,000  worth  of 
cattle,  horses,  and  sheep  for  tribal 'herds  and  individual  Indians,  most  of  the 
purchases  being  for  upbreeding  stock  and  young  stuff — heifers  for  breeding  pur- 
poses ;  at  the  same  time  an  industrious  effort  has  been  made  to  dispose  of  in- 
ferior male  animals.  Accompanying  these  activities  there  has  been  a  corre- 
sponding reduction  in  the  leased  acreage.  The  carrying  capacity  for  reserva- 
tion pastures  has  been  reestirnated,  rentals  increased  to  a  fair  price  and  round- 
ups and  counts  carefully  made  to  determine  where  lessees  failed  to  pay  for  the 
full  number  of  stock  grazed  under  their  permits.  For  example,  on  the  San 
Carlos  Reservation,  in  Arizona,  charges  to  grazing  permittees  were  advanced  so 
that  the  Indians  on  this  reservation  now  receive  $25,000  annually  more  than  at 
any  time  theretofore,  and  on  this  same  reservation  cattlemen  have  been  required 
to  pay  $34,000  excess  grazing  fees.  The  new  leases  cover  the  count  upon  which 
this  excess  payment  was  made.  Long-time  sheep  leases  on  a  reservation  in  the 
Northwest,  which  recently  expired,  have  been  made  to  new  lessees  on  a  com- 
petitive basis  for  $36.000  annually,  which  previously  paid  $16,000 ;  all  of  which 
charges  and  collections  are  entirely  reasonable  and  fair  "  as  between  man  and 
man  "  and  should  be  equally  just  as  between  white  men  and  Indians.  While 
the  protection  of  our  wards  is  a  first  consideration,  we  have  not  been  un- 
mindful of  the  interests  of  the  stockmen  in  matters  of  fencing,  water  supply, 
and  leases  sufficiently  long  to  realize  on  their  improvements  and  investment. 

"  Pony  stallions  are  no  longer  used,  and  the  horse  stock  is  being  so  rapidly 
improved  that  on  many  reservations  the  Indian-owned  horses  are  marketed 
for  prices  almost,  if  ifot  quite,  equal  to  those  raised  by  white  ranchmen.  The 
southwestern  Indians,  notably  the  Navajos  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona,  are 
among  the  best  sheep  raisers  in  the  United  States.  The  Navajos  own  more  than 
2,000,000  sheep,  and  they  are  now  being  upbred  so  rapidly  that  buyers  are  eager 
to  purchase  their  wool  at  the  same  price  paid  to  white  sheepmen.  Two  years 
65333—16 3 


30  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

ago  we  purchased,  with  reimbursable  funds, ,  a  band  of  sheep  for  the  Jicarilla 
Indians,  and  last  year  their  net  profit  from  wool  alone  was  $3,600.  Recently 
Frank  Reed,  a  Crow  Indian,  sold  a  range-raised  and  grass-fed  steer  for  $10.50 
per  hundred.  This  is  said  to  be  the  highest  price  ever  paid  for  a  grass-fed  steer 
on  the  Chicago  market. 

"  These  conditions  and  achievements  now  exist  in  varying  degree  on  all 
Indian  reservations  and  among  numerous  individual  Indians. 

"  There  is  every  probability  that  the  Indian  will  soon  become  the  cattle  king 
of  America,  a  great  factor  in  the  world's  wool  market,  and  a  large  producer 
of  horses. 

"  If  the  Indians  continue  to  progress  as  rapidly  for  the  next  10  years  as  they 
have  for  the  past  3  years,  they  will  be  practically  self-supporting,  with  corre- 
sponding reduction  in  appropriations." 

LEASING  TRIBAL  LANDS  FOR  GRAZING  PURPOSES. 

That  I  might  pass  intelligently  upon  the  renewal  of  permits  for 
grazing  stock  on  Indian  reservations,  I  caused  an  experienced  stock- 
man-to  thoroughly  examine  the  ranges  to  determine  their  real  carry- 
ing capacity  and  to  ascertain  to  what  extent  and  at  what  cost  a  better 
water  supply  could  be  developed;  also  the  necessity  for  and  the  ex- 
pense of  additional  fence  construction  with  a  view  to  increasing  the 
number  of,  and*  protection  for,  the  stock.  Round-ups  and  counts 
were  had  to  determine  whether  permittees  were  grazing  stock  in 
excess  of  the  lease  limit  for  which  they  were  paying  and  a  readjust- 
ment of  charges  for  grazing  privileges  made  to  the  end  that  a  fair 
and  just  rate  to  all  concerned  be  established.  As  a  result  of  this  work 
great  improvements  have  been  effected,  large  sums  collected  for  excess 
grazing,  and  fees  considerably  increased. 

To  protect  the.  interests  of  the  individual  Indians  whose  allot- 
ments are  being  used  inside  of  the  big  pastures,  provision  has  been 
made  that  such  persons  be  paid  pro  rata  for  the  use  of  their  lands 
so  long  as  they  are  a  part  of  the  open  range,  or  that  they  may  with- 
draw them  from  the  range  by  inclosing  with  a  lawful  fence. 

LEASING  FOR  FARMING  AND  GRAZING  PURPOSES. 

Congress  has  at  various  times  enacted  legislation  authorizing  the 
leasing  of  individual  allotments  where  the  allottees  could  not  them- 
selves make  beneficial  use  of  their  lands  by  reason  of  age,  disability, 
or  inability.  To  permit  the  indiscriminate  leasing  of  these  allot- 
ments would  defeat  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  made.  Al- 
lottees are  being  urged  to  go  upon  their  allotments  and  establish 
homes'  and  work  the  lands  rather  than  to  depend  for  a  living  upon 
the  rentals  received.  However,  to  govern  cases  in  which  it  seems  to 
be  expedient  to  make  leases,  regulations  have  been  modified  and 
revised. 

Special  laws  have  been  enacted  to  cover  certain  reservations  and  in 
these  cases  particular  instructions  have  been  issued  to  the  various  su- 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  31 

perintendents.  It  is  believed  that  the  changes  made  in  the  regula- 
tions will  materially  assist  in  inducing  the  Indians  to  engage  in  farm- 
ing and  stock-raising  pursuits. 

ERADICATION  OF  STOCK  DISEASE. 

Congress  has  appropriated  $100,000  for  suppressing  contagious 
diseases  which  have  been  prevalent  among  the  live  stock  of  the  In- 
dians. This  will  permit  adequate  measures  for  eradicating  these  dis- 
eases. The  stamping  out  of  dourine  is  carried  on  in  cooperation  with 
representatives  qf  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry.  It  will  practi- 
cally be  completed  on  Montana  and  North  and  South  Dakota  Reser- 
vations this  year.  Limited  funds  have  prevented  as  successful  re- 
sults on  the  reservations  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico.  j 

The  cooperation  of  representatives  of  the  Bureau  of  Animal  In- 
dustry in  the  inspection  of  the  stock  of  the  schools,  agencies,  and  indi- 
vidual Indians  in  purchases  made  for  them,  and  eradicating  con- 
tagious diseases  has  been  of  valuable  assistance. 

EXPERIMENTATION. 

The  experimental  farms  already  in  operation  at  Shoshone,  San 
Juan.  Malki,  and  other  places  were  continued  during  the  year  with 
good  results.  In  general,  more  emphasis  has  been  placed  upon  dem- 
onstration work  on  the  farms  of  the  Indians  themselves,  under  the 
conditions  which  they  must  meet  in  their  actual  farm  work ;  in  other 
words,  the  demonstration  material  consists  of  the  Indian's  growing 
crops,  on  his  own  land,  in  which  he  naturally  takes  more  interest. 
This  plan  is  in  line  with  the  most  advanced  thought  of  up-to-date 
agricultural  experts  and  teachers. 

SACATON    FARM. 

The  experimental  farm  conducted  at  Sacaton,  on  the  Pima  Reser- 
vation in  Arizona,  in  cooperation  with  the  Bureau  of  Plant  Indus- 
try of  the  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture,  was  operated 
during  the  year  on  the  same  basis  as  formerly,  except  that  plans  have 
been  formulated  and  partially  put  into  effect  for  its  enlargement. 
This  will  bring  it  to  the  full  measure  of  its  usefulness  along  experi- 
mental lines.  A  laboratory  building  completely  equipped  was  erected 
during  the  year  for  the  benefit  of  the  experts  on  duty  at  the  farm, 
which  is  meeting  requirements  and  is  contributing  materially  to  the 
successful  prosecution  of  the  work  at  this  station. 

COOPERATIVE  EXTENSION  WORK. 

A  significant  development  of  the  year  was  the  completion  of  defi- 
nite arrangements  for  cooperative  extension  work  with  the  Federal 
and  State  agricultural  departments  under  the  provisions  of  the 


32  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAX   AFFAIRS. 

Smith-Lever  Act,  and  the  county  agents  are  cooperating  with  the 
farmers  of  this  service  in  behalf  of  the  Indians  along  systematic  and 
effective  lines.  The  officials  of  the  Federal  and  State  agricultural 
departments  connected  with  this  work  have,  without  exception,  ex- 
pressed a  willingness  to  advance  it  among  the  Indians.  Their  sympa-' 
thetic  and  helpful  attitude  will  be  a  potent  influence  among  the 
Indians.  Boj^s'  and  girls'  clubs  were  organized  on  23  reservations. 
The  Grain  Sorghum  Club  at  the  Phoenix  school  was  awarded  the 
first  prize  in  the  State  of  Arizona. 

Agricultural  demonstration  work  "was  very  successful  at  Cheyenne 
River,  Flathead,  Hayward,  Kickapoo.  La  Pointe,  Omaha,  San  Xav- 
ier,  Sisseton*  Tomah,  and  Turtle  Mountain. 

NATIVE  INDUSTRIES. 

Baskets,  pottery,  and  bead  work  are  made  by  Indians  and  encour- 
aged by  the  Indian  Office,  but  the  Navajo  blanket  industry  is  the 
most  important  and  remunerative.  This  industry,  has  not  been  as 
extensive  as  in  previous  years,  owing  to  the  Indians  having  received 
higher  prices  for  their  wool,  which  they  have  preferred  to  sell  as 
clipped  rather  than  weave  into  fabrics. 

The  system  of  tagging  blankets  at  the  San  Juan  and  Mpqui  Indian 
reservations  has  been  extended  to  all  Navajo  reservations  with  the 
ultimate  aim  of  requiring  all  traders  W7ho  purchase  blankets  to  dis- 
tinguish them  by  permanently  attached  tags.  This  guarantees  the 
genuineness  of  the  article  and  gives  it  unique  and  exceptional  value. 
These  metal  tags  are  fastened  to  the  blanket  by  means  of  a  wire  and 
lead  seal.  They  are  placed  on  all  blankets  for  which  the  Indians 
receive  a  price  of  75  cents  or  more  per  pound.  If  the  system  work:-: 
satisfactorily,  it  will  be  extended  to  baskets,  pottery,  and  other 
Indian-made  articles.  New  markets  for  the  sale  of  the  products  of 
native  Indian  industry  are  being  exploited,  and  it  is  believed  that  if 
the  arrangements  now  under  consideration  can  be  perfected  the 
Inlians  will  hereafter  have  a  more  certain  and  better  market  with 
comparatively  satisfactory  prices. 

The  directors  of  the  Commercial  Museum  and  the  University 
Museum,  both  of  Philadelphia,  have  indicated  their  willingness  to 
cooperate  with  us  by  giving  valuable  floor  space  and  assisting  in  set- 
ting up  exhibits  in  conspicuous  places  properly  marked  to  direct  the 
public  to  the  Indian  source  of  supply. 

Prominent  and  reliable  merchants  from  the  populous  centers,  deal- 
ing in  such  wares  extensively,  have  indicated  their  interest  in  a  de- 
pendable and  standardized  supply  of  native  Indian  industries,  and  if 
successfully  developed  will  be  a  source  of  distribution  greatly  to 
the  advantage  of  the  Indians. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  33 

LACE  MAKING. 

The  Sybil  Carter  Lace  Association  of  New  York  City  maintains 
lace  schools  on  several  reservations,  where  it  furnishes  its  own 
teachers,  all  the  material,  the  funds  needed  to  pay  the  Indians,  and 
disposes  of  the  finished  product.  Last  September,  through  a  coopera- 
tive agreement  with  this  association,  a  meeting  was  held  at  Laguna, 
where  the  teachers  of  day  schools  and  field  matrons  in  that  section 
were  given  instructions  in  lace  making  which  would  enable  them  to 
cooperate  with  the  representative  of  the  association  in  extending  this 
industry  to  the  pueblos  under  the  Albuquerque  superintendency. 

This  association  also  intended  to  start  a  lace  school  at  Eastern 
Cherokee,  N.  C.,  but  was  unable  to  obtain  a  teacher,  and  was  com- 
pelled for  the  present  to  give  up  the  project. 

Lace  work  among  the  Mission  reservations  in  California  was  here- 
tofore conducted  in  cooperation  with  Mrs.  Cordelia  S.  Sterling,  of 
Redlands,  Cal.  Prior  to  her  death  this  spring  ill  health  caused  her 
to  give  up  this  labor  of  love,  and  her  death  had  a  depressing  effect 
upon  the  industry  of  which  she  had  so  long  been  the  mainspring. 
Last  year  two  teachers  were  employed  by  the  Indian  Bureau  to  teach 
this  art  among  the  Mission  Indians  in  California.  Altogether  the 
Indians  have  shown  an  interest  in  and  adaptability  to  lace  making, 
•indicating  that  it  will  be  successful  and  profitable  as  an  industry  for 
the  home  employment  of  Indian  women  and  children.  Some  In- 
dians have  shown  skill,  both  in  the  making  of  the  lace  and  patterns. 
Many  have  indicated  industry.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that  the 
interest  of  purchasers  can  be  increased,  by  the  development  of  native 
Indian  patterns,  and  it  is  our  purpose  to  undertake  the  working  out 
of  such  a  plan. 

INDIAN  FAIRS. 

• 
The  holding  of  agricultural  fairs  on  the  different  reservations  and 

of  placing  Indian  exhibits  at  county  and  State  fairs  has  been  con- 
tinued with  excellent  results.  Fifty-four  fairs  were  held  in  1915, 
as  compared  with  38  the  previous  year,  of  which  32,  or  nearly  60 
per  cent,  were  entirely  supported  by  voluntary  contributions  from 
Indians,  gate  receipts,  etc.  On  most  reservations  where  Indian  fairs 
are  held  there  is  a  permanently  organized  fair  association,  with  In- 
dian officers,  charged  with  entire  responsibility  for  the  management 
of  the  fair,  under  the  supervision  of  the  superintendent.  This  makes 
the  Indians  feel  that  it  is  their  enterprise,  for  which  they  are  respon- 
sible. 

About  100  certificates  of  merit,  under  the  official  seal  of  the  Indian 
Office  and  the  personal  signature  of  the  commissioner,  were  sent  to 
Indian  first-prize  winners  at  Indian  and  white  fairs  in  recognition 
of  their  accomplishments. 


34  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

On  January  26,  1916,  I  addressed  the  following  letter  concerning 
Indian  fairs  to  reservation  superintendents : 

To  superintendents: 

As  stated  in  Circular  No.  1041,  the  Indian  fairs  and  the  Indian  exhibits  at 
county  and  State  fairs  in  1915  were  the  most  successful  ever  -known  in  the 
history  of  -the  Indian  Service.  A  large  number  of  prizes  were  won  by  Indians 
on  agricultural  products  in  open  competition  with  the  exhibits  of  white  farmers, 
which  is  gratifying  evidence  that  our  work  in  behalf  of  the  industrial  uplift 
of  the  Indians  is  accomplishing  substantial  and  permanent  results. 

While,  of  course,  the  Indians  themselves  are  primarily  entitled  to  the  credit 
for  these  excellent  results,  yet  they  could  not  have  been  achieved  without  the 
hearty  support  and  cooperation  of  superintendents  and  employees,  whose  splen- 
did work  along  these  lines  I  greatly  appreciate.  Yet  I  feel  that  the  possibili- 
ties of  Indian  fairs  as  a  potent  factor  in  the  industrial  progress  of  the  Indians 
have  just  begun  to  be  realized,  and  I  wish  to  offer  some  suggestions  with  respect 
to  the  conduct  of  future  fairs,  based  on  the  experience  of  the  past  two  years. 

I  understand  that  at  some  of  the  fairs  the  exhibits  are  contributed  by  a  com- 
paratively small  number  of  the  more  intelligent  and  progressive  Indians  in 
proportion  to  the  whole  number  farming.  In  order  to  make  a  good  showing  I 
fear  that  the  tendency  sometimes  is  to  pay  most  attention  to  Indians  of  this 
class.  This  should  not  be,  and  I  desire  that  every  effort  be  put  forth  to  make 
the  fairs  more  representative  of  the  industrial  accomplishments  of  all  the  In- 
dians by  getting  the  largest  possible  number  to  enter  exhibits  at  the  fair. 

The  superintendents  should  be  even  now  making  tentative  plans  for  their 
next  fair,  with  the  view  of  issuing  their  premium  list  early  in  the  spring  so 
that  the  Indians  may  have  the  fair  "  idea  "  definitely  in  mind  when  planting 
and  caring  for  their  crops,  in  order  to  select  some  particular  product  or  prod- 
ucts on  which  they  wish  to  contest  for  a  prize,  thereby  giving  it  or  them  special 
attention  with  the  specific  purpose  of  growing  the  best  possible  crop.  If  prop- 
erly followed  up  by  the  farmers  this  will  eventually  get  the  Indian  into  the 
habit  of  cultivating  all  of  his  crops  according  to  the  latest  and  most  approved 
methods.  The  influence  of  the  fair  will  thus  operate  to  the  permanent  benefit 
of  the  Indian  in  all  the  varied  activities  of  his  life  and  contribute  materially 
to  his  progress. 

Permanent  fair  associations  with  fndian  officers  exist  on  a  number  of  res- 
ervations, holding  successful  fairs,  which  have  the  exclusive  management  of 
the  fair  under  the  supervision  of  the  superintendent,  thus  tending  to  emphasize 
to  the  Indians  the  fact  that  the  fair  is  primarily  their  enterprise.  These  asso- 
ciations should  be  organized  on  all  reservations  holding  fairs  where  they  do  not 
now  exist.  It  is  suggested  that  the  principal  officers  consist  of  president,  vice 
president,  secretary,  and  treasurer,  with  an  executive  committee  made  up  of 
one  Indian  from  each  farm  district  on  the  reservation,  who  would  work  in  con- 
junction with  the  farmer  of  that  district  in  further  developing  the  interest  of 
the  Indians  in  the  fair  and  in  arranging  plans.  The  officers  of  the  fair  asso- 
ciation should  be  progressive  Indians,  who  are  really  interested  in  the  fair,  as 
demonstrated  by  their  active  participation. 

Previous  instructions  limiting  the  fair  to  three  days,  prohibiting  the  old-time 
dances'  entirely,  and  restricting  the  horse  races,  if  any,  to  two  each  day,  are 
still  in  effect  and  must  be  observed.  I  realize  that  some  form  of  amusement 
or  recreation  is  necessary  at  the  fair,  and  it  will  be  the  superintendent's  duty 
to  devise  helpful  and  constructive  substitutes  for  the  old-time  practices,  as  out- 
lined in  Circular  No.  836,  such  as  athletic  contests,  feats  of  strength  or  skill, 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  35 

baseball  games,  foot  races,  etc.  If  evening  entertainment  is  thought  advisable, 
stereopticon  talks  on  suitable  topics,  band  concerts,  etc.,  might  be  arranged.  In 
this  connection  representatives  from  the  State  agricultural  college  were  present 
at  a  number  of  the  fairs  the  past  season  and  delivered  instructive  addresses  to 
the  Indians.  Superintendents  should  endeavor  to  make  these  addresses  a  regu- 
lar feature  of  the  fair  each  year,  submitting  advance  request  for  authority  to 
expends  funds  which  may  be  necessary  to  defray  the  expenses. 

Climatic  and  soil  conditions,  and  the  crops  produced  on  the  different  reserva- 
tions, vary  so  widely  that  no  uniform  premium  list  can  be  adopted.  However, 
broadly  speaking,  the  premium  list  for  your  fair  should  be  arranged  under  the 
following  heads:  Agricultural  products,  live  stock,  poultry,  culinary  products, 
needlework,  Indian  handicraft,  miscellaneous  exhibits  (baby  show,  etc.).  Under 
each  heading  it  would  be  well  to  offer  special  prizes  for  exhibits  of  those 
articles  or  products  which  it  is  desired  especially  to  encourage  on  each  par- 
ticular reservation,  such  as  live  stock,  poultry,  hogs,  milch  cows,  etc.  Prizes 
should  also  be  offered  for  the  best-kept  home  and  the  greatest  improvement  in 
home  conditions  during  the  year,  and  the  best  garden,  with  such  others  as  may 
occur  to  the  superintendent,  adapted  to  conditions  on  each  reservation.  A 
sanitary  and  heath  exhibit  should  also  be  arranged,  if  practicable,  with  the 
cooperation  of  the  agency  physician  or  field  matron,  and  lectures  on  these 
topics  given,  illustrated  with  slides  obtained  from  the  Public  Health  Service, 
as  suggested  in  Circular  No.  1041. 

When  you  have  a  representative  from  the  State  agricultural  college  present 
at  the  fair,  if  agreeable,  he  might  act  as  one  of  the  judges  of  the  agricultural 
or  live-stock  exhibits,  pointing  out  to  the  Indians  the  good  and  bad  qualities 
of  some  of  the  principal  exhibits,  giving  the  "  whys  and  wherefores  "  in  each 
case.  Where  no  representative  of  the  college  is  present,  superintendents  might 
request  several  of  the  leading  farmers  or  stockmen  of  the  locality  to  act  as 
judges  in  the  same  manner. 

I  desire  that  superintendents  again  read  Circular  No.  896  on  the  subject 
and  endeavor  to  conduct  their  fair  accordingly,  so  far  as  conditions  will  permit. 
As  stated  therein: 

"The  campaign  for  the  Indians'  industrial  development  anticipates  the  pass- 
ing of  the  Indian  fairs  in  favor  of  the  county  and  State  fairs,  where  the  Indian 
farmers  on  equal  terms  will  compete  with  the  white  man." 

While  very  successful  Indian  exhibits  were  shown  at  several  county  fairs  this 
fall,  yet  the  number  is  not  nearly  so  great  as  should  be.  I  desire  that  special 
-efforts  be  made  to  place  an  Indian  exhibit  at  every  county  fair  adjacent  to 
Indian  reservations,  in  direct  competition  with  the  exhibits  of  white  farmers, 
entered  in  the  names  of  the  several  Indians  contributing  to  the  exhibit  and 
not  collectively  as  an  agency  or  school  exhibit.  The  matter  of  Indian  exhibits 
at  the  State  fairs  next  fall  will  be  taken  up  through  the  various  superintendents 
in  charge  last  year. 

Of  the  52  Indian  fairs  held  this  fall,  32,  or  61  per  cent,  were  entirely  self- 
supporting  with  respect  to  premiums  and  expenses  from  gate  receipts,  sale  of 
privileges  and  concessions,  advertising  in  programs,  and  voluntary  contribu- 
tions from  the  Indians.  This  is  gratifying,  but  it  is  far  better  that  every 
Indian  fair  be  self-supporting,  if  at  all  practicable,  and  superintendents  should 
endeavor  to  bring  about  this  result  as  rapidly  as  may  be  consistent  with  the 
success  of  the  fair. 

With  this  end  in  view,  where  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  office  to 
assist  the  fair,  superintendents  should  try  to  reduce  the  amount  below  that 
granted  this  year,  and  request  authority  therefor  no,  later  than  March  1.  1916. 


36  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Some  difficulty  has  been  experienced  in  obtaining  advance  information  as 
to  the  dates  of  the  fairs  each  year.  This  information  should  be  promptly 
furnished  the  office  as  soon  as  the  dates  for  the  fair  have  been  fixed. 

Reports  of  fairs  should  include  unmounted  photographs  of  exhibits,  if  avail- 
able, with  any  newspaper  comments. 

An  important  feature  of  your  fair  should  be  the  baby  show,  as  instructed 
in  Circular  No.  1043. 

With  the  hearty  support  and  cooperation  of  superintendents  and  employees 
even  the  splendid  results  of  last  year  should  be  surpassed  this  year. 

Following  the  success  -of  the  first  extensive  Indian  exhibit  at  the 
Oklahoma  State  Fair,  in  1914,  similar  exhibits  were  shown  last  fall  at 
State  fairs  in  Arizona,  Minnesota,  Montana,  Nevada,  New  Mexico, 
Oklahoma,  Oregon,  South  Dakota,  Utah,  Washington,  Wisconsin, 
and  Texas. 

The  Indian  exhibits  proved  a  most  attractive  feature  of  each  fair. 
At  some  of  the  fairs  the  Indian  exhibits  were  entered  in  direct  com- 
petition with  the  products  of  white  farmers,  and  were  awarded  first 
prizes.  At  other  fairs  the  Indians  were  only  allowed  to  compete 
with  each  other,  but  strong  efforts  are  being  made  to  have  all  the 
Indian  exhibits  entered  in  open  competition,  placing  the  Indian 
farmer  on  the  same  basis  as  his  white  neighbor.  This  will  furnish  a 
stronger  incentive  for  success  and  friendly  competition.  Indians 
were  participants  at  a  greater  number  of  county  fairs  than  ever  be- 
fore and  with  good  results. 

We  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  number  of  Indian  fairs  and  the 
number  participating  in  county  and  State  fairs  in  1916  will  be  much 
greater  than  on  any  previous  year. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEYS. 

There  is  no  single  feature  of  Indian  administration  presenting  a 
more  difficult  problem  for  solution  than  the  manner  in  which  indi- 
vidual Indian  money  should  be  handled. 

It  is  a  problem  because  in  this  we  are  dealing  with  individual  lives 
rather  than  a  race,  and.  if  we  succeed,  wholesale  methods  must  be 
abandoned  and  the  needs  of  each  individual  considered. 

The  goal  of  our  endeavor,  through  a  proper  use  of  individual  In- 
dian money,  may  be  said  to  be : 

1.  To  assist  every  Indian  to  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  and  substantial 
home  built  upon  land  to  which  the  individual  whose  money  is  being  expended 
may  expect  to  obtain  a  fee-simple  title. 

2.  To  acquire  independence  of  thought  and  action  and  a  sturdy  self-reliance 
looking  to  eventual  self-support,  substantial  progress  and  permanent  prosperity. 

3.  And  at  last  to  emerge  triumphant  from  tribal  relations  into  those  of  indi- 
vidual citizenship  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  its  rights,  privileges,  and  respon- 
sibilities which  accompany  it. 

It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  see  that  within  even  so  short  a  time 
as  three  years  there  has  been  a  marked  increase  in  the  number  of 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  37 

Indians  who  have  built  and  are  building  substantial  homes  on  their 
allotments  or  wKo  have  purchased  farms  with  their  own  money  and 
have  equipped  and  improved  them  with  good  buildings,  more 
and  better  stock,  and  are  surrounding  themselves  with  the  comforts 
and  pleasures  of  an  enlightened  and  more  advanced  civilization  than 
they  have  hitherto  known. 

There  has  been  a  pronounced  increase  in  the  number  of  bank  ac- 
counts and  in  the  amounts  on  deposit,  also  a  steady  increase  in  the 
interest  earnings  on  the  accounts  of  individual  Indians. 

Some  are  reaching  out  into  business  enterprises  of  various  kinds 
looking  for  investments  and  finding  profitable  ones  in  farm  and  city 
real  estate,  and  others  are  launching  forth  into  specialties,  such  as 
dairy,  poultry,  fruit,  etc.,  some,  of  course,  with  failure  ahead,  but 
many  making  of  their  efforts  a  pronounced  success. 

The  ideal  can  only  be  realized  when  every  Indian  shall  be  fully 
competent  to  care  for  himself  without  assistance.  The  proper  man- 
agement of  an  Indian's  bank  account  is  one  requiring  delicate  tact 
and  skill  in  order  to  teach  him  howT  to  care  for  it  and  himself  without 
robbing  him  of  his  manhood  and  independence.  It  is  really  an  edu- 
cative process  and  calls  for  time  in  its  development.  It  is  felt  that 
the  plan  being  pursued  will  bring  success,  for  the  complaints  regard- 
ing the  management  of  the  Indian's  money  are  steadily  decreasing. 
It  is  confidently  believed  that  the  Indian's  money  can  be  made  to 
serve  him  a  double  purpose,  to  give  him  the  material  things  he  needs 
and  through  experience  in  its  use  inculcate  in  him  principles  of  busi- 
ness and  thrift  wrhich  shall  contribute  permanently  to  his  personal 
and  material  developments.  • 

The  rules  governing  the  handling  of  individual  Indian  money  T 
approved  July  14,  1913,  have  afforded  satisfactory  aid  thus  far,  and 
the  amendments  which  have  been  promulgated  with  the  idea  of  lib- 
eralizing expenditures  of  individual  Indian  money  appear  to  have 
likewise  been  beneficial.  While  it  is  true  that/ the  weight  of  respon- 
sibility for  the  superintendents  has  been  somewhat  increased,  yet 
their  improved  opportunities  for  assisting  the  Indians  without  delay 
have  offset  the  extra  work  involved. 

DEBTS  OF  INDIANS. 

The  problem  of  indebtedness  of  the  Indians  is  gradually  becoming" 
less  serious.  A  strict  adherence  to  the  policy  of  forbidding  assistance 
to  creditors  of  Indians  in  the  collection  of  claims  covering  indebted- 
ness incurred  subsequent  to  that  date  has  wrought  a  beneficial  change. 
The  unscrupulous  trader  is  thus  thoroughly  convinced  that  his 
methods  will  meet  with  no  approval  here  and  is  growing  cautious 
in  permitting  Indians  to  pile  up  debts.  Even  the  rich  Osage  Indians- 


38  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

.are  learning  the  necessity  of  living  within  their  means  so  as  to  avoid 
the  embarrassment  arising  through  the  importunities  of  their  cred- 
itors. In  cases  where  payment  for  property  is  authorized  the  super- 
intendents are  required  to  take  Government  bills  of  sale,  and  the 
possession  is  thus  secured  to  the  Indian. 

REIMBURSABLE  FUNDS. 

For  the  past  three  years  reimbursable  appropriations  have  been 
made  by  Congress  for  use  on  all  the  reservations,  aggregating 
$1,825,000,  for  the  encouragement  of  industry  and  self-support 
among  Indians. 

These  funds  have  been  used  in  limited  amounts  to  assist  Indians 
without  funds  in  the  purchase  of  agricultural  equipment,  work  and 
breeding  stock,  seeds,  fence,  and  building  material.  Many  comfort- 
able homes  have  also  been  built  for  the  Indians  under  this  plan.  The 
property  is  not  given  to  the  Indians,  but  must  be  paid  for  in  easy 
payments,  the  title  thereto  remaining  in  the  Government  until  the 
amount  advanced  has  been  fully  repaid. 

The  results  secured  during  the  time  this  fund  has  been  available 
have  far  exceeded  expectations.  The  Indians  have  made  their  pay- 
ments in  a  surprisingly  satisfactory  manner ;  practically  nothing  has 
been  lost,  and  many  Indians  otherwise  helpless  have  thus  been  enabled 
to  make  beneficial  use  of  their  allotments  and  secure  a  start  not  pre- 
viously within  their  reach. 

Tribal  herds  have  also  been  established  'from  these  appropriations. 
These  herds  are  held  as  tribal  property,  to  be  later  distributed  among 
the  Indians  or  sold  to  them  on  their  individual  reimbursable  agree- 
ments. The  increases  from  these  herds  will  be  utilized  in  making 
repayments  to  the  Treasury  before  the  cattle  are  distributed. 

On  some  reservations  a  part  of  the  available  tribal  funds  was  used 
for  the  same  purposes  as  the  general*  reimbursable  appropriations. 
On  other  reservations  where  the  tribal  funds  were  insufficient  to 
meet  the  needs  of  the  Indians,  apportionments  from  regular  reim- 
bursable appropriations  were  used  to  supplement  their  own  funds. 

In  the  leveling  of  Indian  allotments  on  some  of  the  reservations 
these  funds  have  been  of  real  service  in  preparing  the  lands  of  the 
Indians  for  proper  use  and  enabling  them  to  farm  their  allotments. 

In  some  instances  agricultural  equipment  too  expensive  to  be  sold 
to  one  Indian  has  been  sold  to  several  Indians  on  a  community  or 
partnership  basis.  This  supplied  their  needs  for  threshing  machines, 
tractor  engines,  stump-pulling  outfits,  etc.,  without  compelling  de- 
pendence on  agency  machinery. 

The  Indians  generally  are  fast  coming  to  appreciate  the  assistance 
rendered  them  through  the  use  of  these  reimbursable  funds,  and  it  is 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  39 

believed    that  with  this  better  understanding  the  help  to  be  derived 
will  cause  many  others  to  take  advantage  of  their  opportunity. 

The  following  letter  recently  written  by  the  commissioner  to  an 
Indian  living  in  Arizona  gives  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  desira- 
bility, possibilities,  and  appreciation  of  the  reimbursable  fund: 

Mr.  McGEE,  Hackberry,  Ariz. 

MY  FKIEND  :'  Under  date  of  October  15,  1915,  you  purchased  from  the  super- 
intendent of  the  Truxton  Canon  School  10  head  of  cows  for  a  total  consideration 
of  $470.  These  cows  were  purchased  for  you  under  the  reimbursable  plan  and 
an  agreement  entered  into  between  you  and  your  superintendent  on  behalf  of 
the  Government  for  the  amount  expended  for  you  in  the  purchase. 

Your  agreement  provided  that  the  title  to  the  animals,  free  and  unencumbered, 
would  pass  to  you  upon  full  payment  for  the  same  and  gave  you  four  years  in 
which  to  complete  the  payment.  The  first  installment,  amounting  to  $150,  will 
not  be  due  until  January  1,  1918,  and  the  final  installment,  amounting  to  $320? 
will  not  be  due  until  January  1,  1919. 

I  have  just  been  advised  by  your  superintendent  that  during  the  month  of 
August,  1916,  you  had  found  it  to  your  advantage  to  make  immediate  full 
settlement  for  the  cows,  thus  closing  out  your  reimbursable  account,  notwith- 
standing the  fact  that  you  have  remaining  a  period  of  nearly  two  and  one-half 
years  in  which  to  complete  your  payments. 

This  is  very  commendable  in  you  and  clearly  demonstrates  what  can  be  done 
by  one  who  is  willing  to  exert  the  necessary  energy  and  display  the  proper 
interest  in  the  things  which  make  for  his  best  welfare. 

Your  superintendent  tells  me  that  he  has  granted  you  permission  to  remove 
the  cows  and  all  the  increase  from  them  to  a  range  off  the  reservation  where 
you  have  about  50  or  60  other  head  of  cattle  and  where  proper  range  and  water 
can  be  provided  for  them.  I  understand  that  the  other  cattle  owned  by  you 
were  acquired  through  the  personal  efforts  of  yourself  and  wife  by  hard  work 
and  the  proper  investment  of  your  funds.  Through  your  combined  energy  and 
good  judgment  you  have  achieved  a  success  for  which  you  both  deserve  a  great 
deal  of  credit,  and  I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  you  and  to  wish  you 
success  in  the  handling  of  this  and  other  stock  acquire^  by  you  from  time  to 
time  as  well  as  in  all  other  enterprises  undertaken  by  you  in  the  future. 

EMPLOYMENT  OF  INDIANS. 

From  an  economic  viewpoint  the  progress  of  the  returned  students 
offers  assurance  for  the  future.  Indians  are  engaged  in  industrial 
activities,  both  agricultural  and  -mechanical,  on'  the  different  reser- 
vations, and  as  laborers  on  work  of  every  character,  including 
ditches,  roads,  bridges,  etc.  Many  are  self-supporting  and  prosper- 
ous on  their  allotments. 

Over  200  Indian  boys  were  employed  in  the  beet  fields  at  Rocky 
Ford,  Colo.,  and  Garden  City,  Kans..  during  the  season  1915  and 
earned  $17,790.55. 

The  Navajo  pupils  alone  have  on  deposit  to  their  credit  $3,301.81 
from  their  share  of  the  work.  This » was  used  for  clothing  and  to 
buy  sheep.  More  than  80  boys  have  herds  of  sheep. 


40  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Opportunities  for  work  have  been  greatly  extended  this  year  by 
the  changed  basis  of  work.  A  large  building  has  been  rented  and 
equipped  to  accommodate  80  Indians  who  may  find  Avork  during  the 
entire  year  at  Rocky  Ford. 

This  arrangement  is  intended  to  meet  the  industrial  needs  of 
Indian  youths  past  school  age  who  have  spent  the  best  part  of  their 
lives  in  school  endeavoring  to  gain  an  education  yet  who  have  gone 
through  only  the  fourth  and  fifth  grades.  Such  boys  will  find  lucra- 
tive employment  at  Rocky  Ford  during  the  winter  and,  indeed,  all 
the  year  around. 

About  850  boys  and  young  men  of  Indian  blood  are  employed  for 
the  season  1916  in  the  beet  fields  and  on  ranches  working  for  the 
agriculturists  in  the  vicinity  of  Rocky  Ford. 

On  the  Klamath,  Fort  Peck,  Fort  Belknap,  and  Flathead  irriga- 
tion projects  work  is  plentiful  for  Indians.  On  the  pay  roll  of  the 
irrigation  service  at  Klamath  the  Indians  received  $1,414.75,  whites 
$1,083.96.  at  one  payment.  Indians  also  received  a  considerable 
amount  for  hay,  grain,  logs,  lumber,  and  wood  bought  from  them. 

Indian  employees  are  of  the  faculty  in  every  Indian  school,  but 
the  Navajo  school  at  Fort  Defiance,  Ariz.,  leads  all  the  rest  in  having 
the  majority  of  its  employees,  including  its  superintendent,  of  Indian 
blood. 

This  year  several  Indian  girls  have  been  added  to  the  ranks  of 
Indian  Service  employees  as  graduate  nurses. 

Fifty-four  schools  and  agencies  have  reported  returned  student 
organizations,  with  names  of  officers  and  places  of  meeting,  covering 
a  diversity  of  aims  and  activities.  On  some  reservations  returned 
students  seem  to  feel  a  compelling  inner  urge  to  become  active  par- 
ticipants in  general  welfare  work. 

Indians  and  their  white  neighbors  mingle  freely  in  churches, 
lodges,  schools,  and  clubs  in  some  communities,  and  it  has  been 
thought  by  a  few  that  the  formation  of  returned  student  organiza- 
tions would  act  as  a  deterrent  to  the  progress  of  the  Indian.  In  one 
district  all  the  returned  students  of  the  neighborhood  are  in  the  band. 
Another  organization  meets  on  Sundays,  when  the  International 
Sunday  school  lessons  form  the  basis  of  the  talk  given.  One  super- 
intendent reports  his  organization  to  be  a  potent  factor  in  the  com- 
munity life. 

EXHIBITION   INDIANS. 

The  employment  of  Indians  for  exhibition  purposes  by  Wild  West 
and  other  shows  has  been  discouraged.  Participation  in  these  re- 
vivals of  frontier  life  and  primitive  customs  is  neither  educative  nor 
conducive  to  the  formation  of  habits  of  industry  and  thrift.  While 
such  participation  is  not  absolutely  prohibited,  it  is  discouraged,  and 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  41 

everything  practicable  is  done  to  guard  them  against  demoralizing 
influences  and  to  conserve  their  wages. 

UTE  JUDGMENT  FUND. 

The  sum  of  $300,000  was  available  for  expenditure  during  the 
year  from  the  principal  of  the  $3,000,000  Ute  judgment  fund 
awarded  by  the  Court  of  Claims  in  1911,  plus  one  year's  interest,  the 
most  of  which  was  segregated  into  individual  shares  and  deposited 
in  banks  to  the  credit  of  the  Indians  for  expenditure,  under  super- 
vision, for  permanent  industrial  purposes.  The  use  of  this  money  is 
gradually  bringing  about  a  material  improvement  in  the  industrial 
and  economic  situation  of  these  formerly  backward  Indians  and  some 
of  them  have  become  entirely  self-supporting. 

The  leasing  plan  inaugurated  last  year  at  Uintah  with  the  view 
of  getting  water  on  the  land  in  order  to  save  the  rights  thereto,  which 
expire  in  1919,  has  been  continued  with  good  results,  approximately 
25,000  acres  being  put  under  cultivation  during  this  year.  The 
acreage  cultivated  by  the  Indians  themselves  was  also  largely  in- 
creased, although  definite  figures  are  not  now  at  hand. 

The  water  supply  for  irrigation  on  the  reservation  decreases  each 
year  during  July  and  August,  and  this  has  resulted  in  serious  damage 
to  the  crops  of  the  Indians  and  lessees.  As  various  white  settlers 
were  taking  water  from  the  river  above  the  Indian  project  it  was  our 
contention  that  under  the  doctrine  of  reserved  water  rights  the 
Indians'  land  is  entitled  to  sufficient  water  to  properly  irrigate  the 
crops  produced,  and  to  settle  the  question  suit  was  recently  instituted 
in  the  Federal  court  and  a  temporary  injunction  granted  restraining 
all  parties  from  taking  water  from  the  river  to  the  injury  of  the 
Indians  and  their  white  lessees.  Upon  final  hearing  the  injunction 
was  made  permanent. 

IRRIGATION. 

The  irrigation  work  of  the  Indian  Bureau  is  one  of  the  most 
important  of  the  industrial  activities,  as  irrigation  farming  is  the 
only  means  by  which  nearly  100,000  of  the  Indians  may  be  able  to 
attain  self-supporting,  useful  citizenship.  Included  within  this 
number  are,  with  few  exceptions,  those  with  the  least  resources  and 
those  most  backward  in  adopting  our  civilization,  so  that  efforts  to 
advance  the  irrigation  work  should  and  do  bring  the  most  pro- 
nounced progress. 

More  than  100  irrigation  projects  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian 
farmer  are  in  different  stages  of  completion.  These  vary  in  size 
from  a  comparatively  few  acres  to  several  which  will  include  more 
than  100,000  acres  each  when  fully  developed.  The  total  area  which 


42  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

should  eventually  be  provided  with  water  in  the  projects  now  ini- 
tiated or  favorably  reported  upon  is  more  than  one  and  one-half 
million  acres.  At  present  490,000  acres  may  be  Supplied  with  water 
from  completed  works,  and  of  this  area  already  more  than  220,000 
acres  are  actually  being  farmed. 

During  the  year  of  this  report  no  notable  new  undertakings  were 
possible  in  the  irrigation  work  because  of  the  failure  of  the  passage 
of  the  Indian  appropriation  act.  Nearly  all  irrigation  projects  are 
specially  authorized,  and  as  special  appropriations  are  made  therefor 
it  is  impossible  to  initiate  some  of  the  very  urgently  needed  work? 
pending  such  time  as  funds  are  appropriated.  There  was,  however,, 
increased  activity  in  the  maintenance  and  care  of  the  structures  and 
systems  already  completed  and  more  careful  supervision  of  the  ex- 
penditure of  all  funds  to  see  that  the  highest  economy  was  obtained. 
This  is,  of  course,  desirable  in  the  expenditure  of  all  Government 
funds,  but  as  the  irrigation  appropriations  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Indians  are,  except  in  a  few  instances,  now  all  reimbursable  to 
the  United  States,  the  Indian  Service  considers  itself  custodian  of 
a  trust  for  the  Indians  themselves  in  the  expenditure  of  irrigation 
funds.  There  is  constantly  kept  in  mind  the  necessity  of  securing 
the  greatest  benefit  to  the  Indians  for  each  dollar  expended. 

EXTENSION  OF  IRRIGATION. 

On  several  of  the  reservations  surveys  were  made,  including  ex- 
aminations and  reports  for  the  extension  of  present  irrigation  facili- 
ties or  the  initiation  of  new  projects.  On  the  Colvillfc  [Reservation 
practically  all  of  the  economical  irrigation  possibilities  have  been 
studied.  These  are  scattered  in  12  or  13  districts  and  include  a  total 
area  of  more  than  33,000  acres.  Several  projects  upon  this  reserva- 
tion have  been  reported  upon  which  are  feasible  from  an  engineering 
standpoint,  but  in  some  instances  the  desirability  of  undertaking 
these  is  contingent  upon  the  attitude  of  the  Indians  toward  irriga- 
tion farming,  which  as  yet  is  not  altogether  favorable.  The  Little 
Nespelem  project  to  irrigate  about  3,300  acres  has  been  nearly  com- 
pleted and  some  assistance  given  the  Indian  farmers  on  the  San-Poil 
River,  but  no  other  projects  on  Colville  Reservation  have  been  under- 
taken by  the  Indian  Service. 

The  extensive  surveys  and  investigations,  including  not  only  the  phy- 
sical but  the  legal  questions  involved  with  reference  to  a  water  supply 
for  the  Pima  Indians,  have  been  completed  and  the  final  field  reports 
made.  From  a  thorough  study  of  these  data,  recommendations  as 
required  by  the  act  of  August  1,  1914,  are  expected  to  be  submitted 
shortly.  In  the  meantime  the  possibility  of  improving  the  water 
supply  for  the  deserving  Pimas  by  means  of  better  facilities  for 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  4$ 

diverting  water  from  the  Gila  Eiver  has  been  taken  advantage  of 
and  Congress  has  authorized  a  dam  and  diversion  system  to  take  water 
from  the  Gila  River  about  12  miles  above  Florence,  by  means  of  which 
all  the  irrigable  lands  on  the  south  side  of  the  Gila  River,  as  well  as- 
white  lands  which  are  entitled  to  water,  will  secure  a  much  more 
reliable  supply  than  has  been  possible  from  the  temporary  and  un- 
satisfactory diversions  used  in  the  past.  Congress  has  also  au- 
thorized the  construction  of  a  diversion  dam  lower  down  on  the  Gila 
River,  from  which  water  may  be  diverted  not  only  to  the  south-side 
lands  but  to  the  north  side,  where  a  large  body  of  fine  land  is  already 
being  cultivated  as  well  as  the  limited  supply  of  water  available  will 
permit.  These  appropriations  are  the  first  important  steps  to  rectify 
the  injustice  which  has  been  done  these  Pima  Indians  for  the  30  or 
40  years  that  their  water  supply  has  been  encroached  upon  by  the 
whites. 

Another  important  irrigation  project  which  has  been  authorized 
for  the  coming  year  and  funds  therefor  made  immediately  available 
is  that  for  the  Yakima  Reservation,  for  the  portion  known  as  the 
Wapato  project.  The  situation  at  the  Yakima  Reservation  has  been 
somewhat  similar  to  that  among  the  Pimas,  in  that  the  Indians  were 
apparently  unjustly  deprived  of  water  which  was  found  to  be  neces- 
sary for  their  self-support.  The  matter  of  the  water  supply  had 
previously  been  adjusted  by  Congress  in  the  Indian  bill  for  the  year 
1915,  and  the  appropriation  of  $200,000  now  made  permits  the  con- 
struction of  a  permanent  diversion  dam  and  the  beginning  of  the 
enlargement  of  the  canal  system  which  will  eventually  supply 
120,000  acres  of  land,  most  of  which  is  still  held  by  Indians. 

A  long-needed  irrigation  improvement  has  been  authorized  for  the 
coming  year — the  Pyramid  Lake  project  in  Nevada.  Sufficient  funds 
have  been  appropriated  for  1917  to  construct  a  diversion  data  and  the 
remainder  of  the  authorized  project,  it  is  expected,  will  be  provided 
for  next*  year.  This  improvement  will  permit  the  industrious  In- 
dians of  this  reservation,  who  have  been  attempting  with  very  un- 
satisfactory means  to  farm  a  sufficient  area  to  make  themselves  self- 
supporting,  to  really  accomplish  this  result. 

CONSTRUCTION. 

The  more  important  projects  upon  which  construction  has  been 
maintained  during  the  past  year  are  as  follows :  On  the  Wind  River 
Reservation  on  both  the  ceded  and  diminished  portions ;  on  the  Crow 
Reservation,  Mont.,  where  the  work  of  replacing  the  worn-out  tem- 
porary structures,  many  of  which  have  been  in  use  20  or  more  years, 
with  properly  designed  permanent  works  has  proceeded  as  well  as 
the  necessary  extensions  of  the  lateral  system. 


44  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

Construction  of  somewhat  similar  nature  has  been  performed  on 
the  Uintah  project,  the  Fort  Hall  project,  and  to  a  limited  extent 
on  the  Yakima  project  in  Washington,  although  in  the  past  year 
insufficient  funds  have  been  available  at  the  latter  place  to  do  more 
than  the  most  urgent  repair  work. 

On  the  Colorado  Eiver  Eeservation  the  laterals  were  extended  to 
additional  areas  being  farmed  by  the  Indians,  and  on  the  Gila  River 
Reservation  the  necessary  laterals  were  constructed  to  supply  many 
of  the  new  allotments  which  the  Indians  are  occupying  and  bring- 
ing under  cultivation  nearly  as  fast. as  the  limited  amount  of  water 
available  will  warrant.  Active  maintenance  and  betterment  work 
was  done  upon  the  Fort  Hall,  Modoc  Point,  Pine  River  Valley,  Hog- 
back, Fort  Belknap,  Ganado,  and  the  several  mission  reservations  in 
California  and  others. 

In  southern  California  during  January,  1916,  a  large  portion  of 
the  country  was  devastated  by  the  greatest  flood  known  in  recent 
years.  The  Pala,  Rincon,  Soboba,  La  Jolla,  Campo,  Morongo,  and 
Palm  Springs  Reservations,  all  in  California,  suffered  considerably, 
and  first  reports  indicated  almost  complete  destruction  of  some  of 
the  irrigation  work.  However,  prompt  and  vigorous  repairs  were 
instituted,  and  practically  all  lands  were  being  supplied  with  water 
by  the  time  that  they  needed  irrigation,  at  a  total  expenditure  of  less 
than  $20,000  for  the  repairs.  With  few  exceptions  the  projects  were 
again  placed  in  first-class  operating  conditions.  At  Pala  further 
expenditures  will  be  needed  to  replace  permanently  the  south  side 
diversion.  Though  temporary  works  have  been  provided  for  this 
year,  it  has  not  yet  been  possible  to  arrange  an  economical  permanent 
plan  on  account  of  the  great  erosion  along  the  river.  A  more  sub- 
stantial protection  is  needed  against  the  ravages  of  the  San  Jacinto 
River  at  the  Soboba  Reservation.  Plans  are  being  perfected  to  co- 
operate with  owners  of  private  lands  which  were  also  damaged,  to 
accomplish  these  results. 

One  of  the  subordinate  but  important  phases  of  irrigation  work 
is  the  opportunity  given  many  of  the  Indians  of  laboring  upon  irri- 
gation construction.  For  the  fiscal  year  1916  the  sum  of  $165,330.95 
was  paid  to  these  Indian  laborers  upon  the  various  projects,  and  not 
only  was  this  money  of  direct  benefit  to  them  but  they  were  in- 
structed in  habits  of  industry  and  self-support.  Indeed,  in  many 
instances,  by  exercising  considerable  patience  the  irrigation  officers 
have  trained  many  Indians  in  various  occupations,  such  as  concrete 
workers,  carpenters,  engine  operators,  earth  excavation,  etc.,  so  that 
a  large  number  of  Indians  were  benefited  in  many  'ways.  Some  of 
these  Indians  have  even  developed  sufficient  skill  along  these  lines 
to  act  as  foremen  directing  the  work  of  others.  While  it  is  doubtless 
a  fact  that  the  initial  cost  of  the  irrigation  work  considered  only  as 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  45 

an  engineering  structure  may  have  been  slightly  higher  by  employing 
Indians  to  such  a  large  extent,  the  Indians  benefited  not  only  by 
having  the  money  paid  them  for  labor  but  in  the  knowledge  they 
acquired  of  the  various  trades,  so  that  the  ultimate  benefit  to  them 
was  much  greater  than  any  difference  in  cost.  This  industrial  idea 
as  the  great  means  of  advancing  the  Indians  is  being  emphasized 
wherever  possible,  but  in  no  other  activity  of  the  Indian  Bureau  are 
actual  beneficial  results  obtained  to  a  greater  extent  than  on  irrigation 
work. 

UTILIZATION  OF  WATER. 

The  object  of  irrigation  construction  is  to  arrange  for  a  water 
supply  to  produce  crops,  but  this  obvious  purpose  seems  to  have  been 
neglected  in  the  past  as  compared  to  the  interest  taken  in  the  engi- 
neering investigations  and  construction  relating  to  irrigation  works. 
However,  continued  emphasis  is  now  being  placed  on  the  necessity 
of  encouraging  and  urging  the  Indians  to  make  use  of  the  agricul- 
tural facilities  provided  for  them.  Those  employees  especially  con- 
cerned with  industrial  development  are  taking  hold  of  this  problem 
where  the  engineers'  functions  cease,  and  a  closer  cooperation  between 
the  two  has  resulted  in  commendable  progress  by  the  Indians  in 
irrigation  farming. 

As  a  means  of  teaching  habits  of  industry  and  civilization,  irriga- 
tion is  of  notable  value  as  it  requires  continued  and  faithful  appli- 
cation to  work  by  the  Indians,  but  also  the  returns  may  be  safely 
counted  upon  as  seldom  do  discouraging  crop  failures  result  from 
these  efforts  and  nearly  always  remuneration  is  in  direct  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  energy  exhibited.  In  emphasizing  industrial  train- 
ing, irrigation  farming  is,  of  course,  included,  and  I  am  glad  to  be 
able  to  report  a  continued  progress  in  the  extension  of  the  area 
actually  being  farmed  by  the  Indians  on  nearly  every  reservation. 
Notable  increases  were  made  upon  the  Crow,  Fort  Hall,  Wind  River, 
Colorado  River,  Yuma,  Pima,  Klamath,  Uintah,  Fort  Belknap,  San 
Xavier.  and  several  other  reservations.  The  crops  produced  by 
irrigation  on  the  Yakima  Reservation  during  1916  were  of  an  esti- 
mated value  of  $2,000,000.  On  the  Crow  Reservation  23,846  acres 
were  being  irrigated.  On  the  Fort  Hall  Reservation  the  area  was 
18,542  acres;  on  Gila  River  18,850  acres;  and  on  Uintah  the  area  in 
irrigated  crops  was  25,062. 

WATER-RIGHTS  PROTECTION. 

The  right  to  the  use  of  water  for  irrigation  is  one  of  the  most  in- 
tangible and  complicated  property  rights  with  which  we  have  to 
deal,  and  to  secure  permanently  for  the  Indians  a  sufficient  supply 
this  fact  must  be  kept  in  mind  at  all  times. 
65333—16 4 


46  COMMISSIONED   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

To  protect  the  interests  of  the  Indians,  special  investigations  were 
made  with  respect  to  the  water  rights  of  several  of  the  reservations. 
At  Uintah  a  thorough  study  of  the  situation  was  made  under  direc- 
tion of  a  special  Assistant  Attorney  General,  and  this  preparation 
was  of  primary  importance,  as  it  became  necessary  in  June,  1916,  to 
apply  for  an  injunction  in  the  Federal  district  court  of  Utah  against 
illegal  diversion  of  water  belonging  to  the  Indians.  The  Uintah 
irrigation  project  had  been  suffering  for  several  years  on  account  of 
various  encroachments.  The  conditions  of  law  under  which  this 
work  was  authorized  added  to  the  complications  and  it  will  require 
continued  watchfulness  to  retain  this  large  development  for  the  bene- 
fit of  the  Indians  for  whom  it  is  intended. 

On  the  Umatilla  Reservation,  the  court  rendered  a  decision  con- 
firming to  the  Indians  water  rights  which  had  been  in  litigation  for 
several  years.  On  the  Fort  Hall  Reservation  steps  were  taken  after 
careful  consideration  and  ample  legal  notice  to  offenders  to  prevent 
xlamage  to  the  Indian  lands  and  irrigation  system  by  a  careless  wast- 
ing of  water  from  irrigation  upstream  from  Fort  Hall  lands. 

The  extended  and  comprehensive  investigations  of  conditions  re- 
garding the  water  supply  for  the  Pima  Indians  along  the  Gila  River 
are  expected  to  furnish  the  facts  with  which  the  Government  will 
be  able  to  protect  the  rights  of  the  Indians  to  the  water  of  the  Gila. 
Studies  of  water  rights  of  the  Walker  River  Reservations  have  also 
been  initiated  and  apparently  it  will  be  possible  to  take  steps  to  se- 
cure a  more  equitable  division  of  water  between  the  various  users 
upon  the  Walker  River  drainage  basin.  On  several  other  reserva- 
tions similar  investigations  are  being  instituted. 

Reference  was  made  in  my  last  annual  report  to  conditions  upon  the 
three  Montana  reservations — Flathead,  Blackfeet,  and  Fort  Peck- 
where  irrigation  construction  is  being  carried  on  by  the  engineers 
of  the  Reclamation  Service.  Legislation  along  the  lines  there  sug- 
gested was  enacted  by  the  present  Congress  in  the  Indian  appro- 
priation act. 

This  modification  of  the  method  of  financing  these  projects  re- 
leases a  portion  of  the  tribal  funds  for  other  uses  of  the  Indians,  so 
that  it  may  be  possible  for  them  to  obtain  at  least  to  a  limited  extent 
the  equipment  and  resources  necessary  to  enable  them  to  engage  in 
farming. 

Under  the  old  scheme  the  Indian  funds  were  hypothecated  for  all 
the  expenses  of  irrigation  construction,  although  on  two  of  the 
reservations  a  large  proportion  of  the  irrigated  area  not  needed  for 
Indian  allotments  has  passed  to  other  ownership.  The  injustice  of 
tying  up  Indian  funds  to  construct  irrigation  works  to  supply  lands 
for  the  use  of  whites  is,  of  course,  apparent. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  47 

While  the  law  now  relieves  the  Indians,  it  also  arranges  for  proper 
reimbursement  of  the  Government  for  the  expenditures  chargeable 
to  the  various  landholders. 

Another  important  provision  of  the  Indian  bill  is  that  which  ar- 
ranges for  a  water  right  for  the  Salt  River  Reservation  Indians. 
These  industrious  people  have  been  attempting  to  farm  a  much 
larger  area  than  their  inadequate  water  supply  warranted.  With  the 
addition  provided  for,  they  should  be  soon  comfortably  self-sup- 
porting. 

MISCELLANEOUS   ACTIVITIES. 

Among  the  most  important  operations  of  the  engineers  usually 
engaged  upon  irrigation  has  been  the  development  of  underground 
water.  Upon  the  Navajo,  Hopi,  and  Papago  Reservations  this 
added  Avater  supply  is  of  almost  inestimable  value  for  stock  and 
domestic  use.  With  the  addition  of  these  new  watering  places,  great 
areas  of  hitherto  unavailable  grazing  land  can  be  used,  and  it  also 
adds  to  the  value  of  those  already  occupied  by  reducing  the  damage 
to  both  range  and  stock  by  shortening  the  'trips  of  the  latter  to 
water. 

Upon  the  Navajo,  Hopi,  Isleta,  and  Papago  Reservations  six 
well  rigs  were  constantly  in  operation,  drilling  through  the  year  30 
wells,  of  which,  however,  10  did  not  yield  either  a  sufficient  quantity 
or  a  quality  of  water  to  make  them  successful.  In  addition,  the  10 
wells  drilled  in  various  portions  of  the  Papago  country  during  1915 
had  their  pumping  plants  completed  and  placed  in  operation.  At 
some  of  these  plants  Indians  come  with  barrels  for  water  from  as 
great  a  distance  as  18  miles,  indicating  that  considerable  further 
development  is  needed  at  other  points. 

Upon  the  Hopi  and  Navajo  Reservations  considerable  work  was 
done  cleaning  and  protecting  the  small  springs  found  at  infrequent 
intervals.  The  use  of  the  easily  contaminated  and,  in  some  cases, 
filthy  pools  for  domestic  purposes  is  being  changed  by  cleaning 
and  reconstructing  these  sources  of  supply,  so  that  many  Indians 
for  probably  the  first  time  in  their  lives  have  regularly  pure,  whole- 
some water. 

Some  reservations,  especially  in  the  upper  Mississippi  Valley,  need 
reclamation  not  by  irrigation  but  by  drainage.  To  this  end  I  have 
had  our  engineers  examine  and  report  on  the  feasibility  of  this  sort 
of  work  for  the  Indian  lands  of  Fond  du  Lac,  Minn. ;  Santee  and 
Kickapoo,  Nebr. ;  Haskell,  Kans. ;  Sac  and  Fox,  Iowa ;  Carlisle,  Pa. ; 
Round  Yalfey,  Gal.;  and  Shiprock,  N.  Mex.  All  of  the  foregoing 
work,  which  is  being  done  by  the  Indian  Service,  is  along  those  lines 
which  I  am  constantly  urging  in  the  various  branches  of  the  Indian 


48  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Service — that  is,  to  stucty  each  reservation,  and  after  determining  to 
what  industry  it  is  best  adapted,  to  develop  it  for  this  purpose  for  the 
use  of  the  Indians. 

ALLOTMENTS. 

The  important  work  of  allotting  irrigable  land  on  the  Gila  River 
Reservation,  Ariz.,  was  continued  during  the  year.  In  addition  to 
the  irrigable  allotments,  instructions  have  been  issued  to  the  allotting 
agent  to  allot  the  grazing  lands  pro  rata.  The  area  of  irrigable 
land  to  be  allotted  is  estimated  at  50,000  acres  and  grazing  land 
315,000  acres. 

During  the  year  allotments  were  completed  on  the  Colville  Res- 
ervation in  Washington,  where  a  grand  total  of  about  2,500  Indians 
have  been  allotted  nearly  325,000  acres.  The  surplus  unallotted 
lands,  with  the  exception  of  those  classified  as  timber  and  areas  with- 
drawn for  grazing  purposes  and  for  school,  agency,  and  missionary 
uses,  will  be  opened  to  homestead  settlement  and  entry  this  fall  under 
the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  80). 

On  the  Fort  Peck  Reservation  in  Montana,  under  authority  of  the 
act  of  August  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  L.,  593),  allotments  may  be  made  to 
children  born  to  the  tribe  as  long  as  there  is  any  undisposed-of  tribal 
land.  This  work  is  being  carried  on  under  direction  of  the  superin- 
tendent of  the  reservation. 

On  the  Sioux  Reservations  in  North  and  South  Dakota  allotment 
work  was  continued  under  the  supervision  of  the  superintendents. 

A  list  of  the  reservations,  number  of  allotments  approved  during 
the  year,  and  number  made  in  the  field  but  not  yet  approved  will 
be  found  in  Table  No.  27.  •  . 

EXTENSION  OF  TRUST  PERIODS. 

The  first  act  authorizing  the  issuance  of  trust  patents  to  Indians 
was  the  act  of  August  7,  1882  (22  Stat.  L.,  342).  affecting  the  Omahas 
in  Nebraska.  Allotments  to  963  Omaha  Indians  were  approved  in 
1884,  and  patents  containing  a  25-year  trust,  held  by  the  United 
States,  were  issued  to  the  allottees.  By  Executive  order  of  July  3, 
1909,  this  trust  was  extended  10  years  and  will  not  expire  until  1919. 
Since  1884  patents  containing  a  25-year  trust  clause  have  issued  to 
the  various  tribes  allotted  in  severalty,  mainly  under  authority  of 
the  fifth  section  of  what  is  known  as  the  general  allotment  act  of 
February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388).  The  trust  on  the  allotments  of 
eight  reservations  will  expire  during  the  calendar  year  1916  if  not 
extended.  The  trust  has  been  extended  on  the  allotments  of  five  of 
the  reservations,  and  steps  are  being  taken  to  protect  the  other  allot- 
tees whose  period  of  trust  will  soon  expire. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


49 


The  following  table  shows  the  tribes  whose  period  of  trust  has 
been  extended,  number  of  allotments  on  each  reservation,  date  of 
expiration  of  trust,  and  length  of  extension : 


Tribe. 

Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 

Date 
trust 
expires. 

Extended 
(years). 

Omaha,  Nebraska  . 

963 

1909 

10 

Santee,  Nebraska  

848 

1910 

10 

Sisseton.  South  Dakota.  .  . 

1  381 

1914 

10 

Grande  Ronde,  Oregon 

269 

1916 

10 

Papago,  Arizona  

291 

1916 

10 

Poni-a,  Nebraska  

191 

1916 

10 

Eastern  Shawnee,  Oklahoma  

72 

1916 

10 

Yankton,  South  Dakota  

1  485 

1916 

10 

In  addition  to  these  extensions  on  reservation  allotments,  the  trust 
on  all  Indian  homesteads  and  allotments  on  the  public  domain  which 
would  otherwise  expire  during  the  calendar  year  has  been  extended 
for  one  year  by  an  Executive  order.  Authority  for  these  exten- 
sions will  be  found  in  the  fifth  section  of  the  act  of  February  8, 
1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  section  11  of  the  act  of  March  2,  1889  (25 
Stat,  L.,  888-892).,  and  the  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  326). 

PATENTS  IN  FEE. 

Patents  in  fee  simple  are  issued  under  the  provisions  of  the  act 
of  May  8.  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  and  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36 
Stat.  L.,  855).  During  the  past  year  1,298  applications  for  patents 
in  fee  have  been  received,  of  which,  350  were  denied  and  949  ap- 
proved, involving  an  area  of  132,647.30  acres. 

During  the  past  year  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  has  appointed 
competency  commissions  composed  of  some  of  the  best  men  in  the 
Indian  Service,  who  know  the  Indian  and  the  Indian  question,  and 
whose  duty  it  was  to  make  a  personal  investigation  with  a  view  of 
determining  the  Indians  who  are  fully  qualified  to  care  for  their 
own  affairs.  Examinations  have  been  made  on  the  following  reser- 
vations: Yankton,  Santee,  Flathead,  Cheyenne  River,  Standing 
Eock,  Fort  Peck,  Umatilla,  and  Coeur  d'Alene.  On  the  recommen- 
dation of  the  commissions  thus  appointed  576  fee  patents  have 
issued,  involving  97,842.41  acres,  thus  making  the  total  number  of 
fee  patents  issued  during  the  year  1,525,  involving  an  area  of 
220,489.71  acres. 

SALE  OF  INDIAN  LAND. 

The  sale  of  allotted  and  inherited  Indian  land  is  authorized  by  the 
acts  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245),  March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1015),  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L., 
855),  and  February  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678). 


50  COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

The  act  last  mentioned  extended  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June 
25,  1910,  to  Oklahoma,  with  the  exception  of  lands  belonging  to  the 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osages,  so  that  since  the  passage  of 
this  act  patents. in  fee  simple  can  be  issued  to  purchasers  of  Indian 
lands  in  Oklahoma,  with  the  exceptions  noted. 

During  the  year  1916  there  have  been  made  sales  covering  an 
area  of  90,819.03  acres,  involving  a  consideration  of  $1,661. Sol. 92. 
The  average  price  for  which  the  land  sold  was  $18.60  per  acre.  The 
year  previous  the  office  sold  761  tracts,  involving  102,674.53  acres, 
for  $1,300,303.08,  or  $12.66  per  acre'. 

HOMELESS  INDIANS. 

In  continuation  of  the  work  of  providing  lands  for  homeless  Cali- 
fornia Indians,  small  tracts  aggregating  1,860.04  acres,  at  a  total 
price  of  $19,367.29,  are  now  being  purchased  for  the  benefit  of  ap- 
proximately 1,302  Indians  of  various  bands.  Four  purchases  have 
been  consummated  and  16  more  are  practically  completed. 

With  the  balance  of  funds  provided  by  the  act  of  August  1,  1914 
(38  Stat.  L.,  582),  an  additional  tract  of  about  50  acres  of  agricul- 
tural land  was  bought  for  $6,000  for  the  benefit  of  the  Camp  Verde 
Indians,  located  in  Yavapai  County,  Ariz.  This  tract  is  contiguous 
to  a  240-acre  tract  which  was  purchased  at  $13,000  for  these  Indians 
last  year.  The  Indians  are  settling  on  these  lands  and  Supt.  Taylor 
reports  that  110  acres  have  foeen  placed  under  cultivation. 

Negotiations  have  been  entered  into  for  the  purchase  of  lands  and 
water  rights  in  the  total  amount  of  $32,233.33  for  the  Navajo  of  the 
public  domain  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico. 

MISSION  LANDS. 

The  total  area  of  mission  lands  on  Indian  reservations  and  the 
issuance  of  patents  in  fee  to  mission  organizations  under  the  general 
act  of  March  3,  1909,  and  other  special  acts  has  been  less  than  in 
former  years. 

There  are  pending  for  surveys  orders  for  patents  on  the  following 
reservations : 

Menominee,  under  Keshena:  Catholic,  for  patent,  about  26  acres;  indefinite 
number  of  acres  to  be  set  apart. 

Yankton :  To  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Fellowship,  52  acres. 

Cheyenne  River :  Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary  Society  of  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America,  5  to  15  acres. 

Yakima:  Board  of  Home  Missions  and  Church  Extension  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  12  acres. 

Warm  Springs :  Woman's  General  Missionary  Society  of  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church,  »about  16  acres. 

A  patent  for  40  acres  on  the  Nett  Lake  Reservation,  Minn.,  has  been  issued 
to  the  Northern  Minnesota  Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  since 
the  beginning  of  the  new  fiscal  year,  1917. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  51 

A  small  tract  on  the  Fort  Berthold  Reservation  awaits  survey  on 
the  request  of  the  American  Missionary  Association.  Applications 
for  patents  for  lands  on  the  Fort  Totten,  the  Winnebago  and  Western 
Navajo  Reservations  are  pending.  An  agreement  has  been  reached 
under  which  the  office  is  preparing  for  the  issuance  of  a  patent  to 
the  Women's  Board  of  Domestic  Missions,  Reformed  Church  in 
America,  for  lands  on  the  Winnebago  Reservation  in  Nebraska. 

A  GREAT  PROBATE  COURT. 

The  general  public  has  but  a  vague  idea  of  the  immensity  of  the 
work  devolving  upon  the  Federal  Government  in  connection  with  the 
American  Indian.  Not  only  must  protection  be  afforded  him  in  con- 
nection with  his  personal  rights  and  privileges,  but  his  immense 
property  rights  must  be  safeguarded.  These  rights  consist  of  mil- 
lions of  acres  of  land  allotted  to  the  Indians,  moneys  from  land  by 
way  of  leases  for  grazing,  agriculture,  mines,  oil,  and  other  purposes, 
as  well  as  of  their  lands,  timber,  live  stock,  etc.,  and  the  earnings  of 
individual  Indians  from  innumerable  sources.  The  work  is  not  per- 
mitted to  stop  here,  but  after  the  death  of  the  Indians,  their  estates 
must  be  probated  under  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855, 
856),  and  this  work  has  become  one  of  the  most  important  branches 
of  the  Indian  Service. 

During  the  present  year  the  heirs  to  thousands  of  acres  of  land  and 
millions  of  dollars'  worth  of  trust  property  have  been  determined. 

Hearings  for  the  purpose  of  these  determinations  are  conducted  at 
the  different  reservations  and  agencies  throughout  the  entire  Indian 
country  by  examiners  of  inheritance  who  are  especially  qualified  for 
the  work.  In  addition  to  other  qualifications  they  must  be  members 
of  the  bar  admitted  to  practice  law  in  one  of  the  several  States. 
Hearings  are  conducted  in  a  legal  and  judicial  manner  after  first 
giving  notice  to  all  parties  interested. 

During  the  past  year  4,086  estates  of  deceased  Indians  were  pro- 
bated, 178  *wills  approved,  68  disapproved,  and  5,014  miscellaneous 
cases  disposed  of. 

ROAD  CONSTRUCTION. 

A  magnificent  bridge  has  been  built  over  the  Little  Colorado  River 
near  Topock,  jointly  by  the  States  of  Arizona  and  California,  the 
county  of  San  Bernardino,  and  this  office,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Indians  on  the  Fort  Mojave  Reservation  and  the  traveling  public. 
The  system  of  roads  on  the  Shoshone  Reservation  has  been  carried 
further  toward  completion  by  the  expenditure  of  $25,000. 

Construction  and  maintenance  of  roads  on  the  several  reservations 
by  the  use  of  tribal  funds  and  general  appropriations  have  been  de- 
veloped as  rapidly  as  practicable.  A  good  road  has  been  built  on  the 


52  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  v 

San  Carlos  Reservation  between  bridges  across  the  San  Carlos  and 
Gila  Rivers  by  the  use  of  $20,000  appropriated  by  the  State  of 
Arizona. 

MINING  ON  RESTRICTED  INDIAN  LANDS. 

Until  recently  leasing  for  mining  operations  of  lands  allotted  to 
Indians  outside  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  the  Osage  Nation 
has  been  more  or  less  perfunctory,  but  within  the  last  year  many 
leases  have  been  made  on  several  reservations  in  Oklahoma,  and  also 
in  Wyoming.  A  material  increase  in  the  number  of  leases  executed 
has  been  due  chiefly  to  the  finding  of  several  large  gas  wells  in  the 
Otoe  Indian  Reservation,  Okla.,  and  to  the  increased  demand  for 
crude  oil  and  its  by-products.  It  is  hoped  that  this  leasing  activity 
will  result  in  the  discovery  of  oil  and  gas  in  paying  quantities  on 
these  reservations  and  thereby  increase  the  income  of  these  Indians. 

FORESTRY. 

The  work  of  road,  trail,  and  telephone  construction  has  been  con- 
tinued so  far  as  funds  would  permit.  The  system  of  telephonic  com- 
munication is  now  fairly  satisfactory  on  every  reservation  having 
important  timber  interests.  Although  large  expenditures  will  yet  be 
required  to  make  all.  parts  of  the  extensive  forest  areas  accessible  by 
road  or  trail,  substantial  progress  is  being  made  each  year,  and  the 
comparatively  insignificant  fire  losses  of  the  past  year  indicate  that 
the  existing  means  of  fire  control  are  effective. 

The  administrative  force  has  been  strengthened  during  the  year 
by  the  appointment  of  several  men  who  have  had  thorough  technical 
training  in  forestry. 

The  work  of  estimating  the  timber  on  the  Menominee  Reservation, 
begun  in  September,  1914,  was  completed  early  in  December,  1915. 
About  one-third  of  the  area  of  the  Quinaielt  Reservation  was  cruised 
in  1915.  In  April,  1916,  this  work  was  resumed,  and  it  is  hoped  that 
about  three-fourths  of  the  reservation  can  be  completed  before  the 
October  rains  render  further  field  work  impracticable.  The  work 
will  be  completed  in  1917. 

A  resurvey  of  the  boundaries  and  an  estimate  of  the  timber  lands 
of  the  Eastern  Band  of  Cherokee  Indians  was  made  during  the  year. 
Timber  trespass  upon  these  lands  has  been  very  common  in  the  past, 
and  several  superintendents  h4ve  urged  the  difficulty  of  preventing 
trespass  because  of  a  lack  of  knowledge  as  to  the  boundary  lines. 
At  all  important  points  of  the  boundaries,  as  determined  by  the 
resurvey,  iron  posts  have  now  been  set. 

In  October,  1915,  the  timber  on  tribal  lands  of  the  Bad  River 
•Indian  Reservation,  the  sale  of  which  was  authorized  by  section  23 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  5$ 

of  the  act  of  August  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  L.,  582,605),  was  offered,  and 
on  January  14,  1916,  the  bid  of  the  J.  S.  Stearns  Lumber  Co.  on  the 
saw  timber,  and  that  of  the  M.  J.  Bell  Lumber  CS.  on  the  cedary 
were  accepted. 

The  remaining  timber  on  allotments  of  the  Lac  Courte  Oreille 
Indian  Reservation  was  sold  to  the  Fountain-Campbell  Lumber  Co- 
in February,  1916. 

Timber  operations  were  begun  on  the  Jicarilla  Indian  Reserva- 
tion, under  the  contract  with  the  Pagosa  Lumber  Co.,  and  on  the 
Tulalip  Reservation,  under  tKe  contract  with  the  Everett  Logging 
Co.  On  the  Jicarilla  about  13,000,000  feet,  and  on  the  Tulalip  about 
50,000,000  feet  b.  m.  were  cut.  From  the  Bad  River  Reservation 
about  40,000,000  feet  were  removed,  and  the  cut  at  Neopit  on  the 
Menominee  Reservation  was  approximately  20,000,000  feet.  Rather 
extensive  operations  were  also  conducted  on  the  Leech  Lake  and  Lac- 
Courte  Oreille  Reservations. 

Four  important  items  of  legislation  recommended  by  this  office 
were  included  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year 
1917,  approved  May  18,  1916.  These  were  an  item  authorizing  the 
homesteading  of  timber  lands  of  the  Flathead  Reservation,  which 
should  be  found  valuable  for  agricultural  or  horticultural  purposes,, 
one  authorizing  the  sale  of  the  timber  from  so-called  school  and 
swamp  lands  claimed  by  the  State  of  Wisconsin  within  the  Bad 
River  and  Lac  du  Flambeau  Indian  Reservations,  one  authorizing 
improved  methods  for  the  sale  of  products  of  the  Menominee  Indian 
Mills,  and  one  creating  an  Indian  forest  reserve  on  the  Red  Lake 
Indian  Reservation  in  Minnesota. 

ROCKY  BOY'S  BAND. 

Over  60  years  ago  a  band  of  Chippewa  left  Wisconsin  to  hunt 
buffalo  and  finally  reached  Montana,  then  a  wild  and  unsettled 
country.  Years  passed  and  the  Chippewa  who  remained  in  Min- 
nesota and  Wisconsin  were  given  land,  but  this  offshoot  of  a  once 
powerful  tribe  was  apparently  overlooked.  They  remained  in  Mon- 
tana hunting  buffalo  and  other  wild  game,  then  plentiful  there,  but 
with  the  advent  of  the  white  man  their  natural  means  of  subsistence 
was  dissipated  and  soon  these  people  became  a  wandering  band  of 
tramps,  seeking  odd  jobs  but  depending  largely  upon  the  charities 
of  the  public. 

To  the  credit  of  Rocky  Boy's  Band  it  should  be  said  that  even  in 
need  they  were  honest,  no  complaint  ever  having  been  made  against 
them  for  the  infraction  of  any  law. 

Altogether,  their  condition  appealed  strongly  to  many  of  the  best 
citizens  of  Montana,  some  of  whom,  notably  at  Great  Falls  and 
Helena,  took  an  active  interest  in  their  welfare,  contributing  money,, 
time,  and  practical  helpf 


54  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

So  apparent  were  the  necessities  of  these  Indians  that  Congress 
for  several  years  has  made  a  small  annual  appropriation  for  their 
relief. 

It  was  found  impracticable  to  settle  these  Indians  upon  either 
public  lands  or  on  existing  reservations,  nor  was  the  Government 
able  to  purchase  a  proper  reservation  for  them.  Subsequently  a  part 
of  the  band  was  settled  on  land  within  the  Blackfeet  Reservation, 
but  the  part  of  the  reservation  designated  for  the  Rocky  Boys  was 
not  adapted  to  agricultural  purposes.  Partly  on  account  of  this  fact 
and  partly  owing  to  tribal  antagonism  the  majority  of  the  band 
refused  to  remain  there  and  resumed  their  former  nomadic  habits. 

Early  in  my  administration  an  effort  was  made  through  Congress 
to  provide  land  for  these  Indians  on  the  Fort  Assiniboine  Military 
Reserve,  where  most  of  them  had  been  temporarily  located,  in  order 
that  they  might  be  looked  after  during  the  winter.  These  efforts, 
supplemented  by  the  work  of  earnest  friends  of  the  Indians  raiding 
in  Montana,  in  and  out  of  Congress,  finally  resulted  in  the  recent 
setting  apart  to  them  of  three  townships  in  the  southern  part  of  this 
reserve  as  a  permanent  reservation. 

It  soon  became  apparent  that  the  Rocky  Boy  Band  was  anxious  to 
have  a  home,  to  settle  down  and  become  self-supporting — as  expressed 
by  one  of  their  mimber :  "  To  learn  to  farm,  be  given  land  which 
would  be  their  own,  whereby  they  would  soon  be  self-supporting." 

Carrying  out  this  promise,  they  planted  and  cultivated  gardens 
with  the  seeds  and  implements  furnished  them  and  worked  faith- 
fully, with  the  result  that  they  produced  a  considerable  quantity  of 
hay  and  vegetables,  sufficient,  in  fact,  to  justify  a  substantial  reduc- 
tion in  the  ration  allowance  provided  for  in  the  congressional  appro- 
priation. As  further  evidence  of  their  interest  in  these  practical 
benefits  which  the  Government  -had  conferred  upon  them  they  vol- 
untarily sent  samples  of  the  vegetables  grown  to  the  State  fair  at 
Helena  as  a  part  of  the  Indian  exhibit. 

With  the  encouraging  start  already  made  there  seems  little  doubt 
that  within  a  few  years  these  formerly  nomadic  Indians,  who  were 
literally  wanderers  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  will  be  self-support- 
ing, self-respecting  Indians  on  the  high  road  to  successful  citizenship. 

A  sad  feature  of  their  history  is  revealed  in  the  fact  that  Rocky 
Boy,  who  had  for  so  many  years  led  his  people  through  a  wilderness 
of  starvation  and  despair,  died  as  his  band  reached  the  promised  land. 

PAPAGO  INDIANS. 

On  January  14,  1916,  the  President,  by  Executive  order,  set  apart 
a  permanent  reservation  for  the  use  of  the  Papago  Indians  in  south- 
ern Arizona.  Just  how  long  these  Indians  have  occupied  this  coun- 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES.  55 

try  is  not  known,  but  so  far  as  known  they  have  always  lived  there. 
The  first  authentic  record  of  these  people  is  given  in  the  diary  of 
Father  Eusebio  Kino,  who  made  several  trips  into  their  country 
between  1698  and  1702. 

In  Bancroft's  History,  volume  13,  at  page  550,  is  found  the  fol- 
lowing : 

The  Papagos  have  been  regarded  as  the  best  Indians  in  Arizona.  *  *  * 
More  readily  than  other  Indians  they  adapt  themselves  to  circumstances,  tilling 
the  soil,  raising  live  stock,  working  in  the  mines,  or  doing  anything  that  offers. 
As  the  reader  knows,  they  have  sometimes  had  trouble  with  the  Spaniards  and 
Mexicans,  but  they  have  always  been  friends  of  the  Americans  and  deadly 
foes  of  the  Apaches.  They  have  received  very  little  aid  from  the  Government. 

The  greater  part  of  the  reservation  is  only  adapted  to  grazing 
purposes,  and  the  raising  of  live  stock  has  naturally  been  the  prin- 
cipal occupation  and  must  be  the  chief  means  of  livelihood  for  these 
Indians.  Some  parts  of  the  reservation  are  known  to  contain  val- 
uable minerals,  and  under  the  terms  of  the  order  of  withdrawal 
such  lands  may  be  located,  entered,  and  acquired  by  citizens  under 
the  regular  mining  laws. 

Plans  have  been  formulated  for  the  education  and  civilization  of 
the  Papago  Indians,  and  several  schoolhouses  have  been  built  at 
convenient  points.  Wells  have  been  dug  to  furnish  water  for  do- 
mestic and  stock  purposes,  there  being  no  considerable  irrigation  pos- 
sibilities on  this  reservation. 

In  addition  to  these  improvements  a  hospital  is  in  the  course  of 
construction  at  Indian  Oasis.  Under  these  improved  conditions  it 
is  not  hard  to  believe  that  thig  tribe  of  Indians,  who  have  always 
been  independent  of  the  outside  world  and  self-supporting,  will  in 
time  become  prosperous  citizens. 

The  Papagos  are  a  moral,  intelligent,  industrious,  and  in  all  re- 
spects deserving  people. 

FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

To  avoid  useless  and  expensive  officialdom,  the  Cherokee  Nation 
was  abolished  on  July  1,  1915,  with  the  exception  of  the  principal 
chief,  who  was  retained  at  the  nominal  salary  of  .$25  per  month  to 
sign  Cherokee  tribal  deeds.  On  suggestion  from  this  office,  the 
officers  of  the  Seminole  Nation  of  Indians  in  Oklahoma,  following 
similar  action  by  the  tribal  officials  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  have 
tendered  their  resignations.  This  step  marks  in  a  definite  and  sig- 
nificant way  the  accomplishment  of  the  fhial  disposition  of  the 
affairs  of  the  Seminole  Nation  and  the  disbandment  of  the  tribal 
organization  so  far  as  possible  under  existing  law.  In  the  Choctaw, 
Chickasaw,  and  Creek  Nations  only  pro  forma  tribal  governments 
remain,  which  will  be  abolished  as  soon  as  tribal  affairs  will  permit. 


56  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

The  total  tribal  enrollment  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  corrected 
to  date  is  101,519  enrolled  members,  to  all  of  whom  have  been  made 
complete  allotments  of  land  or  payments  of  money  in  lieu  of  land 
except  in  the  Creek  Nation,  where  partial  allotments  of  the  value 
of  $800  have  been  made.  Of  these,  64,339  are  by  operation  of  law 
in  the  unrestricted  class,  while  37,180  are  in  the  restricted  class. 
This  number  is  further  reduced  by  removal  of  restrictions  and  by 
death  in  5,177  cases,  leaving  32,003  restricted  Indians  on  June  30, 
1916. 

The  total  area  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  is  19,525,966  acres,  of 
which  15,794,238  acres  have  been  allotted,  139,284  acres  have  been 
reserved  for  town  sites,  railroad  rights  of  way,  coal  and  asphalt  seg- 
regation, churches,  schools,  cemeteries,  and  other  public  purposes, 
and  2,673,828  acres  have  been  sold,  leaving  918,616  acres  unsold,  of 
which  there  will  be  offered  from  October  4  to  October  31,  1916, 
907,500  acres,  and  if  all  offered  is  sold  there  will  remain  11,116  acres 
unallotted  and  unsold  land  among  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes.  Since 
September  11,  1900,  a  total  of  309  towns  with  various  additions  have 
been  surveyed  and  platted  by  the  Government  in  the  Creek,  Cherokee, 
Choctaw,  and  Chickasaw  Nations,  for  which  the  tribes  have  received 
from  sale  thereof  a  total  of  $4,540,432.69.. 

During  the  year  6,406  suits  of  the  27,494  separate  suits  instituted 
in  the  United  States  District  Court  for  the  Eastern  District  of  Ok- 
lahoma under  the  act  of  Congress  approved  May  27, 1908,  to  set  aside 
illegal  conveyances  of  restricted  allotted  lands,  have  been  dismissed 
or  otherwise  disposed  of.  Prior  to  July  1,  1915,  19,890  of  these  suits 
were  closed,  now  leaving  7,604  suits  still  pending  and  undetermined. 

Eighteen  field  clerks  have  been  stationed  through  the  40  counties 
comprising  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  with  headquarters  located 
usually  at  county  seats,  and  each  field  clerk  has  in  his  district  an 
average  of  about  1,800  restricted  Indians.  During  the  last  fiscal 
year  112  houses  and  32  barns  were  erected  from  land  funds  under  the 
supervision  of  the  field  clerks  for  the  benefit  of  restricted  allottees. 
Since  May  27,  1908,  restrictions  on  alienation  have  been  removed 
from  504,567.44  acres  of  land,  which  together  with  the  six  acts  of 
Congress,  to  wit,  act  of  July  1,  1902,  act  of  April  21,  1904,  section 
16  of  the  Creek  agreement  of  July  1,  1902,  act  of  May  27,  1908,  act 
of  May  29,  1908,  and  act  of  March  3,  1903,  removed  the  restrictions 
on  alienation  from  a  total  of  12,518,140  acres. 

PROBATE  WORK  IN   OKLAHOMA. 

During  the  present  fiscal  year  the  probate  work  in  the  Five  Civil- 
ized Tribes  has  proceeded  along  well-organized  lines  and  in  a  thor- 
ough and  effective  manner. 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  57 

Pioneer  work,  during  the  two  preceding  years,  was  necessary  in 
order  to  accomplish  the  organization  of  an  adequate  force  of  probate 
attorneys,  the  division  of  the  territory  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes 
into  districts,  and  the  preparation  and  promulgation  of  a  code  of 
rules  and  regulations  to  govern  procedure  in  probate  cases.  With 
these  primary  accomplishments  assured,  the  way  stood  open  for  the 
performance  in  a  systematic  way  of  the  work  that  seriously  de- 
manded attention  with  respect  to  individual  cases. 

A  special  effort  has  been  made  this  year  to  put  all  probate  cases 
upon  a  sound  financial  basis.  In  the  past  straw  bonds  were  accepted 
in  many  cases  and  reports  of  guardians  were  allowed  to  drift  along 
for  years  without  being  audited  or  checked.  But  the  attorneys  are 
now  rapidly  correcting  this  situation.  They  have  checked  case  after 
case,  and  whenever  a  guardian  has  been  found  delinquent  they  have 
secured  an  order  from  the  court  citing  such  guardian  to  appear  and 
make  good  his  shortage,  and  if  necessary  to  give  a  new  and  satisfac- 
tory bond.  In  doing  this  they  have  caused  citations  to  be  issued  in 
7.198  cases,  and  have  secured  the  discharge  or  removal  of  2,584 
guardians.  They  have  also  caused  2,277  new  bonds  to  be  filed,  aggre- 
gating in  amount  $2,625,945. 

These  beneficial  results  were  attained  partly  through  the  institu- 
tion of  suits  in  the  State  courts,  suits  that  would  not  and  could  not 
have  been  filed  and  prosecuted  without  the  assistance  of  the  probate 
attorneys.  There  were  91  suits  in  criminal  cases  and  416  suits  in  civil 
cases  instituted  during  the  year  on  behalf  of  members  of  the  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  and  the  amounts  involved  in  the  civil  actions  totaled 
$1,382,238. 

It  is  always  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  to  cope  with  in  the 
Indian  Service  to  make  proper  and  profitable  disposition  of  funds 
belonging  to  individual  Indians,  especially  where,  as  in  the  oil  dis- 
tricts, they  are  in  receipt  of  large  incomes.  Here  again  the  services 
of  the  probate  attorneys  have  proved  of  great  value,  for  they  have 
been  able  to  follow  up  their  legal  victories  by  supervising  the  con- 
servation and  investment  of  the  funds  of  their  Indian  clients.  This 
they  have  done  during  the  year,  in  the  amount  of  $1,814,972.  They 
have,  moreover,  prevented,  by  their  supervision  of  probate,  cases,  by 
checking  reports  of  guardians,  by  requiring  new  bonds,  and  in  other 
ways,  losses  to  dependent  Indians  in  the  amount  of  $1,487,158  since 
July  1,  1915. 

Altogether  there  has  been  saved  and  conserved  to  the  restricted 
and  adult  allottees  during  the  last  fiscal  year  the  total  sum  of 
$3,302,130. 

In  no  other  branch  of  the  probate  work  in  the  past  have  fraud  and 
graft  perpetrated  their  crimes  upon  helpless  Indians  more  than  in 
connection  with  the  sales  of  minors'  allotments  and  of  inherited  lands. 


58  COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

But  now  every  step  is  scrutinized  by  the  probate  attorneys,  who  in- 
sist that  lands  that  are  to  be  sold  must  be  appraised  by  representa- 
tives of  the  United  States,  and  that  all  sales  shall  be  duly  advertised, 
thereby  doing  away  with  the  undesirable  practice  of  private  sales. 

In  the  accomplishment  of  these  beneficial  results,  the  probate  at- 
torneys have  necessarily  performed  a  vast  amount  of  routine  work, 
including  the  holding  of  conferences  with  allottees  and  others  in 
nearly  50,000  instances  and  the  writing  of  upward  of  57,000  letters 
and  other  official  communications. 

Now  that  the  scope  and  volume  of  the  probate  work  is  apparent, 
I  look  forward  with  confidence  to  the  achievement  during  the  next 
year  of  even  greater  results  than  those  attained. 

OIL  AND   GAS — FIVE   CIVILIZED   TRIBES. 

Mining  for  oil  and  gas  in  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma, 
during  the  past  fiscal  year  has  been  very  active,  and  extensive  wild- 
catting  has  been  done.  No  large  pools  have  been  discovered.  The 
production  of  the  Gushing  field  has  declined  very  rapidly,  and  this 
fact,  together  with  the  conditions  which  have  existed  in  connection 
with  the  marketing  of  crude  oil  at  home  and  abroad,  is  probably  the 
cause  of  the  increased  price  of  oil  from  40  cents  per  barrel  at  the 
close  of  the  fiscal  year,  to  $1.55  during  the  past  winter.  The  posted 
price  remained  at  $1.55  during  the  last  three  or  four  months  of  the 
year.  However,  practically  one-third  of  the  oil  produced  in  the 
Mid-Continent  field  has  been  sold  at  a  premium,  which  varies  from 
5  to  55  cents  per  barrel  above  the  posted  price.  The  Indian  lessors 
have  been  receiving  their  proportionate  share. of  the  premium  re- 
ceived by  the  lessees. 

During  the  past  year  the  affairs  of  several  large  oil  and  gas  lessees 
have  been  investigated,  with  the  result  that  violations  of  the  regula- 
tions have  been  discovered  and  the  guilty  parties  have  been  com- 
pelled to  reduce  their  acreage  within  the  maximum  o'f  4,800  acres 
allowed  by  the  regulations. 

From  1,372  leases,  covering  109,107.68  acres,  there  was  produced 
during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916,  23,988,862.32  barrels  of  oil 
from  departmental  leases,  as  against  27,098,994.02  barrels  during 
the  previous  year.  The  receipts  from  gas  wells  during  the  fiscal  year 
aggregated  $51,557.62,  and  the  receipts  from  coal  production  on 
allotments,  $15,893.29,  representing  212,069  tons,  of  which  160,607 
tons  were  produced  in  the  Creek  Nation.  While  3,110,131.70  less  bar- 
rels of  oil  were  marketed  from  departmental  leases  during  the  year 
ended  June  30,  1916,  the  royalty  interest  was  $1.359,279.74  in  excess 
of  that  for  the  previous  year. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    IXDIAX   AFFAIRS.  59 

OSAGE  OIL  AND  GAS  LEASES. 

March  16,  1896,  the  Osage  Tribe  of  Indians  leased  to  Mr.  Edwin 
E.  Foster  the  Osage  Indian  Reservation  for  oil  and  gas  mining  pur- 
poses. This  lease  expired  in  1906.  However,  by  the  act  of  Congress 
of  March  3,  1905,  it  was  renewed  as  to  680,000  acres  for  a  period  of 
10  years,  which  expired  March  16,  1916. 

It  then  became  necessary  to  provide  new  regulations  to  govern  the 
leasing  of  the  lands  for  oil  and  gas  mining  purposes.  Conferences 
were  held,  both  with  the  oil  and  gas  men  interested  and  the  Osage 
tribal  council,  and  on  June  17,  1915,  the  latter  passed  a  resolution 
containing  recommendations  as  to  the  manner  in  which  new  leases 
should  be  made,  which  resolution  is  set  forth  at  length  in  my  report 
for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1915.  August  26,  1915,  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Interior  promulgated  regulations  to  govern  the  leasing 
of  these  and  other  lands  in  the  Osage  Reservation  for  oil  and  gas 
mining  purposes. 

The  Osage  Tribe  will  receive  considerably  more  revenue  under 
the  new  leases  than  they  received  under  the  Foster  lease.  The  old 
lease  covered  680,000  acres,  wrhereas  the  new  oil  leases  cover  about 
190,000,  of  which  120,000  acres  is  subject  to  a  rental  of  $1  per  acre 
per  year  until  w7ells  are  drilled,  leaving  500,000  acres  out  of  the 
680,000  acres  of  the  old  lease  to  be  leased  for  oil  in  the  future.  New 
gas  leases  have  been  made  to  cover  about  900,000  acres,  a  little  more 
than  that  formerly  covered  by  the  Foster  lease.  Under  the  old  oil 
lease  the  tribe  received  one-eighth  royalty,  but  did  not  receive  any 
rental  on  undeveloped  lands.  The  tribe  will  receive  under  the  new 
oil  leases  one-sixth  royalty  from  each  quarter-section  unit  producing 
less  than  100  barrels  per  well  per  day,  and  one-fifth  royalty  from 
such  units  producing  100  barrels  or  more  per  well  per  day;  also  a 
rental  of  $1  per  acre  on  each  quarter  section  (160  acres)  of  unde- 
veloped lands. 

The  tribe  received  $2,057,600  from  the  sale  of  leases  on  April  20, 
1916,  and  has  received  from  the  sale  held  on  June  20  approximately 
$1,175,000;  these  amounts  being  in  addition  to  the  stipulated  royal- 
ties heretofore  mentioned.  The  properties  which  were  sold  were 
those  producing  tracts  where  the  wells  averaged  over  25  barrels  per 
well  and  producing  lands  in  excess  of  4,800  acres  Jield  by  former  / 
sublessees. 

The  tribe  received  $100  per  year  for  each  gas  well  in  service  on 
the  old  lease,  and  the  amount  realized  last  year  aggregated  about 
$12,000,  but,  under  the  new  lease,  the  tribe  will  receive  a  minimum 
royalty  of  3  cents  per  thousand  cubic  feet,  measured  at  or  near  the 
wells,  which  should  amount,  during  the  first  year  to  at  least  $700,000. 


60  COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

The  Osage  Tribe,  however,  should  within  a  year  after  the  new 
leases  are  approved,  i.  e.,  by  May  17,  1917,  receive  six  or  eight  times 
as  much  as  they  have  heretofore  received  under  the  old  lease.  In 
addition,  at  is  expected  that  gas  lessees,  in  drilling  for  gas  on  the 
700,000  acres  leased  for  gas  but  not  leased  for  oil,  will  find  new  wells 
which  will  prove  that  such  lands  are  valuable  for  oil  and,  when  put 
up  for  sale  and  sold  to  the  highest  bidder,  the  tribe  should  receive 
large  sums  in  bonuses,  the  amount  depending  upon  the  number  and 
extent  of  new  oil  pools  so  discovered  in  the  gas  territory. 

SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  LIQUOR  TRAFFIC. 

From  the  earliest  colonial  days  intoxicating  liquors  have  been  the 
curse  of  the  Indian.  Prior  to  the  advent  of  the  white  man  he  did 
not  know  alcohol,  either  in  distilled  or  fermented  liquor.  It  was  the 
gift  of  the  white  man  to  the  red  man,  and  since  that  time  the  best 
element  of  the  former  race  has  endeavored  to  overcome  the  evils 
which  have  come  from  it. 

For  years  there  have  been  statutes  with  drastic  penalties  against 
the  sales  of  intoxicants  to  Indians  but  until  the  last  few  years  they 
have  proven  almost  dead  letters. 

During  the  last  three  years  a  vigorous,  continuous  and  effective 
assault  has  been  made  upon  the  liquor  interests  which  have  debauched 
the  Indian  race.  Increased  appropriations  have  enabled  the  Indian 
Office  to  place  in  the  field  a  corps  of  detectives  who  have  become  a 
terror  to  the  bootlegger  and  drinking  man  in  the  Indian  country. 

In  three  years  508,880  pints  of  whisky,  beer,  and  other  alcoholic 
decoctions  have  been  confiscated  and  their  contents  destroyed;  5,511 
arrests  have  been  made  of  alleged  violators  of  the  law ;  and  the  courts 
have  assessed  fines  against  convicted  offenders  in  an  amount  practi- 
cally equal  to  the  annual  appropriations  by  Congress  for  the  support 
of  this  branch  of  Indian  work. 

While  the  strong  arm  of  the  law  is  being  invoked  to  prevent  the 
Indian  from  obtaining  whisky  and  to  punish  the  man  who  provides 
him  with  it,  a  moral  awakening  is  being  brought  about  through  more 
peaceful  means.  My  personal  appeal  to  every  employee  in  the 
Indian  Service  and  to  persons  of  prominence  in  local  communities 
has  made  possible  a  most  successful  pledge-signing  campaign  among 
the  Indians,  in  school  and  out  of  school,  young  and  old,  pledging 
themselves  to  abstain  from  the  use  of  all  kinds  of  intoxicants. 

The  last  Congress  has  materially  strengthened  the  hand  of  the 
Government  in  the  enforcement  of  its  prohibitory  liquor  legislation 
for  Indians.  Heretofore  many  violators  of  the  law  have  escaped 
through  inability  of  the  Government  to  discover  how  the  intoxicants 
were  introduced  on  the  reservation.  This  loophole  has  been  closed 
by  making  the  possession  of  intoxicants  within  the  Indian  country 
prima  facie  evidence- of  its  criminal  introduction  and  extending  the 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES.  61 

provisions  of  sections  2140  and  2141  of  the  Revised  Statutes  to  beer 
and  other  classes  of  intoxicating  liquors  not  heretofore  covered  bj 
that  statute. 

This  legislation  has  been  greatly  needed,  and  particularly  so  in 
Oklahoma  and  Minnesota.  In  the  former  State  the  many  decisions 
of  the  circuit  court  of  appeals,  holding  that  possession  by  a  defendant 
within  certain  portions  of  the  State  of  intoxicating  liquor  which 
had  been  brought  into  the  State  from  without  is  npt  sufficient  to 
warrant  conviction  under  a  statute  for  introducing  liquor  into  the 
Indian  country  or  the  old  Indian  Territory,  have  made  it  difficult 
to  obtain  convictions. 

In  Minnesota  within  the  area  ceded  by  the  treaty  of  February  22, 
1855,  there  was  a  large  number  of  saloons,  breweries,  etc.,  and  liquor 
wras  transported  from  one  point  to  another  within  the  territory  as 
legislation  has  heretofore  only  prohibited  distilleries  of  ardent 
spirits  and  authorized  the  destruction  of  ardent  spirits  or  wine 
found  in  the  Indian  country.  This  legislation  remedies  these  condi- 
tions. 

The  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  have 
been  favorable  to  the  contention  of  the  Government,  and  several 
important  decisions  were  rendered.  The  action  of  the  court  in 
upholding  the  provisions  of  the  treaty  of  February  22,  1855,  with 
the  Chippewa  Indians  in  Minnesota  enabled  us  to  extend  our  opera- 
tions in  behalf  of  a  large  number  of  Indians  and  to  close  the  saloons 
within  the  area  in  Minnesota  ceded  by  this  band.  However,  the 
case  of  most  importance  is  that  of  United  States  v.  Nice,  in  which 
this  tribunal  overruled  the  Heff  case  and  held  that  the  power  of 
Congress  to  regulate  or  prohibit  the  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  to 
allottees  under  the  general-allotment  act  is  not  debatable.  Other 
cases  of  importance  have  been  disposed  of  in  the  Supreme  Court  and 
other  Federal  courts.  Likewise,  several  important  decisions  have 
been  rendered  by  State  courts  bearing  on  this  phase  of  our  work 
which  will  prove  beneficial  to  the  Indian., 

Our  work  in  Minnesota  has  been  carried  on  successfully  and  with 
no  feeling  of  resentment  on  the  part  of  a  large  majority  of  citizens, 
although  I  regret  that  one  person  was  killed  in  connection  with 
these  operations.  That  sentiment  has  been  favorable  is  evidenced 
by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  counties  within  the  treaty  territory  have 
recently  voted  for  county  option  and  against  the  liquor  interests. 
During  the  course  of  the  year  all  saloons  remaining  within  the  treaty 
territory  were  closed  and  drunkenness  among  the  Indians  practically 
eliminated.  Our  work  has  resulted  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases 
on  the  charge  of  introducing,  and  many  automobiles,  teams,  and 
conveyances  were  seized  and  libeled,  in  accordance  with  the  provi- 
sions of  law.  The  State  authorities  have  cooperated  with  us,  and 
65333—16 5 


62  COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

with  the  continued  support  of  the  citizens  of  that  community  the 
matter  is  now  well  in  hand,  although  a  considerable  force  of  officers 
is  still  operating  in  that  territory. 

With  the  closing  of  the  saloons,  breweries,  etc.,  and  our  efforts  to 
prevent  the  introduction  of  intoxicants  into  the  treaty  territory  we 
were  confronted  with  difficulties  which  arose  through  what  are  known 
as  near  beers,  ciders,  and  the  like.  Many  preparations  of  this  char- 
acter have  found  their  way  into  closed  territory  and  in  some  in- 
stances they  contained  large  percentages  of  alcohol  and  were  merely 
substitutes  under  false  names  for  intoxicants.  Various  subterfuges 
were  used  which  have  kept  our  suppression  officers  extremely  busy. 

Our  operations  have  covered  the  entire  country  where  Indians 
reside.  Every  means  possible  and  every  provision  of  law  applicable 
has  been  invoked  to  insure  the  greatest  success. 

Section  2078  of  the  Revised  Statutes  relative  to  withholding  an- 
nuity payments  under  certain  conditions  has  been  applied  at  practir 
cally  every  payment  made,  with  the  result  that  the  Indians  have  been 
freed  from  temptation  and  are  now  comparatively  sober.  The  pay- 
ments are  no  longer  drunken  orgies  nor  have  the  Indians  been  de- 
bauched and  robbed  as  formerly. 

All  this  has  resulted  in  the  greatest  activity  and  in  an  unprece- 
dented number  of  arrests  and  convictions.  By  invoking  existing 
legislation  it  has  been  possible  to  protect  the  Indians  during  these 
payments  and  at  a  time  when  it  would  do  the  most  good. 

If  Congress  would  amend  the  present  liquor  laws  applicable  to  the 
Indian  country,  making  the  first  offense  a  misdemeanor  and  permit 
prosecution  by  information  instead  of  indictment  there  would  be 
convictions  where  acquittals  are  now  procured,  because  of  the  present 
drastic  penalty.  Procedure  by  information  would  decrease  the 
heavy  costs  of  prosecution. 

A  native  fermented  liquor  known  as  tulapai  or  tiswin  has  a  strong 
hold  on  the  Apaches.  It  is  so  easily  made  and  so  insidious  that  its 
suppression  is  a  difficult  undertaking.  Instruction  in  schools  and 
among  adults  and  the  punishment  of  offenders  is  gradually  having 
a  good  effect. 

Two  bills  have  been  introduced  in  Congress  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
trolling and  eliminating  the  use  of  peyote,  an  imported  Mexican 
product  which  produces  a  dangerous  narcotic  intoxication.  These 
laws  should  be  quickly  passed. 

INDIAN  CRIMINAL  OFFENSES. 

The  Federal  laws  relating  to  offenses  committed  by  Indians  against 
the  person  or  property  of  other  Indians  or  persons  within  the  limits 
of  any  Indian  reservation  include  <only  murder,  manslaughter,  rape, 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  63 

assault  with  intent  to  kill,  assault  with  a  dangerous  weapon,  arson, 
burglary,  and  larceny.  There  are  other  offenses  committed  by  In- 
dians for  which  they  should  be  punished.  We  are  trying  to  transform 
the  Indian  into  a  law-abiding  citizen,  but  at  the  present  time  a  num- 
ber of  offenses  against  society,  morality,  etc.,  are  allowed  to  go  un- 
punished, as  they  are  not  crimes  under  our  laws.  This  condition  is 
detrimental  to  good  citizenship  and  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order. 

Sections  328  and  329  of  the  Criminal  Code  should  be  amended  so 
as  to  enlarge  the  number  of  offenses  and  make  the  Indian  subject  to 
the  same  laws  and  the  same  penalties  as  are  all  other  persons  com- 
mitting these  or  similar  offenses. 

A  code  of  laws  for  the  guidance  of  the  Indian  courts  on  the  several 
reservations  would  be  of  manifest  advantage  on  reservations  where 
such  courts  are  now  the  principal  form  of  justice. 

I  shall  submit  for  your  consideration,  prior  to  the  next  session  of 
Congress,  a  draft  of  a  bill  which  will  be  designed  to  meet  the  needs 
of  the  service  in  these  respects. 

COURT  DECISIONS. 

The  following  cases  of  interest  to  the  Indian  Service  were  decided 
during  the  last  year : 

La  Rogue  v.  United  States  (239  U.  S.,  62).— The  question  involved 
in  this  case  was  whether  the  Nelson  Act  of  January  14,  1889  (25 
Stat.  L.,  642),  contemplated  that  allotments  should  be  made  on 
behalf  of  Indians  otherwise  entitled  thereto  but  who  died  without 
selecting  the  land  wanted.  It  was  held  that  the  act  mentioned  con- 
templated only  selections  on  the  part  of  living  Indians  acting  for 
themselves  or  through  designated  representatives. 

Hallowell  v.  Commons  (239  U.  £.,  506}.— The  court  in  this  case 
affirmed  the  decision  of  the  court  of  appeals  dismissing  the  bill  for 
want  of  jurisdiction,  and  held  that  where  the  death  of  the  allottee 
intestate  occurred  during  the  trust  period  the  decision  of-  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Interior  determining  his  heirs  is  final  and  conclusive  under 
the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  and 
that  it  was  unnecessary  to  consider  whether  the  court  had  jurisdic- 
tion when  the  suit  was  begiui. 

Franklin  K.  Lane,  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  v.  U.  /S.  ex  rel. 
Julia  Lamere  Mickadiet,  nee  Tiebault,  and  Alma  Lamere  Tie- 
~bault  (decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  on 
May  22,  1916). — The  question  of  the  power  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  to  reopen  or  reconsider  cases  was  involved  in  this  decision, 
and  the  court  held  that  the  words  "final  and  conclusive,"  contained 
in  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  describing  the  power 


64  COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIES. 

given  to  the  Secretary,  must  be  taken  as  conferring  and  not  as  limit- 
ing or  destroying  that  authority;  that,  in  other  words,  they  must 
be  treated  as  absolutely  excluding  the  rights  to  review  in  the  courts, 
as  has  hitherto  been  the  case  under  the  act  of  1887,  the  question  of 
fact  as  to  who  Avere  the  heirs  of  an  allottee,  thereby  causing  that 
question  to  become  one  within  the  final  and  conclusive  competency 
of  the  administrative  authority. 

United  States  v.  Louis  Hemmer  et  al.  (decided  by  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  June  5,  1916). — In  this  case  it  was  held 
that  the  act  of  July  4,  1884  (23  Stat.  L.,  96),  containing  a  provision 
whereby  the  United  States  was  to  hold  the  land  in  trust  for  a  period 
of  25  years,  did  not  apply  to  Indians  located  upon  the  public  lands 
who  before  the  passage  of  the  act  of  1884  had  substantially  complied 
with  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  3,  1875  (18  Stat.  L.,  420), 
relative  to  homesteads.  In  other  words,  it  was  held  that  acts  of 
1875  and  1884  were  independent  acts,  and  that  the  act  of  1884  con- 
taining the  25-year  restriction  was  not  amendatory  of  the  act  of 
1875  containing  a  restriction  against  alienation  for  a  period  of  5 
years  only. 

Levindale  Lead  (&  Zinc  Minnig  Co.,  W.  H.  Aaron  and  M.  L.  Levin 
v.  Charles  Coleman  (decided  by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court 
on  June  5,  1916). — Charles  Coleman,  a  white  man,  the  defendant 
in  error  in  this  case,  brought  suit  to  set  aside  a  conveyance  of  an  un- 
divided interest  in  lands  inherited  from  his  Indian  wife  and  child, 
who  were  members  of  the  Osage  Tribe.  Judgment  was  entered 
annulling  the  conveyance,  upon  the  ground  that  it  was  executed  in 
violation  of  restrictions  imposed  by  Congress.  This  judgment  was 
affirmed  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Oklahoma  and  a  writ  of  error 
sued  out  to  the  United  States  Supreme  Court.  The  United  States 
Supreme  Court  held  that  the  act  of  June  28,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539), 
placed  no  restrictions  upon  the  alienation  of  land  or  undivided  in- 
terests in  land  of  which  white  men  who  were  not  members  of  the 
tribe  became  owners.  The  judgment  of  the  State  court  was  reversed 
and  the  case  remanded  for  further  proceedings. 

New  York  v.  Becker  (decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States  June  12,  1916). — In  this  case  it  was  held  that  the  right  of 
hunting  and  fishing  reserved  by  the  Seneca  Indians  of  New  York 
under  the  treaty  ratified  by  the  Senate  April  11,  1798,  on  the  lands 
ceded  by  that  treaty  was  not  an  exclusive  right  in  the  Indians,  and 
was  subject  to  that  necessary  power  of  appropriate  regulation  which 
inhered  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  State  over  the  lands  where  the 
privilege  was  exercised.  In  other,  words,  the  only  right  reserved  to 
the  Indian  was  that  of  hunting  and  fishing  in  common  with  other 
citizens  of  the  State,  and  subject  to  the  same  provision,  regulation, 
and  limitation  as  are  imposed  on  whites  by  the  laws  of  the  State. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  65 

United  States  v.  Fred  Nice  (decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States,  June  12,  1916). — In  this  case  it  was  held  that  when 
lands  are  allotted  and  trust  patents  issued  to  Indians  the  Govern- 
ment does  not  lose  its  guardianship  over  them,  and  therefore  can 
prohibit  the  sale  of  liquor  to  them  in  violation  of  Federal  laws. 
This  case  overruled  the  Heff  case  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
1905,  wherein  it  was  held  that  an  Indian  who  received  an  allotment 
and  patent  for  land  under  the  act  of  February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L., 
388),  was  no  longer  a  ward  of  the  Government  and  not  within  the 
•  reach  of  Indian  police  regulations  on  the  part  of  Congress.  The 
decision  in  the  Nice  case  is  very  important,  as  under  its  holdings  the 
department  will  be  enabled  more  successfully  to  cope  with  the  liquor 
situation  among  the  Indians. 

United  States  v.  Debell  et  al.  (227  Fed.,  760}  (decided  by  the 
United  States  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  Eighth  Circuit). — It  was 
held  in  this  case  that  where  a  person  with  knowledge  of  the  incompe- 
tency  of  an  Indian  for  whom  the  United  States  holds  lands  in  trust 
induced  the  Indian  to  sell  the  land  to  him  and  apply  for  and  obtain 
a  patent  in  fee  simple  for  it,  and  then  convey  it  to  him,  wrongfully 
appropriates  the  land  to  himself;  he  becomes  a  trustee  de  son  tort 
thereof  and  of  its  proceeds  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian,  and  the 
United  States  may  maintain  a  suit  in  equity  to  set  aside,  as  against 
him,  the  patent  and  the  deed,  and  in  case  the  title  has  passed  to  an  in- 
nocent subsequent  purchaser,  to  recover  of  the  appropriator  the 
amount  he  realized  from  the  land  above  the  amount  he  paid  for  it  to 
the  Indian. 

United  States  v.  Pearson,  County  Treasurer,  et  al.  (231  Fed.,  270) 
(decided  by  the  United  States  court). — This  was  a  South  Dakota 
case  involving  the  Sioux  Indians  who  have  been  allotted  in  sever- 
alty  but  maintain  their  tribal  relations.  It  was  held  that  personal 
property  consisting  of  horses,  cattle  and  their  increase,  and  farm 
implements  and  other  property  acquired  by  exchange  of  such  prop- 
erty or  other Avise,  which  is  derived  directly  or  indirectly  from  the 
Government  and  is  used  by  the  Indians  on  their  farms,  ^is  not  subject 
to  taxation  by  State  authorities;  and  that  such  property  is  not 
absolute  property  of  the  Indians  but  is  still  held  in  trust  for  their 
benefit  by  the  Government  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  its  policy 
of  helping  them  to  be  self-supporting. 

State  v.  Towessnute  (154  Pac.,  805)  (decided  by  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  State  of  Washington). — In  this  case  it  was  held  that  the 
Yakima  treaty  of  March  8,  1859  (12  Stat.  L.,  951),  providing  that 
the  exclusive  right  of  taking  fish  in  all  streams  running  through  or 


66  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 

bordering  on  the  reservation  is  secured  to  the  Indians,  as  also  the 
right  of  taking  fish  at  all  usual  and  accustomed  places  "  in  common 
with  citizens  "  of  the  Territory,  does  not  authorize  a  tribal  inhabit- 
ant of  the  Yakima  Indian  Reservation  to  fish  in  a  river  several  miles 
outside  the  reservation  without  a  license,  contrary  to  a  law  of  the 
State,  the  words  quoted  indicating  an  intent  not  to  give  the  Indian 
an  advantage  but  to  save  him  from  a  disadvantage,  and  to  permit 
the  State  laws  to  operate  on  both  races  alike  in  respect  to  the  right 
to  fish  outside  the  reservation. 

FISHING  RIGHTS. 

The  ancient  fishing  rights  of  Indians  of  the  State  of  Washington 
have  been  considered  in  the  courts  of  that  State  during  the  year. 
Treaties  with  several  of  these  tribes  provide  that  the  Indians  shall 
have  the  right  to  fish  at  their  usual  and  accustomed  fishing  places, 
outside  of  their  reservations,  in  common  with  the  citizens  of  the 
State.  It  is  their  contention  that  this  provision  gives  them  the  right 
to  fish  in  these  places  without  compliance  with  the  requirements  of 
the  State  law.  The  State  has  contested  this,  and  on  February  4,  1916, 
obtained  a  favorable  decision  from  the  State  supreme  court  in  State 
v.  Alex  Towessriute.  An  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Indians  to  the 
United  States  Supreme  Court  is  contemplated. 

An  important  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 
was  rendered  June  12,  1916,  in  State  of  New  York  ex  rel.  Walter  S. 
Kennedy  v.  Becker,  which  has  a  bearing  upon  the  fishing  rights  of 
the  Indians.  The  court  held  in  effect  that  a  reservation  of  fishing 
rights  pertaining  to  land  which  had  been  ceded  by  the  Indians  was 
an  easement  or  profit  as  against  their  grantees,  and  all  who  might 
become  owners  of  the  ceded  lands,  but  that  it  was  not  a  right  in 
derogation  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  State,  and  that  the  State  might 
enforce  within  the  ceded  area  against  the  Indians  as  well  as  white 
people  such  laws  as  might  be  enacted  for  the  preservation  of  the 
fish  and  game  within  the  borders  of  that  State. 

LEGISLATION. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act,  approved  May  18,  1916,  carries  ap- 
propriations for  approximately  $11,000,000. 

Aside  from  the  usual  items  for  conducting  work  among  the  In- 
dians, it  contains  such  important  ones  as  these : 

Repeal  of  the  law  which  prohibits  granting  permission  in  writing 
or  otherwise  to  any  Indian  or  Indians  to  go  into  the  State  of  Texas. 

Allotted  lands  of  Indians  which  are  arid  but  susceptible  of  irriga- 
tion may  be  leased  for  a  period  not  exceeding  10  years  where,  by 
reason  of  old  age  or  other  disability,  the  allottee  can  not  personally 
occupy  or  improve  such  allotments. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  67 

Permitting  the  State  of  Colorado  to  use  the  old  Grand  Junction 
Indian  school  plant,  granted  to  it  in  1910  for  educational  purposes 
(36  Stat  L.,  273),  for  the  care  of  the  insane  or  for  other  public  pur- 
poses which  may  be  authorized  by  the  legislature  of  the  State,  pro- 
vided that  Indians  shall  always  be  admitted  to  the  institution  free 
of  charge  and  upon  an  equality  with  white  persons. 

Amending  section  2  of  the  act  of  March  2,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1221), 
so  that  the  pro  rata  share  of  any  Indian  who  is  mentally  or  physically 
incapable  of  managing  his  or  her  own  affairs  may,  in  the  discretion 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  be  withdrawn  from  the  Treasury 
and  expended  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian. 

Amending  section  9  of  the  act  of  March  3,  1875  (18  Stat.  L.,  450), 
so  that  bidders  may  now  accompany  their  bids  with  a  cashier's  check 
or  an  acceptable  bond  in  favor  of  the  United  States. 

Authorizing  an  advance  to  any  individual  Chippewa  Indian  in 
Minnesota  entitled  to  share  in  the  permanent  fund  of  the  Chippewa 
Indians  of  Minnesota  one-fourth  of  the  amount  which  would  now 
be  coming  to  said  Indian  under  a  pro  rata  distribution  of  the  perma- 
nent fund. 

Creating  the  Red  Lake  Indian  Forest  Reserve. 

Appropriating  $5,000  to  complete  the  enrollment  of  the  allottees 
within  the  White  Earth  Reservation,  Minn.,  required  by  the  act  of 
June  30,  1913. 

Permitting  lands  on  the  Flathead  Indian  Reservation,  Mont., 
valuable  for  agricultural  or  horticultural  purposes,  heretofore  classi- 
fied as  timberlands,  in  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 
to  be  appraised  and  opened  to  homestead  entry. 

Authorizing  the  withdrawal  from  the  Treasury  of  $100,000  of  the 
principal  sum  on  deposit  to  the  credit  of  Indians  on  the  Blackfeet 
Reservation,  Mont.,  if  needed,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  and 
caring  for  cattle,  seeds,  and  farming  equipment  for  the  individual 
Indians  thereof. 

Authorizing  a  compromise  settlement  of  the  suit  of  the  United 
States  against  E.  Dowden  and  others,  now  pending  in  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States. 

Authorizing  the  Atchison,  Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Railway  Co.  to 
reconstruct  its  line  of  railroad  through  the  Chilocco  Indian  School 
Reservation,  Okla.,  so  as  to  eliminate  existing  heavy  grades  and 
curves,  payment  for  the  land  to  be  for  the  use  of  that  school. 

Authorizing  a  per  capita  payment  of  not  to  exceed  $300  to  the 
Choctaw  Indians  of  Oklahoma,  and  $200  to  the  Chickasaws  and  $300 
to  the  enrolled  members  of  the  Seminole  Tribe,  Oklahoma. 

Appropriating  $1,000  for  an  investigation  as  to  the  probable  cost 
of  providing  adequate  school  facilities  on  the  various  Sioux  Indian 


68  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

i 

Reservations  for  the  children  of  the  Sioux  Tribes  who  are  now  with- 
out Government  or  public  school  facilities. 

Authorizing  the  withdrawal  of  $300,000  of  the  principal  funds  to 
the  Confederated  Bands  of  Ute  Indians,  Utah,  for  promoting  their 
civilization  and  self-support. 

Authorizing  the  sale  of  not  to  exceed  20  acres  of  land  within  the 
limits  of  the  abandoned  Fort  Spokane  Military  Reservation,  Wash., 
not  necessary  for  hospital  purposes,  the  proceeds  thereof  to  go  to  the 
credit  of  the  Spokane  Indians  of  Washington. 

Authorizing  for  memorial  purposes  a  patent  to  be  issued  to  the 
Washington  State  Historical  Society  for  land  approximating  25 
acres  in  area  on  the  diminished  Colville  Indian  Reservation,  Wash- 
ington. 

Authorizing  leases  to  citizens  of  the  United  States  for  mining  pur- 
poses of  unallotted  mineral  lands  on  the  diminished  Spokane  Reser- 
vation in  the  State  of  Washington  for  periods  of  25  years  with 
privilege  of  renewal  on  conditions. 

Appropriating  $95,000  in  addition  to  the  tribal  funds  to  pay  mem- 
bers of  the  Stockbridge  and  Munsee  Tribes  of  Indians  enrolled  under 
the  act  of  Congress  of  March  3,  1893  (27  Stat.  L.,  744) ,  sums  equal 
to  the  amounts  paid  the  other  members  of  said  tribe  prior  to  the 
enrollment  under  said  act. 

Appropriating  $100,000  reimbursable  for  support  and  civilization 
of  Wisconsin  Band  of  Potawatomi  Indians  residing  in  Wisconsin 
and  Michigan. 

Authorizing  the  withdrawal  of  $300,000  from  the  tribal  funds  of 
the  Menominee  Indians  of  Wisconsin,  for  the  purpose  of  clearing 
their  land,  erecting  sanitary  homes,  and  purchasing  building  mate- 
rial, seeds,  implements,  stock,  equipment,  and  supplies. 

Amending  section  3  of  the  act  of  March  28,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  51), 
so  as  to  authorize  the  sale  of  lumber,  lath,  shingles,  crating,  ties,  poles, 
posts,  bolts,  logs,  bark,  pulp  wood,  and  other  marketable  materials 
obtained  from  the  forests  on  the  Menominee  Reservation,  the  pro- 
ceeds of  the  sale  to  be  deposited  to  the  credit  of  the  Menominee  Tribe 
of  Indians. 

Authorizing  without  bias  or  prejudice  to  the  rights  or  interests  of 
any  party  to  the  litigation  now  pending  the  sale  of  timber  on  the  so- 
called  school  lands  and  swamp  lands  within  the  boundaries  of  the 
Bad  River  and  Lac  du  Flambeau  Indian  Reservations  in  Wisconsin, 
to  which  the  State  has  asserted  a  claim,  provided  that  the  consent 
of  the  State  or  any  person  claiming  title  therefrom  shall  be  obtained 
before  a  sale  shall  be  made.  . 

Authorizing  with  the  consent  of  the  Indians  the  leasing  or  grant- 
ing of  the  flowage  rights  on  the  unallotted  and  allotted  lands  in  the 
Lac  Courte  Oreilles  Reservation,  Wis.,  for  storage  reservoir  purposes. 


COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  69* 

THE  PURCHASE  OF  GOt)DS  AND  SUPPLIES. 

To  maintain  its  schools,  its  industrial  activities,  its  agricultural 
and  stock-raising  program  for  nearly  300,000  Indians  required  the 
Indian  Office  annually  to  purchase  about  $4,500,000  worth  of  supplies 
of  a  most  varied  nature.  These  supplies  are  almost  entirely  bought 
by  contract  after  proper  advertising  and  notice  to  prospective  bid- 
ders. The  bulk  of  these,  other  than  live  stock,  are  contracted  for  at 
the  annual  lettings,  held  during  the  last  fiscal  year  in  Chicago,  San 
Francisco,  and  St.  Louis. 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  variety  of  supplies  essential  to  the  Indian 
Service,  the  following  statement  is  given  to  show  approximately  the 
amounts  expended  annually  for  various  purposes  and  activities: 

Subsistence 7 $1, 123,  000 

Dry  goods  and  clothing 1_  418,  000 

Forage :___  269,000 

Fuel__                                      _-__  365,000 

Stationery  supplies 49,000 

Educational  supplies 43,  000 

Medical  supplies 61,  000 

Live  stock,  equipment,  and  miscellaneous  supplies 2,  757,  000 

Supplies  are  bought  under  two  general  classifications — general 
contracts  and  specific  advertisements — and  bids  received  from  time  to 
time  to  meet  the  immediate  needs  of  the  particular  point  in  the  service 
where  the  supplies  are  required.  During  the  last  fiscal  year  there 
were  maintained  warehouses  at  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  a  large  bulk  of  our  supplies  passed  through  these  ware- 
houses on  their  way  to  their  separate  destinations. 

Close  inspection  is  made  of  all  deliveries  and  articles  checked  with 
awarded  samples.  In  making  its  purchases,  the  Indian  Service  prac- 
tically covers  every  section  of  the  country  from  coast  to  coast  and 
from  the  Gulf  to  the  Great  Lakes.  No  vendor  is  so  remote  from  the 
Indian  country  as  to  bar  him  from  competition  with  other  dealers 
in  the  sale  of  goods  and  supplies. 

The  revised  system  of  handling  the  purchase  of  supplies  in  this 
office  by  assigning  certain  clerks  to  a  particular  class  of  goods  has 
evolved  a  superior  system  and  one  which  educates  the  clerk  along 
a  line  of  work  similar  to  that  of  the  buyers  of  specialties  in  the 
ordinary  business  trade  marts. 

NEW  SYSTEM  OF  BOOKKEEPING. 

The  bookkeeping  system  of  the  Indian  Office  for  years  has  con- 
sisted of  a  number  of  separate  and  unrelated  records  which  had  been 
designed  and  instituted  from  time  to  time  to  suit  special  needs  as  they 
arose.  Although  each  unit  of  the  system  served  the  particular  pur- 


70  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

pose  for  which  it  was  intended,  the  activities  and  expenditures  in 
the  Indian  Service  have  so  increased  in  the  last  few  years  that  the 
business  could  not  be  handled  satisfactorily  under  the  old  system, 
and  a  general  revision  was  imperatively  demanded.  By  authority 
and  direction  of  the  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June  30, 
1913  (38  Stat.,  103),  an  entirely  new  system  has  accordingly  been 
worked  out  and  installed,  which  will  better  take  care  of  the  work 
and  enable  the  department  to  furnish  Congress  with  the  detailed  in- 
formation it  requires  with  respect  to  expenditures  and  appropria- 
tions. 

Making  a  complete  change  of  system  in  a  bureau  having  so  many 
field  officers  in  26  States  and  which  controls  and  keeps  account  of 
disbursements  aggregating  approximately  $20,000,000  per  annum 
was  a  stupendous  task,  but  it  was  accomplished  with  very  little  ap- 
preciable confusion  or  interruption  to  the  current  work. 

The  superintendents  and  employees  having  to  do  with  accounts  and 
disbursements  throughout  the  entire  service  were  brought  together 
at  the  several  institutes  during  the  summer,  where  conferences  were 
held,  instructions  given,  and  discussion  had  of  Order  No.  7,  to  the 
end  that  all  concerned  might  quickly  arrive  at  a  comprehensive 
understanding  of  the  new  accounting  system. 

THE  EYES  OF  THE  INDIAN  SERVICE. 

Thoroughgoing  and  frequent  inspection  is  the  surest  safeguard 
against  inefficiency  and  fraud. 

Millions  of  dollars  invested  for  the  Indians  in  land,  stock,  timber, 
oil,  minerals,  etc.,  are  intrusted  to  the  care  of  many  persons  who 
are  employed  by  the  Government.  These  material  interests  are 
closely  interwoven  with  their  social  and  industrial  life. 

Few  persons  understand  the  extensive  and  intimate  association 
which  the  Indian  Bureau  has  with  the  more  than  300,000  Indians 
of  the  United  States.  This  association  touches  the  home,"  the  school, 
the  farm,  and  the  field.  Six  thousand  employees  come  into  almost 
daily  contact  with  them.  Every  walk  of  life  and  every  kind  of  intel- 
lectual and  professional  ability  is  represented  in  these  employees. 
While  the  greatest  care  is  exercised  in  their  selection,  the  inefficient 
and  unworthy  occasionally  find  an  entrance.  To  discover  them  is 
very  important  for  an  efficient  administration  of  this  great  trust. 

Inspection  in  the  past  has  been  inadequate  and  loose.  This  fact 
was  quickly  disclosed  and  a  corps  of  faithful  and  intelligent  men 
with  human  sympathy  and  business  acumen  was  obtained.  The 
inspecting  corps  is  a  fine  body  of  18  well-equipped  men  engaged 
in  weeding  out  the  incompetent,  inefficient,  and  unworthy.  Their 
duties  are  constructive  in  character  with  a  view  to  promoting  the 
welfare  of  the  Indians — morally,  industrially,  and  otherwise. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  .  71 

Indian  schools,  agencies,  and  projects  are  scattered  throughout 
two-thirds  the  area  of  the  United  States,  and  for  the  purposes  of 
administration  this  territory  has  been  divided  into  10  districts  and 
an  inspecting  officer  assigned  to  each.  It  is  his  duty  to  visit  at  least 
twice  in  each  year  every  Indian  school,  reservation,  irrigation  proj- 
ect, or  other  Indian  activity  in  his  district.  He  makes  a  thorough 
examination  of  office,  school,  and  field  work.  Helpful  criticism  and 
suggestions  are  given  impartially  where  merited.  The  Indians  are 
seen  in  their  homes,  at  their  work,  and  in  their  play,  so  that  an  intel- 
ligent transcript  of  real  conditions  can  be  made  by  the  inspectors 
in  their  reports.  As  a  result  of  this  comprehensive  plan  much  of 
the  dry  rot  infesting  the  service  has  been  eliminated,  and  cases  where 
more  heinous  offenses  were  involved  have  mercilessly  been  dealt 
with. 

While  corruption  and  inefficiency  may  find  its  way  into  the  rank 
and  file  of  Government  employees,  the  greatest  danger  to  the  Indian 
lies  in  the  greed  of  the  white  man  for  his  land  and  money.  Where  a 
tribe  has  these  the  grafter  is  sure  to  be  in  evidence.  He  comes  from 
every  breed  known  to  mankind,  and  in  the  past  has  despoiled  the 
Indian  with  a  ruthlessness  unparalleled.  Under  the  present  system 
of  fearless  and  dependable  inspecting  officers  many  of  these  schemes 
have  been  ferreted  out  and  their  promoters  punished,  while  other 
schemes  of  these  human  sharks  have  been  discovered  and  their  vorac- 
ity thwarted.  Their  course  is  as  crooked  as  their  morals  and  difficult 
to  follow,  but  through  the  present  thoroughly  coordinated  force  the 
fraudulent  practices  of  these  financial  pariahs  have  been  reduced  to 
a  minimum.  As  long,  however,  as  the  Indian  has  property  with 
no  practical  combative  experience,  so  long  will  nefarious  schemes 
against  him  be  attempted. 

No  past  system  of  inspection  has  been  as  comprehensive,  as  vigor- 
ous, or  as  intimate  in  reaching  every  part  of  one  of  the  greatest  func- 
tions ever  attempted  by  any  government  for  developing  a  semiciyil- 
ized  nation  into  self-respecting  and  industrious  citizens  as  that  in 
operation  in  the  Indian  Service.  Quick  results  in  adequate  rewards 
and  punishments  follow  the  reports  of  these  officers. 

EMPLOYEES. 

There  are  approximately  6,000  employees  in  the  Indian  Service. 
This  great  host  deals  with  every  phase  of  the  most  distinctively 
human  problem  connected  with  our  Government.  It  comes  into 
intimate  association  with  every  detail  of  the  Indian's  life,  his  home, 
religion,  health,  education,  property,  and  all  of  his  moral,  social, 
and  industrial  relations. 

Few  persons  outside  of  those  who  have  had  practical  experience 
with  the  work  devolving  upon  employees  in  this  service  realize  the 


72  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

responsibilities  and  difficulties  under  which  their  arduous  duties  are 
performed. 

During  my  administration  of  Indian  affairs,  and  particularly  when 
in  attendance  at  the  institute  meetings  this  year,  I  have  had  close 
personal  contact  with  practically  all  of  the  superintendents  and 
employees  of  the  service.  This  association  was  inspiring  and  helpful 
to  me.  I  have  found  a  corps  of  capable,  earnest,  and  missionary- 
spirited  men  and  women,  as  self-sacrificing  as  any  friend  of  the 
Indian  could  wish,  from  the  superintendent,  who  deals  with  the 
problems  of  his  super intendency,  to"  the  field  matron  who,  in  their 
homes,  works  out  a  comprehensive  and  improved  life  for  the  adult 
Indian  and  his  children. 

They  are  a  splendid  body  of  workers,  who  deeply  appreciate  their 
burdens  and  opportunities  and  are  loyal  to  its  ideals,  each  in  his  or 
her  sphere  contributing  to  a  successful  uplift,  of  the  Indian  race. 
It  was  quickly  discovered  that  thorough  discipline,  coherency  of 
purpose,  and  intelligent  action  everywhere  prevailed. 

There  is  complete  harmony  between  the  field  and  office  forces. 
Each  of  these  branches  has  come  to  understand  the  conditions  under 
which  the  other  is  performing  its  functions. 

Our  policy  of  recognizing  merit,  with  equipment  and  adaptability 
for  service,  has  met  with  splendid  response  and  field  accomplish- 
ments have  been  correspondingly  improved. 

As  a  corollary  to  our  program  in  this  respect  the  indiscriminate 
transfer  of  employees  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum.  The  wander- 
luster  in  the  Indian  Service  no  longer  piles  his  avocation. 

Altogether  there  is  cause  for  congratulations  on  gratifying  ac- 
complishments, in  which  practically  every  employee  in  the  Indian 
Service  shares  and  for  which  they  have  full  credit. 

CONCLUSION. 

I  have  had  the  hearty  cooperation  of  the  Indian  Office  and  field 
employees  in  dealing  with  the  stupendous  problems  of  Indian  ad- 
ministration. In  the  conservation  of  the  Indian's  health  and  morals 
and  in  the  development  of  his  industrial  life  all  have  worked  with  a 
unity  of  purpose  which  makes  me  confident  that  a  strong  economic, 
moral,  and  social  life  is  being  evolved  which  will  result  in  the  certain 
addition  of  a  splendid  body  of  American  citizens  to  our  country. 

I  am  sincerely  grateful  to  you  for  your  uniform  support  and 

encouragement. 

CATO  SELLS,  Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES.1 

TABLE  1. — Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  A/airs  since  1809. 


Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received  . 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(—  )  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(  +  )  or 
decrease 
(-)  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

18^9 

59  707 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 
245 
260 
260 

Per  cent. 

1900 

62*601 
67,  376 
79,237 
79.  115 
86,588 
98,322 
106,533 
117,556 

+  4.84 
+  7.62 
+  17.60 
+     .22 
+  9.03 
+  13.55 
+  8.35 
+  10.34 
+30.  14 
+  15.53 
+  9.88 
+  1.74 
+  12.37 
+23.97 
+  1.92 
+  6.23 
-  4.70 

+  13.86 
+  3.48 
+  10.92 
-     .75 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
-  2.68 
+  10.34 
+  11'.  87 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+  11.82 
-  1.32 
+  5.80 
+  3.37 
+  6.12 

1901                                               

1902 

1903                     .       .             

1904 

1905  

1906                                                  .                

1907  

1908                         .                

152.995 
176,765 
194,241 
197,637 
222,  187 
275,  452 
280,744 
2^8,  240 
284,  195 

1903 

1910  

1911 

1912  

1913              .                                                                      

1914 

1915                 .                      

1916 

Per  cent  . 
Increase  in  work,  1916  over  1899  ...................................................................  375.  98 

Increase  in  force,  1916  over  1899  ....................................................................  157.  43 


TABLE  2.  —  Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1916. 

[Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 
census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  representative  is  located.] 

Grand  total  ............................................................  335,  753 


Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  v.  hites 101,  519 

By  blood 75,  532 

By  intermarriage 2,  582 

Freedmen 23, 405 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes 234,  234 

INDIAN      POPULATION      BY      STATES      AND      TERRITORIES. 

4,  162 
188 

279 
363 
1,415 
234 
780 
892 
55 
688 

1  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  and  scattered  Indians  under  Government  jurisdic- 
tion, except  where  indicated. 

73 


Arizona 

44,  436 

Illinois 

Arkansas 

460 

Indiana                ...   . 

California 

....       15,335 

Iowa  

Colorado 

898 

Kansas 

Connecticut 

152 

Kentucky 

Delaware 

5 

Louisiana 

District  of  Columbia 

68 

Maine  

Florida 

574 

Marvland  

Georgia.  . 

95 

Massachusetts... 

74 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


Michigan 

7,  514 

ll,758t> 

1,253 
313 
11,  450V 
3,941 

7,  915 
34 
168 
20,  819 
6,  245 
8,  096 
8,887 
127 

]f  the  Unite 

C 
( 

p 

s 
s 
ri 
r[ 
i 
\ 
\ 
\ 

A 
\ 
\ 

dt 

>klahor 
Oregon  . 

na  l  1] 

8,996 
6,544 
284 
331 
21,  237 
216 
702 
3,  215 
26 
539 
LI,  438 
36 
9,997 
1,684 

,  1916. 

Minnesota 

Mississippi                            

tfiode  1 
outh  C 
outh  E 
'enness 
'exas 

sland  - 

Missouri                           

arolina 
•akota 

'    Montana           

C 

'•''  Nebraska 

ee   

Nevada 

New  Hampshire 

Jtah     

New  Jersey 

rermon 
"irginia 
Yashins 
^est  VI 
Viscons 
Vyomii 

States,  < 

t  

New  York          

*ton  

North  Carolina 

rginia 

North  Dakota 

in                 

Ohio 

ig 

TABLE  2.  —  Indian  population  c 

exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30 

States,  superintendences,  and  • 
tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

|    Mixed  blood. 

Full    ! 
blood.      One-       Less 
i  half  or      than 
more.       half. 

Total  population  2  

335,753 

106,093 

105,  411 

90,  270 

107,  816 

169,987     49,176       69,370 

54  909 

Arizona.  .  ^  '.  -  

44,  436 

22,074 

22,  3C2 

19,892 

22,  544 

44,094  1        184             158 

Camp    Verde    School—  Mohave— 
Apache  

416 

219          197 

168 

248 

399  |          17    

1,215 

677 

538 

503 

712 

1,136  !          18              61 

1,002 
213 

2,384 

569 
108 

433 
105 

}      503 

712 

1,  136             18              61 

Mohave  

Fort  Apache  School—  White  Moun- 
tain Apache  

1,216       1,168 

1,226 

1,158 

2,297             11 

76 

Havasupai  School—  Havasupai  
Kaibab  School—  Kaibab—  Paiute  .  .  . 
Leupp  School—  Navaho  

170 
95 
1,761 

4,203~~ 

88 
53 
925 

2,226 

82 
42 
836 

72 
41 

458 

98 
54 
1,303 

2,233~ 

170      . 

95 

1,761    

1,977 

1,970 

4,203    

2,203 
2,000 

1,179 
1,047 

1,024 
953 

1,020 
950 

1,183 
1,050 

2,203    .. 

Navaho  

2,000    

Navajo  School  —  Navaho  5  

11,915 

5,769 
3,164 

6,146 
3,089 

6,968 
1,830 

4,947 
2,423 

11,826            88 

1 

6,253 

6,243"~   ~~8~ 

2 

269 
3,984 
2,000 

130 

2,034 
1,000 

139 
1,950 
1,000 

127 
1,703 

142 
2,281 

269                  | 

Pima      .              

3,974              8                2 
2  000 

Gila  Bend  Reservation,  Papago.. 

'         i 

1,222 

642 

580 

558 

664       1,220              2 

84 
230 
908 

46 
123 
473 

38 
107 
435 

33 

89 
436 

51 
141 
472 

.     84      

Mohave  \pache                 .... 

228              2 
908    

Pima  

San  Carlos  School  . 

2,670 

1,378 

1,292 

1,208 

1,462       2,645            20 

5 

Apache  
Mohave  

2,584 
86 

1,337 
41 

1,247   \  T  onS 
45   /  I'208 

1,462 

2,645            20 

5 

San  Xavier  School—  Papa°;o  
Truxton  Canon  School—  Walapai.  .  . 

Western  Navajo  School  
Moqui  (Hopi) 

5,112 
470 

2,462 
255 

2,650 
215 

1,860 
191 

2,839 

3,252 
279 

3,711 

5,089  i          11 
460              9 

12 
1 

6,550 

3,000 

3,550 

6  550  i 

273 
6,087 
190 

3460 

138 

2,782 
80 

135 
3,305 
110 

139 
2,620 
80 

134 
3,467 
110 

273 

6  087 

Paiute 

190    

Arkansas:  Not  under  aeent.  .  , 

1  Includes  2^,405  freedmen  and  2,582  intermarried  4  Includes  Fort  Mojave. ' 

whites.  5  Includes    Indians   in  New  Mexico  under  this 

2  Correct  as  reported  by  superintendents.  school. 

3  1910  census.  6  Unknown . 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


75 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of    the    United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30,. 

1916— Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and 
tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

California  .  . 

15,335 

7,736 

7,599 

3,866 

6,469 

9,779       3,960 

1,596 

Bishop  School  —  Paiute,  Shoshoni, 
and  Moache  

1,568 

740 

828 

nT 

547 
83~ 

1,021- 

144 

1,273 

209 

187 

108 

4 

Campo  School  

227 

116 

14 

Mission  Indians  at  Campo 

137 

8 
7 
6 
69 

77 
4 
3 
2 
30 

60 
4 
4 
4 
39 

48 

89 
8 
6 
4 
37 

132 

8 
7 
5 
57 

3 

2 

Cuvapaipe  .  .  . 

Laguna  

1 
2 
32 

La  Posta 

1 

10 

Manzanita 

2 

Digger  /  gency  —  Digger 

293 

147 

146 

91 

202 

47 

231 

15 

Fort  Bid  well  School  

797 

376 

421 

277 

520 

770 

18 

9 

Digger 

14 
207 
576 

117 
252 

7 
90 
324 

2 
92 
183 

12 
115 
393 

3 

198 

569 

2 
7 

9' 

Paiute  .  .  . 

Pit  River 

... 

Fort  Yuma  School—  Yuma  

7 
158. 
119 

813 
624 

431 
326 

382 
298 

312 

254 

501 

370 

780 
312 
622~ 

26 
154 
549 

Greenville  School—  Digger,  Washo, 
Concow,  and  Uki 

Hoopa  Vallev  School 

1,290 

634 

656 

484 

806 

Hupa  

453 
568 
269 

-222 
292 
120 

231 
276 
149 

165 
218 
101 

288 
350 
168 

192 
295 
135 

240 
207 
102 

5 

32 
34 

Klamaih 

Lower  ^'  lamath  
Malki  School  

609 

333 

276 

204 

405 

531 

44 

Mission  In  'Mans  at  -A  ugustine  
Cabazon  . 

20 
31 
120 
16 
233 
53 
50 
86 

11 

18 
74 
9 
122 
28 
23 
48 

9 
13 

46 
7 
111 
25 
27 
38 

7 
11 
26 
6 
97 
13 
7 
37 

347~ 

13 
20 
94 
10 
136 
40 
43 
49 

20 
31 
112 
16 
177 
53 
50 
72 

Martinez. 

8 

Mission  Creek 

Morongo  .  .  . 

22 

34 

Palm  Springs 

San  Manuel  .  .  . 

Torres  

14 

120" 

Pala  School.. 

1,017 

514 

503 

670 

890 

7 

f        Mission  Indians  at— 
Capitan  Grande  

133 
247 
195 
51 
194 
148 
4 
45 

71 
128 
90 
23 
93 
83 
1 
25 

62 
119 
105 
28 
101 
65 
3 
20 

48 
97 
66 
20 
41 
51 
2 
22 

85 
150 
129 
31 
153 
97 
2 
23 

117 
246 
151 
50 
194 
91 
1 
40 

16 
1 
42 
1 

La  Jolla 

Pala  

2, 

Pauma  

Pechanga 

Rincon  

52 
3 
5 

5- 

San  Pasqual 

Syquan  .  . 

Roseburg     (Oreg.)     School—  Scat- 
tered   Wichumni,    Kawia,    Pit 
River,   and   others  in  northern 
California  .  .  . 

5,000 
1,716 

2,500 
859 

2,500 

857 

CO 

720 

C) 

996 

2  2,  500 
615 

2  1,  875 
645 

2625. 
456 

Round     Valley     School—  Concow, 
Ukie,  and  others  .  . 

Soboba  School  

935 

526 

409 

352 

583 

796 

85  |            54- 

*         Mission  Indians  at  Cahuilla  
Inaja 

132 
35 
125 
200 
63 
71 
133 
176 

72 
18 
75 
118 
36 
38 
73 
96 

60 
17 

50 
82 
27 
33 
60 
80 

38 
11 
48 
84 
11 
26 
45 
89 

94 
24 
77 
116 
52 
45 
88 
87 

132 
35 
125 
146 
63 
1 
118 
176 

Mesa  Grande 

54 

Santa  Rosa 

Santa  Ynez 

16 
15 

54. 

Soboba  

Volcan 

Unknown. 


2  Estimated. 


76 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1916— Continued. 


- 

Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superintendencies,  and 
tribes. 

popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 

half. 

•California  —  Continued. 
Tule  River  School 

446 

234 

212 

195 

251 

434 

12 

Tule  River 

150 

89 

61 

] 

Auberry 

157 

74 

83 

>      195 

251 

434 

12 

Burrough  

139 

71 

68 

| 

"Colorado 

898 

461 

437 

446 

452 

881 

9 

8 

Southern  Ute  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute 

365 

175 

190 

159 

206 

348 

9 

8 

Ute  Mountain  School  —  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute 

533 

286 

247 

287 

246 

533 

'Connecticut'  Not  under  agent    .  .  •- 

1  152 

Delaware:  Not  under  agent  

15 

District    of   Columbia:    Not    under 
agent  

168 

Florida*  Seminole  

574 

342 

232 

206 

368 

558 

3 

13 

•Georgia"  No't  under  agent            .  . 

1  95 

Idaho      

4  162 

2  070 

2  092 

1  565 

2  597 

3  999 

551 

312 

Coeur  d'  Alene  .  .  .•  

840 

419 

421 

320 

520 

640 

111 

8Q 

* 

Coeur  d'  Mono 

615 

309 

306 

245 

370 

433 

93 

89 

Kalispol          .  -  

91 

50 

41 

31 

60 

91 

Kootenai 

134 

60 

74 

44 

90 

116 

18 

Fort  Hall  School                     .  . 

1  771 

903 

868 

670 

1  101 

1  484 

229 

58 

Bannock    .      .  -          

378 

200 

178 

}„ 

\ 

1  393 

703 

690 

6/0 

1,101 

1,484 

229 

58 

Fort  Lapwai  School—  Nez  Perce  — 
Illinois*  Not  under  agent            .... 

1,551 

1  188 

748 

803 

575 

976 

1,175 

211 

165 

Indiana:   Not   under  agent—  Miami 
and  others      

1  273 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  School—  Sac  and 
Fox       

363 

188 

175 

154 

209 

3*53 

1  415 

756 

659 

774 

641 

745 

331 

339 

Kickapoo  School 

630 

331 

299 

345 

285 

217 

195 

218 

Iowa                 .  .             

313 

158 

155 

166 

147 

15 

80 

218 

Kickapoo 

219 

126 

93 

131 

88 

190 

29 

Sac  and  Fox  

98 

47 

51 

48 

50 

12 

86 

Potawatomi  Agency  —  Prairie  Band 
of  Potawatomi                         .  .  . 

785 

425 

360 

429 

356 

528 

136 

121 

Kentucky  Not  under  agent.         

!234 

Louisiana'  Not  under  agent            .  . 

i  780 

Maine*  Not  under  agent  

1  892 

Maryland'  Not  under  agent  

155 

Massachusetts'  Not  under  agent 

i  688 

Michigan                

7  514 

690 

657 

618 

729 

209 

591 

617 

Bay  Mills  Agency—  Chippewa  2  
Mackinac  Agency—  L'Anse,  Vieux 
Desert,  and  Ontonagon  Bands  of 
Chippewa  

250 
1  097 

125 
565 

125 
532 

102 
516 

148 
581 

9 
200 

121 
400 

120 
497 

Not  under  agent—  Scattered  Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa,  Potawatomi,  and 
others           

i  g  167 

Minnesota       

11  758 

5  864 

5  894 

5  772 

5  986 

3  229 

4  208 

2  818 

Fond  du  Lac  School—  Chippewa  ..  . 
Grand  Portage  School—  Chippewa  . 
Leech  Lake  School  

1,050 
319 
1  758 

543 
139 

883 

507 
180 

875 

540 
145 

738 

510 
174 
1  020 

86 
8 
997 

554 
202 
697 

410 
109 

64 

Cass  and  Winibigoshish  . 

459 

215 

244 

201 

258 

307 

146 

g 

Leech  Lake  . 

803 

402 

401 

343 

460 

460 

330 

13 

White  Oak  Point  (Miss.)  Chip- 
pewa.         

496 

266 

230 

194 

302 

230 

221 

45 

1 1910  Census. 


2 1915  report. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


77 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the   United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1916 — Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and 
tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

M  innesota  —  Cont  inued  . 
Nett  Lake  School—  Chippewa  (Bois 

625 

1,503 
6,343 

288 

751 
3,185 

337 

752 
3,158 

279 

766 
3,227 

346 

737 
3,116 

407 
0)  - 

1,671 

162 

0) 
2,508 

56 

0) 
2,164 

Red  Lake  School—  Red  Lake  and 
Pembina  Chippewa  

White  Earth  School 

White  Earth  (Miss.)  Chippewa..  . 
Mille  Lac  (removal) 

2,446 
1,187 
830 
438 
282 
425 
275 
288 
111 
61 

1,244 
571 
425 
212 
137 
236 
125 
136 
66 
33 

1,202 
616 
405 
226 
145 
189 
150 
152 
45 
28 

3,227 

3,116 

1,671 

2,508 

2,164 

Otter  Tail  Pillager 

Gull  Lake  (Miss.)  

Mille  Lac  (nonremoval) 

Pembina  —  Pillager  

Leech  Lake  Pillager  
White  Oak  Point  (removal) 

Fond  du  Lac  (removal)  

Cass  and  Winibigoshish  . 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley)  Mdewa- 
kanton   and   Wapaguita,   Sioux 
and  Sisseton,  and  Wahpeton  

M  ssissippi'  Not  under  agent 

160 

11,253 
1313 

11,  450 

75 

85 

77 

83 

60 

85 

15 

Missouri:  Not  under  agent  

Montana  . 

5,762 

5,688 

5,218       6,232 

6,436 

3,083 

1,931 

Blackfeet  School—  Blackfeet 

2,743 
1,  707 

2,343 
1,211 

1,379 
860 

1,179 
636 

1.364 

847 

1,164 
575 

1.466 
709 

1,025 
542 

1,277 

998 

1,318 
669 

1,228 
1,264 

660 
861 

1,152 
246 

835 
252 

363 
197 

848 
98 

Crow  Agency  —  Crow 

Flathead     School  —  Confederated 
Flathead 

Fort  Belknap  School  

Assiniboin  . 

640 
_  571 

342 
'294 

298 
277 

264 

278 

376 
293 

468 
393 

101 
151 

71 

27 

Grosventre  

Fort  Peck  School—  Fort  Peck  Sioux 
Tongue    River    School—  Northern 
Cheyenne 

1,985 

1,461 
3,941 

999 

709 
2,011 

986 

752 
1,930 

. 

645 
780 

892 

584 
1,956 

1,093 

877 
1,985 

652~ 
726 

1,074 

1,349 
1,728 

528 

70 
976 

121 
453 

383 

42 
1,237 

183 

468 

Nebraska 

Omaha  School  —  Omaha 

1,331 
1,511 

686 
731 

679 

785 

1,027 
590 

Santee  School  

Ponca 

338 
1,173 

1,099 
7,915 

153 

578 

594 

3,987 

185 
595 

214 
571 

124 
602 

94 
496 

111 
7,175 

138 
315 

106 
362 

Santee     . 

Winnebago  School—  Winnebago  
Nevada  

505 
3,928 
22~2~ 

492 
2,227 
124 

607 
5,688 
315 

402 
527 

586 
213 

—  —          ^ 

13 

Fallen  School 

439 

217 

396 

30~ 

Paiute  at  Fallen     . 

326 
113 

164 
53 

162 
60 

.       85 
39 

241 

74 

303 
93 

23 

7 

Lovelocks  

13 

Fort  McDermitt  School—  Paiute  
Moapa  River  School—  Paiute  

341 
119 
600 
712 

172 
58 
271 
347 

169 
61 
329 
365 

137 
42 
198 
210 

204 
77 
402 
502 

327 
116 
596 
636 

14 
3 
4 
76 

Nevada  School—  Paiute 

Walker  River  School  

Paiute 

564 
148 

276 
71 

288 

77 

210 

502 

• 

328 

636 

76 

Paiute  (Mason  Valley) 

Western  Shoshone  School  

604 

322 

282 

276 

604 

Hopi 

1 

274 
329 

5,100 

1 
121 

160 

1 
146 
181 

604 

Paiute  

153 

169 

128 

148 

Shoshoni  .    .  . 

200 

Reno,  special  agent  

Digger  (scattered  California  tribes)] 
Paiute               .                         ... 

2,600 

2,500 

1,240       3,860 

4,500 

400 

2,100 
1,400 
1,000 
600 

1,030 
725 
525 
320 

1,070 
675 
475 
280 

1,240 

3,860 

4,500 

400 

200 

Shoshoni 

Vasho... 

i  Unknown. 

65333—16 6 


2  1910  census. 


78 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1916 — Continued. 


Mixed 

blood. 

States,  superintendences,  and 
tribes. 

lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

New  Hampshire  '  Not  under  agent 

1  34 

New  Jersey:  Not  under  agent. 

2  168 

New  Mexico  

20,819 

10,545 

10,  274 

10,513 

10,306 

20,386 

351 

82 

Jicarilla  School  —  Jicarilla  Apache... 

642 

347 

'     295 

275 

367 

642 

Mescalero  School—  Mescalero  Apache 
Pueblo  Bonito  School  —  Navaho  

2630 
2,724 

306 
1,200 

324 
1,524 

275 
1.362 

355 
1,362 

602 
2,724 

17 

11 

Pueblo  Day  Schools  

8  535 

4  437 

4  098 

3,774 

4,761 

8,130 

334 

71 

Navaho 

378 

185 

193 

195 

183 

378 

Pueblo.           .  .                

8  157 

4  252 

3  905 

3  579 

4,578 

7,752 

334 

71 

San  Juan  School—  Navaho  

6  483 

3  269 

3  214 

3  4  050 

3  2  433 

6  483 

Zuni  School  —  Pueblo 

1  805 

986 

819 

111 

1  028 

1  805 

» 

New  York.             .  .                .  . 

6  245 

3  036 

2  849 

2  388 

3  497 

5  885 

New  York  Agency  

5  885 

3  036 

2  849 

2  388 

3  497 

5  885 

Cayuga 

177 

71 

106 

61 

116 

177 

Oneida  ... 

249 

120 

129 

76 

173 

249 

Onondaga 

550 

264 

286 

191 

359 

550 

Seneca  (Allegany).. 

938 

479 

459 

392 

546 

938 

Seneca  (f  attaraugus)  

1  319 

631 

638 

483 

836 

1  319 

Sene°a  (Tonawanda). 

504 

289 

215 

178 

326 

504 

St.  Regis  (not  a  part  of  Six  Na- 
tions)                     .         

1  538 

811 

727 

768 

770 

1  538 

Tuscarora  .. 

360 

196 

164 

114 

246 

'350 

Montauk  

30 

15 

15 

15 

15 

30 

Poospatuck  

20 

10 

10 

10 

10 

20 

Shinnecock  

200 

100 

100 

100 

100 

200 

Not  under  agent  

4  360 

North  Carolina  

8,096 

1,205 

1  055 

1  207 

1  053 

1  348 

365 

547 

Cherokee  School  —  Eastern  Cherokee 
Not  under  agent  

2.260 
5  836 

1,205 

1,055 

1,207 

1,053 

1,348 

365 

547 

North  Dakota  

8  887 

4  456 

4  431 

4  089 

4  798 

4  478 

4  021 

388 

Fort  Berthold  

1  182 

590 

592 

559 

623 

847 

306 

29 

Arikara  

417 

205 

212 

202 

215 

260 

144 

13 

Grosventre  

497 

248 

249 

231 

266 

368 

114 

15 

Mandan  

268 

137 

l5l 

126 

142 

219 

48 

1 

Fort  Totten  School—  Sisseton,  Wah- 
peton,  and  Cuthead  Sioux  (known 
as  Devils  Lake  Sioux) 

1  004 

514 

490 

423 

581 

1  004 

(r>) 

(5) 

Standing  Rock  School—  Sioux  
Turtle    Mountain    School—  Turtle 
Mountain  Chippewa 

3,484 
3  217 

1,729 
1  623 

1,755 
1  594 

1,379 
1  728 

2,105 
1  489 

2^460 
167 

665 
3  050 

359 

Ohio:  Not  under  agent  . 

1  127 

Oklahoma  

118  996 

8  749 

8  728 

8  783 

8  694 

35  838 

14  463 

46  290 

Cantonment  School 

784 

424 

360 

345 

439 

731 

37 

16 

Arapaho 

238 

132 

106 

107 

131 

228 

10 

Che  enne  

546 

292 

254 

238 

308 

503 

27 

16 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School  

1,263 

636 

627 

547 

716 

933 

274 

56 

Arapaho 

523 

259 

264 

, 

Chevenne  

740 

377 

363 

}      547 

716 

933 

274 

56 

1  1910  census. 

2  Includes  183  Apache;  1913  Fort  Sill  removal. 
»  Estimated. 

4 1910  census,  minus  250  Montauk.  Poospatuck,  and  Shinnecock. 
s  Included  in  full  blood. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


79 


TABLE   2. — Indian  population  of  the-  United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,   June  30, 

1916 — Continued . 


States,  superintendences,  and 
tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more 

Less 
than 
half. 

Oklahoma  —  Continued. 
Kiowa  School  . 

4,514 

2,216 

2,298 

2,282 

2,232 

3,314 

800 

400 

Apache 

184 
1,568 
1,548 
1,128 
86 

87 
782 
735 
564 
48 

97 
786 
813 
564 
38 

1,068 
238 
364 

2,282 

2,232 

1,021 
226 
354 

3,314 

800 

400 

Comanche  . 

Kiowa  

Wichita  and  Caddo 

Apache  prisoners  

Osage  School  —  Osage 

2,195 
492 
693 

1,127 
254 
329 

1,174 

266 
339 

808 
424 
538 

1,387 
54 
121 

Otoe  School—  Oto  and  Missouri.  .  .  . 
Pawnee  School  —  Pawnee 

14 
34 

Ponca  School  .   . 

1,036 

524 

512 

634 

402 

391 

419 

226 

Kaw  (Kansas)  

355 
633 

48 

ieT 

679 

186 
314 
24 

169 
319 
24 

274 
339 
21 

sT 

369 

81 
294 
27 

113~ 
310 

102 
?50 
39 

i67~ 

395 

27 
383 
9 

226 

Poma  

Tonkawa 

Red  Moon  School  —  Cheyenne 

=— 

88 
332 

79 
347 

Sac  and  Fox  School  

145 

139 

Iowa  .  . 

87 
592 

37 
295 

50 
297 

35 
334 

52 
258 

46 
349 

41 
104 

'     139 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger  School 

595 

281           314 

257 

338 

530 

22 

43 

Arapaho 

152 
443 

2,050 

65 
216 

87 
227 

75 
182 

77 
261 

134 
396 

119 

7 
15 

42S" 

11 
32 

Cheyenne  

Seneca  School 

1,007 

1,043 

1,112 

938 

1,506 

Eastern  Shawnee 

152 
273 
333 
432 
467 
393 

63 
146 
161 
212 
244 
181 

1,531 

89 
127 
172 
220 
223 
212 

73 
171 

186 
235 
217 
230 

79 
102 
147 
197 
250 
163 

4 
4 
79 
14 

26 
10 
9 
278 
28 
74 

122 
259 
245 
140 
439 
301 

Ottawa 

Quapaw  

Seneca 

Wyandot  

Peoria  —  Miami  (citizen)  
Shawnse  School  . 

18 

3,009 

1,478 

1,404 

1,605 

701 

386 

1,922 

Absentee  Shawnee  .  . 

569 
2,229 
211 

101,519 

293 
1,132 
106 

276 
1,097 
105 

251 

1,068 
85 

318 
1,161 
126 

472 

24 
205^ 

26,  787 

80 
300 
6 

17 
1,905 

41,934 

Citizen  Potawatomi 

Mexican  Kickapoo  

Five  Civilized  Tribes 

10,393 

Cherokee  Nation 

— 

' 

41,  824 

8,703 

4,778 

23,  424 

By  blood  

36,  432 
2S6 
187 
4,919 

i 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

By  intermarriage 

Dela  wares  .' 

J 

Freedmen 

Chickasaw  Nation 

966~ 

3,823 

10,  966 

1,515 

By  blood  

5,659 
645 
4,662 

X 

1,515 

966 

3.823 

By  intermarriage  
Freedmen  

/••• 

26,  828 

' 

=== 

8,444 

2,473 

10,882 
10,882 

By  blood  

17,488 
1,651 
1,660 
6,029 

18,  774 

\ 

8,444 

2,473 

Mississippi  Choctaw  

1 

Creek  Nation 

— 

6,871 

1,698 

3,396 

By  blood  

11,  965 

6,871 

1,698 

3,396 

Freedmen 

6,809 
3,127 

Seminole  Nation  

= 

= 

478~ 

1,  254 

409 

2  141 

1,254 

478 

409 

Freedmen... 

'986 

80 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE   2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,   exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1916— Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and 
tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

.Male. 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full  . 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Oregon 

6,544 

1,152 
31,  000 

416 
1,151 

825 
2284 

2331 
21,237 

3,171 

3,373 

1,491 

2,053 

3,937 

1,668 

939 

Klamath  Schools—  Klamath,Modoc, 
Paiute  and  Pit  River 

547, 
1,500 

215 
541 

368 

605 
.   1,500 

201 
610 

457 

510 
0) 

180 
483 
318 

642 
0) 

236 
668 
507 

870 
1,500 

193 

577 
797 

261 
1,125 

.    206 

48 
28 

21 
375 

17 
526 

Roseburg    Schools—  Scattered    In- 
dians on  public  domain  
Siletz    School—  Clackamas,   Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Siletz  (confeder- 
ated) Grande  Ronde,  Umpqua, 
HaData  Lake,  and  Yamhill  
Umatilla  School—  Cayuse,  Umatilla, 
and  Walla  Walla  

Warm     Springs     School—  Wasco, 
Tenino,  and  Paiute  

Rhode  Island:  Not  under  agent 

South  Carolina:  Not  under  agent— 
Catawbas,  Cherokee,  Oneida,  and 
others 

South  Dakota 

10,594 

10,  643 

9,693 

1,257 
397 
96 

•    239 
3,413 
2,484 

906 
901 

11,544 

1,484 
563 
193 

258 
3,875 
3,037 

1,159 
975 

12,  358 

5,808 

571 
210 
56 

227 
1,638 
1,602 

879 
625 

3,071 

559 
46 

40 
971 
771 

330 
354 

Chevenne  River  School—  Blackfeet, 
Minrxmjou,  Sans  Arc,  and  Two 
Kettle  Sioux  
Crow  Creek  School  —  Lower  Yank- 
tonai  Sioux  

2,741 
960 
2S9 

497 
7,288 
5,521 

2,055 
1,876 

2216 
702 
3  192 

t,377 
455 
153 

252 
3,668 
2,764 

1,045 
880 

1,364 
505 
136 

?45 
3,620 
2,757 

1,020 
996 

1,611 
704 

233 

230 
4,679 
3,148 

856 
897 

Flandreau    School—  F  1  a  n  d  r  e  a  u 
Sioux 

Lower  Brule  School—  Lower  Brule 
Sioux 

Pine  Ridge  School—  Oglala  Sioux. 
Rosebud  School  —  Rosebud  Sioux. 
Sisseton  School—  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  

Yankton  School—  Yankton  Sioux. 
Tennessee:  Not  under  agent 

Texas:  Not  under  agent  

Alabama  

|==== 



Koosati,  Seminole,Isleta,and  others. 
Utah  \  

2510 
3,215 

135~ 
1,164 

866 

909 

540 

53~ 

487 

759 

1,695 

135 
1,060 

83 

21 

Shivwits  School  —  Paiute 

64 
595 

71 
569 

82 
677 

Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency  

83 

21 

Uinta  Ute  

439 
444 
281 

207 
223 
165 

232 
^221 
^16 

j-      487 

677 

1,060 

83 

21 

Uncompahgre  Ute 

White  River  Ute  

Salt  Lake—  Under  special  agent- 
Pain  te  and  others 

500 
21,416 

226 
2539 

11,438 

231 

269 

0) 

0) 

500 

Not  under  agent—  Paiute  and  others 
Vermont:  Not  under  agent 

Virginia*  Not  under  agent 

Washington  

5,522 

1,229 
1,176 

5,823 

1,297 
1,163 

4,121 

1.181 
269 

5,524 

7,518 

1,486 
1,427 

2,575 

489 
687 

1,252 

Colville—  Confederated  Colville  
Cushman  School  

2,526 
2,339 

1,345 
370 

551 
225 

Chehalis 

100 
167 
82 
213 

77 
1,700 

60 
74 
46 
105 
41 
850 

40 
93 
36 
108 
36 
850 

43 

67 
24 
98 
37 

57 
100 
58 
115 
40 

68 
132 
52 
135 
40 
1,000 

32 
34 
20 
70 
31 
500 

i 

10 
8 
6 
200 

Muckleshoot  

Nisqualli 

Skokomish  

Squaxon  Island  .   .  . 

Unattached 

Cowlitz  

490 
537 
372 
301 

240 
301 
190 
119 

250 
236 

182 
182 

1,000 

500 

200 

Clallam  

Puyallup  

Various  other  Indians 

Unknown. 


2 1910  census. 


s  Special  agent's  report,  1910. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


81 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the    United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,    June  30, 

1916 — Continued. 


States,  superintendencies.  and 
_                    tribes. 

Total 
popu- 
lation. 

Male. 
364 

Fe- 
male. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Washington—  Cont  inued  . 
Neah  Bay  School 

698 

334 

299 

399 

649 

49 

Hoh 

50 
412 
14 
222 

25 
211 
6 
122 

25 
201 
8 
100 

15 

192 

35 
220 
14 
130 

3S1T 
468 

50 
365 
14 
220 

413 
494 

"~47 

Makah 

Ozette  

92 

2 

Spokane  School  —  Spokane  

616 
745 

282 
356 

334 
389 

262 
277 

54 
232 

149 
19 

Taholah  School 

Queets  River  Reservation  

82 

38 

44 

22 

60 

81 

1 

Quileute  

26 
56 

11 

27 

15 
29 

8 
14 

18 
42 

408~ 
688~ 

26 
55 

Quinaielt  ...        

1 

Quinaielt  Reservation—  Quinaielt. 
Tulalip  School 

663 

318 

345 
662 

255 
647 

413 

231 

19 

1,335 

673 

899 

384 

52 

Lummi  

488 
190 
220 

437 

3,086 
193 

248 
95 
109 

221 
1,442 

240 
95 
111 

216 

1      647 
1,186 

688 

899 

384 
680 

52 

Susquamish 

Swinomish  

Tulalip  (remnants  of  many  tribes 
and  bands)  

Yakima  School—  Confederated  Ya- 
kima  

1,644 

1,900 

2,150 

256 

Not  under  agent  

West  Virginia:  Not  under  agent  
Wisconsin 

136 
9,997 

1,242 

1,254 
2,342 

5,140 

4,857 

3,950 

4,805 

2,709 

1,228 

213 
434 

5,245 

9 

896 
868 

1,437 

Grand  Rapids,  Wisconsin  Band  of 
Winnebago  

611 

631 

1,248 

631 

623 
1,094 

(2) 

547 
1,068 

(2) 

707 
1,274 

5 

145 
434 

Hayward    School  —  Chippewa,  Lac 
Courte  Oreille 

Keshena  School  

Menominee 

1,736 
606 

933 
315 

803 
291 

794 
274 

942 
332 

434 
(2) 

868 
(2) 

434 

(2) 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  3  . 

Lac  du  Flambeau  School—  Chip- 
pewa   

737 
316 

1,042 
2,550 
514 

1,684 

348 
186 

523 
1,319 
274 

868 

389 
130 

519 
1,231 
.240 

816 

280 
144 

458 
1,200 
253 

801 

457 
172 

584 
1,350 
261 

883 

465 
316 

50 

162 

110 

Laona  Agency  —  Potawatomi  

La  Pointe    School—  Chippewa    at 
Bad  River 

360 
2  550 

632 

Oneida  School—  Oneida  

Red  Cliff  School  —  Chippewa 

3 
1,224 
1,224 

'400 
244 

111 
216 

Wyoming  

Shoshone  School  

1,684 

868 

816 

801 

883 

244 

216 

Arapaho 

853 
831 

436 
432 

417 

399 

414 

387 

439 
444 

751 

473 

94 
150 

8 
208 

Shoshoni  

1910  census. 


2  Unknown. 


s  Now  citizens. 


82 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fe 

patents,  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Total  1916 

312,654 
309,911 
307,891 
307,  433 
300,930 
296,320 
247,  522 
230,437 

184,865 
182,289 
'180,605 
183,  742 
177  626 
164,215 
64,853 
15,  166 

72,508 
68,980 
69,944 
72,411 
103,417 
88,  182 

3,492 
2,623 
1,643 
1,420 
1,926 

108,865 
110,  686 
109,018 
109,911 

70,  904 
i  76,  033 

126,  547 
126,  379 
124,  797 
121,233 
120,  876 
120,  780 

1915  

1914  . 

1913 

1912        

1911 

1901  2 

1890  2. 

Arizona    

44,  436 

7,935 

7,935 

36,  501 

Camp  Verde  

416 
1,215 
2  384 

416 

Colorado  River  3 

1,215 

1,215 

Fort  Apache 

2,384 
170 
95 
1,761 
4,203 
11,915 
3,010 
535 
2,670 
2,322 
470 
6,  550 

7.  191 

Havasupai 

170 

95 
1,761 

Kaibab 

Leupp 

Moqui 

4,203 
11,915 

Navajo  .-.. 

Pima 

6,253 
1,222 
2,670 
5,112 
470 
6,550 

3,243 

687 

3,243 

687 

Salt  River...  

San  Carlos 

San  Xavier  

2,790 

2,790 

Truxton  Canon 

Western  Navajo  

Calif  oniia 

10,335 

3,144 

2,348 

1 

795 

Bishop. 

1,568 
227 
293 
797 
813 
624 
1,290 
609 
1,017 
1,716 
935 
446 

898 

236 

234 

2 

1,332 
227 
269 
562 
70 
414 
453 
609 
758 
1,176 
935 
386 

692 

Campo  

Digger 

24 
235 
743 
210 

837 

24 
235 

""216" 

826 

1  ort  Bidwell 

Fort  Yum  a 

743 

(  i  reenville 

II  oopa  Valley  .. 

11 

Malki 

Pala      

259 
540 

221 

538 

38 

/             1 

Round  Valley  . 

1 

Soboba 

Tule  River 

60 
206 

60 
206 

Colorado 

Southern  Ute  

365 
533 

'      574 
4,162 

206 

206 

159 
533 

574 
1,180 

Ute  Mountain.. 

Florida:  Seminole... 

Idaho    

2,982 

2,810 

37 

135 

Coeur  d'Aleue 

840 
1,771 
1,551 

363 
1,415 

522 
1,614 
846 

481 
1,614 
715 

41 

318 
157 
705 

363 
639 

Fort  Hall           ... 

Fort  Lapwai 

37 

94 

Iowa*  Sac  and  Fox... 

Kansas  

776 

621 

80 

75 

Kickapoo  

630 

785 

1,347 

302 

474 

323 

254 
367. 

323 

-    11 

69 

37 
38 

328 
311 

1,024 

Potawatomi.  . 

Michigan.           

Bay  Mills 

250 
1.0  j7 

250  I            250 
73                73 

Mackinac... 

i.()24 

1  Includes  fee  patents  Tor  part  of  their  allotment. 

2  Only  items  reported. 

3  Includes  Fort  Mojave. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


83 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  SO,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
alloted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 

Part  of  al- 
lot ment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Minnesota. 

11,  758 

5,101 

4,345 

552 

204 

6,657 

Fond  du  Lac.. 

1,050 
319 
1,758 

625 
160 
1,503 
6,343 

11,450 

300 
167 
993 
299 
42 

290 
153 
966 
295 
42 

'    10 

"•"ii" 

23 
4 

750 
152 
765 
326 
118 
1,503 
3,043 

4,250 

Grand  Portage1  - 

Leech  Lake  

4 

Nett  T  ake.  .. 

Pipestone  (Birch  Coolev)  2  
Red  Lake.  . 

White  Farth 

3,300 
7,200 

2,599 
6,666 

538 
106 

163 
428 

Montana  ... 

Blaekfeet 

2,743 
1,707 
2,343 
1  211 

2,387 
1,263 
1,891 

2,385 
1,217 
1,531 

1 

7 
25 

39 
335 

356 
444 
452 
1,211 
326 
1,461 

2,530 

Crow. 

Flathead 

Fort  Pelknap 

Fort  Peck  l 

1,985 
1  461 

1,659 

1,533 

73 

53 

Tongue  Rivor.  . 

Nebraska 

3,941 

1,411 

684 

46 

681 

Omaha 

1,331 
1,511 
1,099 

7,915 

598 
438 
375 

1,439 

287 
170 
227 

1,434 

20 
16 
10 

291 
252 
138 

5 

733 
1,073 
724 

6,476 

Santee      

Winnebago 

Nevada 

Fallon 

439 
341 
119 
600 
712 
604 
5,100 

20,  819 

304 
86 
102 

304 
86 
102 

135 

255 
17 
600 
375 
604 
4,490 

20,  301 

Fort  McDermitt 

Moapa  River.  . 

Nevada 

Walker  River  

337 

337 

Western  Shoshone  

Reno,  special  agent  

610 
518 

605 
518 

5 

New  Mexico  

Jicarilla 

642 
630 
2,724 
8,  535 

518 

518 

124 
630 
2,724 
8,535 
6,483 
1,805 

5,885 
2,260 

978 

Mescalero  

Pueblo  Bonito  

Pueblo  day  schools  

San  Juan. 

6  483  : 

Zuni  

1,805 
5,885 
2,260 
8,887 

New  York:  New  York  Agency 

- 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

North  Dakota.. 

7,909 

6,963 

306 

640 

Fort  Berthold... 

1,182 
1,004 
3,484 
3,217 

118,603 

1,007 
493 
3,396 
3,013 

110,935 

988 
400 
3,239 
2,336 

7,257 

17 
80 
92 
117 

1,016 

2 
13 
65 
560 

102,  662 

175 
511 
88 
204" 

7,668 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock.. 

Turtle  Mountain  

Oklahoma 

Cantonment  ... 

784 
1,263 

101,519 
4,514 
2,195 
492 
693 
1,036 
167 
679 
595 
<  1,657 
3,009 

385 
637 
101,519 
3,100 
1,889 
315 
302 
619 
106 
248 
304 
768 
743 

363 
362 

4 
150 

18 
125 
3  101,  519 

399 
626 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  .  .  . 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.. 

Kiowa 

2,927 
1,460 
144 
250 
562 
105 
148 
284 
136 
516 

59 
429 
150 
15 
54 
1 
53 
8 

114 

1,414 
306 
177. 
391 
417 
61 
431 
291 
889 
2,266 

Osaee... 

Otoe 

21 
37 
3 

"'47' 
12 
632 
134 

Pawnee  

Ponca  . 

Red  Moon  

Sac  and  Fox  .  . 

Seger  

Shawnee... 

93 

i  As  reported. 

2 1915  report  included  pupils. 

*  37,180  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation;  includes  26,907  intermarried  whites  and  Freedmen. 

4  Does  not  include  393  Peoria-Miami  citizen  Indians. 


84 


COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding   trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1916— Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Unal- 
lotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of  al- 
lotment. 

Entire  al- 
lotment. 

Oregon  

11,544 

4,006 

3,668 

9 

329 

7,538 

Klamath 

1,152 
18,000 
416 
1,151 
825" 

21,  237 

'      816 
2,000 
212 
531 
447 

18,038 

-     7% 
1,977 
110 
346 
439 

15,  920 

20 
23 
94 
184 
8 

907 

336 
6,000 
204 
620 
378 
'•1 
3,199 

Roseburg  

Siletz 

8 
1 

Umatilla  

Warm  Springs. 

South  Dakota  

1,211 

Cheyenne  River  

2,741 
960 
289 
497 
7,288 
5,521 
2,065 
1,876 

1,799 

2,637 
960 

2,549 
902 

38 
5 

50 
53 

104 

Crow  Creek  .  . 

Flandreau  

289 
9 

684 

Lower  Brule 

488 
6,604 
5,521 
965 
863 

639 

453 
5,975 
5,185 
500 
356 

635 

2 

568 
92 
286 
220 

2 

33 
61 
244 
179 
287 

2 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud 

Sisseton 

1,100 
1,013 

1,160 

Yankton  .             

Utah  

Shivwits 

135 
1,164 
500 

11,345 

135 
525 
500 

4,110 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

639 

635 

2 

9 

Salt  Lake,  special  agent  

Washington 

7,235 

6,745 

39 

4& 

Colville 

2,526 
2,339 
698 
616 
745 
1,335 
3,086 

9,997 

2,518 
167 
284 
524 
521 
189 
3,032 

3,639 

2,476 
159 

42 
4 
284 
35 

8 
2,172 
414 
92 
224 
1,146 
54 

5,116 

Cushman  

4 

Neah  Bay... 

Spokane 

485 
521 
177 
2,927 

2,035 

4 

Taholah... 

Tulalip 

1 

30 

82 

11 
75 

1,522 

Yakima  

Wisconsin  

Grand  Rapids 

1.242 
1,254 
2,342 
737 
316 
1,042 
2,550 
514 

1,684 

ro«, 

3  606 
356 

(2) 
535 

(2)- 
6 

(2) 

""3  606" 
12 

(2) 
713 
1,736 
381 
316 

Havward  (Lac  Courte  Oreille) 

Keshena  

Lac  du  Flambeau 

344 

Laona  

La  Pointe.      ... 

1,042 
968 
126 

1,429 

977 
70 
109 

1,395 

65 
822 
17 

29 

Oneida 

76 
5 

1,582 
388 

255 

Red  Cliff..:  

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

,.  Includes  5,000  Indians  in  California. 

2  Unknown. 

3  Stockbridge  and  Munsee  Indians  now  citizens. 


11 
I 


S* 

«>  ft 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

8    -      :      :       8  :  :-  :  :      : 


jo  suazi^p 


pire 


00  'JO'*! 
t~  t^-  00  C-  I 


rH  CO  O  *O  rH  O 
C  CD  --O  00  <N  r- 
(M  -*i  T-H  10  UJ  -^ 


\£8%Z 

:ssss 


•<**  oo  •*  oo  ^n 

OO  Ol  Ci  O  CO 

•^OJiocq^f 
co"co'"-*"'o'cr 

I-H  1-1  O  O  CT> 


iliii 


- 
t--  oo  r4  3  >o 


'9161 


-oad 


•rao; 


pue 


)  rH  OO  Q<N 


o^oooio 


)  O  O  O  O  ^  ( 

)  co  o  r^  oo  co  < 


iO  ^f  O  t^  O  O  O  ' 

cc  O  i— '  t^  O  t^  O  '• 


o    •  ^j  >o  co  GO 


:  o 

!     ® 
_•    > 

rH       S 
"S 


CO  fcO  M<  CO  C^l  T-H  ( 


a^-eEi 


-86 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 

d 


Indians  who— 

WiWy 

8      S    ;    |91S§S|^             ; 

\      i 

».,p 

pajuifi   aq; 
jo  suazpp  aay 

00 

•<* 

e   js  0!s°§  !    i 

i      i 

*  is  ? 

'Smu^op 

s 

i 

0                TjT 

SES  i 

a^iiAi  puB  pBay; 

1 

CQ     C-^ 

O              <N        O 

00               ^1         CO 

Hi  ? 

USJI3U5J      3[Badg 

! 

i 

Q<M        O        O 

ooo     c 

Church-going 
Indians. 

'OTJOTHBQ 

s 

N      '         CO               CO  O  C7~CO  00  i-H        rH 

§ 

1 

l:|l 

CO 

1-4  ^ 

•— 

i 

1 

aS|3SS  V  §  s 

s     s 

1 

Bli 

•suBiptrj  3uoraB  satpantjo 

85 

^<N^^     JOO^       -*<M       (N 

<N 

•<*" 

COM  OS         rH 

Missionaries 
working 
among 
Indians. 

•ano^O 

8 

jir 

!^H    !    !-x>t^<M     10         1-1 

^' 

<M 

O      -<M 

~* 

8 

<N 

C<l  i-H  C^  C<l  •*  CO  Tt<             •<£>         CO 

<NrH         (> 

05 

;^M         ^ 

ffl 

•WWUM 

'SUBIpUI 

S 

<£> 

ic  o      co  r~    -r-iio      to  1-1      co 

(N  i-H       c^ 

. 

38 

Misde- 
meanors. 

•sa^AV^a 

•suBipuj  Xg 

SJ 

CO 

rtco    «NO  :  :  : 

^ 

"H 

<M 

o 

•sew**! 

** 

.  ^        

•suBipui  Xa 

o 

co(M    <N      :  :  : 

CO     '       .-i 

I 

8 

i-H  O> 

(M 

| 

•9I6T  '08  3tmf 
3m:}STxa    saSBuiBui    iBjnu 

s 

(N 

:  :     : 

Marriages. 

•ajnpao 
-oad    iB3at    ^a 

s 

* 

:    ^^23 

CO  •*>       <M 

IM 

a 

00  CO 

•* 

'uio; 
-sno   IBQUJ   Xa 

(M 

; 

•          .     *     i     * 

•     • 

• 

•     • 

1^    '.        !    ! 

:  : 

•SUBTp 

J^ 

* 

-  -a-  Ss 

CO  •*        (N 

iM             C«- 

00 

1C  CO 

^ 

PUB     SUBtp 

-ui   uaaAv^ag 
« 

*"" 

i        •  I-H    I  co  co    '• 

:  :    ~ 

\ 

CO 

CO      '• 

1 

| 

jj 

I 
1 

BQ 

California  

;;;;;;;;;;;;:   ;   ;;   • 

O 

j  1  I 
I       1 

I-K-S 

ooo 

1  "fefe 

i 


4 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


r-l      '  <N 


I  i-l        iC 

<0 


>  O5  O  O  1C  O  CO  ( 


I"! 


<N  1-1  IM  i-H  i 


J8S8S    S 


1-1 1-1 1-1      t- 


OOi-HOO        <0 
r-T  IC~ 


i  i-l  O>  Q  O3  ^t<  O 
)  •*  r-l  O  i-l  O  O 
'  CO  -I  CO  t>  CC  ^H 


>  O  co  < 


S§  : 


1C  i-l  O»      -CO  CO 


^H      .  CO  I-H  IM  1-1  ^H  oo        CO     1    IM  <M  CC  Ol  00  CO        i-l 


CO  Tfi  t^  (N  00  <N        (N 


I  CO  1CIM  COCO  < 


o     ^ 


Mi-lfO 


i-l  CO  to  -^  00  t 


-  « 

i 


•S   •  §«£-§  2  «® 

iii«™*rs  i  in 

I    o£? 


:§5  £2 

•  O  tac    +j  ® 

,.^3  c3      o  > 


^  ft 


88 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


jo 


oiy 


-trei 


ptre 


OS  1C 
2  O  1C 


1C  O  CO  t- 

CO  LO  O  TH 

(M  CO  'C  <M 


SC^Ot^CO'     iCTf 


C-ltoOiCCiO^fM'Ct^OiiCOO 


•streipai  SUOUIB  saqoanqo 


J8M 
ill: 


^       12    3 


rH  ^H  1C  (M  CO  CO  -*< 


unken 
ness. 


•streipui 


<N  (N  COCO 


(N  t»       00 


I 


'9161  '08  aunf 


•*  O  rH  00         O 


•<N  OOi-H      •  •     •  i-l      -CO 


-nj 


•sireip 


pue   SUBJP 
-ui 


3    S3 


•  (M  ^  O5  i-H  i-l  (N 


\^ 

.-.  rj 
fic3 


S 

fc         ^     5? 


COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


89 


eo~ 


>!  2  ~ ' 


0s  r^  o  »— *  o  in  co 

OGCicOCvlOcD  l^-~ 
>  (M  •*  (M  (N  Tt<  O  00 


828  2 


.-<  ••*<  r~o>    -o  m 
co  t-      co    •  <M  -i 


<N  TO    .-H  CO 


IM  <N  r-C  CC 


[gl§ig§  I 


O  O  O       |O   i  >O 

0s!  O  O        CO     I   ^-» 


OOi-i<35OOOO>Q 

lOOCTCT-HiMOO'-lO 


OOQ        CO 
010       CO 


I-H  eo 


asss 


MIS  1  § 


ass 


>  U5N  O 

>t>IWO 


(M        (M  C^  CO 


I-H  00  (M  TJ<  M  •*  CO        ^ 


•*  ic  <N  i-i  eo  >c  TH 


U5COIM       «-l 


(M  -^i  i-(  i-(  (M 


(N  C<1  i-«M  CO  1C  O5  OO       OO 


i  ^H  rt  1-1  eot-~ 


:    % 


so     i-i   I  o CO<M os oomoo i 

)  <M          O          CO         1-H  i-l  I-H 


•  I-H  t—          CO 


%  •  :  : 


I    § 

PH       02 


*  £ 


90 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1916. 


Number 

Vrea  in  acres 

States  and  reservations. 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Grand  total    *                   

1  218,  713 

35,  564,  708 

36,  413,  121 

71,  977,  829 

Total  reservations.                     

211,172 

34,  477,  970 

36,413,121 

70,891,091 

Total  public  domain 

7  541 

1,086,738 

1,086,738 

Arizona  ,  

1,671 

80,769 

18,  993,  158 

19,073,927 

Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River)  

24,971 

24,971 

Colorado  River  

516 

5,159 

235,  540 

240,  699 

Fort  Apache                      

1,  681,  920 

1,681,920 

Fort  Mojave  (Colorado  River) 

31,328 

31,328 

Gila  Bend  (Pima)  

10,231 

10,  231 

Gila  River  (Pima) 

366,  309 

366,  309 

Havasupai  (Suppai)  

518 

518 

Hualapai  (Truxton  Canon) 

730,880 

730,  880 

Kaibab  

138,  240 

138,  240 

Moqui  (Hopi) 

2,  472,  320 

2,  472,  320 

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico  and  Utah)  

60 

9,600 

8,680,397 

8,  689,  997 

Papago 

2.  649,  600 

2,  649,  600 

Papago  (San  Xavier)  '.  

291 

41,606 

114,348 

155,954 

Salt  River 

804 

24,  404 

22,  316 

46,  720 

San  Carlos 

1  834  240 

1,834,240 

California  

2,593 

82,172 

430,  126 

512,298 

Digger 

370 

370 

Hoopa  Valley 

639 

29  091 

99,051 

128,  142 

Mission— 
Agua  Caliente  (Malki)  .  . 

7,205 

7,205 

Augustine  (Malki) 

616 

616 

Cabazon  (Malki) 

1,280 

1,280 

Cahuilla  (Soboba) 

18,880 

18,880 

Campo 

1,640 

1,640 

Capitan  Grande  (Pala) 

15,080 

15,080 

Cuvapipa  (Campo).  .  . 

4,080 

4,080 

Inaja  (Soboba) 

760 

760 

Laguna  (Campo)  

320 

320 

La  Posta  (Campo) 

3,679 

3,679 

Los  Coyotes  (Soboba)    

21,520 

21,520 

Manzanita  (Campo) 

19,  680 

19,680 

Martinez  (Malki)  

1,280 

1,280 

Mission  Creek  (Malki) 

1,920 

1,920 

Morongo  (Malki)  

11,069 

11,069 

Pala 

177 

1,396 

3,084 

4,480 

Pechanga  or  Temecula  (Pala)  

85 

1,299 

3,896 

5,195 

Potrero  or  La  Jolla  (Pala) 

8,329 

8,329 

Ramona  (Soboba)  

560 

560 

Rincon  (Pala) 

2,554 

2,554 

San  Manuel  (Malki)  

653 

653 

San  Pascual  (Pala)  

2,200 

2,200 

Santa  Rosa  (Soboba)  

2,560 

2,560 

Santa  Ysabel  (Soboba) 

15,042 

15,  042 

Soboba  

, 

5,461 

5,461 

Syquan  (Pala) 

17 

270 

370 

640 

Torres  (Malki) 

20,800 

20,800 

Tuolumne  .  .      .    .           

34 

34 

Twenty-nine  Palms  (Malki) 

480 

480 

Paiute      ....              

75,746 

75,  746 

Round  Valley 

877 

42  106 

42,  106 

Tule  River..."  

48,  55i 

48,  551 

Yuma  (Fort  Yuma) 

798 

8  6i6 

31,376 

39,386 

Colorado 

372 

72,  731 

396,  143 

468,  874 

Ute  (Ute  Mountain  and  Southern  Ute) 

371 

72,  651 

395,  143 

468,  794 

Absentee  Wyandot 

1 

80 

80 

Florida:  Seminole 

23,542 

23,542 

Idaho  

4,377 

628,098 

54,841 

682,939 

Cceurd'Alene  

638 

104,  077 

101,077 

Fort  Hall 

1  883 

345  209 

21  263 

366,  472 

Lapwai  (Nez  Perce)  

1,876 

178  812 

33,578 

212,390 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox.  . 

3.251 

3,251 

1  Decrease;  see  Choctaw,  Oklahoma. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


91 


1 
Number 

Vrea  in  acres 

• 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Kansas  .  . 

3  079 

272  519 

272  519^ 

Chippewa  and  Munsee  (Potawatomi)  

100 

4  195 

4  195 

Iowa  (Kickapoo)  

143 

11  769 

11  769 

Kickapoo  . 

351 

27  691 

27  691 

Potawatomi 

2  363 

220*785 

220  78  5< 

Sac  and  Fox  (Kickapoo) 

122 

8  079 

8  079 

Michigan  

2  646 

153  107 

803 

153  910- 

Isabella 

1  943 

98  395 

191 

98  586 

L'  Anse  

668 

52*  161 

612 

52*  773. 

Ontonagon. 

35 

2  551 

2  551 

Minnesota  

8  349 

953  395 

546  733 

]  500  128 

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

712 

56  782 

56  782 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)  

4 

296 

296 

Fond  du  Lac  

583 

35  866 

35  866 

Grand  Portage  

304 

24  191 

24  191 

Leech  Lake  .  . 

628 

48  280 

48  28ft 

Mdewakanton  (Birch  Cooley) 

135 

12  582 

12  582 

Red  Lake  

543  528 

543  528 

VermiJlion  Lake.  .  . 

1  080 

1  080 

White  Earth...  . 

5  157 

710  665 

2  125 

712  790- 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake)  .... 

826 

64,  733 

64,  733- 

Montana  

6  901 

1  432  852 

4  312  452 

5  745  304 

Blackfeet  

7 

2  220 

1  491  167 

1  493  387 

Crow  

2,438 

479  028 

1  834  185 

2  313  213 

Fort  Belknap  .  .  . 

497  600 

497  600 

Fort  Peck  

2  028 

723  196 

723  196 

Jocko  (Flathead)  

2  428 

228  408 

228  408 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River) 

489  500 

489*500 

Nebraska  

4  036 

353  383 

6  159 

359,  542 

Omaha  

1  460 

130  642 

4  380 

135  022 

Ponca  (Santee)  

168 

27  2?6 

27  236 

Santee  (Niobrara)  

850 

73*251 

73  251 

Sioux  (additional)  .  . 

640 

640 

Winnebago  

1  558 

1  122  254 

1  139 

1  123  393 

Nevada  

973 

14  018 

686  179 

700  197 

Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone) 

321  920 

321  920 

Moapa  River  .... 

117 

605 

523 

1,  128. 

Paiute  (Fallen)  

366 

3  650 

990 

4  640 

Pyramid  Lake  (Nevada)  

322,  000 

322,  000. 

'Walker  River  

490 

9  763 

40  746 

50  509 

v 
New  Mexico  

2  800 

673  175 

3  870,517 

4,543  692 

Jicarilla  Apache  

796 

353  812 

407,  300 

761  112 

Mescalero  Apache 

474  240 

474  240 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  Utah) 

2  004 

3i9  363 

1  980  637 

2  300*000 

Pueblo— 
Acoma  (Albuquerque)  .... 

95  792 

95  792' 

Cochiti 

24  256 

24  256 

Isleta  (Albuquerque).  . 

110  080 

110  080 

Jemez 

40  550 

40  550 

Laguna  (Albuqueroue) 



154*025 

151  025 

Nambe 

13  586 

13  586 

Pecos  

18  763 

18  763 

Picuris 

17  461 

17  461 

Pojoaque.  .„... 

13  520 

13  520' 

San  Dia  (Albuquerque)  

24,187 

24  ,187 

San  Juan.  .  . 

17  545 

17  545 

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque).  .  .. 

34  767 

34  767 

Santa  Ana  (Albuquerque) 

17  361 

17  361 

Santa  Clara.  . 

49  369 

49  369 

Santo  Domingo 

92  398 

92  398 

17  515 

17  515 

San  Ildefonso 

17  293 

17  293 

Taos  

17  361 

17  361 

Tesuque 

17  471 

17  471 

Zuni... 

:::::::::::: 

215.040 

215  040) 

1  Includes  12,348  acres  purchased  from  the  Omaha  Indians. 


92  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Number 

Area  in  acres 

. 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

New  York  

87  677 

87  677 

Allegany  -  -  - 

30  469 

30  469 

Cattaraugus  

21  680 

21-680 

Oil  Spring.  . 

640 

'640 

Oneida  

350 

350 

Onondaga 

6  100 

6  100 

St.  Regis  

14  640 

14  640 

Tonawanda 

7  549 

7  549 

Tuscarora  

6  249 

6  249 

North  Carolina:  Qualla  

63  211 

63  211 

North  Dakota  

8  178 

2,004,844 

285  908 

2  290  752 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)  .  .  . 

1  189 

137  381 

137  381 

Fort  Berthold  

2  165 

435  708 

285  908 

721  616 

Standing  Rock  

4  498 

1  387  935 

1  387  935 

Turtle  Mountain 

326 

43  820 

43  820 

Oklahoma  

116  700 

19  548  768 

919  003 

20  467  771 

Cherokee  

40  193 

4  346  203 

4  346  203 

Chickasaw  

10  955 

3  800  350 

889 

3,801,239 

Choctaw  .  . 

i  26  723 

4  291  036 

2  915  070 

5  206  106 

Creek  

18  710 

2  997  114 

2  495 

2  999  609 

Seminole    . 

3  118 

359  535 

162 

359  697 

Cherokee  Outlet  

'  62 

4  949 

4  949 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

3  331 

528,  789 

528,  789 

Iowa  (Sac  and  Fox) 

108 

8  605 

8  605 

Kansa  (Kaw,  now  Ponca)  

247 

99  644 

99  644 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee) 

280 

22  650 

22  650 

Kiowa,  Comanche,  and  Apache 

3  451 

547'  236 

547  236 

Modoc  (Seneca)  

'  68 

3,966 

3,966 

Oakland  (Ponca).  . 

73 

11  456 

11,456 

Osage  

2.230 

1,465.350 

1,  465,  350 

Otoe 

514 

128  351 

128  351 

Ottawa  (Seneca)     

160 

12  995 

12,  995 

Pawnee 

820 

112  701 

112,701 

Peoria  (Seneca)      

218 

43  334 

43,  334 

Ponca 

782 

100  745 

387 

101  132 

Potawatomi  (  Shawnee) 

2.  108 

291  616 

291,616 

Quapaw  (Seneca) 

248 

56  245 

56,245 

Sac  and  Fox  

548 

87,  684 

"  87,  684 

Seneca 

435 

41  813 

41,813 

Shawnee  .  .  . 

117 

12,  745 

12,  745 

Wichita  (Kiowa) 

957 

152,  714 

152,  714 

Wyandot  (Seneca) 

244 

20  942 

20,  942 

Oregon 

4,244 

507  392 

1  208  804 

1,  716,  196 

Grande  Ronde  (Siletz)  

269 

32,  983 

32,983 

Klamath 

1  345 

207  374 

8ii  802 

1,019,176 

Siletz  

551 

44,  459 

44,459 

Umatilla 

1.113 

82  444 

74  330 

156,  774 

Warm  Springs  

966 

140,  132 

322,672 

462,  804 

South  Dakota 

26  115 

6  038  133 

429  425 

6,  467,  558 

Cheyenne  River 

3.247 

921  834 

288  996 

1,  210,  830 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago 

1  460 

272  560 

16  345 

288,  905 

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton)  

2.006 

308,  838 

308,  838 

Lower  Brule 

843 

197  855 

41  656 

239,511 

Pine  Rid^e    , 

7  870 

2  284  720 

82  428 

2  367  148 

Rosebud        

8.076 

1  784.063 

1,784  ,.063 

Yankton 

2  613 

268  263 

268,  263 

Utah  

1,367 

111  947 

1  506,960 

1,618,907 

Goshute  and  Deep  Creek  

31,500 

31,500 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  New  Mexico) 

600  000 

600,000 

Paiute  (Navajo) 

600  000 

-  600,000 

-  Shivwits... 

23,  040 

23,040 

SkullValley  

80 

80 

Uintah  Valley  . 

777 

39  620 

249  340 

288,  960 

Uncomparurre.  -  - 

590 

72.  327 

72.327 

1915  figures  erroneous. 


Includes  timber  lands,  and  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  lands. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


93 


TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Number 

j 

^.rea  in  acres 

allotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Washington  

9,959 

1,018,919 

1,705,581 

2,  724,  500 

Chehalis  (Cushman)  

136 

3,799 

3,799 

Columbia  (Colville)  . 

35 

22,  618 

22,  618 

Colville 

2  918 

332  795 

1,015.194 

1,347  989 

Hoh  River  (Neah  Bay)  

640 

640 

Kalispel  (under  Cceur  d'Alene) 

4,629 

4,629 

Lummi  (Tulalip) 

109 

12,  561 

12  561 

Makah  (Neah  Bay)  

373 

3,728 

19,312 

23,040 

43 

3  491 

3  491 

Nisqualli  (Cushman) 

30 

4'  717 

4'  717 

Ozette  (Neah  Bay)..                                          .  .  .  . 

640 

640 

Port  Madison  (Tulalip) 

51 

7,219 

65 

7  284 

Puvallup  (Cushman) 

167 

17  463 

17  463 

Quileute  (Neah  Bay)... 

837 

837 

Quinaielt  (Taholah) 

690 

54,990 

168,  553 

223  543 

Shoal  water  

335 

335 

Skokomish  (Cushman) 

134 

7,803 

7  803 

Snohomish  (Tulalip)  

164 

22,166 

324 

22,490 

Spokane  

628 

64,954 

82,  488 

147,442 

Squaxon  Island  (Cushman) 

23 

1.494 

1  494 

Swinomish  (Tulalip)  

71 

7,359 

7,359 

Yakima.  . 

4,487 

451,762 

412,564 

864  326 

Wisconsin 

4  415 

286  690 

297  237 

583  927 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Hayward) 

876 

68  511 

403 

68  914 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

600 

45,756 

25,274 

71  030 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

1,063 

83,871 

39,880 

123,  751 

Menominee  (Keshena)  

231,680 

231.680 

Oneida.  . 

1,504 

65,466 

65  466 

Red  Cliff  

205 

14,  166 

14,  166 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  (Keshena) 

167 

8,920 

8  920 

Wyoming:  Wind  River  (Shoshone)  

2,397 

245,058 

585,411 

830  469 

Public  domain 

7,541 

1,086  738 

1  086  738 

1  Homesteads. 
TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31,  1915,  by  calendar  years. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

Homesteads 

Chehalis 

Washington  .. 

36 

3  798.59 

1860  

Chippewa  and  Munsee  

Kansas  

100 

4  195.31 

1867 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin 

46 

3  022  03 

1868  

Potawatomi  

Kansas  

411 

43  399.88 

1869 

do 

do 

669 

57  541.40 

1870  

do  

do  

232 

22  584.11 

1871 

do 

do 

242 

20  879  73 

Saginaw  Swan  Creek  etc  . 

Michigan  

1  037 

57  896.23 

Winnebago  

Nebraska  

235 

18,407.42 

1872 

Saginaw-  Swan  Creek  etc 

Michigan  

1,514 

668 

97,  183.  38 
29  304  20 

1875 

L'Anse 

do 

302 

23  575  47 

1876 

Winnebago 

Nebraska  

66 

4  090  41 

1877 

Red  Cliff 

Wisconsin 

20 

1  642  21 

1881 

Lac  Courte  Oreille 

do 

186 

14  774  65 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

do  

138 

10  779.05 

Red  Cliff 

do        

14 

838  35 

Washington 

45 

2  820  37 

1882 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin  

383 
32 

29,212.42 
2  518  83 

1883 

Isabella 

Michigan  

112' 

6  148.05 

Lac  Courte  Oreille 

Wisconsin     . 

97 

7  656  02 

Winnebago 

Nebraska  

9 

'  619.  03 

218 

14,423.10 

65333—16 7 


94  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31,  1915,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

1884 

Fond  du  Lac 

Minnesota  

40 

3,074.98 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin     .          

32 

2,555.14 

Lummi 

Washington  

72 

10,494.98 

Nisqualli 

do                       

30 

4,  717.  26 

Omaha                                             -  -  - 

Nebraska  

963 

78,016.64 

Puyallup  

Washington  

167 

17,462.82 

Snohomish 

..do  

96 

13,721.12 

do           

23 

1,494.15 

1885 

Lac  Courte  Oreille 

Wisconsin  

1,423 
196 

131,537.09 
15,423.15 

Michigan                 

93 

7,366.82 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin  

55 

4,387.62 

Nebraska                   .  .  . 

846 

72,  638.  75 

Skokomish 

Washington  

47 

3,  893.  36 

do 

49 

5,628.02 

ISSfi 

Wisconsin  

1,286 
22 

109,337.72 
1,775.48 

Port  Madison 

Washington  

35 

5,289.48 

1887 

Lac  du  Flambeau.                 

Wisconsin  

57 
29 

7,064.96 
2,318.48 

Red  Cliff 

do  

1 

55.35 

1000 

.do... 

30 
38 

2,  373.  83 
2,991.65 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

do 

.    48 

3,  705.  98 

South  Dakota  

1,316 

123,888.93 

icon 

Lac  Courte  Oreille 

Wisconsin  

1,402 
47 

130,586.56 
3,  792.  24 

1890 

do  

do  

29 

2,092.99 

Peoria                              

Oklahoma  

218 

43,  334.  54 

Nebraska  

168 

27,235.90 

Shawnee                              -  

Oklahoma  

72 

6,272.87 

South  Dakota  

1,471 

166,764.44 

Oklahoma  

1,958 
108 

245,  700.  74 
8,  605.  30 

Isabella                                   

Michigan  

126 

5,046.83 

Oregon  

269 

32,983.43 

Modoc                                           

Oklahoma  

68 

3,966.00 

Oneida 

Wisconsin  

1,503 

65,440.49 

Papago                             

Arizona  

291 

41,605.62 

Oklahoma       .           .  . 

2,107 

291,455.83 

Sac  and  Fox                              

....'.do  

548 

87,683.64 

do 

5,020 
3  331 

536,  787.  14 
528,  789.  15 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten) 

North  Dakota  

872 

101,378.15 

Ottawa                           •                 ... 

Oklahoma  

160 

12,994.70 

Kansas  .       .  .         .... 

115 

12,  154.  88 

Sac  and  Fox 

do  

76 

6,407.63 

Oklahoma       .        .... 

301 

25,821.55 

Shawnee 

do  

12 

4,278.35 

Sisseton  (Lake  Traverse) 

South  Dakota 

1690 

184,949.31 

Wyandotte 

Oklahoma  

244 

20,942.17 

1893 

Cherokee  Outlet 

do    . 

5,801 
62 

897,  715.  89 
4,  949.  45 

Hoopa  Valley 

California 

161 

9,  761.  79 

Iowa 

Kansas  

143 

11,  769.  49 

Pawnee 

Oklahoma 

820 

112,  701.  24 

Potawatomi. 

Kansas  

150 

16,075.36 

Tonkawa 

Oklahoma    

73 

11,455.89 

Umatilla 

Oregon 

1,045 

77,061.27 

Winnebago 

Nebraska  

956 

81,066.23 

3,410 

324,840.72 

1644  additional. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


95 


TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31, 1915,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

1894 

Kickapoo 

Oklahoma 

280 

22  649  62 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  

Wisconsin  . 

118 

9  186  17 

Lac  du  Flambeau    

do 

101 

8  045  97 

L'Anse 

Michigan 

176 

13  861  20 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

Wisconsin 

122 

9  793  29 

Potawatomi  ..                        .... 

Kansas 

116 

9  220  76 

Siletz  

Oregon.      .  .          . 

551 

44  459  30 

Yankton  

South  Dakota 

1,142 

101  499  00 

1895 

Crow  Creek 

do 

2,606 
842 

218,  715.  31 
172  211  81 

Kickapoo     

Kansas 

163 

12  984  13 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Wisconsin 

126 

10  116  47 

Nez  Perce  (Lapwai)  

Idaho         

1.876 

178*811  78 

Pala 

California 

15 

119  99 

Ponca 

Oklahoma 

626 

75  082  36 

Potawatomi  

Kansas 

322 

30  448  52 

Round  Valley 

California 

622 

5  408  33 

Southern  Ute  

Colorado 

371 

72*  650'  65 

Syquan 

California 

17 

270  24 

L896  

Fond  du  Lac  

Minnesota    . 

4,609 
349 

485,453.63 
23  114  85 

Grand  Portage 

do 

304 

24  191  31 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  

Wisconsin.  .  . 

89 

6  800  55 

Quapaw 

Oklahoma 

248 

12  057  03 

...do... 

....  do  

(i) 

44  188  18 

Red  Cliff               .     .     . 

Wisconsin 

169 

11  566  90 

Warm  Springs 

Oregon 

965 

14o'  044  35 

Southern  Ute  *  

Colorado 

371 

72  650  65 

White  Oak  Point 

Minnesota 

174 

13  909  75 

897  

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

do 

2,669 
684 

348,523.57 
54  523  54 

Deep  Creek  (Nett  Lake)  

....  do  

4 

295  55 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten).  . 

North  Dakota 

244 

28  339  51 

Leech  Lake  (Cass  Lake) 

Minnesota 

17 

1  381  20 

Pechanga  

California 

85 

1  299  00 

Swinomish 

Washington 

g 

269  30 

White  Oak  Point  

Minnesota 

203 

16  331  19 

Yakima 

Washington 

1  840 

174  129  63 

898  

Kickapoo  2  . 

Kansas 

3,083 
109 

276,568.92 
8  312  14 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Wisconsin 

153 

12  116  15 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)... 

do 

183 

14  624  19 

Rosebud 

South  Dakota 

344 

72  171  88 

Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas 

g 

710  67 

899.. 

Otoe 

Oklahoma 

798 
441 

107,953.03 
65  095  05 

White  Oak  Point  .  . 

Minnesota 

381 

29  065  45 

Yakima 

Washington 

613 

53  232  89 

WO  

Colville 

.     .do 

1,435 
651 

147,393.39 
50  937  55 

Fort  Berthold 

North  Dakota 

948 

go'  526  55 

Klamath  

Oregon.  .           .  . 

951 

146  316  84 

Omaha 

Nebraska 

467 

49  926  06 

RedCliff  

Wisconsin  

1 

63  20 

Rosebud 

South  Dakota 

2  759 

770  778  87 

White  Oak  Point  

Minnesota  

2 

160  00 

K)l  

Colville 

Washington 

5,779 
9 

1,098,709.07 
715  86 

Klowa,  Comanche,  and  Apache  

Oklahoma  

2,758 

443  178  37 

L'Anse 

Michigan  

15 

1  160  56 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin 

357 

28  452*64 

Lower  Brule 

South  Dakota  

555 

151  823  78 

Omaha 

Nebraska 

12 

1  283  29 

White  Earth 

Minnesota 

4  372 

361  '  005  97 

Wichita 

Oklahoma  

'957 

152'  713  99 

Winnebago 

Nebraska 

292 

18  071  11 

9,327 

1,158,405.57 

i  Additional. 


2  Prior  to  1898. 


96  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31,  1915,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

1902  

Fort  Hall  

Idaho 

79 

6  298  72 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Wisconsin 

35 

2  815  87 

Rosebud  

South  Dakota  

887 

216  719  79 

Seneca 

Oklahoma 

134 

15  991  50 

Shawnee 

do 

33 

2  193  29 

Snohomish  

Washington  . 

7 

1  135  41 

Swinomish.  . 

do 

7 

830  65 

Umatilla  

Oregon  

64 

4  614  88 

1903 

Kansas  (Kaw) 

Oklahoma 

1,246 
247 

250,600.11 
99  643  81 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  

Wisconsin... 

112 

8  705.84 

Lac  du  Flambeau  

do 

115 

7  310  42 

L'Anse 

Michigan 

55 

4  237  07 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

Wisconsin...     .          .  . 

4 

318  04 

Leech  Lake  

Minnesota  

48 

3,  749.  41 

Ontonagon1. 

Michigan 

33 

2  551  35 

Rosebud  .  .  . 

South  Dakota  

665 

139,  407.  32 

White  Oak  Point  

Minnesota  

57 

4  558  94 

1904  

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)  

North  Dakota  

1,336 
61 

270,482.20 
6,  196.  54 

Md  ewakanton    

Minnesota... 

135 

12  582  46 

Muckleshoot 

Washington 

38 

3  U5<i  22 

Omaha  

Nebraska  

16 

1295  99 

Snohomish 

Washington 

61 

7  309  17 

1905    . 

Crow.           

Montana 

311 
343 

30,437.38 
60  992  99 

Fond  du  Lac 

Minnesota 

14 

1  123  78 

Kickapoo  

Kansas  

74 

5  920.00 

Leech  Lake 

Minnesota    . 

3 

240  00 

Ponca  

Oklahoma  

156 

18,133.04 

do 

do 

2  195 

7  518  66 

Port  Madison 

Washington 

4 

640  00 

Red  Lake  (public  domain)  

Minnesota  

3 

320.  15 

Swinomish 

Washington 

8 

590  55 

Uintah 

Utah 

776 

39  580  05 

Uncompahgre 

do 

590 

72  327  29 

White  Oak  Point  

Minnesota  

8 

626.  02 

1906  . 

Cheyenne  River  

South  Dakota 

1,979 
1,757 

208,012.53 
601,576  99 

Crow 

Montana 

114 

19  540  94 

Kiowa,  Comanche.  and  Apache 

Oklahoma 

517 

82  699  00 

Leech  Lake  

Minnesota  

546 

41,780.97 

Lummi  ... 

Washington  . 

9 

1  091.96 

Otoe 

Oklahoma 

73 

12  257  75 

Pine  Ridge  

South  Dakota  

1,128 

385  429.49 

Potawatomi 

Kansa's 

106 

8  480  59 

Skokomish  

Washington  

42 

1,089.66 

Swinomish  

do 

1 

40  00 

Walker  River 

Nevada 

490 

9  763  27 

Wind  River  (Shoshone)  

Wyoming 

368 

34  017.79 

Yakima 

Washington 

680 

68  724  92 

1907..  

Crow  

Montana 

5,831 
1,929 

1,266,493.33 

387  875  93 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten) 

North  Dakota 

11 

1  336  49 

Kickapoo  

Kansas  

4 

315.00 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Wisconsin 

5 

201  98 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

do 

11 

880  00 

Otoe  

Oklahoma 

2  371 

50  998  42 

Pine  Ridge... 

South  Dakota 

647 

215  760  05 

Quinaielt 

*   119 

9  535  84 

Rosebud  

South  Dakota 

252 

63  600  93 

Sac  and  Fox 

Kansas 

37 

960  91 

Standing  Rock  

North  Dakota 

867 

297  674.51 

Turtle  Mountain. 

do 

326 

43  820  14 

White  Earth 

505 

40  190  89 

Wind  River  (Shoshone). 

Wyoming 

1  786 

189*217  93 

6,499 

1,302,369.02 

i  Prior  to  1903. 


2  Additional. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


97 


TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31,  1915,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

1908 

Flathead  (Jocko) 

Montana 

2  369 

222  544  28 

L'Anse  

Michigan  .           

7 

520.  00 

Navaj  o  .  . 

New  Mexico 

468 

74  875  96 

Osage  

Oklahoma  

2,230 

1,465,350.51 

Pine  Ridge  

South  Dakota'  

829 

253,  535.  08 

Quinaielt 

Washington 

349 

27  587  90 

Rosebud  

South  Dakota  .-. 

803 

132,  503.  61 

Standing  Rock  

North  Dakota  

1,620 

553,790.97 

1909 

Cheyenne  River  .                         ... 

South  Dakota 

8,675 
969 

2,730,708.31 
245  842  98 

Coeur  d'Alene 

Idaho 

637 

103  911  53 

Crow..              .•  

Montana    .        ... 

40 

8  '  051.  91 

Flathead  (Jocko) 

.    do 

56 

5  602  61 

Jicarilla  

New  Mexico  

796 

353,811.50 

Lower  Brule 

South  Dakota 

151 

24  259  18 

Muckleshoot  

Washington  

4 

298.  75 

Navajo                                     

New  Mexico  

473 

75  680  00 

Pine  Ridge 

South  Dakota 

965 

338  415  36 

Spokane                       

Washington  

626 

64,794.48 

Standing  Rock 

North  Dakota 

1,271 

360  304  72 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain) 

do 

1  182 

178  453  28 

White  Earth 

Minnesota, 

216 

16  810  29 

White  Oak  Point 

do 

1 

81  50 

Yakima  

Washington  

4 

320.  00 

1910 

Blackfeet 

Montana                        < 

7,391 
2 

1,776,638.09 
640  00 

Cheyenne  River  

South  Dakota.  .  . 

6 

1,  585.  21 

Coeur  d'Alene 

Idaho 

1 

160.  00 

Crow  »  

Montana  

11 

2,  242.  16 

Devils  Lake  (Fort  Totten)   . 

North  Dakota.. 

1 

130.00 

Fond  du  Lac 

Minnesota 

5 

323  75 

Fort  Berthold.. 

North  Dakota.  . 

359 

35,686.93 

Hoopa  Valley 

California 

478 

19  328  95 

Kiowa  Comanche  and  Apache 

Oklahoma 

169 

20  498  25 

Lac  Courte  Oreille  ... 

Wisconsin  

2 

'   79.40 

L'Anse 

Michigan 

18 

1  320  00 

Leech  Lake 

Minnesota... 

1 

80.00 

Makah 

Washington 

373 

3  727  60 

Muckleshoot 

do  

138.  75 

Navajo 

New  Mexico 

1  063 

168,  807.  25 

Paiute  ..                            .             

Nevada  .  .  . 

354 

3.  540.  00 

Pine  Ridge 

South  Dakota 

869 

256,  452.  09 

Port  Madison  ...           

Washington  

12 

1,  289.  50 

Quinaielt 

do  

222 

17,  865.  81 

Rosebud  

South  Dakota  

682 

113,  435.  85 

Round  Valley 

California 

i  359-255 

36,  697.  23 

Standing  Rock 

North  Dakota 

12  486 

11  137  83 

..     .do  

...do.... 

2125 

558.  70 

do 

do.... 

32 

320.00 

do 

do 

*253 

49  392  83 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  

Wisconsin  

167 

8,920.00 

1911 

Columbia 

Washington 

5,304 
35 

754,358.09 
22  618.12 

Crow.. 

Montana  .  .               

1 

320.00 

Klamath 

Oregon.. 

394 

61.  056.  79 

Leech  Lake 

Minnesota 

3 

221  20 

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico) 

Arizona 

60 

9,600.00 

Ontonagon 

Michigan 

2 

160  00 

Paiute 

Nevada  .  .  . 

4 

40.00 

Pine  Ridge 

South  Dakota 

1  006 

278  493.85 

Rosebud 

do 

421 

71  296  31 

Umatilla  

Oregon  

3 

480.00 

1912. 

Blackfeet     . 

Montana  . 

1,929 
3 

444,  286.  27 
960.00 

Cheyenne  River... 

South  Dakota.  .  . 

408 

83,  244.  09 

Crow  Creek 

.do.... 

477 

77,  838.  77 

Fort  Berthold 

North  Dakota 

i  507-72 

113  420  43 

Lower  Brule 

South  Dakota.     . 

71 

11,273.09 

Paiute 

Nevada 

4 

30  00 

Pine  Ridge  .... 

South  Dakota.  .  . 

549 

125,  586.  52 

Rosebud 

.do  

349 

55,  473.  48 

Standing  Rock 

do  .. 

49 

40  842  76 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  

do  

15 

2,400.80 

1,997 

511,069.94 

1  Additional. 

2  Additional;  timber. 


s  Additional;  partly  in  South  Dakota. 

4  Temporary  assignments  under  department  certificates. 


98  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  6. — Allotments  approved  to  Dec.  31, 1915,  by  calendar  years — Continued. 


Year. 

Reservation  or  tribe. 

State. 

Number 
allot- 
ments. 

Area. 

1913  
1914  

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

Minnesota 

11 
3 
1 
488 
1 
31 
3 
2,026 
3 
28 
162 
657 
33 
804 
145 
5 
434 
22 
1 
1 
60 
(2) 
797 

880.00 
640.  68 
160.00 
4,  878.  74 
160.00 
4,  929.  24 
480.00 
722,  453.  47 
233.45 
974.00 
1,  276.  28 
179,307.74 
7,  660.  76 
24,  403.  74 
24,  879.  13 
40.00 
61,  640.  76 
3,  029.  02 
40.00 
160.00 
4,  302.  32 
287,996.92 
8,000.00 

Cheyenne  River 

South  Dakota. 

Crow.. 

Montana 

Colorado  River.. 

Arizona  

Crow.. 

Montana 

Crow  Creek 

South  Dakota 

Flathead  (Jocko). 

Montana  .  . 

Fort  Peck.. 

.       .do... 

Leech  Lake 

Minnesota.  .  . 

Lummi  .  .  .                                                     Washington  .  . 

Pala 

California 

Pine  Ridge  

South  Dakota. 

Rosebud  . 

..     .do.... 

Salt  River 

Arizona 

Standing  Rock. 

North  Dakota  . 

Truckee  Carson 

Nevada 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  .  .  . 
do  

Montana  .  . 

North  Dakota 

ITintah 

Utah  . 

Umatilla 

Oregon.. 

White  Earth 

Minnesota 

White  Earth  i... 

do  

Yuma.  .  . 

California 

Blackfeet.... 

Montana  .  . 

5,715 

2 
13 
10 
13 

1,784 
647 
212 
4 

241 
1 
2 
1 
1,119 

1,338,363.25 

638.36 
1,  063.  20 
1,904.48 
130.00 
338,909.95 
134,  167.  85 
35,  707.  86 
40.00 

35,  858.  12 
160.00 
324.98 
160.00 
120,  966.  00 

1915  

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

Minnesota. 

Cheyenne  River  

South  Dakota. 

Colorado  River.. 

Arizona  . 

Fort  Hall 

Idaho 

Pine  Ridge.... 

South  Dakota 

Standing  Rock 

North  and  South  Dakota 
Nevada  .  .  . 

Truckee  Carson  .   . 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  .  .  . 
Umatilla.... 

North      Dakota      and 
Montana  

Oregon.. 

Warm  Springs 

do 

White  Earth. 

Minnesota... 

Yakima. 

Washington 

Cheyenne  Rh  er.  .  . 

South  Dakota 

4,049 

281 
13 
113 
143 

787 
7 
1 
11 
2 
5 
117 
2 
574 
1 
230 
85 
42 

338 
1 
3 
248 

4 

670,031.16 

49,  702.  36 
130.00 
18,063.12 
5,748.18 
206,  154.  08 
858.94 
10.00 
879.  75 
120.00 
380.21 
604.  52 
120.00 
117,  732.  20 
43.70 
23,  086.  00 
13,  855.  17 
5,  735.  81 

51,  650.  15 
160.00 
200.00 
36,  716.  52 
396.  63 

Colorado  River 

Arizona 

Crow  Creek  

South  Dakota. 

Fond  du  Lac.. 

Minnesota 

Fort  Berthold.... 

North  Dakota.. 

Fort  Sill,  Apache.... 

Oklahoma 

Fort  Yuma 

California 

Lac  Du  Flambeau.   . 

Wisconsin. 

L'Anse  and  Vieux  Desert 

Michigan 

Leech  Lake  

Minnesota.  .  . 

Moapa  River. 

Nevada 

Omaha... 

Nebraska 

Pine  Ridge  

South  Dakota 

Santee..  . 

Nebraska 

Shoshone  

Wyoming 

Standing  Rock  
Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  
do  

North  Dakota... 

Montana  . 

Montana,    North    and 
South  Dakota  
Oregon.. 

Warm  Springs  .  .  . 

White  Earth 

Minnesota 

Yakima  

Washington.  . 

Public  domain  .  . 

California 

Total  reservations  3  

3,008 

108,  429 
«7,520 

532,347.34 

18,314,983.17 
M,083,944.06 

Total  public  domain 

Grand  total  3.  .  . 

115,949 

19,  398,  927.  23 

i  Prior  to  1913. 

1  Additional  allotments. 

3  Table  6,  p.  93, 1915,  annual  report,  should  not  include  allotments  and  acreage  on  public  domain;  deduct 
same  from  grand  total  also. 

*  Includes  2,274  Turtle  Mountain  allotments  of  338,767.94  acres,  and  4  California  allotments  of  396.63 
acres,  above;  and  5,246  allotments  of  745,176.12  acres  not  itemized  above;  but  shown  in  Table  6,  p.  93, 
1915  annual  report. 


COMMISSIONER  OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


99 


TABLE  7. — Lands  set  apart  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916,  for  temporary  use  and 
occupancy  by  mission  organizations. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act  and  citation. 

Warrant 
for  action. 

Acre- 
age. 

Arizona: 
San  Xavier  

Franciscan  Fathers  of  Arizona  

Policy... 

175.00 

Do 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Presby- 

do 

5  00 

Western  Navajo 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America, 
do 

do 

60 

California:  Cold  Springs  . 

Northern  California  Baptist  Conven- 

do 

2.50 

North  Dakota: 
Standing  Rock 

tion. 
Domestic    and    Foreign    Missionary 

Feb.  14,  1913  (37 

80.00 

Do  

Society  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church   hiv  the   United   States   of 
America. 
American  Missionary  Association    .... 

Stat.  L.,  675). 
do  

40.00 

South  Dakota: 
Pine  Ridge  

Domestic    and    Foreign    Missionary 

Policy... 

20.00 

Do  

Society  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church   in  the   United   States  of 
America. 
Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

May 27,  1910  (35 

40.00 

Washington:  Colville.... 

Wyoming: 
Shoshone 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America. 
Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions.  .  . 

Wyoming   State   Conference   of  the 

Stat.  L.,  440). 

Mar.  22,  1901  (34 
Stat.  L.,  82). 

Policy  .  . 
do 

470.86 

88 

Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 

Total 

S34  84 

TABLE  8. — Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1916. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act. 

Citation. 

Acre- 
age. 

Arizona: 
Pima  

Franciscan  Fathers  of  Arizona  

Mar.    3,  1909 

35  Stat.,  814... 

10.00 

Salt  River 

do 

do 

do 

2.50 

California:  FortYuma.. 

South  Dakota: 
Pine  Ridge 

The  Roman  Catholic  Bishop  of  Mon- 
terey and  Los  Angeles. 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  the  Presby- 

June 25,1910 
Mar.     3,  1909 

36  StBt.,  829... 
35  Stat  ,  814 

3.13 

160.00 

Do  

terian  Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America. 
Domestic    and    Foreign    Missionary 

do  

do  

i  409.  09 

Rosebud  

Society  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church   in  the   United   States  of 
America. 
American  Missionary  Association  

May  30,1910 

36  Stat.,  448... 

80.00 

Total 

664  72 

1  Four  tracts. 


100 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Total  1916 

26,  956 

$1,206,826 

1915 

27,  927 

1,177,600 

1914       ..                                                    

22,968 

1,  194,  185 

1913 

24,490 

1,316,298 

1912     

22,564 

1,211,335 

1911 

21,235 

847,  456 

1900 

177,  169 

1890  

131,374 

Arizona  -. 

8,264 

423,124 

Camp  Verde  

Basket  making  

65 

480 

Woodcutting 

2 

12 

Total  

67 

492 

Colorado  River 

Basket  making  

10 

300 

Beadwork 

95 

1  850 

Woodcutting 

135 

12  200 

Total  

240 

14,350 

Fort  Apache 

Basket  making  

1  75 

600 

Beadwork  

110 

50 

Woodcutting 

1  75 

4  200 

Total  

160 

4,850 

Havasupai      .  .            i 

Basket  making  

40 

800 

Woodcutting 

11 

162 

Others 

22 

1  000 

Total  

73 

1,962 

Kaibab  

Basket  making  

15 

140 

LOUDT) 

Blanket  weaving  

600 

18,000 

Woodcutting 

100 

1  200 

j    ' 

Others              

100 

5  000 

Total  

800 

24,200 

Moqui 

Basket  making  

100 

1  000 

Blanket  weaving  
Pottery 

300 
50 

14,611 
500 

Woodcutting.    ... 

80 

1  126 

Others  

562 

58,  535 

Total  

1,092 

75,775 

Navajo 

Blanket  weaving  

750 

190,000 

Woodcutting  

60 

5  600 

Total 

810 

195  600 

Pima 

Basket  making  

1  050 

10  500 

Pottery 

200 

350 

Woodcutting 

450 

7  500 

Total  

1,700 

18,350 

Salt  River 

Basket  making  

116 

1  900 

Pottery  

7 

105 

Woodcutting 

170 

6  900 

Total  

293 

8,905 

San  Carlos 

Basket  making.  .  . 

150 

500 

Beadwork  

100 

150 

Woodcutting.    . 

200 

9  600 

Total 

450 

10  250 

San  Xavier  

Basket  making  

700 

7  000 

Pottery 

50 

400 

Woodcutting  

400 

36,000 

Others 

12 

600 

Total  

1  162 

44  000 

i  Estimated. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


101 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superin  tendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Arizona  —  Continued. 
Truxton  Canon 

Basket  making 

30 

$200 

Woodcutting.     . 

30 

3:000 

Others  

102 

3,400 

Total. 

162 

6,600 

Western  Navajo  .  . 

Basket  making  

76 

250 

Blanket  weaving  . 

1  000 

15  000 

Woodcutting.    .  .     . 

40 

900 

Others 

125 

1  500 

Total. 

1,240 

17  650 

'California  

1,267 

42,  697 

Bishop 

Basket  making 

30~ 

450 

Beadwork 

12 

150 

Woodcutting  

20 

2,000 

Total                                         x 

62 

2  600 

Campo     ... 

Basket  making 

5 

225 

Digger.    . 

do 

g 

140 

Fort  Bidwell 

do 

50 

1  000 

Beadwork 

15 

400 

Woodcutting 

75 

7  500 

Others 

25 

850 

Total  

165 

9,750 

FortYuma  

Beadwork 

28 

2  000 

Pottery         

6 

l'200 

Woodcutting 

125 

5  000 

Others              

1 

'SOO 

Total  

160 

8  700 

Greenville 

Basket  making 

60 

300 

Beadwork 

10 

80 

Fishing      

150 

700 

Woodcutting 

130 

500 

Total  

i  350 

1  1  sgo 

Hoopa  Valley  

Basket  making    ...... 

80 

250 

Fishing 

100 

10  000 

Woodcutting 

40 

2'  800 

Total  

220 

13  050 

Malki 

Basket  making 

13 

275 

Woodcutting 

3 

380 

Total  

21 

655 

Pala 

Basket  making 

47 

1  490 

Lace  making  " 

27 

'318 

Pottery    

5 

33 

Woodcutting 

24 

874 

Others  

1 

24 

Total    

104 

2  739 

Soboba  .               

Basket  making    . 

66 

1  221 

Lace  making  

52 

875 

1  .... 

Woodcutting 

10 

250 

Total  

128 

2  346 

Tule  River 

Basket  making 

24 

192 

Woodcutting    . 

20 

720 

Total  ..-.  

44 

912 

i  Estimated. 


102 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
il  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Idaho 

230 

$35,200 

Coeur  d'Alene 

Beadwork     

8 
25 
37 

200 
10,000 
12,200 

Total  

Woodcutting 

Others        .      ... 

70 

22,400 

Fort  Hall  

Basket  making  

20 
40 
100 

200 
600 
12,000 

Total 

Beadwork 

Others  

160 

12,800 

Iowa 

58 

2,400 

Sac  and  Fox 

Beadwork 

25 
33 

3 

245 

250 
2,150 

2,600 
9,600 

Kansas:  Potawaton 
Michigan  

ii  

Others     

Others  

Mackinac  

Basket  making  

35 
25 
110 

75 

4,071 

300 
300 
7,000 
2,000 

63,  821 

Minnesota  

Beadwork     

Fishing 

Woodcutting    ..  . 

Grand  Portage  . 

Fishing  

20 
79 

6,000 
316 
4,290 

Total  

Woodcutting 

Others     

99 

10,606 

Leech  Lake  

Beadwork  

130 
25 
400 
40 
2,200 

3,000 
800 
3,608 
1,200 
10,500 

Total    . 

Lace  making 

Fishing  

Woodcutting 

Others    

2,795 

19,100 

Nett  Lake 

, 

Woodcutting 

5 
112 

315 

2,500 

Total  

Others 

117 

2,815 

Red  Lake  

Beadwork     

150 
200 
50 

3,000 
6,000 
4,000 

Total 

Fishing 

Wood  cutting  

400 

13,000 

White  Earth  2. 

Basket  making    

50 
100 
10 
300 
200 

100 
3,000 
200 
5,000 
10,000 

Total  

Beadwork 

Lace  making  

Fishing 

Woodcutting    

660 

427 

18,300 
22,550 

"Montana  

Blackfeet  

Wood  cutting 

20 
2 

3,750 

Crow     

Others 

Total  

22 

3,750 

Flathead 

4 
12 
2 
8 
4 

100 
800 
300 
4,000 
2,500 

Total  

Beadwork  

Fishing        

Woodcutting...  
Others     

30 

7,700 

Fort  Belknap.. 

Woodcutting... 

30 

2,100 

i  Unknown.                                             «  Estimated. 

COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


103 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1 9 1 6--— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Montana—  Continued. 
Fort  Peck             

Bead  work 

45 

$500 

Woodcutting 

60 

2  200 

Others     

50 

5,000 

Total                                                                       

155 

7  700 

Tongue  River        

Beadwork      

165 

400 

Woodcutting 

25 

900 

Total              

190 

1  300 

Nebraska 

74 

38  780 

Omaha                           •                                            

Others 

13 

is  580 

Santee 

Others 

61 

30  200 

Nevada 

534 

11  765 

Fallen            

Basket  making 

10 

25 

Beadwork  

5 

25 

Total                                                              

15 

50 

Fort  McDermitt  .»  . 

Woodcutting 

25 

850 

Others 

31 

455 

Total       

56 

1  305 

Moapa  River      

Basket  making    .     ... 

15 

600 

Others 

1 

60 

Total    

16 

660 

Nevada  

Basket  making         .  . 

30 

500 

Beadwork 

30 

300 

Fishing      

50 

2,000 

Others 

4 

1  1  200 

Total  

114 

4  000 

Walker  River 

Basket  making 

125 

1  500 

Beadwork 

50 

'200 

Fishing      

50 

1,000 

Woodcutting 

70 

1,000 

Total 

295 

3  700 

Western  Shoshone 

Basket  making 

g 

50 

Reno,  special  agent 

Others 

30 

2  000 

New  Mexico  

3,380 

114  446 

Jicarilla  

Basket  making        .  . 

60 

600 

Beadwork  l 

50 

250 

Woodcutting  l  

15 

425 

- 

Others 

68 

1  275 

Total  

193 

2  550 

Mescalero  

Basket  making  

15 

400 

Beadwork       " 

15 

150 

Woodcutting 

25 

1  050 

Others     

15 

200 

Total  

70 

1,800 

Pueblo  Bonito 

Woodcutting 

50 

10  000 

Pueblo  day  schools                                              .  . 

Basket  making 

g 

250 

Beadwork 

97 

1  598  • 

Blanket  weaving  
Lace  making  . 

23 

100 

900 

(2) 

Pottery 

1  530 

8  000 

Woodcutting  

38 

2  260 

Others 

6 

1  488 

Total.  ...                .                             

1,802 

14  496 

i  Estimated. 


"  Not  reported. 


104 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIKS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
San  Juan 

Basket  making 

25 

1  $200 

Blanket  weaving  

1,000 

180,000 

Total 

1  025 

80  200 

Zuni  

Beadwork 

100 

2  500 

Pottery 

100 

500 

Woodcutting    

40 

2,400 

Total 

240 

5  400 

Oklahoma 

345 

5  500 

Cantonment  

Beadwork           .   . 

200 

(2) 

Kiowa 

W  oodcutt  ing 

20 

2500 

Seger  

Beadwork     

125 

3,000 

Oregon 

2  181 

165  400 

Klamath 

Basket  making" 

200 

1  000 

Woodcutting  

6 

2,400 

Total 

206 

3  400 

Roseburg    

Fishing 

1  200 

M  000 

Woodcutting  

1  4,000 

Others             .... 

1,500 

150,000 

Total 

1  800 

158  000 

Warm  Springs 

Beadwork 

50 

500 

Woodcutting    

50 

2,500 

Others 

75 

1  000 

Total    

175 

4  000 

South  Dakota  

848 

5,950 

Crow  Creek. 

Beadwork    .    • 

50 

200 

Other  

1 

(2) 

Total  

51 

200 

Flandreau 

Beadwork 

6 

2200 

Others  .  . 

5 

2500 

Total  

11 

700 

Lower  Briile" 

Beadwork 

28 

50 

PineRi4ge  

do  

710 

4,000 

Woodcutting  

47 

1  000 

Others 

1 

(t) 

Total  

758 

5,000 

Utah..          .... 

59 

3  040 

Shivwits  

Basket  making.. 

20 

240 

W  oodcutting 

20 

1  100 

Total 

40 

1  340 

Uintah  and  Ouray  .  .  . 

Basket  making.. 

5 

1  100 

Beadwork 

10 

1  1  000 

W  oodcutting  .  . 

4 

1600 

Total  

19 

1,700 

Washington  

1,825 

203,  273 

Colville  

Basket  making.. 

g 

160 

Beadwork  

25 

700 

Fishing 

200 

2  500 

Woodcutting.. 

20 

2,400 

Others  . 

258 

5,760 

Total  

511 

11,520 

i  Estimated. 


2  Unknown. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


105 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  Jarming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Cushman                                                        

Basket  making  

43 

$442 

Fishing  

23 

750 

Woodcutting  

26 

3,735 

Others 

21 

1  200 

Total  

113 

6,127 

Basket  making  

128 

7.560 

Fishing 

112 

29  848 

Woodcutting 

8 

296 

Total  

248 

37,704 

Spokane  ..."  

Woodcutting  

25 

2,400 

Taholah..                           

Basket  making  

76 

2,865 

Fishing 

95 

76  240 

Woodcutting  

18 

'788 

Others 

18 

6  000 

Total  

207 

85,893 

Tulalip 

Basket  making  

130 

1  400 

Fishing 

147 

1  10  174 

Woodcutting 

100 

38  855 

Others 

24 

1*200 

Total 

201 

50  629 

Basket  making  

1  50 

1  400 

Bead  work    . 

300 

•1  600 

Fishing  

150 

2  500 

Woodcutting..  . 

20 

4  500 

Total 

520 

9  000 

2,990 

50  180 

Grand  Rapids 

Fishing  

5 

2  000 

Woodcutting  

25 

750 

Total 

30 

2  750 

Hayward 

Basket  making  

60 

525 

Fishing 

450 

600 

W  oodcutting 

50 

2  000 

Others            ... 

675 

2'  025 

Total 

1  235 

5  150 

Keshena  . 

Basket  making  

20 

100 

Beadwork  

50 

300 

Fishing 

50 

400 

Woodcutting  

100 

6  000 

Others 

362 

5  200 

Total 

582 

12  000 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Basket  making..  . 

150 

1  000 

Beadwork 

200 

1  500 

Fishing  

200 

J800 

Woodcutting..  . 

50 

3  000 

Others  

300 

1  250 

Total                                                                    ^ 

90Q 

7  550 

La  Pointe  . 

Basket  making.. 

5 

100 

Beadwork 

10 

200 

Fishing  

5 

4  300 

Others 

12 

i  3  600 

Total                                                      

32 

8  200 

Oneida  

Basket  making  

50 

(2) 

Lace  making 

75 

2  500 

Others  . 

3 

i  i  500 

Total                                                       

128 

4  000 

i  Estimated, 


2  Unknown. 


106 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  191 6^— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

"W  isconsin  —  Continued. 
Red  Cliff 

Bead  work... 

3 

$30 

Fishing  , 

20 

5  000 

Woodcutting  .  . 

20 

5  000 

Others 

40 

500 

Total 

83 

10  530 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  . 

155 

6  500 

Beadwork 

i  50 

(Z) 

Woodcutting.. 

55 

1500 

Others  

1  50 

5,000 

RECAPITULATION. 


Total 

Basket  making.. 

4,059 

$48,  930 

Beadwork 

3  134 

35  033 

Blanket  weaving.. 

3,673 

318.511 

Fishing 

2  939 

180  712 

I/ace  making  

289 

4.693 

Pottery 

1.948 

11  088 

Woodcutting  

3,770 

252,  514 

Others 

7,144 

355  345 

Grand  total 

26  956 

1  206  826 

Estimated. 


2  Unknown. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


107 


10  w  .-it--  cq  ic  o 

O  00  JH  05  00  .;<  r-; 
r—  r-f  I>-  iO  O  O  C^ 


2  "2 


IO  t^-  CO  ^  CD  O5  O5  < 
rH  OO  T  00  Oi  O  ^f  < 
rH  t>  >O  »O  £*  O>  CO  ( 


CO  •**<  rH  rH  t>-  O 
<N  CO  O  t^  <M  TT 

i  lO  CO  t-l  O>  O  Oi 


:  :rH~«r     :  55. 

•       •          rH  •      O   O- 


Igl 


•  T— I  1— I  CO  T— I  C^l  O  CO 

Sr-  TT  co  g>  S  35 

co  Tt<  loocc^i  rf 

'<  cf  i-Tcf  i-T     t>T  oo" 


t^-  Oi  CO  ****  ^f  O  CO 

r-  co  «5  <N  f-i  co  t-- 

CO  CO  ••»<  rH  -«J1  «3  1C 


l^-  O  C*}  CO  TT1  ^O  iO  ^L 

CO  CO  i-<  O  O>  00  O5 


JOOIOIOOOOOC^COOOOCSCOOCO  C^ 

)  O  fi  00  >O  <N  IO«O  OI^  CDOO  t^  O  O5 

roo"<N'r-rt^odsco"'o~io'i>^i-rTf*~i>'cD'  i-r 

<CS  -^iC^lOrHCO^rH  CO 


o^ 

IP 


I  ^  ,H  i-l  (N  i-t 


8.       .         T»1 
•    •      t^ 


I  rH  in  CO  <N  00  ^H  rH 


rfsKr^'tf 


:*rH%jroO'         CT 
O         »O         i-H 


8-5 


JL~ 


I        CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  IM 


O  d  O  i 


to  «o  ^  co  esi  ^ 

r-Hl-Hr-HrHT-Hi— 4 


Il?lfsa 


»l 


•     •     .—     •     i  9) 

!  I  i||3l 

M,^     .-so.r.-w-S^'Si     ca     ^ftfe^^flg, 

||^||l||l|ijall  a  IJKfll 

oofeWW^^^P-iPMMccOTH^    a    pqofifefnOW 

1 


108 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


tji 

•  eo    •    •    •      t> 

s|     5 

500^          i-H          CO 

s  S 

1 

1 

IIII 

:°1  :  :  :    *• 

!  «yt      '      •      '        <— 

if! 

§ 

§                 i 

•    '• 

§ 

:      :    SI 

CO 

j   i 

j 

" 

Is* 

y 

8 

JH"      V 

1  8 

8 

1 

M<O^OCO 
^  CM  CM  ^ 

t^  ofco"io" 

? 

. 

•; 

111 

§i 

•      c 

0 

CM" 

a  i 

CM"   •    • 

^ 

CM" 

CM" 

8 

9f 

. 

sis 

qi 

1 

s 

00  00  S 

f 

is 

1 

^h              ^ 

S^  • 

:    1 

1 

I"s 

o 

1010 

w        cb 

5*1  pr  } 

CM~C~"             oo" 

S  ': 

o 

0 

81 

§ 

CO" 

HIS  S 

II 

pi 

1    I 

3§  §  1 

to  S  2      o      >* 

11 

1    1 

aS 

o 

m  t-  o  co      o 

r 

iO  CO        O        ^ 

1-H  rH                                   rH 

oo  cc 

i-H           1C 

IT 

oo 

t^  CM  t~~CO        O 

ji* 

ir 

•0 

1 

CO" 

I 

CO         CO 

iji 

CM" 

CO  C<l 

is 

CM" 

i 

III  -- 

1  ! 

oT 

§ 

882 

li 

1 

s 

525 

Sg 

8        <N 

o«o    •      >o      o 

iC  t^      '        t>-        "^t1 

0 

g 

i 

-oo-co" 

"    § 

^^  : 

rfi 

§li 

Si 

1 

Tf   O             »O 

S8        0        CM 
00  CM         O         CO 

O  i-H  O        O        Oi 

Is 

£ 

1 

O  >O  OQ        O 
co"      CO"I-H"      T-5 

feSS 

OCO         ^J 

CO               CM        IO 

o,^co      „       3 

CO  00 

£ 

gri 

8S 

^§       c§ 

II  1  § 

00  O  00        Tt< 
C^C^S         § 

CO 

S5§  1 

li  1 

O>  •*  O  iO        -fi 

co^ 

t—  CO         CM 
(>•  1-H           CO 

Sec      3      | 

iO  iO  GC         CO         I>- 

00  OC  O         OO 

C^  iO        O 

rH                   IO 

s«s«  - 

A 

"°  0 

§!!- 

ill 

IO  CO        Tt>        CM 

co  co      r--      co 

CO  iO        "5        I-H 

iES  1 

»o 

•Ml  § 

t*       •          00 

Cb      '        ^O 

IISI  1 

; 

:    ^ 

1 

OQ 

l    i!  i       t  I.J     i  :  H 

.g       £|  :            cj.g    «         §    J    | 

o    la  !|      g|  1     1=1  | 
lllllll  1  IS  |  5  SSS  I 

8           E    2             1 

;      .      .      .  ;            .  ;      .  o  . 

I    i       |      j|   S 

111  NI    p|i|i 

it!  d  li  i  liiSfl 

i  Is!  |  II  I 

1         s       S 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


109 


2? 


a  s 


20, 
me 


t^--* 

IOCO 


;83&3  §3 

CN"    n         CR 


8 


eoWefrf  I    : 


CO  00  i-l  OS  t^  1C 

•^c^coosiot^- 

CO  CO  O  C<)  CO  O  l 


tO'ffrf'O' 


OJOOOCOOOCOOO  JO       g 


I    |8J 

eoV>N» 


i 


T-I        Tt<  CO 


sis 


3" 


r^  o      c<j 

23    S 


888SS 

^*  W  O  i-H  t>- 


££££$£ 


O  !>•        i-H 

CN  -f         OO 


00*000      iv 

i—  l  CO  CO        CO 

o  o  t*-      -^i 


^O  *-• 

c<i     oo 


i|f- 

MV  «• 

10     d 


05TPOOcOiOO 


C0~       r-T 


So-S    2 

t*-  CO  rH         OO 


0*00*0" 


iiy 

_•  a  i-i 


•  u+*      M     -^fe^Sc     «a      o^SS  <5b'.,P4c3-i«i-iJO  a-rj3rQ^j>-3^.r,      >H      o3      «      fl.^, 

Ill  1  !  Illl  I  f  111 II 

O  ©  <U  ^  05        O        O 


65333—16  -  8 


110 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


<  (N     •  OO 
JO     '"** 


•sts  . 

PI 

a  rt^ 


)  CO  00  COlO 
•  CO  O  Oi  T— * 


O  IM  ^  < 
lOCOlM 


IO          t~  r-tl^  r-< 


«    i 


lllf. 

liff 

fl  t*^ 


>  t^  1-H  I 

l-^i  O  I 


I     g 


llPt*.  tO 

isa     i 


0}  CO        t- 


*O  O  T-l 


>00  CO         CO         T-I  CO 


'.M 


§  : 


-3  .s 


U  iliiJ 


•z**** 

•  ^  03  4) 

:|^o 
i^fl|^.H 


r^.rt.rt-^H 


rH    OJU 


33ffga2£fifi&i£i£ 


o  §c«  2     ^ 

C3    (D     Sr^H 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ill 


O  O  O  O 
^OOC^T»< 


t-        COi-HCOO        <N 
.  »>•      CD      t^  co      TT 

*O  ^         CO 


eooo      <M 


SSSSESl 

t^OO         r-(  COI 


t~  CO  O5  3  I 


I-H        O 


JIN  ^ 


-o 


CN  iCCN  t^     •  CO  ^  O 


IS  :  :S 


SI  g 


oo^^oo 


rH  GO  CO  t^  ,-H  05  GO  TH 


CO  O3CO' 
^1t^-H( 
1-4  1-H  00  ( 


r^-ioo5oo5i-HC^c 


COCO          IO 
i-H  IO  •* 


10  S 


O  U  O  fc  J  P-i  P-irtPnccoir 


iiii 


112 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 


§1 

la's 


P^  ^r  co  <N  oc  CN  ' 


T-I  1-1  10  o  o 


(N  <N  i-4  CCKN  (N 


»c  i>-  1^-  1>-  10  co 

•^  O  iO  ^  O  »O 


:    8 


|J- 

I°3. 


O»O  OO  CO 


CCiO  » 


>O  CO  Tf  00  t~-  1C 


co  o>  2ft  10 


tiv 
ndi 


2 


ISSSSl 


>  (M  <N  O  c 

Poo'oo'si-r> 


:§ 


TP  t^-  o  ^*  c 
oo  I-H  t~~  10 


to  o  10  coco  co 


"SK  o 

1 


:^g.s^^ 

;  >«  >  fl  p| 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


113 


'  CN  CO  TT  CC  O 

I  CO  i-H  IO  "*>  CS 

)  i-H  CM        CO 


:  O  CG         CO 
.  OOOi         •? 


t^  00  5> 

sfdsf 


)  O>  t^- 

)000 


>lOOO         r-l 


S»o 
5g 

CO         -«Ji 


S  T-H  1C  00          CO  I 


CMOSOO  • 

S0^ 


1  S 


8S3S; 


o  CQ 

as" 


11 

O,     o 


I 


*      2 

1     .s 


IIll 


ooSs     <o     o> 


)N0^3         O 
>        CN  O        <O 


ISiIli  f !! ! 


g  "3 


i^s^Ill 


114 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 

•5 

Total 
income, 
rea.  Income. 

0 

8" 

i 

SI 

co    • 

::::§:: 

§ 
J 

50 

CC  CO 

i 

I 

TnonmA  Number  . 
Income.  ofleases  A 

1 
i 

|§§  :  :     : 

ssg 

:  :  :  :8  :  : 

S 

i 

« 

.8 

o  oo  w      o 

::::§:: 



§ 

gg 

•6 

4 

^ 

83S 

:::::; 

88 

s^ 

1 

III 

CO 

S=S 

3 

gl 

'a  ^ 

H  ^ 

i 

S8|    - 

:::!-:: 

i 

i«  CO 

5§ 

Number 
of 
Indians 

bC 
3 

3 

1 

151  i 

co~ 

ISllil     | 

IS 

O  iO 

- 

i||; 

g 

S 

sail 

2«SSlg  | 

aae!s8    e 

1  S 

(N  O 

fi 

Un- 
allotted. 

if 

O     •     •       o- 
O     |     •       <N 

:     :      "       gf 

I1!!!  | 

! 

IS 

| 

.CO 

2  o 

is§  i 

SIS  a  S  1 

1  1 

i  § 

i§ 

o 

c 

^ 

rH  O  O          CO 

^ 

;       50 

50,-J 

I 

"c3 

i! 

co~     i-T    pf 

21  ?!    1 

O  OQ  O  Q             t- 

! 

0 

- 

J 

8?8  i 

§11  j|  :g    § 

S    |        i 

:    1 

s§ 

j 

| 

<o^o     ^ 

Tfi  r-4                O5       •  ^H          CO 

!  !- 

fa 

:  •  •     •§  «     : 

•        '•  i-^               £4 

i  :     : 

lj 

Nebraska  

O32  ^        o3 

ijj  |1| 

Hill  j 

Jicarilla  
Mescalero  
Pueblo  Bonito  5 
Pueblo  day  scho 
San  Juan  
Zuni  

New  York:  NewYc 
Agency  

North  Carolina:  Ch 
okee  

North  Dakota  

Fort  Berthold 
Fort  Totten.  .  .  . 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


115 


a  55  ss'sWs^sV  sf  a 


g  : 


%  : 


~    :? 


OCT> 


IS    S 

ICC         rt 


a 


S    3 


jo  eg  o^ 

t-  00  8  00 


SO       <N  O  FH  CO  <O  O        -^t1  T»<        so        CO 
00        OO'O'O'HIN        too        ?-        05 

-*      1-1      in  o  ift  IN  •*  <o      IN  c<i      eo      I-H 


05      12 

1— (  C^l 


)  t^-*i        JO 

IS?    15 


1000  r^r~  to 


llll 


.-TcT 


1  in  4J« 
zJ  o 


lifHiU 
llftlttjl 


116 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


rQ    W 

M 


l 


11 


,- 


af-r 


5    S3    2 


oc      c*i 


IM  t~-  -<ri  co  o      ® 


oo  co  in  T-I  T-I 


in  T-I  T-I  to      o 


<  S(N  O  O  CO 


§§§  IS 


coo          oo 


1 1 

I 


[J    .S    -Si 

53    3    9  b 


c 


COMMISSIONER   OF 

IS 


AFFAIRS. 


117 


OC  CO  ~H  Q  iO 


I  r-l  rH  •*  CO  CM 


l*» 
1*1 

go* 


II 

as 


1 


I 

£5 


^^ 


TC5'-ic 


oo  oo  oo  oo  oo  - 


" 


>  oj 

S|c 

•§1' 

ca^s  c 


nil 

slse 


fililllli 

OfeWW^S^FU(K! 


118 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 

d 


Num 
of  lea 


I  3 


sss 


a     g 


-I 

-2 
,2 

-9 


2*0  w> 


8 


Set    3 


co  to      •-< 


§§§ 


n 

I 


to     5-3     o 


1 


= 

£2 


>C<)  O        CO 

3  Tf  lO          1O 

>  i-H  CS|          DC 


sgssss 


to  >o  •*  oo  os  r^ 


S2 


)  r-  OiO  iO  C        -^ 

i  <M  ,-*  CC  -H  O        GC 
>  CH  CC  <N  CC  00          rH 


i  ITS    •  o    •      e^i 


;  -  ~         — 
)  ^H  00      •  CC 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

S        S  il 


119 


13  i 


E  § 


^HOfCOO       10 


e<>  es      t- 

1C  >H          »O 


>•*<  1C  >H 
)Tt«  t^  ^H 


1      § 


iO  1-1  CO       Oi 

)  rH  rt  00         "3 


§  s 


:s      -5 


8   g5i 

-II 


8 


K  Uil 

!?^el  s  al 


[  .1  Sl=s3      I  I  II 

>         >5       'CS'Q'C'~S'«         "3  /S  -(-s-tJ 

ill=§l  S  2  °s 

I  1 


111 


a«-H  » 

IP! 


II   §  I 

-2p    2    c8 


120 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


f 


t>r1-IWco'    10* 

3rHOO<N        rH 


CO  TO  OC  CD  r—t 


«>!-(£;  00  10 

iO  t—  1  OC  W         i-H 


fc! 

^•^^ 

feS8? 


Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 


Num 
of  lea 


"*     >o 

r~co      co 


T—  1  O  CD  t*-  IO  CD 


TO       TO 

*•       CO 


1  S 


s  g 


Q  ^  O  CD  I-  ( 


O<N  O  i-l  ( 

Tfl   l^.Tfl   00   < 


t--  CO  t>  rH  t^  IO 

TO  0        CO 


I 

2 


•      - 
3131 


)  COf~  rt 


llggg 


!S^5^! 


3S3S3S    S 


O  O 
<N<N 

9 


cojo 


* 


>  10  1C  ^  rH  Tt<  10 


.9  :  : 


' 


Shi 
Uin 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


121 


:  :8 


I  i  if 


:  :s 


:  :s 


i& 

s    r? 


8    5 


i-H  CO  CO  Tf<  C<J  IN  C 


.      .  Oi 

.      -IOC 


llffi^ 


122 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


0500 
t-H  CO  CO 


-rfi  O  ip  ^f  iO 

^"Vfrfco1 


O  Q  !>•  T*  g>  10  < 

1-HC50OOXN 
»H  i-H 


S    8 


I-H  U5       CO 

.-I  <>)          r~ 


:?SS 


i— I  "^ 
C3001 


:  :g 


:  :g 


ll 


:  :  :  :S! 


•^  (M  IM      •      •  r-( 


00  CO  05  CO     ;  10 


>-§^a 


56 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


IO  OS  ( 


1C  CO  O 
00  CN  10 


CO  rH  O3 


S  !§ 


£5 

IrHt^      01 

"of  r-T  co" 


O(M       CO 


I  CO        "*l  rH  rH 


OrH 


" 


s 


00  CO  5O  O        <N        rH 


SSSS  S5 


r^  »c  t—  CM  os  o  "• 


a 


O  t^-  10  O  O  iO     iO 


23 


SI 


g 


. 


1        I 


-2 


f 


sf  I    «   gl 

^M  I  %% 
1  f 


ofeO^^OH«>^   -       Wo 


d!P 
0!$^  ^ 


124 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


si 


M 
ill 

«     * 


t^  ^  ^{N 

S    3- 


cogr-4 

i— I  O  t^- 


£838S! 


.-IC<I.-I          <N 


'232    S3    3 


3    2    S 


sisissss  s  3 


S3"3? 

)  CO          i-H 


5S2 


?H  1C  O  iO 
^-lrl<CO 


roo^o 
:  :So 


gf 


sg 


N 


Joi^  :  :    S 


i 


il!ii 


!!SJ      5      5 
00 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TUfH         C-         «>£§ 


125 


882SSS 

I-H  ^<  CM  N  JO 


CM       tti-lt 


g 


g^S: 


J2S    2 

i^        CO 


>  t>»  O     '  O  ( 
,-lrH      -CMC 


ooo 

"" 


8S8   > 


t-      CM         i- 


U5000CC       *ONOfO       "50 


0       0 


T»<  O  CM  •<»< 


oo" 


•0300 

•CM 


if  I  i 


jiiijiis  |.jipi*4i£]fi 

i^j|  Ui! 

^  — ^"^  ^ 


1    I    <§2gffl 

MIS  I ! 


65333—16 9 


126 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


ool 


ll 

*" 


HI 


ll 


fig 


ifj  C^»  1C 


SS    It 


**% 


•^•^•10 

COThrH 


eo  Is 


(MOO       O 


(MOO 


i; 


ecus 


its 
h  a 
k 


K  «S  a      <=>'    '^fi-M^-^S      a 

Ifi  I          i 


£•§  «±i    ^ 


^3;r  o3     -a      o 
j$P$     -g     O 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  127 

TABLE  14. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintenden- 
cies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Reeular  em- 
pi  Dyees. 

Irre?ular  em- 
pbyees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num-   Farn- 
ber.      ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ing. 

Total   1916 

25,  948  $2,378,377 
25,681'  2,304,339 
23,440   2,127,403 
22,793   2,065,124 
22,424   1,940,414 
11.781    1,391,630 
2^901       953,573 

2,  115  $922.  735 
2,533   940,013 
2'.  319   810,950 
2,271   7)2,2*4 
2,516,  732,523 
1,995   687,039 
2,094    749,148 

1 
14,5871427,689 
13,968   414,422 
1?,218   505,492 
12,2)0   414,706 
12,420   432,470 
6,582   582,919 
(2)          0) 

6,992 
6,899 
5,553 
5,585 
5.113 
3^204 
(2) 

1882,  784 
828,218 
689,517 
778,  117 
673,289 
591,672 
177,  169 

2,254 
2,281 
2,  350 
2,647 
2,375 
(») 
807 

1145,168 
121,686 
121,444 
110,037 
102,  129 
0) 
27,256 

1915  

1914 

1913  

1912  

1911 

1900  

Arizona. 

5,213 

386,380J      307 

124,  757 

3,007     96,177|  1,455 

134,075       444 

31,371 

Camp  Verde               . 

108 
410 
1,253 
87 
51 
113 
62 
244 
140 
772 
•      64 
459 
587 
551 
162 
152 

2,602 

11,483!          3 
48,  689i        25 
28,668:        33 
2,445           1 
1.985           1 
1.  558         14 
8,428;        35 
43,  252         61 
20.  763         16 
55,  708         35 
5,464!          9 
17,970:          8 
55,  705         34 
54,  7831        10 
17,370           8 
6,  103         14 

361,492       110 

720 
11,880 
14,068 
300 
285 
4,396 
7,451 
30,078 
7,080 
17,948 
4,902 
3,240 
14.088 
2",  469 
1,200 
4,652 

36,919 

11 

223 
1,223 
53 
35 
32 
27 
95 
7 
482 
55 
81 
500 
25 

94 
7,638 
14,600 
325 
!      1,100 
2,101 
977 
6,760 
894 
24,510 
832 
3,100 
30.977 
814 
730 

935 

!     15,950 

88 
93 

10,575           4 
23,480         63 

100 
2,691 

Colorado  River  

Fort  Apache 

Havasupai 

33 
15 

50 

1,820 
600 
500 

Kaibab  

Lcupp 

17 

561 

Moqui 

Navajo  

88 
117 
135 

6,414 
12,  789 
8,000 

Phoenix 

Pima  

m 

5,250 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River 

370 
53 
516 
117 

11.630 
10,640 
51,500 
15,080 

San  Carlos.  

San  Xavier 

Truxton  Canon  

3 
17 

607 

360 
456 

49,  741 

Western  Navajo  

California  

1,62" 

258,873 

Bishop 

28 
16 
49 
187 
364 
486 
141 
319 
197 
33 
432 
267 
83 

173 

7.105 
2,455 
4,970 
25,912 
49,444 
114,483 
13,603 
39,845 
28,386 
2,921 
18,967 
50,498 
2,902 

-18,944 

6|      1,630 
3j      1,475 

8i      4,375 

14 

1,100 

Campo 

13 

49 
150 
253 
387 
30 
279 
17o 

980 
4,970 
20.600 
42,230 
85,525 
5,400 
36,390 
21,  408 

Digger 

Fort  Bidwell 

5 
13 
1 
22 
10 
13 

r? 

17 
1 

15 

2,852 
2.664 
500 
6,716 
2,748 
3,948 
1,925 
6.229 
5,692 
540 

6,680 

32 
28 
90 
4 
11 
7 

2,450 
3.503 
27,000 
360 
300 
2.280 

Fort  Yuma  

70 
8 
85 
K 

25 

1,047 
1,458 
1,130 
407 
750 
996 

Greenville 

Hoopa  Valley  .  .  . 

Malki.. 

Pala 

Round  Vallev  

Sherman  Institute  .... 

421 

12,  738 

Soboba 

31 
12 

158 

5,534 
282 

12,234 

219 

70 

39,270 
2,100 

Tule  River  

Colorado 

Southern  Ute  . 

88 
85 

60 
395 

5,411 
13,533 

6,000 
34,360 

7, 
8 

4,100 
2,580 

81 

77 

1,311 
10,953 

Ute  Mountain  J  

Florida:  Seminole 

60 
51 

6,000 
11,590 

Idaho. 

34 

13,425 

310 

9,345 

Coeur  d'Alene... 

80 
307 

8 

10 
92 

14,559           7 
15,  701         19 
4,  100           8 

5,040         10 
13,450[        18 

2,664! 
6,661 
4,  100 

5,040' 
11,272' 

22 

288 

305 
9,040 

51 

11,  590 

1 

Fort  Hall... 

Fort  Lapwai 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas  

3 

30 

71 

2,148 

Haskell  Institute 

80 
9 
3 

14 

8,628 
3,622 
1,200 

5,823 

9 

(i 
3 

12 

6.  4801 
3,592| 
1,200' 

5,802 

71 

2,148 

Kkkapoo  i 

3 

30! 

Potawatomi  ' 

Michigan  

2 

21 

Mackinac 

2 
12 

21 

5,802 

2 

21 

1 

—  .  

Mount  Pleasant... 

12 

5,802 

1  Included  with  adults  by  private  parties. 

2  No  data  available. 


128  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  14.— Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Contd. 


States  and  superintenden- 
ces. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  emploved  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Minnesota  

1,185 

$118,  101 

137 

$63,  245 

780 

$18,235       268 

$36,621 

Fond  du  Lac 

103 
23 
310 
102 
43 
390 
21 
196 

1,430 

17,  845 
2,897 
27,  740 
6,  143 
10,030 
28,  224 
3,4fiO 
21,  762 

211,674 

9 
4 
32 
5 
13 
29 

39 
167 

"4,500 
2,560 
12,  162 
2.340 
7)500 
12,988 
3,160 
18,035 

75,239 

94 

13,345 

Grand  Portage 

16 
180 
97 
5 
310 
15 
157 

1,069 

337 
2,678 
3,803 
430 
6,960 
300 
3,727 

51,595 

I  eech  Lake  .  . 

98 

12,900 

Nett  Lake 

Pipestone.              .  .  . 

. 
25 
51 

2,100 

8,276 

Red  Lake 

Vermillion  Lake 

White  Earth 

Montana  

194 

84,840 

Blackfeet 

151 
375 
205 
319 
72 
308 

115 

33,229 
39,789 
55,  805 
22,276 
38,348 
22,227 

36,372 

36 
42 
14 
19 

28 

28 

31 

14,  724 
19,970 
6,799 
6,968 
11,648 
15,  130 

15,023 

82 
333 
74 
300 

0) 

280 
19 

"    5,215 
19,819 
1,906 
15,308 
2,250 
7,097 

670 

33 

13,  290 

Crow 

Flathead 

117 

47,100 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck  

144 

24,450 



Tongue  River 

Nebraska 

49 

19,376 

16 

$1,300 

Genoa  

11 

78 
20 

924 

6,360 
2,040 
11.770 
16,  202 

96,598 

11 

4 

8 
8 

37 

6,360 
1,860 
3,280 
3,523 

13,998 

!  

Omaha 

1 

18 

180 
490 

Santee  

37 
12 

717 

6,700 
12,676 

76,785 

16 

1,300 

Winnebago.  . 

Nevada  .                 

108 

3,815 

62 

2,000 

Carson 

89 
192 
172 
49 
19 
320 
83 

1,915 

6,740 
11,900 
30,  748 
3,852 
3,831 
31,523 
8,004 

174,592 

8 
2 
2 
3 
8 
5 
9 

187 

3,890 
900 
919 
552 
3,024 
984 
3,729 

65,185 

19 

850 

62 

2,000 

Fallon 

190 
168 

2d 

11,000 
2^,800 
3,100 

Fort  McDermitt 

2 
20 
11 
50 
6 

1,026 

29 
200 
807 
989 
940 

25,747 

Moapa  'liver. 

Nevada 

WalVer  "  ^  iver 

235 
68 

363 

29,550 
3,335 

70,866 

Western  Soshore 

Ne^  Mexico 

339 

12,  794 

-A  Ibuouerque 

139 
471 
38 
19 
318 
583 
159 
188 

28 
252 

2,661 

9,343 
25.328 
8,031 

6,2;>9 

78,357 
26,075 
10,503 
10,  656 

200 

15,42fe 

97,042 

13 
26 
13 
15 
54 
40 
17 
9 

5,132 
10,812 
4,415 
6,120 
13,378 
13,540 
7,728 
4,060 

31 

336 
24 
4 
18 
455 
5 
153 

28 
73 

2,425 

959 
9,934 
3,016 
179 
123 
6,836 
54 
4,646 

200 
2,297 

33,566 

95 
6 

3,252 
297 

Jicarilla  

103 
1 

4,285 
2600 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

Pueblo  day  schools  . 

233 

64,031 

13 

88 
137 

825 
5.699 
2,721 

San  Juan  

Santa  Fe  

Zuni  

26 

1,950 

New  York:  New  York 
Agency  

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  .  .  . 
North  Dakota  

12 

'   144 

4,982 
57,256 

162 

75 

8,000 
6,000 

5 
17 

150 
220 

Bismarck  

24 
448 
47 
2,117 
13 
12 

464 

3,440 
20,029 
10,704 
52,  629 
4,540 
5,700 

166,896 

6 
22 
24 
67 
13 
12 

266 

2,920 
8,473 
10,  140 
25,483 
4,540 
5,700 

158,  623 

1 

351 
23 

12,050 

300 
5,556 
564 
127,146 

17 

220 

Fort  Berthold  

75 

26,000 

F6rt  Totten 

Standing  "lock  f  .  .  . 

Turtle  Mountain 

Wahpeton  

Oklahoma    .  .  . 

147 

5,573 

1 

900 

50 

1,800 

Cantonment  

28 
36 
70 
80 
55 
17 

4,558 
11,  700 
12,  687 
53,046 
21,449 
12,220 
3.480 

8 
17 
20 
80 
50 
17 
3 

4,229 
10,820 
10,887 
53,046 
21,200 
12,220 
2.160 

20          329 

19           880 

Cheyenr  e  and  Arapaho.  . 
Chilocco  

50 

1,800 

Five  Civilized  Tribes..  .  . 
Kiowa  

::::;::::  

5 

249 

Osage  

i 

Otoe... 

4 

1.320 

1 1915  report. 


2  Estimated. 


COMMISSIONER  OF    INDIAN   AFFAIBS.  129 

TABLE  14. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1916 — Contd. 


States  and  superintenden- 
cies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private 
parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults 

Minors  or 
outing  pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Oklahoma  —  Continued. 
Pawnee 

10 
8 
34 
18 
44 
10 
12 

35 
396 

?5,080 
4,200 
831 
6,141 
5,137 
7,100 
9,440 

9,827 
40,288 

8 

$3,700 
4,200 

2 

$480 

1 

$900 

Red  Moon 

34 

7 
34 

831 
341 
557 

Sac  and  Fox 

11 
10 
10 
12 

13 

62 

5,800 
4,580 
7,100 
9,440 

9,241 
29,341 

Seger 

Sereca 

Shawnee 

Five    Civilized    Tribes 
schools 

22 
334 

586 
10,947 

Klamath 

253 
13 
10 
20 
100 

673 
3,016 

13,056 
8,774 
3,126 
5,615 
9,717 

45,939 
204,419 

16 
13 
6 
12 
15 

13 

304 

6,095 
8,774 
2,940 
4,824 
6,708 

6,663 
118,432 

237 

6,961 

Salem 

Siletz 

4 
8 
85 

184 

2,428 

186 
791 
3,009 

Umatilla 

Warm  Springs 

Pennsylvania'  Carlisle 

4,107 

60,525 

476 
24 

135,  169 
1,622 

South  Dakota                . 

260 

23,840 

Cheyenne  "liver  . 

880 
305 
70 
108 
33 
609 
12 
908 
19 
4 
68 

180 

41,701 
22,668 
10,934 
8,610 
4,064 
48,  121 
5,179 
45,049 
9,960 
1,320 
6,813 

13,  861 

42 
20 
17 
13 
7 
96 
11 
62 
1-9 
4 
13 

24 

17,  480 
8,408 
8,314 
6,190 
3,220 
33,236 
5,023 
18,949 
9,960 
1,320 
6,272 

10,384 

838 
178 
29 
75 
26 
468 
1 
758 

24,221 
2,180 
998 
2,050 
844 
12,475 
156 
17,060 

Crow  Creek     

107 

12,080 

24 

1,622 

Lower  Brule  

20 

370 

Pierre 

Pine  "  adge          

45 

2,350 

Rapid  City  

RossVud  .           

88 

9,040 

Sisseton 

Springfield              

Yankton 

55 

97 

541 

2,227 

Utah 

51 

1,100 

8 

150 

Shivwits 

93 
43 

44 
1,050 

1,864 
11,  128 

869 
99,260 

2 
22 

324 
10,060 

32 
21 

44 
570 

290 
1,068 

869 
15,557 

51 

1,100 

8 

150 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

Salt  Lake  City,  special 
agent 

Washington 

86 

41,503 

389 

40,650 

5 

1,550 

Colville 

385 
214 
49 
210 
81 
28 
83 

2,102 

35,  870 
18,330 
5,716 
11,084 
2,970 
10,084 
15,206 

153,061 

15 
12 
5 
8 
5 
19 
22 

115 

8,900 
5,840 
1,560 
2,573 
1,429 
9,453 
11,  748 

46,736 

301 
33 
12 

96 
58 
9 
61 

639 

8,170 
350 
556 
1,151 
1,241 
631 
3,468 

9,284 

69 
164 
32 
106 
18 

18,800 
10,590 
3,600 
7,360 
300 

Cushman  

5 

1,550 

Neah  Bay 

Spokane  

Taholah 

Tulalip  

Yakima 

Wisconsin 

1,219 

92,068 

129 

4,973 

Grand  "°apids  

1 

619 
580 
65 
31 
585 
21 
167 
23 
10 

£98 

600 
30,950 
21,615 
6,258 
1,320 
43,669 
6,661 
34,961 
3,107 
3,920 

73,156 

1 
8 
36 
12 
1 
7 
16 
5 
19 
10 

24 

600 
3,690 
15,  630 
5,550 
720 
4,230 
6,540 
2,820 
3,036 
3,920 

12,228 

Hayward 

15 

•544 
53 

225 
5,985 
708 

471 

22,260 

125 

4,775 

Keshena  

Lac  du  Flambeau  
Laona  

30 

570 

600 
37,708 

La  Pointe 

8 
5 
10 
4 

1,731 
121 
443 
71 

Onoida  

Red  Cliff. 

148 

31,500 

4 

198 

Tomah  

Wittenberg 

Wyomhig:  Shoshone  

921 

49,548 

52 

11,200 

1 

180 

130 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


milios 
ing  in 


iJiii 


Estimated  h 
ing- 


4 
I? 


a  (N 

€        *     8 


QCO     •  CO  tg  O  t-"  O5  if)  «3  t»       O 

i-H  t^  O  TT  C<ll>-  CM 


+  -M-+ 

s  -? 


^Oi     w 


CO       0 


n  i  i  i  M  \  i  u  «   i 


i 


•  CN  N  CN  M<  1-1  CO  CO  OC 


1-1  CO  C 

CJ»-I 


t    >  i  • 4- 


-d- 


(N  t^  tO  "3  TJ.  CO       »C 


r   CM  -*  CO        CO  .-         t-    O  CO 


LL 


5-1 


y*  r- ^t^  Wod.»-iC3C3n^>-'^'<!x'+J  v3  WJ-HW  Cl    C.  *J        •C'Tr 

5 1  1 

I  -     g 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


131 


Is-"  O 

*- 


t-       O  CO  iO  »O  »r  < 

co     et-t--ic^i 

CO  •—*        £ 


*->      coooo 


O  OO    00       iftO 


i 


oo    10 
e5    oo 


(N 

-M-J- 


||2888  8 


^  OO 

T  o  10  1- 


)  I   i 


O     CN 

rJ     0 


«1  MM") 


s 


-A-^ 


:S    SJ2S 

.  CO  »O 

f  i  |:  I  M 


Tt*  CC  ^r  »C  ^C 
tO»H        CNC-1 


I  I  .  <  /  < 


1 1  I 


- 


I^i4-l 


~i-+-M-M- 


^-    iV 


£2 


t  I    i 


i  i 


33SS  2  S 

•^r  00  »^     »—  <     rH 


or  QC  oc  10  o« 

1-HlO  5O  »C  ^ 


jia 


10  co  t-<  oo  t»    -r 


00  "5  1>-     CO     rt< 


sss  s 


i  i    ^ 


T-IU5 


r  ?? 


^s§  2 


0-.  co  oo  «o  os  «o  o        - 


i-l"3'O( 
lM        CO 


oo  *H  •«*  o  GO 


4-+ 


OS     »O 


CO  iH  >ft  •-«     « 


'So  53 


:  : 


PH 

Jpf  -e 
5^§ 


r  d' 
Hall 
Lap 


ort 
ort 

Sa 


F 
F 


Iow 

Kan 


Kickapoo.. 
Powatom 

hig 


ta 
an 


Mills 
kinac. 

ta 


111 


S| 


iN 


!i? 


«s  s 
:« 

s 


dC.a  cs   =st:g 

a  Jjr   -o     .ea.o.2 
Ooj^    ca 


illl 
i?l& 

Illl  « 


* 


132 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ill 

£§§ 


a££ 


V 


o  ic 

O  CO 


o     t^- 


Slilil 


E"  i-3  co 
Ii 


8    | 

LI 


•saggga 


4-4- 


-U- 


1-Hicoojio 

O  •«  >C  IO  CQ 


l 


sggg 


t^OO  t^-<f<       CO 

rHO?C6(M         CO 


— 


t  t in  t  t 


4 


44 


-t-W^« 


J-A-f 


«        <* 


i 


4-^ 


<N»0-l<N       CO 


COCONON     co 


COt>-        OU5O         OO        ^f        Q 

c5  <N  ^^eo  1-1  ec      01      co      S 
/    1    •    1  '    i        I       i        i 


t--     oo  o<*      oo 


MM) — | — L 


^__ 


_-_ 


i  i  i 


ooooon 


^<N 


-2    I 


%  a  a  Siy 

..       "JS         O  03  O  C" 

i  lilies  il !  i  f-fi 

'^S^fStKN        fe       5       5  lSl§QQH 

I  588 

^  J?;     S5     55 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


133 


:8  :35S 


OC.  OOO  O  »C 


OO  O  » 

rH  1C 


+4-V 


8  rH 


:8  :  iSS'-S  S 


-T 
i* 

,L,S 


i  J 


!•-  00  ^  00  "9" 


' 


l_ 


1     ' 


r-  »c  c^  I-H    .-i 


C  CO  C*3  *-t  01  C<!  O 

t^  Tt-  «o  -J3  ao  t-  ~* 


Tfi  -"J"  rH      rH 


*™<  co  o  * 


^*    S 


CO  t^  1^  r4  •*•  05 


•*•  05     CO 
r-t  rH      ^ 


rH  1C  »C  1"H  -^f  C«  ^       O 

,        .       ,  , 


e>i  co  <N  oo  1-1  1^  oo    o 

U3  rH  N  i-l  r-t  Tf  CO      O> 


00  O«  OS  t^  O  t 

0<NrH          r-H 


I  1  \  I 


' 


.  t^  05  CC  1C  0  »C  -H 


00  CO  CO  rH  CM  CC 


SUSSES  8?  3 


h. 
rg 


lla. 
Spr 

ota 


3E& 


Rnse 
Silet 
Uma 
War 

uth  D 


2.S  -^ 


X  •*    r 

l!^|!a 
1031  s 


t? 

N 


S§3 


a   S 


I  |; 
I  3: 
i  I 


*o         *CB 
•  "*^         "£  ?3 

!§         «« 


r 

II 


134 


3*3  - 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

iS-je^SS  S3          *»      ^<OcoM?o.o>N  eo      ~~~< 


<N 


of 


O        "5 

s  a 


S3!      o 


C4  N  rH  r-l  1-4  <-4 


oo  r-  10  <«< 


ooooo 

'''< 


§£  a 


f 

cd 

g 

n 
^ 


s 


peri 


g  :g 


•    :: 

CQ     ••<     . 


n 


t  !  i  n 


^'ei  '•£  '•! 

11114s 

a  s^gg^l 
f'.fsli  § 

£  phfeow  a 
I 


§ 

IB 

II 

CCCQ 


Fort  Fall 
Fort  Lapwai 

a:  Sac  and  Fox 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


135 


-     ^ 

oo 

2 

o     o. 

COT"                          S 

MM        00 

00 

a 

<NO^ 

cs 

. 

0 

«c2 

CO                    C6 

ti     oo 

t^        rH         »O 

rt 

NCO^I 

s5 

0  § 

11 

S        1        1 

SI 

58 

S    g 

3S^2    § 

gg?        | 

ga° 

3 

Sff 

S55| 

Is 

11 

» 

-5 

• 

f-H 

|I 

|o 

" 

II 

g  s 

i—  l        ^ 

8*  S 

|§S 

2- 

sg 

68g 

i« 

III 

bl 

g        |        g 

3 

§2 

I    § 

!5SSa|    | 

g^  a 

gas 

g 

55 

SS| 

is 

il| 

f-T 

X  t  CL 

s«a 

o  c  « 

03        <N 

s 

•^ 

i 

S 

_:     2 

8    S    2 

S2 

2§» 

SSS3I 

*j* 

3S» 

i 

5°°'S 

S 

^5 

sss 

iH 

^5  1 

—  ;  

-  — 

38*    a 
ug-c    -3 

d      o 

^     ^ 

11 

»S«i 

III 

0 
13 

§  o  o'o 
g-d-e-c 

fe  ;  ;  :ps 

if 

sJsl 
£111 

|^ 

0 

T; 

llli 

«<JPQfs, 

OR        6 

l|     2 

PQo2     fc 

PI   -g 

>>->  -. 

•s-g-a    1 

sfl^1 

s 

3?g£-3 

Zs 

-M-t-  03.0  p, 

!!«s<3 

,  ^^^^^  ^  ii;< 

^ 

segs 
st^ 

,                     ££<;2 

|  ^ 

1 

illi 

..  Sanatorium. 
.  .  Agency  
do  
..  School  

it 
II 

..  School.:.... 
.  .  Sanatorium  . 
..  School  
.  .  Agency  

I  IjMlyj  !*t 

I  illllllll  1  s|a 

:;::;:::::     :   »•-  «£  1 
::::::::::        f'Sl 

i  !  !  i  !  !  i  :  !  i       ^Is 

| 

1 

a 

i 

I 

Fond  du  Lac  
Leech  Lake7  
Pipestone  
Red  Lake  

Vermillion  Lake  .  .  . 
White  Earth  

[ontana  .  .  . 

•           •  o> 

i  il 
Ills  ! 

•—  •___  '—'—    _ 

e 

Genoa  
Winne"bago  

evada... 

Carson  '  
Do  

Fort  McDermitt  
Western  Shoshone  »  

[ew  Mexico... 

fiilMliifiS 

yiilaliiii  esgfs 
li^lolil^  l  ilil 
iraJiliIrS 

<;?;    i££i    $5    5 

-    - 


136 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


1 


--5J  S 


o  10  o  o  o  o  o*      <o      en 

(N  CO  SO  55  rt  rH  r-l         CO         Ui 


C35OO5CO«C       C<« 
i—  t  CO  oo  c5  O       O5 


» 


o  o  o 

--- 


. 

oooBoooo 

-  --- 


"          " 


"S      o  o  o1     o 
§T3-o-d  g     -a 


o    -S^§5 

•S   ^jsa  = «H 

2  Hi!  I 

5     ^03H^  •§     OO^WOf^ 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


137 


S?    2 


IN  I 

Bin  :    •< 


§1 


li! 
1=1 

Cu  ® 


o 
a, 

I 


alue 
ppli 


O  O  O  O 


ue  o 
plies 


ue  of 
plies. 


lue  of 
ions. 


e  of 
ons, 


Value  of 
rations. 


i-c  "T  O  00  CO 

g"5S3Jg 


pssss 


O3  »OCO  «5O 


oTo^oTo'o" 


O  U5  (M 
OS  t>-  I~ 


oo  •*  t>-  «o  10  1 


CO-HOO 
co  o  I-H  i— * 

t-t^^H10 

oT^-c^^ 


^00 

coo 

0 


«M  Oi 

i-  t- 


II 


tOiOTfi-i 


0"OOJ       ' 

^r  -a- 


'' 


138 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 
§ 

ous  supplies. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Able'  rti««hiPH  Value  of 
>oci3d.  ]  led'  supplies. 

gSg      | 
2°         S 

:  :-    8  ::::::: 

:  : 

;  ;  j 

c. 

5       O 

5    S 

3  g 

1 

- 

pa 

»?     . 

1 

1 

"3 
J3 

I 
I 

£ 
I 

3 

0 

ig  Value  of  vr.^^-  Value  of 
.  supplies.  *  ben  supplies.  I 

11  I  i 

r-Tl-H            1-' 

ii 

gs  »  s 

SB  is  !  i  §3 

:  : 

oo 

eo" 

•  i 

SOI 
Bl 

! 

•S  S 
If 

BS      g 

i";  i      i  i 

* 

*~l. 

2 

jj 

li 

III 

S§S1§SRS«S1      § 

IS  S 

1 

g 

Ill 

1 

J 

H 

a 

i-l                                                                O 

CN  t^ 

oo 

CN 

j 

t  labor  equ 

Disabled. 

i"  i 

S8S3S-S3-8S       $ 

SS"3 

i 

CM 

8"S 

«; 

*•§ 

i 

2£ 

8 

oco 

1 

1 

receiving  ration 

for  labor.  Wi 

ii 

i:H,l 

mf! 

v—  . 

!S| 

| 

j 

Indians 

;al.  In  return 

11 

I1    1 

B^ 

i 

oo" 

•  § 

of 

lil 

i 

g 

®  "2 
£f 

p  5 

CS<MrHOO5        O  C^        *OCOCS|        1^- 
r-»                                        CO 

^§     ^ 

i 

i 

sss 

1 

|2 

«!•&* 
K'C 

hH   OJ 

»!• 

1 

i-l        CO 

§  § 

! 

§|| 

f 

> 

1  ;  -sf 

::::::•:  i^;  :: 

jj     ^ 

:    g 

jai 

£»5 

aS|ol  • 

dS     d 

si 

1^1 

H 

I 

si 

? 

pi  j 

SoSfefeoSSj2«MH    | 
1 

Souther 
Ute  Moi 

Florida:  Sei 

II 

j 

is 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


139 


s 

S    <§ 

8 

g^2 

CO  OJ 

I 

:  :~ 

00 
0 

g 

coco 

1 

1 

g  i 

8 

" 

01 

co 

O         O4 

o 

co 

0       0 

= 

i  ; 

0 

s 

r- 

g 

*o 

g    5 

2i§ 

: 

! 

: 

I 

CO 

co 

i  i 

i 

* 

i  s 

||g          ^      § 

s  § 

i 

g 

1 

II 

;   ;    2 

o    -g 

»o 

s 

* 

! 

o« 

s 

CO 

cc 

*    of  of 

;  : 

<O       I^> 

:J23       co    f2 

s 

g 

I 

*••? 

:  :    S 

i  j 

f 

!! 

^-T             of             co" 

§  § 

of 

00 

1 

co"    co"     of  of 

5 

s 

s  a 

s1 

0 

f 

»    S 

2    2SS    8    8 

«-     go 

o 

i 

isa  6i 

§ 

s 

g  s 

23; 

co 

»o      rt<  es  ^      co 
00"     eg" 

S^SISoi    t2    S 
i~-"         co~o"     of     co~ 

Ol                     O4 

r*                    U} 

ooVo 

S 

IT 

OJ 

s 

05Q^H-H          g 

cooc 

• 

?5 

05        OJrt"       i-T 

*  885  | 

rf*  O  i—  *  O  *O        CO       Oi 

S2S838       g 

SiO 
t^ 

1-4         >0 

OiiO  i-HO       t^ 

"""'  1 

'.5 

r-jjf 

co" 

g 

co" 

•    •© 

.    .  •v 

CO 

CO 

to 

IO     > 

:  :  :  : 

:  :  :  fc 

:  :g 

i  i 

OJ 

"5 

s  g 

g 

•    -^ 

j  : 

t-l 

1   :  :  c  : 

:  '  '.  '. 

S  611  | 

|38!|  5  ! 

-f                     V? 

gljg 

oj"o" 

*  1 

O»  i-H  COOJ        "3 

CO  00 

1 

of 

l«»ig«-i 

SSS838       | 

-"" 

'  :- 

SSBS  s 

OOThiO      -S 

w 

O       OO  O        CO 

of   ^r 

00  O  »O  OO        O        ^H 
O  -H  OOO  "O         «3        t^- 

TJ(  •<»<  (N  Tf  ^             0           1C 

co"        o" 

N*      *<* 

of        ~     of 

1111  1 

nil 

llisf  i        1  *  ifllfil  I  fill! 

fcPn      «£•     -g      tt£E££      J      |      £S£££«           -J      £S£&H 

1  1    |  «£|U      ||,| 

1  1  1  i  nil  i  fliif- 

° 


140 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  17.  —  Indians  self-supporting  and  Indians  receiving  rations  and  miscellaneous  supplies  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1916  —  Continued. 

Indians  receiving  miscellaneous  supplies. 

3r.  Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
supplies. 

0 

s  *  §     i 

t—  O       O 

CN  ^       CO 
O* 

§::::: 

s 

co          S          eo 

S 

0 

of  Able-  DiooWpH 
es.  bodied.  ] 

8 

o 

8  :  : 

OS 

O 

oo 

00             g 

::::::«    s  1 
§  :::::: 

2       5      £ 

Total.  In  return  for  lab 

Value  of  TsjiimVioi-  Value 
supplies.  Number-  suppli 

Tf 

0 

s 

003  OS 

8 

00 

o" 

00        °> 
o" 

:::::§:     : 

co         o         co 

Receiving 
supplies. 

•i 

g«s 

S 

g 

-i  s 

8           ""    " 

a     ,     | 

Indians  receiving  rations. 

Without  labor  equivalent. 

Value  of 
rations. 

1 

«o 

5? 

g£>    Sg-g 

8 

CO 

o"    CN" 

g^sS 

o    5 

iQ         W 

co" 

1  S 

f 

S3 
P 

1 
of 

g3S3S§3    S 

53         1 

•*  oo  oo  oo  t~ 

s  s 

Sol 

g 

If 

S 

g 

ii 

I 

1 

9 

oo     o» 

S« 

6 

In  return  for  labor. 

Value  of 
rations.  1 

i 

1 

i 

T 

I    § 

§ 

1 

S  2 

Number. 

I 

s 

s 

:    § 

s 

OS 

0        CO 

i 

' 

3 

o 

Value  of 
rations. 

1 

ooooo 

II 

is 

jl 

cios      el 
o"    of 

li^i 

o      oo 

iO        ^O 

O  i—  *  ^  O 
OS  00  «O  i-l 

§  s 

1 

2^    " 

ffS 

i 

10 

co 

" 

Receiving 
rations. 

oo 

82SS||3  § 

coos      r~ 

Sco1000^ 

s  S 

SSo!" 

oo      JH 

Witt 

us 

3 

eo" 

»ooooio»oo     oo 

10  t--  JO  0  t-  t^  OS        T}< 

OQO       O 

ooo     t^- 

co" 

a 

irsgogoo     o 

ll 
I  '  . 

South  Dakota  

£JJ 

!  i  ;  j  i  ;;;;;;;  i  i  ;|  i  1  i  1 

S^'  :•=  »  •  ;           TS          :::::::          :.§::.    g 
(Bgac;^  :•          ^o      ;      i^t^::;:         ^  :g®  :  •    ^ 

1  1  |                         f 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


141 


65333—16 10 


142 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I 

•I 


* 


ss  «  a 


8S8 


2  1 


* 


s 


i! 


$ 


toooec  o 


•aS 


CD          •, 

M 


I 

I 

I 


II 


^       t>- 

I  s 


I'S   •  fe 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


143 


i-l  (N 


§O5  C<l  C 
^^ 


:    g 


coos  O      oo 


CO  CO  <N  0>       00 


:2 


S"<J<CS  »-!  ^J" 
c<i  co  oo  10 

t*»  CO  t*-  i— * 


:  :  :S 


O  CO  O  >O  O  O  b« 

t^  C5  •*  t^  O  O  TH 


:|Ill"l 

i^d^^ss 


^OM^?-rt?aj 


«S       «      «*! 


ul 


£  I 


il 


Mm  i  i 

8  77    P<  S3  r      -M   O  •»-»  X         *g 

«*•-„-,*«*,      o     I 


o-S2 

552 


I 


144 


m 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

3g8S! 


fids  g- 
if -Si' 


It] 

s  * 


a?i, 

gll: 


^ 


3 


B    55 


S5  :  : 


!^t^i5S^ 

CO  tO  »-( 


m 


•  t^» 


S::    | 


!3S 


00  OO  rH  -H  I 


00500 


000000000 


i-HCO^<'OOOOO 


i^ 

t>.iOiO^COO5^CCi—4lO 
^H  <N  (M  OO  rH  tH  CO         (NT-H 


New  York: 
North  Carol 


SilJI 


B 
T 
i 
le 


I  o-cJ    !    •  o>     r. 

iSS^Sg    I 


5  £^S   a  sg,i§«f§*afeis  ^ 
2    fefelsg    §    g^-2^2l§^§l^j§  ^ 

S       PHr^OT&HO)     '•§       OOWOO^irXirtoQOQCQW 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


145 


ocT  co"  <*«" 


10  ift  *"-*  r>- 

os  o  oo  co 

-0  1^  00  C 

oo"  of  TjTco" 


SOO  CO  S 
o  ^  co 
^  t>.      .,   ^ 


00 


Oi     !>. 
^     CO 

CO      r-l 


S  2 


t»  C  -H 
.0--C-* 
O  CO^l 


'-iJ  T!< 

co  ^ 


SI 


O  S  O  iO        <N 


eo-oo 


co  oo  co  -M  t^  ^  o 


co-oo 


S3S 


u^< 


CO  CO  00  TJ<  O  d        t^ 

r-i  o?  ei  02  P-  10      •«* 


5  s 


ow 


r-<  OO          CO 


I  ii 


r-lrH         CO-* 


a*  1-1  coco 


OOOOi-H 

,H  co  2- 


183  i|88 

t>,0   M  «> 

-  iff! 
His 


Cherokee  Nati 
Chickasaw  Na 


111     : 
III     I 

igl  : 
111  1 

OOOT 


Scatte 
gon 


S^  :•§«::: 

QJ  0>  D  £  W)    .     .     . 

c  £  gcq^-a  J  fl 


Shivwits 
Uintali  a 
Sa.t  Lak 


i  f 

H 

g  s 
^  .a 
St^s 

gas 


146 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


t! 

if 


•- 


SIP 


Sill. 


e 

It 


l*l 

2.23 


i          *rb 

Ig^l 


CO  ^*  i"H  rH        CO 


•I   p 


1^5 


I  1 


fill 

•I 


w  S,O  a 

i  8 11 

lit! 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


147 


1 

I 

go! 

#     Si 

1 

11 

S 

£ 

11    < 

S        3 

5 

is 

fg 

""^cT 

> 

So 

00 

S        o 

•X; 
O  C 

1-1  1 

I 

1 

t  less  than  the 
ince  during  thi 

is  some'vha 
id  in  attendi 

I! 

OS  g 

^ffl 

03  £j 

lj 

03  fl 

li 

jn  O 

111 

1 

||t 

fe 

III 

I 

ir*0^ 

m 
P 

l|| 

1 

SB 

a 

®   OT*t 

in 

"S 

S 

m™  § 

1 

M 

Sis 

1 

||| 

1 

0        ? 

1! 

2   c 

w       S 

O        0 

1 

1  1 

III 

1  ! 

| 

! 
\ 

|S| 

fci 

1 

, 

S3® 

1  1 

D 

1 

j: 

| 

§«? 

"    a 

bO 

0 

t 

i 

2  ^  S 

sa    i 

i         .a 

5 

C 

c 

i 
| 

"^5  S 

Si  1 

>      IS 

H«S 

1 

1 

s 

! 

g°^ 

Indian  children  ineligi 

Tntal  TnHfan  r>M 

Government  schools: 
Nonreservation  bo 
Rft<sflrvat.ion  hoard 

Day  

Mission  schools: 

Prmtra.pt  hnnrrlinp 

Noncontract  — 
Boarding  

Day  

Private  schools:  Contr 

V 

\ 

c 
"c 
w      ^ 

11 

3  * 

3 

3 

DM 

S 

1 

.1 

'! 

? 

! 

i 
| 

f 
5 
5 

1  Includes  eligible 
number,  besause  in  th 
school  year,  and  in  a  fi 

148 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 

year  ended  June  80,  1916. 


Superintendcncies  and  nair.es  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Aver  are 
enroll- 
ircnt.' 

Average 
attend- 
ance.2 

Class  of  school. 

Grand  total                       .  ... 

33  094 

32  780 

28  842 

25,302.8 

Arizora                                   

5.275 

5.  076 

4  6C9 

4.159.4 

Camp  Verde  superintendency  — 

GO 

65 

'  54 

47.3 

Camp  Verde 

30 

30 

25 

22.0 

Dav 

Clarksdale  

30 

35 

29 

25.3 

"Do. 

Colorado  River  superintendency. 

280~ 

308~ 

"!         277" 

2GlTo~ 

Colorado  River 

80 

108 

91 

85.0 

Reservation  boarding 

Fort  Mohave  

200 

200 

186 

176.0 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Fort  Apache  superintendency  .  .  . 

372 

382 

3c8 

329.2 

Fort  Apache 

200 

228 

214 

204.  9 

Reservation  boarding 

Canon                  

42 

39 

35 

30.0 

Day 

Cibeoue 

50 

32 

31 

25.3 

Do       R»    <*•    s*» 

Fast  Fork      

40 

43 

41 

38.0 

Do.  CT  PT*?TT-*" 

Cib~ecuc                         

20 

20 

17 

14.0 

Mission     day  T  Fvangelica) 

Fast  Fork                  

20 

20 

20 

17.0 

Lutheran.     & 
Do 

Havasupai             

35 

27 

26 

21.8 

Day 

Kaibab 

22 

17 

15 

12.3 

Do 

88 

91 

90 

86  0 

308 

09 

08 

C4.9 

Reservation  boarding 

To'chaco              

20 

22 

22 

21.1 

Mission  boarding*  independ- 

ent. 

Moqui  supcrintendency 

£91 

371 

329 

298  0 

Moqui 

4  125 

Reservation  boarding 

Chi  monovv  

55 

42 

37 

34.0 

Day 

Hoteville-Bacabi     

65 

40 

34 

30.7 

Do 

Oraibi 

156 

86 

77 

67  3 

Do 

Polarca 

100 

118 

108 

99.0 

Do 

Second  Mesa 

90 

85 

73 

67  0 

Do 

Navajo  superintendency 

926 

844 

758 

628  4 

Navaio                        

300 

277 

210 

131.9 

Reservation  boarding 

Chin  Lice 

166 

116 

114 

105  0 

Do 

Tohatchi              • 

150 

165 

151 

145  4 

Do 

Corn^plds 

25 

30 

28 

21  0 

Dav 

Luki  Chuki 

60 

21 

21 

14  0 

bo 

Ganado  

35 

40 

39 

36.9 

Mission  day;  Presbvterian. 

Rehoboth 

40 

68 

68 

60  5 

Mission  boarding'  Christian 

St  Michael's  

150 

127 

127 

113  7 

Reformed.                       ( 
Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Phoenix         

700 

780 

761 

708  4 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Pima  suporintendency 

847 

843 

778 

695  9 

Pima 

218 

253 

233 

222  0 

Reservation  boarding 

Blackwater  

36 

40 

39 

30  0 

Dav 

Cdsa  Blanca 

40 

83 

55 

45  8 

Do 

CM'iChuischu 

40 

g 

g 

7  9 

Do 

Cock  ebur 

40 

13 

13 

8  2 

Do 

GilaBend  

30 

12 

11 

6  8 

Do 

Gila  Crossing 

40 

45 

40 

32  7 

Do 

Maricopa 

40 

^8 

38 

36  3 

Do 

Sacaton  (Pima)  

28 

38 

30 

21  8 

Do 

Santan 

40 

31 

31 

22  7 

Do 

St.  Ann's  (Guadalupe)  
St.  John's 

35 

2  <5 

24 
232 

24 
232 

17.0 
227  0 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 
Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

St.  Michael's  

25 

25 

23 

17  7 

Mission  day  Catholic 

1  The  average  enrollment  is  computed  by  adding  the  total  enrollment  for  the  four  quarters  and  dividing 

2  The  decrease  in  attendance  is  due  to  a  different  method  of  computation.     Formerly  the  average  at 
tendance  was  the  average  o  f  the  three  quarters  having  the  greatest  attendance.    This  year's  attendance  has 
been  comouteci  for  10  moat  is,  inMucLng  September,  when  the  attendance  is  always  small. 

3  In  1917  the  capacity  will  be  1(53. 
*  Not  in  operation. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


149 


TABLE  19. — Location)  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
irent. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona  —  Continued. 
Rice  Station  

216 

233 

216 

199  7 

Reservation  boarding 

Salt  River  superintendency  .  .  .  . 

1.58 

147 

129 

99  4 

Salt  River       

88 

70 

68 

52  3 

Dav 

Camp  McDowell 

40 

43 

32 

26  7 

Do 

Lehi  

30 

34 

29 

20  4 

Do 

San  Carlos  superintendency  

165 

219 

183 

164  8 

Do 

San  Carlos 

100 

125 

106 

93  5 

Do 

Bvlas               

40 

64 

49 

45  6 

Do 

Rice 

25 

30 

28 

25  7 

Lutheran. 

San  Xavier  superintendency  

420 

410 

385 

306.5 

San  Xavier  

155 

128 

107 

95  5 

Dav 

Tucson              .  .         . 

35 

33 

29 

21   1 

Do 

30 

35 

35 

25  8 

St  Anthony's  

30 

44 

44 

32  2 

Do 

San  Miguel 

20 

22 

22 

17  0 

Do 

San  Solano     

20 

20 

20 

14  9 

Do 

Tucson  Mission 

130 

128 

128 

100  0 

rian. 

Truxton  Canon  

140 

100 

97 

g«5  4 

Western  Navajo  superintendency 

255 

239 

213 

204.3 

Western  Navajo 

1  190 

154 

139 

13^  0 

Do 

Marsh  Pass  „  

30 

33 

31 

30  6 

Do 

Moencopi. 

35 

52 

43 

38  7 

California                 

1  982 

2  013 

1  724 

1  546  6 

Bishop  superinteridency 

140 

134 

115 

103  0 

Bishop    

60 

68 

59 

52  8 

Do 

Big  Pine 

30 

21 

19 

16  6 

Do 

•   Independence  

20 

14 

12 

9  9 

Do 

Pine  Creek 

30 

31 

25 

23  7 

Do 

Campo 

30 

24 

22 

19  9 

Do 

Fort  Bidwell  superintendency.  .  . 

160 

132 

110 

101.1 

Fort  Bidwell  

98 

78 

69 

66  0 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Alturas. 

24 

20 

13 

11  4 

Dav                                 < 

Likely  

20 

22 

18 

14  6 

Do 

Lookout  

18 

12 

10 

9  1 

Do 

Fort  Yuma  superintendency  

220~ 

200" 

179~ 

i5o7o~ 

Fort  Yuma  

180 

183 

164 

137  3 

Reservation  boarding 

Cocopah 

40 

17 

15 

12  7 

Dav 

Greenville  

90 

97 

75 

70  7 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Hoopa  Valley 

165 

202 

168 

153  7 

Malki    superinten  dene  y—  S  t. 
Boniface. 
Pala  superintendency  

100 

98 

95 

86 

95 
63 

80.0 
50  3 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Pala  

30 

25 

21 

18.1 

Dav. 

Capitan  Grande  .  . 

24 

16 

14 

12  5 

Do 

La  Jolla 

30 

13 

13 

9  8 

Do 

Rincon  

14 

32 

15 

9.9 

Do 

Round  Valley  superintendency,. 

153 

116 

91 

74.7 

Round  Valley 

80 

43 

35 

29  7 

Do 

Manchester... 

18 

17 

11 

6.2 

Do. 

'  '  Ukiah      * 

25 

25 

22 

1    18  5 

Do 

Upper  Lake  

30 

31 

23 

20.3 

Do. 

1917  capacity,  308. 


150 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Snperintendencies  and  natres  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

A\erare 
enroll- 
ment. 

A^era^e 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Califorr  to—  Continued. 

650 

795 

688 

655  8 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Soboba  superintendency  

90 

46 

45 

38.8 

Cahuilla 

30 

|| 

11 

9  6 

Day 

Mesa  Grande        

30 

15 

15 

14  2 

Do 

Volcan  

30 

20 

19 

J5.0 

Do. 

Tule  River  superintendency  

86~ 

86 

73 

48.6 

Tule  River             

30 

19 

16 

10.2 

Do. 

32 

34 

28 

18  5 

Do 

Burrough             

24 

33 

29 

19.9 

Do. 

Colorado  

105 

106 

99 

91.1 

Southern  Ute  superintendency.  . 

80 

81 

75 

• 
71.6 

<* 

Southern  Ute 

50 

65 

59 

57  5 

Reservation  boarding 

Allen                    

30 

16 

16 

14.1 

Day. 

Ute  Mountain      

25 

25 

24 

19.5 

•    Do. 

Idaho  -  

640 

541 

475 

389.8 

Coeur  d'Alene  superintendency.. 

140~ 

12T 

119 

9J.7 

Kalispel  

30 

34 

31 

14.6 

Do. 

Kootenai             

30 

29 

28 

26.7 

Do. 

De  Sinet 

80 

60 

60 

52.4 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Hall  superintendency  .  . 

270 

20J 

173 

160.1 

Fort  Hall                       

200 

159 

130 

125.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Skull  Valley  

20 

14 

11 

9.1 

Day. 

Good  Shepherd  .        

30 

19 

19 

16.5 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Presbyterian  Mission 

20 

11 

11 

9  0 

Mission  day;  Presbyterian. 

Fort  Lapwai  superintendency  .  .  . 

233 

215 

183 

13o.O 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium  — 

80 
50 

143 
23 

118 
16 

92.0 
13.2 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 

St  Joseph's           .        

100 

49 

49 

30.8 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Iowa               "              

150 

119 

113 

97.5 

Sac  and  Fox  superintendency.  .  . 

150 

119 

113 

97.5 

Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium  
Fox 

80 
40 

57 
28 

57 
25 

57.0 
19.2 

Reservation  boarding. 
Dav. 

Mesquakie  

39 

31 

31 

21.3 

Do. 

Kansas  

811 

962 

839 

762.4 

Haskell 

TOO" 

838 

733 

677  2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kickapoo  superintendency  

111 

124 

106 

85.2 

K  ickapoo  

71 

89 

80 

75.3 

Reservation  boarding. 

Great  Nemaha   .            ... 

40 

33 

26 

9.9 

Dav. 

Michigan                     

731 

667 

625 

585.1 

Bay  Mills 

32 

40 

33 

20  6 

Do 

Mackinac  superintendency  

352 

261 

251 

225  5 

Baraga  (Holy  Name)  

152 

97 

95 

72.2 

Mission  boarding  and  day? 

Harbor  Springs  (Holy  Child- 
hood). 

200 

164 

156 

153.3 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Mount  Pleasant  

350 

366 

341 

339.0 

Nonreservfttion  boarding. 

Minnesota  

1  367 

1,377 

1,195 

1  039.1 

Cass  Lake 

40 

47 

42 

38  9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fond  du  Lac  superintendency.  .  . 

74 

56 

46 

27.3 

Fond  du  Lac  

40 

20 

18 

13.3 

Day. 

Norman  town         ... 

34 

36 

28 

14.0 

Do. 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


151 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.t  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ir.ent. 

A\  erage 
enroll- 
rr.cnt. 

Averare 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Minnesota—  Cor.tined. 
Grand  Portage  

20 

29 

23 

16.0 

Day. 

Leech  Lake  superintendency  

104 

84 

73 

57.9 

Leech  Lake  .  .              

180 

69 

61 

51.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Sugar  Point 

24 

15 

12 

6  1 

I>av. 

Nett  Lake 

60 

56 

40 

28.5 

Do. 

Pipestone  superintendency 

248 

235 

220 

204  7 

Pipestone 

212 

215 

201 

192  5 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Birch  Coolev  

36 

20 

19 

12.2 

Day. 

Red  Lake  superintendency  

188 

268 

226 

198.3 

Red  Lake 

75 

112 

85 

76  0 

Reservation  boarding 

Cross  Lake  

43 

54 

50 

50.0 

Do. 

St.  Mary's 

70 

102 

91 

72  3 

Contract  mission  boarding* 

Catholic. 

Vermillion  Lake  

110 

139 

121 

109.2 

Reservation  jjoarding. 

White  Earth  superintendency  .  .  . 

523 

463 

401 

358.3 

White  Earth  

250 

251 

217 

198.6 

Do. 

Elbow  Lake 

30 

20 

10 

12  3 

Day. 

Pine  Point  

53 

31 

23 

It.  2 

Do. 

Round  Lake 

30 

23 

18 

12  3 

Do. 

Twin  Lake  

30 

3-3 

31 

21.  9 

Do. 

St.  Benedict's 

130 

103 

99 

96.0 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Montana  ...               .  . 

1,838 

1,498 

1,295 

1,098.7 

Blackfeet  superin  tendency... 

349 

301 

322 

277.6 

Blackfeet      .     ...         ... 

144 

173 

143 

124.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Heart  Butte  

30 

29 

29 

23.9 

Day. 

Old  Agency  Badger  Creek.  .. 
Holy  Family 

30 
145 

39 
120 

32 
118 

28.2 
101  1 

Do. 
Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Crow  superintendency 

442 

288 

255 

221.9 

Crow 

100 

55 

47 

42  5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Prvor  Creek  

47 

47 

44 

42.5 

Black  Lodge 

30 

31 

28 

20.6 

Mission  dav;  American  Mis* 

Lodge  Grass 

50 

30 

27 

20.5 

sbnary  Society. 
Mission  dav;  Baptist. 

Reno  

35 

33 

28 

22.3 

Mission  day;  American  Mis- 

St. Ann's 

25 

21 

20 

16  2 

sionary  Society. 
Mission  dav  Catholic 

San  Xavier  

125 

58 

51 

48.5 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic. 

Wyola 

30 

13 

10 

8  8 

Mission  day  Baptist. 

Flathead   superintendency—  St. 
Ignatius. 
Fort  Belknap  superintendency  .  . 

300 
251 

147 
225 

132 

177 

120.7 
149.1 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Belknap...    . 

51 

92 

65 

60.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Lodge  Polo 

40 

34 

27 

18  0 

Day. 

St.  Paul's   

160 

99 

85 

70.3 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Peck  superintendency  

280 

255 

.    224 

192.3 

Fort  Peck... 

120 

103 

94 

90.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

No.  1 

30 

25 

20 

16.0 

Day. 

No.  2... 

30 

38 

25 

15.4 

Do. 

No.  3 

30 

16 

13 

11.8 

Do. 

No.  4  

30 

28 

27 

21.7 

Do. 

Wolf  Point  

40 

45 

45 

37.2 

Mission  boarding  and  day; 

Presbyterian. 

Tongue  River  superintendency.  . 

216 

222 

185 

137.1 

Tongue  River     ... 

69 

90 

65 

51.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Birney  

47 

47 

41 

32.2 

Day. 

Lamedeer  

40 

43 

37 

24.2 

Do. 

St.  Labre's 

60 

42 

42 

29.3 

Contract  mission  boarding* 

Catholic. 

1917  capacity,  116. 


152 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Nebraska                 

647 

590 

526 

504.3 

Genoa                 

400 

418~ 

375~ 

371.3 

Non  reservation  boarding. 

Santeo  s'iperintendency  —  San  tee 
Normal  Training. 
Winnebago    s'iperintendency— 
St.  Augustine. 

Nevada 

125 
122 

075 

138 
34 

634 

117 
34 

570 

101.0 
32.0 

507.0 

Mission  boarding  and  day; 
Congregational. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Carson                                .  . 

286 

287 

273 

26P.O 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Falton  superintendency 

65 

37 

36 

25.1 

Fallon  

40 

20 

19 

10.8 

Day. 

Lovelocks              

25 

17 

17 

14.3 

Do. 

Fort  Mc.T>ermitt          

80 

59 

53 

46.9 

Do. 

Moapa  River 

20 

17 

14 

13  0 

Do. 

Nevada  suporintendencv  

95 

103 

89 

77.4 

Nevada  

70 

84 

73 

64.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wadsworth 

25 

19 

16 

13.4 

Dav. 

Walker  River 

60~ 

43 

32~ 

23.5 

Do. 

Western  Shashone  superintend- 
ency. 

69 

88 

73 

52.1 

No  1 

35 

37 

31 

20.8 

Do. 

No  2 

34 

51 

42 

31  3 

Do. 

New  Mexico   • 

2  802 

2,977 

2,726 

2  511  2 

Alb'trmerque 

400 

475 

438 

423  8 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Jicarilla  ...     .                

108 

117 

113 

102.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Mes^alero  . 

100 

102 

101 

87  7 

Do. 

Pueblo  Bonito  

180 

157 

140 

132.  6 

Do. 

Pueblo  Day  School  superintend- 
ency. 

1,166 

1,199 

1,067 

924.5 

Albuquercmo— 
Acomita            

32 

57 

49 

37.6 

Day. 

Encinal 

30 

23 

21 

17  8 

Do. 

Isleta  

120 

121 

116 

98.0 

Do. 

I  ag'ina               •" 

31 

60 

48 

3Q  3 

Do. 

McCarty  

38 

31 

29 

23.6 

Do. 

Mesita 

38 

32 

30 

28.3 

Do. 

Paguate  

60 

79 

70 

61.2 

Do. 

Paraie    

20 

39 

33 

28.9 

Do. 

San  Felipe 

60 

54 

53 

4*  7 

Do. 

Seatna  

28 

37 

33 

29.7 

Do. 

Bernalillo    ' 

125 

116 

108 

102.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Santa  Fe— 
Coehiti     

28 

27 

21 

18.4 

Day. 

Jemez 

120 

80 

72 

52  6 

Do. 

Picnris  

24 

22 

20 

18.6 

Do. 

San  Ildefonso. 

40 

21 

16 

14.0 

Do. 

San  Juan 

70 

50 

43 

38  4 

Do. 

Santa  Clara  

40 

47 

38 

27.1 

Do. 

Santa  Domingo 

50 

71 

57 

56.8 

Do. 

Sia  

30 

18 

16 

13.5 

Do. 

Taos    . 

70 

96 

76 

60.5 

Do. 

Jemez 

34 

12 

12 

8  5 

Mission  day. 

St.  Catherine's  

75 

106 

106 

102.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

San  Juan  superintendency  

270 

214 

190 

179.0 

San  Juan 

150 

214 

190 

179.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Aneth 

i  40 

1)0. 

Toadlena  

1  80 

Do. 

Santa  Fe  

3">0 

410 

384 

377.6 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Zuni  superintendency  

228 

303 

293 

283.2 

Zuni 

80 

116 

114 

112  5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do  

118 

150 

143 

138.7 

Day. 

Christian  Reformed.. 

30 

37 

36 

32.0 

Mission  day;  Christian  Re- 

formed. 

Not  in  operation. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


153 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

North  Carolina  

310 

358 

307 

231.9 

Cherokee  superintendency 

310 

358 

307 

231.9 

Cherokee     .  .        .           .  .. 

160 

253 

221 

189.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Big  Cove 

40 

23 

19 

9.9 

Day. 

Birdtown  

40 

35 

28 

15.5 

Do. 

Little  Snowbird 

30 

24 

18 

8.5 

Do. 

Snow  Bird  Gap  

40 

23 

21 

12.0 

Do. 

North  Dakota 

1,  509 

1,747 

1,458 

1,  206.  1 

Bismarck 

80 

111 

98 

87.5 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Fort  Berthold  superintendency.  . 

184 

162 

132 

101.2 

Fort  Berthold 

75 

79 

58 

41.1 

Reservation  boarding 

No.  1  

30 

21 

19 

12.0 

Dav. 

No.  2 

36 

22 

20 

17.9 

'Do. 

No.3  

30 

28 

23 

20.2 

Do. 

Congregational  

13 

12 

12 

10.0 

Mission  boarding;  Congrega- 
tional. 

Fort  Totten 

323 

404 

331 

285.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Standing  Rock  superintendency. 

562 

569 

504 

443.6 

Standing  Rock  

202 

229 

207 

195.2 

Do. 

Martin  Kenel.  . 

100 

106 

95 

83.3 

Do. 

Bullhead 

40 

40 

32 

26.6 

Day. 

Cannon  Ball  
Grand  River 

40 
30 

34 

24 

31 
21 

21.7 
16.0 

Do. 
Do. 

Little  Oak  Creek  
Porcupine 

40 
24 

31 
12 

26 
10 

20.2 
8.2 

Do. 
Do. 

No.  1  

20 

11 

11 

10.0 

Do. 

St.  Elizabeth's  .. 

50 

65 

54 

50.6 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

Standing  Rock  Mission  

16 

17 

17 

11.8 

Mission  boarding. 

Turtle       Mountain       superin- 
tendency 

160 

297 

203 

119.9 

No  1 

40 

67 

44 

31.0 

Day 

No.  2  

30 

70 

48 

26.0 

Do. 

No  3 

30 

35 

30 

16.3 

Do. 

No.  4... 

30 

76 

52 

34.6 

Do. 

No  5 

30 

49 

29 

12.0 

Do. 

Wahpeton 

200 

204 

187 

168.4 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Oklahoma  

4,196 

4,345 

3,793 

3,445.5 

Cantonment  

90 

115 

85 

74  A 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  super- 
intendency. 

195 

167 

154 

151.5 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

150 

135 

130 

127.7 

Do. 

St.  Luke's  T 

45 

32 

24 

23.8 

Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Chilocco  I  

500 

657 

585 

530.1 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kiowa  superintendency 

683 

682 

620 

563.3 

Anadarko 

110 

158 

141 

124.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Sill  

160 

188 

178 

•  169.8 

Do. 

Rainy  Mountain 

155 

179 

153 

140.6 

Do. 

Riverside 

168 

123 

118 

105.3 

Do. 

Cache  Creek  

50 

14 

10 

9.7 

Mission  boarding;  Reformed 

Red  Stone  

40 

20 

20 

13.9 

Presbyterian. 
Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Osage  superintendency 

190 

197 

165 

133.5 

Osage 

115 

151 

132 

109.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

St   Louis's 

75 

46 

33 

24.3 

Contract  mission  boarding' 

Catholic. 

Otoe  

80 

67 

63 

62.9 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pawnee  

100 

82 

75 

72.8 

Do. 

Ponca 

90 

106 

101 

93  0 

Do. 

Red  Moon     

65 

29 

28 

20.5 

Day. 

Sac  and  Fox... 

80 

78 

67 

59.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

154 


COMMISSIONER  OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendences  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity, 
mm 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Averare 
enroll- 
rrent. 

A^  era^e 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Oklahoma—  Continued  . 
Seger    

79 

103 

89 

83.8 

Reservation  boarding. 

Seneca  superintendency  

100 

185 

172 

159.8 

Seneca  .f  

100 

147 

134 

125.  2 

Do. 

St  Mary's 

(i) 

38 

38 

34  6 

Contract,  mission  boarding' 

Catholic. 

Shawnee  superintendency  

310 

283 

240 

207.7 

Shawnee  

no 

141 

117 

97.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Benedict's) 
Sacred  Heart  (St.  Mary's)... 

100 
100 

50 
92 

48 
75 

40.0 
70.7 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Total,  western  Oklahoma.. 

2,562 

2,  751 

2,444 

2.212.8 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 

1  634 

1  594 

1  349 

1  232  7 

Cherokee  Nation—  Cherokee 
Orphan  School. 
Creek  Nation 

110 
327 

89 
397 

80 
342 

69.4 
314.0 

Tribal  boarding. 

Fuchee    

100 

129 

115 

103.7 

Do. 

Fufaula 

112 

124 

115 

110  5 

Do. 

Nuyaka     

115 

144 

112 

99.8 

Do. 

Chickasaw  Nation  

87 

98 

81 

70.9 

Co  lins  Institute  

52 

83 

67 

58.2 

Do. 

El  Meta  Bond  College.  .  . 
Choctaw  Nation  

35 
550 

15 

598 

14 
501 

12.7 
471.4 

Private  boarding. 

Armstrong  Male  Acad- 
emy. 
Jones  Male  Academy  
Tuskahoma  A  cademy  .  .  . 
Wheelock  A  cademy  
Old  Goodland 

120 

100 
110 
100 
80 

138 

129 
138 
111 
33 

110 

107 
115 
98 
27 

99.6 

98.5 
106.9 
97.7 
24  8 

Tribal  boarding. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Presbyte- 

St. Agnes  Mission 

40 

49 

44 

"43.9 

rian. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Chicka^aw     and     Choctaw 
Nation 

460 

270 

238 

212  0 

Murray  School  of  Agri- 
culture. 
Oklahoma  Presbyterian 
College. 
St.  Agnes  Academy.  .   . 

150 
50 
160 

50 
51 

95 

46 
41 
86 

35.0 
37.2 
76.8 

Mission  boarding;  private. 

Mission  boarding;  Presbyte- 
rian. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Flizabeth's  

70 

59 

54 

52.3 

Do. 

St.  Joseph's  

30 

15 

11 

10.7 

Do. 

Seminole       Nation—  Meku- 
sukey. 

Oregon  

100 
1  355 

142 
1,230 

107 
1,029 

95.0 
884.3 

Tribal  boarding. 

Klamath  superintendency  

262 

227 

163 

136.2 

Klamath 

112 

128 

86 

74  2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Mo  loc  Point 

30 

23 

16 

11.0 

Day. 

Yainax 

30 

19 

18 

12  3 

Do. 

No.  1... 

30 

24 

18 

17.3 

Do. 

No  2  . 

30 

13 

9 

7.2 

Do. 

No  3 

30 

20 

16 

14  2 

Do. 

Salem 

650 

564 

498 

441  3 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Siletz  superintendency  

70 

52 

41 

27.9 

Siletz 

50 

37 

29 

17  0 

Dav 

Upper  Farm     

20 

15 

12 

10.9 

Do. 

Umatilla  superintendency  

243 

233 

209 

171.6 

Umatilla     .  . 

93 

125 

101 

94  0 

Reservation  boarding. 

St.  Andrew's  (Kate  Drexel).  . 

150 

108 

108 

77.6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

1  Capacity  not  reported. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


155 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1916— Continued . 


Superintendences  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity, 
mm 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Oregon—  Continued  . 
Warm  Springs  superintendency.  . 

130 

154 

118 

107.3 

Warm  Springs 

100 

121 

97 

94  1 

Simnasho     

30 

33 

21 

13  2 

Dav 

Pennsylvania*  Carlisle  

757 

814 

705 

452  1 

Nonreservation  boarding 

South  Dakota  

4,136 

3,963 

3,364 

2  906.2 

Cheyenne  River  superintenden  cy 

242 

249 

195 

160.0 

Chevenne  River 

180 

169 

139 

128  2 

No.  2  

20 

33 

18 

11  8 

Dav 

No  7 

22 

18 

15 

11  6 

Do 

No.  8  

20 

29 

23 

8.4 

Do 

Crow  Creek  superintendency.  .  .. 

157 

147 

131 

121.4 

Crow  Creek 

82 

90 

82 

76  8 

Immaculate  Conception  

75 

57 

49 

44.6 

Contract  mission  boarding; 
Catholic. 

Flandreau    .         .  .            .  . 

360 

429 

379 

341  2 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Lower  Brule 

100 

73 

67 

65  8 

Pierre  

250 

261 

234 

216  4 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Pine  Ridge  superintendency  

1,273 

1,117 

917 

747.8 

Pine  Ridge 

210 

274 

218 

188  8 

No.  1...                    ....*.... 

25 

32 

28 

20  7 

Dav 

No.  3  

23 

10 

9 

6  0 

Do 

No  4 

30 

23 

20 

18  5 

Do 

No.  5  

30 

45 

39 

31  6 

Do 

No  6 

30 

23 

21 

18  4 

Do 

No.  7.  . 

33 

33 

27 

20  5 

Do 

No  8 

33 

10 

7 

5  0 

Do 

No.9  

30 

24 

22 

18  9 

Do 

No.  10    .  . 

33 

20 

15 

10  8 

Do 

No  11 

30 

15 

12 

10  2 

Do 

No.  12  

30 

11 

9 

7  0 

Do 

No  13 

24 

13 

12 

9  0 

Do 

No.  14  

22 

15 

13 

7  e 

Do 

No  15 

24 

21 

19 

14  0 

Do 

No.  16... 

36 

25 

18 

9  0 

Do 

No.  17  ... 

30 

22 

18 

14  3 

Do 

No  18 

33 

29 

23 

17  7 

Do 

No.  19  

30 

32 

22 

18  7 

Do 

No  20 

24 

21 

15 

12  4 

Do 

No.  21... 

30 

20 

14 

9  6 

Do 

No  22 

27 

20 

14 

6  9 

Do 

No.  23... 

30 

19 

17 

14  0 

Do 

No.  24  ... 

33 

38 

27 

17  4 

Do 

No.  25  

30 

20 

15 

12.0 

Do 

No.  2f>.;  .    ..    . 

30 

22 

19 

16  3 

Do 

No  27 

20 

13 

13 

11  3 

Do 

No.  28... 

23 

13 

11 

9  0 

Do 

No.  29 

30 

11 

10 

7  g 

Do 

No.  30  

20 

14 

13 

7.2 

Do 

Holy  Rosary  

240 

229 

197 

177.2 

Contract  mission  boarding* 

Catholic. 

Rapid  City  . 

300 

290 

251 

249  7 

Rosebud  superintendence     . 

1  146 

1  016 

878 

724  8 

Rosebud 

200 

246 

224 

218  2 

Big  White  River 

35 

14 

13 

10  8 

Dav 

Black  Pipe 

20 

25 

24 

21  1 

Do 

.     Bull  Creek  

32 

15 

11 

9.6 

Do 

Corn  Creek  

40 

23 

15 

11  8 

Do 

Cut  Meat 

24 

19 

17 

14  7 

Do 

He  Dog's  Camp  

27 

29 

24 

18.9 

Do 

Ironwood  . 

24 

23 

19 

15  9 

Do 

Little  Crow's  Camp  

26 

16 

15 

12.9 

Do 

Little  White  River 

26 

g 

g 

7  2 

Do 

Lower  Cut  Meat 

27 

21 

15 

13  2 

Do 

Milk's  Camp  

29 

23 

22 

17.3 

Do 

Oak  Creek.., 

26 

23 

22 

19.0 

Do. 

156 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  SO,  1916— Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Averare 
enroll- 
ment. 

Averaee 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South  Dakota—  Continued. 
Rose^ui  superintendency--  Con. 
Pine  Creek           

25 

26 

20 

14.0 

Day. 

Red  Leaf 

23 

27 

14 

9.9 

Do. 

Ring  Thunder  

23 

11 

9 

7.8 

Do. 

Rosebud 

25 

27 

21 

15.9 

Do. 

Spring  Creek  

.  26 

23 

16 

14.4 

Do. 

Unner  Cut  Meat  . 

21 

30 

18 

13.0 

Do. 

Whirlwind  Soldier 

26 

15 

12 

9.9 

Do. 

White  Lake  

19 

14 

12 

10.6 

Do. 

White  Thunder 

27 

16 

12 

10.2 

Do. 

St  Mary's    1  

70 

53 

53 

51.0 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

St  Francis's 

325 

289 

262 

177.5 

Contract  mission  boarding; 

Sisseton 

133 

105 

149 

===== 
145.0 

Catholic. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Springfield               

60 

91 

67 

56.6 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Yankton  

115 

125 

96 

77.5 

Reservation  boarding. 

Utah 

137 

130 

,n 

100.7 

Ooshute                     

30 

38 

32 

32.0 

Day. 

Shivwits 

40 

25 

22 

14.7 

Do. 

Uintah               

67 

67 

57 

54.0 

Reservation  boarding. 

i 
Washington  ...  .  

1  562 

1,553 

1,303 

1,095.7 

ColviHe  superintendency 

380 

308 

264 

202.6 

No  1 

25 

23 

17 

13.2 

Day. 

No  3 

30 

40 

33 

26.6 

Do. 

No  4 

30 

43 

33 

23.0 

Do. 

No  5 

30 

29 

26 

21.9 

Do. 

No  6 

25 

34 

28 

15.6 

Do. 

No  7 

25 

5 

4 

2.8 

Do. 

No  9  

25 

23 

22 

20.5 

Do. 

Sacred  Heart 

90 

33 

29 

24.1 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St  Mary's  

100 

78 

72 

54.9 

Do. 

Cushman  superintendency 

515 

571 

446 

391.9 

Cushman 

350 

394 

300 

272.2 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Jamestown  

30 

21 

18 

12.1 

Day. 

Port  Gamble 

25 

30 

24 

19.3 

Do. 

Skokomish  

40 

32 

25 

14.8 

Do. 

St  George's        

70 

94 

79 

73.5 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Neah  Bay  superintendency  

120 

127 

116 

98.6 

Neah  Bay  

60 

70 

65 

55.2 

Day. 

Quilleute 

60 

57 

51 

43.4 

Do. 

Spokane  superintendency  

90 

88 

67 

48.0 

No  1  . 

33 

26 

22 

16.6 

Do. 

No  2 

32 

44 

30 

21.0 

Do. 

No  8 

25 

18 

15 

10.4 

Do 

Taholah  superintendency     ..... 

76 

80 

67 

55.7 

Taholah                      

36 

65 

55 

44.0 

Do. 

Queets  River 

40 

15 

12 

11.7 

Do. 

Tulalip  superintendency 

250 

234 

205 

178.7 

TulaHp                    

180 

174 

153 

149.4 

Reservation  boarding. 

Lummi 

40 

39 

33 

14.2 

Day. 

Swinomish  

30 

21 

19 

15.1 

Do. 

Yakima 

131 

145 

138 

120.2 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wisconsin                                   .  . 

2  406 

1  798 

1  658 

1  453.1 

Hay  ward  superintendency  

274 

273 

248 

203.7 

Hayward 

i  200 

221 

203 

1G6.8 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

La  Courte  Oreille  

74 

52 

45 

36.9 

Day. 

1917,  capacity,  231. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


157 


TABLE  19. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Wisconsin  —  Continued. 
Keshena  superintendency  

590 

533 

490 

416.8 

Keshena  .  .          .         

170 

172 

146 

133.7 

Reservation  boarding 

Neopit 

80 

42 

37 

22.3 

Day 

St.  Joseph's  

220 

217 

216 

192.8 

Contract  mission  boarding; 

St  Anthony's 

120 

102 

91 

68.0 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Lac  du  Flambeau.  

160 

152 

128 

125.0 

Reservation  boarding 

La  Pointe  superintendency  

690 

181 

181 

144.0 

Odanah  Mission 

490 

131 

131 

94.0 

Mission  day  Catholic 

St.  Mary's  

200 

50 

50 

50.0 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Oneida  superintendency 

190 

193 

~~188~ 

168.1 

Oneida 

140 

158 

153 

149.1 

Reservation  boarding 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

18 

18 

10  0 

Mission  day  Adventist 

Hobart  Mission  

25 

17 

17 

9.0 

Mission  day;  Episcopal 

Red  Cliff  superintendency  

irr 

76~ 

~^0~ 

62.5 

Red  Cliff 

52 

33 

31 

25.9 

Day 

Bayfield  (Holy  Family)  

65 

43 

39 

36.6 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Tomah 

275 

260 

226 

212  8 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Wittenberg  

110 

130 

127 

120.2 

Do. 

Wyoming  

300 

282 

258 

232.0 

Shoshone  superintendency 

300 

282 

258 

232.0 

' 

Shoshone 

135 

161 

146 

136.0 

Reservation  boarding 

Arapaho 

25 

16 

14 

11.2 

St  Stephen's  

120 

89 

83 

72.6 

Contract  mission  boarding; 

Shoshone  Mission  

20 

16 

15 

12.2 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Episcopal 

TABLE  20. — School  statistics  for  40  years.1 

INDIAN  SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE  FROM  1877  TO  1916. 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.2 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

1877.  .  . 

48 
49 
52 
60 
114 
140 
157 
153 
167 
158 
156 
3170 
«168 
»166 
«160 
8162 

> 

102 
119 
107 
109 
86 
106 
125 
154 
145 
227 
227 
242 
230 
233 
228 
238 

150 
168 
159 
169 
200 
246 
282 
307 
312 
385 
383 
412 
398 
399 
388 
400 

3,598 
4,142 
4,448 
4,651 
8,143 
12,232 
18,188 
21,568 
25,455 
24,945 
23,647 
26,281 
25,830 
26,  127 
26,128 
*  25,  303 

1878                .   . 

1879 

1880  . 

1885 

6,201 
9,865 
15,061 
17,  708 
21,812 
20,106 
18,  774 
20,973 
20,607 
20,858 
20,702 
<  20,  083 

1,942 
2,367 
3,127 
3,860 
3,643 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5,223 
5,289 
5,426 
*  5,  220 

1890  

1895 

1900  

1905..   . 

1910 

1911  

1912 

1913  

1914  . 

1915 

1916  .. 

1  For  other  years  see  1913  report. 

2  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 

3  Includes  Five  Tribes  boarding  schools. 

4  The  decrease  in  attendance  is  due  to  a  different  method  of  computation.    Formerly  the  average  attend- 
ance was'  the  average  of  three-quarters  having  the  greatest  attendance.    This  year's  attendance  has  been 
computed  for  10  months,  including  September,  when  the  attendance  is  always  small. 

65333—16 11 


158 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  20. — School  statistics  for  40 'years— Continued. 

APPROPRIATIONS  MADE  FOR  SCHOOLS  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  SINCE   1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877 

$20.000 

1899   . 

$2,  638,  390 

0.25 

1878 

30  000 

50.00 

1900                                      ..   . 

2,936,080 

11.28 

1879 

60  000 

100  00 

1901 

3,080,367 

4.91 

1880 

75  000 

25.00 

1902           

3,244,250 

5.32 

1881 

75  000 

1903 

3,531,250 

8.84 

1882 

135  000 

80  00 

1904 

3,  522,  950 

1  23 

1883 

487.200 

260.00 

1905   

3,  880,  740 

10.15 

1884 

675  200 

38  00 

1906 

3,  777,  100 

1  2.67 

1885 

992  800 

47  00 

1907 

3  925  830 

3  93- 

1886 

1  100,065 

10.00 

1908   .                  

4,105,715 

4.58 

1887 

1  211  415 

10  00 

1909 

4,008,825 

1  2.36 

1888 

1,179,916 

1  2.60 

1910  

3,757,909 

16.26 

1889 

1  348  015 

14.00 

1911                                 .... 

3,  685,  290 

1  1.  93 

1890 

1  364  568 

1  00 

1912 

3  757,495 

1.96 

1891 

1,842,770 

35.00 

1913  

4,015,720 

6.87 

1892 

2  291  650 

24  30 

1914 

2  4,  403,  355 

9.65 

1893 

2,315,612 

1.04 

1915  

34,678,627 

6.25 

1894 

2  243,497 

1  3.50 

1916.             

4  4,  391,  155 

1  6.14 

1895 

2  060  695 

1  8  87 

1917 

2  4  701  903 

7.08- 

2  056  515 

i  2  00 

1897 

2  517'  265 

22.45 

Total  since  1876.. 

98,  756,  905 

1898 

2,631,771 

4.54 

1  Decrease. 

2  Includes  $400,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  "buildings. 

s  Includes  $440,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 
4  Includes  $430,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

TABLE  21. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of  tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees  en- 
gaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

1,511 

$66,360 

$4,550 

23 

$6,570 

$4,899 

$2,830 

$319 

$1,  750 

Arizona  

60 
<?« 

5 
200 

48 

110 
20 
90 

638 

410 
40 

12,000 

0) 

12,000 

200 
3,270 
960 

9,750 
2,100 
7,650 

6,380 

32,  800 
1,000 

875 
585 
290 

8 
6 
2 

1,960 
1,000 
960 

400 

22 

95 

283 

Kaibab 

San  Xavier  •  

400 
161 

22 
161 

95 

283 

California*  Campo 

Idaho'  Fort  Hall  3 

Montana*  Blackfeet 

778 
602 

1 

2 

900 

600 

216 
997 

126 
472 

84 
435 

Nebraska 

90 

Santee  3 

Winnebago 

602 
445 

2 
8 

600 
1,050 

997 
3,028 

472 
1,991 

90 
134 

435 
903 

North  Dakota:  FortBerthold 
Oklahoma:    Cheyenne    and 

Oregon*  Klamath 

1,850 

4 

2,060 

103 

58 

45 

i  Not  reported.  2  Leased.  3  Only  items  reported. 

TABLE  22. — Experimentation  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of  tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees  en- 
gaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total... 

512 

$16,  638 

$2,  239 

78 

i~73~ 

(2) 

1 

$3,636 

$3,  586 

$1,  452 

$1,  708 

$426 

137 
264 

Arizona:  Pima  —  
California:  Round  Valley  

55 
(?30 

47 
80 

5,500 
$20 

418 
800 

2,119 

(2) 
(2) 

% 

2,461 

(\ 

150 

1,639 
1,781 

170 
1,224 

1,332 
293 

New   Mexico:    Pueblo   day 

Utah'  Shivwits 

166 

58 

83 

25- 

1  Includes  cotton  pickers. 


2  Not  reported. 


s  No  data. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


159 


160 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


or 
. 


"2    2 


rH  IM     -H  50  05  t 


-0     .      .0     • 
.  iO     •      •  t^-     • 


S;i« 


S  :S 


of  :  :« 


-co" 


r^«r 


" 


Si!    «-   8 


I    * 
<s& 

*£3 
||S 

2    ofe^ 


"3          r— 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


161 


•'      of 


esfef 


g  a 


5    3" 


h^     t-l   ,3     0>         '     C     «- 

SfS^s^SH 

i  "o^j.^a. 


:3 


!it.i 

:  :  >»  : 


.S    -S 

1    1 

o    Q 


s     ! 


*  s 


1  S 


g 


162 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


o-- 


It 


e<«          Tt< 


6 

Is 

1 

> 
I, 


fc"-' 


il 


ss  8 


>> 

(§>£ 


l 


8 


OO  O5  C 


e<r     inoao 


•  o  OO  r^  \ 

»ft  O  00  I-  • 


I 


O  ^5  -^  i-H  CO  1C  CO         i-f 
O  C^         CO  to  Ci  CO         I>- 


ggg 

cogoc 


^2  :    g 
Is    -S 


, 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


163 


sf 


>  -rr  >O  »H  to  (O  ( 

>  CO  O  <N  (N  1C  • 


•  1C  CO  O  S  CN  i 

ic"t-"co~  cf 


SIS 

M 


•  t-~  1C        CO  -fr      • 

•<M"^         o"   • 


iS    2SS! 

«"     co"^ 


of 


8  :g 
:o~ 


OCOQO»COO5 

^ 


^H  1C  t<       -O 


:S^ 


1C       O  O  Tf.  O  ~« 


{2° 

(N 


:S 


O  OQ  QQ       ^H 


CO      •  00  rH 


II 


OiCOggg       00 

pf^'-H"         M"     «" 


SS':2  : 
If00"  i00"  : 


COO  1^ 

w 


I  CO  »-l  CO  CO  t^  O  «S| 


o     2 


«a>^-p«  ca  i 

4J  «  _  «  »?       -ri       42 


03  CS  O  5  O  o3  c8 ^  S^^Sd^          2         22S-S 

uww^s^piH    A,^^^H?   I   «c3q 


s  :  : 

«  ife 


sl«  i;  1141551 


gSfifiSWSfi 


164 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


S     S8 


§  s 

t--'     IM' 


OS        CO 


9  ss 

co"    c<T 


§  § 


COO^ 


lO  -^ 


0  N  CO  CO 


gfeg  : 


<N~c<r     oo" 


•r-(       •       •       •         OS 


S    8 


i-H  OS  rf         r-l 


00  <N 
t~  oo 

ii 

ir5"*O* 


§- 


•I 


CO      •  OO  CO 
»-H       •  OO  O  CO 


TT  *O  O  O 


O  1C  O 
COlCO 


10      o  10  co 

I>-        CO  iO  Tf 


83! 

co"i-T 


nd 
de 


:P  :-2 


-^g 

co 


,     ««'«^2'|s«    •§    a"! 

i  s  1| 


rH  CO          i-l 


I  S 


88    2 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

lO^fO         CO         -^fCOO         ILO 
i-l  CN  CM         ^         <NC5(M         O 


%s%  g 


;§s 

;do 


JOOCO 


O  CO 
lOr-t 


8 


oTirfcsT 


as5 
|S  si 

PXWCQN 


o   ; 

-^   , 
ce    • 

ft  : 
*•§    § 

•*J   O          t£ 

S«     £ 

^       o 


i|    g 
S     w 


8 


0     -10 

S  :S 


t^  CS  5 


O        U3 


61,998.58 
32,  182.  49 


1  'Is  s 


o  r3 

8.  :° 


g§  8 


28 


n  i  nil 


- « iiis  in 

£r 


165 


166 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Remain- 
der to  be 
put  under 
ditch. 


OOOOiQiOO       COQcM       ©  O>O       O5       ©O  CO  ©O  O5  O  W  i-l  *H       O       p       O* 

£-OOINC^CO      oqpco      Sas§5      o      St^      g^oo^^^          g      §      ^ 


co      co      i- 


8  §8' 


O  O  t^  O>  iO  »O  O  *O  i-H 


OCOO         OO 
cOCOO        l>- 


Val 
cr 


O  ^  i-4 
iO  Oi  ^ 


3        CO        O 


r-(  S  ""*  2-">O  *°  "5  S  rH  ^         S         S         OO 
rH         -^ 


1C  (M  O  SrH  CO  >C  COO 


CO 

t,-     eg 


'8    S 

i-T    c4" 


ION  S 

^IC  i-H 


III! 


um 
30, 


Tt<iCOco       O5ONO 
C^  i—  I  CO  r-  1        »OCOCO*C 


i-«       CO 
^        t— 


<ff!! 


s 


lO        rH 


coe^ 

Sf: 


Ditches  on  res- 
ervation. 


S3 


iO       OS 
<N       I> 


i-l  C<1  CM       O       COCO"* 


;  =  ill!  H  IS  1  w 


3  3  3  1 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


167 


!  1 


8 


IS    3    88 

>00         •*         10^ 


?»  o  ^     2 

CO  i-H  CO        O 


t^oooocococo 


cococo 


1~  »o  o  •<*<  e<i 
c<i  t^-  10  ^  t^- 


co2      coS 


^     oufioo       cc* 


- 


3S 


OO  CO 


O  50  05 


O  O 
'O  00 


fj 

,1-gS 

|«£S 
•^+j+j  M 
^fefeg 

fe^ftnE-i 


mill 


Salt  Lake,  spe 
Shivwits  ..... 
Uintahand  O 

hingto 


3g       8 


ma 


-  °°  *  s  s 


I 

PH 

bJD 

a 

1 
«<g 


llll 

Q3    £3  IO  4^> 

o  — i  >-i  o 


168 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  27 .—Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1916,  and  made  in  the  field. 


States  and  tribes  or  reservations. 

Approved  by 
department. 

Made  in  the 
field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Total  

4,976 

798,179 

2,994 

256,  398 

Arizona                       .                            .  .                 

3 

30 

1,905 

24,  488 

Colorado  River 

3 

30 

17 
1,733 
155 

1 

170 
23,  930 

388 

46 

Pima  (Gila  River) 

AkChin              

California                                                                         .     .  . 

8 

563 

Absentee  Wyandot  (public  domain)....           

2 

2 
4 

1 

1 
3 

42 

146 
20 
397 

80 
160 
240 
3,211 

Fort  Yuma  "            'Jr 

Public  domain                              

1 

46 

Colorado*  Absentee  Wyandot  (public  domain) 

Kansas*  Kickapoo 

Michigan*  Absentee  Wyando*  (public  domain) 

i 

Minnesota 

Fond  du  Lac                                             -      .         

34 
5 
3 

60 

2,642 
369 
200 

9,195 

Leech  Lake 

White  Earth 

Montana                                    

346 

102,  360 

Absentee  Wyandot  (public  domain)  

2 
2 

56 

4 
4 
801 

160 
743 
8,292 

640 
40 
207,624 

Fort  Peck 

311 

35 

99,  520 
2,840 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)  

Nebraska*  Santee 

Nevada;  Truckee  Carson 

North  Dakota 

*£ 

FortBerthold 

787 
1 
13 

1 

1,526 

206,  154 
158 
1,312 

80 
270,205 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain)      

Oregon:  Absentee  Wyandot  (public  domain)  

SouthDakota  

486 

88,014 

Cheyenne  River  

4 

1,120 

243 
39 
12 
192 

39,210 
6,230 
1,917 
40,658 

Crow  Creek                                      

Lower  Brule 

66 
574 
882 

2,263 

10,499 
117,  732 
140,  854 

281,619 

Pine  Ridge...            

Rosebud 

Washington.. 

256 

41,490 

Colville         

2,257 
2 
4 

12 

11 
1 

247 

280,  819 
160 
640 

906 

880 
26 

23,  586 

256 

41,  490 

Spokane 

Yakima  

Wisconsin                     * 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Oneida 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  169 

TABLE  28. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales.1 

Inherited-land  sales.2 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Grand  total 

3,407 

370,988.92 

$6,136,368.14 

969,611.24 
584,  724.  56 
779,  526.  14 
407,  315.  56 
568,880.75 
978,588.27 
1,245.639.96 
442,  762.  85 
159,318.81 

8,  345 

1,034,474.14 

$15,879,539.34 

Total,  1916  .  . 

583 
422 
529 
208 
324 
494 
520 
235 
92 

54,958.62 
34,  429.  09 
45,526.31 
20,  778.  80 
34,391.11 
56,197.98 
82,  655.  80 
34,060.33 
7,990.88 

324 
393 
418 
109 
392 
638 
873 
753 
768 
820 
643 
978 
1,236 
(5) 

7 

35,762.25 
68,245.45 
45,241.99 
10,797.94 
43,652.27 
79,665.66 
129,359.61 
102,  708.  00 
91,302.57 
106,  359.  25 
64,447.67 
90,214.97 
122,222.52 
44,493.99 

959.60 

694,241.48 
715,  568.  52 
773,309.16 
285,  097.  72 
889,285.02 
1,503,960.38 
1,956,315.92 
1,321,258.72 
1,302,508.94 
1,248,793.34 
981,430.87 
1,  393,  131.  52 
2,  057,  464.  50 
757,  173.  25^ 

4,  739.  00 

1915 

1914  

1913 

1912  

1911  3... 

19103 

1909  4 

1908 

1907 

1906     .   . 

1905 

1904 

1903 

California  

14 

1,  764.  72 

14,  114.  00 

Fort  Bidwell 

1 
6 

1 
9 

160.00 
799.60 

80.00 
923.08 

1,015.00 
3,  724.  00 

500.00 
31,018.60 

Roseburg 

14 

1,  764.  72 

14,  114.  00 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute. 

Idaho 

16 

1,513.79 

58,870.00 

Coeur  d'Alene 

3 
13 

17 

480.00 
1,033.79 

999.  89 

14,328.00 
44,  542.  00 

41,  807.  25 

3 
6 

13 

478.  88 
444.20 

1,  069.  85 

8,797.00 
22,221.60 

42,821.30 

Fort  Lapwai  

Kansas  .. 

Kickapoo 

8 
9 

1 
25 

499.  89 
500.00 

80.00 
1,  429.  73 

20,064.27 
21,  742.  98 

1,200.00 
22,306.55 

5 

8 

1 
11 

498.90 
570.95 

80.00 
609.96 

20,324.30 
22,497.00 

850.00 
6,145.39 

Potawatomi...  . 

Michigan:  Mackinac  

Minnesota  

Fond  du  Lac  . 

'     5 
14 

6 

45 

251.  40 
829.45 
348.  88 

5,957.42 

3,163.90 
12,394.65 
6,748.00 

67,994.85 

2 
8 
1 

11 

80.00 
449.  96 
80.00 

1,  110.  72 

1,  400.  00 
4,  105.  39 
640.00 

16,  094.  85 

Leech  Lake  .  .  . 

White  Earth 

Montana  

Crow... 

20 
21 
4 

38 

3,099.95 
1,  737.  17 
1,  120.  30 

2,530.82 

22,  529.  65 
36,248.20 
9,217.00 

121,046.24 

7 
4 

675.  93 
434.  79 

8,  159.  85 
7,935.00 

Flathead. 

Fort  Peck 

Nebraska 

23 

1,389.95 

82,930.48 

Omaha.  .  . 

6 
21 
11 

61 

434.  67 
1,665.80 
430.35 

5,533.45 

39,063.98 
44,999.75 
36,982.51 

62,689.19 

4 
4 
15 

20 

373.60 
320.00 
696.35 

2,735.51 

22,741.16 
8,722.00 
51,467.32 

25,155.05 

Santee 

Winnebago  

North  Dakota  

Fort  Berthold 

10 
33 
18 

201 

760.00 
2,599.01 
2,  174.  44 

20,383.96 

10,  196.  00 
41,539.19 
10,954.00 

308,019.97 

1 

8 
11 

125 

160.00 
877.  56 
1,697.95 

15,965.72 

2,000.00 
11,  173.  20 
11,982.85 

257,218.54 

Fort  Totten  

Turtle  Mountain 

Oklahoma  

Cantonment  

34 
46 
3 
46 
14 
17 
13 
1 

4,204.39 
5.663.33 
174.  70 
5,266.75 
728.53 
1,501.12 
441.00 
160.00 

48,648.00 
110,157.55 
7,  156.  00 
43,897.19 
11,254.63 
26,718.00 
10,906.60 
1,616.00 

15 
18 

5 
6 
27 
10 
3 

2,  370.  78 
2,560.00 
13.80 
754.33 
940.64 
3,831.51 
890.32 
174.32 

23,081.50 
52,189.00 
240.04 
5,139.00 
12,578.00 
56,849.50 
18,520.50 
2,510.00 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho. 

Kiowa 

Osage... 

Otoe. 

Pawnee  

Ponca.  .  . 

Red  Moon  

1  Under  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1018),  modified  by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444), 
June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

2  Under  act  of  May  27, 1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245-275),  modified  by  acts  of  May  8, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  May  29, 
1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L..  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

« Includes  sales  of  lands  of  Kaw,  Osage,  and  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
« Includes  sales  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
5  Unknown. 


170 


COMMISSIONEE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  28. — Sale  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — 

Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales. 

Inherited-land  sales. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Sac  and  Fox 

1 
13 
11 
2 

7 

80.00 
1.306.25 
774.  99 
82.90 

755.80 

$1,465.00 
33,  290.  00 
12,131.00 
780.00 

9,624.80 

1 

18 
19 
2 

18 

160.00 
2,800.00 
1,230.02 
240.00 

1,549.23 

$1,350.00 
58,858.00 
23,413.00 
2,490.00 

51,611.75 

Seger  

Seneca 

Shawnee  

Oregon 

Klamath.  . 

4 
3 

95 

640.00 
115.80 

10,  794.  02 

2,  803.  00 
6,821.80 

176,462.61 

I 

40 

960.00 
589.23 

5,923.90 

6,851.75 
44,760.00 

98,864.80 

Umatilla 

South  Dakota                         

Cheyenne  River  

3 
9 

4 
27 
27 

24 
21 
15 

1.047.80 
1.  294.  65 
960.00 
4,412.18 
1,518.92 
320.00 
1,240.47 

1,299.71 
771.20 

5,598.15 
10,499.00 
3,510.00 
50,959.00 
45,553.80 
431.00 
59,911.66 

25,  249.  05 
36,532.60 

Crow  Creek     ... 

Pine  Ridge 

2 
19 
6 

200.06 
4,  220.  40 
520.00 

1,  200.  00 
53,264.00 
14,847.40 

Rosebud  

Sisseton 

Standing  Rock  

Yankton 

13 
13 

8 

983.44 
960.00 
436.  05 

29,553.40 
17,518.00 
26,094.50 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  

Washington  

Colville 

1 
3 
1 
1 
9 

18 

2.55 
102.  15 
120.00 
43.50 
503.00 

577.57 

75.00 
5,161.50 
4,860.00 
1,350.00 
25,086.10 

16,616.00 

1 

2 

62.33 
13.72 

3,277.00 
1,925.00 

Gush  man 

Spokane 

Tulalip 

Yakima  

5 

7 

360.00 
444.82 

20,892.50 
12,005.00 

Wisconsin  ,  '.  

La  Pointe   ' 

5 
13 

9 

243.07 
334.50 

566.54 

7,400.00 
9,216.00 

7,078.13 

Oneida  '.  

7 
17 

444.  82 
1,523.86 

12,005.00 
20,674.22 

Wyoming'  Shoshone 

TABLE  29.— Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  £.,  182],  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444},  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}. 


States  and  superinten- 
dencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906.  to 
June  30,  1916. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended   June  30, 
1916 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Total  

11,926 

1,235,031.15 

2,300 

247,  103.  79 

1,283 

349 

934 

130,980.43 

Arizona:  San  Xavier  
California              

1 
22 

40.00 
1,388.00 

1 
1 

12.40 
10.00 

2 

2 

130.00 

Bishop  

2 
1 

16 
3 

154 

280.00 
80.00 
963.00 
65.00 

19,868.86 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley 

1 
1 

16 

1 
1 

10 

80.00 
50.00 

1,  239.  49 

Round  Valley  

1 
53 

10.00 
3,252.18 

Idaho 

6 

Coeur  d'  Alene  

84 
27 
43 

12,  SOL  97 
4,217.94 
2,  848.  95 

4 

627.65 

6 

6 

880.00 

Fort  Hall 

Fort  Lapwai  

4'9 

2,624.53 

10 

6 

4 

359.  49 

COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


171 


TABLE  29. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182},  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat,  L.,  444},  and  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}.— Con. 


States  end  superintend- 
encies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1916. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended    June  30, 
1916 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Kansas  . 

113 

7,987.30 

62 

5,459.02 

24 

5 

19 

1,  115.  34 

Kickapoo  

49 
64 

17 
3,661 

2,991.14 
4,996.16 

1,  283.  28 
293,  186.  73 

32 
30 

4 
13 

2.754.30 
2,704.72 

202.24 
800.00 

13 

11 

4 
31 

3 
2 

10 

9 

4 
24 

540.62 
574.  72 

160.00 
2,  243.  22 

Potawatomi 

Michigan:  Mackinac  and 
Mount  Pleasant 

Minnesota  

7 

Fond  du  Lac  

18 
16 
43 
11 
13,573 

549 

1,357.50 
1,366.32 
3,641.52 
981.  39 
285,  840.  00 

77,971.08 

6 
2 
3 
2 

280.00 
160.00 
200.00 
160.00 

4 

8 
15 
4 

2 
3 

2 
5 
15 
2 

80.00 
410.  40 
1,606.32 
146.50 

Grand  Portage  
Leech  Lake  
Nett  Lake  

2 

White  Earth 

Montana  

275 

36,  157.  03 

166 

20 

146 

31,550.93 

Blackfeet  

4 

46 
366 
133 

1,020 

920.97 
9,012.95 
32,627.61 
35,  409.  55 

69,276.29 

1 
6 
40 
119 

31 

1 
2 
34 
109 

20 

280.00 
438.  77 
2,980.01 
27,  852.  15 

1,316.03 

Crow  

208 
44 
23 

476 

25,448.72 
3,708.31 
7,000.00 

44,379.77 

4 
6 
10 

11 

Flathead 

Fort  Peck 

Nebraska 

Omaha...  . 

566 
26 
265 
163 

3 
1,018 

36,756.94 
3,365.06 
19,889.80 
9,264.49 

360.00 
181,614.00 

183 

44,331.00 

19 

8 

11 

718.50 

Ponca  

Santee  

257 
36 

17,590.00 
2,458.77 

11 
1 

3 

8 
1 

557.  53 
40.00 

Winnebago 

Nevada:  Carson..  . 

North  Dakota  

161 

23,968.47 

280 

70 

210 

30,353.99 

Fort  Berthold  
Fort  Totten  

17 
56 

244 
701 

1,805 

1,  932.  90 
4,  792.  80 
75,841.85 
99,046.45 

162,  797.  67 

3 

37 
49 
72 

368 

324.00 
3,030.67 
9,662.21 
10,951.59 

36,000.77 

6 
34 

37 
203 

278 

1 
14 
13 
42 

154 

5 
20 
24 
161 

124 

440.00 
1,489.52 
4,630.25 
23,794.22 

12,  709.  79 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  
Oklahoma 

Cantonment  

53 

154 
155 
94 
62 
75 
114 
37 
557 
504 

313 

7,  415.  88 

19,434.98 
19,775.14 
10,  835.  79 
7,378.38 
5,  225.  01 
11,923.86 
4,  117.  77 
35,098.46 
41,592.40 

23,552.75 

28 

15 
20 
17 
28 
27 
29 
1 
184 
19 

72 

4,  252.  66 

2,673.49 
3,  277.  86 
2,213.74 
2,  281.  51 
3,223.36 
3,727.07 
160.00 
12,061.08 
2,  130.  00 

6,643.62 

37 

47 

32 
23 

5 
24 

560.00 
2,523.50 

Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho  

Kiowa  

Otoe  

42 
34 
45 
27 
15 
13 
18 

26 

20 
12 
35 
8 
12 
4 
8 

15 

22 
22 
10 
19 
3 
9 
10 

11 

2,184.87 
2,677.70 
520.00 
1,903.80 
480.00 
656  82 
1,  203.  10 

840.00 

Pawnee  . 

Ponca 

Sac  and  Fox  . 

Seger 

Seneca  

Shawnee 

Oregon  

Klamath 

33 
15 
20 
242 
3 

1,834 

4,952.27 
2,  147.  09 
1,378.78 
14,714.61 
360.00 

324,910.92 

3 
10 

8 
46 
5 

307 

482.  72 
1,511.29 
642.  72 
3,246.89 
760.00 

55,956.44 

4 
1 
12 

9 

1 

3 
1 
1 
6 

400.00 
80.00 
80.00 
280.00 

Roseburg  .  .  . 

Siletz 

11 
3 

Umatilla  

Warm  Springs  

South  Dakota  

307 

49 

258 

42,709.70 

Cheyenne  River  
Crow  Creek  

180 
63 
69 
520 
351 
138 
513 

50,  199.  84 
9,896.76 
18,  847.  15 
99,046.49 
78,725.25 
12,836.11 
55,359.32 

22 
46 
6 
153 
59 
7 
14 

3,831.86 
7,403.97 
1,050.00 
31,546.32 
10,097.54 
756.  75 
1,270.00 

14 
49 
6 
215 
5 
16 
2 

14 
43 
6 
181 
5 
7 
2 

2,763.82 
6,560.17 
1,515.26 
30,  488.  34 
782.  11 
440.00 
160.  00 

6 

""34" 
.„„ 

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridge 

Rosebud  

Sisseton. 

Yankton... 

Restrictions  removed  under  act  June  21, 1906  (  34  Stat..  L,  353). 


172 


COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  29. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182,  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444},  and  June  25, 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855)— Con. 


States  and  superintend- 
encies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1916. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1916. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

De- 
nied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray. 
Washington  . 

4 
223 

240.00 
17,  834.  59 

262 

20,906.01 

15 

7 

8 

665.  74 

Colville  

53 
6 
35 

4,  276.  30 
570.00 
3,  242.  50 

2 

3 

160.00 
153.  90 

5 

5 

405.  74 

Cushman 

Spokane  

3 

2 

1 

160.00 

Taholah  

1 
1 
255 

209 

80.00 
163.85 
20,348.26 

11,114.19 

Tulalip 

12 

117 

1,152 

1,678.36 
8,067.43 

48,  811.  70 

5 
2 

91 

'  5 
4 

Yakima  

2 

87 

100.00 
4,960.75 

Wisconsin  

Hayward 

4 
10 
74 
1,045 
19 

37 

373.04 
711.14 
5,831.53 
40,629.69 
1,266.30 

3,907.98 

3 
8 
32 
34 
14 

12 

1 
2 
1 

2 

6 
31 
34 
14 

11 

240.00 
458.  10 
2,406.21 
848.  62 
1,007.82 

985.  45 

Lac  du  Flambeau  — 
La  Pointe 

6 
15 
187 
1 

36 

458.  10 
1,410.54 
9,165.55 
80.00 

2,241.65 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

1 

SUMMARY  OF  PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8, 1906. 


Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907.  . 

889 

92,  132.  50 

1908 

1,987 

153,991.78 

1909  '.  

1,166 

133,331.79 

1910                   .          .              .          ... 

955 

99,339.10 

1911  

1,011 

115,575.37 

1912        

344 

45,529.49 

1913 

520 

67,  477.  49 

1914     

1,148 

152,405.44 

1915 

940 

124,114.86 

1916  

934 

130,980.43 

Total 

9,894 

1,114,878.25 

TABLE  30.' — -Removals  of  restrictions. 


Fiscal  year. 

Quapaw  (Seneca), 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.2 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate  

500 

25,809.52 

8,485 

504,334.57 

1916 

30 
25 
72 
37 
'  53 
68 
215 

1,401.45 
1,095.28 
3,889.35 
1,930.00 
3,218.28 
4,104.91 
10,  170.  25 

697 
786 
1,106 
956 
652 
953 
1,470 
1,865 

42,  103.  60 
50,077.33 
81,034.72 
60,532.64 
45,075.51 
84,679.34 
88,070.34 
52,761.09 

1915  

1914 

1913  

1912 

1911 

1910  

1909  

i  Act  of  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

*  Act  of  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

NOTE.— Act  of  Congress  dated  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312),  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  inter- 
married whites,  freedmen,  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands,  except  homesteads 
of  Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove 
restrictions  from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


173 


TABLE  31. — -Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1916,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate 

278 

25  936 

Total,  1916 

90 

9.042 

1915 

65 

5  616 

1914  

33 

3,951 

1913                                                                      ..                     .     . 

23 

1.600 

1912 

25 

1  917 

1911               .                      

42 

3,810 

Fort  Hall  Idaho 

27 

4  218 

'  Mackinac,  Mich                                                       

1 

40 

Mount  Plsasant  Mich 

2 

80 

Seneca  Okla 

17 

1  378 

Roseburg,  Oreg                                                                 

1 

80 

Tulalip  Wash 

2 

-160 

Lac  du  Flambeau,  Wis    

3 

248 

La  Pointe,  Wis                                                                     

23 

1,830 

Red  Cliff  Wis 

14 

1  008 

TABLE  32.— Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


Fiscal  year. 

Kaw.i 

Osage.» 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate                                   

52 

16,  784 

461 

1916 

4 
12 
4 
23 
22 
84 
293 
19 

1,960 
5,880 
1,960 
10,890 
10,890 
41,160 
143,  570 
9,310 

1315                                                                 .                 

5 
12 
1 
1 

800 
1,904 
400 
480 

1914 

1913 

1912 

1911 

1910 

1909 

20 
6 
6 
1 

8,000 
2,400 
2,400 
400 

1908                                    

1907 

1906 

i  Act  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  636). 

65333—16 12 


«  Act  June  88,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  539). 


174 


I 


S. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
§ 


s 


111 


Eg 
II 


<N 


s<0i 


oo 


3     o 

II 

ri-i 


rf 


li  §lssii 


»ct^      es:  I-H 


eQOO  < 
Is; 


o          t^esi 

^       P5 


'*    8 


§0000 


O  iO  CO 
iCt>-OO 


8? 


ooo 


11 


-    1 
a    ^    * 

3^0 


£2 


tf 


oo 


I 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  175. 

TABLE  34. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total 

1 

$775,883.57 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache 

Frame  cottage.  .  .  .         

945.  70 
75,  435.  00 
2,985.15 
5,  145.  07 

18,  622.  50 
14,891.36 
14,517.28 
2,425.10 
936.60 
12,  213.  25 
14,925.17 
16,  800.  00 
1,573.00 
1,500.00 
7,  833.  00 
544.00 
25,300.00 

1,850.00 
11,575.00 
495.00 
700.00 
3,750.00 
1,352.54 
1,261.00 
115.00 
1,  168.  00 

5,  850.  00 
2,500.00 
1,  990.  00 
2,  139.  00 
2,381.00 
7,055.00 
2,  123.  00 

20,075.94 
2,424.63 
11,  433.  28 

2,  400.  00 
1,743.00 
900.00 
581.50 
936.  68 
1,  746.  32 
1,511.49 
3,500.00 
975.00 
2,  320.  00 
3,  500.  00 
20,  105.  00 

14,  466.  67 
12,  565.  00 

10,473.10 
2,  794.  00 
3,988.00 
6,  494.  00 
3,355.59 

4.000.00 
4,000.00 
1,  925.  00 
2,500.00 
'4,000.00 
1,  030.  80 
1,  603.  00 
848.00 
8,  692.  85 
1,559.00 
1,  830.  00 

14,  666.  67 
450.00 
1.000.00 

Fort  Mojave 

Steel  highway  bridge  across  Colorado  River  near  Topock  
Four  cottages 

Moqui 

Do 

Eight  day  schools  at  Hoterville  

Navajo— 
Navajo  School 

Chin  Lee  School 

Stone  schoolhouse                            .  ..           

Luki  Chuki  day  school. 
Pima.  ...                .... 

Stone  schoolhouse  and  quarters 

Flour  mill  building  

Do 

Drilling  two  wells                                          

Do 

Laboratory  building 

Do 

Frame  sanatorium      

Do  

Schoolhouses  at  Gila  Bend,  Cockleburr,  and  Chiu  Chuischui. 
Stone  domestic  science  building 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River 

Frame  office  building                                 

San  Xavier 

Day  schoolhouses,  Indian  oasis,  San  Pedro,  and  Santa  Rosa. 

Do 

Western  Navajo 

Additions  to  stone  dormitory            .                            

California: 
Hoopa  Valley 

Cement  bakery  building  

Do 

Frame  schoolhouse 

IFort  Bidwell 

Do 

Moving  schoolhouse                                                 

Greenville 

Heating  plant 

Do 

Addition  to  hospital.  ...              ..                  

Do 

Addition  to  reservoir 

Do 

Concreting  bottom  school  dam  reservoir  

Tule  River  (Auberry,  day). 
Idaho: 
Fort  Hall 

Frame  cottage 

Addition  to  stone  schoolhouse  .                   ....  

Do 

Frame  horse  barn 

Do 

Steel  water  tower                       

Do 

Addition  to  office  building 

Fort  Lapwai 

Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium.. 

Brick  boiler  house  and  laundry.  ...              

Electric  wiring  buildings 

Kansas: 
Haskell  Institute 

Brick  gymnasium 

Kickapoo             ...  . 

Frame  dairy  barn  

Michigan:  Mount  Pleasant  
Minnesota: 
Cass  Lake. 

Brick  gymnasium                                                           .  . 

Pump  house  and  water  system  ..         

IDo 

Lavatory  annex 

Fond  du  Lac  

Steel  tank  

Do 

Septic  tank                                                

Do 

Council  hall 

Leech  Lake 

Addition  to  frame  dormitory  

Do 

Remodeling  frame  buidng  for  hospital 

Nett  Lake.  . 

Frame  schoolhouse  

Do 

Steam  heating  plant  schoolhouse 

Pipestone 

Two  frame  cottages 

Do 

Stone  lavatory  annex                    .          

Red  Lake 

Frame  hospital 

Montana: 
(Blackfeet 

Frame  sanatorium 

Do    

Two  cottages  and  two  school  buildings  at  Old  Piegan  and 
Heart  Butte. 
Frame  hospital 

Crow 

Do 

Pryor  School  emlpoyees'  quarters  and  laundry  

Do 

Heating  plant 

Fort  Bel  knap 

Two  lavatory  annexes 

Tongue  River 

Flour  mill                                .          

Nebraska: 
Genoa 

Brick  laundry  building  

Do 

Brick  industrial  building 

Do. 

Installing  boiler  

Do 

Lavatory  annex                        

Do 

Addition  to  hospital 

Omaha 

Remodeling  employees'  building  

§Santee 

Huntka  Creek  steel  bridge          .        

Winnebago  

Electric  lighting  

Do 

Remodeling  building  for  hospital  

Do 

Frame  cottage 

Do 

Laundry  equipment  

Nevada: 
Carson 

Frame  sanatorium 

Fallon 

Frame  office  building  *.  

Do... 

Water  system... 

.176  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  34. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916 — Con. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

New  Mexico: 
A  Ibuquerque 

Brick  assembly  hall  and  gymnasium 

$25  000  00 

Do  

Two  steel  tanks  

2,  225.  00 

Albuquerque  Pueblos,  Is- 

Day  schoolhoiise  and  quarters  .  . 

10  055  00 

leta. 
Albuquerque  Pueblos,  La- 

Frame  dairy  and  horse  barns  

3,  500.  00 

guna  Sanatorium. 
Isleta      

Sewer  system  and  septic  tank  

1,354.71 

Pueblo  Bonito 

Water  tank  and  tower  

3,  150.  00 

Do 

Two  brick  dormitories 

19  600  00 

Do.                  v 

Drilling  well  

1,  400.  00 

Mescalero 

Frame  sanatorium 

14,666  67 

Santa  Fe  

Brick  and  frame  dairy  barn  

3,  848.  32 

San  Juan  — 
Aneth  day  school 

Stone  dormitory  and  repair  building 

7,000  00 

Toadlena  day  school 

Two  stone  dormitories  

18,  000.  00 

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee 

Frame  hospital 

3  030  25 

Do 

Frame  dining  hall,  kitchen  and  baker,  and  sleeping  porches 

2,063.08 

North  Dakota: 
Standing  Rock 

Cement  walks  

990.70 

Turtle  Mountain 

Frame  sanatorium 

14,  666.  67 

Do 

Water  system  

4,  090.  00 

Oklahoma: 
Cantonment 

Frame  schoolhouse 

3,735  00 

Do 

Two  frame  lavatory  buildings         

1,917.07 

Cherokee  Orphan 

Frame  dormitory 

13,565.12 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Dairy  barn  

1,  775.  00 

Do 

Water  system 

2,  333.  97 

Do  . 

Central  heating  plant  

10,587.49 

Chilocco 

Addition  to  stone  schoolhouse 

11,085.00 

Choctaw  Sanatorium  
Kiowa 

Frame  hospital  and  power  house,  water,  sewer,  and  lighting 
system. 
Repair  to  hospital  roof 

48,  954.  00 
558.  30 

Five  Tribes— 
Nuyaka  boarding 

Converting  schoolhouse  into  dining  room  and  quarters 

2,  022.  96 

school. 
Do 

Frame  laundry  and  lavatory  building         

3,  500.  00 

Kiowa  Fort  Sill  School 

Annex  to  boys'  dormitory 

3,  100.  00 

Rainy  Mountain  School 

Frame  school  buildings  "       .             

10,307.00 

Do 

Frame  laundry  building 

2,  698.  00 

Do 

Annex  to  boys'  dormitory  

4,065.00 

Do 

Acetylene  gas  lighting 

1,  156.  62 

Riverside  School 

Water  system 

3,  542.  60 

Osage 

Repairing  buildings  at  Gray  Horse              

665.00 

Do 

Frame  domestic  science  cottage 

1,  855.  90 

Ponca                                  w 

Painting  buildings                               

775.00 

Oregon'  Umatilla  School 

Water  system 

2,  832.  75 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

Three  frame  cottages  

4,  432.  18 

South  Dakota: 

Frame  cottage 

3,  997.  60 

Cheyenne  River 

Cottage  at  breeding  station                             

1,  334.  25 

Crow  Creek 

Cottage  for  field  matron 

1,  205.  30 

Do 

Two  frame  cottages                             

3,  139.  94 

Pierre 

Brick  mess  hall 

16,842.00 

Do 

Brick  laundry    

3,  184.  00 

Pine  Ridge 

Frame  lavatory  building                                         

2,  700.  00 

Rosebud 

Frame  warehouse 

1,364.00 

Do 

Frame  dining  hall  and  coal  shed          .           

2,  869.  00 

Do 

Frame  stallion  barn 

2,  638.  98 

Do 

653.75 

Do 

Laundry  building 

2,  898.  00 

Do 

Three  frame  barns,  Cut  Meat,  Ring  Thunder,  and  Ashurst 

999.00 

Sisseton 

Hospital. 
One  2-story  cottage 

1,  375.  00 

1,  866.  32 

Utah-  Uintah 

Water  system                                                           

7,  245.  31 

Washington: 
Spokane  Agency 

Remodeling  building  for  hospital                   

5,  367.  00 

Tulalip 

Frame  quarters                                                               

2,  650.  00 

Wisconsin: 
Oneida 

Septic  tank                                                      

1.  720.  00 

Tomah 

Brick  employees'  quarters 

9,891.00 

Do 

940.00 

COMMISSIONEB  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


177 


TABLE  35. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  on  contract  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total 

$260  731  83 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache  

Frame  dormitory  

1  18,  000  00 

Leupp  .  .  . 

Two  stone  cottages 

4  136  OO1 

t)o 

Additions  to  stone  dormitory 

1  17  goo  00' 

Navajo  (Tohatchi)  .  .  . 

Frame  commissary  building.  .  . 

1,990  00> 

Do..  . 

Frame  hospital 

1  5  431  18 

San  Xavier 

Day  school  Quajote  and  Vamori 

i  9  546  00' 

California: 
Round  Valley.  . 

Schoolhouse  No.  83  and  quarters  No  87  Ukiah  day  school- 

3  374  OO1 

Hoopa  Valley  

house  No.  63. 
Frame  hospital 

12  125  00' 

Campo  

Frame  building  for  kitchen  and  dining  room 

510  00' 

Idaho:    Fort    Lapwai    Sana- 

Superintendent's cottage 

3,998  Oft 

torium. 
Montana: 
Crow  

Frame  office  building 

5  500  00 

Do  

Brick  schoolhouse 

21  250  00 

Fort  Belknap  

Brick  laundry  and  heating  plant 

18  947  00 

Do... 

Sewer  system 

878  00 

Fort  Peck  

Steel  water  stand  pipe  

2  065  00 

Tongue  River  

Spiral  fire  escapes  .     . 

910  00 

Nebraska:                               • 
Genoa  .-  

Dairy  barn  .  . 

6  000  00 

Santee  

Drilling  well 

612  50 

New  Mexico: 
San  Carlos  

Repairs  to  San  Carlos  bridge 

1  173  60 

Jicarilla  

Frame  hospital  No.  48 

i  12  806  00 

Pima..  

Adobe  school  building  at  Gila  Crossing  and  Maricopa 

i  4  goo  00 

Pueblo  Bonito..  . 

Steam  heating  plant  for  dormitory 

1  247  00 

Do... 

Frame  day  school  plant  quarters  barn  and  three  outhouses 

i  5'  600  00 

Do  

Brick  industrial  building  No.  12 

i  7  680  00 

San  Juan  

Frame  hospital 

12  000  00 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

Refrigerating  plant  

1  285  00 

North  Dakota:  Wahpeton  

Oklahoma: 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  .  . 

Extension  of  power  plant,  water  system,  and  addition  to 
power  house. 

Frame  sanatorium  

i  10,  000.  00 
1  14  916  08 

Chilocco  

Fire  escape  

793  00 

Seger  

Frame  office  building 

3  010  59 

Shawnee  

Frame  schoolhouse  

4  885  00 

South  Dakota: 
Canton  Asylum  

Cement  block  dairy  barn 

5  550  00 

Crow  creek... 

Frame  hospital 

13  117  00 

Do  

Two  frame  cottages 

4  850  00 

Do  

Three  steel  bridges  

2  743  00 

Rosebud  . 

Exhibit  building  stock  shed  and  two  outhouses 

1  700  00 

Do.... 

Frame  school  building  and  outhouses 

l'  535  00 

Do  

Frame  dairy  barn  

i  g  000  00 

Do  

Frame  cottage 

1  849  00 

Springfield  

Electric  lighting  plant  

1  190  00 

Yankton  

Cement  walks... 

848  88 

Wisconsin:  Lac  du  Flambeau. 

Frame  employees'  quarters  

9  780  00 

»  Cost  to  June  30,  1916. 


178 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAX   AFFAIRS. 


11 


m 


Ilill 

l^3'! 


S- 


mil 

5 s     S 


«> 

>a 


Itliii 

rg  5  H  -9  S  >> 
OK 


gg< 


CO  ^J  g  CO  rM 

2§  ^  S5 1^  *o 

g«N*tr4-^HSrHt 


sai 

!>•«-!  O 


9£| 


sis 


5K?: 

>ocq 


S! 


3§S 


K8SI: 


JC^TS 


r?!  Go'io'oo'fH** 

t—  >4  rl  COCO  ( 

--1  «*  IN  -*  55 1 


S8§5  : 


ill: 


ISS^^SSSS 

>  ^<  TJH  r^  cJi  os  1-1  co 


-s 


ss§a«a 

s 


S  :  :  :  :  :  :28<3 


*r 


S    1 


II! 


^--H-w-r 


*ir 


§s  * 


S-" 


888 

fH  00 


i§§ 


:§§§  • 


;SS8  : 


?5^8||^Sg| 


S    - 


sfs  a 


ifegss 

lrt4S^IT»<, 


«S|  C<<  CO  "5         r-lrHOO         rHi-<         N 


ss 


sss^r^s  :»s 

X-M-I  00  lO  !-H         t  1 


;sss^ 


CO  Tf«CiC<        C<) 


CO  C«5  ^  i-iC^ 


-a  »o 


88^ 


P" 
W 


fibe* 
!§^ 


1C  iO  < 

sis 

58 


CO  10  TJH  CO  N  t-i  < 

So3SSo555( 


jijj.i 


lilt 


iH8a« 


.        . 

I  III  13  II 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


179 


3S2 


a 


>  Oi  CN  »-H  OO  O          1C 

>  oo  co  OIQ  10      CN 

>  CO  CO  CN  t~ -*i(        i-H 


-  s 


•rf  O  O  O>O  f-00  Q  g        CO 


»-o  »o  o  o  c^  ' 

tfSClQ  >5cO  • 
COC025C31CO( 


oosiQcpi— (HMr^co  t*-»*     r^-* 


S§ 


i 


CO          i-H          O 


11 


^-vtN 


s  I 


II  i  1 


t^«  OO        O5 

S«    5" 


S  :< 


OT3        O 

^3  4>         rt 

CO  •*>       •" 


S  S  2  S  S  S 


If 


58 

m 


S  S  '" 


OOM<  OU3OQ 

TtH  i-H  -^t*  O  T-I  r-1  •*$* 

•rH  CO  »-i  *  CO  00  00 


«  s 


m?  >i! 

w^fl§,- 

vBijijiiii 

^^OWSPn«cn^ 


l 


1 


1   '1 


180 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


pur 


W 


: 


S«8 


00      •      *C<| 


O  O       O 

f§  1 


S88i 


>S    S 


T2T2" 


111! 


m 


S8 

"^ 


c*      ^%-T 


^ 

Sf!       8 


:sg  & 


ill  i 


SS§  1 


§11 


5SSS?^S2    S 

)  t>»  CO  CO  Tt^  O  i-H         1s* 


i  o       O5 


i 


|    «   .6    S 

O 


1  1 


«        •         .1—  1 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

SB  :So£°.      :       S  8 


^H  CO  O  O        *O 
COCOCOO        CN1 


O      in 


l  iO  »O  CN  O3  O         CN 
->r  GO  CO  IO  CO         i-( 


!>•  -^  i-l  l>-  CN  -»>         O 

CD  ^f         O  CN  OO         IO 


ii§ 


co22co  '£3    S 


eo"     oo" 


CO  i-H  00-*  OO 


OOO       JO 

^H  IO  CO          00 

»O  CN 


i-H  i—i  o  co  oo     ?5 

^r-COOcO          00 


§s!  1 


S    fe 

c5     S 


OO  CO  "Ot^- 
CO  CO  OO  iO 


1005  _rH< 


I  OO  CO  IOC 
)  i— I  G3  iO  C 
I  IO  »O  i— t  I 


f—  1  IO  CN         IO 

i  co^;  1-1      t^ 
i-^  O  CO       O5 


l 

a  S  S  S 


•^        CO  «O 


S    8    °. 
*•€"£*" 


s       S      S 


tw 


Sw      ,-s" 


So* 
^ 


i°  ;§^  ; :,: 


3M  :  P?tt 

si  i    .5*0  OT  o 

lid  112  £ 

«oS 


g  b  -^02^5    >  «  o^i 

lljlai  c3Ss 


181 


182 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


In 


II 
Si 


is 


sill 

02  S    .2, 


11 


T1 

i 


9    S 


il     1 


!  S    I  I-H  S? 


•  ~<  OS         »O 


:s  ill    1 


: 


rl          *?~    O 


g  ; 


S  illl 


: 


<N        CD     •!>        CO-* 


[fifiiSlPSSl  1 


<N 


a     | 


rf 


C«5  iC 


sg 


I  ,_(         ,-1       .         QO 


COMMISSIONER   OF   JNDIAN    AKFAIBS. 


183 


•      '  O      • 


'Cq(Nect-e^ 


g 


.        i        «        '  LTJ  2s        •  ^ 


RiaTTi    ;  1  § 


|     w 


r-     c>» 

iC        •-! 

rH,-, 


T  ?5  10  C»  ?3  Tfl  ^<  i-c        O5 

«o  to  ^  co  ec  os  o  <o      oo 


.   O 

-ct  ft 


52 


fi- 
ll 

SI 

II 

•S3  "5 


1  I 


I  5 


is 

II 
II 


184  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 

TABLE  37. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations ,  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Grand  total... 
Arizona  

$35,407,121 

$3,562,907 

$1,^72,334 

$18,452 

$14,128,596 
52,867 

$1,882,058 

$1,289,870 

$13,252,904 

2,779,915 

271,083 

193,530 

350 

345,673 

35,821 

1,880,591 

Camp  Verde  
Colorado  River1. 
Fort  Apache  
Havasupai 

19,850 
220,  774 
237,  486 
7,849 
5;  820 
78,  791 
175,600 
471,044 
551,  662 

15,010 
6,400 
35,398 
2,642 
1,835 
13,050 
35,275 
51,026 

275 
6,370 
13,925 
246 
50 
6,445 
28,510 
23,500 
69,  704 

4,565 
158,449- 
154,565 
3,511 
3,935 
51,351 
108,090 
382,  414 
481,958 
115,  767 
94,490 
29,207 
31,344 
25,513 
118,667 
116,  765 

704,626 

36,657 

12,900 
12,881 
1,445 

20,717 

5 

Kaibab 

Leupp 

3,650 

4,295 
3,725 
,    10,900 

Moqui 

Navajo 

3,204 

Phoenix  

Pima 

243,066 
99  015 

3,437 

19,075 
4,525 
3,490 
5,000 

350 

12,555 

91,882 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River  
San  Carlos  
SanXavier  
Truxton  Canon 
Western  Navajo 

California  

45,072 
2296,274 
37,  623 
127,812 
162,  175 

912,124 

4,350 
83,160 
12,110 
2,820 
4,570 

65,703 

8,025 
2164,870 

11,900 

6,325 
6,090 

45,665 

275 

4,475 

34,750 

86,262 

5,118 

Bishop 

32,707 
10,330 
8,824 
103  595 

1,280 
1,875 
8,824 

110 
225 

125 

590 

30,602 
8,230 

Campo  

Digger  
Fort  Bid  well 

370 

150 

103,  075 
82,400 
45,358 
50,225 
1,320 
10,  355 
64,343 

275,852 
19,309 
13,557 

44,  895 

Fort  Yuma 

83,200 
49,878 
78,225 
17,615 
31,  980 
70,997 

362,508 
46,374 
15,891 

92,161 

800 

Greenville 

4  520 

Hoopa  Valley  .  .  . 
Malki  

»4,900 
14,385 
13,210 
2,669 

12,800 
110 
1,505 
645 

24  215 

8,750 

1,550 

1,800 
2,600 

Pala 

4,310 

Round  Valley... 
Sherman  Insti- 
tute 

3,340 

62,441 
10,  171 

Soboba 

15,729 
2,031 

39,813 

1,165 

Tule  River 

75 
2,100 

228 

Colorado 

2,453 

2,900 

Southern  Ute... 
Ute  Mountain... 

Florida:  Seminole... 
Idaho 

63,553 
28,608 

75 

16,673 
23,  140 

75 

1,850 
603 

2,100 

42,930 
1,965 

2,900 



454,437 
63.399 
232,052 
158,986 

89,996 

80,819 
49,906 
30,913 

40,706 
1,725 
16,  431 
22,550 

83,350 

16,991 

74,778 
910 
14,352 
59,516 

1,570 
570 

239,573 
10,288 
153,365 
75,920 

6,296 

Coeurd'Alene... 
Fort  Hall 

16,991 

Fort  Lapwai  
Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox.. 
Kansas 

1,000 

350 

568,676 

9,350 

24,533 

127,818 

406,975 

Haskell  Institute 
Kickapoo  
Potawatomi  

Michigan 

475,072 
79,381 
14,223 

224,327 

"9,~350 
11,825 

24,358 
175 



120,589 
7,229 

330,125 
71,  977 
4,873 

212,502 

Mackinac  

2,385 
221,942 

771,582 

310 
11,515 

152,072 

2,075 
210,427 

530,  186 

Mount  Pleasant. 
Minnesota  .  . 

78,119 

4,089 

7,116 

Cass  Lake  

19,284 
36,889 
7,790 
103,  607 
50,548 
164,  418 
126,  499 
56,975 
205,572 

19,284 
4,160 

Fond  dii  Lac  
Grand  Portage.. 
Leech  Lake  
NettLake  

7,525 
7,440 
36,019 
25,540 
5,975 
19,505 

25,  124 

80 

350 

2,219 
2,575 

65,369 
22,  162 
158,  443 
72,660 
56,975 
131.133 

271 

Pipestone  

Red  Lake 

23,830 

4,009 

6,495 

Vermillion  Lake 
White  Earth... 

so.oesl      24.37! 

Includes  Fort  Mojave. 


2  Includes  $151,000,  value  stock. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  185 

TABLE  37. — Distribution  of 'Government  property  valuations ,  June  30, 1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Montana    

SI,  112,  201 

$373  028 

$65  957 

$1  151 

S150  190 

$101  235 

$18  560 

$402  080 

Blackfeet  

177,  070 

38,  494 

23,  417 

6  225 

108  934 

Crow 

331  151 

126  766 

20  835 

62  617 

27  500 

900 

92  533 

Flathead 

167  931 

73  883 

1  125 

78  889 

800 

12  660 

'574 

Fort  Belknap  .  . 

154,508 

53'  027 

2  450 

[ 

7'  684 

34  510 

2*000 

54  837 

Fort  Peck  * 

157  927 

52  958 

15  990 

!       l  151 

14  736 

73  092 

Tongue  River.  .  . 

123,  614 

27  900 

2  140 

1  000 

17  464 

3  000 

72*  110 

Nebraska  

439,  061 

71,641 

38,945 

... 

20,  180 

308  295 

309  315 

6  475 

302  840 

Omaha  

27.520 

7  340 

20  180 

Santee 

30  418 

29  968 

245 

205 

Winnebago  

71,  808 

34  333 

32,  225 

5  250 

Nevada 

316  346 

50  014 

92  241 

29 

2  830 

37  526 

203  706 

Carson 

124  765 

1  883 

19  861 

26  886 

76  135 

Fallen  

17,  440 

17  440 

Fort  McDermitt. 

17,  871 

3,948 

880 

70 

3,740 

9,233 

Moapa  River  

5,195 

400 

495 

135 

4  165 

Nevada     . 

77  580 

8  600 

68  980 

Walker  River.  .  . 

18,585 

13,885 

2,075 

2^625 

Western      Sho- 
shone 

54  231 

20  648 

1  005 

550 

6  900 

25  128 

Reno,      special 
agent 

679 

650 

29 

New  Mexico  

1,  430,  501 

84,072 

51  488 

11,  795 

140  240 

23  339 

1  119  567 

Albuquerque.  .  .«. 

291,047 

9,220 

8  925 

30,  787 

242  115 

Jicarilla. 

141  896 

33  404 

5  807 

16  340 

10  889 

75  456 

Mescalero  

136  862 

14  698 

2'  364 

15  005 

11*650 

93*  145 

Pueblo  Bonito 

145  802 

(2)' 

615 

9  040 

136  147 

Pueblo  day 
schools 

139  972 

1  750 

16  254 

13  468 

10S  500 

San  Juan  

204,  170 

25,000 

6  120 

26,  500 

800 

145,  750 

Santa  Fe 

219  142 

2  725 

216  417 

Zuni  

151  610 

8'678 

11,795 

29,100 

102,037 

New  York  Agency  . 

710 

135 

575 

North  Caroli  na: 
Cherokee 

119  785 

180 

358 

119  247 

North  Dakota 

990  765 

172  888 

74  833 

313 

112  516 

630  415 

Bismarck 

82  638 

82  638 

FortBerthold... 
Fort  Totten 

80,828 
200  539 

44,695 
7,979 

1,777 
6  410 

313 



25,993 
4  410 



8,050 
181  740 

Standing  Rock  * 

336  209 

81  578 

29  900 

48  108 

176  623 

Turtle  Mountain 

82  086 

32  618 

18'  786 

2*845 

27  837 

Wahpeton 

208  465 

5  818 

17  960 

i  31  160 

153  527 

Oklahoma 

3  083  322 

186  017 

118  579 

100 

270  410 

2  508  216 

Cantonment 

109  005 

6  710 

i  400 

100 

64  185 

37,  610 

Cheyenne     and 
Arapaho  .  . 

'390  482 

23,  439 

4  057 

87,  984 

275,002 

Chilocco 

642  441 

4  500 

637  941 

Five     Civilized 
Tribes 

65  985 

i  15,  035 

50  950 

Kiowa  

613,  296 

35,650 

53,  250 

388,323 

436,073 

Osage 

219  184 

36,  315 

1.150 

8,000 

173,  719 

Otoe 

61  545 

1400 

61,  145 

Pawnee 

129  655 

25  569 

300 

103  786 

Ponca 

92'  809 

16'  410 

300 

5,508 

70,  591 

Red  Moon 

70  635 

1  930 

184 

68  521 

Sac  and  Fox 

55'  386 

14,  425 

40,961 

Seger 

104  727 

4  834 

2  852 

4  1,420 

95  621 

28  423 

28  423 

Shawnee  .  .  . 

106!240 

5,700 

100,540 

1 1915  report. 

2  Included  with  school. 


3  Increase  in  land  value. 

4  Value  land  not  included . 


186  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  37. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30 '1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Oklahoma—  Contd. 
Five     Civilized 
Tribes  schools 

$393  509 

$236 

$14  990 

$378  283 

Armstrong 
Male  Acad- 
emy    .... 

56,856 

56  856 

Bloomfield 
1     Seminary  * 

1  177 

1  177 

Cherokee   Or- 
phan  School 

47  843 

47  843 

Collins   Insti- 
tute 

14,150 

14  150 

Euchee  Board- 
ing School 

47,  755 

11,455 

36  300 

EufaulaBoard- 
ing  School 

36,070 

125 

3,535 

32  410 

Jones       Male 
Academy 

31,210 

31  210 

Mekusukey 
Male  Acad- 
emy           

55,388 

55  388 

NuyakaBoard- 

33  426 

111 

'33  315 

Tuskahoma 
F  e  m  al  e 
Academy 

38,830 

38  830 

Wheelock  Fe- 
male Acad- 
emy   

30,804 

30,804 

Oregon 

755,  934 

$17,  772 

29,957 

$30 

$9,  320 

111,945 

$35,  560 

551  350 

Klamath       

170,  826 

7,211 

2,305 

9,320 

17,075 

24,260 

110  655 

Roseburg 

2  200 

2,120 

30 

50 

Salem  

Siletz 

349,800 
17  057 

"  5~  871 

122,807 
1  645 



191,820 

235,  173 
9  541 

U  mat  ilia 

120  530 

300 

1  200 

650 

118  380 

Warm  Springs 

95,  521 

2,270 

2  000 

3,050 

10,600 

77  601 

Pennsylvania:   Car- 
lisle 

544  965 

25  930 

101  400 

417  635 

South  Dakota 

3  022,649 

648,  184 

281  054 

5,870 

27,700 

243,  080 

379,  706 

1  437  055 

Canton  Asylum. 

146,  626 

146,626 

Cheyenne  River 

375  975 

212,  122 

40  435 

4  845 

1,200 

16  610 

100  763 

Crow  Creek 

116  575 

41  767 

3  070 

225 

10  868 

60  645 

Flandreau 

249'  806 

6,625 

4  300 

56  015 

182*  866 

Lower  Brule  .... 

121,097 

56,  442 

6,275 

8,850 

49,  530 

Pierre 

245  201 

7  145 

26  500 

45  325 

166  231 

Pine  Ridge  

880,  540 

176,  148 

20,290 

500 

18,  503 

2  379,  631 

285,  468 

Rapid  City   .  . 

261  239 

4,415 

5  090 

62,999 

188,  735 

Rosebud 

414  290 

88  205 

46  381 

300 

23  910 

75 

255  419 

Sisseton 

82  940 

20  945 

442 

61,553 

Springfield 

30  518 

30  518 

Yankton  

97,  842 

41,  515 

1  000 

55,  327 

Utah 

395  136 

291  201 

3  285 

34  328 

6  700 

4  600 

55  022 

Shivwits 

9  355 

230 

145 

8  980 

Uintah  and  Ou- 
ray 

380  038 

290  971 

3  140 

34  328 

6  700 

4  600 

40,  299 

Salt  Lake  City, 
special  agent  .  . 

5,743 

5,743 

WashiDgt  on 

1  675  445 

785  295 

58  598 

575 

62  019 

50  297 

718  661 

Colville..   . 

3  830  717 

3  707  607 

4  968 

575 

56  229 

35  259 

26  079 

Cushman  

439,  059 

2,550 

11,000 

425,  509 

Neah  Bay.  .  .  . 

8  920 

4  375 

4  545 

Spokane 

72  262 

17  047 

32  700 

6  850 

15  665 

Taholah  

20,661 

800 

750 

19,111 

Tulalip  

205  177 

29  866 

6  405 

168  906 

Yakima.  .  . 

98.649 

23.  850 

2.725 

5.790 

7.438 

58.  846 

i  1915  report. 

?  Includes  timber  reserve. 

3  Includes  value  land  and  old  Spokane  Sanatorium. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  187 

TABLE  37. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1916 — Continued* 


States  and  snperin- 
tendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irrigation. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Wisconsin 

$1  383  650 

$37  052 

$25  921 

$775 

' 

$28  437 

$709  825 

$581  640 

Grand  Rapids.." 

790 

790 

Hayward  .   .  . 

121  795 

2  240 

5  000 

20  010 

27 

94  518 

Keshena  

1  860,  096 

25,305 

12,306 

5,387 

8  709,  558 

107,  540 

Lac   du   Flam- 
beau . 

79  478 

750 

1  370 

77  358 

Laona  

1,600 

1,225 

375 

La  Pointe  

8.212 

7  042 

175 

775 

180 

40 

Oneida 

63  756 

1  460 

62  296 

Red  Cliff  

3,620 

""490 

540 

2,070 

200 

'320 

Tomah    

184,606 

4  695 

179  911 

Wittenberg  

59,  697 

59,  697 

Wyoming  :  Shoshone 

384  084 

163  103 

6  615 

$16  525 

4  670 

18  000 

174  371 

State  totals.... 

21,547,047 

3,511,292 

1,272,334 

9,468 

329,  121 

1,882,058 

1,289,870 

13,252,904 

Miscellaneous  

13,  860,  074 

51,  615 

8,984 

13,  799,  475 

Warehouses  

i  2,  884 

12,884 

Liquor  suppres- 
sion 

1  650 

i  650 

Allotting:  service 

18,984 

1  8,  984 

.  Irrigation  service 
(cost) 

13  799  475 

13  799  475 

Indian  Office  

48,  081 

48,  081 

, 

1915  report. 


2  $502,475  value  lumber,  etc.,  in  1915  report  not  shown. 


188 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


11 


11 


CO   •     •   f- 


'coooooQO5caooa>oco 
irHO<N-rt<OiQ<Mo<Na>-^'f~ 


;8o-i£ 


:  : 

•  10     •     t 


I  iiil 


200  O 
VC.O  O 
0000  O 


'OX?o"«roo'c<5~ 
O3  1^-  C^  Oi  CO 


fa* 

111 


»  O  OS  OC -00 


t^OOO"COOOOOOOOO     •* 
T— i*oc^t--OiOOOOiOOOiOO     »^ 


111 

Isl 


Sco^ 


:5  :S§  :  : 

>  Tf        •  CO        •        • 


:§ 


:8 


|§§< 


12    8 


I  CO  CO  (MO  OO         i-H 


rH  O  »O  CO  OO  CO 
Tfl  C^l  -^1  O5  O  T-l 


rH  O  CO  t~-  1C  1 


rH 
-^  ?5  03  3  <M  00  OS  00  00  M<  CO  CO  OO 


4 


I  I  13 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


189 


CD   cs 

t-    CO 

,-r  co 


O    <N    CO 


^  tc  oc   co 


£    3S2S    & 

O        (M^rOcD        CM 


t^  1M  CM  O 
t^  O:  co  iM 


5  t^  00  ^  00    00 

>  CO  <O  T— t  Tfi  T 

-  O   Tf<  Tf<   TP  Oi 


Sill  is 


SS§1  :§    1 


I  i 


i  i 


CC  O5«O        S 


t>  o  c<i  o      co  -*i  CD      a> 

l^-FCOfM         lOCMOO         1-1 
"C  IM  O>CO         CO         IO         rH 


)  O  t^  CO  t-  O5 

jf-  C  CO  O  CD 

,-1  —  <M  CO  .-H 


II    1 


'co  So?  ^  oc      oS 


CO  00  00        °°        iO 
I-H  (N  (N  CO 


CO  00 


c?§      N      gg 


>O  OO  r-l 


CftO        00 
S        CO 


§8    So 
O        O5 


III 


§§§ 


CO  OC  (N  CO  Oi 
CO  CO  (N  C^l  CO 
f  >0  O  10  CD 


lOCo"       O" 


srs^ss 


III  £ 

PlO^io"       co" 
ICDCO         CO 


o  »o      o 
ooo      S 


'  r-(  **f  ^tt  lO  IO          IO 

i  CO  >O  IO  CM  iO        •* 
S^^rHC^          CO 


-r~r    > 

:  :  o 


II    g 


II  S 


oorot 
^(I0< 


CO  'Sf  <N        CO 


I        I 


OC'  .-H  00  i-H 


(N 


oor-      o> 

t^-  OO        1^- 

Clt^        CO 


:£S 


CM  vTco"  co~ 


S 


;O    ;    ; 

if?  :-S 


H 

g 

„  ^       T) 


s  § 

.  (~       OJ 


!! 


5    M 
65333—16— 


§! 

c.  ^ 
5"^ 

^  c3 

•2o 


-13 


21  J  2- 


a  c»  ® 

a   -S^sg 
»    sgr 

1°" 


:§« 


190 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


1 


ill 


Sill! 


I  C5  lO  rH  CO  O         ^ 


IS    §8 


8»o  oo 
iO 

c^f     i-T 


:§!::: 


^oo~ 

•  O5  00 
:,Httr 


CO      •  O 

3  :£ 


<M  O  O  C 


l 


fl  3   °    i 

•rH    a    w    rH  . 

_?2  °3'C'C 


111 


:S    S 

•^         00 


§§§ 


^888    5? 

r-lOOiO         rH 

SS^Sf    S 


§1^      « 
O      • 


ooi  « 
o  ^<  - 
ioo  > 


i  ;§ 


S 


ic*     oT 
10     o 

sC 


<N  O       <N 

I  rH  CO          l>- 

rH  CO       O 


OOO-^rH 


rcooorH 


i--^rsLOco 
COrHrH 


5O5OOOO5OO          O          rH          C^  LOLOOOCO          O 

1-.  05  06  CO  10  CO       t^       CO       «0        iOt-(N05       -* 


., 

— I    03  rH-^ 


OO^        CO 


(M  IO  CO  T  »O  rH 


*  '.  :     b 


ijlii  I  I 

ill  :  :  £  o 

cil^j  :  I  §  « 

P  ro  IT-*  rt     .  ^  2  -i-3 

S^    «    4|ao|  '.*•%% 

-So1  '^   ss^sz1^.-;  -H  «s  .5 

I      SS§§g|  o  O  ft 

SSPH^MN  ^  £  5 

<jj  CP  O  O 

r?  Z  Z  X 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


191 


i  i 


(N  tr  cN        <M 


111     I 


•co       o 

CO  CS  CO        1^» 
<NTT"*          05 


O  O  >O        t^ 


88  :88    8 

lO  O      •  iO  O        O 


)  CO  <N  t--  00        1-1 


i-H  OC  (^  TT  CO 


t-  r-Trn  O  10 

S!N  l^  1C  CO 
>O  CO  TT  !>• 


o  S  co  Sfo 

Tf  CO  >C<N  O 


I 


SfSSfl 

T-H  CO  rH  < 

i-Tco" 


§o  < 
Is 


00  i-H  1C  IO  OO 


Wf   2 


S^        00 


oo 

<N~co"' 


00  ta        1C  U5      'TT        (M 


8      '  S  CO  CN 

2  issss 

<N      •  IN  00  OO 


00      •  (N  — <  <M 

S  :™'3S 


t-  OC  IN 

O5CC  CO 
KNCMCO 


1  r-t  CX)          O 

>  CO  <N         00 

>  CO  CO          i-H 


illi 


'  CO  O  CO  O 


SOO  i-H 
T  t^ 
I-H  CO  00  C 


-OiCOrHOOCSlO          I>- 


:S  : 


(N  CO  X  O  OC  ( 
C:  O  -S  O  V  • 
^r  05  O  <M  l^  < 


^H  rt  t-  05  10  < 


)  OOO  >C  O  <N  O  c 
>  <N  ^r  Oi  O  CO  T1  < 

rio'cfr-raTeoV-^ 


BIS  S 


CO  CO  OS  J3 

O  1C  ^H  t^- 

(NoCoseO 


CO  i-t  OJ 


i  OS  t~*  OS  O  OO  CO  ^t" 
i  ifl  O  r~  (N  O  co  !N 

I  l>-  O  00  rH  O  OS  TT 


oo"         co~i-T         V 


Ii3  §  «:  1*8^1  r  S 

stte  i  lllllli  i  § 


S^ 

II 


b*V  03 

a-s-s 

cu  3  3 

III 


§       •< 

I    i 


111 


192 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  39. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendent-  ies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Fm- 

plov- 
ees. 

<&]E 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Grand  total 

5,347 

2,115   3,232 

S3,  622,  454 

3,526 

1,308 
2,218 

$2,591,755 

1,  821 

$1,030,699 

Total  schools  
Total  agencies  

\rizona 

2,883 
2,464 

812 
1,303 

2,071 
1,161 

1,  947,  889 
1,  674,  565 

462,033~ 

1,091,930 
1,  499,  825 

1,575 
246 

855,959- 
174,  740 

716 

307 

409 

471 

326,563  |        245 

135,470 

Camp  Verde  schools 

4 
5 
34 
22 
27 
43 
3 
2 
4 
2 
12 
17 
56 
30 
67 
•43 
71 
42 
42 
24 
8 
12 
10 
48 
6 
18 
16 
5 
22 
21 

304 

..... 

9 
16 
11 
22 

""i" 

..... 

3 
11 
21 
14 
32 
29 
16 
13 
22 
9 
1 
7 
3 
31 

""16" 
6 
2 
3 
11 

110 

4 
2 
25 
6 
16 
21 
3 
1 
4 
1 
9 
6 
35 
16 
35 
14 
55 
29 
20 
15 
7 
5 
7 
17 
6 
8 
10 
3 
19 
10 

194 

3,140 
2,  220 
23,  200 
15,260 
17,  255 
27,  928 
2,220 
1,400 
2,600 
780 
8,570 
9,608 
31,000 
17,  532 
42,  050 
24,068 
54,810 
27,  670 
29,  468 
16,  300 
5,  440 
6,720 
7,960 
29,  088 
4,400 
9,688 
9,970 
3,760 
15,  160 
12,  768 

185,917 

2 
4 
12 
20 
15 
42 
2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
17 
27 
23 
28 
39 
37 
21 
39 
12 
4 
11 
4 
46 
1 
16 
4 
5 
9 
21 

192 

2,120 
1,620 
10,  370 
13,340 
11,455 
27,  208 
1,920 
1,400 
1,700 
780 
3,800 
9,608 
17,  890 
13,  272 
20,  040 
21,  728 
32,820 
18,  550 
27,  428 
8,260 
3,850 
6,120 
4,780 
27,  888 
1,400 
8,668 
4,120 
3,760 
7,900 
12,  768 

124,  137 

2 
1 
22 
2 
12 
1 
1 

1,020 
600 
12,  830 
1,  920 
5,800 
720 
300 

Camp  Verde  Agency 

Colorado  River  schools  *•  
Colorado  River  Agency  .... 
Fort  Apache  schools.  
Fort  Apache  A  gene  v 

Havasupai  School.  .".  

Havasupai  Agency  

Kaibab  School  .  . 

2 

900 

Kaibab  Agency 

Leupp  School. 

8 

4,  770 

Leupp  Agency  . 

Moqui  schools  

29 
7 
39 
4 
34 
21 
3 
12 
4 
1 
6 
2 
5 
2 
12 

13,110 
4,260 
22,  010 
2,340 
21,990 
9,120 
2,040 
8,040 
1,590 
600 
3,180 
1,200 
3,000 
1,020 
5,850 

Moqui  Agency  .  .  . 

Navajo  schools 

Navajo  Agency  .    . 

Phoenix  School     . 

Pima  schools  

Pima  Agency  .  .  . 

Rice  Station  School 

Salt  River  schools 

Salt  River  Agency 

San  Carlos  schools  .  . 

San  Carlos  Agency  
San  Xavier  schools  

San  Xavier  Agency.  .  . 

Truxton  Canon  School  
Truxton  Canon  Agency  
Western  Navajo  schools... 
Western  Navajo  Agency... 

California.  .  . 

13 

7,260 

112 

61,  780 

Bishop  schools.  . 

11 

7 
5 
2 
2 
20 
7 
21 
11 
14 
20 

17 

1 
18 
9 
15 
10 
15 
61 
9 
20 
5 
4 

48 

2 
4 
1 
2 

9 
3 

4 

6,190 
3,540 
3,430 
1,020 
1,720 
13,  135 
4,480 
14,070 
5,744 
9,720 
11,590 

8,528 
1,400 
6,748 
5,710 
8,448 
7,180 
8,844 
43,  820 
6,060 
9,160 
3,520 
1,860 

31,790 

5 
6 
2 
2 
1 
8 
7 
12 
9 
7 
8 

16 
1 
15 
4 
15 
4 
14 
28 
3 
20 
3 
2 

35 

3,955 
2,940 
1,880 
1,020 
1,000 
6,460 
4,480 
8,460 
4,424 
5,760 
5,670 

7,928 
1,400 
5,548 
3,610 
8,448 
3,940 
8,064 
23,  140 
3,150 
9,160 
2,440 
1,260 

25,  460 

6 
1 
3 

2,235 
600 
1,550 

Bishop  Agency  

Campo  School 

Campo  Agency 

Digger  Agency  

2 
18 
4 
15 
4 
13 
9 

6 
1 

8 
7 
4 
9 
8 
50 
7 
5 
5 
3 

33 

1 
12 

720 

6,  675. 

Fort  Bidwell  School 

2 
3 
6 
.      7 
1 
11 

11 

Fort  Bidwell  Agency 

Fort  Yuma  schools 

9 
2 

7 
12 

1 

5,610 
1,320 
3,960 
5,920 

600 

Fort  Yuma  Agency 

Greenville  School 

Hoopa  Valley  School 

Hoopa  Valley  Agency 

Malki  Schoof 

Malki  Agency  

10 
2 
11 
1 
7 
11 
2 
15 

3 
5 

1,200 
2,100 

Pala  schools  .  . 

Pala  Agency  . 

Round  Valley  schools  . 

6 
1 
33 
6 

3,240 
780 
20,  680 
2,910 

Round  Valley  Agency  

Sherman  Institute  

Soboba  schools 

Soboba  Agency 

Tule  River  schools 

2 
2 

13 

1,080 
600 

6,330 

Tule  River  Agency 

1 

15 

Colorado 

Southern  Ute  schools  

12 

16 
3 
17 

107 

1 
6 

34 

11 
10 
3 
9 

73 

8,230 
10,  740 
2,640 
10,  180 

78,262 

5 
13 
1 
16 

75 

4,630 
9,600 
1,650 
9,580 

58,042 

7 
3 
2 
1 

32 

3,600 
1,140 
990 
600 

20,220 

Southern  Ute  Agency  
Ute  Mountain  School  
Ute  Mountain  Agency  

Idaho 

Coeur  d'Alene  schools  
Coeur  d'Alene  Agency  
Fort  Hall  schools  

5 
17 

20 

7 

5 
10 
13 

3,540 
12,  334 

14,480 

3 

15 

8 

2,940 
11,014 
7,400 

2 
2 
12 

600 
1,320 
7,080 

1  Includes  Fort  Mojave  School. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


193 


TABLE  39. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1916— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ploy- 
ees. 

In- 
dians. 

Non- 
In- 
dians. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Idaho—  Continued  . 
Fort  Hall  Agency.  . 

24 
25 
16 

27 

12 
1 

7 

10 

12 
24 
9 

17 

$15,  248 
20,180 
12,480 

16,910 

23 
12 
14 

13 

$14,248 
11,680 
10,  760 

9,590 

1 

13 
2 

14 

$1,000 
8,500 
1,720 

7,320 

Fort  Lapwai  School 

Fort  Lapwai  Agency  

Iowa 

Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium.  .  . 
Sac  and  Fox  Agency  

22 
5 

89 

7 
3 

18 

15 
2 

71 

14,  130 

2,780 

67,  110 

8 
5 

47 

6,810 
2,780 

40,060, 

14 

7,320 

Kansas 

42 

27,050 

Haskell  Institute 

65 
14 
2 
8 

41 

9 
5 
1 
3 

12 

56 

? 

5 

29 

50,770 
8,760 
1,780 
5,800 

27,920 

33 
6 
2 
6 

19 

28,  880 
4,500 
1,780 
4,900 

14,800 

32 

8 

21,890 
4,260 

Kickapoo  schools 

Kickapoo  A  gency  

Potawatomi  Agency 

2 
22 

900 
13,  120 

Michigan 

Mackinac  Agencv 

2 
39 

268 

2 

27 

131 

2,000 
25,920 

172,606 

2 
17 

173 

2,000 
12,800 

121,096 

Mount  Pleasant  schools  
Minnesota 

12 
137 

22 
95 

13,  120 
51,510 

Cass  Lake  School 

8 
6 
15 
4 
5 
15 
36 
4 
9 
28 
20 
32 
14 
42 
30 

350 

4 

""9" 
1 
3 
6 
22 
1 
4 
13 
9 
20 
6 
18 
21 

167 

4 
6 
6 
3 
2 
9 
14 
3 
5 
15 
11 
12 
8 
24 
9 

183 

3,940 
4,640 
10,200 
2,  750 
2,680 
9,840 
22,928 
2,850 
5,560 
18,380 
12,090 
19,388 
9,240 
26,  520 
21,600 

237,223 

3 

4 
10 
2 
4 
7 
35 

S 
16 
7 
28 
6 
15 
27 

280 

1,900 
4,040 
7.100 
1,680 
2,280 
5,700 
22,  148 
1,200 
4,960 
11,790 
5,580 
16,688 
4,840 
12,390 
18,800 

198,  688 

5 
2 
5 
2 
1 
8 
1 
3 
1 
12 
13 
4 
8 
27 
3 

70 

2,040 
600 
3,100 
1,070 
400 
4,140 
780 
1,650 
600 
6,590 
6,510 
2.700 
4,400 
14,  130 
2,800 

38,  535 

Fond  du  Lac  schools  

Fond  du  Lac  Agency 

Grand  Portage  School 

Grand  Portage  Agency  
Leech  Lake  school5? 

Leech  Lake  Agency  

Nett  Lake  School 

Nett  Lake  Agency 

Pipestone  schools  

Red  Lake  schools  
Red  Lake  Agencv    

Vermillion  Lake  'School  .... 
White  Earth  schools 

White  Earth  Agency  
Montana 

Blackfeet  schools 

20 
50 
23 
68 
3 
27 
11 
33 
22 
33 
18 
42 

84 

6 
30 

7 
35 

14 
20 
16 
33 
3 
13 
9 
16 
12 
15 
14 
18 

53 

12,800 
32,938 
16,990 
45,628 
4,500 
19,  508 
8,125 
22,388 
14,380 
19.  508 
12,410 
28,048 

62,878 

10 
46 
10 
•  61 
3 
25 
4 
32 
8 
33 
9 
39 

57 

8,100 
30,718 
9,460 
41,  048 
4,500 
18,068 
4,300 
21,  668 
7,520 
19,  508 
8,090 
25..  70S 

45,968 

10 
4 
13 

7 

4,700 
2,220 
7,530 
4,580 

Blackfeet  Agency  

Crow  schools  .  . 

Crow  Agency 

Flathead  School          .     ... 

Flathead  Agency  

Fort  Belknap  schools 

14 
2 

17 
10 
18 
4 
24 

31 

2 
7 
1 
14 

""9" 
3 

27 

1,440 
3,825 
720 
6,860 

"4  '320 
2,340 

16,910 

Fort  Belknap  Agency 

Fort  Peck  schools 

Fort  Peck  Agency       

Tongue  River  schools 

Tongue  River  Agency    

Nebraska 

Genoa  School  ...      ' 

42 
9 
1 
11 
2 
19 

117 

11 

4 

31 
5 
1 
3 
2 
11 

80 

28,830 
7,580 
l',700 
7,840 
2,800 
14,  128 

74,605 

21 
8 
1 
11 
2 
14 

70 

16,  100 
6,980 
1,700 
7,840 
2,800 
10,548 

48,265 

21 

1 

12,  730 
600 

Omaha  Agency 

Santee  School 

San  tee  Agencv 

8 

Winnebago  School 

Winnebago  Agency  

8 
37 

5 

47 

3,580 
26,  340 

Nevada  

Carson  School 

29 
9 
3 
8 
2 
4 
3 
11 
14 

8 
""2" 
'"2 

""3" 
2 
6 

21 
9 

8 

"'4' 
""9" 

8 

20,960 
4,880 
1,440 
5,025 
624 
3,180 
564 
6,840 
9.164 

12 
5 
3 
4 
2 
2 
3 
2 
12 

11,080 
3,060 
1,440 
3,165 
624 
2,280 
564 
1,900 
7,844 

17 
4 

9,880 
1,820 

Fallen  schools    

Fallen  Agency  

Fort  McDermitt  School  
Fort  McDermitt  Agency  .  .  . 
Moapa  River  School 

4 

1,860 

2 

900 

Moapa  River  \gency 

Nevada  schools       

9 
2 

4,940 
1.320 

Nevada  Aeencv.  .  . 

194 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  39. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ploy- 
ees. 

In- 
dians. 

Non- 
In- 
dians. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Nevada—  Continued. 
Walker  River  School  

5 
10 
6 
13 

430 

1 

4 
1 

8 

187 

4 
6 
5 
5 

243 

$3,  720 
6,004 
4,380 
7,824 

259,  218 

2 

8 
4 
11 

272 

$1,800 
4,624 
3,780 
6,104 

169,  783 

3 
2 
2 
2 

158 

$1,920 
1,380 
600 
1,720 

89,  435 

Walker  River  Agency 

Western  Shoshone  schools.. 
Western  Shoshone  Agency. 

New  Mexico       

Albuquerque  School 

42 
17 
46 
11 
28 
21 
16 
49 
61 
26 
42 
39 
21 
11 

3 

13 
5 
21 
3 
10 
6 
9 
15 
39 
10 
30 
17 
5 
4 

29 
12 
25 
8 
18 
15 
7 
34 
22 
16 
12 
22 
16 
7 

3 

28,  630 
11,640 
25,  140 
7,440 
19,  320 
13,480 
10,940 
29,  070 
27,860 
17,  730 
20,888 
25,  850 
13,210 
8,020 

2,250 

22 

7 
43 
3 
25 
5 
15 
13 
49 
11 
42 
20 
8 
9 

2 

15,  940 
6,100 
24,000 
3,060 
16,680 
5,200 
10,  580 
11,155 
20,660 
8,910 
20,  888 
14,  170 
5,860 
6,580 

1,650 

20 
10 
3 
8 
3 
16 
1 
36 
12 
15 

12,690 
5,  540 
1,140 
4,380 
2,  640 
8,280 
360 
17,  915 
7,200 
8,820 

Jicarilla  schools  

Jicarilla  Agency 

Mescalero  School  

Mescalero  Agency  

Pueblo  Bonito  School 

Pueblo  Bonito  Agency  
Pueblo  day  schools 

Pueblo  day  schools  agency.  . 
San  Juan  schools  

San  Juan  Agency 

Santa  Fe  School    

19 
13 
2 

1 

11,  680 
7,350 
1,440 

600 

Zuni  schools       

Zuni  Agency 

New  York  Agency  .  . 

North  Carolina 

35 

12 

23 

23,810 

23 

16,430 

12 

7,380 

Cherokee  schools        .  .     .  . 

27 

8 

284 

9 
3 

144 

18 
5 

140 

17,010 
6,800 

163,284 

16 

7 

192 

5 
8 
30 
20 
9 
22 
60 
6 
19 
13 

577 

10,350 
6,080 

117,454 

11 

1 

92 

6,660 
720 

45,830 

Cherokee  Agency 

North  Dakota 

Bismarck  School 

12 
17 
32 
46 
12 
47 
65 
11 
19 
23 

909 

6 
2 
20 
17 
7 
17 
50 
1 
12 
12 

266 

6 
15 
12 
29 
5 
30 
15 
10 
7 
11 

643 

6,900 
9,845 
17,548 
27,700 
7,760 
29,080 
31,868 
6,825 
10,028 
15,  730 

733,889 

3,320 
6,125 
16,  288 
13,880 
5,960 
17,370 
29,008 
5,325 
10,028 
10,  150 

526,360 

7 
9 
2 
26 
3 
25 
5 
5 

3,  580 
3,720 
1,260 
13,820 
1,800 
11,710 
2,860 
1,500 

Fort  Berthold  schools  
Fort  Berthold  Agency  
Fort  Totten  schools 

Fort  Totten  Agency   

Standing  Rock  schools  
Standing  Rock  Agency  
Turtle  Mountain  schools  
Turtle  Mountain  Agency  .  .  . 
Wahpeton  School  

10 
332 

5,580 
207,529 

Oklahoma       

Cantonment  School  

12 
14 

20 

19 
55 
69 
61 
28 
32 
12 
7 
15 
11 
16 
10 
4 
6 
13 
12 
15 
12 
16 
5 
19 
8 

4 
4 

9 

8 
20 
17 
33 

8 
9 
2 

4 
3 
5 
3 

""5" 
6 
3 

7 
7 
3 
8 
4 

8 
10 

11 

ii 

35 
52 
28 
20 
23 
10 
6 
11 
8 
11 
7 
4 
6 
8 
6 
12 
5 
9 
2 
11 
4 

6,950 
10,  020 

13,400 

14,440 
39,880 
43,900 
39,600 
19,  880 
34,  680 
8,020 
4,920 
10,  160 
7,860 
10,  210 
8,500 
2,890 
2,680 
8,330 
8,700 
9,970 
7,840 
11,190 
3,060 
10,930 
4,980 

4 
13 

9 

16 
29 
29 
48 
12 
29 
6 
6 
5 
10 
7 
9 
2 
3 
6 
9 
6 
11 
7 
4 
10 
7 

3,200 
9,720 

7,080 

12,  220 
23,890 
22,800 
32,  520 
11,  360 
31,  580 
4,740 
4,200 
4,400 
6,960 
6,220 
7,900 
1,790 
1,360 
5,010 
6,420 
4,840 
7,000 
5,940 
2,340 
6,200 
4,380 

8 

1 

11 

3 
26 
40 
13 
16 
3 
6 
1 
10 
1 
9 
1 
2 
3 
7 
3 
9 
1 
9 
1 
9 
1 

3,750 
300 

6,320 

2,220 
15,990 
21,  100 
7,080 
8,520 
3,  100 
3.280 
720 
5,760 
900 
3,990 
600 
1,100 
1,320 
3,320 
2.280 
5,130 
840 
5,250 
720 
4,730 
600 

Cantonment  Agency  . 

Cheyenne     and     Arapaho 
School  

Cheyenne     and     Arapaho 
Agency  

Chilocco  School       

Kiowa  schools 

Kiowa  Agency  

Osage  School  

Osage  Agency 

Otoe  School  

Otoe  Agency  . 

Pawnee  School 

Pawnee  Agency    

Ponca  School 

Ponca  Agency  

Red  Moon  School  

Red  Moon  Agency 

Sac  and  Fox  School  
Sac  and  Fox  Agency  

Seger  School 

Seger  Agency 

Seneca  School  

Seneca  Agency  

Shawnee  School 

Shawnee  Agency  

Total  i. 

491 
•  Excl 

172 

usive  ( 

319 
>f  Five 

342,990 
Civilized  Ti 

297 
ibes. 

234,  070 

194 

108,920 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


195 


TABLE  39. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ploy- 
ees. 

In- 
dians. 

Non- 
In- 
dians. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Five  Civilised  Tribes 

418 

93 

325 

$390,  899 

280 

$292,290 

138 

$98,  609 

Office  at  Muskogee  
Field  employees  
Schools  —  supervisor  
Armstrong  Academy.  .  . 
Cherokee  Training  

129 
128 
14 
16 
12 
12 
15 
14 
15 
16 
15 
16 
16 

183 

26 

54 
4 

2 

103 
74 
10 
14 
12 
12 
13 
14 
14 
16 
14 
15 
14 

121 

144,  240 
137,270 
15,  630 
10,500 
8,185 
7,560 
9,652 
8,580 
10,  170 
9,862 
9,480 
9,900 
9,870 

134,052 

93 
123 
11 
8 
5 
7 
5 
2 
7 
6 
6 
4 
3 

117 

107,520 
133,  190 
12,390 
6,240 
4,045 
4,620 
4,155 
960 
5,640 
4,275 
4,635 
3,120 
1,500 

94,852 

36 
5 
3 
8 
7 
5 
10 
12 
8 
10 
9 
12 
13 

66 

36,720 
4,080 
3,240 
4,260 
4,140 
2,940 
5,497 
7,620 
4,530 
5,587 
4,845 
6,780 
8,370 

39,200 

Collins  Institute     

Euchee  Boarding  
Eufaula  Boarding  

2 

"T 

Jones  Academy 

Mekusukey  Academy  .  . 
Nuyaka  Boarding    .... 

1 
1 

2 

62 

Tuskahoma  Academy.  . 
Wheelock  Academy  

Oregon    

Klamath  school'' 

24 
29 
7 
51 
3 
7 
13 
10 
17 
22 

76 
670 

5 

11 

19 
18 
7 
38 
2 
2 
6 
5 
12 
12 

63 
366 

15,710 
24,460 
8,500 
38,470 
3,050 
3,980 
9,060 
5,744 
10,830 
14,248 

59,410 
396,  806 

11 

24 
6 
24 
1 
7 
6 
8 
9 
21 

39 

448 

9,750, 
20,700 
8,200 
21,520 
1,550 
3,980 
4,920 
4,004 
6,700 
13,52,8 

35,350 
285,  926 

13, 
5 
1 
27 
2 

5,960 
3,760 
300 
16,950 
1,500 

Klamath  Agency     

Roseburg  School 

Salem  School 

13 

1 
5 
7 
5 
5 
10 

13 
304 

Siletz  schools         

Siletz  Agency 

Umatilla  School    

7 
2 
8 
1 

37 
222 

4,140 
1,740 
4,130 
720 

24,060 
110,880 

Umatilla  Agency 

Warm  Springs  schools  
Warm  Springs  Agency  .  .  .  ,  . 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  School.  . 
South  Dakota    

Canton  Asylum  

23 
22 
53 
13 
26 
45 
13 
17 
26 
90 
99 
33 
71 
71 
18 
9 
9 
15 
17 

60 

23 

16 
17 
9 
10 
28 
9 
8 
19 
71 
22 
22 
60 
20 
7 
1 
5 
8 
11 

36 

14,  280 
15,  110 
28,  288 
9,230 
15,428 
30,  120 
8,940 
9,944 
18,030 
54,  570 
45,696 
21,730 
41,820 
38,660 
11,990 
5,920 
5,380 
10,090 
11,  580 

41,414 

11 

10 
52 
6 
24 
18 
5 
16 
13 
44 
97 
14 
34 
63 
9 
8 
3 
7 
14 

49 

8,960 
9,170 
28,  108 
5,280 
13,988 
14,  860 
4,440 
9,044 
10,920 
36,050 
44,256 
11,350 
25,980 
33,380 
7,180 
5,200 
2,480 
5,920 
9,360 

35,754 

12 
12 
1 

7 
2 
27 
8 
1 
13 
46 
2 
19 
37 
8 
9 
1 
6 
8 
3 

11 

5,320 
5,940 
180 
3,950 
1,440 
15,  260 
4.500 
900 
7.110 
18,520 
1,440 
10,380 
15,840 
5,280 
4,810 
720 
2.900 
4,170 
2,220 

5,660 

Cheyenne  River  schools  
Cheyenne  River  Agency  
Crow  Creek  schools 

6 
.  .36 
4 
16 
17 
4 
9 
7 
19 
77 
11 
11 
51 
11 
8 
4 
7 
6 

24 

Crow  Creek  Agency  

Flandreau  School        

Lower  Brule  School  
Lower  Brule  Agency  

Pierre  School 

Pine  Ridge  schools  

Pine  Ridge  Agency 

Rapid  City  School  

Rosebud  schools 

Rosebud  Agency 

Sisseton  School     

Sisseton  Agency 

Springfield  School    

Yank  ton  School 

Yankton  Agency    

Utah 

Goshute  schools 

5 
3 
3 
12 
37 

253 

5 
3 
1 

7 
20 

167 

1,840 
2,020 
824 
9,490 
27,  240 

185,  160 

3 
1 
3 
6 
36 

188 

1,240 
1,000 
824 
6,170 
26,520 

147,  250 

2 
2 

600 
1,020 

Shivwits  School    

Shivwits  Agency 

2 
5 
17 

86 

Uintah  and  Ouray  School.  . 
Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency. 

Washington       

6 
65 

3,320 
720 

37,910 

Colville  schools    

17 

42 
36 
8 
7 
5 
7 
18 
3 
12 
29 
21 
18 
30 

2 
13 

8 
4 
2 
3 

""~8~ 
...„ 

9 
10 
9 
13 

15 
29 

28 
4 
5 
2 
7 
10 
3 
7 
20 
11 
9 
17 

11,710 
36,  228 
27,290 
5,720 
4,820 
2,340 
4,650 
11,260 
3,280 
8,164 
20,730 
14,  640 
12,990 
21,338 

11 
38 
20 
7 
5 
4 
4 
16 
3 
12 
13 
21 
8 
26 

9,910 
32,708 
18,040 
4,520 
3,530 
1,740 
3,750 
10,100 
3,280 
8,164 
11,300 
14,  640 
7,410 
18,  158 

6 
4 
16 
1 
2 
1 
3 
2 

1,800 
3,520 
9,250 
1,200 
1,290 
600 
900 
1,160 

Colville  Agency 

Cushman  schools  

Cushman  Agency 

Neah  Bay  schools  
Neah  Bay  Agency       

Spokane  schools 

Spokane  Agency  

Taholah  schools  

Taholah  Agency 

Tulalip  schools  

16 

9,430 

Tulalip  Agency 

Yakima  School 

5 

5,580 
3,180 

Yakima  Agency  

196 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  39. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1916— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ploy- 
ees. 

In- 
dians. 

Non- 
In- 
dians. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Wisconsin 

230 

115 

115 

$158,  742 

138 

$108,632 

92 

$50,  110 

Grand  Rapids  Agency  

5 

24 
4 
22 
38 
18 
7 
4 
1 
22 
25 
3 
8 
30 
19 

63 

1 
6 
2 
9 
27 
8 
4 
1 

4 
18 
2 
13 
11 
10 
3 
3 
1 
15 
9 
3 
3 
11 
9 

39 

4,680 
16,260 
2,460 
17,  325 
21,  898 
12,  370 
4,404 
4,220 
2,750 
20,960 
13,900 
2,375 
5,040 
19,  190 
10,  910 

47,  165 

5 
10 
4 
9 
31 
8 
6 
4 
1 
22 
10 
1 
7 
11 
9 

49 

4,680 
8,120 
2,460 
10,160 
18,138 
6,880 
3,744 
4,220 
2,750 
20,960 
6,560 
1,400 
4,320 
8,640 
5,600 

39,  645 

Hay  ward  schools  

14 

8,140 

Havward  Agency     

Keshena  schools 

13 

7 
10 
1 

7,165 
3,760 
5,490 
660 

Keshena  Agency  
Lacdu  Flambeau  School... 
Lac  du  Flambeau  Agency.  . 
Laona  Agency  

La  Pointe  School  

La  Pointe  Agency  

7 
16 

Oneida  School 

15 
2 
1 
19 
10 

14 

7,340 
975 
720 
10,  550 
5,310 

7,520 

Red  Cliff  School     

Red  Cliff  Agency       

5 
19 
10 

24 

Tomah  School 

Wittenberg  School  

Wyoming 

Shoshone  schools 

19 

44 

3 

21 

16 
23 

14,  440 
32,  725 

8 
41 

8,780 
30,  865 

11 
3 

5,660 
1,860 

Shoshone  Agency     

TABLE  40. — Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  30,  1916. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force. 
Total  .  . 

118 

$189,810 

19 

$43,550 

99 

$146,260 

Inspection  

6 
3 

24 
9 
25 
8 

2 

2 

7 
21 
9 

1 
1 

269 

16,000 
6,100 
31,  590 
17,400 
37,200 
16,700 

4,400 
2,800 

13,  750 
23,  370 
17,000 

2,000 
1,500 

300,  730 

1 
1 
1 
1 

1 
1 

1 

1 

1 
1 

7 

1 

1 

14 

3,500 
2,500 
2,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 

3,000 
2,000 

2,250 
1,800 
14,000 

2,000 
1,500 

27,500 

5 

2 
23 
8 
24 

7 

1 
1 

6 
20 
2 

12,500 
3,600 
29,590 
14,400 
34,200 
13,  700 

1,400 
800 

11,500 
21,570 
3,000 

Special  supervisors  

Liquor  

Construction  

Health...  

Schools  .  . 

Industries: 
Farming 

Employment  

Forestry: 
Field  supervising  officers  

Menominee  

Special  agents    . 

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  In- 
dians   

Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians 

Field  irrigation  service. 
Total... 

255 

273,230 

Chief  inspector  

1 

7 

4,000 
15,800 

1 
1 

4,000 
2,500 

Superintendents  of  irrigation  

6 

13,300 

Total  

8 
25 
6 

19,800 
35,  170 
5,700 

2 
1 
2 

6,500 
2,000 
2,400 

6 
24 
4 

13,300 
33,  170 
3,300 

Arizona  and  New  Mexico:  Miscellaneous  work.  . 
Arizona  

Pima  

5 
1 

83 
13 

4,500 
1,200 

74,800 
12.045 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1.200 
1,200 

2,000 
1.600 

4 

3,300 

Salt  River  

California:  Miscellaneous  work  

182 
12 

72,800 
10.  445 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall... 

1  Temporary,  or  for  emergency. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  197 

TABLE  40. —  Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  30,  1916 — Continued. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  irrigation  service  —  Continued. 
Montana  

15 

$14,  705 

2 

$3,000 

13 

$11,705 

Billings 

1 
7 
6 
1 

18 
1 
43 

1,500 
6,560 
6,345 
300 

21,  440 
900 
49,190 

1 

6 
5 
1 

17 

1 
41 

1,500 
5,060 
4,845 
300 

19,440 
900 
45,390 

Crow  

1 
1 

1,500 
1,500 

Fort  Belknap 

Tongue  River  

Oregon:  Klamath  

1 

2,000 

South  Dakota:  Pierre 

Utah  

2 

3,800 

Salt  Lake  . 

24 
19 

42 
15 

11 

29,  440 
19,  750 

50,880 
16,100 

11,065 

1 
1 

1 
1 

5 

1,800 
2,000 

2,100 
2,100 

5,380 

23 
18 

41 
14 

6 

27,640 
17,  750 

48,780 
14,000 

5,685 

Uintah  

Washington:  Yakima 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

Field  allotment  service. 
Total  .  . 

Special  allotting  agent 

1 
2 
1 
1 
3 

2,500 
1,980 
1,080 
900 
2,445 

1 

2,500 

Arizona:  Pima  

2 

1,980 

Montana:  Blackfeet  

1 

1,080 

North  Dakota*  Turtle  Mountain 

1 

2 

900 
1,725 

South  Dakota 

1 

720 

Pine  Ridge    .                           .... 

1 

2 

1 
2 

53 
17 
40 

1,050 
1,395 

540 
1,620 

59,500 
42,500 
40,220 

1 
1 

1,050 
675 

Rosebud  r  

1 

1 
1 

18 
17 
3 

•720 

540 
540 

32,800 
42,500 
6,200 

Washington-  Colville 

Wisconsin:  La  Pointe 

1 

35 

1,080 
26,700 

Heir  ship  work. 
Examiners  

Probate  work. 
Attorneys.      .  .                   

Warehouses. 
Total 

37 

34,020 

Chicago 

28 
7 
5 

26,870 
7,180 
6,170 

1 
1 
1 

2,200 
2,000 
2,000 

27 
6 
4 

24,670 
5,180 
4,170 

St.  Louis  

San  Francisco 

TABLE  41. — Recapitulation  of  all  Indian  Service  employees. 


Designation. 

Number. 

Salaries. 

Total  .  .   .                          

6,115 

$4,  599,  529 

School 

i  2  883 

1  947  889 

Agency  .  .                                                                     

i  2,  464 

1,  674,  565 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force 

118 

189  810 

Irrigation  service                                      

269 

300,  730 

Allotment  service 

11 

11  065 

Heirship  work 

53 

59  500 

Probate  work                                                              

17 

42,500 

Warehouses 

40 

40  220 

Indian  Office  employees,  exclusive  of  commissioner  and  assistant  commissioner.  .  . 

260 

333,250 

1  School  and  agency  includes  2,115  Indians  earning  $922,736.    (Decrease  from  1915  is  due  to  failure  of  some 
superintendents  in  1915  to  separate  Indians  and  non-Indians.) 


198 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


TABLE  42. — -Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1916,  with  unexpended  balances. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands  of 
disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Approp'ria- 
tions  for 
fiscal  year 
1916. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1916. 

Balance  in 
U.  S.  Treas- 
ury and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers, June  30, 
1916.1 

Total                                                   ..  .. 

$638,  240.  12 

59,  383,  714.  50 

$8,  577,  841.  65 

$1  444  112  97 

General  provisions: 
Court  costs,  etc..  in  suits  involving  lands 
allotted  to  Indians  

2,  000.  00 

384.  75 

1,  615.  25 

Determining    heirs    of    deceased    Indian 
allottees 

100  000  00 

82  987  48 

17  012  52 

Expenses  of  Indian  commissioners 

10  000.00 

5  811.  12 

4  188  88 

General  expenses  Indian  Service 

135  000  00 

124  393  45 

10  606  55 

Indian  schools  support                  

1  500,000.00 

1  404  796.53 

95  203  47 

Indian  school  and  agency  buildings 

430  000  00 

322  053  16 

107  946  84 

Indian  school,  transportation  .             

72.  000.  00 

64  167.46 

7  832  54 

Industrial  work  and  care  of  timber 

450  000  00 

420  118  94 

29  881  06 

Industry  among  Indians  

600,  000.  00 

537,311.76 

62  688  24 

Inspectors  Indian  Ssrvice 

30  000  00 

14  303  12 

15  696  88 

Irrigation,     Indian     reservations     (reim- 
bursable) 

124  504  92 

345  700.00 

359  924  90 

110  280  02 

Judgments,  Indian  depredation  claims  
Pay  of  Indian  police 

98,622.44 

59,259.50 
200  000.  00 

48,455.50 
185  779.47 

109,426.44 
14  220  53 

Pay  of  judges,  Indian  courts  

8,  000.  00 

7,  540.  33 

459.  67 

Purchase   and   transportation    of   Indian 
supplies  

300,  000.  00 

281,426.65 

18,  573.  35 

Relieving  distress  and  prevention,  etc.,  of 
diseases  among  Indians.  .          

296,  500.  00 

216,114.52 

80,  385.  48 

Suppressing  liquor  traffic  among  Indians 

100  000.00 

97  749.22 

2  250.78 

Surveying  and  allotting  Indian  reservations 
(reimbursable) 

91  505.82 

150  000.  00 

105,  334.  77 

136  171.05 

Telegraphing    and    telephoning,    Indian 
Service 

10  000.00 

4,851.48 

5,  148.  52 

Fulfilling  treaties  with— 
Choctaws,  Oklahoma                                .  . 

31  610.00 

10,  520.  00 

50.00 

42,  080.  00 

Crows,  Montana  .             

6,  000.  00 

5,  545.  00 

455.  00 

Navahos,  schools,  Arizona                  

100  000.00 

20,  305.  55 

79,694.45 

Pawnees,  Oklahoma  .        

7,  237.  74 

30,  000.  ,00 

30,000.00 

7,  237.  74 

Senecas  of  New  York 

2  548.53 

6  000.00 

6,  132.  64 

2  415.89 

Six  Nations  of  New  York  

1,221.35 

4,  500.  00 

4,817.12 

9  04.  23 

Support  of— 
Bannocks  employees  Idaho 

5  000  00 

4  631  00 

369.  00 

Cheyennes  and  Arapahoes,  Oklahoma  

35  000.00 

30,111.90 

4,  888.  10 

Chippewas  of  Lake  Superior  Wisconsin 

7  000  00 

6  757  35 

242.  65 

Chippewas  of  the  Mississippi,  Minnesota  .  . 

4  000.00 

4,  000.  00 

Chippewas,  Turtle  Mountain  Band,  North 
Dakota..            .  .               

11,000.00 

10,  438.  35 

561.  65 

Coeur  d'Alenes  Idaho 

3  000  00 

2  920  63 

79.37 

Confederated  Bands  of  Utes— 
Employees  etc 

23  740  00 

23  087.49 

652.  51 

Subsistence  

30,  000.  00 

22,406.  17 

7,  593.  83 

Seeds  and  implements  Utah 

10  000  00 

1  582.32 

8,417.68 

D'Wamish  and  other  allied  tribes  in  Wash- 
ington    ^  

7,000.00 

6,220.81 

779.  19 

Support  of  Indians  in— 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico  .            

330,  000.  00 

317,340.40 

12,  659.  60 

California 

42  000  00 

41  267  19 

732.  81 

Nevada  . 

18,  500.  00 

17,836.31 

663.  69 

Utah 

10  000  00 

8  142.46 

1,857.54 

Support  of  Indians  of— 
Blackfeet  Agancy  Mont 

15  000  00 

14,  615.  23 

384.  77 

Colvilleand  Puyallup  Agencies  and  Joseph's 
Band  of  Nez  Perces,  Wash 

13  000.00 

12,486.47 

513.  53 

Flathead  Agencv,  Mont  

12,000.00 

11,158.63 

841.  37 

Fort  Belknar*  Agencv,  Mont  

20,000.00 

19,379.33 

620.  67 

Fort  Berthold  Agency,  I  *.  Dak  
Fort  Hall  Reservation,  Idaho  



15,000.00 
30,  000.  00 

14,  748.  41 
29,233.97 

251.  59 
766.  03 

Fort  Peck  Agency  Mont 

30  000  00 

29  843.  18 

156.  82 

Grande  Ronde  and  Siletz  Agencies,  Oreg.  .  . 

4,  000.  00 

3,837.22 

162.  78 

Klamath  Agency,  Oreg 

6  000.00 

5  506.85 

493.  15 

Umatilla  Agencv,  Oreg  

3,  000.  00 

2,943.79 

56.21 

Warm  Springs  Agencv,  Oreg 

4,  000.  00 

3,  888.  68 

111.32 

Yakima  Agency,  Wash.  .  . 

3,000.00 

2,  715.  78 

284.  22 

1  A  large  part  of  the  unexpended  balances  shown  in  this  column  will  be  expended  on  account  of  out" 
standing  obligations  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


199 


TABLE  42. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended' 
June  30,  1916,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands  of 
disbursing 
officers, 
June  30,  1916. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  year 
1916. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1916. 

Balance  in 
U.  S.  Treas- 
ury and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers, June  30, 
1916. 

Support  of  — 
Kansas  Indians,  Oklahoma  

JL500.00 

$1,409.37 

$90.  63 

Kickapoos,  Oklahoma.. 

2,000.00 

1,  918.  18 

81.82 

Makahs,  Washington 

2  000.00 

1,  262.  41 

737.  59 

Northern  Cheyenne^  and  Arapahoes,  Mon- 
tana 

85,  000.  00 

70,901.65 

14,  098.  35> 

Pawnees,  Oklahoma  — 
Employees,  etc  

6,600.00 

6,  529.  86 

70.14 

Iron,  steel  etc 

500.  00 

496.  38 

3.62 

Schools  

10,000.00 

8,  758.  53 

1,241.47 

Poncas,  Oklahoma 

8,  000.  00 

7,  476.  05 

523.  95 

Pottawatomies,  Wisconsin       

7,000.00 

6,980.29 

19.71 

Quapaws,  Education,  Oklahoma 

1,  000.  00 

750.  00 

250.  00 

Quapaws,  Employees,  etc.,  Oklahoma  

500.00 

370.  67 

129.  33 

Quinaielts  and  Quillehutes,  Washington 

1,000.00 

444.24 

555.  76 

Rocky    Boy's    Band   of   Chippewas   and 
other  Indians,  Montana  ... 

10,000.00 

9,  384.  96 

615.04 

Sacs  and  Foxes  of  the  Missouri  Kansas 

200.00 

200.00 

Shoshoni  in  Wyoming  

15,  000.  00 

10,  724.  84 

4,  275.  16 

Employees  etc 

6,  000.  00 

5,480.83 

519.  17" 

Sioux  of  Devils  Lake,  N.  Dak  

5,000.00 

4,981.31 

18.69 

Sioux  of  different  tribes,  South  Dakota- 
Employees  etc                      ' 

107  000.00 

106,  033.  50 

966.  50* 

Subsistence  and  civilization 

200,  000.  00 

181,434.76 

18,  565.  24 

Sioux,  Yankton  Tribe  South  Dakota 

14  000.00 

12,501.00 

1  499.  00* 

Spokanes,  Washington  

1,000.00 

850.  67 

149.33 

Wichitas  and  affiliated  bands  Oklahoma 

5,  000.  00 

4,  955.  14 

44.86 

Indian  schools: 
Albuquerque,  N.  Mex  

, 

68,  600.  00 

67,  746.  95 

853.  05- 

Repairs  and  improvements 

5  000.00 

4,  996.  87 

3.13 

Bismarck,  N.  Dak  

18,  200.  00 

18,  054.  61 

145.  39 

Repairs  and  improvements 

2,000.00 

1,  862.  38 

137.  62 

Carlisle,  Pa  

132,000.00 

131,908.41 

91.59 

Repairs  and  improvements.. 

20,  000.  00 

19,903.66 

96.34 

Carson  City  Nev 

41  700  00 

40  407.  11 

1  292.89 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

8,  000.  00 

7,  220.  82 

779.  18- 

Cherokee  N.  C 

30  000.00 

29  109.77 

890.  23 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

6,000.00 

5,591.90 

408.  10' 

Cherokee  Orphan  Training  School,   Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma  

35,000.00 

18,  737.  89 

16,262.11 

Repairs  and  improvements.. 

7.000.00 

6,  900.  61 

99.39 

Chilocco,  Okla  

86,250.00 

84,228.37 

2.021.63 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

7,  000.  00 

5,  470.  97 

1,  529.  03 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  Oklahoma 

275  000.00 

273  936.80 

1  063.20' 

Flandreau,  S.  Dak  

61,  500.  00 

61,236.41 

263.  59 

Repairs  and  improvements 

6,000.00 

5,  574.  34 

425.  66 

Fort  Bidwell,  Cal  

20,  500.  00 

18,462.84 

2,037.16 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

3,  600.  00 

2,  872.  53 

727.47 

Fort  Mojave  Ariz 

35  100.00 

30  002.68 

5  097.32 

Repairs  and  improvements  

3,  800.  00 

1,  580.  31 

2,219.69 

Fort  Totten,  N.  Dak 

68  500.00 

67,  999.  91 

500.09 

Repairs  and  improvements  

6,000.00 

5,659.97 

340.03 

Genoa,  Nebr 

60,  000.  00 

59,  307.  22 

692.  78- 

Repairs  and  improvements  

4,  500.  00 

4,494.58 

6.42 

Greenville,  Cal 

18,  400.  00 

18,  057.  72 

342.28 

Repairs  and  improvements 

6  600.00 

6  174.37 

425.  63 

Hayward;  Wis  

36,670.00 

34,  898.  08 

1,771.92 

Repairs  and  improvements 

5,  000.  00 

2,  725.  65 

2  274.35- 

Kickapoo  Reservation  Kans 

14  860.00 

14  586.  15 

273  85 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

2,  500.  00 

2,  207.  94 

292.  06 

Lawrence  Kans 

127,  750.  00 

122  364.66 

5  385.34 

Repairs  and  improvements  

11,000.00 

10,999.76 

.24 

Mount  Pleasant,  Mich... 

60,  450.  00 

57,  191.  57 

3  258.43- 

Repairs  and  improvements  

5,000.00 

4,  576.  49 

423.  51 

Phoenix,  Ariz  

119,400.00 

114,844.14 

4,  555.  86 

Repairs  and  improvements 

7,  500.  00 

6  990.48 

509.52 

Pierre,  S.  Dak  

43,  750.  00 

42,  519.  26 

1.  230.  74 

Repairs  and  improvements  . 

5,  000.  00 

4,111.68 

888.  32 

Pipestone  Minn 

39  175.00 

38  159.51 

1  015  49 

Repairs  and  improvements  

6,000.00 

5,  069.  18 

930.  82' 

Rapid  City  S.  Dak 

48,  500.  00 

46  532.54 

1  967.46 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

5,  000.  00 

4,  984.  83 

15.17 

Riverside,  Cal.. 

108,  125.  00 

104,429.76 

3  695.24' 

Repairs  and  improvements... 

10,  000.  00 

8,  188.  21 

1.811.79* 

200 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  42. — Statement  of  appropriations  for  the  Indian  Service  for  the  fiscal  year  ended 
June  30,  1916,  with  unexpended  balances — Continued. 


Title  of  appropriation. 

Balance  in 
Treasury 
and  hands  of 
disbursing 
officers 
June  30,  1915. 

Appropria- 
tions for 
fiscal  vear 
1916. 

Disburse- 
ments for 
1916. 

Balance  in 
U.  S  Treas- 
ury and 
hands  of  dis- 
bursing offi- 
cers June  30, 
1916. 

Indian  Schools  —  Continued. 
Salem  Oreg                                         

$102,  000.  00 
12,000.00 
61,  150.  00 
6,000.00 
31,025.00 
6,000.00 
50,000.00 
18,200.00 
3,000.00 
43,450.00 
6,000.00 
35,200.00 
3,000.00 

175,000.00 
37,500.00 
2,000.00 

4,000.00 
200,000.00 

40,000.00 

15,000.00 
50,000.00 
200,000.00 
50,000.00 
10,000.00 
25,000.00 
1,500.00 
10,000.00 
25,000.00 
20,000.00 
4,  740.  00 
15,000.00 
25,000.00 
100,000.00 
85,000.00 
10,000.00 
25,000.00 

25,000.00 
5,000.00 
20,  000.  00 

$98,  479.  03 
11,512.39 
58,721.25 
5,879.65 
27,  741.  94 
3,378.87 
47,569.21 
17,475.74 
2,309.13 
43,164.45 
5,592.14 
32,581.30 
2,634.11 

171,980.23 
29,351.08 
1,  700.  00 

$3,520.97 
487.  61 
2,  428.  75 
120.  35 
3,283.06 
2,621.13 
2,  430.  79 
724.  26 
690.  87 
285.  55 
407.  86 
2,  618.  70 
365.  89 

3,019.77 
8,  148.  92 
300.  00 

4,000.00 
10,834.88 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Santa  Fe  N  Mex 

Repairs  and  improvements  ' 

Repairs  and  improvements 

Truxton  Canon  Ariz 

Toman  Wis                                       

Repairs  and  improvements 

Wahpeton  N   P  ak  

Repairs  and  improvements 

Miscellaneous: 
Administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  Five  Civ- 
ilized Tribes  Ofelahoma 

Asylum  for  Insane  Indians,  Canton,  S.  Dak. 
Counsel  for  Pueblo  Indians  New  Mexico 

Education— 
Chippewas  of  Minnesota  (reimbursable) 

$11,  944.  58 

201,  109.  70 
40,000.00 

16,  293.  62 
26,370.21 
209,063.97 
40,  495.  43 
42,991.29 
25,149.10 
1,432.00 
8,443.97 
24,528.31 
19,926.73 
4,628.18 
14,504.25 
21,955.25 
100,000.00 
83,  424.  72 
4,585.50 
24,  385.  61 

20,  740.  53 
5,000.00 
18,  763.  39 

Irrigation,  allotments,  Yuma  Reservation, 

Irrigation  system- 
Colorado  River  Reservation,  Ariz,  (re- 
imbursable)               

2,505.83 
766.  99 
174,980.76 
10,534.66 
60,930.44 
4,657.08 

1,  212.  21 

24,396.78 
165,916.79 
20,039.23 
27,  939.  15 
4,507.98 
68.00 
1,556.03 
471.69 
73.27 
111.82 
495.  75 
3,044.75 

Blackfeet  Reservation,  Mont,   (reim- 
bursable)   

Flathead   Reservation,   Mont,   (reim- 
bursable)   

Fort  Peck  Reservation,  Mont,  (reim- 
bursable)   

Uintah  Reservation,  Utah  (reimburs- 
able) 

Wind  River  Diminished  Reservation, 
Wyo  (reimbursable) 

Line  Riders,  Northern  Cheyenne  Reserva- 
tion Mont 

Maintenance,  irrigation  system,  Pima  In- 
dian Lands  Arizona  (reimbursable) 

Fort  Hall  irrigation  system,  Idaho  (reim- 

Milk  River  irrigation  system,  Fort  Belknap 

Modoc  Point  irrigation  system,  Klamath 
Reservation  Oreg  (reimbursable) 

Irrigation  system,   Yakima  Reservation, 
Wash  (reimbursable) 

Oil  and  gas  inspectors,  Five  Civilized  Tribes 
Oklahoma 

Payment  for  water,  Yakima  Reservation, 
Wash 

Probate  attorneys,  Five  Civilized  Tribes, 

1,575.28 
17,597.12 
614.  39 
6,  745.  83 

Purchase  of  land  for  landless  Indians  in  Cali- 
fornia   

12,  182.  62 

Roads  and  bridges,  Shoshone  Reservation, 
Wyo  (reimbursable) 

Water  supply  — 
Navaho  Indians,  Arizona  (reimbursable 

2,486.36 

1,236.61 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  201 

TABLE  43. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  80,  1916. 

[Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner  are  received 
in  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guaranties  for  right  of  way  across  Indian 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.  For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
as  required  by  sec.  3622,  Rev.  Stats.] 

On  hand  July  1,  1915 $92, 570. 12 

Received: 

July,  1915 $50. 00 

August,  1915 21.00 

September,  1915 336.56 

October,  1915 29, 843. 65 

November,  1915 .91 

December,  1915 2, 332. 90 

January,  1916 

February,  1916 2,762.11 

March,  1916 7, 566. 80 

April,  1916 6, 550. 55 

May,  1916 74. 88 

June,  1916 1 57. 16 

49,596.52 

Total  on  hand  and  received 142, 166. 64 

Disbursed  and  deposited: 

July,  1915 30, 839. 84 

August,  1915 1. 00 

September,  1915 1, 141. 15 

October,  1915 .34 

November,  1915 85, 001. 16 

December,  1915... 

January,  1916 

February,  1916 7,363.87 

March,  1916 4.50 

April,  1916 9,959.05 

May.  1916 165.08 

June,  1916....  26.23 

134,502.22 

Balance  on  hand  June  30,  1916 7,664.42 


:202 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


(N        CO 
0       IN 


m    0< 
g    Zi 


rH  OS          rH          CO 


§O  CO       O  O  t^-  OO  OO  COrHCO  O  OCMOS          CO  rH       CM       rH  CM  IO  ^O  »f* 

CO  OS      (NrHrHlN  !>.  O  rH  Tt<  O          O       rH  IO          O          O       OO       OS  CM          t>-  CO  OS 


CO  rH     -^CMCOOO 

CO  CM     CM  O  CO  iO 


' 


CM      r~ 

CO         TH 
t-          CO 


- 

00  IO 


* 


a 


(N        i  1-5 


S    §  ^  §§ 

rH          O  O       MO 


SS2 
SSffS 

OrHCO 

CM  CM 


3  o 

00  CO 

t^  Oi 

01  O 


SS     S 


o*     o*       cT  cDs^LrTio'       oT       co"'co*»c 

22^:  SSS^     S     SSco" 


§  §s 
i  §  lei 

^     oT  co'oo'     o"     oo"  of  co" 

rH       •>*<  lO  CM  00      CO 


^ 

1 


3 

•s- 

8 


»O  Tt*  ^  O  1C  i 


CO  T}i        IM        l>-  CO  CO  (N  O5  CM  iO  Tti  - 

•rPCO          O5          TTCOOilCrHt^OCO 

COOS  ^        10  CO  CO  00  CO  10  ( 


r*      10      lot^ococoiocoioco 

C<5        CO        CO  CN  CO  CO  CO  OI  CO  CO  CO 


Date  of  acts 
or  treaties. 


CMCCOCOOCOCOO 

O5O5O5O5O5O5O50O 


I 


Crow  ceded  lands,  M 
Devils  Lake  Reserva 
Flathead  patented  la 
Flathead  Reservatio 
Fort  Peck  Reservati 
Irrigable  land,  Yuma 


A 
C 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


203 


O  t-  i-l     ID 


?2      t      eo 


ills  1 1! 


CO      t^  CO  r-H 


s  s 


g    s 


(MOO  -w     I-H 


•<^  Tf<  O  O  - 
'  i-l  IO  O  r-H  ( 


£    8 


JO        CO       O 


§    s    g 


I  1  S  3 


oo 

35 


)  r»<  (N     r-H     CO  1C  •*  Tf  O5  r-i  O  OC  C>  IM     OO     O  TF  O        T-I        r^        LO        <N        CO 

<r^OCOCOr~COlOi-li-lOOOOiO>OOr^CO  00         O         CO         O         O         IO 


0  I-H       O  rt< 

01  CO  i-H 


»' 

05 


DOOCOOr^»OC'OCOOO^CMr^C^II>.COO5TrCD        COOOCOOCOCOOCOOOCOOCOCOOCOO 


Tt<iOCOCO'^lOCCtOOO»OOiO^f^t1lOC^COOOCO        TticDC^rfC^^f'^CD^fCDC^TtHC^'^'^CD^fCD 
CO(MCOCOCOO)CO(M<MCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO(NeO        COCOe<><NC<l(NCOCOCOCO<N(M<N  IM'CO  CO  CO  CO 


ft     : 

ri  a 


jjsj 

1I*T 


el -a5- 


"<„' 


HI   fncSi§§ 


sue . 


iW 


''   ^Q     W 

i  O  ^    "O 

•Sfc-S  "S 


o  i 


13      S 

S 


•8    o 


gaj  8  g-alg 


rnGPn    P? 


*->!>!> .^ 

i 


sag 

o  o  S 


00^ 


SSI 


p 

|!I 

SScs 
53  o  S 

III 

TjC3 
g^o 
^^>, 

c  ro>c 

111 

£  ^  C3 

?£| 

BS»S 
TJ  «U3 

§s3- 
£11 


204 


r^SA, 


II 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

oT  co"     ^Tcc 


00        .0^, 


!» 


"o  "o  "o  <M  "o  "o  <»  "o 


!lf  *  8 

O      •         <M       •         O 
CO  'O         t^-  CO         t>. 

!>.  CO         ^  •*         «O 

o  o 

sd  s 

iftp^^o     p, 

^P.    »A    ^ 

ftft 

ftgg  p^ 

'^s^^-i 

T: 

c 

T: 

s^-  a*  »c 

€ 

-"S       ^ 

2-3^^ 

S'o'o  ->S"o 

o  o      o  o      o 

o  o 

*o  >•  S"o 

»    »    > 

» 

>     > 

s       3 

PH  P, 


if 

:| 


S*| 

c/r2  o 
jd^« 


Tabasquache,  Moac 
potc,  Wiminuche,  Y 
Grand  River,  and 
Bands  of  Utes. 


Do 
Do 


COMMISSIONEE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

S 


205 


r9®E:3 

^•^  S  a 

5^-50-g.f 

SIS? 

rfiii 

sJs?1§ 

S%co'Hw3  2. 
2«^  BS" 2^ 

G-C^5  » 


65333—16 14 


206  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  47. — Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average 
share. 

Amount 
paid. 

Total 

2,406 

$710  433  54 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox...                         ' 

Sac  and  Fox 

rj 

$1,  079.  57 

5  397  85 

Kansas  

15 

5,  043.  49 

Kickapoo 

Kickapoo 

5 

584  47 

2  922  89 

r'otftwatOTn  i     T    .            .... 

Potawatomi  .. 

10 

212.06 

2  120.  60 

Nebraska:  Santee  

Ponca  

24 

70.50 

1,  692.  00 

New  York-  New  York 

Tonawanda  (Seneca) 

13 

164.15 

2  134  05 

North  Dakota:  Standing  Rock 

Sioux.  .    .. 

419 

157.  13 

65  840.05 

Oklahoma  

378 

424,325.84 

Cantonment  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

12 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho.  . 

do  

43 

Red  Moon 

do 

9 

323.  50 

29,  762.  28 

Seger...    ...     .     . 

..do  

28 

Kiowa 

Apache     Kiowa     and    Co- 

mancne  

33 

326.  67 

10,  780.  36 

Do      

do    . 

38 

849.  74 

32,  290.  27 

Pawnee 

Pawnee 

21 

511.18 

10  734.98 

Ponca  

Ponca..                 

19 

72.10 

1,369.98 

Osage 

Osage 

162 

3,  819.  76 

326,  213.  77 

Sac  and  Fox  

Sac  and  Fox  

13 

1,013.40 

13,  174.  20 

Oregon 

64 

15  027.37 

Klamath  . 

Klamath 

40 

224.23 

8,  969.  35 

Umatilla  

Umatilla,  Cayuse,  etc  

24 

252.  41 

6,  058.  02 

South  Dakota  

1,312 

174,840.73 

Cheyenne  River 

Sioux      ... 

83 

122.00 

10,  126.  62 

Crow  Creek  

.  ..do  

69 

170.97 

11,  797.  26 

Lower  Brule 

do  ... 

10 

143.87 

1,  438.  78 

Pine  Ridge.  .  .. 

....do  

845 

121.66 

102,806.09 

Rosebud 

do     .                       .    .. 

199 

124.  10 

24,  697.  12 

Yankton  

....do  

106 

226.  17 

23,974.86 

Wisconsin'  Keshena 

Menominee 

176 

91.66 

16,  132.  16 

TABLE  48. — Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  national  banks  of 

Oklahoma.1 


Tribes. 

On  deposit  June  30,  1916. 

Interest. 

Total. 

Principal. 

Interest. 

Paid 

in  the 
United 
States 
Treasury. 

Total 
paid 
and  due. 

Total                            

$6,153,385.45 

$6,024,573.37 

$128,812.08 

$830,556.64 

$959,368.72 

Choctaw                    

3,891,499.99 
1,  158,  202.  11 
.53 
1,063,645.04 
40,037.78 

3,809,510.45 
1,134,521.38 

81,989.54 
23,680.73 
.53 
22,353.50 

787.78 

468,084.94 
161,097.50 
31,896.75 
164,339.67 
5,  137.  78 

550,074.48 
184,778.23 
31.897.28 
186,693.17 
5,925.56 

Chickasaw 

Cherokee  ,... 

Creek 

i,  041,291.  54 
39,250.00 

Seminole  

*  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  311  banks, 
interest  are  from  4  to  5J  per  cent. 


The  rates  of 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  207 

TABLE  49. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


Warehouses. 

Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago 

127,600 
78,028 
58,580 
5,689 
10,994 

Pov,nds. 
140,866,459 
138,793,162 
6,644,999 
617,  596 
941,485 

$805,807.20 
428,  136.  66 
258,885.19 
158,  340.  33 
45,359.57 

7 
27 

W3 

(2) 

Pounds. 
347 
1,733 
(2) 
147 
(2) 

$172.  40 
207.  78 
(*) 
236.  25 
(2) 

St  Louis 

San  Francisco. 

New  York  3 

Omaha4  

Total 

280,891 

87,863,701 

1,696,528.95 

37 

2,227 

616.  43 

Warehouses. 

Packages  mailed. 

Percentage    of    increase    of 
totals  over  previous  year. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago  

5,261 
2,104 
254 
2,951 
228 

Pounds. 
34,348 
11,580 
2,055 
11,832 
1,865 

$19,  159.  54 
5,524.94 
703.88 
10,293.84 
417.49 

Per  cent. 
24.4 
35.0 
63.7 
525.0 
653.3 

Per  cent. 
30.9 
11.0 
95.6 
&30.0 
667.3 

Per  cent. 
36.0 
104.9 
76.7 
533.8 
668.6 

St.  Louis 

San  Francisco  

New  York  » 

Omaha  4 

Total  .. 

10,798 

61,680 

36,099.69 

22.6 

19.8 

26.9 

Total  number  of  shipments  (packages) 291, 726 

Total  weight  (pounds) 87, 927, 608 

Total  value $1,733,245.07 

1  A  considerable  part  of  this  weight  is  coal,  handled  in  car  lots. 

2  Included  with  freight. 

3  Sept.  1  to  Jan.  15  only. 

4  Sept.  1  to  Jan.  1  only. 

5  Decrease;  temporary  warehouse,  open  10  months  in  1915,  and  but  4£  months  in  1916. 

6  Decrease;  temporary  warehouse,  open  9  months  in  1915,  and  but  4  months  in  1916. 

TABLE  50. — Expense  at  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916. 


Warehouses. 

Rent. 

Light 
and  fuel. 

Employees 
'  and  in- 
spection of 
supplies.  i 

Miscella- 
neous. 

Total. 

Value  of 
supplies 
handled. 

Chicago 

$4,500.00 

$149.40 

$23  649.15 

$1  712.23 

2  $30  010  78 

Per  cent. 
2  3  63 

St.  Louis  

1,  500.  00 

224.81 

11,296.68 

1,070.92 

14,092.41 

3.25 

San  Francisco 

2  400.00 

37.65 

9  011.86 

836.  68 

12  286.19 

4.78 

New  York  3  

900.  00 

41.31 

4  2,  017.  00 

745.  36 

4  3,  703.  67 

62.19 

Omaha  6.. 

(7) 

(7) 

938.  09 

85.09 

1,023.18 

2  23 

Total... 

9,  300.  00 

453.  17 

46,912.78 

4,450.28 

61,116.23 

3.53 

Total  1915 

64  415  10 

4  72 

Saving  over  1916 

3  298  97 

1.19 

1  Includes  cost  of  letting  annual  contracts  for  supplies. 

2  Includes  cost  of  making  out  transcripts,  calculating  cost  of  annual  estimate  supplies,  etc.    T  his  expense 
is  properly  chargeable  against  all  the  warehouses  jointly,  instead  of  Chicago  only,  as  shown  here. 

3  Temporary  for  4£  months. 

4  Does  not  include  $675,  salary  of  clerk  in  charge,  he  being  detailed  from  Indian  Office. 

5  Considerable  preliminary  work,  in  placing  requisitions,  etc.,  was  done  by  the  Chicago  warehouse. 

6  Temporary  for  4  months. 

7  None;  courtesy  of  Quartermaster  Corps. 


INDEX  TO  STATISTICAL  TABLES. 


A. 

Page. 

Able-bodied  male  adults 112 

Account,  commissioner's,  1916 201 

Agency  lands,  how  used 122 

Agricultural  lands 112 

acreage 112 

cultivated  by  Indians 112 

irrigation 163 

Allotments: 

acreage  allotted 90, 93 

acreage  unallotted 90 

approved 168 

by  years 93 

Indians  without . .  82 

irrigation 163 

leased , 112,117 

number 90, 93 

number  made 168 

patentsin  fee  issued 170 

removal  restrictions  on  sale 172 

timber  on 160 

under  ditch 166 

used  for  grazing 117 

when  made 93 

Allottees: 

living  on  reservations 82 

lands  cultivated  by 112 

.  sale  of  inherited  lands  by 169 

•Appropriations  and  disbursements 198 

See  also  Funds. 

Area  of  Indian  lands 90 

B. 

Basketry 100 

Beadwork 100 

Births 130 

Blanket  weaving 100 

Buildings: 

erected 1 175 

under  construction 177 


C. 

Cattle.    See  Stock. 

Churches  among  Indians 

Church-go  ing  Indians 

Citizen  Indians 

Clothing,  citizen  Indians  who  wear. 


...»  85 
85 
85 
85 

Commissioner's  account,  1916 201 

Competency  certificates  issued 173 

Crimes  by  Indians  and  whites 85 

Crops 107 

See.  also  Products. 

D. 

Deaths 130 

Disbursements 198, 202, 205 

Disease 130 

Indians  examined  for 130 

Dress,  citizen  Indians  who  wear 85 


E. 

Page. 

Employees  in  Indian  Service: 

female 192 

male 192 

miscellaneous  field 196 

Office  of  Indian  Affairs 73, 197 

recapitulation 197 

school  and  agency 192 

Employment  of  Indians.  .^ 127 

wages  earned 107, 127 

F. 

Farming  by  Indians 112 

crops  raised 107 

See  also  Agricultural. 

Farms: 

agency 122 

demonstration 158 

experimentation 158 

school 122 

Federal  supervision,  Indians  under 82 

Financial  statement,  1916 205 

See  also  Appropriations  and  Funds. 

Five  Civilized  Tribes: 

incomes : . .  110 

population 73,79 

production,  minerals  and  royalty 174 

removal  restrictions  and  disposal  lands. .  172 

Tribal  funds  in  Oklahoma  banks 206 

Forestry.    See  Timber. 

Freedmen 73, 79, 172 

Full  blood,  population 74 

Funds: 

in  bank,  individual 188 

in  treasury,  tribal 188 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  in  banks 206 

receipts  and  disbursements,  1916 205 

treaty  liabilities,  United  States  to  Indian 

tribes 204 

trust,  interest  on 107 

payments  made 107 

tribal,  pro  rata  shares  paid 206 

See  also  Appropriations  and  Moneys. 

G. 
Grazing: 

acreage  used  by  Indians 117 

lands,  area 117 

leased 117 

H. 

Hospitals 134 

capacity 134 

patients  treated 134 

Housing  of  Indians 130 

families  living  in  houses 130 

families  living  in  tents,  tepees 130 

209 


210 


INDEX. 


I. 

Page. 

Implements  belonging  to  Indians,  value 188 

Incomes  of  Indian  tribes 107 

Industries,  native 100, 107 

Inherited  land: 

patents  issued 170 

sale 169 

Irrigated  lands: 

cultivated  by  Indians 166 

leased 166 

Irrigation: 

areas  irrigable 163 

expenditures 163 

miles  of  ditches  on  reservations 166 

projects,  area  under 163 

Issues  to  Indians: 

miscellaneous  supplies 107, 137 

rations 107, 137 

L. 

Labor,  Indian  moneys,  proceeds  from 107 

Lace  making 100 

Lands: 

agency  and  school,  how  used 122 

agricultural 112 

area 90 

assigned  to  mission  organizations  tempo- 
rarily   99 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 188 

patented  to  missionary  organizations 99 

proceeds  of  sales 107, 202 

receipts  and  disbursements,  1916. %.  202 

removal  of  restrictions 172 

sales 169 

See  also  Grazing,  Inherited,  Irrigation, 
Leases,  Mineral,  Reservations,  Timber. 


allotted  lands 112, 117 

income  from 107, 112, 117 

irrigated  lands 166 

mining 174 

tribal  lands 112, 117 

Liabilities,  treaty,  of  United  States  to  Indian 
tribes 107, 204 

Liquor: 

sale  to  Indians;  convictions  and  sentences     159 

seizures  made 159 

suppression 159 

Live  stock.     See  Stock. 

Logging.     See  Timber. 


Marriages: 

legal 

plural 

tribal  custom. 
Mineral  lands: 


M. 


85 

85 

85 

174 

production  and  royalty 174 

Missionaries  among  Indians,  number 85 

Missionary  organizations: 

lands  assigned,  for  temporary  use 99 

lands  patented  to 99 

Moneys,  individual  Indian 188 

See  also  Appropriation  and  Funds. 


Page. 
Noncompetents,  sale  of  lands  of 169 

O. 

Office  Indian  Affairs:  v 

employees '. 73, 197 

work  and  force  since  1899 'compared 73 

Oil,  production 174 

P. 

Patents  in  fee: 

applications  for 170 

Indians  under  Federal  jurisdiction  hold- 
ing         82 

issued  missionary  organizations 99 

issued  to  Indians 170 

Population 73, 107 

Pottery 100 

Poultry.    See  Stock. 

Products: 

agency: 122 

school 122 

Property: 

individual 188 

tribal 188 

Government,  valuation 184 

Q. 

Quapaw,  removal  restrictions  from  disposal 
lands...  172 


R. 
Rations: 

Indians  receiving 

value  of  those  issued 

Reservations: 

areas  unallotted 

See  also  Lands. 
Restrictions  on  sale  lands,  removal . 


S. 
Sales  of  land: 

noncompetent  sales 

inherited-land  sales 

Sanatoria- 

Sawmills 

School  lands 

Schools: 

appropriations  for,  since  1876 , — 

attendance,  1916 

attendance,  1877  to  1916 

capacity  and  enrollment 

children  eligible  to  attend 

children  ineligible  to  attend 

children  in  school 

farms 

Indians  of  school  age 

lands,  how  used 

population 

recapitulation 

Sheep  raising .' 

Stock: 

belonging  to  Indians 

milch  cows,  number  of  families  using. 

purchased 

slaughtered 


137 
137 


'  90 
172 


169 
169 
134 
160 
122 

158 
148 
157 
148 
141 
141 
141 
122 
141 
122 
141 
147 
178 

178 
130 
178 
178 


INDEX. 


211 


Page. 

Sto  ck — Continued. 

sold 178 

tribal 178,179 

Stock-raising  industry 117 

T. 

Timber: 

acreage 160 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 188 

cut,  value 107,  160 

cut,  quantity  and  value 160 

on  allotments 160 

on  unallotted  lands 160 

quantity  and  stumpage  value 160 

Tents,  tepees 130 

See  Housing. 


Page. 
Trachoma 130 

Treaties,  obligations  arising  from 107,  204 

Trust  fund.    See  Funds. 

Tuberculosis....  130 


Valuation  of  property.    See  Property. 

Vital  statistics. 130 

Voting  Indians 85 

W. 

Wagons  belonging  to  Indians,  value 188 

Warehouses,  Indian: 

volume  of  business 207 

expense 207 


O 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 


REPORT 

OF  THE 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN 
AFFAIRS 

TO  THE  • 

SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR 

FOR  THE 

FISCAL  YEAR  ENDED  JUNE  30, 1917 


WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 
1917 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 

A  declaration  of  policy 3 

The  Indian  and  the  war 6 

Liberty  loan  bonds 

Education 9 

Farming ' 25 

Stock  raising 32 

Rocky  Boy  Indians. 64 

Reimbursable  funds 37 

Native  industries 38 

Road  and  bridge  work 39 

Motion  pictures 40 

Indian  traders 40 

Debts  of  Indians 40 

Exhibition  Indians 40 

Annuity  and  per  capita  payments 41 

Destitute  In(Jians 41 

Sioux  allotment  benefits 42 

Tribal  trust  funds 42 

Individual  Indian  moneys 42 

Indian  employment 43 

Health 16 

Suppression  of  intoxicants 21 

Allotments 45 

Classification  and  appraisement  of  surplus  Indian  lands 46 

Land  purchases 46 

Extension  of  trust  period 47 

Osage  oil  and  gas  leases 47 

Oil  and  gas  industry  outside  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and  Osage  Nation 48 

Fee  patents  to  Indians 49 

Competency  commission 49 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 49 

Probate  work  in  Oklahoma 50 

Sale  of  remaining  unallotted  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  tribal  lands 52 

Estates  of  deceased  Indians 53 

New  system  of  bookkeeping 54 

Forestry 54 

Irrigation 34 

Court  decisions 56 

Legislation 58 

Seminole  Indians  in  Florida. 63 

Alabama  Indians  of  Texas 65 

Conclusions 66 

18404—17  HI 


Statistical  tables  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1917,  unless  otherwise  noted. 

Page. 

TABLE  1.  Work  and  force  of  Indian  Office  since  1899,  compared 69 

2.  Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  1917 69 

3.  Indians  under  Federal  supervision,  allotted  and  unallotted 78 

4.  Marriages,    missionaries,    churches,    language,    dress,    citizenship, 

crimes,  misdemeanors 81 

5.  Areas  of  Indian  lands,  allotted  and  unallotted 86 

6.  Reservations,  authority  for  establishing 89 

7.  Lands  set  aside  temporarily  for  mission  organizations 108 

8.  Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations 108 

9.  Industries  other  than  farming  or  stock  raising 109 

10.  Incomes  of  Indians 116 

11.  Use  of  agricultural  lands,  farming,  leasing 121 

12.  Use  of  grazing  lands,  stock  raising,  leasing 126 

13.  Employment  of  Indians 130 

L4.  Vital  statistics,  housing  and  disease 133 

L5.  Hospitals  and  sanatoria 138 

16.  Indians,  self-supporting,  and  those  receiving  rations  and  miscel- 

laneous supplies  issued 141 

17 .  School  population,  number  in  school,  capacity 145 

18.  Schools,  location,  enrollment,  attendance 152 

19.  Schools,  average  attendance  and  appropriations  since  1876 . . . .' 161, 162 

20.  Demonstration  farms 162 

21.  Experimentation  farms 163 

22.  Suppression  of  liquor  traffic ". 164 

23.  Timber  on  reservations,  sawmills,  timber  cut 165 

24.  Areas  irrigable  and  under  projects,  expenditures 168 

25.  Miles  of  ditches,  use  of  irrigated  areas 171 

26.  Allotments  approved  and  made 174 

27.  Sales  of  allotted  lands 175 

28.  Patents  in  fee  issued 176 

29.  Removal  of  restrictions  on  alienation  of  land 179 

30.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  under  act  of  June  25,  1910 179 

31.  Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians 179 

32.  Lands  leased  for  mining,  production  of  minerals,  and  royalty 180 

33.  Buildings  erected. 181 

34.  Buildings  under  construction 182 

35.  Live  stock  belonging  to  Indians,  sold  and  slaughtered 184 

36.  Government  property  valuations  classified 190 

37.  Property  of  Indians,  tribal  and  individual,  value 194 

38.  Employees  in  Indian  School  and  agency  service 199 

39.  Employees,  miscellaneous,  field 203 

40.  Employees  in  Indian  Service,  recapitulation 205 

41.  Account  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs 205 

42.  Sales  of  Indian  lands,  receipts  and  disbursements 206 

43.  Treaty  liabilities  of  the  United  States  to  Indians 208 

44.  Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled 210 

45.  Funds  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  banks 210 

46.  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses 211 

47.  Expense  at  warehouses 211 

Index  to  statistical  tables 213 

IV 


REPORT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR, 

OFFICE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS, 
Washington,  D.  C.,  October  15,  1917. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  this  the  eighty-second  annual 
report  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1917. 

A  DECLARATION  OF  POLICY. 

A  careful  study  of  the  practical  effects  of  governmental  policies 
for  determining  the  wardship  of  the  Indians  of  this  country  is  con- 
vincing that  the  solution  is  individual  and  not  collective.  Each 
individual  must  be  considered  in  the  light  of  his  own  environment 
and  capacity  for  larger  responsibilities  and  privileges. 

While  ethnologicaUy  a  preponderance  of  white  blood  has  not 
heretofore  been  a  criterion  of  competency,  nor  even  now  is  it  always 
a  safe  standard,  it  is  almost  an  axiom  that  an  Indian  who  has  a  larger 
proportion  of  white  blood  than  Indian  partakes  more  of  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  former  than  of  the  latter.  In  thought  and  action,  so 
far  as  the  business  world  is  concerned,  he  approximates  more  closely 
to  the  white  blood  ancestry. 

On  April  17, 1917,  there  was  announced  a  declaration  of  policy  for 
Indian  affairs,  as  follows: 

DECLARATION  OF  POLICY   IN  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  INDIAN 

AFFAIRS. 

During  the  past  four  years  the  efforts  of  the  administration  of  Indian  affairs  have 
been  largely  concentrated  on  the  following  fundamental  activities — the  betterment  of 
health  conditions  of  Indians,  the  suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic  among  them,  the 
improvement  of  their  industrial  conditions,  the  further  development  of  vocational 
training  in  their  schools,  and  the  protection  of  the  Indians'  property.  Rapid  progress 
has  been  made  along  all  these  lines,  and  the  work  thus  reorganized  and  revitalized 
will  go  on  with  increased  energy.  With  these  activities  and  accomplishments  well 
under  way,  we  are  now  ready  to  take  the  next  step  in  our  administrative  program. 

The  time  has  come  for  discontinuing  guardianship  of  all  competent  Indians  and 
giving  even  closer  attention  to  the  incompetent  that  they  may  more  speedily  achieve 
competency. 

Broadly  speaking,  a  policy  of  greater  liberalism  will  henceforth  prevail  in  Indian 
administration  to  the  end  that  every  Indian,  as  soon  as  he  has  been  determined  to  be 
as  competent  to  transact  his  own  business  as  the  average  white  man,  shall  be  given 
full  control  of  his  property  and  have  all  his  lands  and  moneys  turned  over  to  him, 
after  which  he  will  no  longer  be  a  ward  of  the  Government. 

3 


4  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Pursuant  to  this  policy,  the  following  rules  shall  be  observed: 

1.  Patents  in  fee. — To  all  able-bodied  adult  Indians  of  less  than  one-half  Indian 
blood,  there  will  be  given  as  far  as  may  be  under  the  law  full  and  complete  control 
of  all  their  property.    Patents  in  fee  shall  be  issued  to  all  adult  Indians  of  one-half 
or  more  Indian  blood  who  may,  after  careful  investigation,  be  found  competent, 
provided,  that  where  deemed  advisable  patents  in  fee  shall  be  withheld  for  not  to 
exceed  40  acres  as  a  home. 

Indian  students,  when  they  are  21  years  of  age,  or  over,  who  complete  the  full 
course  of  instruction  in  the  Government  schools,  receive  diplomas  and  have  demon- 
strated competency  will  be  so  declared. 

2.  Sale  of  lands. — A  liberal  ruling  will  be  adopted  in  the  matter  of  passing  upon 
applications  for  the  sale  of  inherited  Indian  lands  where  the  applicants  retain  other 
lands  and  the  proceeds  are  to  be  used  to  improve  the  homesteads  or  for  other  equally 
good  purposes.    A  more  liberal  ruling  than  has  hitherto  prevailed  will  hereafter  be 
followed  with  regard  to  the  applications  of  noncompetent  Indians  for  the  sale  of 
their  lands  where  they  are  old  and  feeble  and  need  the  proceeds  for  their  support, 

3.  Certificates  of  competency. — The  rules  which  are  made  to  apply  in  the  granting 
of  patents  in  fee  and  the  sale  of  lands  will  be  made  equally  applicable  in  the  matter 
of  issuing  certificates  of  competency. 

4.  Individual  Indian  moneys. — Indians  will  be  given  unrestricted  control  of  all  their 
individual  Indian  moneys  upon  issuance  of  patents  in  fee  or  certificates  of  competency. 
Strict  limitations  will  not  be  placed  upon  the  use  of  funds  of  the  old,  the  indigent, 
and  the  invalid. 

5.  Pro-rata  shares — trust  funds. — As  speedily  as  possible  their  pro  rata  shares  in  tribal 
trust  or  other  funds  shall  be  paid  to  all  Indians  who  have  been  declared  competent, 
unless  the  legal  status  of  such  funds  prevents.    Where  practicable  the  pro  rata  shares 
of  incompetent  Indians  will  be  withdrawn  from  the  Treasury  and  placed  in  banks 
to  their  individual  credit. 

6.  Elimination  of  ineligible  pupils  from  the  Government  Indian  schools. — In  many  of 
our  boarding  schools  Indian  children  are  being  educated  at  Government  expense  whose 
parents  are  amply  able  to  pay  for  their  education  and  have  public  school  facilities  at 
or  near  their  homes.     Such  children  shall  not  hereafter  be  enrolled  in  Government 
Indian  schools  supported  by  gratuity  appropriations,  except  on  payment  of  actual 
per  capita  cost  and  transportation. 

These  rules  are  hereby  made  effective,  and  all  Indian  Bureau  administrative  offi- 
cers at  Washington  and  in  the  field  will  be  governed  accordingly. 

This  is  a  new  and  far-reaching  declaration  of  policy.  It  means  the  dawn  of  a  new 
era  in  Indian  administration.  It  means  that  the  competent  Indian  will  no  longer 
be  treated  as  half  ward  and  half  citizen.  It  means  reduced  appropriations  by  the 
Government  and  more  self-respect  and  independence  for  the  Indian.  It  means 
the  ultimate  absorption  of  the  Indian  race  into  the  body  politic  of  the  Nation.  It 
means,  in  short,  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the  Indian  problem. 

In  carrying  out  this  policy,  I  cherish  the  hope  that  all  real  friends  of  the  Indian 
race  will  lend  their  aid  and  hearty  cooperation. 

CATO  SELLS, 

Commissioner. 
Approved : 

FRANKLIN  K.  LANE. 

Secretary. 

The  cardinal  principle  of  this  declaration  revolves  around  this  cen- 
tral thought — that  an  Indian  who  is  as  competent  as  an  ordinary  white 
man  to  transact  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  should  be  given  un tram- 
meled control  of  his  property  and  assured  his  personal  rights  in  every 


COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  5 

particular  so  that  he  may  have  the  opportunity  of  working  out  his 
own  destiny.  The  practical  application  of  this  principle  will  relieve 
from  the  guardianship  of  the  Government  a  very  large  number  of 
Indians  who  are  qualified  to  mingle  on  a  plane  of  business  equality 
with  the  white  people.  It  will  also  begin  the  reduction  of  expendi- 
tures, and  afford  a  better  opportunity  for  closer  attention  to  those 
who  will  need  our  protecting  care  for  some  years  longer. 

A  vitally  important  result  also  will  be  obtained  in  placing  a  true 
ideal  before  those  Indians  remaining, under  guardianship.  It  will 
be  a  strong  motive  for  endeavoring  to  reach  the  goal  of  competency, 
and  prove  a  material  incentive  to  a  sincere  effort  for  that  end. 

This  new  declaration  of  policy  is  calculated  to  release  practically 
all  Indians  who  have  one-half  or  more  white  blood,  although  there 
will  be  exceptions  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  manifestly  incom- 
petent. It  will  also  give  like  freedom  from  guardianship  to  those 
having  more  than  one-half  Indian  blood  when,  after  careful  investiga- 
tion, it  is  determined  that  they  are  capable  of  handling  their  own 
affairs.  This  latter  class,  however,  will  be  much  more  limited  since 
only  about  40  per  cent  of  the  Indians  of  the  country  speak  the 
English  language  and  the  large  majority  of  this  latter  class  still 
greatly  need  the  protecting  arm  of  the  Government. 

As  an  additional  safeguard  for  those  Indians  of  half  or  less  white 
blood,  a  homestead  commensurate  with  the  value  of  the  property 
to  be  patented  may  be  retained  by  the  allottee  and  made  inalienable 
except  by  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  In  other  cases 
of  manifest  incompetency,  the  trust  period  on  their  land  will  be 
extended  whenever  it  is  deemed  beneficial  and  in  the  interest  of  the 
Indians  themselves. 

As  a  corollary  of  this  central  idea  of  the  declaration,  a  more  liberal 
policy  has  been  adopted  in  the  sale  of  inherited  lands  and  Indian 
allotments,  and  the  Indians  are  urged  to  sell  that  portion  of  their 
land  which  is  not  available  or  adaptable  for  their  own  uses  and 
utilize  the  proceeds  for  the  improvement  of  their  remaining  land  or 
increasing  their  facilities  for  its  fuller  development  by  purchasing 
stock,  machinery,  etc. 

A  liberal  policy  is  now  being  pursued  in  allowing  the  use  of  the 
proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the  lands  of  old  and  indigent  Indians,  and 
following  the  general  line  of  procedure  of  State  laws,  in  all  sales  of 
allotted  lands  where  circumstances  warrant  it,  a  part  of  the  allot- 
ment may  be  retained  as  a  homestead  so  that  the  Indian  may  not  be 
deprived  of  a  home.  Especially  is  this  desirable  where  an  Indian 
and  his  wife  need  such  place  during  their  declining  years. 


6  COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

THE  INDIAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

The  peculiar  conditions  applicable  to  each  separate  band  or  tribe 
of  Indians  caused  their  registering  for  the  military  census  under  the 
act  of  May  18,  1917,  to  be  assigned  to  this  bureau.  There  were 
instances  where  the  registration  could  be  handled  by  the  State 
authorities  more  expeditiously  and  with  less  expense  than  by  this 
bureau  and  the  highest  degree  of  cooperation  existed  in  order  that 
the  work  would  be  a  success.  The  Secretary  of  War  placed  the 
Indian  Service  upon  the  same  plane  with  the  States  and  it  had  con- 
trol of  this  branch  of  the  work.  All  of  our  employees  were  required 
to  serve  as  registrars  and  as  members  of  the  registration  board  with- 
out compensation,  and  but  little  expense  was  incurred  in  carrying 
on  this  work.  The  draft  of  those  Indians  who  are  citizens  was 
handled  by  the  local  boards  appointed  by  the  President  and  in 
order  that  the  claims  of  the  Indians  to  exemption  might  be  given 
consideration  and  presented  in  proper  form,  superintendents  were 
instructed  to  appear  on  their  behalf  and  assist  them  in  every  way 
possible. 

The  growing  attitude  of  the  Indian  toward  the  world  war  is  a 
credit  to  his  race.  A  well-nigh  limitless  devastation  and  conflict  is 
bringing  to  him  its  profound  lesson  that  the  highest  authority  and 
best  social  welfare  must  spring  from  a  free  and  self-governing  people. 
This  awakening  is  especially  noticeable  among  the  younger  generation, 
largely  the  product  of  our  Indian  schools,  who  are  quick  to  catch 
the  spirit  of  a  new  era.  Reports  on  file  indicate  that  a  large  number 
of  voluntary  enlistments  have  been  made  in  the  Army,  Navy,  and 
National  Guard,  or  in  some  branch  of  the  Military  Establishment, 
by  Indian  students  and  ex-students  alone.  Many  of  the  schools 
report  20  to  30,  some  from  40  to  50  enlistments.  Among  them  is 
represented  practically  every  tribe.  Several  enlisted  for  the  aviation 
service  and  some  were  admitted  to  officers'  training  camps.  A 
former  student  at  the  Carlisle  School,  Ernest  Kick,  was  among  the 
early  accessions  to  the  Princess  Patricia  Regiment  of  Canada  and 
gave  his  life  in  the  trenches  of  France.  Sylvester  Long  Lance,  a 
graduate  of  that  school,  is  a  lieutenant  in  the  same  regiment  and 
received  wounds  in  valorous  action.  Requests  were  repeatedly  made 
for  permission  to  form  exclusively  Indian  organizations  which,  under 
the  regulations  of  the  War  Department,  could  not  be  encouraged  as 
proposed,  but  were  significant  of  the  loyal  and  active  interest  among 
the  Indians. 

I  am  deeply  impressed  by  all  that  has  come  from  the  Indian's 
serious  heart  and  mind  in  this  time  of  incomprehensible  strife  and  am 
sure  that  among  the  compensations  that  must  follow  will  be  his  clearer 
vision  of  what  constitutes  well-organized  society. 


COMMlSSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  7 

I  hope  and  confidently  believe  that  the  native  American  soldiers 
mil  equip  themselves  with  credit  to  the  noble  ancestry  of  their  race. 

LIBERTY  LOAN  BONDS. 

With  your  approval,  the  matter  of  purchasing  bonds  of  the  first 
issue  of  the  liberty  loan  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Indians 
and  all  employees  of  the  Indian  Service.  Official  information,  with 
suitable  subscription  blanks,  was  sent  to  all  superintendents  and 
encouragement  extended  to  them  to  participate  in  a  movement 
offering  investments  both  prudent  and  patriotic. 

Considering  the  brief  time  allowed  for  fully  presenting  this 
important  subject  before  the  date  fixed  for  closing  subscriptions, 
the  results  impress  me  as  a  distinct  and  gratifying  triumph.  It 
is  quite  certain  that  many  subscriptions  were  made  by  Indians,  and 
some  by  service  employees,  which  were  not  specifically  reported,  but 
the  following  are  definitely  known:  Subscriptions  by  1,147  employees, 
$178,750;  by  525  adult  Indians  $3,273,450,  by  851  Indians  minors 
and  students  in  Indian  schools  $1,334,400;  making  a  total  of  2,623 
subscriptions  for  $4,786,600  in  liberty  loan  bonds. 

Of  the  foregoing,  the  employees  and  pupils  of  one  of  the  leading 
schools  subscribed  $15,000;  employees  in  the  Indian  Office  at  Wash- 
ington subscribed  $23,900;  employees  in  the  office  of  the  superin- 
tendent of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  subscribed  $16,300. 

Probably  the  most  noteworthy  showing  was  the  subscription  of  67 
Indians,  including  incompetents  and  minors,  aggregating  $3,919,650. 
The  individual  amounts  ranged  from  $50  to  $640,000,  but  20  of  them 
being  less  than  $10,000  each.  The  largest  subscription  was  by 
Jackson  Barnett,  through  his  guardian,  a  full  blood,  and  one  of  the 
wealthiest  of  the  Creek  Indians.  He  also  desired  to  donate  $50,000 
to  the  Red  Cross  fund,  but  owing  to  legal  objections  it  was  deemed 
inadvisable  to  authorize  such  a  gift.  The  individual  moneys  invested 
by  these  and  many  other  Indian  subscribers,  it  should  be  stated,  were 
very  largely  either  noninterest  bearing  or  drawing  less  than  the 
interest  rate  of  the  bonds.  But  while  the  Indians  were  readily 
attracted  by  the  investment  feature,  they  were  willing  and  eager  to 
contribute  patriotic  support  to  the  Government.  Many  applications 
were  made  too  late  for  acceptance  under  the  regulation  and  many 
who  were  unable  to  purchase  declared  an  intention  to  subscribe  when 
the  next  issue  is  offered.  Among  the  Apache  subscribers  of  New 
Mexico,  one  wears  a  medal  presented  by  the  President  for  special 
service  as  a  scout  in  the  capture  of  the  Geronimo  band  in  1882. 
Several  other  war  scouts  were  liberal  purchasers,  and  the  only 
remaining  strife  with  the  old  warrior  line  seems  to  be  the  friendly 
rivalry  for  owning  bonds,  for  both  the  widow  and  son  of  Geronimo 
were  subscribers,  as  was  also  the  son  of  old  Chief  Victoria,  long  an 
enemy  of  the  Government. 


8  COMMISSIONEB   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

In  view  of  the  limited  resources  of  great  numbers  of  the  Indians  r 
ranging  from  near  destitution  to  such  conditions  as  yield  a  fair 
support  but  admit  of  no  savings,  the  subscriptions  reported  and  the 
expressions  of  attachment  to  the  principles  and  institutions  of  the 
Government  coming  to  me  from  every  reservation  eloquently  attest 
the  growth  of  Indian  thought  and  sentiment  along  lines  pertaining 
to  the  general  welfare. 

I  regard  the  subscriptions  by  employees  throughout  the  Indian 
Service  as  worthy  of  a  special  word.  When  it  is  known  that  the 
average  annual  salary  of  all  employees  is  approximately  $750,  or, 
on  a  per  diem  basis,  about  one-half  that  received  by  many  groups 
of  factory  and  mechanical  trade  workers,  their  response  to  the  first 
call  in  the  Nation's  defensive  need  forms  a  very  creditable  record. 
The  average  per  capita  purchase  of  those  subscribing  for  bonds 
was  nearly  double  the  highest  increase  of  salary  provided  by  the  5 
and  10  per  cent  advance  under  legislation  effective  on  July  1,  1917, 
and  can  be  understood  only  as  showing  a  willingness  to  sacrifice 
the  immediate  use  of  much  more  than  the  merited  benefits  of  such 
legislation. 

I  venture  here  to  digress  for  the  expression  of  a  conviction  that 
has  been  with  me  since  boyhood  to  emphasize  another  feature  of  the 
Liberty  Loan  Bond  purchase,  which  I  am  persuaded  will  be  of  last- 
ing benefit  not  only  to  the  Indians  but  the  entire  population  of  our 
country. 

It  is  the  business  side,  the  money  saving  habit.  To  my  mind,  the 
best  barometer  of  a  young  man's  future  may  be  found  in  his  disposi- 
tion to  accumulate.  The  Indian  or  white  youth  who  has  established 
a  savings-bank  account  is  apt  to  have  a  good  character.  Ordinarily 
he  will  be  anxious  to  increase  his  deposit,  and  if  so  will  make  an 
effort  to  create  and  sustain  such  a  reputation  as  will  invite  promotion. 
He  will  save  rather  than  spend  his  earnings  foolishly.  The  manliness 
of  his  attitudes  and  the  inspiration  from  accomplishment  will  insure 
his  advancement.  As  a  boy,  this  is  apparent;  as  a  man  it  becomes 
an  inheritance  which  stays  with  him  throughout  life. 

Generally  speaking  Americans  have  become  so  rapidly  rich  and 
are  so  powerful  as  a  Nation  that  we  are  in  danger  of  being  overfat 
and  contented.  The  war  has  necessitated  the  conservation  of  our 
food  supply;  but  we  have  yet  to  learn  the  lesson  of  universal  saving, 
economy  in  conduct.  Man  has  no  stronger  element,  when  developed, 
than  the  disposition  to  acquire  property,  own  a  home,  and  be  a 
substantial  factor  in  society.  It  stabilizes  his  life  and  makes  him  a 
better  citizen,  provided  always  that  he  is  neither  miserly  nor  a 
worshiper  of  the  almighty  dollar. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  9 

Thousands  of  men  and  women,  boys  and  girls,  have  invested  in 
Liberty  Bonds  who  never  before  realized  the  satisfaction  of  property 
ownership.  Others  have  introduced  themselves  to  their  first  effort 
to  restrain  the  spending  habit.  Altogether  this  epoch-making 
experience  and  its  probabilities  foretell  a  basic  revolution  which  will 
immeasurably  benefit  present  and  future  generations. 

EDUCATION. 

COURSE  OF  STUDY  FOR  INDIAN  SCHOOLS. — In  my  annual  report  for 
the  fiscal  year  1916,  a  somewhat  extended  description  was  given  of  a 
new  and  uniform  course  of  study  which  had  been  prepared  for  use 
in  all  the  Indian  schools.  During  the  current  year  a  strong  effort 
has  been  made  to  develop  and  perfect  the  operation  of  this  course. 

Supervising  officials  have  visited,  with  a  few  unavoidable  excep- 
tions, all  the  schools  of  their  respective  districts,  giving  counsel  and 
aid  in  such  ways  as  have  led  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  course 
of  study  and  a  more  thorough  compliance  with  its  requirements. 

During  the  year  all  of  the  schools  were  supplied  with  a  diagram- 
matic representation  of  the  course  showing  upon  one  page  an  epit- 
ome, or  picture,  of  its  scope  for  boarding  schools,  illustrating  the 
two  principal  divisions  above  the  primary  grades  and  the  academic 
and  industrial  subjects  for  each  group  under  headings  suggestive 
of  appropriate  organization  and  supervision.  This  was  done  to 
secure  a  more  uniform  understanding  of  the  structural  principles 
involved  in  comprehensive  outlines  of  some  300  pages,  and  has 
been  found  to  be  helpful.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  condensed  dia- 
gram, with  a  few  brief  notes  accompanying  it,  will  be  of  sufficient 
public  interest,  particularly  among  educational  people,  to  justify 
its  inclusion  here. 


10 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


Diagrammatic  Representation 

of  the 
Course  of  Stud/ 


I Superintendent | 


1 Academic  Principal  I 


Vocational  Committee  including 
Superintendent  and  the  Academic 
Principal    ..  _ 


General  Exercises 


English 


Arithmetic 


Geography 


Physiology  and 
Hygiene 


Writing 


Drawing 


History 


Physical  Training 


Prevocational  Division 


Girls 


Boys 


Home 
Training 

10  Wks. 

Cooking 

40  Wks. 

Poultry 
Raising 

5  Wks. 

Sewing 

30  Wks. 

Laundering 

15  Wks. 

Nursing 

5  Wks. 

Unassigned 

15  Wks.' 

Vocational  Division 


Gardening 

10  Wks. 

Dairying  and 
Peultry  Raising 

10  Wks. 

Farming  and  Stock 
Raising 

10  Wks. 

Plant  Production 

30  Wks. 

Farm  Carpentry 

15  Wks. 

Farm  Blacksmithin^ 

10  Wks. 

Farm  Engineering 

10  Wks. 

Farm  Masonry 

5  Wks. 

Farm  Panting 

5  Wks. 

Shoe  and  Harness 
Repairing 

5  Wks. 

Unassigned 

10  WKS. 

Enelish 


Vocational  Arithmetic 


Industrial  Geography 


Agricultural  Botany 


History  of  the  United  States 
Farm  and  Household  Accounts 

iliti 

Farm  and  Household  Physics 
and  Chemistry 


/" 

{Course  in  Agi 

•iculture            J 

S~* 

1  Course  in  Cs 

irpentry             j 

Field  Crops  and  Plant  Diseases 
Child  Study 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  11 

UNIFORM  EXAMINATIONS. — A  further  step  has  been  the  preparation 
of  uniform  final  examinations  to  be  given  in  all  schools  to  the  pupils 
completing  each  academic  or  industrial  course.  These  examina- 
tions were  given  in  nearly  all  schools  during  the  week  beginning 
June  4. 

Unfortunately,  however,  a  few  boarding  schools  had  been  compelled 
to  close  prior  to  the  usual  date  of  closing  because  of  inability  to 
comply  with  the  act  of  September  7,  1916  (39  Stat.  L.,  p.  741),  which 
limited  expenditures  for  school  support  or  maintenance  to  $200  per 
pupil  per  annum.  While  under  favorable  circumstances  it  might 
be  and  was  found  possible  to  properly  operate  vocational  schools 
within  this  limitation,  yet  in  some  cases  greatly  increased  costs  of 
all  supplies  coupled  with  the  reduced  enrollment  of  pupils  necessitated 
the  closing  of  schools. 

This  could  not  be  avoided  in  some  17  instances  without  exceed- 
ing the  per  capita  cost  fixed  by  law  and  at  these  schools  it  became 
necessary  to  furlough  some  of  the  employees.  Examinations  pre- 
pared at  the  schools  were  given  instead  of  the  uniform  examina- 
tions. 

Much  importance  is  attached  to  the  new  course  and  results  thus 
far  are  encouraging  for  a  high  standard  of  school  work  and  attain- 
ment for  the  Indian  pupils.  The  aim  of  the  course  is  to  fit  thor- 
oughly the  student  to  become  an  efficient  wage  earner  and  citizen, 
qualified  to  make  his  way  successfully  and  with  credit  to  himself 
and  his  race. 

The  introduction  of  a  course  of  study  more  comprehensive  and 
systematic  than  that  adopted  by  many,  perhaps  most,  of  the  public 
schools  was  not  attempted  without  facing  the  possibility  of  dis- 
appointments; but  these,  I  am  glad  to  state,  have  been  few.  The 
results  of  the  first  full  year  have  been  in  a  promising  degree  suc- 
cessful as  regards  better  classification  of  pupils,  better  organization  of 
school  employees,  more  definite  educational  aims,  more  clearly  defined 
outlines  for  preparation,  instruction,  and  study;  in  general,  a  knitting 
together  of  loose  and  variant  methods  and  theories  of  educational 
work  into  something  more  uniform,  practical,  and  withal  focal  as  to 
the  essential  needs  of  the  Indians.  I  am  greatly  encouraged  by 
what  has  been  accomplished  in  the  introduction  of  an  effort  to  make 
the  system  of  Indian  education  thoroughly  applicable  to  racial 
conditions  and  prospects. 

Upon  the  recognized  truism  that  there  can  be  no  lasting  civiliza- 
tion without  schools  for  all,  without  a  democracy  of  education,  I 
hope  by  such  provision  more  than  by  any  other  to  guarantee  the 
perpetuation  and  progress  of  the  red  race.  I  see  in  this  molding 
process  the  certain  development  of  a  body  of  young  men  and  women 


12  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

who  will  become  the  leaders  and  transformers  of  their  people  as  the 
generations   come    and    go. 

ELIMINATION  OF  INELIGIBLES. — There  are  not  Government  schools 
sufficient  for  all  Indians  and  in  order  that  these  schools  might  serve 
those  who  depend  upon  them  alone  for  an  education,  I  considered 
it  wise  to  eliminate  children  who  were  not  property  entitled  to  an 
education  at  the  expense  of  the  Federal  Government.  So  in  my 
declaration  of  policy  I  said: 

In  many  of  our  boarding  schools  Indian  children  are  being  educated  at  Govern- 
ment expense  whose  parents  are  amply  able  to  pay  for  their  education  and  have 
public-school  facilities  at  or  near  their  homes.  Such  children  shall  not  hereafter 
be  enrolled  in  Government  Indian  schools  supported  by  gratuity  appropriations, 
except  on  payment  of  actual  per  capita  cost  and  transportation. 

The  superintendents  of  several  schools  are  now  receiving  instruc- 
tions to  carefully  examine  and  limit  their  enrollment  in  accordance 
with  the  principle  involved.  There  is  also  a  considerable  number 
of  Indian  children  who  are  citizens  of  the  United  States  and  not 
wards  remaining  under  partial  control  of  the  Government,  as  this 
term  " wards"  has  been  used  and  applied  by  the  courts.  These 
children  receive  the  citizenship  status  of  a  citizen  father,  and,  more- 
over, many  of  them  have  a  large  degree  of  white  blood.  This  class 
should,  as  Indians,  no  longer  receive  Federal  educational  assistance. 
Their  elimination  will  lead  to  two  important  results,  namely,  their 
place  in  the  schools  will  be  taken  by  others  for  whom  there  are  not 
other  school  opportunities,  and  the  eventual  entrance  of  the  citizen 
class  into  the  public  district  schools  of  the  States  will  be  brought 
about. ,  In  certain  localities  this  policy  will  allow  some  schools  to 
be  closed,  thus  effecting  an  economy  in  use  of  public  funds  and  doing 
this  without  injustice  to  any  real  Indian  children.  I  do  not  intend, 
however,  to  carry  the  general  principle  so  far  as  to  deprive  of  school 
facilities  children  for  whom  no  school  but  a  Government  institution 
is  available. 

•  SCHOOLS  DISCONTINUED. — It  has  already  been  found  practicable 
and  wise  to  close  the  Sac  and  Fox  boarding  school,  Oklahoma,  where 
public  schools  abound  in  an  advanced  community,  and  the  Witten- 
berg boarding  school,  Wisconsin,  where  other  facilities  will  be  avail- 
able for  all  children  not  belonging  to  the  class  of  nonwards  to  whom 
reference  has  been  made. 

GRADUATES  OF  DEMONSTRATED  COMPETENCY. — Another  important 
provision  in  the  declaration  of  policy  aims  at  educational  evidence  of 
competency.  This  will  be  best  presented,  perhaps,  by  reproducing 
a  portion  of  my  letter  dated  April  28,  1917,  addressed  to  the  superin- 
tendents of  all  the  noiireservation  boarding  schools  which  are 
equipped  and  authorized  to  conduct  full  courses  of  study,  including 
a  four-vear  period  of  vocational  training. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  13 

The  letter  in  part  follows : 

I  ask  your  special  attention  to  the  following  paragraph  of  the  declaration  of  policy  in 
the  administration  of  Indian  affairs  issued  on  April  17,  1917. 

"Indian  students,  when  they  are  21  years  of  age,  or  over,  who  complete  the  full 
course  of  instruction  in  the  Government  schools,  receive  diplomas  and  have  demon- 
strated competency  will  be  so  declared." 

This  declaration  is  founded  upon  the  right  and  the  desire  of  all  progressive-minded 
Indians  to  become  full  citizens  in  the  land  of  their  nativity  and  to  be  classed  with  other 
free  men  who  enjoy  the  privilege  of  owning  and  controlling  property,  who  participate 
in  the  councils  of  the  community  and  the  larger  welfare  of  the  State,  and  who  exercise 
that  personal  initiative  which  is  the  beginning  of  high  destinies  whether  of  individuals, 
of  nations,  or  of  races. 

You  are  in  charge  of  one  of  the  large  and  well  equipped  Government  schools  for 
Indian  youth.  Its  commencement  exercises  will  soon  close  the  school  year  and  the 
members  of  its  graduating  class  will  have  reached  a  very  significant  period  in  their 
lives.  The  transition  from  the  theory  and  training  of  the  classroom  to  the  practice  and 
achievements  of  real  life,  from  school  work  to  world  work,  applies  the  acid  test  to  the 
pure  gold  of  every  student's  character  and  attainments. 

The  Indian  boys  and  girls  have  been  at  some  natural  disadvantage  but  have  enjoyed 
some  unusual  opportunities.  They  have  had,  and  now  more  than  ever  have,  educa- 
tional privileges  superior  to  those  in  many  of  the  schools  for  white  children:  They 
have  been  provided  not  only  with  good  academic  training  but  with  excellent  vocational 
courses  calculated  to  fit  them  for  successful  home-making,  for  healthful  and  prudent 
domestic  life,  and  for  the  efficient  pursuit  of  agriculture,  of  many  of  the  mechanical 
trades  and  some  of  the  skilled  manual  arts  and  crafts. 

There  must,  therefore,  be  in  every  Indian  school  giving  the  full  courses  a  very  con- 
siderable number  of  graduates  this  year  who  have  improved  their  opportunities  and 
have  acquired  such  a  practical  education  as  will  reasonably  enable  them  to  enter  some 
remunerative  occupation  and  make  their  way  successfully  with  those  engaged  in  the 
pursuits  of  our  modern  life.  To  every  such  capable  young  man  and  woman  should  be 
given  a  certificate  of  competency  or  a  patent  in  fee,  as  authorized  by  law  and  the  new 
"Declaration  of  policy  in  the  administration  of  Indian  affairs,"  attesting  the  faith  of 
the  United  States  in  their  ability  and  determination  to  prove  worthy  of  this  recog- 
nition. 

It  is  not  intended  to  declare  every  graduating  student  competent  to  handle  his  own 
affairs,  but  to  select  those  who  are  21  years  of  age  and  who  by  their  conduct  through  the 
years  of  instruction  have  profited  by  wise  discipline  and  shown  that  they  possess  the 
qualities  of  scholarship  and  character  that  fit  them  for  responsibility  and  competition. 
To  these  graduates  you  will  have  the  happy  privilege  on  the  day  you  hand  them 
diplomas  to  give  them  also  this  declaration  of  their  independence.  It  should  be  to 
them  the  Magna  Charta  of  their  freedom  from  the  restraints  not  imposed  upon  other 
citizens  of  our  country,  and  in  thus  granting  it  I  know  you  will  fully  represent  me  with 
yourself  in  the  hope  that  no  recipient  will  ever  strive  for  less  than  the  most  honorable 
and  loyal  fulfillment  of  American  citizenship.  I  am  sure  that  you  thoroughly  appre- 
ciate the  importance  of  this  emancipating  movement  and  that  upon  all  appropriate 
occasions  you  will  impress  its  significance  upon  your  student  body  as  the  bright  goal  of 
their  school  training,  to  the  end  that  all  pupils  shall  not  only  resolve  to  complete  a  full 
course  but  that  graduation  for  them  will  be  incomplete  unless  it  earns  such  a  certificate 
of  competency. 

The  uniform  course  of  study  was  not  introduced  until  February  1 , 
1916.  Hence,  there  was  not  time  for  all  of  the  schools  giving  the 
full  courses  to  cover  the  required  work  and  prepare  students  for 


14  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

graduation  by  the  close  of  the  school  year  1917.  However,  several 
of  these  schools  in  which  comprehensive  courses  had  been  previously 
given  were  able  to  meet  the  new  requirements.  A  considerable  num- 
ber of  young  men  and  women  who  thus  received  diplomas  were 
recommended  for  certificates  of  competency  and  found  to  be  worthy 
of  the  same  from  the  standpoint  of  general  character,  habits,  and 
educational  attainments.  Some  of  these  graduates  were  not  21  years 
of  age  and  their  diplomas  will  be  considered  at  a  later  time  in  deter- 
mining the  question  of  their  competency. 

I  expect  that  hereafter  each  succeeding  year  will  show  from  the 
full-course  schools  a  larger  number  of  graduates  who  will  have  proved 
themselves  to  be  reasonably  capable  of  managing  their  own  affairs. 
I  believe  that  graduation  as  the  gateway  to  citizenship  should 
become  in  some  real  sense  a  gathering  call  for  pupils,  inspiring  many 
more  to  complete  their  education,  as  well  as  a  maxim  for  the  schools 
arousing  them  to  the  fullest  efficiency. 

INCREASE  IN  PUBLIC-SCHOOL  ENROLLMENT. — For  the  fiscal  year 
1916  there  was  appropriated  $20,000  for  payment  of  tuition  of  Indian 
children  in  State  public  schools.  This  amount  was  insufficient,  and 
by  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  year  1917  more  money  was 
rendered  available  for  this  purpose,  not  to  exceed,  however,  the 
sum  of  $200,000. 

During  1916  contracts  were  made  with  45  public  schools  (exclud- 
ing eastern  Oklahoma,  occupied  by  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes)  for 
education  of  853  Indian  pupils,  and  calling  for  a  maximum  expendi- 
ture of  $24,984,  of  which  amount  about  $14,000  was  actually  earned 
and  paid  to  the  schools. 

During  1917  contracts  were  made  with  194  public  schools  (exclu- 
sive also  of  eastern  Oklahoma)  for  2,194  pupils  and  for  the  total 
of  $57,126. 

This  represents  an  actual  increase  of  157  per  cent  over  the  number 
of  children  provided  for  in  public  schools  during  1916. 

The  cooperative  arrangement  for  enrollment  of  Indian  children 
in  public  schools  has  been  made  in  California,  Oklahoma,  Minne- 
sota, Montana,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  South  Dakota,  Utah,  and  Wash- 
ington. In  nearly  all  school  districts  in  these  States  attendance  of 
Indian  children  has  been  acceptable  to  the  white  patrons  and  these 
school  authorities  and  devoid  of  any  injurious  results  so  far  as  my 
information  indicates.  If,  in  due  course  of  time,  the  States  are  to 
assume  charge  of  the  Indian  and  receive  him  as  a  citizen  entitled  to 
the  benefits  and  subject  to  the  liabilities  of  their  laws,  it  seems 
equally  for  the  interests  of  the  States  to  assist  in  this  manner  in  his 
education  and  training.  There  seems  an  evident  willingness  to  do 
so,  provided  the  Federal  Government  will  assist  and  share  the 
financial  obligations,  especially  in  those  districts  which  have  limited 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  15 

sources  of  school  revenue  by  reason  of  nontaxable  Indian  lands  or 
otherwise. 

PUBLIC  SCHOOLS  IN  EASTERN  OKLAHOMA. — In  aid  of  the  public  dis- 
trict schools  in  the  territory  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Oklahoma, 
there  was  appropriated  $275,000,  and  all  of  this  money  has  been 
applied  in  accordance  with  the  intent  of  the  law  to  assist  financially 
2,285  school  districts.  In  the  schools  so  assisted  have  been  enrolled 
18,185  Indian  pupils. 

In  this  connection,  the  following  editorial,  from  the  Washington 
(D.  C.)  Star,  may  be  of  interest. 

INDIAN    SCHOOLS. 

Probably  no  branch  of  the  Government  service  contains  a  more  united  and  faithful 
body  of  workers  than  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs.  Among  the  signal  and  char- 
acteristic movements  is  the  drive  along  the  lines  of  practical  and  systematic  educa- 
tion. The  educational  idea,  probably  more  than  all  other  things  combined,  it  is 
held,  will  effectually  solve  the  Indian  problem. 

Two  things  stand  out  prominently  in  the  policy  of  the  bureau  regarding  Indian 
schools:  First.  To  make  them  producers  as  nearly  self-supporting  as  possible  not 
only  as  object  lessons  to  the  Indians,  but  as  a  simple  business  proposition,  resulting 
in  the  lowest  per  capita  cost  and  the  consequent  reduction  of  appropriations  neces- 
sary for  their  support.  This,  it  is  urged,  is  rationally  and  concretely  both  effective 
education  and  such  economy  as  any  great  private  or  corporate  interest  should  observe. 
Therefore,  the  farm,  the  garden,  the  orchard,  the  dairy  and,  where  the  area  of  the 
land  would  justify,  the  production  of  live  stock  has  been  pushed  intensively  and, 
as  far  as  possible  in  accordance  with  scientific  methods  and  practice  approved  by  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  which,  under  existing  arrangement,  supplies  all  super- 
intendents of  Indian  schools  with  bulletins  upon  the  latest  dependable  research. 
Statistical  data  indicate  amazing  accomplishments  along  these  productive  lines. 

Second.  There  has  been  a  clear  perception  of  the  need  of  a  well-balanced  course  of 
study  essentially  parallel  with  the  academic  work  of  the  public  school,  but  including 
thorough  industrial  training  in  agriculture,  with  its  allied  pursuits  and  the  ordinary 
trades,  together  with  domestic  arts  and  science  adequate  for  practical  and  healthful 
housekeeping. 

To  prepare  such  a  course,  having  special  adaptation  to  the  social  and  economic 
status  of  the  Indians  as  well  as  to  their  scattered  geographical  locations,  was  no  small 
task. 

Experts  of  the  bureau  who  had  charge  of  this  work  were  quick  to  see  the  need  of  a 
definitely  planned  curriculum  that  would  enable  the  schools,  through  efficient  service, 
to  take  the  raw  material,  the  Indian  boys  and  girls,  from  a  largely  uncivilized  state, 
^t  a  very  young  age,  when  they  can  not  speak  English,  and  make  them  over,  as  it 
were,  a  condition  and  undertaking  which  the  world  elsewhere  does  not  furnish,  and 
after  a  few  years  turn  them  out  a  finished  product,  capable  of  entering  the  competitive 
activities  of  their  community  or  State  and  becoming  independent  self-supporters  and 
citizens  of  average  intelligence  and  progressiveness.  In  this  more,  perhaps,  than 
in  all  other  factors,  it  is  admitted,  lies  the  solution  of  the  Indian  problem. 

This  new  course  of  study  that  has  been  laid  out  has  now  been  tried  for  more  than  a 
year  and  seems  to  have  been  so  well  prepared  that  but  slight  revision  will  be  advisable. 
It  has  been  scrutinized  by  educators  of  prominence  throughout  the  country  and  has 
elicited  from  many  sources  hearty  indorsement.  It  is  now  followed  to  the  fullest 
possible  extent  in  every  Indian  school  under  the  aid  and  guidance  of  21  supervising 
officials  who  cover  a  like  number  of  territorial  districts  and  whose  special  duties  are 


16  COMMISSIONER   OF   IXDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

to  see  that  the  course  is  understood  and  complied  with  and  to  report  any  unavoidable 
conditions  that  seem  to  call  for  modification  of  its  requirements.  Its  academical 
features  are  such  as  will  enable  pupils  readily  to  enter  the  public  schools  without 
retarding  their  progress  and  are  designed  to  subserve  the  general  policy  of  the  bureau 
of  encouraging  the  attendance  of  Indian  children  in  the  State  schools.  There  are  now 
upward  of  30,000  Indian  children  in  the  public  schools  and  under  the  provisions  of 
law  for  paying  their  tuition,  equal  to  the  per  capita  cost  for  white  pupils,  and  provid- 
ing the  Indian  parents  pay  no  taxes,  the  number  is  rapidly  increasing  and  objection 
to  such  attendance  by  white  patrons  is  also  diminishing. 

HEALTH. 

The  health  problems  in  the  Indian  Service  are  concerned  with 
tuberculosis,  trachoma,  infant  welfare,  and  epidemics  of  contagious 
diseases. 

TUBERCULOSIS. — The  conditions  which  are  met  in  the  solving  of 
the  tuberculosis  problem  are  the  tendency  of  many  of  the  Indians 
to  neglect  seeking  the  physician's  aid  until  the  appearance  of  warning 
symptoms,  such  as  hemoptysis,  the  disinclination  of  many  of  the 
Indians  to  accept  the  white  man's  methods,  failure  to  continue 
treatment  long  enough  in  many  instances  to  effect  a  cure,  and  the 
neglect  in  some  instances  of  observing  the  principles  of  modified 
quarantine  with  respect  to  young  children.  Strenuous  efforts  have 
been  made  to  improve  the  sanitary  conditions  bearing  on  this  ques- 
tion, and  throughout  the  year  all  health  employees  have  endeavored 
to  improve  conditions  in  the  Indian  homes,  institute  measures 
looking  to  the  separation  of  open  cases  from  others,  especially  where 
there  are  young  children,  and  the  treatment  in  sanatoria  of  all  cases 
which  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  benefit  from  sanatorium 
treatment.  A  stay  of  considerable  duration  in  a  sanatorium  has 
been  found  to  be  of  great  educational  value  and  the  Indian  reacts 
very  well  to  this  form  of  treatment.  The  sanatoria  are  certainly 
a  success,  and  the  demand  for  enlarging  the  institutions  now  in 
existence  and  the  establishment  of  further  sanatoria  far  exceeds 
the  supply  of  available  funds.  The  Indians  are  realizing  more  and 
more  the  value  of  the  sanatoria  and  many  of  them  now  have  waiting 
lists.  This  fact  indicates  the  value  of  the  educational  campaign  which 
has  been  waged  consistently  during  the  past  few  years. 

TRACHOMA. — The  difficulties  met  with  in  the  campaign  against 
trachoma  are  the  foci  of  the  disease  among  the  older  Indians,  which 
results  in  the  constant  stream  of  new  cases  entering  the  Indian 
schools,  the  disinclination  on  the  part  of  many  of  the  older  Indians 
to  submit  to  treatment  for  a  long  enough  time  to  effect  a  cure,  and 
the  painful  nature  and  long  duration  of  the  treatment. 

The  corps  of  special  physicians  have  accomplished  a  great  deal 
not  only  in  the  education  of  the  members  of  the  medical  fraternity 
who  have  recently  entered  the  Indian  Service,  but  in  the  operation 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  17 

and  placing  under  treatment  of  many  of  these  older  Indians.  The 
returned  students,  who  have  experienced  the  beneficent  results  of 
trachoma  treatment,  have  been  a  large  factor  in  the  dissemination 
of  information  concerning  this  disease  among  the  old  Indians. 

The  pupils  in  the  day  schools  and  the  boarding  schools  all  receive 
compulsory  treatment  for  trachoma,  and  it  is  now  a  common  occur- 
rence to  receive  reports  from  the  eye  specialists  that  the  disease  in 
the  schools  they  visit  is  under  control. 

EPIDEMICS. — There  have  been  rather  numerous  epidemics  during 
the  last  fiscal  year  of  smallpox,  diphtheria,  rabies,  measles,  and 
whooping  cough.  The  handling  of  these  epidemics  presents  greater 
difficulties  among  the  Indian  population  than  occurs  among  white 
people,  owing  to  the  fact  that  many  of  the  Indians  do  not  under- 
stand the  need  for  quarantine.  Some  of  the  diseases  cause  a  much 
higher  mortality  among  Indians  than  among  whites,  more  especially 
measles,  in  the  epidemics  of  which  there  has  followed  a  high  per- 
centage of  pneumonia.  Smallpox  early  in  the  year  broke  out  among 
the  Navajos,  of  whom  there  are  in  the  neighborhood  of  25,000  in 
northern  Arizona,  and  before  the  cases  were  discovered  there  had 
been  a  rather  wide  exposure.  This  was  due  to  the  unfortunate 
shortage  of  physicians,  partly  due  to  the  demand  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment. However,  a  medical  supervisor  was  immediately  sent  to  take 
charge  of  the  situation,  and  wholesale  vaccination  was  started  and 
detention  camps  established.  Satisfactory  progress  has  been  made 
and  it  is  believed  the  disease  is  under  control.  The  Navajos  have 
learned  the  value  of  vaccination,  but  like  many  white  people  they 
are  likely  to  wait  until  danger  is  present  before  protecting  them- 
selves. Sanitary  preparedness  is  in  order,  and  Indians  are  becoming 
more  and  more  amenable  in  this  respect. 

"SAVE  THE  BABIES." — Continued  and  vigorous  effort  has  been  the 
watchword  in  the  campaign  for  better  health  conditions  among  chil- 
dren, especially  the  young  infants,  among  whom  the  mortality  has 
been  so  great.  Results  in  this  direction  have  been  surprisingly 
gratifying,  and  much  has  been  accomplished.  At  the  Indian  fairs 
last  fall  a  "Baby  contest"  formed  a  prominent  part  in  the  program, 
and  great  interest  was  manifested  by  the  Indian  mothers.  They 
were  so  successful  that  it  is  planned  to  conduct  them  on  even  a  more 
elaborate  scale  this  year,  and  to  this  end  standard  score  cards  have 
been  secured  upon  which  the  children  contesting  will  be  registered. 
They  will  be  carefully  graded  by  the  physicians,  and  the  cards  of  the 
babies  having  the  highest  scores  will  be  sent  to  Washington,  where 
suitable  certificates  will  be  issued  to  the  parents. 

One  of  the  most  important  factors  bearing  on  the  health  problem 
among  the  children  is  the  education  of  the  mother  in  the  proper  care 
18404—17 2 


18  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

of  her  offspring.  To  this  end  emphasis  has  been  laid  upon  the 
necessity  of  bringing  every  possible  case  of  confinement  to  the 
agency  hospitals  for  the  lying-in  period.  This  policy  has  resulted 
not  only  in  giving  the  mother  requisite  instruction  in  the  care  of 
herself  and  her  child  but  has  given  to  many  Indian  children  a  start 
in  life  that  would  have  been  impossible  had  their  birth  been  con- 
summated under  the  old  unhygienic  environments. 

Herewith  find  my  letter  to  a  superintendent  of  one  of  the  Indian 
reservations  in  response  to  his  report  on  an  Indian  fair  in  which 
the  baby  show  was  emphasized : 

I  have  your  letter  reporting  the  Indian  fair,  in  which  you  make  particular  refer- 
ence to  your  baby  show,  inclosing  photographs  of  the  very  interesting  Indian  babies 
exhibited. 

It  is  gratifying  to  learn  that  the  baby  show  was  the  most  attractive  feature  of  your 
fair  and  that  the  Indians  were  greatly  interested,  not  only  in  the  contest  between 
babies,  but  especially  as  you  say: 

"  I  believe  the  physical  examination  of  these  babies,  which  was  closely  watched 
by  the  mothers,  was  as  much  an  item  of  education  to  them  as  anything  that  has 
happened  in  many  a  day.  *  *  *  The  examinations  were  far  more  than 
a  superficial  observation  of  the  general  appearance  of  the  children.  Notes  were 
taken  of  irregularities  and  deficiencies.  It  gave  the  physician,  nurse,  and  field 
matron  an  excellent  chance  for  some  very  good  advice  to  these  mothers  in  a  way 
they  will  remember  as  long  as  they  live." 

This  is  fine  and  indicates  intelligent  and  commendable  activity  on  the  part  (f 
yourself,  the  physician,  field  matron,  and  nurse,  which  I  greatly  appreciate.  How- 
ever, a  baby  show  is  apt  to  be  regarded  as  a  display  of  babies  and  not  taken  as  seri- 
ously by  the  Indians  and  employees  as  I  desire.  It  is  my  purpose  in  our  health  cam- 
paign to  utilize  the  baby  show  as  an  object  lesson  that  may  be  the  means  of  help- 
fulness in  extending  our  work  into  every  home  of  the  reservation .  I  am  determined 
to  leave  no  stone  unturned  to  accomplish  the  best  results  obtainable,  and  this  requires 
a  vigorous  campaign.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  talk  about  these  things  at  the  agency, 
but  it  is  incumbent  upon  us  all  to  see  that  employees  properly  associated  with  this 
work  make  unceasing  effort  to  improve  health  conditions  not  only  in  saving  the  baby 
but  quite  as  much  to  restore  the  constitution  and  improve  the  health  of  the  adult 
Indian. 

It  involves  sanitation  and  ventilation  of  the  homes;  cleanliness  not  only  of  houses 
and  surroundings  but  of  the  person  and  proper  food  for  the  child.  It  requires  the 
instilling  of  respect  for  the  physician,  the  nurse,  the  field  matron,  and  the  hospital, 
and  with  it  the  elimination  of  the  medicine  man. 

I  am  particularly  anxious  that  our  hospitals  shall  be  used  for  mothers  in  childbirth. 
It  is  my  great  desire  that  every  Indian  mother  not  otherwise  well  provided  for  shall 
find  a  place  and  proper  care  at  this  critical  period  in  her  life  in  a  hospital.  Every 
Indian  hospital  bed  not  necessarily  occupied  by  those  suffering  from  acute  disease 
or  serious  injury  should  be  available  for  mothers  in  childbirth. 

All  of  these  things  can  be  brought  about  only  through  organized,  aggressive,  and 
continuous  activity. 

Perhaps  the  most  pressing  feature  of  our  campaign  is  sanitation.  The  first  thing  to 
be  done  is  to  see  that  every  Indian  home  and  its  immediate  surroundings  are  thor- 
oughly cleaned  up  and  kept  in  a  sanitary  condition.  This  is  an  absolutely  necessary 
accomplishment.  In  effecting  sanitation,  do  not  assume  that  conditions  are  satis- 
factory because  you  find  a  tidy  appearance.  AYhile  there  is  apt  to  be  such  harmony, 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  19 

it  is  not  necessarily  so,  either  with  the  Indian  or  the  white  man.  Many  times,  when 
the  outward  appearance  is  good,  there  can  be  found  unsanitary  conditions. 

Infant  children  should  not  be  fed  the  food  of  an  adult,  but  rather  and  always  the 
nourishing  foods  suitable  for  infants.  Too  much  food  is  sometimes  quite  as  harmful 
as  too  little.  The  important  thing  is  that  an  infant  or  growing  child  shall  always  have 
the  proper  food  for  his  age.  It  is  essential,  too,  that  the  mother  shall  be  well  cared  for 
before,  at  the  time  of,  and  following  childbirth,  at  home  or  in  a  hospital. 

As  you  know,  our  health  campaign  has  been  vigorously  pursued  for  nearly  three 
years.  I  have  regarded  it  as  the  thing  about  which  all  other  administrative  activities 
should  revolve.  Education  and  protection  of  property  are  highly  important,  but 
everything  is  secondary  to  the  basic  condition  which  makes  for  the  perpetuation  of 
the  race. 

Our  whole  field  force  has  earnestly  joined  the  office  in  a  determined  campaign  to 
rebuild  the  constitution  of  the  Indian  as  rapidly  as  possible,  reduce  tuberculosis, 
eliminate  trachoma,  and  speedily  stop  the  appalling  percentage  of  deaths  among 
Indian  children.  For  many  years  it  has  been  truthfully  announced  that  the  Indian 
was  a  vanishing  race.  Many  conditions  conspired  to  make  it  so.  It  was  a  crime  to 
permit  it  to  exist  long  after  discovery,  but  it  has  continued  until  the  world  looks 
upon  the  Indian  as  a  dying  race.  Under  such  conditions  it  would  seem  almost  in- 
defensible that  Congress  should  appropriate  large  sums  of  money  for  the  education 
and  the  general  administration  of  their  affairs.  It  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  whole 
program  that  we  should  make  the  fight  now  in  progress  for  the  advancement  of  a 
dying  race. 

I  am  indeed  proud  of  the  fact,  and  may  I  not  say  that  its  accomplishment  will 
stand  out  in  history  as  a  mile-stone,  yes  as  a  monument,  more  conspicuous  than  any 
other  one  thing  in  the  history  of  Indian  administration  during  the  last  half  century, 
that  we  have  now  demonstrated,  as  ascertained  from  dependable  reports  made  by  the 
superintendents,  physicians,  and  field  matrons  at  the  series  of  Indian  school  institutes 
held  this  summer,  for  the  first  time  in  50  years  there  were  in  1915-16  more  births  than 
deaths  among  the  Indians  of  the  United  States.  The  Indian  is  no  longer  a  vanishing 
race.  Our  strenuous  efforts  are  certainly  worth  while  with  such  a  reward  awaiting 
us — saving  a  noble  and  deserving  people.  With  a  continuance  of  our  present  cam- 
paign there  is  now  every  promise  that  the  Indian  will  permanently  survive  and  be- 
come a  component  part  of  our  civilization  standing  side  by  side  with  the  Caucasian. 

Together  with  the  other  things  mentioned  in  this  letter,  I  wish  again  to  impress 
most  earnestly  upon  you  the  tremendous  importance  of  improving  sanitary  condi- 
tions in  every  Indian  home.  Let  sanitation  be  our  watchword.  In  our  nation-wide 
Indian  health  campaign,  let  us  make  sanitation  the  first  consideration. 

CHOCTAW  AND  CHEROKEE  HEALTH  DRIVES. 

Some  time  since  it  came  to  my  attention  that  health  conditions 
were  especially  bad  among  the  Choctaws  and  Cherokees  oi  Oklahoma, 
accordingly  as  soon  thereafter  as  funds  could  be  secured,  I  arranged 
for  health  diives  among  these  two  tribes;  set  aside  the  necessary 
funds,  organized  an  experienced  and  competent  force  consisting  of  a 
special  medical  supervisor  and  a -woman  supervisor,  with  six  field 
matrons  lor  each,  under  the  immediate  direction  of  Supt.  Parker. 
This  work  contemplated  a  campaign  of  three  or  four  months'  house 
to  house  canvass,  to  effect  immediate  results  by  way  of  prevention  as 
well  as  cure,  improving  sanitary,  health,  and  home  conditions,  with 
special  reference  to  tuberculosis,  the  segregation  of  open  cases  and 


20  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

advice  to  Indians  concerning  appropriate  treatment,  hygienic,  die- 
tetic, medical,  or  otherwise,  the  improvement  of  Indian  homes  and 
their  outside  surroundings,  including  sanitation  and  personal  hygiene, 
with  emphasis  on  sanitation.  After  their  initiation  I  went  to  Mus- 
kogee  and  held  a  conference  with  all  of  the  people  engaged  in  these 
two  drives,  finding  them  deeply  interested  in  their  work  and  their 
accomplishments  gratifying.  While  there  I  discovered  opportunity 
to  intensify  this  health  work,  and  among  other  things  addressed  a 
letter  to  the  chief  of  the  Ke-doo-wah. Society,  consisting  of  Cherokee 
Indians,  from  which  the  following  excerpts  are  taken: 

Shortly  after  assuming  the  duties  of  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  it  came  to  my 
attention  that  the  Indians  throughout  the  United  States  were  fast  becoming  a  dying 
race  and  that  it  was  largely  the  result  of  tuberculosis  and  other  diseases.  I  found 
this  condition  so  universal  and  serious  that  I  was  appalled.  It  appeared  to  me  as 
almost  beyond  belief  that  a  race  of  people,  with  such  a  splendid  ancestry  and  because 
of  their  historical  grandeur  and  nobility,  should  be  permitted  to  diminish  and  be 
eliminated  as  a  substantial  factor  among  those  who  are  to  live  for  all  time. 

It  occurred  to  me  that  the  first  obligation  of  the  Government  to  the  Indians  is  to 
exert  itself  to  the  uttermost  to  save  the  race — to  perpetuate  its  life.  With  this  end 
in  view,  more  than  three  years  ago  the  Indian  Bureau  commenced  a  systematic  and 
widespread  campaign  to  improve  home  and  health  conditions  among  the  Indians 
throughout  the  country — to  give  the  Indian  baby  an  equal  chance  with  the  white 
child  to  live  and  to  the  Indian  father  and  mother  an  opportunity  to  enjoy  the  fruits 
of  life  in  a  manner  equal  to  that  of  their  white  neighbors.  During  these  three  years 
we  have  made  a  vigorous  effort  through  physicians,  nurses,  and  field  matrons  to 
reestablish  their  health,  with  the  result  that  last  year,  for  the  first  time  in  more  than 
50  years,  there  were  more  Indians  born  than  died  from  every  cause.  This  means 
that  the  Indian  is  no  longer  a  dying  race,  and  yet  it  is  a  fact  that  in  spots  here  and 
there  throughout  the  Indian  country  health  conditions  are  still  so  bad  that  the  In- 
dians are  dying  faster  than  they  are  being  born. 

To  remedy  this  situation,  we  have  recently  made  a  special  effort  to  find  funds  to 
pay  the  expenses  of  an  organized  health  drive  that  is  now  being  carried  on  in  your 
community.  If  we  are  to  be  successful  it  must  come  about  as  the  result  of  coopera- 
tion, and  leading  Indians  like  yourself  should  join  the  officers  and  others  who  are 
making  this  effort  in  behalf  of  your  people.  It  is  essentially  important  that  you  and 
others  like  you  who  have  influence  shall  lead  in  this  campaign,  not  only  because  of 
the  work  that  you  may  do,  but  more  especially  on  account  of  the  influence  you  will 
have  upon  others. 

At  this  time  these  campaigns  are  still  on,  consequently  I  am  not 
prepared  to  make  a  final  statement  of  the  results.  However,  I  have 
assurance  that  the  expenditure  and  effort  have  been  more  than 
justified.  Details  must  necessarily  await  another  report. 

THE  MEDICINE  MAN. — I  have  great  satisfaction  in  announcing 
the  fact  that  the  influence  of  the  medicine  man  is  fast  being  elimi- 
nated. He  has  everywhere  been  a  destructive  element.  To  the 
extent  that  he  has  flourished  his  tribesmen  have  been  nonprogressive, 
never  reaching  their  possibilities,  suffering  for  want  of  the  hospital, 
physician,  nurse,  and  field  matron.  He  has  been  a  constant  menace 
to  the  progress,  prosperity,  morals,  and  health  of  the  Indian  race. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  21 

The  medicine  man  is  no  longer  dominant,  neither  is  he  now  a  large 
factor  in  the  life  of  many  tribes,  although  he  is  still  found  here  and 
there  in  decreasing  numbers. 

THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  INTOXICANTS. 

The  fiscal  year  just  brought  to  a  successful  close  has  been  one  of 
remarkable  changes  in  so  far  as  the  suppression  of  the  traffic  in 
intoxicants  among  the  Indians  is  concerned. 

The  increase  in  prohibition  sentiment  throughout  the  country, 
and  especially  in  those  States  where  Indians  reside,  has  materially 
aided  our  work.  The  addition  of  these  States  to  the  "dry  column," 
and  the  drastic  laws  relating  to  the  importation  of  liquor  into  them 
has  proved  their  effective  aid. 

As  evidence  of  the  effect  among  the  Indians  of  prohibition,  the 
superintendent  of  the  Umatilla  School  in  Oregon  has  submitted 
some  interesting  figures.  During  the  calendar  year  1915  the  police 
records  of  the  city  of  Pendleton  show  that  there  were  1,440  arrests, 
of  which  number  270  were  Indians,  or  about  19  per  cent.  During 
the  calendar  year  1916  there  were  only  385  arrests,  of  which  number 
69  were  Indians.  The  saloons  closed  on  January  1,  1916,  and  the 
number  of  Indian  offenders  fell  off  as  above  stated. 

A  posseman  shot  a  bootlegger  on  the  Nez  Perce  Reservation  hi 
Idaho,  which  raised  the  interesting  question  of  the  authority  of  his 
appointment,  but  the  Federal  court  in  granting  a  writ  of  habeas 
corpus  ruled  favorably  to  the  Government. 

Several  officers  operated  in  the  State  of  New  York  during  the 
course  of  the  year  in  order  to  bring  about  an  improvement  in  the 
liquor  situation  among  the  Indians  in  that  State.  This  has  resulted 
in  improving  the  situation. 

As  the  States  near  the  Omaha  and  Winnebago  Reservations  in 
Nebraska  have  gone  dry,  the  Indians  have  found  the  difficulty  in 
obtaining  intoxicants  so  great  that  it  is  having  a  markedly  deterrent 
effect  on  them. 

By  reason  of  prohibition  in  Oregon,  Idaho,  and  Washington,  the 
bootlegger  and  others  engaged  in  the  liquor  traffic  have  been  forced 
to  seek  new  fields  of  operation.  Consequently  Montana,  with  its 
large  Indian  population,  has  experienced  an  increase  in  the  liquor 
traffic  among  the  Indians.  This  will  entail  much  heavy  work  on 
this  service. 

The  conviction  and  sentence  to  the  penitentiary  of  W.  J.  Creek- 
more  was  a  distinct  victory  for  the  liquor-suppression  service  in 
Oklahoma.  Creekmore  was  known  as  the  king  bootlegger  and  is 
reputed  to  have  made  more  than  $1,000,000  in  this  traffic.  He  was 
the  head  of  a  ring  which  is  said  to  have  practically  controlled  the 
liquor  business  of  that  State.  He  was  frequently  in  the  clutches 


22  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

of  the  law  but  managed  to  evade  punishment  until  his  recent  con- 
viction. Following  this  conviction  he  was  fined  in  the  amount  of 
$2,200  with  a  three  years'  sentence  in  the  several  cases  against  him. 
This  hard  fought  and  splendid  victory,  together  with  that  obtained 
in  the  cases  of  other  notorious  bootleggers  in  Oklahoma,  is  a  stern 
warning  of  the  campaign  being  waged  for  the  protection  of  the 
Indians  against  the  liquor  menace  everywhere  and  has  effectively 
destroyed  the  organized  illegal  traffic  in  Oklahoma. 

An  interesting  ruling  was  handed  down  by  the  United  States 
District  Court  for  the  Eastern  District  of  Oklahoma  wherein  an 
Osage  Indian  who  had  received  a  certificate  of  competency  was  held 
to  be  still  a  ward  of  the  Government  and  that  it  was  a  Federal  offense 
to  furnish  him  with  liquor,  thus  establishing  an  additional  safe- 
guard. ; 

The  distribution  of  large  amounts  of  money  to  the  Osage  Indians 
from  time  to  time  has  heretofore  brought  about  a  condition  resulting 
in  their  being  debauched  and  defrauded.  The  application,  however,  of 
the  law  prohibiting  the  payment  of  moneys  to  Indians  who  are  intoxi- 
cated has  largely  diminished  this  evil,  although  it  has  not  been  com- 
pletely eradicated. 

The  declaration  by  Congress  that  Osage  County  is  Indian  country 
for  the  purpose  of  the  enforcement  of  liquor  laws  has  proven  exceed- 
ingly helpful,  and  during  the  quarterly  payments  our  enforcement 
officers  have  been  very  active. 

The  appropriation  act  for  the  current  fiscal  year  authorized  the 
payment  to  the  enrolled  members  of  the  Choctaw,  Chickasaw  and 
Seminole  Tribes  of  an  amount  of  approximately  $9,000,000.  This 
vast  sum  of  money,  as  well  as  $2,000,000  to  the  Osages,  has  called  for 
the  most  strenous  efforts  of  the  officers  of  the  liquor  service  to  prevent 
the  use  of  liquor  and  the  consequent  debauchment  of  the  Indians. 
Our  service  was  thoroughly  mobilized  and  on  guard,  while  the  gov- 
ernor of  the  State,  the  Commissioner  of  Internal  Revenue  and  other 
officers  were  enlisted  in  the  campaign  for  protection.  The  governor 
addressed  letters  to  county  officials,  and  their  active  cooperation 
solicited  for  the  enforcement  of  law  and  order  in  the  earnest  effort 
to  prevent  payments  being  made  to  Indians  who  were  hpJbitual  users 
of  intoxicants.  The  Indian  Office  liquor  suppression  service  made  a 
thorough  canvass  of  the  State,  as  a  result  of  which  it  has  found  neces- 
sary to  withhold  payments  in  Pushmataha  and  Choctaw  Counties 
because  of  conditions  prevailing  there.  In  Choctaw  County,  the 
county  attorney  and  a  prominent  business  man  were  apprehended  for 
introducing  liquor.  These  men  were  prosecuted  and  convicted, 
notwithstanding  the  great  pressure  brought  to  bear  in  their  favor  due 
to  their  prominence  in  the  State.  These  prosecutions  will  have  a 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  23 

salutary  effect  and  indicate  a  disposition  to  treat  all  men  who  violate 
the  liquor  laws  as  equal  criminals  in  the  eye  of  the  law. 

Reports  indicate  that  the  payment  was  generally  a  marked  suc- 
cess; that  many  of  the  Indians  deposited  their  shares  in  the  bank 
and  checked  against  them  for  the  purchase  of  the  necessaries  of  life 
and  other  beneficial  purposes. 

Illustrative  of  the  activity  of  this  thoroughgoing  canvass,  the  fol- 
lowing excerpt  from  a  report  will  show  certain  conditions  which  were 
remedied : 

In  my  former  report  covering  this  situation  I  make  mention  of  the  fact  that  the  dis- 
trict court  was  in  session  in  McCurtain  County  and  that  at  the  time  of  my  leaving  there 
on  that  occasion  22  persons  had  been  convicted  and  sentenced  to  the  penitentiary  for 
various  crimes.  On  arriving  at  Idabel  on  this  occasion  I  learned  that  the  district 
court  had  adjourned,  that  during  its  session  of  five  weeks  34  convictions  had  been  had 
and  34  persons  taken  to  the  penitentiary  and  as  said  in  my  former  report  this  seems  to 
be  the  healthiest  indication  I  have  found  in  McCurtain  County  and  can  only  mean 
that  the  citizenship  has  begun  to  waken  up  to  the  condition  in  that  country  and  are 
intending  to  see  that  the  same  is  bettered. 

Another  payment  has  been  authorized  and  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  the  active  campaign  which  has  been  made  for  good  gov- 
ernment and  for  the  elimination  of  the  disastrous  effects  of  liquor  on 
such  occasions  will  be  as  successfully  carried  out  as  previously. 

Stringent  and  active  measures  are  also  thrown  around  similar  pay- 
ments in  lesser  amount  elsewhere  throughout  the  Indian  country. 

In  view  of  conflicting  decisions  by  the  courts  as  to  the  meaning  of 
section  2140  of  the  Revised  Statutes,  which  provides  not  only  for  the 
seizure  and  forfeiture  of  liquor  but  for  the  boats,  teams,  wagons,  and 
sleds  used  in  conveying  same,  Congress  cleared  up  the  situation  by 
enacting  that : 

Automobiles  or  any  other  vehicles  or  conveyances  used  in  introducing  or  attempting 
to  introduce  intoxicants  into  the  Indian  country  or  where  the  introduction  is  prohibited 
by  treaty  or  Federal  statutes,  whether  used  by  the  owner  thereof  or  other  person  shall 
be  subject  to  the  seizure,  libel,  and  forfeiture  provided  in  section  2140  of  the  Revised 
Statutes  of  the  United  States. 

The  enactment  of  this  specific  legislation  will  be  an  effective  bar  to 
the  collusion  of  parties  who  would  endeavor  by  claiming  a  mortgage 
or  other  lien  on  the  automobiles  thus  confiscated  to  defeat  the  pur- 
poses of  the  Government. 

The  question  whether  it  is  an  offense  to  transport  liquor  from  a 
point  outside  to  another  point  beyond  a  reservation  and  whether  the 
liquor  while  in  transit  across  the  reservation  was  subject  to  seizure 
and  destruction  under  section  2140,  has  been  and  is  now  before  the 
courts. 

This  has  created  an  unfortunate  condition  and  may  cause  consider- 
able trouble  to  reservation  officers.  However  the  Reed  amendment 


24  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

to  the  post  office  bill  will  to  some  extent  remedy  it.  Congress  is  now 
being  asked  to  close  up  this  gap  in  our  otherwise  effective  liquor  laws. 

Owing  to  the  advancement  to  the  Chippewa  Indians  of  one-fourth 
of  the  amount  which  would  now  be  coming  to  the  Indians  under  a 
pro  rata  distribution  of  their  permanent  fund  under  the  treaty  of 
February  22,  1855,  a  troublesome  condition  has  been  created.  There 
is  a  large  element  within  this  area  which  has  been  accustomed  to 
obtain  liquor  freely,  which,  coupled  with  the  desire  on  the  part  of 
others  to  reap  large  profits  from  the  illegal  introduction  and  sale 
of  liquor,  has  caused  the  liquor  suppression  officers  a  great  deal  of 
trouble,  although  their  work  has  mainly  been  very  satisfactory. 

The  difficulties  experienced  by  all  who  are  engaged  in  the  work  of 
suppressing  the  liquor  traffic  among  Indians  have  been  great  and  have 
been  carried  on  with  many  legal  battles.  The  legality  of  these  opera- 
tions and  the  actions  of  the  officers  have  frequently  been  called  into 
question  into  the  courts,  but  in  the  face  of  all  obstructive  measures 
substantial  progress  has  been  recorded.  Instances  are  known  where 
liquors  under  the  titles  of  "near  beers"  have  been  shipped  into 
treaty  territory  and  a  market  established.  Afterwards  the  percentage 
of  alcohol  would  be  increased  until  in  some  instances  real  beer  was 
going  in  the  place  of  the  "near  beer"  and  under  its  guise  and  label. 
To  minimize  this,  an  order  was  issued  prohibiting  the-  introduction 
of  malt  liquor,  which  immediately  brought  the  question  into  the 
courts  for  restraining  orders  to  prohibit  our  officers  from  interfering 
with  these  shipments.  It  is  gratifying,  however,  that  the  action 
taken  in  the  State  courts  was  to  promptly  dispose  of  the  case  by 
refusing  to  grant  the  restraining  orders.  Many  prosecutions  were 
instituted  and  are  now  pending  in  the  Minnesota  judicial  district. 

An  interesting  case  arising  out  of  the  enforcement  of  treaty  provi- 
sions is  now  pending  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 
wherein  the  John  Gund  Brewing  Co.  seeks  to  compel  the  Great 
Northern  Railway  Co.  to  accept  a  shipment  of  beer  and  other  fer- 
mented malt  liquors  to  persons  residing  within  the  treaty  territory 
where  purchased  for  and  intended  to  be  used  personally  and  for  the 
private  consumption  of  the  consignees.  Because  of  the  importance 
of  this  question  in  connection  with  this  work  in  Minnesota  the 
Government  has  intervened  and  the  outcome  of  the  case  is  being 
awaited  with  interest. 

An  important  decision  has  been  rendered  by  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  United  States  in  the  case  of  denying  the  authority  of  Federal 
courts  to  suspend  sentences,  etc.  This  decision  will  prove  of  inesti- 
mable ^value  to  our  service.  Many  reports  have  been  received  from 
the  officers  of  the  liquor  service  in  which  attention  was  invited  to 
cases  where  a  minimum  sentence  of  60  days  in  jail  and  the  payment  of 
a  fine  of  $1,000  was  suspended  upon  the  payment  of  a  fine  of  $25. 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  25 

This  appears  to  have  proven  an  incentive  for  the  vendor  immediately 
to  reengage  in  the  traffic  to  recoup  his  loss.  The  imposition  of 
penitentiary  sentences  in  a  few  aggravated  cases  in  each  jurisdiction 
will  have  a  great  influence  upon  the  violators  of  the  law  and  show 
that  the  Indian  Office  is  in  earnest  in  waging  uncompromising  war- 
fare upon  all  persons  who  carry  intoxicants  of  any  kind  to  the  Indians. 

Position  or  influence  should  not  be  a  factor  in  the  enforcement 
of  the  law  against  the  introduction  or  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors 
to  Indians  or  in  Indian  country.  It  is  an  axiomatic  and  good  principle 
that  all  men  should  stand  equal  before  the  law.  In  fact  the  institu- 
tions of  our  country  are  .in  no  way  better  reflected  than  when  this 
idea  is  faithfully  executed. 

More  than  four  years'  experience  in  an  effort  to  minimize  the  use  of 
liquor  among  Indians  has  persuaded  me  that  they  advance  more 
rapidly  and  prosper  more  certainly  when  they  are  sober.  It  has 
been  my  observation  that  merchants  and  those  who  trade  with 
Indians  have  enjoyed  prosperity  in  proportion  as  the  liquor  traffic 
among  them  has  been  suppressed;  that  crime  and  disorder  have 
been  reduced  to  a  minimum  when  we  have  been  successful  in  elimi- 
nating the  bootlegger;  that  health  conditions  have  been  improved, 
social  standards  raised,  and  betterments  generally  effected  not  other- 
wise obtainable  where  the  sale  of  liquor  prevails. 

I  sincerely  believe  that  no  appropriation  of  $150,000  made  by 
Congress  will  be  fraught  with  more  lasting  and  beneficial  results. 

FARMING. 

FOOD  CAMPAIGN. — Following  the  practice  of  the  present  adminis- 
tration, I  issued  on  January  4,  1917,  a  letter  to  every  superintendent 
regarding  the  necessity  for  early  and  thorough  preparation  by  all 
Indians  desiring  to  farm  this  year.  This  letter  outlined  the  essential 
steps  to  be  taken  in  the  selection  of  seeds  and  implements,  indicated 
the  proper  methods  and  funds  respecting  the  purchase  thereof,  the 
need  for  careful  cleaning  and  testing  of  seed,  the  conditions  under 
which  the  reimbursable  plan  would  apply,  the  importance  of  larger 
gardening  operations,  etc. 

On  April  9,  1917,  less  than  a  week  after  the  passage  of  the  con- 
gressional resolution  recognizing  a  state  of  war  between  the  United 
States  and  Germany,  I  sent  the  following  telegram  to  137  Indian 
Service  superintendents  throughout  the  country: 

War  situation  makes  it  imperative  that  every  tillable  acre  of  land  on  Indian  reserva- 
tions be  intensively  cultivated  this  season  to  supply  food  demands,  particularly  wheat, 
beans,  potatoes,  corn,  and  meat.  Call  farmers  and  leading  Indians  together  immedi- 
ately for  organized,  united  efforts  under  your  continuous  supervision.  This  is  the 
highest  importance  and  requires  aggressive  action.  There  must  be  no  delay  in  any- 
thing necessary  to  insure  results.  Wire  what  may  be  expected  and  report  progress  by 
letter. 


26  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Similar  telegrams  were  sent  to  the  supervisors,  inspectors,  super- 
intendents of  irrigation,  and  others,  urging  organization  and  coopera- 
tion. The  purpose  of  this  telegram  was  amplified  in  a  letter  to  all 
superintendents  dated  April  12,  1917,  incorporating  the  President's 
appeal  to  the  farmers  of  the  country,  in  which  I  said  in  part: 

I  am  much  gratified  at  the  prompt  and  enthusiastic  responses  to  my  telegram  of 
April  9,  urging  increased  production  of  foodstuffs  by  the  Indians. 

With  the  entry  of  the  United  States  into  the  world  war  the  importance  of  an  in- 
creased food  supply  can  not  be  overestimated.  We  must  sacrifice  every  nonessential 
along  other  lines  for  this  supreme  object.  The  service  farmers  should  get  into  the 
field  early  and  stay  late,  encouraging  and  assisting  the  Indians  in  every  way  possible. 
Enlist  the  cooperation  of  the  lessees  of  Indian  land  and  of  the  white  farmers  in  the 
vicinity.  This  appeal  is  based  on  both  economic  and  patriotic  grounds.  See  that 
it  is  brought  home  to  every  employee  and  Indian  on  the  reservation,  through  the 
farmers  and  other  industrial  employees.  Publish  it  in  the  school  and  agency  papers 
and  circulate  it  by  every  other  means  which  may  occur  to  you.  Appeal  to  the  pa- 
triotism of  the  Indians.  Show  them  how  they  can  serve  their  country  effectively  in 
the  present  emergency  by  exerting  themselves  to  the  uttermost  in  the  production  of 
foodstuffs.  While  my  telegram  mentioned  foodstuffs,  "particularly  wheat,  beans, 
potatoes,  corn,  and  meat,"  there  should  be  no  diminution  in  the  production  of  forage 
for  your  own  use. 

On  April  21,  1917,  the  following  telegram  was  sent  to  the  superin- 
tendents: 

What  are  you  doing  and  what  can  be  done  in  raising  corn,  milo,  sorghum,  potatoes, 
and  other  suitable  crops  in  your  jurisdiction?  It  is  highly  important  that  everything 
possible  be  done  in  this  connection  immediately.  Wire  program  showing  estimated 
acreage  various  crops  and  total  increased  acreage  over  last  year. 

And  on  May  12,  1917,  the  following  letter  was  mailed: 

Telegraphic  and  letter  responses  to  my  follow-up  telegram  of  April  21  indicate  most 
commendable  and  gratifying  activities  on  practically  every  reservation,  as  well  as  at 
the  schools,  in  the  prosecution  of  our  campaign  for  increased  production  of  foodstuffs. 
It  is  now  apparent  that  the  acreage  of  Indian  land  cultivated  or  to  be  cultivated  this 
season  will  be  from  25  to  50  per  cent  greater  than  last  year,  and  on  some  of  the  reserva- 
tions 100  per  cent  greater.  I  now  wish  to  emphasize  certain  features  of  the  campaign 
for  your  careful  attention. 

In  the  enthusiasm  for  an  increased  acreage  do  not  overlook  the  necessity  of  proper 
and  intensive  methods  to  obtain  the  maximum  yield  from  each  cultivated  acre.  This 
will  require  very  aggressive  and  systematic  follow-up  work  and  continuous  supervision 
by  the  service  farmers,  that  there  may  be  no  let-up  when  the  "first  big  drive  "  is  over. 

Increased  production  is  only  one  feature  of  the  campaign,  conservation  being  the 
other.  The  Indian  women  and  girls  should  play  an  important  part  in  this  phase  of 
the  campaign  by  the  production  of  vegetables  and  fruits  to  be  eaten  fresh,  or  canned 
for  winter  use,  and  by  more  careful  and  economical  methods  in  preparation  and  dis- 
position of  foodstuffs  for  the  table.  The  field  matrons  should  be  very  helpful  in  these 
respects. 

My  attention  has  been  called  to  the  value  of  dried  corn  as  an  article  of  food.  The 
corn  ears,  either  sweet  corn  or  field  corn,  are  pulled  when  in  the  roasting-ear  stage, 
scalded  slightly,  and  the  grains  cut  from  the  cob  and  dried  in  the  sun.  A  circular  will 
be  issued  later  giving  the  best  methods  of  drying  and  caring  for  corn.  I  call  it  to  your 
attention  now  so  that  you  may  have  your  farmers  and  field  matrons  take  up  the  sub- 


COMMISSIONER   OF   IXDIAX   AFFAIRS.  27 

ject  with  the  Indians  and  urge  them  to  increase  planting  to  meet  the  demand  along 
this  line.  It  is  probable  that  corn  can  be  successfully  grown  for  this  purpose  in  a 
climate  where  it  will  not  mature  for  the  ordinary  uses.  Push  this  suggestion. 

The  figures  given  in  the  telegraphic  replies  to  my  message  of  April  21  were  no  doubt 
largely  estimates,  but  you  should  now  be  in  position  to  report  with  reasonable  accuracy 
the  acreage  of  the  different  crops  planted  or  to  be  planted  this  year.  In  this  connection 
there  is  attached  a  blank  form  on  which  to  show  the  acreage  devoted  to  the  different 
crops  on  the  agency  and  school  farms,  by  the  Indians,  by  lessees,  and  the  increased 
acreage  over  last  year.  Each  column  should  be  carefully  filled  in  with  as  accurate 
information  as  it  is  possible  to  obtain. 

The  showing  thus  far  made  by  the  Indians  must  be  still  further  augmented.  On 
many  of  the  reservations  large  numbers  of  Indians  will  not  bring  under  cultivation 
nearly  all  the  available  land  on  their  own  allotments,  and  by  that  I  mean  their  home 
allotments,  lands  which  ought  not  to  be  leased  but  which  the  Indian  could  cultivate 
if  he  had  the  will  to  work  and  the  means  to  provide  himself  with  the  necessary  equip- 
ment. Here  is  where  your  most  urgent  task  lies,  and  where  the  most  lasting  results 
may  be  obtained.  Thinking  men  believe  the  results  of  the  present  and  projected 
agricultural  activities  should  be  far-reaching;  that  they  will  extend  beyond  the 
present  emergency,  and  especially  is  this  true  in  the  Indian  Service.  The  immediate 
aim  is  of  supreme  importance  but  the  ultimate  result  may  be  and  should  be  very 
effective  in  solving  the  Indian  problem  of  self-support.  Spare  no  effort  to  get  the 
Indians  fully  aroused  to  the  great  need  for  continued  and  increased  activity  as  a 
patriotic  duty.  The  present  campaign  has  been  wonderfully  well  launched,  but  with 
the  experience  gained  much  greater  things  may  be  reasonably  expected  for  the  next 
year  or  crop  season. 

There  is  attached  hereto  a  form  upon  which  to  show  the  land  which  will  remain 
uncultivated  this  year.  You  should  supplement  the  statistical  table  with  a  written 
report,  taking  up  the  figures,  item  by  item,  and  carefully  analyzing  them,  showing 
th?  character  of  the  land;  to  what  crops  it  is  adapted;  whether  tribal  or  allotted; 
whether  irrigation  is  necessary,  and  if  so  whether  the  land  is  now  under  ditch  with 
water  available;  if  irrigation  is  necessary  and  the  land  is  not  now  under  ditch,  the 
feasibility,  cost,  and  time  required  to  provide  irrigation  facilities;  whether  the  agricul- 
tural land  lies  in  one  large  body,  if  tribal,  or  in  different  tracts  (show  the  acreage  of 
each);  whether  tractors  can  be  used  to  advantage,  and  if  so  whether  it  would  be 
practicable  to  develop  the  land  on  a  large  scale  by  leasing. 

In  short,  I  want  such  a  description  of  the  land  still  unused  as  will  enable  me  to 
make  definite  answer  to  inquiries  from  individuals,  corporations,  or  governmental 
sources,  as  to  the  location  and  possibilities  of  land  suitable  for  their  various  purposes. 
Of  course,  in  all  the  statistics  and  information  herein  requested  I  realize  that  no 
actual  measurements  can  be  taken ;  that  the  ability  of  the  superintendent  to  estimate 
accurately  the  acreage  and  soil  possibilities  will  determine  the  real  value  of  this 
report;  and  for  these  reasons  I  ask  that  you  give  sufficient  time  and  attention  to  the 
subject  to  insure  that  the  report  will  represent  your  very  best  judgment.  However, 
to  be  of  most  value,  the  information  should  be  in  my  hands  not  later  than  June  15. 
When  completed  both  reports  should  be  returned  to  me  with  the  other  information 
requested  above. 

It  will  be  seen  that  a  tremendous  amount  of  work  was  involved 
along  two  distinct  but  related  lines;  (1)  Awakening  employees  and 
Indians  to  a  full  realization  of  the  emergency  with  the  consequent 
determination  to  do  their  part  to  meet  it,  and  (2)  providing  the 
physical  equipment,  seed,  etc.,  necessary  to  handle  the  largely  in- 
creased cultivated  acreage  to  follow.  The  first  was  accomplished 


28  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

in  part  by  means  of  the  telegrams  and  letters  mentioned  above, 
through  the  visits  of  supervisory  officials  especially  detailed  for  this 
work,  and  the  meetings  of  employees  and  Indians  called  pursuant  to 
my  instructions,  at  which  the  greatest  enthusiasm  was  shown,  and 
the  second  by  the  immediate  emergency  purchase  of  thousands  of 
dollars'  worth  of  additional  implements,  seeds,  etc.,  beyond  estimates 
previously  made  to  meet  the  normal  demands  of  the  service.  As  one 
example  typical  of  many  other  reservations,  the  superintendent  at 
Shoshone  had  estimated  for  15,000  pounds  of  seed  wheat  but  actually 
issued  to  Indians  69,000  pounds,  all  of  which  was  produced  on  the 
school  farm. 

As  a  further  step  in  this  direction,  I  detailed  several  of  the  most 
experienced  field  men  to  visit  a  number  of  the  reservations  where 
the  need  seemed  most  urgent,  to  assist  in  the  organization  and 
prosecution  of  the  campaign. 

The  response  was  gratifying  on  the  part  of  both  Indians  and  em- 
ployees indicating  a  patriotic  realization  of  the  situation  and  a 
determination  to  do  everything  possible  to  contribute  to  the  success 
of  the  campaign. 

Detailed  figures  received  from  most  of  the  reservations  and  schools 
indicate  that  the  acreage  of  Indian  land  cultivated  this  season  is 
from  25  to  50  per  cent  greater  than  ever  before,  and  on  some  of  the 
reservations  100  per  cent  greater,  showing  that  the  Indian  will  be  a 
substantial  factor  in  increasing  the  country's  food  supply  during  the 
present  emergency.  However,  as  intimated  in  my  letter  of  May  12, 
1917,  the  opportunity  is  at  hand  in  this  situation  for  a  great  and 
permanent  impetus  to  Indian  progress,  which  will  set  the  race  ahead 
many  years  along  industrial  lines,  if  the  high  standard  of  activity 
and  accomplishment  established  this  year  is  maintained.  This  will 
materially  hasten  the  final  solution  of  the  Indian  problem,  in  keeping 
with  the  new  declaration  of  policy  in  Indian  affairs,  for  the  obvious 
reason  that  the  Indians  gradually  achieve  self-support  and  become 
independent  by  means  of  their  increased  industrial  activity  and  the 
better  business  judgment  employed  in  handling  and  disposing  of 
their  surplus  products. 

Reports  thus  far  received  show  that  the  Indians  on  73  reserva- 
tions are  cultivating  this  season  472,156  acres  of  land,  as  compared 
with  358,796  acres  last  year,  which  represents  an  increase  of  113,360 
acres  or  31.6  per  cent.  Practically  every  reservation  showed  an 
increase,  the  highest  being  100  per  cent. 

This  result  shows  hitherto  untapped  supplies  of  energy  and  capa- 
city, indicative  of  the  possibilities  of  the  race  and  its  partial  readi- 
ness, at  least  for  the  responsibilities  of  modern  civilization.  These 
need  only  to  be  fully  developed  by  the  gradual  processes  of  educa- 
tion and  industrial  activity,  to  accomplish  the  final  solution  of  the 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  29 

Indian  problem.  We  may  now  say  with  certainty,  as  demonstrated 
in  this  campaign,  that  the  Indian  is  an  asset  and  not  a  liability. 

An  incident  worthy  of  mention  happened  at  Lower  Brule  during 
the  year.  An  Indian,  after  starting  his  crop,  was  taken  ill  and  had 
to  go  to  the  hospital,  when  seven  of  his  neighbors  voluntarily  gathered 
at  his  place  and  put  in  five  acres  of  oats,  besides  breaking  ten  acres 
of  new  land,  on  which  they  planted  corn,  entirely  without  sugges- 
tion from  the  superintendent  or  anyone  else.  This  is  a  spirit  of 
initiative  and  community  responsibility,  which  is  an  indication  of 
Indian  competency  to  shoulder  the  duties  of  citizenship  and  stand 
on  their  own  feet  as  independent  members  of  society. 

Evidence  of  substantial  progress  was  found  on  the  recently  estab- 
lished Papago  Reservation  in  Arizona,  where  an  inspector  found 
comfortable  homes  at  remote  Papago  villages,  with  adobe  walls, 
glass  windows,  chimneys,  shingle  roofs,  and  floors,  about  which  he 
states  in  part  as  follows: 

So  far  as  my  information  goes,  this  advance  in  home  building  among  the  Papagoa 
does  not  proceed  from  any  definite  tangible  plan  of  concerted  action  emanating  from 
the  employees,  but  is  rather  the  mere  material  expression  of  the  spirit  of  progress 
dominating  this  tribe  of  Indians,  which  spirit  among  them  is  doubtless  greatly  stimu- 
lated by  the  good  work  of  practical  education  that  has  been  done  by  superintendent 
and  subordinate  employees. " 

LEASING. — Realizing  that  with  our  utmost  efforts  it  is  beyond  the 
physical  capacity  of  the  Indians  to  bring  under  cultivation  all  the 
surplus  land  on  the  different  reservations,  aggressive  steps  have 
been  taken  with  the  view  of  leasing  as  much  of  this  surplus  land  as 
possible,  on  liberal  terms,  special  regulations  having  been  promul- 
gated for  this  purpose  which  will  permit  of  long  term  leases.  Al- 
though final  arrangements  have  not  yet  been  made,  it  is  estimated 
that  more  than  200,000  acres  of  additional  land  have  been  or  will 
be  leased  by  the  next  crop  season,  thus  insuring  a  further  addition  to 
the  country's  food  supply  by  the  utilization  of  land  which  would 
otherwise  remain  uncultivated.  Special  efforts  are  being  made  to 
lease  hitherto  unused  irrigable  land  on  the  large  projects  in  the  west, 
including  Crow,  Blackfeet,  Flathead,  Fort  Hall,  Fort  Peck,  Gila 
River,  Colorado  River  and  others. 

FAIRS. — The  spirit  of  rivalry  and  competition  is  a  strong  incen- 
tive to  success  among  the  Indians  as  well  as  the  whites,  and  the 
agricultural  fair  has  proved  one  of  the  most  effective  means  of  stimu- 
lating the  enthusiasm  of  the  Indians  along  industrial  lines.  At  these 
fairs  the  Indians  display  their  agricultural  products,  live  stock,  etc., 
in  competition  with  each  other.  Suitable  prizes  are  awarded  on  the 
best  exhibits.  The  first  fair  of  this  nature  was  held  on  the  Crow 
Reservation  in  1906,  the  number  being  gradually  increased  each 
year  until  in  1916,  fifty-seven  such  fairs  were  held,  most  of  which 


30  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

were  entirely  supported  by  means  of  gate  receipts,  the  sale  of  con- 
cessions, advertising  in  programs,  voluntary  contributions  by  the 
Indians,  etc.  Many  of  the  fairs  are  managed  entirely  by  the  Indians, 
who  have  regular  associations  organized  for  the  purpose,  with  In- 
dian officers,  which  gives  them  training  in  business  administration 
and  organization,  thus  contributing  to  their  education  and  com- 
petency along  the  lines  of  modern  activities. 

The  next  logical  step  in  this  direction  is  participation  by  the 
Indians  in  conveniently  located  county  fairs  on  the  same  basis  as 
the  whites,  their  products  being  shown  in  competition  with  those 
of  other  exhibitors.  This  plan  is  encouraged  wherever  practicable, 
and  this  year  the  Indians  have  continued  their  good  record  of  winning 
numerous  prizes,  which  increases  their  sense  of  civic  responsibility 
and  interest  in  local  aifairs,  tends  to  make  them  feel  that  they  are  a 
part  of  the  civilized  community,  and  thereby  contributes  to  their 
progress  and  final  emancipation  from  Government  control. 

Indian  exhibits  were  also  shown  at  State  fairs  in  nearly  every 
State  where  Indian  reservations  are  located,  and  likewise  with  good 
results  many  premiums  being  won  by  the  Indians  in  open  competi- 
tion, including  first  prize  on  wheat  in  South  Dakota,  which  was 
awarded  to  a  full-blood  Indian  of  the  Lower  Brule  Reservation. 

AGRICULTURAL  EXTENSION  WORK. — Agricultural  extension  work 
under  the  Smith-Lever  Act,  in  cooperation  with  the  United  States 
Department  of  Agriculture  and  the  various  State  colleges,  has  been 
conducted  during  the  year  with  very  gratifying  results.  This  work 
is  carried  on  in  three  ways:  (1)  by  means  of  county  agents  who 
instruct  the  farmers  in  the  most  approved  methods  of  intensive  agri- 
culture; (2)  stereopticon  lectures,  field  demonstrations,  etc.,  by 
Federal  and  State  experts,  and  (3)  the  organization  of  girls  and 
boys  into  clubs  of  various  kinds  along  agricultural  and  related 
lines.  Wherever  practicable  this  work  in  all  its  branches  is  con- 
ducted with  excellent  results  in  behalf  of  the  Indians  and  will  play  a 
part  in  bringing  about  their  absorbtion  into  the  body  politic  of  the 
Nation. 

EXPERIMENTATION. — In  keeping  with  the  policy  set  forth  in  my  last 
annual  report  of  emphasizing  demonstration  work  on  the  farms 
of  the  Indians  themselves,  the  special  activities  of  this  nature  during 
the  year  have  been  principally  confined  to  the  cooperative  experi- 
mental and  demonstration  farm  at  Sacaton,  on  the  Pima  Reserva- 
tion in  Arizona,  operated  jointly  by  this  service  and  the  Bureau  of 
Plant  Industry  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture. 
This  farm  was  considerably  enlarged  during  the  year  with  the  view 
of  increasing  its  usefulness.  Results  have  been  accomplished,  the 
most  significant  being  with  Egyptian  cotton,  which  is  now  produced 
by  both  Indians  and  whites  all  over  that  section.  The  Indians  also 


COMMISSIONER   01    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  31 

earn  considerable  money  each  year  by  picking  cotton  for  white 
farmers. 

This  cotton  has  become  a  principal  crop  in  the  Salt  River  Valley, 
about  35,000  acres  being  grown  there  this  season,  of  which  the 
Indians  near  Sacaton  had  100  acres,  realizing  approximately  $10,000 
therefrom.  A  new  variety  of  this  cotton  has  been  developed  at  the 
Sacaton  farm,  named  "Pima,"  which  yields  approximately  1  bale 
per  acre  and  sells  for  as  much  as  75  cents  per  pound. 

Successful  experiments  have  also  been  made  at  this  farm  with 
Bermuda  onions,  soy  beans,  Peruvian  alfalfa,  pecans,  pomegranates, 
date  palms,  pistachio  nuts,  grapes,  etc. 

Besides  the  farm  at  Sacaton  preliminary  work  has  been  carried 
on  at  several  other  places  in  cooperation  with  the  experts  of  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  including  the  culture  of  dates  at  Martinez 
and  Palm  Springs,  Egyptian  cotton  at  Colorado  River,  Salt  River,  and 
Fort  Mojave,  and  Chinese  vegetables  at  San  Juan. 

The  following  appeared  in  the  Christian  Science  Monitor  shortly 
after  my  return  from  a  tour  of  the  desert  countries  in  Arizona  and 
southern  California: 

WASHINGTON,  D.  C. 

Cato  Sells,  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  has  returned  to  Washington  from  a  two 
months'  tour  of  the  deserts  in  Arizona  and  Southern  California.  During  his  trip 
Commissioner  Sells  traveled  hundreds  of  miles  in  automobiles,  and  many  miles  on 
horseback,  frequently  climbing  mountains  on  foot  and  wading  rivers.  He  inspected 
the  watersheds  of  the  Gila  River  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico  for  the  purpose  of  locating 
possible  reservoir  and  dam  sites,  and  traversed  the  entire  Salt  River  Valley.  He 
closely  followed  the  Colorado  River  from  Needles,  Ariz.,  to  Yuma,  Cal.,  inspected 
the  Parker  and  Yuma  Reservation  irrigation  possibilities,  and  studied  conditions  in 
the  Imperial  Valley,  his  definite  purpose  being  to  thoroughly  familiarize  himself  with 
the  water  conditions  and  productive  possibilities  of  the  desert  countries  of  the  South- 
west. Among  other  things  accomplished  during  his  trip,  the  commissioner  effected  pre- 
liminary arrangements  for  power  to  be  used  in  pumping  and  for  clearing,  leveling  and 
putting  into  cultivation  50,000  acres  in  one  tract  of  desert  land  on  the  Pima  Reser- 
vation, southwest  of  Phoenix. 

Commissioner  Sells  says  that  with  water  these  desert  lands  are  capable  of  almost 
unbelievable  production;  that  Egyptian  long-staple  cotton  is  fast  becoming  a  chief 
crop,  making  approximately  one  bale  to  the  acre,  and  now  selling  for  70  cents  a  pound; 
that  alfalfa  grows  in  great  quantities,  being  cut  seven  or  eight  times  each  season,  and 
that  milo  maize  produces  abundantly;  that  there  are  more  cattle  and  hogs  fed  in  the 
Salt  River,  Yuma,  and  Imperial  Valleys  than  in  any  other  equal  territory  in  the 
world.  The  commissioner  visited  one  ranch  in  the  Yuma  Valley  where  7,000  hogs 
were  being  fed. 

It  is  his  purpose,  within  the  next  18  months,  to  develop  not  only  the  50,000  acres 
on  the  Pima  Reservation,  but  in  like  manner  thousands  of  acres  on  the  Parker  and 
Yuma  Reservations.  With  the  first-hand  information  Commissioner  Sells  obtained  on 
this  trip,  he  is  able  to  rapidly  and  effectively  transform  portions  of  the  great  deserts 
of  the  Southwest  into  lands  suitable  for  the  production  of  food  for  the  world's  immediate 
necessities. 


32  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

STOCK  RAISING. 

For  four  years  we  have  been  stocking  the  Indian  reservations 
with  cattle,  horses,  and  sheep,  and  assisting  the  Indians  to  become 
acquainted  with  the  proper  method  of  handling  these  interests. 

The  number  of  stock  on  the  various  reservations  has  been  in- 
creased during  the  year  1916-17,  in  addition  to  the  natural  increase, 
by  the  purchase  and  distribution  in  20  reservations  of  610  bulls, 
3,127  heifers,  522  cows  and  calves,  376  mares,  and  many  rams. 

More  satisfactory  results  were  obtained  this  year  under  a  new 
plan  of  purchase,  whereby  representatives  of  the  Indian  Service 
visited  the  ranches  where  the  stock  offered  could  be  inspected.  A 
better  grade  of  stock  was  procured  and  at  a  price  which  represented 
a  saving  of  $20,000  on  the  entire  amount. 

The  improvement  of  dairy  herds  maintained  at  the  various  schools 
and  agencies  along  the  lines  of  work  conducted  by  the  dairy  division 
of  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry  has  been  successful.  Definite 
instructions  were  sent  to  superintendents  and  others  in  charge  of 
dairying  interests  on  October  16,  1916,  suggestive  paragraphs  of 
which  follow : 

From  personal  observation  and  reports  received  from  time  to  time  it  is  apparent 
that  the  dairy  herds  belonging  to  the  various  schools  and  reservations  in  the  Indian 
Service  are  not  as  a  general  rule  being  handled  in  the  best  manner,  and  are  not  receiv- 
ing the  care  and  attention  necessary  to  get  satisfactory  results.  I  am  convinced  that 
there  is  urgent  need  of  improvement  in  all  phases  of  the  work  involved  in  the  produc- 
tion of  milk  and  also  in  the  methods  of  handling  the  dairy  herds. 

In  order  to  determine  what  should  be  done  to  accomplish  this,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  person  in  charge  of  the  herd  should  make  a  careful  study  of  each  animal  so  as  to 
become  familiar  with  the  characteristics  of  every  animal  in  the  herd.  This  can  not 
be  done  without  keeping  a  correct  record  which  will  show  the  peculiarities  of  tempera- 
ment and  susceptibility  to  surroundings  and  conditions.  A  special  study  should  be 
made  of  the  dairy  capacity  and  the  feed  consumption  of  each  animal  in  order  that  the 
"star  boarders"  of  the  herd  which  do  not  produce  enough  milk  to  pay  for  their  feed 
may  be  eliminated.  A  periodical  culling  of  the  herd  to  eliminate  unworthy  members 
is  necessary  to  bring  the  dairy  herd  up  to  the  standard,  and  I  want  every  employee 
in  charge  of  such  work  to  install  immediately  a  system  of  records  to  provide  for  carrying 
on  this  work  intelligently  and  effectively. 

In  the  management  of  the  dairy  herd  at  your  school  it  is  desirable  wherever  possible 
to  utilize  the  male  calves  and  the  cows  which  have  reached  an  age  when  they  are  no 
longer  profitable  for  milking  purposes  for  beef  where  such  policy  can  be  followed  pro- 
fitably. In  order  to  do  this  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  sufficient  amount  of  feed  or 
pasture  available  to  produce  this  beef  at  a  satisfactory  cost.  All  animals  used  for  that 
purposes  should  be  run  in  a  separate  herd  and  under  no  circumstances  should  they  be 
handled  as  a  part  of  the  dairy  herd. 

It  is  our  desire  to  have  each  school  know  what  its  dairy  herd  is  doing  in  comparison 
with  the  dairy  herds  at  other  schools  in  the  Indian  Service. 

Success  in  handling  this  industry  is  entirely  dependent  upon  the  type,  quality,  and 
development  of  the  animals  in  the  herd,  the  general  conditions  under  which  they  are 
maintained,  and  the  interest  of  the  superintendent  and  the  employee  in  direct  charge 
of  this  work. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  33 

I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  Holstein-Friesian  breed  is  best -suited  for  the  needs  of 
most  of  the  schools  in  the  Indian  Service,  and  that  this  type  of  animal  will  give  the 
most  satisfactory  results  under  the  conditions  prevailing  at  the  various  schools  and 
reservations.  Therefore,  in  considering  changes  in  your  present  herd  you  should 
plan  to  purchase  animals  of  this  breed  and  thus  gradually  improve  the  dairy  herd 
until  it  is  composed  of  animals  of  only  one  l>reed. 

You  should  have  a  first-class  1  ull  to  head  your  herd.  It  is  generally  recognized 
that  "the  bull  is  half  the  herd."  This  will  enable  you  to  rapidly  improve  the  class 
of  stock,  retaining  only  such  calves  as  prove  to  be  superior  animals. 

All  animals  should  be  tuberculin  tested  at  the  time  of  purchase  and  at  least  once 
a  year  thereafter.  These  tests  will  l:e  made  upon  request  to  the  representative  of  the 
Bureau  of  Animal  Industry,  in  charge  of  the  district  in  which  your  reservation  is 
located,  who  will  detail  a  veterinarian  for  that  purpose. 

Every  school  should  have  at  least  one  farm  paper,  with  a  department  in  it  relating 
to  this  class  of  work,  available  for  the  use  of  all  employees,  especially  those  supervising 
or  handling  such  matters. 

Cleanliness  is  of  vital  importance  and  there  is  no  excuse  for  the  buildings  and  the 
adjoining  inclosures  in  which  the  dairy  herds  are  maintained  being  in  a  dirty  and 
insanitary  condition. 

I  shall  expect  every  cow  to  pay  her  way  and  yield  a  reasonable  profit  on  the  invest- 
ment. I  do  not  want  you  to  feel  that  you  should  make  radical  changes  immediately 
to  effect  this — in  fact  the  records  which  you  are  expected  to  keep  will  largely  determine 
what  action  shall  be  taken. 

In  general,  I  shall  expect  every  dairy  herd  in  the  Indian  Service  to  be  handled  on 
a  business  basis  and  the  records  kept  in  such  manner  that  the  various  inspecting  officials 
visiting  your  school  can  readily  determine  whether  satisfactory  results  are  being 
produced. 

The  dairy  division  of  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry  has  a  number  of  slides  which 
are  used  in  giving  stereoptican  lectures  in  regard  to  these  matters,  and  I  will  endeavor 
to  arrange  to  have  sets  of  these  slides  circulated  among  the  various  schools  of  the 
Indian  Service  with  pamphlets  giving  a  full  description  of  the  subjects  illustrated 
by  them. 

The  suppression  of  contagious  diseases  prevalent  among  the  live 
stock  of  the  Indians  has  been  carried  on  energetically  during  the 
past  year.  Work  done  in  connection  with  the  eradication  of  dourine 
has  practically  eradicated  that  disease  from  among  the  horses  in  the 
States  of  Montana  and  North  and  South  Dakota.  Kepresentatives 
of  the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry  have  discovered  the  existence  of 
this  disease  among  the  horses  of  the  whites  and  the  Indians  in  various 
parts  of  the  Southwest,  and  efforts  to  effectually  stamp  it  out  are 
being  carried  on  there  in  cooperation  with  the  Bureau  of  Animal 
Industry.  Much  credit  is  due  to  representatives  of  that  bureau  for 
their  cooperation  in  work  along  these  and  other  lines. 

On  some  of  the  reservations  there  are  many  worthless  wild  horses 
running  on  the. range,  which  seriously  interfere  with  the  live-stock 
industry.  On  the  Fort  Apache  Indian  Reservation,  where  the  num- 
ber of  this  class  of  animals  running  on  the  range  is  reported  to  be 
5,000  or  more,  an  organized  effort  is  being  made  to  round  up  and 
dispose  of  them,  retaining  only  such  as  are  valuable  to  the  Indians 
18404—17 3 


34  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

for  breeding  or  other  purposes.  Should  this  plan  be  successful,  it 
is  proposed  to  adopt  it  on  other  reservations  in  order  that  the  range 
heretofore  grazed  by  them  may  be  available  for  stock  that  has  a 
marketable  value. 

The  tribal  herds  on  practically  all  of  the  reservations  have  been 
profitable  and  individual  Indians  generally  have  been  successful  in 
the  management  of  their  live  stock.  The  Indians  have  shown  a 
remarkable  adaptability  for  stock  raising  and  they  are  coming  to 
understand  that  it  is  desirable  to  own  well-bred  stock  rather  than  the 
inferior  animals  raised  by  them  in  former  years.  While  the  tribal 
herds  are  high  grade,  the  cattle,  horses,  and  sheep  owned  by  the 
individual  Indians  are  fast  approaching  the  same  standards.  There 
are  practically  no  long-horned  cattle  on  Indian  reservations.  Pony 
stallions  are  being  castrated  and  replaced  with  Percherons  or  other 
equally  good  breeds.  The  flocks  of  sheep  that  have  for  years  been 
permitted  to  inbreed  are  being  rapidly  improved  by  the  introduction 
of  the  best  rams,  with  the  result  that  already  the  wool  from  Indian 
sheep  is  a  much  higher  class  than  heretofore — almost  if  not  quite 
as  high  grade  as  the  wool  from  the  sheep  owned  by  white  men. 
Many  Indians  have  demonstrated  themselves  to  be  the  equal  of  their 
white  neighbors  as  stock  raisers.  Their  recent  advancement  in  this 
respect  has  been  remarkable.  Furthermore,  it  has  intensified  their 
interest  in  doing  things  since  they  have  come  to  realize  the  profits 
involved  in  personal  effort. 

While  endeavoring  to  put  the  Indian  into  business  for  himself, 
because  it  means  self-support  and  a  corresponding  reduction  in 
appropriations,  we  have  at  the  same  time  sought  to  so  develop  con- 
ditions as  to  increase  the  carrying  capacity  of  the  grazing  lands. 
This  we  have  accomplished  largely  by  developing  and  increasing  the 
water  supply,  with  the  result  that  the  Indian  reservations  are  now 
capable  of  supporting  many  more  thousand  head  of  stock  than 
formerly.  For  the  better  protection  and  care  of  the  stock  of  the 
Indians  and  the  lessees  much  fencing  has  been  done  and  increased 
efforts  made  to  avoid  depredations  from  wild  animals. 

Altogether  the  Indians  have  been  great  gainers  from  this  pro- 
cedure, and  the  white  stockmen  have  found  grazing  privileges  on 
Indian  reservations  much  more  desirable  than  ever  before. 

IRRIGATION. 

Commensurate  with  available  appropriations  and  the  steadily 
rising  prices  of  labor  and  material  the  irrigation  work  has  progressed 
during  the  year.  When  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  the  estimates  for 
many  of  the  projects  were  made  several  years  ago  and  with  an  in- 
crease of  anywhere  from  25  to  over  100  per  cent  in  the  cost  of  labor 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  35 

and  material  the  difficulty  of  carrying  some  of  the  projects  to  com- 
pletion with  available  funds  will  be  realized. 

Early  in  the  spring  instructions  were  issued  to  field  men  to  stimu- 
late crop  production  wherever  possible;  to  confine  activities  to  increas- 
ing areas  under  cultivation  and  to  bringing  additional  lands  under 
ditch  at  the  earliest  date,  where  such  could  be  done  without  serious 
detriment  to  the  project  as  a  whole.  This  met  with  a  hearty  response, 
and  in  many  localities  the  area  actually  cultivated  increased  by  as 
much  as  50  per  cent. 

The  Wapato  dam  across  Union  Gap  on  the  Yakima  River  was 
completed  during  the  year  at  an  aggregate  expenditure  of  some- 
thing over  $144,000.  This  dam  consists  of  two  dikes  and  two 
spillways,  the  combined  length  of  which  is  1,960  feet.  When  the 
distributing  system  is  completed  it  is  estimated  that  this  project 
will  irrigate  about  120,000  acres,  of  which  over  57,000  acres  are  now 
in  actual  cultivation.  The  total  crop  production  during  the  present 
calendar  year  from  this  project  is  estimated  to  reach  over  $6,000,000. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  and  by  no  means  unimportant  features 
of  the  irrigation  work  is  the  development  of  underground  water  in 
the  arid  southwest  for  stock-watering  purposes.  This  is  done  by 
means  of  wells  and  springs,  and  while  each  unit  in  itself  is  exceed- 
ingly small  and  the  development  of  water  for  irrigation  purposes  in 
most  localities  out  of  the  question  owing  to  the  limited  supply,  yet 
these  units  are  of  great  value,  especially  to  the  Navajo  Indians. 
These  wells  are  frequently  25  or  30  miles  apart,  scattered  over  a 
territory  150  miles  long  (north  and  south)  by  250  miles  broad  (east 
and  west).  With  a  reservation  embracing  over  12,000,000  acres,  in 
many  parts  of  which  range  is  available  for  stock  provided  water  can 
be  found,  the  Navajo  problem  is  not  one  of  grass  but  of  water  for  their 
stock.  In  many  places  one  of  these  small  wells  will  supply  a  range 
of  40  square  miles  and  for  a  number  of  years  past  every  effort  has 
been  made  to  increase  the  supply  of  water,  especially  in  those  locali- 
ties where  the  available  range  could  not  be  used  on  account  of  the 
lack  of  water.  One  of  the  field  men  reports  that  with  the  addi- 
tional water  developed  the  Navajos'  stock  has  increased  more  in  the 
past  five  years  than  it  did  in  the  preceding  50.  That  our  efforts  in 
their  behalf  are  not  unappreciated  the  following  excerpt  taken 
from  a  field  report  will  show: 

Proud  and  thankful  owners  are  they  (the  Navajos),  to  know  that  "The  Great  White 
Father"  at  Washington  has  at  last  come  to  their  rescue,  by  sending  men  and  machinery 
with  which  to  develop  their  water  resources. 

As  early  as  1910  Congress  directed  the  construction  of  a  pumping 
plant  on  the  Colorado  River  Reservation  with  a  view  of  ultimately 
securing  an  appropriation  of  water  for  the  irrigation  of  approximately 
150,000  acres  of  land.  The  funds  actually  made  available  for  this 


36  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

work,  however,  have  been  so  limited  that  the  capacity  of  the  pumping 
plant  installed  will  not  exceed  5,000  acres.  The  only  logical  system 
for  the  irrigation  of  such  large  areas  is  by  gravity.  The  valley  at 
this  point  on  the  Colorado  River  is  fertile  and  the  climatic  conditions 
favorable.  A  dam  across  the  Colorado  River  and  the  attendant  dis- 
tributing system  to  supply  these  lands,  would  cost  several  million 
dollars  and  Congress  has  not  yet  made  even  an  initial  appropriation 
for  beginning  the  construction  of  a  gravity  system.  These  lands  are 
capable  of  wonderful  production  and  the  area  should  be  fully  devel- 
oped. 

I  regard  this  as  one  of  the  best  undeveloped  irrigation  opportuni- 
ties remaining  in  this  country  and  one  on  which  the  necessary  appro- 
priations by  Congress  would  be  entirely  justified. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  directs  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Interior  to  furnish  in  perpetuity  water  for  the  irrigation 
of  631  allotments  on  the  Salt  River  Reservation,  Ariz.,  and  steps  have 
been  taken  to  secure  this  water  from  the  storage  provided  by  the 
Roosevelt  Dam.  Heretofore  the  Indians  of  this  reservation  have 
attempted  to  cultivate  more  land  than  the  available  supply  of  water 
would  irrigate,  and  this  additional  supply  of  assured  water  will  come 
to  them  as  a  great  blessing. 

A  diversion  dam  across  the  Truckee  River  for  the  purpose  of  sup- 
plying water  to  land  within  the  Pyramid  Lake  Reservation,  Nev., 
was  completed  during  the  year  at  a  total  cost  of  $26,296.24.  The 
construction  of  the  distributing  system  is  being  pushed  as  rapidly  as 
possible  and  when  completed  will  irrigate  over  3,000  acres.  The 
Indians  of  this  reservation  are  very  industrious  and  much  time  and 
labor  has  heretofore  been  lost  annually  in  the  construction  of  brush 
dams  and  headings  which  were  periodically  destroyed  during  every 
flood.  A  permanent  diversion  will  stimulate  the  Indians  to  greater 
effort  and  come  to  them  as  a  reward  for  merit  shown. 

A  sharp  controversy  having  arisen  in  the  Uintah  Valley,  Utah, 
over  the  use  of  water  for  irrigation  purposes  by  Indians  and  whites, 
the  matter  finally  reached  that  stage  where  the  Indians  were  getting 
practically  no  water.  The  Department  of  Justice  was  requested  to 
institute  proceedings  and  during  the  early  part  of  the  fiscal  year  the 
United  States  District  Court  for  Utah  issued  a  restraining  order  and 
appointed  a  water  commissioner  to  distribute  the  water  pending  a 
hearing  and  the  issuance  of  a  final  decree  in  the  case.  It  is  expected 
that  this  will  result  in  a  substantial  acknowledgment  of  the  prior 
rights  of  the  Indians.  During  the  year  the  value  of  the  crops  raised 
in  the  Uintah  Basin  by  both  Indians  and  whites  exceeded  $400,000. 

On  the  Crow  Reservation,  Mont.,  something  over  $1,000,000  has 
been  expended  in  the  construction  of  various  irrigation  projects  with 
an  aggregate  irrigable  area  of  about  73,000  acres,  of  which  over 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  37 

69,000  acres  can  be  supplied  from  the  systems  now  constructed. 
The  larger  project  diverts  water  from  the  Big  Horn  River  and  will 
supply  slightly  over  33,000  acres.  On  this  river,  above  the  Indian 
heading,  will  be  found  quite  a  valuable  power  site  capable  of  a  maxi- 
mum development  of  over  90,000  horsepower.  The  site  is  isolated, 
however,  as  far  as  railroad  facilities  are  concerned,  being  some  68 
miles  from  the  nearest  available  station.  Construction  at  this  time 
with  the  present  prices  of  labor  and  material,  renders  the  project 
somewhat  dubious.  To  assure  a  maximum  development  would 
necessitate  a  dam  430  feet  high  and  the  quantity  of  material  required 
would  be  enormous.  Logically,  therefore,  the  construction  of  a 
railroad  to  the  site  of  the  proposed  dam  would  be  a  preliminary  step 
to  undertaking  the  project  itself.  It  has  been  estimated  that  the 
cost  of  the  project,  including  the  railroad,  would  exceed  $20,000,000. 

The  irrigable  area  on  the  Wind  River  Reservation  under  our  ex- 
isting systems  approximates  80,777  acres,  of  which  70,594  acres  fall 
within  the  diminished  reservation  and  10,183  acres  on  "the  ceded 
lands."  Something  over  $800,000  has  been  expended  in  irriga- 
tion works  on  this  reservation.  During  the  past  year  the  value  of 
the  crops  grown  amounted  to  $264,700,  of  which  the  Indians  raised 
$148,270  and  the  whites  $116,430. 

Strenuous  efforts  are  being  made,  with  every  reasonable  prospect 
of  success,  to  greatly  increase  the  area  of  irrigable  land  for  the  Pima 
Indians  on  the  Gila  River  Indian  Reservation  by  the  installation  of 
pumps  to  develop  underground  water.  Electric  power  from  the 
Roosevelt  Dam  is  available,  at  a  low  rate,  for  pumping  purposes,  and 
it  is  expected  that  about  50,000  acres  of  additional  land  will  be  thus 
irrigated.  This  will  be  of  great  benefit  to  the  Pima  Indians  who 
are  deserving,  and  who  have  been  greatly  handicapped  in  the  past 
on  account  of  their  uncertain  water  supply. 

A  recent  personal  inspection  of  the  reservations  in  the  southwest 
has  impressed  me  with  the  unusual  opportunities  for  development 
there,  especially  in  the  raising  of  long-staple  cotton,  for  which  there 
is  such  an  urgent  demand  and  for  the  growing  of  which  these  reser- 
vations are  peculiarly  adapted  where  water  for  irrigation  purposes 
can  be  made  available. 

REIMBURSABLE  FUNDS. 

The  Indians  residing  on  approximately  85  reservations  have 
participated  in  the  use  of  reimbursable  funds  available  for  the  pur- 
chase of  live  stock,  agricultural  equipment  and  supplies,  and  for  the 
encouragement  of  industry  and  self-support  among  Indians.  It  has 
opened  a  way  to  them  to  obtain  the  means  for  active  participation  in 
various  industrial  pursuits.  Under  the  plan  in  operation,  the  money  is 
not  given  to  the  Indians  for  expenditure  by  them;  rather,  it  is  expended 


38  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

through  the  regular  governmental  channels  in  buying  the  stock  and 
supplies  required  after  competitive  proposals  are  received.  Expe- 
rience has  demonstrated  this  procedure  to  be  preferable  to  one  which 
would  permit  the  Indians  to  buy  individually  in  small  quantities. 
The  purchases  made  by  the  Government  have  been  usually  in  large 
quantities,  representing  the  combined  needs  of  a  number  of  Indians, 
and  much  lower  prices  have  been  obtained.  As  an  indication  of  what 
has  been  accomplished  in  buying  equipment  for  the  Indians  at  the 
minimum  cost,  reports  before  me  show  that  wagons  which  the  Govern- 
ment bought  and  sold  to  the  Indians  at  one  of  the  southwestern 
reservations,  at  a  cost  of  $90  on  the  reimbursable  plan,  were  selling 
locally  for  $180. 

The  tribal  herds  of  cattle  established  from  funds  of  this  character 
in  previous  fiscal  years  have  proven  profitable,  and  when  the  time 
arrives  for  turning  the  stock  over  to  the  Indians  they  will  then  have 
an  excellent  means  for  attaining  self-support.  The  increases  from 
these  herds  will  eventually  be  utilized  in  making  repayments  to 
the  Treasury  of  the  amounts  expended  in  the  establishment  and 
maintenance  of  the  various  herds,  and  it  may  be  said  that  the  Gov- 
ernment is  therefore  certain  of  reimbursement. 

Where  property  has  been  bought  and  sold  to  individuals,  they 
have  been  required  to  sign  contracts  providing  for  repayment  of 
the  amount  of  money  expended  in  buying  the  property  delivered  to 
them,  and  it  has  been  found  that  they,  as  a  rule,  have  conscien- 
tiously endeavored  to  live  up  to  their  agreements  and  utilize  the 
property  bought  to  the  best  advantage.  There  have  been  cases 
where  the  Indians  were  unable  to  make  payments  upon  their  ac- 
counts on  the  specific  dates  agreed  upon,  and  in  all  cases  where 
such  failure  was  found  due  to  causes  beyond  the  control  of  the 
debtors,  the  delinquent  Indians  were  given  further  time  in  which 
to  pay  the  amounts  due.  The  Indians  generally  appreciate  the 
benefits  which  may  be  derived  through  participation  in  the  use  of 
reimbursable  funds. 

Altogether,  the  reimbursable  fund  has  been  wonderfully  helpful. 
It  has  been  our  purpose  to  permit  the  use  of  these  funds  only  by 
those  who  have  demonstrated  or  given  evidence  of  their  willingness 
and  ability  to  make  good  use  of  them,  character,  industry,  and 
desire  to  do  things  looking  toward  self-support  being  chief  elements 
in  selecting  the  Indians  upon  whom  this  opportunity  is  conferred. 
Unquestionably  many  deserving  Indians  have  through  this  means 
been  given  a  substantial  start  who  would  not  otherwise  have  been 
able  to  utilize  their  allotments  to  the  best  advantage. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  39 

NATIVE  INDUSTRIES. 

The  Navajo  Indians  continued  to  make  blankets,  but  in  less 
quantities  than  in  previous  years,  primarily  because  the  price  of  wool 
was  so  much  better  than  in  previous  years,  and  they  found  it  more 
profitable  to  sell  the  wool  in  its  raw  state  than  to  weave  it  into 
blankets.  Unfortunately  the  plan  of  tagging  blankets,  heretofore 
inaugurated  for  the  purpose  of  guaranteeing  their  genuineness  to  the 
public,  has  not  proven  as  successful  as  was  hoped.  Tags  were  placed 
upon  blankets,  for  which  the  Indians  received  75  cents  or  more  per 
pound  from  the  majority  of  the  licensed  traders  on  the  various 
Navajo  Reservations,  but  it  developed  that  those  traders,  quite 
largely,  sold  the  blankets  bought  from  the  Indians  to  wholesale 
dealers  in  nearby  towns,  and  the  wholesale  dealers  removed  the 
tags,  apparently  for  commercial  reasons. 

Notwithstanding  the  existing  war  conditions,  advantage  was  taken 
of  every  opportunity  to  encourage  the  Indians  engaged  in  native 
handicraft  work  to  make  more  and  better  articles  than  heretofore, 
so  that  the  products  of  their  industry  might  be  worth  more  to  the 
buying  public,  and  consequently  bring  them  larger  returns.  From 
present  indications  it  does  not  appear  that  the  supply  of  the  various 
articles  made  by  the  Indians  is  equal  to  the  demand,  and  hence  no 
steps  have  been  taken  to  open  up  new  markets. 

LACE  MAKING. — The  Sybil  Carter  Lace  Association  of  New  York 
City  has  continued  its  cooperation  with  the  Government  in  the 
advancement  of  the  lace  industry  among  the  Indians.  I  believe 
that  the  foundation  has  been  laid  at  a  number  of  reservations  in 
California,  New  Mexico,  Wisconsin,  and  Minnesota  from  which  this 
important  industry  will  later  become  a  wonderful  help  to  the  Indian 
women  in  the  profitable  use  of  all,  or  a  part,  of  their  spare  time  in  a 
remunerative  occupation. 

At  all  places  where  it  has  been  possible  to  give  instruction  in  this 
art  the  Indian  women  have  manifested  much  enthusiasm,  resulting  in 
better  homes  and  better  methods  of  living  through  incomes  derived 
from  lace  making. 

ROAD  AND  BRIDGE  WORK. 

The  construction  and  maintenance  of  roads  and  bridges  on  the 
various  reservations  has  proceeded  as  rapidly  as  available  funds 
would  permit.  Excellent  progress  has  been  made  on  the  construc- 
tion of  the  Mesa-Verde-Gallup  highway  across  the  Navajo  Reser- 
vation, for  which  an  appropriation  of  $15,000  to  commence  the  work 
was  made  by  the  last  Congress.  This  work  will  be  continued  during 
the  ensuing  year  under  an  additional  appropriation. 

A  road  is  being  constructed  across  the  Kiabab  Reservation  which 
will  form  a  part  of  an  international  automobile  highway  extending 


40  COMMISSIONER   OF   IXDIAX   AFFAIES. 

from  Salt  Lake  City  to  the  Pacific  coast.  The  system  of  roads  on 
the  Shoshone  Reservation  in  Wyoming  has  been  brought  nearer  to 
completion  by  the  expenditure  of  $25,000  for  the  purpose.  An 
appropriation  of  $10,000  for  similar  work  on  the  Yuma  Reservation, 
Cal.,  has  been  expended  toward  the  completion  of  a  system  of  roads 
on  that  reservation.  A  fine  bridge  is  being  constructed  across  the 
Little  Colorado  River  near  the  town  of  Winslow,  Ariz.,  in  cooperation 
with  the  authorities  of  Navajo  County. 

MOTION    PICTURES. 

Numerous  applications  have  been  acted  upon  during  the  past 
year  from  persons  desiring  to  take  moving  pictures  of  Indian  life  on 
the  reservations.  The  established  policy  has  been  followed  of  grant- 
ing such  applications  with  the  understanding  that  the  pictures  so 
taken  will  be  of  present-day  scenes  only,  and  that  the  Indians  will 
not  be  induced  to  give  "made-up"  exhibitions  of  their  old-time 
customs  and  dances,  such  exhibitions  having  been  found  to  exert  an 
influence  against  the  efforts  of  the  Government  to  have  the  Indians 
adopt  methods  of  living  more  conducive  to  their  general  welfare  and 
industrial  advancement.  In  certain  cases,  where  it  is  satisfactorily 
shown  that  the  pictures  will  be  used  for  educational  purposes  only, 
permission  has  been  granted  for  taking  motion  pictures  of  such  old- 
time  ceremonies  as  the  " snake  dance"  of  the  Moqui  Indians,  but  the 
usual  practice  is  to  prohibit  the  taking  of  such  pictures  where  it  is 
intended  that  they  will  be  used  for  " commercial"  purposes. 

INDIAN  TRADERS. 

The  number  of  traders  on  Indian  reservations  operating  under 
license  from  this  bureau  is  being  gradually  diminished.  Many  of 
them  are  going  out  of  business  voluntarily;  others  have  purchased 
lots  in  Government  town  sites  and  moved  their  stores  to  such  loca- 
tions and  are  no  longer  under  governmental  supervision.  As  a 
whole  the  traders  have  exhibited  willingness  to  comply  with  the 
regulations  in  respect  to  trading  with  the  Indians  and  there  have 
been  few  cases  of  complaint. 

DEBTS  OF  INDIANS. 

The  policy  of  forbiding  assistance  to  creditors  of  Indians  in  the 
collection  of  claims  incurred  subsequent  to  departmental  order  of 
December  17,  1909,  has  been  strictly  adhered  to.  The  number  of 
complaints  regarding  nonpayment  of  debts  by  Indians  is  gradually 
diminishing,  which  would  seem  to  indicate  that  this  policy  is  having 
the  desired  effect.  The  trader  who  tries  to  increase  the  sale  of  his 
merchandise  by  giving  the  Indian  unauthorized  credit  is  evidently 
beginning  to  realize  that  it  is  not  profitable. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  41 

EXHIBITION  INDIANS. 

Very  few  instances  where  the  employment  of  Indians  for  exhibi- 
tion purposes  was  desired  came  before  me  during  the  past  year.  In 
every  case  such  employment  was  discouraged,  and  only  those  allowed 
to  go  who  were  not  needed  at  home  for  farming  and  other  industrial 
pursuits  on  the  ground  that  participation  in  such  exhibitions  is  not 
conducive  to  the  formation  of  habits  of  industry  and  thrift  which  I 
am  endeavoring  to  inculcate  among  the  Indians. 

ANNUITY  AND  PER  CAPITA  PAYMENTS. 

Under  the  new  declaration  of  policy  referred  to  elsewhere  in  this 
report,  it  has  been  my  endeavor  to  make  all  the  activities  of  the 
service  contribute  to  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the  Indians  from 
Government  control,  so  far  as  practicable.  Perhaps  the  most  im- 
portant and  vital  feature  of  this  policy  involves  the  placing  of  their 
funds  in  the  hands  of  competent  Indians  for  expenditure  without 
supervision.  The  payment  of  annuities  to  certain  of  the  Indian 
tribes  is  made  mandatory  by  law,  and  in  cases  of  this  kind  it  had 
been  the  custom  to  make  the  payment  at  such  times  of  the  year  as 
the  money  would  be  of  most  benefit  to  the  Indians  in  connection 
with  their  industrial  activities. 

For  several  years,  however,  the  policy  has  been  to  discourage 
optional  cash  payments,  as  the  Indians  in  many  cases  did  not  make 
good  use  of  the  money.  Under  the  new  policy  I  have  thought  it 
advisable  to  be  more  liberal  in  this  respect,  even  at  the  risk  of  some 
of  the  money  being  squandered,  in  order  to  give  the  Indians  actual 
business  experience  in  handling  their  funds  themselves,  so  that  they 
might  "learn  to  do  by  doing." 

DESTITUTE  INDIANS. 

The  demands  lor  funds  for  the  relief  ol  distress  among  Indians  dur- 
ing the  past  year  has  been  augmented  by  the  high  cost  of  food  sup- 
plies. The  funds  allotted  for  this  work  are  small  in  the  aggregate, 
and  it  is  necessary  to  spread  them  over  the  entire  jurisdiction,  no  one 
territory  receiving  a  large  amount.  The  greatest  demand  for  assist- 
ance has  naturally  come  irom  the  Indians  in  the  Northern  States T 
where  climatic  conditions  make  it  necessary  for  people  to  be  clothed 
warmer  and  fed  better  than  in  the  South  or  Southwest. 

Under  the  new  declaration  of  policy  I  have  had  in  mind  the  gradual 
withdrawal  of  governmental  supervision  and  care  of  destitute  Indians 
who  are  living,  not  on  Indian  reservations  but  in  white  communities. 
The  various  white  communities  are  beginning  to  realize  that  the 
Indians  living  among  them  are  entitled  to  the  same  rights  and  privi- 


42  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAX   AFFAIRS. 

leges  as  the  whites,  including  the  right  to  be  cared  for  as  indigents, 
if  their  condition  warrants.  Recent  court  decisions  in  the  State  of 
California  have  emphasized  these  rights  in  the  Indians  and  have  made 
the  work  much  easier  for  this  bureau. 

SIOUX  ALLOTMENT  BENEFITS. 

The  majority  of  the  Indians  of  the  various  Sioux  Reservations, 
entitled  to  allotment  benefits  provided  by  the  act  of  March  2,  1889 
(25  Stat.,  888-894),  with  the  subsequent  amendments  thereto,  have 
received  issues  of  implements,  stock,  or  the  cash  value  thereof.  A 
very  satisfactory  standard  of  implements  has  been  supplied,  attested 
by  the  fact  that  no  complaint  or  request  for  any  changes  have  been 
made  on  any  reservation.  A  high  grade  of  stock  has  been  purchased 
for  issue,  and  by  careful  supervision  the  loss  in  such  stock  has  been 
reduced  to  a  minimum.  Excellent  results  have  been  obtained  in 
stock  breeding  with  the  animals  issued  on  Sioux  benefit  applications. 
Practically  all  applications  now  being  submitted  are  made  by  the 
younger  generation  of  Sioux  Indians,  for  the  most  part  just  out  of 
school,  who  derive  the  maximum  benefit  of  the  issues  made  in  estab- 
lishing themselves  on  their  allotments  as  farmers  or  stock  breeders. 

TRIBAL  TRUST  FUNDS. 

Rapid  progress  has  been  made  in  prorating  tribal  trust  funds  in 
order  to  assist  the  Indians  to  embrace  the  varied  opportunities 
offered  them  at  this  time.  An  important  step  forward  was  made  in 
securing  the  legislation  contained  in  the  Indian  appropriation  bill, 
approved  May  18,  1916  (39  Stat.,  123-128),  which  permits  the  with- 
drawal of  shares  of  noncompetent,  able-bodied  Indians  for  expendi- 
ture under  supervision  for  their  benefit.  This  law  makes  it  possible 
to  establish  noncompetents  on  their  allotments  and  purchase  the 
equipment  and  supplies  necessary  to  start  them  toward  self-support. 
Thousands  of  Indians  are  being  encouraged  to  greater  effort  through 
the  benefits  afforded  by  this  new  law.  Under  the  new  policy,  much 
greater  liberality  is  being  exercised  in  prorating  the  shares  of  trust 
funds  on  deposit  in  the  United  States  Treasury  to  the  credit  of  the 
various  tribes,  so  far  as  consistent  with  present  legislation  on  the 
subject. 

INDIVIDUAL  INDIAN  MONEY. 

The  problem  of  handling  the  moneys  belonging  to  individual 
Indians  so  as  to  yield  them  the  greatest  possible  advantage  consist- 
ent with  the  preservation  and  development  of  their  self-respect  is 
pressing  as  vigorously  for  attention  as  at  any  time  in  the  past. 

This  task,  of  necessity,  must  be  disposed  of  slowly  because  of  its 
great  proportions  and  because  it  relates  to  each  individual  rather 
than  a  race  or  even  a  tribe. 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  43 

During  the  year  special  effort  has  been  made  to  induce  and  assist 
adult  Indians  to  establish  permanent  and  substantial  homes  upon 
land.  The  results  have  been  gratifying,  though  there  yet  remains 
many  who  need  the  stimulating  influence  of  a  permanent  home  to 
spur  them  on  to  higher  and  more  consistent  endeavor. 

Under  amended  rules  it  has  been  possible  to  reduce  formal  applica- 
tions from  Indians,  through  their  several  superintendents  for  indi- 
vidual Indian  moneys,  from  about  27,000  per  annum  to  about  9,000 
per  annum  without  any  disadvantage  whatever  to  the  Indians  so  far 
as  can  be  observed. 

There  has  been  an  increasing  demand  for  individual  Indian  money 
from  all  quarters,  due  principally  to  the  high  cost  of  living,  but  it 
is  noted  that  most  of  these  requests  involve  the  use  of  minors'  funds 
by  parents  or  guardians,  who  have  exhausted  their  own  funds  and 
now  hope  to  have  the  use  of  their  children's  money.  This  money, 
however,  is  being  held  in  bank  at  interest  to  the  credit  of  the  Indians 
until  they  become  of  age,  or  until  some  very  unusual  circumstance 
should  arise  fully  justifying  withdrawal  of  their  money.  This  is  not 
a  hard-and-fast  rule,  but  is  deviated  from  only  in  the  interest  of  the 
minor  whose  funds  are  involved.  It  is  held  to  be  more  important 
that  the  children's  money  shall  be  kept  intact  for  them,  so  that  they 
shall  some  day  receive  its  full  benefit,  rather  than  permit  parents  to 
use  this  money  for  ordinary  current  expenses,  though  circumstances 
sometimes  arise  in  which  it  appears  to  be  necessary  that  a  small 
part  of  these  funds  be  so  used. 

It  is  believed  that  the  interests  of  the  Indians  have  been  furthered 
materially  by  the  present  method  of  handling  their  funds,  and  that 
the  full  operation  of  the  new  declaration  of  policy  will  soon  register 
a  long  advance  in  their  interests. 

INDIAN  EMPLOYMENT. 

The  policy  of  improving  industrial  conditions  for  Indians  and 
stabilizing  the  employment  offered  them  has  given  a  marked  im- 
petus to  Indian  employment  generally,  and  on  some  reservations  a 
compelling  desire  to  get  to  work  leaves  none  idle  excepting  the  aged 
or  physically  unfit.  Kecently  when  employment  at  a  good  wage 
was  offered  to  about  100  Indians  of  different  reservations,  7  of  the 
number  accepted;  the  others  were  employed. 

The  field  of  work  giving  employment  to  Indians  of  mechanical 
ability  in  the  large  automobile  factories  of  the  Middle  West  was 
greatly  widened  during  the  year.  They  are  under  the  supervision  of 
an  overseer,  usually  an  Indian,  who  sees  to  it  that  their  work  is  sped 
up  and  looks  after  their  welfare  sympathetically.  The  boys  agree 
to  refrain  from  the  use  of  intoxicants,  pay  their  debts,  and  save  a 
portion  of  their  earnings  for  a  bank  account,  that  they  may  start  in 


44  COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN"   AFFAIES. 

business  in  a  small  way  when  they  have  become  expert  mechanics. 
A  few  Indians  occupy  clerical  positions  in  the  factories.  Indians  of 
mechanical  qualifications  are  to  be  placed  in  tractor  factories  to  learn 
the  construction  and  handling  of  tractors,  that  they  may  become 
important  wage  earners  in  the  agricultural  operations  of  the  West. 

One  nonreservation  school  alone  at  the  close  of  the  year  entered 
a  class  of  18  in  one  of  the  leading  motor  factories,  bringing  its  en- 
rolled number  there  up  to  36. 

These  young  men  on  reaching  the  factory  go  into  the  "student 
corps/'  and  besides  working  eight  hours  a  day  spend  four  nights  a 
week  on  a  factory  course  in  mechanical  drafting  and  technical  auto- 
mobile engineering. 

Most  of  these  Indian  boys  have  made  good.  One  of  them  upon 
completing  his  factory  work  had  saved  $750  in  wages  and  was  placed 
in  charge  of  a  local  branch.  Another  beat  all  records  in  assembling 
a  car  and  was  given  a  western  branch  where  his  earnings  approxi- 
mate $3,000  per  year.  Others  have  taken  positions  as  branch  man- 
agers and  skilled  laborers  at  excellent  wages.  A  student  from  this 
school  is  in  charge  of  a  monotype  on  a  New  York  paper. 

The  Indian  factory  b,oys  liave  furnished  their  full  quota  for  mili- 
tary and  naval  service.  A  number  of  them  are  petty  officers,  one 
of  this  class  receiving  $71  a  month  on  a  United  States  torpedo-boat 
destroyer. 

Boys  attending  Indian  schools  of  the  Southwest,  not  needed  at 
home  to  assist  their  parents  during  vacation,  are  provided  with 
out-of-door  work  in  the  Arkansas  Valley,  from  Rocky  Ford,  Colo., 
,to  Garden  City,  Kans.,  during  the  summer.  Food,  shelter,  instruc- 
tion, the  gratuities  of  school  life,  must  be  paid  for  at  Rocky  Ford, 
where  Indians  gain  their  first  practical  demonstration  of  the  mone- 
tary value  of  service. 

The  work  is  rapidly  becoming  self-supporting.  The  earning 
capacity  of  the  boys  has  increased  in  such  measure  that  the  majority 
now  pay  transportation  to  and  from  school,  and  board  while  work- 
ing. Results  have  abundantly  justified  the  effort  put  forth  in  carry- 
ing on  the  work. 

The  earnings  for  1916  by  pupils  from  a  group  of  five  southwestern 
schools  were  approximately  $23,000. 

Superintendents  write  that  they  have  only  a  few  Indians  to  recom- 
mend for  employment  off  the  reservations,  as  there  is  abundant 
work  available. 

Fifty-six  associations  of  returned  students  have  sent  in  reports, 
showing  them  to  be  working  for  better  babies,  better  homes,  better 
farms,  and  many  phases  of  social  service. 

The  mere  enumeration  of  a  few  of  the  activities  of  the  returned 
students  gives  but  little  idea  of  the  importance  of  the  work  of  Indians 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  45 

who  have  gone  from  the  tepee,  hogan,  or  wigwam  to  Government, 
or  mission  schools,  and  thence  to  different  fields  of  labor,  where  their 
work  is  merged  into  that  of  the  citizenry.  Throughout  the  year, 
the  office  has  enjoyed  calls  from  many  returned  students,  who,  to 
quote  their  own  words,  "came  to  pay  their  respects,"  or  to  express 
gratitude  for  the  help  given  by  the  Government  in  sending  them  to 
school,  and  giving  them  "a  start."  Among  students  who  have 
visions  for  civic  usefulness  and  well  defined  plans  for  work,  may  be 
listed  aviators,  soldiers  and  sailors,  professional  musicians,  nurses, 
some  now  in  France,  many  boys  and  girls  in  industrial,  literary,  and 
professional  work,  and  numbers  working  their  way  through  college. 
Because  of  their  narrowed  environment  at  home  and  lack  of  diversity 
in  occupations,  the  schools,  this  year,  have  placed  a  larger  number 
of  pupils  than  formerly  in  families.  The  vacation  work  amplifies 
the  school  instruction  and  gives  another  perspective  to  life's 
opportunities. 

The  number  of  returned  students  who  are  prosperous  and  inde- 
pendent on  their  allotments  over  last  year  is  of  important  economic 
significance  as  showing  a  year  of  constructive  work  upon  which  to 
build  for  competency. 

ALLOTMENTS. 

Allotment  work  was  continued  on  the  various  Sioux  reservations 
during  the  year  under  authority  of  the  acts  of  March  2,  1889  (25  Stat. 
L.,  888),  and  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444-451).  The  act  of  1908, 
supra,  authorizes  allotments  to  any  living  children  of  the  Sioux  Tribe 
of  Indians  belonging  on  any  of  the  Great  Sioux  reservations,  and  who 
have  not  heretofore  been  allotted,  as  long  as  the  tribe  to  which  such 
Indian  children  belong  is  possessed  of  any  unallotted  tribal  or  reserva- 
tion lands. 

Allotment  work  was  also  continued  on  the  Gila  River  Reservation, 
Ariz.,  under  a  special  alloting  agent.  Due  to  the  intense  heat  in  that 
part  of  the  country  a  cessation  of  field  operations  is  necessary  during 
the  summer  months. 

Under  the  act  of  August  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  L.,  593),  456  allotments, 
covering  an  area  of  132,315.72  acres,  were  made  to  the  Indians  of  the 
Fort  Peck  Reservation,  and  the  schedule  of  selections  is  being  checked 
up  with  a  view  to  its  ultimate  approval  and  the  issuance  of  trust 
patents. 

During  the  year  120  allotments  on  the  public  domain  were  approved 
to  Turtle  Mountain  Indians  under  the  act  of  April  21, 1904  (33  Stat.  L., 
189-194),  and  cover  an  area  of  15,030.40  acres. 

On  the  Colorado  River  Reservation,  Ariz.,  additional  lands  were 
allotted  to  Indians  having  rights  thereon,  more  especially  Indians  who 
formerly  resided  at  Fort  Mojave. 


46  COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Allotment  work  under  an  item  contained  in  the  Indian  appropria- 
tion act  approved  March  2,  1917  (Public  369),  has  been  authorized 
on  the  Morongo  Mission  Reservation,  Cal.,  and  a  special  agent  was 
recently  detailed  to  that  reservation  for  the  purpose  of  making  allot- 
ments. It  is  expected  that  allotment  work  on  other  mission  reserva- 
tions will  be  taken  up  soon. 

A  large  number  of  reallotments  were  made  on  various  reservations 
during  the  year,  notably  on  the  Blackfeet  Reservation,  under  au- 
thority found  in  the  acts  of  October  19,  1888  (25  Stat.  L.,  611-612), 
and  March  3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  781-784).  Changes  are  encouraged 
where  the  Indians  will  be  benefited,  and  especially  where  a  better 
character  of  land  is  obtainable. 

A  list  of  the  reservations,  number  of  allotments  approved  during 
the  year,  and  number  made  in  the  field  but  not  yet  approved  will  be 
found  in  Table  26. 

CLASSIFICATION     AND    APPRAISEMENT    OF    SURPLUS 

INDIAN    LAND. 

Under  authority -found  in  the  act  of  June  6,  1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  125), 
a  large  amount  of  reclassification  and  appraisement  work  was  under- 
taken. This  reexamination  work  is  done  in  specific  cases  upon  a 
formal  application  by  the  homestead  applicant  that  an  error  was  made 
in  the  original  classification  or  appraisement  of  the  land  covered  by 
his  entry.  These  applications  have  covered  mainly  surplus  Flathead 
lands. 

A  commission  was  recently  appointed  under  the  act  of  February 
27,  1917  (Public  358),  to  examine,  classify  and  appraise  as  to  their 
surface  values  the  surplus  coal  lands  on  the  Fort  Peck  Reservation 
consisting  of  approximately  120,000  acres.  The  commission  is  now 
at  work  in  the  field  and  it  is  estimated  that  the  work  will  be  com- 
pleted by  the  1st  of  November,  1917. 

LAND  PURCHASES. 

A  special  agent  is  still  engaged  in  purchasing  land  for  homeless 
California  Indians,  and  up  to  the  present  time  purchases  have  been 
consumated  covering  8,019.51  acres  for  approximately  4,100  Indians. 

Purchases  have  also  been  made  for  the  benefit  of  numerous  bands 
of  homeless  nonreservation  Indians  in  Nevada,  from  appropriations 
contained  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  for  the  fiscal  year  1917  (39 
Stat.,  123-143).  Provision  has  also  been  made  for  these  Indians 
through  lease  and  the  withdrawal  of  certain  areas,  and  it  is  estimated 
that  approximately  500  Indians  will  be  provided  with  homes. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


47 


EXTENSION  OF  TRUST  PERIODS. 

The  following  table  shows  the  tribes  whose  period  of  trust  has  been 
extended,  number  of  allotments  on  each  reservation,  the  number  so 
extended,  date  of  expiration  of  trust,  and  length  of  extension: 


Tribe. 

Allot- 
ments. 

Allot- 
ments 
ex- 
tended. 

Date 
trust  pe- 
riod 
expires. 

Ex- 
tended. 

Modoc,  Oklahoma  

68 

56 

1916 

Years. 
10 

Absentee  Shawnee,  Oklahoma 

519 

504 

1917 

10 

Citizen  Potawatomi,  Oklahoma.  . 

1  588 

1  503 

1917 

10 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Oklahoma.. 

3  331 

3  164 

1917 

10 

Ottawa,  Oklahoma  

'l58 

'   87 

1917 

10 

Seneca,  Oklahoma  

435 

357 

1917 

10 

Wyandotte,  Oklahoma... 

244 

118 

1917 

10 

Sac  and  Fox,  Kansas  and  Nebraska.     . 

122 

118 

1917 

10 

Sac  and  Fox,  Oklahoma  

548 

496 

1916 

10 

Iowa,  Oklahoma  

108 

105 

1916 

10 

Oneida,  Wisconsin  

1  524 

1  501 

1917 

1 

In  addition,  the  trust  period  on  all  Indian  homesteads  and  allot- 
ments on  the  public  domain  which  would  otherwise  expire  during 
the  calendar  year  1917  has  been  extended  for  one  year  by  an  Exec- 
utive order.  Authority  for  these  extensions  will  be  found  in  the 
fifth  section  of  the  act  of  February  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  and  the 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  326). 

OSAQE  OIL  AND  GAS  LEASES. 

On  May  31,  1917,  there  were  sold  at  public  auction  at  Pawhuska, 
Okla.,  leases  covering  certain  Osage  lands  for  oil-mining  purposes, 
aggregating  9,120  acres,  for  a  bonus  consideration  of  $1,997,600,  an 
average  of  $219  per  acre.  These  lands  consisted  of  scattering  tracts 
on  the  east  side  of  the  reservation,  which  were  being  drained  by 
reason  of  development  on  adjacent  property  and  certain  tracts  in- 
cluded in  gas  leases  on  which  oil  wells  were  brought  in.  Leases  cov- 
ering these  tracts  are  for  a  period  of  five  years  and  as  long  thereafter 
as  oil  is  found  in  paying  quantities,  and  provide  for  a  royalty  in 
addition  to  the  bonus  consideration  of  16§  per  cent,  except  when 
wells  on  quarter-section  tracts  or  fractional  parts  of  quarter  sections 
are  sufficient  to  average  100  or  more  barrels  per  well  per  day  the 
royalty  on  oil  produced  is  20  per  cent. 

The  Osage  Reservation,  under  which  oil  and  gas  is  reserved  to  the 
tribe  until  1931,  comprises  approximately  1,500,000  acres,  of  which 
one  block  on  the  east  side  was  leased  for  oil  and  gas  under  a  blanket 
lease  authorized  by  Congress,  which  expired  March  16,  1916.  New 
leases  have  been  made  covering  about  900,000  acres  for  gas  and 
about  227,000  for  oil.  The  oil  leases,  aggregating  about  227,000  are 
included  in  the  900,000  acres  leased  for  gas. 

On  June  30,  1917,  there  were  1,234  dry  and  abandoned  wells  on 
the  Osage  Reservation,  3,244  producing  oil  wells,  and  333  gas  wells. 
The  gross  production  of  oil  from  July  1,  1916,  to  June  30,  1917, 


48 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAX   AFFAIRS. 


amounted  to  9,943,919.45  barrels,  of  which  the  Osage  Tribe  received 
as  royalty  1,643,223.68  barrels.  The  total  receipts  of  the  Osage 
Tribe  from  oil  and  gas  leases  from  July  1,  1916,  until  June  30,  1917, 
amounted  to  approximately  $5,000,000. 

OIL  AND  GAS  INDUSTRY  OUTSIDE  THE  FIVE  CIVILIZED 
TRIBES  AND  OSAGE  NATION. 

Prior  to  the  fiscal  year  1912  comparatively  little  interest  was  shown 
in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  outside  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  and 
Osage  Nation.  Subsequent  to  that  time,  however,  the  industry  has 
shown  a  steady  increase,  until  at  the  present  time  oil  fields  are 
in  operation  not  only  on  the  Indian  lands  in  Oklahoma  but  in  the 
States  of  Wyoming  and  Washington  as  well,  and  recently  on  the 
Pine  Ridge  Reservation  in  South  Dakota. 

The  greatest  development  has  been  made  on  the  Otoe,  Pawnee, 
Ponca,  Kiowa,  and  Sac  and  Fox  Reservations  in  Oklahoma,  on 
allotted  lands,  Shoshone,  Wyo.,  showing  the  greatest  development 
on  tribal  lands. 

Owing  to  the  steady  increase  in  the  price  of  oil  during  the  fiscal 
year  1917,  it  has  been  a  banner  year  in  the  leasing  of  Indian  lands 
for  oil  and  gas  mining  purposes.  The  regulations  approved  Septem- 
ber 3,  1912,  governing  the  leasing  of  restricted  allotted  Indian  lands 
for  mining  purposes  fix  the  amount  of  rentals  and  royalties,  making 
it  obligatory  on  the  lessee  to  pay  the  amounts  thus  specified. 

In  addition  to  the  rentals  and  royalties  prescribed  by  the  regu- 
lations, bonuses  are  paid  directly  to  the  Indian  lessors,  varying  in 
amount  from  a  few  dollars  to  several  thousands  of  dollars,  owing  to 
the  geological  indications  of  the  presence  of  oil  or  gas  and  the  prox- 
imity of  the  land  to  developed  territory. 

The  following  statement  shows  the  approximate  number  of  acres 
on  which  leases  for  oil  and  gas  mining  purposes  are  approved  or 
pending  at  the  various  agencies  outside  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes 
and  Osage  Nation  up  to  and  including  June  30,  1917 : 


Agency. 

Acreage. 

Pending. 

Approved. 

ALLOTTED  LANDS. 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  . 

4,982.94 
2.  724.  62 
8,  328.  58 
2,391.35 
6,  439.  12 
1,200.00 
840.00 
281.05 
363.27 

20,  22*.  00 
36,287.00 
62,946.00 
63,600.00 
1,040.00 
19,640.00 
6,625.00 
7,  869.  00 
1,380.00 

Kiowa.  .  . 

Otoe  

Pawnee  . 

Ponca  

Sac  and  Fox,  Okla. 

Shawnee 

Shoshone  

Spokane  .  . 

Total 

27,550.93 

219,615.00 

TRIBAL  LANDS. 

Shoshone  .  .  . 

24,080-00 

Total... 

24,080.00 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  49 

FEE  PATENTS  TO  INDIANS. 

During  the  fiscal  year  2,500  applications  for  fee  patents  have  been 
received,  of  which  297  were  denied  and  2,203  approved,  involving  an 
area  of  275,553  acres,  valued  at  approximately  $5,000,000.  Of  the 
fee  patent  applications  approved,  576  were  full  blood  Indian  allot- 
tees and  1,627  mixed  bloods.  Under  the  new  policy  and  a  broad- 
ening of  its  application  to  requests  for  fee  patents  it  is  estimated  that 
several  thousand  fee  patents  will  be  issued  to  competent  Indians. 

COMPETENCY  COMMISSIONS. 

During  the  fiscal  year  competency  commissions  have  investigated 
the  qualifications  of  Indian  allottees  to  manage  their  own  affairs  on 
the  following  Indian  reservations:  Cheyenne  and  Arapaho,  Crow, 
Crow  Creek,  Devils  Lake,  Kickapoo,  Lower  Brule,  Oneida,  Sac  and 
Fox,  Seneca,  Shawnee,  and  Sisseton.  These  commissions  are  com- 
posed of  men  who  are  well  qualified  for  the  work  and  who  have  had 
long  experience  in  the  Indian  Service.  Numerous  fee  patents,  in- 
volving an  area  of  about  50,000  acres  of  land,  have  been  issued  on  the 
recommendation  of  these  commissions. 

FIVE  CIVILIZED  TRIBES. 

The  area  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  was  19,525,966  acres  of  un- 
allotted lands,  of  which  15,794,238  acres  have  been  allotted  to  en- 
rolled members,  3,130,129  acres  not  needed  for  allotment,  have  been 
sold  as  surplus  unallotted  lands  at  public  auction  to  the  highest 
bidder  for  over  $17,000,000,  while  139,284  acres  were  reserved  from 
sale  and  set  aside  for  town  sites,  railroad  rights  of  way,  churches, 
courthouses,  schools,  cemeteries,  etc.,  leaving  remaining  unsold 
458,937  acres  in  Choctaw  Nation,  721  acres  in  Chickasaw  Nation,  none 
in  Cherokee  Nation,  2,495  acres  in  the  Creek  Nation,  and  162  acres 
in  Seminole  Nation.  The  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  tribal  unsold 
lands  will  be  offered  for  sale  at  public  auction  to  the  highest  bidder 
from  October  15  to  31,  1917,  to  be  followed  on  November  19  by  a 
sale  of  the  remaining  unsold  Creek  tribal  lands. 

In  volume  of  business  transacted  by  the  office  of  the  superintend- 
ent for  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  the  fiscal  year  1917  surpasses  all 
previous  years.  One  million  pieces  of  mail  and  $42,000,000  were 
handled.  One  hundred  and  eighty  houses  and  barns  were  erected 
at  a  cost  of  $126,492.11 ;  2,042.25  acres  of  land  were  bought  for  homes 
costing  $52,437.10;  489,076.62  acres  of  tribal  and  allotted  lands  were 
sold  for  $2,190,293.13 ;  $1,741,550  were  invested  for  individual  Indians 
in  Liberty  loan  bonds;  $7,500  were  invested  in  other  loans  andpur- 

18404—17 4 


50 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


chases;  $7,429,066.10  were  disbursed  on  account  of  per  capita  pay- 
ments to  the  Choctaws,  Chickasaws,  and  Seminoles;  2,328  leases  for 
various  purposes  were  approved,  and  1,252  canceled;  the  restric- 
tion against  alienation  of  land  was  removed  from  155,428.39  acres 
and  $4,407,909.62  were  collected  on  account  of  royalties  arising  from 
leases,  not  to  mention  16,000  separate  accounts,  maintenance  pay- 
ments, thousands  of  investigations,  reports  and  miscellaneous 
matters. 

The   Five   Civilized   Tribes   in   Oklahoma   now   number    101,506 
enrolled  members,  tabulated  as  to  tribes  as  follows: 


Nation. 

Restricted  class. 

Unrestricted  class. 

Full 
bloods. 

Mixed, 
three- 
fourths 
or 
more. 

One- 
half 
to 
three- 
fourths. 

Total. 

Less  than 
one-half, 
including 
inter- 
married 
whites. 

Freed- 
men. 

Total. 

Grand 
total. 

Ohickasaw 

1,515 

7,087 
1,357 
8,703 
6,858 
1,254 

258 
709 
90 
1,803 
541 
133 

708 
1,644 
30 
2,975 
1,157 
345 

2,481 
9,440 
1,477 
13,481 
8,556 
1,732 

3,823 
9,699 
183 
23,  424 
3,396 
409 

4,662 
6,029 

8,485' 
15,  728 
183 
28,343 
10,  205 
1,395 

10,966 
25,  168 
1,660 
41,  824 
18,  761 
3,  127 

Choctaw  j         

Mississippi  Choctaw 

Cherokee    

4,919 
6,809 
986 

Creek 

Seminole  

Total 

26,  774 

3,534 

6,859 

i  37,  167 

40,934 

23,  405 

64,339 

2  101,506 

1  This  indicates  the  total  number  of  citizens  of  the  restricted  class  whose  names  appear  on  the  approved 
roll.    It  is  estimated  that  during  the  year  the  restrictions  have  been  unconditionally  removed  from  2,286 

persons  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  or  by  death.  The  approximate  number  of  restricted  citizens 
who  have  had  the  restrictions  removed  from  their  entire  allotments  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  and 
by  death  is  12,000,  leaving  25,167  restricted  Indians  June  30,  1917. 

2  This  total  is  13  less  than  shown  by  the  report  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1916,  it  having  been 
found  that  this  number  of  persons  whose  names  appear  on  the  approved  Creek  rolls  were  not  entitled  to 
enrollment  and  notations  to  that  effect  have  been  placed  on  the  roll  opposite  their  names  by  departmental 
authority. 

PROBATE  WORK  IN  OKLAHOMA. 

The  volume  and  importance  of  the  work  accomplished  during  the 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917,  by  the  corps  of  probate  attorneys, 
stationed  in  that  part  of  Oklahoma  comprising  the  former  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  can  only  be  fully  appreciated  by  those  who  are 
familiar  with  conditions  obtaining  there;  and  this  year,  as  in  th& 
past,  these  men  have  demonstrated,  in  no  uncertain  manner,  the 
value  of  their  work  and  have  justified,  by  actual  results,  the  estab- 
lishment of  this  arm  of  the  Indian  Service. 

The  establishment  of  such  a  force  followed  as  a  necessary  corol- 
lary the  allotment  of  the  lands  and  other  property  of  these  Indians 
among  the  one  hundred  and  one  thousand  persons  who  were  enrolled 
as  members  and  freedmen  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  for  it 
was  inevitable  that  the  personnel  of  that  body  of  persons  should 
be  entirely  changed,  within  a  few  short  years,  by  the  passing  of  the 
old  and  the  substitution  of  a  new  generation.  With  this  change, 
which  is  now  being  rapidly  accomplished,  has  come  a  host  of  per- 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  51 

sons  who  have  succeeded  to  the  original  Indian  estates,  but  who, 
although  owners  thereof,  are  not  protected  by  the  safeguards  that 
were  thrown  about  their  predecessors  in  interest. 

It  therefore  became  necessary  to  protect  this  new  class  of  Indian 
property  holders  in  an  entirely  new  way  and  to  invoke  a  new  machin- 
ery of  law  and  a  different  forum,  to  wit,  the  probate  court,  as  a 
means  of  continuing  the  fostering  care  of  the  Government  over 
those  members  of  the  Indian  race  who  are  still  dependent.  The 
United  States  could  appear  in  this  forum  only  by  its  attorneys,  and 
hence  the  establishment  of  the  corps  of  legal  representatives  which 
uniformly  and  systematically  operates,  for  the  benefit  of  Indian 
citizens,  by  the  authority  of  the  United  States  and  the  cooperation 
of  the  State  of  Oklahoma,  in  the  40  counties  embracing  the  great 
domain  formerly  known  as  the  Indian  Territory. 

It  is  impossible  to  state  in  a  brief  space  all  things  actually  accom- 
plished by  the  probate  attorneys,  but  the  fact  that  there  are  nearly 
45,000  probate  cases  now  on  the  dockets  of  the  county  courts  of 
eastern  Oklahoma  affords  some  measure  of  the  volume  of  the  work. 

The  work  during  the  last  fiscal  year  shows  the  determined  efforts 
of  the  probate  attorneys  to  put  each  on  a  sound  basis  and  to  correct 
abuses  generally.  In  doing  so  they  have,  within  the  past  year, 
participated  in  numerous  criminal  actions  and  civil  suits  on  behalf 
of  Indian  citizens,  the  civil  suits  involving  property  valued  at 
upward  of  $474,000. 

During  the  year  a  total  of  4,470  citations  were  issued  by  the  pro- 
bate attorneys  to  delinquent  guardians,  which  resulted  in,  the  re- 
moval or  discharge  of  1,762  of  such  guardians  and  the  filing  of  2,935 
new  bonds,  amounting  to  $3,331,693. 

Of  the  tangible  results,  most  readily  appreciable,  are  the  accom- 
plishment of  preventing  losses  in  the  amount  of  $1,514,314  during 
the  last  fiscal  year  that  would  have  befallen  Indians  but  for  the 
efforts  of  the  probate  attorneys,  which  is  exceeded,  however,  by 
the  amounts  conserved  for  them  through  bank  deposits  and  invest- 
ments aggregating,  for  the  same  period,  $3,424,226. 

The  scope  of  the  year's  work  of  these  attorneys,  and  the  character 
and  quantity  thereof,  may  be  comprehended  at  a  glance  from  the 
following  summary  of  results: 

Cases  pending  first  day  of  year 47, 148 

Cases  pending  last  day  of  year " 44,  766 

Regular  cases  in  which  attorney  appeared 18,  965 

Civil  actions  instituted 261 

Amount  involved  in  such  civil  actions $474, 162 

Civil  actions  finally  determined 231 

Criminal  actions  instituted 15 

Criminal  actions  finally  determined 25 

New  bonds  filed..  2,935 


52  COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

Amount  covered  by  such  new  bonds $3,  331,  693 

Guardians  removed  or  discharged .1,  762 

Conservation  of  funds: 

(a)  Bank  deposits $973. 123 

(6)  Investments $2,  451, 103 

Amounts  saved  to  minors  and  others $1,  514,  314 

Inherited  land  sales 1, 004 

Minor  allotment  sales 471 

Citations  issued 4, 470 

Quit-claim  deeds  obtained 79 

Official  letters  and  reports • 41,  818 

Conferences  with  allottees  and  others  (approximate) 41,  565 

Leases  drafted  by  probate  attorneys 449 

Other  leases  passed  upon  by  probate  attorneys 887 

Appraisements  secured  from  Government  appraisers 975 

SALE    OF    REMAINING     UNALLOTTED    CHOCTAW    AND 
CHICKASAW  TRIBAL  LANDS. 

Under  the  regulations  governing  the  next  sale  of  unallotted  Choc- 
taw  and  Chickasaw  tribal  lands,  including  the  timber  land  and  the 
surface  of  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  land,  including  townsites 
established  on  said  surface,  a  sale  of  these  lands  at  public  auction 
to  the  highest  bidder  will  commence  at  Hugo,  Okla.,  on  October 
15,  and  concluding  at  Ardmore,  Okla.,  on  October  31,  1917.  The 
timber  lands  and  surface  of  the  segregated  coal  and  asphalt  lands 
classified  as  suitable  for  townsite  purposes  will  be  sold  on  the  deferred 
payment  plan  as  heretofore,  but  the  surface  of  the  segregated  coal 
and  asphalt  land  area  classified  as  agricultural  and  grazing  will  be 
sold  for  cash  in  accordance  with  Section  4  of  the  act  of  Congress 
approved  February  19,  1912  (authorizing  the  sale  of  such  surface), 
without  regard  to  the  appraised  value  thereof,  two  years  having 
expired  since  the  lands  were  first  offered  for  sale  from  November 
16  to  December  2,  1914. 

The  most  valuable  agricultural  lands,  consisting  of  25,910  acres, 
to  be  sold  are  practically  all  located  in  Haskell  County,  while  the 
timber  lands  are  located  in  McCurtain,  Pushmataha,  Le  Flore,  and 
Latimer  Counties,  there  being  141,126  acres  in  McCurtain  County, 
107,083  acres  in  Pushmataha  County,  119,450  acres  in  Le  Flore,  and 
51,500  acres  in  Latimer  County  yet  to  be  sold.  These  timber  lands 
averaged  at  the  last  sale  held  from  October  4  to  31,  1916,  $3.36  per 
acre,  and  the  agricultural  lands  averaged  $9.15  per  acre. 

Steps  will  be  taken  as  soon  as  practicable  to  sell  the  remaining 
unsold  Creek  tribal  lands  consisting  of  a  little  over  2,000  acres,  and 
Creek  town  lots  in  Muskogee  and  Tulsa,  recovered  as  a  result  of  Creek 
town -lot  suits,  and  the  old  Creek  capitol  building  site  at  Okmulgeo. 
Okla.,  which  occupies  a  square  in  the  center  of  that  city,  for  the  dis- 
posal of  which  several  propositions  have  been  advanced,  as  the 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  5£ 

preservation  of  the  old  Creek  capitol  building  which  was  the  Creek 
council  house,  as  a  Creek  National  Museum,  to  be  purchased  by  the 
United  States  for  the  Creek  Tribe  for  that  purpose,  to  give  Okmulgee 
County  preferential  right  to  purchase  the  old  capitol  building  site 
with  improvements  for  a  courthouse,  at  the  appraised  value  (about 
$60,000),  or  to  have  Congress  purchase  the  site  for  a  post-office  build- 
ing for  Federal  purposes. 

ESTATES  OF  DECEASED  INDIANS. 

Not  only  does  the  United  States  follow  the  Indian  with  watchful 
care  during  his  life,  but  after  his  death  distributes  his  estate,  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  Congress  and  the  regulations  of  the 
Department  of  the  Interior  in  pursuance  of  these  laws. 

In  former  days,  before  the  present  really  hopeful  spirit  of  under- 
standing and  sympathy  existed  between  the  white  man  and  the  In- 
dian, it  used  to  be  commonly  and  flippantly  remarked  that  "the  only^ 
good  Indian  is  a  dead  Indian."  The  Indian  Office  can  see  no  dis- 
tinction as  to  goodness  between  living  Indians  and  those  who  have 
passed  on;  it  does  note,  however,  in  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
cases  in  which  it  undertakes  the  distribution  of  the  estate  of  a  de- 
ceased Indian,  that  he  has  during  his  lifetime  undertaken  and  gener- 
ously fulfilled  heavy  responsibilities  toward  relatives,  adopted  chil- 
dren, or  other  dependents,  who  may  or  may  not  be  claimants  to  his 
estate  after  his  death. 

In  the  determination  of  heirs  to  Indian  estates,  the  department 
occupies  the  position  of  a  probate  court,  and  operates  under  regula- 
tions as  to  notice  and  hearing,  etc.,  very  much  as  would  such  a  court. 
In  the  consideration  of  wills  made  by  Indians,  however,  the  depart- 
ment acts  also  as  a  guardian  of  the  Indian  and  his  estate,  the  law 
making  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  a  condition  precedent  to  the 
validity  of  such  wills,  and  providing  that  such  approval  (or  dis- 
approval) may  be  given  either  during  the  life  or  after  the  death  of 
the  testator.  The  circumstances  of  many  individual  cases  have 
made  this  method  of  procedure  appear  to  be  the  only  adequate  one. 

The  fact  that  during  the  past  year  a  considerable  number  of  wills 
(49,  or  28.5  per  cent  of  the  entire  number  acted  upon)  was  disap- 
proved, shows  the  importance  of  the  discretionary  power  in  this, 
respect  vested  in  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  The  total  number 
of  wills  approved  was  123,  exclusive  of  Osage  wills,  which  receive 
consideration  under  a  law  applicable  to  them  alone  and  for  the 
approval  of  which  no  fee  is  collected. 

The  total  number  of  estates  which  were  the  subject  of  final  deter- 
mination during  the  year  ending  June  30,  1917,  was  2,851.  On 
2,608,  or  91.4  per  cent  of  these,  a  $15  fee  for  such  determination  was 
collected,  the  total  amount  of  such  fees  being  $39,120.  Of  the  172 


54  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

wills  considered,  123,  or  71.5  per  cent,  received  approval  and  49,  or 
28.5  per  cent,  were  disapproved. 

NEW  SYSTEM  OF  BOOKKEEPING. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  of  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.  L.,  103), 
required  a  new  system  of  bookkeeping  to  be  installed  in  the  Office 
of  Indian  Affairs  which  would  afford  a  ready  analysis  of  expenditures 
by  appropriations  and  allotments  and  by  units  of  the  service,  show- 
ing for  each  class  of  work,  or  activity,  the  expenditures  for  salaries 
and  wages  of  employees,  etc. 

In  order  to  comply  with  this  law  a  new  system  of  bookkeeping, 
devised  by  the  Indian  Office,  was  installed  throughout  the  service 
July  1,  1916.  However,  the  act  of  May  18,  1916,  directed  the  Bureau 
of  Efficiency  to  prepare  and  submit  a  system  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  on  or  before  December  31,  1916.  This  was  done,  and  the 
system  recommended  by  the  Bureau  of  Efficiency  has  been  adopted. 

The  new  system  is  divided  into  two  parts  denominated,  respec- 
tively, "Fund  accounting"  and  " General  accounting."  It  was 
ordered  that  the  fund  accounting  feature  should  be  installed  by  the 
disbursing  officer  for  each  unit  of  the  service  July  1,  1917,  in  accord- 
ance with  printed  instructions.  The  general  accounting  feature  is 
to  be  installed  at  the  various  units  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the 
first  of  July  under  the  personal  direction  of  representatives  of  the 
Bureau  of  Efficiency  and  such  employees  of  the  Indian  Service  as 
may  be  available  for  the  purpose. 

The  new  system  differs  materially  from  the  one  heretofore  in 
use,  being  designed  to  show  the  actual  cost  of  the  various  activities 
by  expenditures  of  money  and  property,  rather  than  by  cash  dis- 
bursements alone. 

FORESTRY. 

ORGANIZATION  AND  ADMINISTRATION. — Efforts  to  improve  the  ad- 
ministrative force  met  with  much  success  during  the  first  half  of 
the  year;  but  during  the  last  two  months  of  the  fiscal  year  the  force 
was  weakened  by  the  withdrawal  of  four  technical  men  to  serve  in 
the  American  military  forces. 

The  Regulations  and  Instructions  for  Officers  in  Charge  of  Forests 
on  Indian  Reservations,  approved  June  29,  1911,  were  amended  on 
March  17,  1917,  to  embody  changes  found  desirable  for  the  more 
efficient  administration  of  Indian  timber.  In  this  connection  changes 
were  made  in  the  allotment  and  tribal  timber  contract  forms,  and 
a  new  timber  contract  form  introduced  for  the  sale  of  logs,  etc.,  cut 
by  Indians  from  their  allotments  or  from  tribal  lands.  Several  forest 
survey  report  forms  were  adopted  during  the  year. 

New  regulations  for  the  more  efficient  sale  of  the  products  of  the 
Menominee  Indian  mills  were  approved  and  put  into  effect  October 
1,  1916. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  55 

APPRAISAL  OF  TIMBER  RESOURCES. — The  work  of  estimating  the 
timber,  classifying  the  land,  and  gathering  data  for  a  contour  map 
of  the  Quinaielt  Indian  Reservation  was  completed  in  the  summer 
of  1917.  Several  townships  of  the  Klamath  were  covered  by  strip 
valuation  surveys  in  accordance  with  a  plan  for  the  gradual  examina- 
tion of  the  whole  timbered  area  upon  the  reservation.  A  general 
reconnaissance  of  the  forested  area  of  the  Crow  Indian  Reservation 
indicated  a  stand  of  about  30,000,000  feet.  Estimates  on  a  com- 
paratively small  scale  were  made  on  a  large  number  of  reservations 
and  allotments  upon  the  public  land  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
small  timber  sales  and  of  sales  of  land  bearing  timber. 

As  a  basis  for  the  administration  of  the  Red  Lake  Indian  Forest, 
created  by  the  act  of  May  18,  1916  (39  Stat.  L.,  123,  137),  an  exami- 
nation was  made  of  the  lands  south  of  Lower  Red  Lake.  This 
examination  showed  that  the  greater  part  of  the  white  and  Norway 
pine  was  mature  or  decadent  and  should  be  immediately  removed. 
The  burning  over  of  more  than  three-fourths  of  this  area  during  the 
very  severe  drought  in  May,  1917,  made  an  early  timber  operation 
imperative.  Accordingly  all  mature  timber  on  a  large  part  of  the 
area  south  of  Lower  Red  Lake  has  been  offered  for  sale. 

TIMBER  SALES. — Two  large  sales  of  timber  comprising  approxi- 
mately 430,000,000  feet  were  made  from  the  Klamath  Reservation 
in  June,  1917.  Upon  the  larger  unit  a  price  of  $3.57  per  thousand 
feet,  board  measure,  was  received  for  yellow  pine,  with  a  provision 
in  the  contract  for  increased  prices  at  successive  three-year  periods 
in  accordance  with  future  advances  in  lumber  values.  In  addition 
to  these  large  sales  about  15,000,000  feet  were  sold  from  allotments. 

Two  large  sales  of  timber,  comprising  about  60,000,000  feet,  board 
measure,  were  made  from  the  southern  portion  of  the  Flathead 
Reservation  in  June,  1917.  Under  one  of  these  sales  western  yellow 
pine  brought  $3.65  and  under  the  other  $4  per  thousand  feet.  A 
unit  of  57,000,000  feet  in  the  Ronan  district  has  been  advertised 
for  sale  under  sealed  bids  to  be  received  September  11,  1917. 

About  18,000,000  feet  of  mixed  species  was  sold  from  the  L'Anse 
Indian  Reservation  in  northern  Michigan,  and  comparatively  small 
sales  were  made  from  allotments  on  the  Coeur  d'Alene,  Leech  Lake, 
and  Muckleshoot  Reservations. 

Under  sales  previously  made  extensive  timber  operations  were 
conducted  during  the  year  on  the  Bad  River,  Fond  du  Lac,  Jicarilla, 
Klamath,  Lac  Courte  Oreille,  Leech  Lake,  and  Tulalip  reservations, 
and  minor  operations  on  the  Chehalis,  Coeur  d'Alene,  Flathead, 
Mackinac,  and  Muckleshoot.  The  amount  cut  on  each  reservation 
is  shown  in  the  Statistical  Appendix  accompanying  this  report. 

At  the  Menominee  Indian  mill,  where  17,000,000  feet  of  lumber 
were  manufactured  under  Governmental  management,  Indians  earned 


56  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

more  than  $80,000  in  wages  during  the  year.  On  January  1,  1917, 
the  Menominee  log  fund,  from  which  all  expenditures  connected  with 
logging  operations  at  Neopit  have  been  paid,  was  fully  reimbursed 
for  all  expenditures  therefrom.  In  addition  to  the  excess  funds  which 
were  then  deposited  in  the  4  per  cent  fund,  provided  for  by  the  act 
of  March  28,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  51),  and  over  30,000,000  feet  of 
manufactured  lumber  on  hand,  the  Neopit  operation  had  up  to  Janu- 
ary 1,  1917,  increased  the  assets  of  the  Menominee  Indians  to  the 
extent  of  the  value  of  the  whole  manufacturing  plant,  inventoried 
at  more  than  $1,000,000. 

FOREST  FIRES. — No  serious  fire  loss  was  suffered  during  the  summer 
and  autumn  of  1916.  While  human  efforts  are  almost  unavailing 
in  the  prevention  and  suppression  of  forest  fires  during  an  unfavor- 
able season,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  efficient  lookout  and  patrol 
system  now  inaugurated  on  the  Indian  reservations  having  large 
timber  areas  contributes  materially  to  the  prevention  of  large  annual 
fire  losses.  The  timber  burned  upon  the  Red  Lake  and  Bad  River 
Reservations  during  May,  1917,  will  undoubtedly  be  cut  during  the 
coming  winter  season. 

COURT  DECISIONS. 

The  following  cases  affecting  Indians  were  decided  during  the 
last  year: 

Williams,  Chief,  et  al.  v.  City  of  Chicago  et  al.  (2J.2  U.  S.,  434).— 
This  was  an  action  brought  by  eight  Pottawatomie  Indians,  mem- 
bers of  the  Pokagon  band  and  residents  of  Michigan,  against  the 
city  of  Chicago  and  certain  corporations  now  occupying  valuable 
lands  within  the  geographical  limits  of  Illinois,  which  have  been  re- 
claimed from  Lake  Michigan.  The  Indians  claimed  ownership  of 
the  lands  in  question  under  the  treaty  of  Greenville  of  August  3, 
1795  (7  Stat.  L.,  49).  It  was  held  in  this  case  that  the  treaty,  supra, 
under  which  the  Indians  claimed  did  not  convey  a  fee-simple  title  to 
the  Indians;  that  under  it  no  tribe  could  claim  more  than  the  right 
of  continued  occupancy;  and  that  when  this  was  abandoned,  all 
legal  right  or  interest  which  both  tribe  and  its  members  had  in  the 
territory  came  to  an  end. 

Hill,  a  minor,  et  al.  v.  Reynolds,  a  minor  (24%  TJ-  $.,  361). — A 
decision  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  adjudicating  a  contest  over 
certain  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  lands,  and  awarding  a  patent  under 
the  agreement  in  the  act  of  June  28,  1898  (30  Stat.  L.,  505),  and  the 
supplemental  agreement  in  the  act  of  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  641), 
was  upheld  by  the  court  in  this  case. 

Dickson  v.  Luck  Land  Company  (242  U.  S.,  371).— It  was  held 
in  this  case  that  the  issuance  of  a  fee-simple  patent  to  a  mixed-blood 
Chippewa  Indian  of  the  White  Earth  Indian  Reservation,  under  the 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS.  57 

provisions  of  the  act  of  March  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015,  1034),  pro- 
viding for  the  removal  of  restrictions  from  allotments  held  by  adult 
mixed-blood  Indians,  was  not  decisive  of  the  allottee's  age  for  any 
purpose  other  than  that  of  fixing  his  right  to  receive  the  full  title 
freed  from  all  the  restrictions  upon  its  disposal  which  Congress  had 
imposed,  and  that  after  the  issuance  of  the  fee-simple  patent  the 
allottee  became  subject  to  and  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the  laws  of 
the  State,  among  which  were  those  laws  governing  the  transfer  of 
real  property,  fixing  the  age  of  majority,  and  declaring  the  dis- 
ability of  minors. 

Harnage  et  al.  v.  Martin  et  al.  (242  U.  S.,  386). — It  was  held  in 
this  case  that  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  that  one  of 
two  contesting  claimants  to  an  allotment  under  section  11  of  the 
Cherokee  agreement  of  July  1,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  716),  was  the  owner 
of  improvements  on  the  land,  is  conclusive,  unless  made  without 
evidence  to  support  it  or  otherwise  the  result  of  an  error  of  law,  and 
that  of  two  applicants  under  section  1 1  of  the  Cherokee  agreement, 
supra,  the  owner  of  the  improvements  on  the  tract  in  question  is 
entitled  to  the  allotment  to  the  exclusion  of  the  applicant  having  no 
such  ownership  in  such  improvements. 

G.  E.  Gannon,  plaintiff  in  error,  v.  D.  R.  Johnson  and,  Wilburn 
Wolfe  (decided  by  United  States  Supreme  Court  Mar.  6,  1917). — It 
was  held  in  this  case  that  the  restrictions  imposed  by  sections  15 
and  16  of  the  supplemental  agreement  between  the  United  States 
and  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Indians,  approved  July  1,  1902 
(32  Stat.  L.,  641),  were  intended  by  Congress  to  bind  the  surplus 
lands  during  the  restrictive  periods,  whether  in  the  hands  of  the 
original  allottee  during  his  lifetime  or  of  his  heirs  after  the  decease 
of  the  original  allottee;  and  that  the  restriction  was  upon  the  aliena- 
tion of  the  lands  as  such,  and  not  merely  personal  as  to  the  allottee. 

United  States  v.  Lucky  S.  Waller  and  Mamie  S.  Waller  (decided  by 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  on  Apr.  9,  1917). — In  this 
case  it  was  held  that  where  conveyances  by  adult  mixed-blood  Chip- 
pewa  Indians  of  their  patented  allotments  were  made  after  the  adop- 
tion of  the  acts  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  325,  353),  and  March 
1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015,  1034),  which  removed  restrictions  from 
sale  or  encumbrance,  that  the  United  States  was  without  capacity 
to  bring  suit  on  behalf  of  the  Indian  grantors  to  set  the  sale  aside 
because  of  fraud  of  the  grantees  and  the  incapacity  of  the  grantors. 

United  States,  plaintiff  in  error,  v.  James  F.  Rowell  et  al.  (decided 
by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  Apr.  9,  1917). — It  was  held  in 
this  case  that  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June  17,  1910  (36  Stat.  L., 
533),  authorizing  and  directing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  issue 
a  patent  in  fee  to  a  quarter  section  in  an  Indian  school  reserve  in 
Comanche  County,  Okla.,  to  James  F.  Rowell,  who  was  an  adopted 


58  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

member  of  the  Kiowa,  Comanche,  and  Apache  Tribes  of  Indians  of 
Oklahoma,  in  lieu  of  all  claims  to  any  allotment  of  land  or  money 
settlement  in  lieu  of  an  allotment  did  not  give  any  right  which  could 
not  be  divested  by  a  repealing  act,  and  that  the  act  of  December  19, 
1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  887),  repealing  the  act  of  June  17,  1910,  supra, 
was  valid. 

United  States  v.  Bessie  Wildcat  et  al.  (decided  by  the  United  States 
Supreme  Court  May  21,  1917). — This  action  was  begun  by  the  United 
States  in  behalf  of  the  Creek  Tribe  of.  Indians  against  Bessie  Wildcat 
and  others,  heirs  of  Barney  Thlocco,  a  full-blood  Creek  Indian,  to 
obtain  cancellation  of  the  allotment  certificate  and  deeds  for  his 
allotment  of  160  acres.  It  was  held  by  tlie  court  that  a  decision  by 
the  Dawes  Commission,  where  it  proceeded  in  good  faith  to  determine 
the  matter  and  to  act  upon  information  before  it,  not  arbitrarily,  but 
according  to  its  best  judgment,  that  a  person  was  entitled  to  enroll- 
ment under  the  provisions  of  section  28  of  the  Creek  agreement  of 
March  1,  1901  (31  Stat.  L.,  861,  870),  upon  the  approval  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Interior  should  be  finally  concluded  and  the  rights  of 
the  parties  forever  settled,  subject  to  such  attacks  as  could  success- 
fully be  made  upon  judgments  of  this  character  for  fraud  or  mistake. 
The  court  stated  that  the  district  court  rightly  ruled  that  the  Govern- 
ment had  not  offered  evidence  competent  to  impeach  the  validity  of 
the  commission's  action  and  thus  to  invalidate  the  title  subsequently 
conveyed  by  the  patent  to  Thlocco  with  the  approval  of  the  Interior 
Department. 

United  States  v.  Joyce  (240  Fed.,  610)  (decided  by  the  Circuit  Court 
of  Appeals,  Eighth  Circuit).— It  was  held  in  this  case  that  where  an 
Indian  entered  public  lands  as  a  homestead  under  the  act  of  July  4, 
1884  (23  Stat.  L.,  76,  96),  which  provided  that  the  patents  issued 
thereunder  should  be  of  the  legal  effect  and  declare  that  the  United 
States  does  and  will  hold  the  land  thus  patented  for  the  period  of  25 
years,  in  trust,  etc.,  the  mere  absence  of  the  required  declaration 
from  the  patent  does  not  change  the  legal  effect  of  the  patent,  and 
that  the  various  vendees  of  the  land  in  question  were  all  charged 
with  notice  of  the  restrictions. 

Hopkins  et  al.  v.  United  States  (325  Fed.,  95)  (decided  by  the 
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  Eighth  Circuit). — It  was  held  in  this  case 
that  the  surplus  allotment  of  a  three-quarter  blood  Creek  Indian, 
who  was  a  minor  when  the  act  of  May  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312), 
became  effective,  was  subject  to  the  restrictions  against  alienation 
and  encumbrance  prescribed  by  that  act,  after  she  had  reached  her 

majority.  <   *  < 

LEGISLATION. 

The  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  March  2,  1917,  carried 
appropriations  for  the  expenses  of  the  Indian  Service  aggregating 


COMMISSIONER    OF    IXDIAX   AFFAIRS.  59 

approximately  $11,365,000.  The  important  items  of  legislation 
contained  in  the  Indian  act  are  as  follows: 

An  appropriation  of  $75,000  was  made  to  reimburse  Indians  for 
live  stock  wrhich  may  be  hereafter  destroyed  on  account  of  being 
infected  with  dourine  or  other  contagious  diseases  and  for  expenses 
in  connection  with  the  eradication  and  prevention  of  such  diseases. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  cause  to  be  sold  to 
the  highest  bidder  any  tract  or  part  of  a  tract  of  land  purchased  by 
the  United  States  for  day  school  or  other  administrative  uses,  not 
exceeding  160  acres  in  any  one  tract,  when  said  land  is  no  longer 
needed  for  the  original  purpose. 

Amending  the  act  of  March  11,  1904  (33  Stat.,  L.,  p.  65),  so  that 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  nowT  grant  temporary  permits  for 
rights  of  way  for  the  conveyance  of  oil  and  gas  before  maps  of  definite 
location  have  been  approved  by  him. 

Appropriating  $42,500,  reimbursable,  for  the  construction  of  two 
bridges  over  the  Little  Colorado  and  Canyon  Diablo  Rivers,  near 
the  Leupp  Indian  Agency,  Ariz. 

Amending  section  3  of  the  act  of  January  12,  1891  (26  Stat.,  L.  712) , 
so  as  to  authorize  the  President  to  extend  the  trust  period  for  such 
time  as  may  be  advisable  on  the  lands  held  in  trust  for  the  use  and 
benefit  of  the  Mission  Bands  or  villages  of  Indians  in  California. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  cause  allotments  to 
be  made  to  Indians  of  the  Mission  Indian  Reservations  in  California, 
in  areas  as  provided  in  section  17  of  the  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36 
Stat.  L.,  859),  instead  of  as  provided  in  section  4  of  the  act  of  Janu- 
ary 12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  713). 

Amending  the  act  of  June  17,  1892  (27  Stat.  L.,  52),  so  that  the 
proceeds  arising  from  the  sale  of  lands  of  the  Klamath  River  Indian 
Reservation,  Cal.,  may  now  be  used  for  the  pro  rata  improvement 
of  individual  Indian  allotments,  maintenance  and  education  of  the 
Indians  and  their  children,  and  for  the  construction  of  roads,  trails, 
and  other  improvements  for  their  benefit. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  pay  to  the  enrolled 
members  of  the  Sac  and  Fox  of  the  Mississippi  Tribe  of  Indians  of  the 
State  of  Iowa,  entitled  under  existing  law  to  share  in  the  funds  of  the 
tribe,  or  to  their  heirs,  the  sum  of  $10,334.96,  together  with  interest, 
from  the  sum  of  $42,893.25  transferred  to  the  credit  of  those  Indians 
under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  June  10,  1896  (29  Stat.  L.,  331). 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  approve  the  assess- 
ments, together  with  maps  showing  right  of  way  and  definite  location 
of  proposed  drainage  ditches,  made  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of 
Minnesota  upon  the  tribal  and  allotted  lands  of  the  Indian  reserva- 
tions in  the  State  of  Minnesota,  and  to  pay  the  amounts  assessed 
against  said  tribal  and  allotted  lands,  on  account  of  benefits  accruing 


60  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

to  said  lands  by  reason  of  the  construction  of  a  drainage  ditch  or 
ditches  under  the  State  laws.  An  appropriation  of  $60,000,  reim- 
bursable, was  made  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  provisions  of 
this  legislation. 

Authorizing  the  use  of  $5,000  of  the  tribal  funds  of  the  Chippewa 
Indians  of  the  State  of  Minnesota  as  part  of  the  cost  of  a  bridge  to 
be  constructed  across  the  Mississippi  River  on  the  Cass  Lake 
Reservation. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  pay  from  the  funds 
of  the  Chippewa  Indians  in  Minnesota  the  amount  or  amounts 
due  any  person  whose  name  or  names  were  erroneously  stricken 
from  the  rolls  and  reinstated  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  Indian  act. 

Appropriating  $3,791.17  for  payment  to  certain  enrolled  members 
of  the  Citizen  Band  of  Pottawatomie  Indians,  Oklahoma,  of  shares 
which  they  failed  to  receive  in  the  per  capita  distribution  made  to 
the  band  under  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  March  2,  1889  (25  Stat. 
L.,  989). 

Providing  that  all  of  Osage  County,  Okla.,  shall  hereafter  be 
deemed  to  be  Indian  country  within  the  meaning  of  the  acts  of 
Congress  making  it  unlawful  to  introduce  intoxicating  liquors  into 
the  Indian  country. 

Authorizing  an  appraisement  to  be  made  of  all  lands  of  Osage 
County,  Okla.,  owned  by  Osage  Indians  as  allottees  or  as  heirs  of 
tribal  members,  and  providing  that  the  appraisement  so  made  might 
be  taken  as  a  basis  for  the  adjustment  and  settlement  of  any  excep- 
tion or  claim  made  by  any  such  Indian  or  in  his  behalf  with  respect 
to  any  assessment  made  prior  to  July  1,  1917,  and  appropriating 
$5,000  from  the  funds  of  the  Osage  Tribe  to  defray  the  expenses  of 
such  appraisement. 

Authorizing  the  use  of  $50,000  of  the  Chickasaw  funds  for  con- 
structing and  equipping  dormitories  at  the  Murray  State  School  of 
Agriculture  at  Tishomingo,  Okla.,  for  the  accommodation  of  Chick- 
asaw children. 

Authorizing  per  capita  payments  of  $100  to  the  Choc  taw  and 
Chickasaw  Indians  and  not  to  exceed  $200  to  the  Seminole  Indians, 
Oklahoma. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  use  not  exceeding 
$5,000  from  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  funds  for  building  a  road  to 
and  improving  the  grounds  of  the  Choctaw  Sanatorium,  near  Tali- 
hina,  Okla. 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  use  $10,000  of  the 
Cherokee  tribal  funds  for  building  a  road  to  the  Cherokee  Orphan 
Training  School  from  Tahlequah,  Okla. 

Providing  that  hereafter  no  allotments  of  land  shall  be  made  to 
members  of  the  Creek  Nation. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  61 

Authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  make  allotments 
on  the  Umatilla  Reservation. 

Appropriating  $1,000  bequeathed  to  the  Carlisle  Indian  School 
by  the  will  of  Bradford  R.  Wood,  late  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  to  assist 
needy  students  from  the  Carlisle  School  in  extending  their  educa- 
tion to  become  trained  nurses. 

Appropriating  $300,000  for  school  buildings  on  the  Crow  Creek, 
Pine  Ridge,  Rosebud,  Standing  Rock,  Yankton,  Sisseton,  Lower 
Brule,  and  Cheyenne  River  Reservations.  Following  this  appro- 
priation is  a  provision  that  it  is  hereby  declared  to  be  the  settled 
policy  of  the  Government  to  hereafter  make  no  appropriation  what- 
ever out  of  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  for  education  of  Indian 
children  in  any  sectarian  school. 

Ratifying  and  confirming  as  of  the  dates  of  issuance  certain  patents 
to  lands  in  the  State  of  Washington  heretofore  issued  as  fee-simple 
patents  under  the  homestead  act  of  May  20,  1862  (12  Stat.  L.,  392). 

Appropriating  $100,000  for  the  support  and  civilization  of  the 
Wisconsin  Band  of  Pottawatomie  Indians  residing  in  the  States 
of  Wisconsin  and  Michigan. 

Authorizing  the  withdrawal  of  $387,000  of  the  tribal  funds  of 
the  Menominee  Indians  in  Wisconsin,  to  be  expended  in  aiding  these 
Indians  to  fit  themselves  for  or  to  engage  in  farming  or  such  other 
pursuits  or  avocations  as  will  enable  these  Indians  to  become  self- 
supporting.  This  provision  also  authorized  an  apportionment  of 
these  funds,  together  with  the  $300,000  appropriated  last  year,  on  a 
per  capita  basis  among  all  enrolled  members  of  the  Menominee 
Tribe,  and  a  per  capita  payment  of  $50  to  each  member  of  the  tribe 
was  authorized  to  be  made  immediately  after  the  passage  of  the  act. 

Appropriating  $5,000  to  enable  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to 
make  additional  surveys  and  examinations  for  the  purpose  of  pre- 
paring and  submitting  an  estimate  for  the  beginning  of  construction 
of  a  project  for  the  watering  of  a  portion  of  the  conditionally  ceded 
lands  of  the  Wind  River  Reservation,  Wyo. 

The  article  just  below,  which  appeared  in  the  New  York  Herald, 
emphasizes  in  an  interesting  way  our  disposition  to  be  substantially 
helpful  to  the  small  and  heretofore  neglected  tribes  ol  Indians  through- 
out the  country. 

FORGOTTEN   INDIAN   TRIBES   AT   LAST   REMEMBERED. 

The  Federal  Government  has  long  made  provisions  for  the  welfare  of  the  "big" 
Indians — the  Apache,  the  Cheyenne,  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  and  others — but  only 
very  recently  has  the  paternal  hand  of  Uncle  Sam  been  extended  toward  the  lesser 
groups  of  red  men,  none  the  less  deserving  because  they  have  no  particular  hold  on 
the  popular  imagination. 

Small  tribes  are  now  claiming  a  share  of  the  attention  of  Cato  Sells,  Indian  Com- 
missioner. The  Papago,  of  Arizona,  one  of  the  most  industrious  of  the  Indian  peoples, 


62  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

at  last  have  been  insured  against  further  encroachments.  In  Montana  Rocky  Boy's 
Band,  a  branch  of  the  Chippewa,  which  for  60  years  were  nothing  more  than  wander- 
ing mendicants,  have  received  a  permanent  home,  and  Commissioner  Sells  is  enabling 
them  to  work  out  a  system  for  their  self-support.  Even  more  recently  have  steps 
been  taken  to  establish  the  status  of  the  Florida  Seminoles,  a  task  long  neglected 
because  of  the  peculiar  conditions  existing  in  the  peninsula. 

The  story  of  the  Papago  is  one  of  the  most  inspiring  in  the  annals  of  the  original 
American.  The  tribe,  which  now  numbers  about  6,000,  has  lived  for  hundreds  of 
years  in  what  is  now  southern  Arizona,  one  of  the  most  uninhabitable  regions  of  the 
United  States.  They  have  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  agriculture  of 
the  world  by  originating  and  developing  the'Papago  bean,  also  known  as  the  tepary 
bean,  a  vegetable  of  no  little  food  value  that  is  almost  as  hardy  as  cactus.  This  bean, 
through  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  has  been  sent  to  almost  every  arid  region  in 
the  world. 

So  desperate  was  their  fight  with  nature  that  the  Papago  had  no  time  for  hostilities 
against  the  whites  and  thus  escaped  the  notoriety  that  was  first  a  hindrance  and  later 
a  material  help  to  the  more  warlike  tribes.  Living  on  Government  land,  with  no 
definite  reservation,  they  were  crowded  farther  and  farther  into  the  desert  until 
their  last  stand  was  made  in  a  barren  tract  through  which  there  was  not  a  single  per- 
manent running  stream.  It  was  while  they  were  being  still  further  pressed  that 
Commissioner  Sells  took  up  the  cudgel  in  their  behalf. 

"There  were  6,000  of  these  people  living  in  a  land  where  a  white  man  would  have 
starved  to  death  in  a  season,"  he  said  in  describing  his  first  trip  to  the  Papago  country. 
There  was  not  a  stream  anywhere,  but  they  were  the  original  irrigationists  and  had 
learned  to  run  lateral  ditches,  sometimes  covering  2,000  acres  to  a  single  pond,  where 
they  impounded  the  water  of  infrequent  rains  and  used  it  for  their  stock  and  to 
cultivate  a  few  acres. 

"They  fenced  these  water  holes  with  withes  and  poles,  without  the  use  of  nails 
or  any  metal.  They  dug  wells  in  some  places,  drilling  now  and  then  through  the 
solid  rock  with  nothing  but  stone  implements." 

When  it  was  first  proposed  to  set  aside  a  tract  of  land  for  the  Papago  there  was  great 
opposition  in  the  Southwest,  which  culminated  in  a  hearing  before  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior.  Attorneys  for  the  white  men  were  well  fortified  with  precedents  and 
arguments,  but  they  had  never  slept  in  the  Papago  villages  nor  ridden  over  the 
trackless  miles  in  the  Indian  country  as  Cato  Sells  had  done.  So  facts  won,  and 
President  Wilson  issued  an  Executive  order  providing  a  permanent  home  for  these 
deserving  desert  people. 

In  the  meantime,  through  the  aid  of  the  Indian  Office,  the  Papago  had  dug  deeper 
wells  and  installed  pumps.  Tanks  are  replacing  the  wasteful  water  holes,  and  the 
breed  and  value  of  their  live-stock  herds  are  improving.  The  Government  has  also 
established  schools  which  are  well  attended. 

The  story  of  Rocky  Boy's  Band,  now  numbering  about  350,  may  be  more  sordid 
but  it  promises  to  end  just  as  happily.  More  than  60  years  ago  a  band  of  Chippewa 
left  Wisconsin  to  hunt  buffalo  in  Montana,  then  a  very  wild  country.  Years  passed 
and  the  Chippewa  in  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin  received  land,  but  this  band  continued 
to  wander,  its  hunting  grounds  becoming  more  and  more  restricted,  until  they  became 
little  better  than  nomads,  seeking  odd  tasks  and  depending  largely  on  the  bounty 
of  the  whites. 

In  time  one  of  their  number  named  Rocky  Boy  developed  qualities  of  leadership 
and  the  Indians  became  known  as  Rocky  Boy's  Band.  Congress  usually  has  made 
small  annual  appropriations  for  them,  but  nothing  was  done  to  make  them  self- 
supporting  and  self-respecting  until  the  last  three  years. 

Mr.  Sells  at  last  prevailed  on  Congress  to  give  them  three  townships  in  the  Fort 
Assiniboine  Military  Reserve,  and  there  they  are  now  establishing  themselves. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES.  63 

The  sad  feature  of  their  history  is  that  Rocky  Boy,  after  leading  his  people  through 
the  wilderness  for  many  years,  died  just  before  they  entered  the  promised  land. 

Their  new  home  is  a  wild  country  that  would  appeal  but  little  to  white  settlers, 
but  they  are  making  rapid  progress.  From  reimbursable  funds  Commissioner  Sells 
has  provided  breeding  stock,  and  a  Government  farmer  is  directing  their  efforts  at 
stock  raising  and  agriculture. 

The  problem  of  the  Florida  Seminoles,  of  whom  there  are  less  than  600,  is  now  claim- 
ing the  personal  attention  of  the  commissioner.  He  is  the  first  Government  official 
to  obtain  their  consent  to  place  their  children  in  school,  and  a  small  Government 
institution  with  an  Indian  teacher  will  be  opened  at  Indian  Town,  Fla.,  this  year. 
Many  things  are  now  in  prospect  for  the  heretofore  neglected  Seminoles. 

Commissioner  Sells  has  recently  arranged  to  send  an  inspector  to  investigate  and 
report  conditions  among  the  Alabama  Indians  of  Polk  County,  Tex.,  and  has  expressed 
his  intention  of  aiding  these  long  overlooked  but  worthy  people.  The  forgotten 
fellow  is  for  the  first  time  receiving  the  attention  of  the  Government. 

SEMINOLE  INDIANS  IN  FLORIDA. 

As  a  result  of  the  earnest  and  untiring  efforts  of  friends  of  the 
Indians,  the  Legislature  of  Florida,  on  May  9,  1917,  created  a  reser- 
vation of  approximately  100,000  acres  for  the  Seminoles  of  this 
State.  The  act  provided  that  the  trustees  of  the  International 
Improvement  Fund  should  convey  to  the  board  of  commissioners  of 
State  institutions  the  title  to  this  land  in  trust  for  their  perpetual 
use  and  benefit.  As  late  as  October  8,  according  to  advice  from 
Gov.  Catts,  this  conveyance  had  not  been  made;  however  such  action 
doubtless  will  be  taken  in  due  time. 

This  provision  for  the  native  Americans  of  Florida  probably  marks 
the  passing  of  a  crisis  with  which  these  Indians  have  for  many  years 
been  confronted.  Their  hunting  grounds  are  now  apparently  safe 
from  further  encroachments  and  will  helpfully  se^ve  them  until  they 
can  be  induced  to  take  up  agriculture  as  a  permanent  means  of  self- 
support.  During  the  period  from  1895  to  1900  some  23,063  acres 
of  land  in  southern  Florida  were  purchased  for  the  benefit  of  these 
Indians,  with  money  appropriated  by  Congress,  and  by  Executive 
order  of  June  28,  1911,  3,680  acres  of  public  land,  adjacent  to  the 
Everglades  in  southern  Florida,  were  withdrawn  for  their  benefit, 
making  a  total  of  126,743  acres  now  available  for  the  use  of  the 
Seminoles. 

Hunting,  particularly  catching  alligators,  is  the  present  source  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  Indians'  income.  It  has  lately  developed  that 
the  hide  of  an  alligator  is  approximately  ten  times  more  valuable 
after  being  tanned  than  when  green.  This  fact  has  moved  me  to 
consider  the  establishment  of  a  tannery  at  which  the  Indians  could 
have  hides  of  all  kinds  prepared  for  market.  Investigation  shows 
that  with  the  prevailing  high  prices  such  an  industry  would  require 
the  expenditure  of  approximately  $4,500,  and  in  addition  to  insuring 
proper  prices  for  hides  would  be  an  important  factor  in  bringing 


64  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

them  into  that  relation  with  the  Government  which  will  hasten 
their  earlier  acceptance  of  civilization. 

Schools  are  always  an  important  element  in  the  transition  of  the 
Indians  from  their  native  state,  and  accordingly  provision  is  being 
made  for  educational  facilities.  In  the  past  there  has  been  great 
difficulty  in  inducing  these  Indians  to  attend  any  kind  of  a  school. 
Recently  a  few  of  the  Seminoles  have  entered  the  public  schools  of 
Fort  Lauderdale  and  Indiantown.  One  Seminole  boy  has  attended 
the  Carlisle  School.  .  ^. 

The  Florida  Seminoles  have  been  reluctant  in  accepting  assistance 
from  the  Government;  they  have  retained  a  deep-seated  suspicion  of 
the  white  man's  civilization,  largely  because  of  historical  grievances. 
The  prosecution  of  John  Ashley,  convicted  for  killing  a  Seminole 
Indian,  has  modified  their  attitude,  and  other  recent  administrative 
acts  of  the  Indian  Bureau  have  developed  a  better  feeling  among 
them,  so  that  now  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  they  are  responsive 
to  the  friendly  disposition  of  the  Indian  Office  and  that  much  greater 
progress  may  hereafter  be  expected  than  has  heretofore  been 
accomplished. 

I  am  deeply  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  Seminoles  and  other 
similarly  forgotten  small  tribes  of  Indians  and  shall  do  everything 
in  my  power  to  better  their  condition. 

ROCKY  BOY  INDIANS. 

As  mentioned  in  my  last  annual  report,  a  reserve  has  been  set 
aside  by  Congress  for  the  Rocky  Boy  Indians,  consisting  of  several 
fractional  townships  in  the  southern  part  of  the  old  Assinniboine 
military  reserve,  in  Montana.  In  appreciation  of  this  action,  most 
of  them  have  given  up  their  former  nomadic  habits  and  settled  upon 
the  reservation,  where  they  are  endeavoring  to  achieve  self-support. 
They  have  built  houses  for  themselves  from  the  timber  available  on 
the  reservation,  and  constructed  a  barn,  storehouse,  and  other  build- 
ings, besides  cultivating  several  hundred  acres  of  land  during  the 
past  year. 

As  the  Indians  have  not  sufficient  stock  at  this  time  to  utilize  fully 
the  grazing  land  on  the  reservation,  a  lease  has  been  negotiated  with 
a  white  stockman  for  1,600  head  of  cattle,  at  $5.25  per  head  per 
annum,  which  is  the  highest  price  ever  paid  for  grazing  land  in  that 
part  of  the  country.  This  will  produce  a  substantial  revenue  for 
the  Indians  each  year  until  their  own  stock  has  increased  sufficiently 
to  utilize  the  entire  grazing  reserve,  when  the  lease  will  be  dis- 
continued. 

A  census  of  all  Indians  claiming  to  be  members  of  the  band  has 
been  made,  which  comprises  657  names,  and  compiled  the  complete 
family  history  of  each  group.  After  careful  consideration  of  the 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  65 

records  in  each  case,  206  names  were  eliminated,  so  that  the  ap- 
proved roll  now  contains  451  Indians.  This  includes  a  number  of 
the  Rocky  Boy  Indians  tentatively  allotted  on  the  Blackfeet  Reser- 
vation, most  of  whom  will  no  doubt  eventually  remove  to  their 
own  reservation,  where  they  will  have  much  better  opportunities 
for  self-support. 

The  notable  change  brought  about  among  the  Rocky  Boy  Band 
since  they  have  been  permanently  located  presents  in  contrast  a 
demonstration  and  emphasizes  the  importance  not  only  of  a  fixed 
habitation  for  Indians  but  the  probability  of  self-support  when 
given  opportunity  and  encouragement.  For  years  a  wandering  band, 
they  necessarily  relied  upon  odd  jobs  and  charity  for  subsistence, 
frequently  a  burden  upon  the  white  citizens  of  the  localities  in 
Montana  where  they  roamed.  The  industry  displayed  and  their 
accomplishments  within  the  last  two  years  present  an  object  lesson 
and  a  warning  of  the  conditions  invited  when  Indians  are  relieved 
of  their  lands  and  no  longer  have  means  of  support.  These  Indians 
are  now  doing  things  worth  while,  showing  initiative  and  purpose 
not  heretofore  apparent.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that 
complete  support  can  not  be  accomplished  in  a  brief  period,  but 
they  are  making  progress  and  the  outlook  is  promising. 

Their  long-time  and  faithful  friends  in  Montana  have  reason  to 
feel  that  loyalty  to  the  Rocky  Boys  has  been  justified. 

ALABAMA  INDIANS  OF  TEXAS. 

The  almost  unknown  band  of  Alabama  Indians  located  about  18 
miles  east  of  the  town  of  Livingston  in  southeastern  Texas  and  num- 
bering approximately  206  persons,  which  has  been  ekeing  out  a  bare 
existence  for  the  past  several  decades,  has  been  brought  to  my 
attention,  and  I  sent  a  special  representative  to  visit  this  band  and 
make  an  investigation  of  their  needs. 

These  Indians  are  occupying  1,110  acres  of  land  granted  to  them 
by  the  State  of  Texas  more  than  a  half  century  ago.  The  land, 
originally  timbered  but  now  partly  cleared,  can  scarcely  be  called 
agricultural,  and  the  crude  methods  employed  by  the  Indians  in 
attempting  to  raise  crops  has  deteriorated  it  until  it  is  now  practically 
unproductive. 

It  is  reported  that  these  Indians  need  more  and  better  land,  train- 
ing in  agricultural  pursuits,  instruction  in  domestic  science,  and 
some  attention  to  their  health  condition.  My  plans  for  relieving 
this  situation  and  providing  the  means  whereby  this  neglected  band 
may  be  made  self-supporting  will  be  embodied  in  a  report  to  Congress 
at  its  next  session. 

18404—17 5 


66  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

These  Indians  enjoy  the  good  will  of  the  white  citizens  residing 
thereabouts.  They  have  been  law-abiding,  industrious,  and  are 
worthy  of  more  consideration  and  attention  than  have  heretofore 
been  given  them. 

COOPERATION   OF  MISSIONARIES  AND  OTHERS. 

I  wish  to  express  earnest  appreciation  for  the  cooperation  and 
helpful  assistance  rendered  by  the  missionaries  at  large  and  in  the 
field.  While  ardent  in  the  propagation  of  their  respective  religions 
or  denominations,  they  have,  almost  without  exception,  been  generous 
rather  than  critical  of  myself  or  of  those  representing  religious  ideas 
other  than  their  own.  Their  accomplishments  have  been  construc- 
tive and  effective,  not  only  in  the  advancement  of  the  Indians 
spiritually,  but  industrially,  morally,  and  otherwise. 

I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  unselfish  service  of  philanthropic 
organizations  and  individuals  who  have  shown  their  devotion  to  and 
genuine  interest  in  the  native  American. 

CONCLUSION. 

The  recent  material  advancement  of  the  Indian  has  been  remarkable 
and  has  kept  pace  with  the  vigorous  policy  of  giving  him  help  toward 
self-support  leading  to  final  dissolution  of  the  ties  of  paternalism.  In 
1911  the  Indians  cultivated  388,025  acres,  and  last  year  678,529 
acres;  in  1911  they  raised  crops  valued  at  $1,951,000,  sold  stock  val- 
ued at  $900,000,  realized  from  native  industries,  such  as  basket 
making,  blanket  weaving,  etc.,  $847,556;  and  last  year  they  raised 
crops  valued  at  $5,293,719,  sold  $4,583,083  worth  of  stock,  and 
increased  the  value  of  their  native  wares  to  $1,206,826.  The  Indian 
wage  earners  for  private  individuals  in  1911  were  3,204,  and  last 
year  the  number  thus  engaged  increased  to  6,902,  while  the  value 
of  all  live  stock  owned  by  the  Indians  has  risen  from  $17,971,209, 
in  1911,  to  $28,824,439  last  year. 

The  Indian  is  discovering  himself.  He  is  coming  to  a  realization 
of  his  own  possibilities;  putting  the  past  behind  him  and  looking 
to  the  future;  beginning  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  accom- 
plishments resulting  from  industry;  to  see  the  profit  in  individual 
effort  and  comprehend  the  ultimate  difference  between  a  cultivated 
and  uncultivated  field;  the  fact  that  it  requires  no  more  labor  or 
expense  to  raise  a  well  bred,  profitable  animal  than  it  does  to  pro- 
duce a  Img-horn  steer,  an  inbred  sheep,  or  an  old-time  Indian  pony. 

Vital  statistics  for  the  same  period  are  not  available,  but  the 
strenuous  efforts  being  made  for  a  betterment  of  the  purely  human 
side  of  the  Indians  is  illustrated  in  the  fact  that  42,110  families,  or  at 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  67 

least  200,000  Indians,  have  forsaken  the  teepee  and  live  in  houses 
built  largely  in  a  sanitary  manner. 

Evidences  of  material  and  humanitarian  advancement  are  every- 
where apparent.  Industrially  and  socially  the  Indians  are  making 
unparallelled  strides  toward  self-support  and  civilization.  I  have 
discovered  that  with  sympathetic  cooperation  and  intelligent  en- 
couragement their  response  is  almost  universal. 

I  have  been  exceedingly  gratified  with  the  very  general  approval 
given  our  new  declaration  of  policy  by  the  Indians  and  white  citizens 
of  the  country.  There  is  every  indication  that  it  will  speedily  bring 
about  a  revolution  in  the  administration  of  Indian  affairs,  greatly 
benefit  ting  the  Indians,  with  a  corresponding  reduction  in  appro- 
priations. 

The  Indian  problem  can  not  be  solved  in  a  day,  it  must  be  brought 
about  in  a  deeply  serious,  in  all  respects  courageous,  and  continuously 
sympathetic  manner,  but  the  time  is  approaching  when  governmental 
care  and  supervision  will,  generally  speaking,  become  unnecessary. 
However,  every  true  friend  of  the  Indian  should  guard  against  pre- 
cipitate and  ill-advised  action. 

All  this  has  been  made  possible  by  your  sincere  cooperation  and 
the  loyal  confidence  and  support  of  those  engaged  with  me  in  this 
work. 

Very  respectfully, 

CATO  SELLS, 
Commissioner. 

The  SECRETARY  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 


STATISTICAL  TABLES.1 

TABLE  I.— Comparative  statement  of  work  and  force  in  Office  of  Indian  A/airs  since  1899. 


» 

Year. 

Work. 

Employees. 

Commu- 
nications 
received. 

Increase 
(+)or 
decrease 
(-)  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

Total 
number 
em- 
ployed in 
Indian 
Office. 

Increase 
(  +  )or 
decrease 
(—  )  over 
preced- 
ing year. 

1899... 

59.707 

Per  cent. 

101 
115 
119 
132 
131 
142 
149 
145 
160 
179 
189 
203 
227 
224 
237 
245 
260 
260 
262 

Per  cent. 

1900  

62,601 
67,376 
79,237 
79,115 
86,588 
98,322 
106,533 
117,556 
152,995 
176,765 
194,241 
197,637 
222,187 
275,452 
2»o  744 

+  4.84 
+  7.62 
+17.60 
+     .22 
+  9.03 
+13.  55 
+  8.35 
+  10.34 
+30.  14 
+15.53 
+  9.88 
+  1.74 
+12.37 
+23.  97 
+  1.92 
+  6.23 
—  4.70 
-     .91 

+13.86 
+  3.48 
+10.92 
-     .75 
+  8.39 
+  4.93 
-  2.68 
+  10.31 
+  11.87 
+  5.58 
+  7.40 
+11.82 
1  32 

1901 

1902  

1903  

1904 

1905  

1906            .   .   . 

1907 

1908  

1909 

1910  

1911  .              . 

1912 

1913 

+  5.80 
+  3.37 
+  6.12 

1914 

1915 

298,240 
284,195 
281,618 

1916     . 

1917  

+    .77 

Per  cent. 

Increase  in  worV,  1917,  over  1899 371 . 67 

Increase  in  force,  1917,  over  1899 159.41 

TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1917. 

[Figures  compiled  from  reports  of  Indian  School  superintendents,  supplemented  by  information  from  1910 
census  for  localities  in  which  no  Indian  Office  representative  is  located.] 

Grand  total..  .  335,998 


Five  Civilized  Tribes,  including  freedmen  and  intermarried  whites 101, 506 

By  blood..... ' 75,519 

By  intermarriage 2,  582 

Freed  men 23, 405 

Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribe?. 234, 492 

INDIAN  POPULATION   BY  STATES  AND  TERRITORIES. 


Alabama 

909 

Illinois  

.     .                  188 

Arizona 

44,617 

Indiana  

279 

Arkansas    

460 

Iowa  

360 

California 

15  362 

Kansas 

1,421 

Colorado 

898 

Kentucky                   .  . 

234 

Connecticut 

152 

Louisiana  

780 

Delaware                      

.   ..                5 

Maine  

892 

District  of  Columbia 

68 

Maryland 

55 

Florida 

586 

Massachusetts 

..     .   .             688 

Georgia 

95 

Michigan  

7,  514 

Idaho.. 

4,168 

Minnesota.  . 

11,777 

i  Exclusive  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  Oklahoma  and  scattered  Indians  under  Government  jurisdiction, 
except  where  indicated. 


70 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917 — 

Continued. 

Mississippi 1,253  O  regon 6,612 

Missouri 313  R  hode  Island 284 

Montana 11, 525  S  >  uth  Carolina 331 

Nebraska 3,  955  S  >  uth  Dakota 21,246 

Nevada 7,944  Ts  nnessee 216 

New  Hampshire 34  TB  xas 702 

New  Jersey 168  Ut  ah 2,854 

New  Mexico 20,  853  VB  rmont 26 

New  York 6,272  Vi  rginia 539 

North  Carolina 8, 118  W  ashington 11,181 

North  Dakota 8,  903  W  est  Virginia 36 

Ohio 127  VV  isconsin 10,216 

Oklahoma l  119, 108  W  yoming 1,  674 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Total  population  2    

335,  998 
"909 
44,617 

106,114 

105,672 

^-.'i^_ 

95,869 

115,917 

171,688 

47,  728 

68,  373 

Alabama*  Not  under  agent 

Arizona 

22,115 

22,  502 

20,  601 

24,016 

44,  251 

281 

85 

Camp    Verde    School  —  Mohave- 
Apache 

439 
1,207 

2.609 
173 
95 
1,536 

225 
671 

1,331 
90 
55 
750 

214 
536 

1,278 
83 
40 

786 

183 

474 

1,251 
48 
40 
893 

256 
733 

1,358 
125 
.55 
643 

422 
1,128 

2,501 
173 
95 
1,536 

17 
18 
108 

Colorado  Rr  er  Agency  —  Mohave- 
Chemehue  i                               .  . 

61 

Fort  Apache  School—  White  Moun- 
tain Apache                             .... 

Ha  asupai  School—  Ha-  asupai  
Kaibab  Agency  —  Kaibab  —  Paiute.  . 
Leupp  School  —  Navaho 

Moqui  School                              .     .  . 

— 

= 

4,200 

2,171 

2,029 

2,009 

2,191 

4,200 

Moqui  (Hopi)    

2,260 
1,940 

~12,  080 
6,253 

1,186 
985 

1,074 
955 

6,250 

1,059 
950 

1,201 
990 

2,260 
1,940 

11,991 

Navaho 

Navajo  School  —  Navaho  8 

1 
2 

5,830 

7,068 

5,012 

88 
8~ 

Pima  School  4  

3,164 

3,089 

2,830 

3,423 

6,243 

Maricopa  (Gila  River)  

269 
3,984 
2,000 

1,232 

130 
2,034 
1,000 

64~5~ 

139 
1,  950 
1,000 

127 
1,703 
1,000 

567 

142 

2,281 
1,000 

665~ 

269 
3,974 
2,000 

Pima  (Gila  Ri  er) 

8 

2 

Gila  Bend  Reservation,  Papago.. 
Salt  River  School 

587 

1,230 

2 

Maricopa    .  . 

82 
237 
913 

45 
127 
473 

37 
110 

440 

31 
95 
441 

51 
142 
472 

82 
235 
913 

Moha  .  e  —  Apache  

2 

Pima  

San  Carlos  School  

20 

2,659 

1,  384       1,  275 

1,195 

1,464 

2,630 

9 

Apache 

2,585 
74 

1,347 
37 

1,238 
37 

1,162 
33 

1,423 
41 

2,  556 
74 

20 

9 

Mohave  

San  Xa-  ier  School—  Papago  

5,112 
457 

2,  556 
233 

2,556 
224 

1,000 
182 

4,112 
275 

5,089 
448 

11 

9 

12 

Truxton  Canon  School—  Walapai.  .  . 
Western  Navajo  School  

6,565 

3,010 

3,555 

2,861 

3,704 

6,565 

Moqui  (Hopi) 

288 
6,087 
190 

M60 

148 
2,782 
80 

140 
3,305 
110 

161 
2,620 
80 

127 
3,467 
110 

288 
6,087 
190 

Na  aho 

Paiute  

Arkansas:  Not  under  asent  .  . 

1  Includes  23,405  freedmen  and  2,582  intermarried  whites. 

2  Correct  as  reported  by  superintendents. 

8  Includes  Indians  in  New  Mexico  under  this  school. 
*  1916  report. 
6  1910  census. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


71 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula 
tion. 

Male. 

Female 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

California 

15,362 

1,600 
23T 

7,786 

7,576 

5,783 

9,579 

9,884 

3,931 

187 
19~ 

1,547 

108 

"       7 

Bishop  School—  Paiute,  Shoshoni, 
and  Moache 

773 

827 

562 
83 

1,038 
150" 

1,305 
207~ 

Cam  po  School    ....  . 

119 

114 

Mission  Indians  at  Campo 

140 
8 
7 
6 
72 

299~ 

79 
4 
3 
2 
31 

61 
4 
4 
4 
41 

149~ 

49 

91 

8 
6 
4 
41 

202~ 
492~ 

128 
8 
6 
5 
60 

6 

6 

Cuyapaipe 

Laguna 

1 
2 
31 

97~ 
264~ 

1 
1 
11 

La  Posta  

Manzanita 

1 

Digger  Agency  —  Digger 

150 

47 
726" 

231 

—  .       —  —  .-. 

21 

21 

Fort  Bidwell  School  

756 

364 

392 

9 

Die?er 

14 
209 
533 

83T 
629 

7 
124 
233 

7 
85 
300 

392 
301 
669~ 

2 
89 
173 

335~ 
259 
54T 

12 
120 
360 

r  —  '       -.      "1" 

498 
370 

758~ 

3 
198 
525 

799 
317 

•~  —  •_.• 

736 

2 
11 

8 

sT 

154 
445 

9 

Paiute  

Pit  River 

Fort  Yuma  School  —  Yuma 

3 

158 

441 
328 

C-reen  ille  School—  Digger,  Washo, 
Concow,  and  Uki  

Hoopa  Valley  School  .  . 

1,299 

630 

118 

Hupa 

464 
575 
260 

629~ 

230 
289 
111 

ssT 

234 
286 
149 

278 

198 
237 
106 

266 
338 
154 

403~ 

19» 
297 
141 

555 

144 
209 
92 

'"       -—^,_JJ^ 

33 

22 
69 
27 

!__."-    '    " 

41 

Klamath  

Lower  Klamath 

Malki  School    

226 

Mission  Indians  at  Augustine  
Caba/.on  

19 
29 
125 
14 

249 
50 
56 
87 

11 

17 
76 
8 
137 
27 
28 
47 

52T 

8 
12 
49 
6 
112 
23 
28 
40 

•—  '              -•".. 

502 

5 
8 
37 
5 
105 
14 
17 
35 

14 
21 
88 
9 
144 
36 
39 
52 

19 
29 
123 
14 
177 
50 
56 
87 

1 

1 

Mission  Creek 

Maronjro  

32 

40 

Palm  Springs 

San  Manuel  

Torres  

Pala  School  

1,023 

376 

647 

896 

125 

2 

Mission  Indians  at  Pala 

203 
140 
235 
57 
196 
143 
4 
45 

5,000 
1,700 
92T 

98 
75 
126 
25 
93 
78 
1 
25 

105 
65 
109 
32 
103 
65 
3 
20 

12,500 
844 

400" 

83 
59 
85 
23 
51 
51 
2 
22 

11,800 
713 
328 

120 
81 
150 
34 
145 
92 
2 
23 

13,200 
987 
59JF 

155 
123 
234 
56 
196 
91 
1 
40 

"—   —-^-^ 

12,500 
615 

46 
17 
1 

1 

2 

Capitan  Grande  

La  Jolla 

Pauma  

Pechanga         .  .  . 

Rincon 

52 
3 
5 

1  1,  875 
645 

isT 

San  Pasqual  

Syquan  

Roseburg(Oreg.)School  —  Scattered 
Wichumni,   Kawia,   Pet   River, 
and  others  in  northern  California. 
Round    Valley    School—  Concow, 
Ukie,  and  others  

12,500 
856 

1625 
440 
15 

Soboba  School 

521 

753 

Mission  Indians  at  Soboba 

132 
131 
35 
117 
200 
62 
70 
174 



440 

73 
73 
18 
70 
115 
38 
38 
96 

232~ 

59 
58 
17 
47 
85 
24 
32 
78 

208~ 

34 
43 
11 

48 
78 
8 
29 

77 

199" 

98 
88 
24 
69 
122 
54 
41 
97 

241 

117 
124 
35 
117 
97 
62 
70 
131 

428 

15 

7 

Cahuilla 

Inaja  

Los  Coyotes 

Mesa  Grande 

89 

14 

Santa  Rosa  

Santa  Ynez 

Volcan 

42 
12^ 

1 

Tule  River  School             .    ... 

Tule  River  

151 
152 
137 

91 
71 
70 

60 
81 

67   ; 

j-      199 

241 

428 

12 

Auherry 

Burroueh... 

Estimated. 


72 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Colorado  

898 

466 

432 

453 

445 

881 

9 

8 

Southern  Ute  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute            

372 
526 

181 
285 

^  — 

-191 
241 

166 
287 

206 
239 

355 
526 

9 

8 

Ute  Mountain  School—  Capote  and 
Moache  Ute  

1  152 

15 

168 
586 
195 

4,168 
826 

District    of    Columbia:  Not    under 

Florida'  Seminole            

337 

249 

255 

331 

570 

3 

13 

2,068 
4lT 

2,100 
415~ 

1,599 
327~ 

2,569 
499~ 

3,300 
633~ 

520 

m" 

348 

82 

Coeur  d'Alene  School        

Coeur  d'Alene                 

609 
89 
128 

= 
1,769 

304 
49 
58 

892 

305 
40 
70 

877~ 

250 
31 
46 

65T 

359 
58 
82 

430 
89 
114 

97 

82 

Kootenai  

14 

210 

Fort  Hall  School 

1,118 

1,505 

54 

354 
1,365 
50 

193 
677 
22 

765~ 

161 

688 
28 

[•      629 
22 

1,090 

28 

952 

1,455 
50 

1,162 

210 

54 

Shoshoni           

SkullValley  

Fort  Lapwai  School—  Nez  Perce..  .  . 

1,573 
U88 
1279 
360 
1,421 

808 

621 

199" 

212 

Indiana:   Not  under   agent—  Miami 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  School  —  Sac  and 

189 
750 
332~ 

171 
671 
308~ 

158 
768 
336~ 

202 
653 

360 
733 
211 

Kansas                                  

338 

204 

350 
225 

Kickapoo  School  

640 

304 

Iowa 

317 
224 
99 

781 

1234 
1780 
1892 
155 
1688 

7,514 

ieo 

125 

47 

157 
99 
52 

162 
126 
48 

432 

155 
98 
51 

349 

13 

187 
11 

79 
37 
88 

225 

Sac  and  Fox  

Potawatomi  Agency—  Prairie  Band 
of  Potawatomi 

418 

363 

522 

134 

125 

Kentucky  Not  under  agent 

Louisiana*  Not  under  agent 

Maryland'  Not  under  agent 

Massachusetts'  Not  under  agent 

Michigan  

690 

657 

618 

729 

209 

521 

617 

Bay  Mills  Agency  —  Chippewa  *  
Mackinac  Agency—  L'Anse,  Vieux 
Desert,  and  Outonagon  Bands  of 
Chippewa 

250 
1,097 

6,167 
11,777 

125 

565 

125 
532 

102 
516 

148 

581 

9 
200 

121 

400 

120 
497 

Not  under  agent—  Scattered  Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa,  Potawatomi,  and 
others 

Minrmsotfl  .  , 

5,886 

5,891 

5,755 
530~ 

6,022 
526~ 

3,198 

4,285 

2,802 
420 

Fond  du  Lac  School—  Chippewa.... 
Grand  Portage  School—  Chippewa.. 
Leech  Lake  School  

1,056 

549 

507 

85 

551 

321 

138 

183 

137 

742 
211 
347 

184 

184 

1,028 
260 
458 

310 

8 

992~ 
307 
456 

229 

202 

111 

70 
8 
17 

45 

. 

1,770 
471 
.     805 

494 

897 
223 
407 

267 

873 
248 
398 

227 

708 
156 
332 

220 

Cass  and  Winibigoshish 

Leech  Lake  

White  Oak  Point  (Miss.)  Chip- 
pewa 

1 1910  census. 


« 1915  report. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


73 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  SO,  1917 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Nett  Lake  School—  Chippewa  (Bois 
Fort)  

607 

160 
1,492 

6,371 
2,459 
1,188 
830 
433 
286 
423 
277 
290 
117 
62 

21,253 
2313 

279 

75 
745 

328 

85 
747 

3,168 
1,209 
613 
409 
220 
152 
191 
147 
152 
48 
27 

266 

76 
747 
3,257 

3,257 

341 

84 
745 
3,114 

3,114 

388 

60 
P) 

162 

86 
(') 

57 

14 

(') 
2,130 

2,130 

Pipe^tone  (Birch  Coolev)  Mdewa- 
kanton  and   Wapaguita,   Sioux 
and  Siiseton,  and  Wahpeton  
Bed  Lake  School—  Red  Lake  and 
Pemtina  Chippewa  

White  Earth  School 

3,203 
1,250 
575 
421 
219 
134 
232 
130 
138 
69 
35 

1,665 
1,665 

2,576 
2,576 

White  Earth  (Miss.)  Chippewa... 
Mille  Lac  (removal) 

Otter  Tail  Pillager 

Gull  Lake  (Miss.)  

Mille  Lac  (nonretnoval) 

Pembina  —  Pillager 

Leech  Lake  Pillager         

White  Oak  Point  (removal) 

Fond  du  Lac  (removal)  

Cassand  WinitigoshLh    

Mississippi:  Not  under  agent  

Missouri:  Not  under  agent  

Montana  

11,525 

2,752 
1,710 

2,410 

1,206 
639 
567 

1,986 
1,461 
3,955 

5,835 

1,415 

856 

1,222 

628 
331 

297 

— 

1,008 
706 
1,998 

5,690~ 

1,337 

854 

1,188 

5,342 

1,513 
733 

1,053 

6,183 

1,239 
977 

1,357 

6,333 

1,223 
1,246 

640 

8fiT 
469 
392 

1,074 
1,349 
2,534 

3,007 

1,155 

258 

746 

2,125 

374 

206 

1,024 

97 
70 
27 

383 
41 
743 

Blackfeet  School—  Blackfeet  

Crow  Agency  —  Crow               .     ... 

Flathead     School  —  Confederated 
Flathead  

Fort  Belknap  School 

578           507 
308           245 
270          262 

____________ 

978  j        952 
755          584 
1,957  '    1,979 

699 
394 
305 

===== 

1,034 

877 
1,976 

248 
100 
148 

529 
71 

678 

Assiniboin     .        

Grosventro 

Fort    Peck    School—  Fort    Peck 

Sioux 

Tongue    River    School—  Northern 
Cheyenne 

Nebraska  

Omaha  School  —  Omaha  

1,318 
1,532 

684 
742 

634 

790 

682 
815 

636 
717 

1,010 
611 

124 
451 

184 
470 

Santee  School 

Ponca  3  

338 
1,194 

153 
589 

185 
605 

214 
601 

482~ 
2,719 
127~ 

124 
593 

94 
517 

913~ 
7,225 
408 

138 
313 

103~ 
519 

—  IT 

106 
364 

89 
200 

Santee 

Winnebago  School—  Winnebago  
Nevada  

1,105 

7,944 
= 
429 

572 

3,943 

— 

214 

533 
4,001 
215~ 

623 
5,225 

302~ 

Fallon  School  

Paiute  at  Fallon 

314 
115 

350~ 
120 
614 

161 

_»= 

174 
57 
279 

351 

153 
62 

176" 
63 
335 

355* 

87 
40 

14T 
43 
211 

206~ 

227 
75 

209~ 
77 
403 

500 

305 
103 

336~ 
116 
610 

| 

14 
4 
4 

Lovelocks  

Fort  McDermitt  School—  Paiute  
Moapa  River  School  —  Paiute  

=— 

Nevada  School  —  Paiute     . 

Walker  River  School 

706 

630 

76 

Paiute  

548 
158 

274 

77 

274 
81 

287~ 

}   *» 

291 

500 
337 

630 
625" 

76 

_...  

Paiute  (Mason  Valley)  

Western  Shoshone  School 

_._:-  J*^T  T""^ 

625 

338 

Hopi          .              

1 
285 
339 

1 
124 
162 

1 

144 
189 

1 

285 
339 

Paiute 

161 
177 

141 
150 

Shoshoni.  .  . 

1  Unknown. 


•  1910  census. 


« 1916  report. 


74 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917 — 

Continued . 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Nevada—  Continued. 

5,100 

2,530 

2,570 

1,700 

3,400 

4,500 

400 

200 

Digger  (scattered  California  tribes) 
Paiute      

2,100 
1,400 
1,000 
600 

134 
U68 

20,&53 

1,030 
700 
500 
300 

1,070 
700 
500 
300 

1,700 

3,400 

4,500 

400 

200 

Shoshoni 

Washo  

New  Hampshire:  Not  under  agent... 
New  Jersey  Not  under  agent    

New  Mexico 

10,445 

10,408 

10,243 

10,610 

20,394 

376 

83 

Jicarilla  School    Jicarilla  Apache 

645 

2627 
2.724 

343 

304 
1,200 

302 

323 
1,524 

4,273 

277 

275 
1,362 

368 

352 
1.362 

645 
602 

Mescalero  School—  M  e  s  c  a  1  e  r  o 
A  pache  

17 

8 

Pueblo  Bonito  School—  Navaho  s... 
Pueblo  day  schools  

359" 

75 

8,700 

4,427 

4,055 

4,645 

8.266 

Navaho 

371 
8,329 

176 
4,251 

195 
4,078 

3,164 
822 

2.862 

190 
3.865 

181 
4,464 

371 

7.895 

Pueblo        ....            . 

359 

75 

San  Juan  School    Navaho 

6,354 
1,803 

6.272 

3,190 
981 

3.050 

<3,500 
774 

2,418 

«  2,  854 
1,029 

3,494 

6,354 
1,803 

Zuni  School  —  Pueblo 

New  York 

5,912 

New  York  Agency      ... 

5,912 

3,050 

2,862 

2,418 

3,494 

5,912 

Cayuga        

174 
256 
549 
953 
1,328 
505 

1,538 
359 
30 
20 
200 
6  360 

80 
126 
269 
497 
669 
281 

811 
192 
15 
10 
100 

94 
130 
280 
456 
659 
224 

727 
167 
15 
10 
100 

59 
90 
174 
415 
473 
202 

768 
112 
15 
10 
100 

115 
166 
375 
538 
855 
303 

770 
247 
15 
10 
100 

174 
256 
549 
953 
1,328 
505 

1,538 
359 
30 
20 
200 

Oneida 

Onondaga    

Seneca  (Alleganv) 

Seneca  (Cattaraugus) 

Seneca  (Tonawanda) 

St.  Regis  (not  a  part  of  Six  Na- 
tions)      

Tusoarora 

Montauk  

Poos  pat  uck 

Shinnecock        

Not  under  agent  „  

North  Carolina  .... 

8,118 

1,221 

1,061 

1,191 

1,091 

1,000 

900 

382 

Cherokee  School—  Eastern  Cherokee 
Not  under  agent 

2,  282 
5,836 

8.903 

1,221 

1,061 

1,191 

1,091 

1,000 

900 

382 

North  Dakota       .  . 

4,442 

4.461 
592~ 

4,310 
559~ 

4.593 
<523~ 

4.647 

847~ 

4,195 

61 
29 

Fort  Berthold  School  8 

1.  182 

590 

306 

Arikara  

417 
497 
268 

= 

1.002 
3,  455 

3,264 
i  127 
119,  108 

205 
2-48 
137 

212 
249 
131 

202 
231 
126 

215 
266 
142 

260 
368 
219 

144 
114 
48 

13 
15 

1 

n» 

Grosventre  . 

Mandan 

FortTotten  School—  Pisseton.  Wah- 
peton,  and  Cuthead  Pioux  (known 
as  Devils  Lake  Sioux) 

518 
1,  705 

1,629 

484 
1,750 

1,635 

476 
1,424 

1,851 

526 
2,031 

1,413 

1.002 
2,640 

158 

(6> 
783 

3,106 

Standing  Rock  School—  Sioux    

Turtle    Mountain    School—  Turtle 
Mountain  Chippewa  

Ohio:  Not  under  agent 

Oklahoma         i  

8,812 

8,790 

8.608 

8,994 

34,728 

15.  422 

45.553 
16 

785 

422 

363 

331 

454 

737 

32 

Arapaho      .  . 

238 
547 

132 
290 

106 

257 

108 
223 

130 
324 

228 
509 

10 
22 

Cheyenne 

16 

'1919  census. 

*  Includes  183  Apaches:  1913  Fort  Sill  removal. 
8 1916  report. 

*  Estimated. 


n;'i<3,  minus  250  Montauk,  Poospatauk, 
and  Shinneeock. 
s  Included  in  full  blood. 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


75 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917- 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes 

Total 

"SSI* 

Male. 

Female 

Minors 

Adults 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  School  

Arapaho  

1,252 

630 

622 

537 

715 

913 

280 

59 

517 
735 

259 
371 

258 
364 

}      537 
2,243 

715 
2,311 

913 
2.275 

280 

59 

Cheyenne 

Kiowa  School  

4,554 

2,233 

2,321 

1,937 

342 

Apache 

183 
1,596 
1,56} 
1,124 

87 

87 
783 
753 
560 
£0 

96 
813 
811 
564 
37 

2,243 

2,311 

2,275 

1,937 

342 

Comanche       ... 

Kiowa 

Wichita  and  Caddo           .  . 

Apache  Prisoners  

Osas^e  School  —  Osage 

2,180 
518 
714 

1,121 
263 
345 

530 

1,059 
255 
369 

•^^y 

515 

1,009 
294 
353 

1    ' 

648 

1,171 
224 
361 

— 
397 

795 
443 
556 

389 

1,385 
56 
124 

Otoe  School—  Oto  and  Missouri.... 
Pawnee  School  —  Pawnee  

19 
34 

===== 
227 

Ponca  School           

1,045 

429 

Kaw  (Kansas) 

357 
639 
49 

187 
319 
24 

170 
320 
25 

275 
350 
23 

82 
289 
26 

3lT 

98 
250 
41 

32 
389 
8 

227 

Ponca       

Tonka  wa 

Sac  and  Fox  School 

682 

333 

349 

369 

394 

146 

142 

Iowa  

84 
598 

35 

298 

49 
300 

33 
336 

51 
262 

45 
349 

39 
107 

Sac  and  Fox  

142 

Seger  School 

758 

368 

390 

293 

465 

693 

23 

42 

Arapaho      

150 
608 

2,061 

66 
302 

1,017 

84 
306 

68 
225 

1,086 

82 
383 

132 
561 

8 
15 

477 

10 
32 

1,468 

Cheyenne 

Seneca  School 

1,044 

975 

116 

Eastern  Shawnee 

154 
274 
337 
435 
468 
393 

67 
146 
165 
213 
245 
181 

87 
128 
172 
222 
223 
212 

77 
173 
192 
236 
178 
230 

77 
101 
145 
199 
290 
163 

1,608 
271 
1,211 
126 

3 
3 
79 
13 

is 

60 
10 
27 

279 
27 
74 

91 
261 
231 
143 
441 
301 

Ottawa  

Quanaw 

Seneca 

Wvandot 

Peoria—  Miami  (citizen)  1  

Shawnee  School 

3,053 
545 
2,2% 
212 

~01,506 

1,550 

285 
1,156 
109 

...      _.  .     .... 

1,503 
200 
1,140 
103 

.   - 

1,445 

274 
1,085 
86 

643 
439 

140 

85 
47 
8 

10,393 

2,270 
21 
2,249 

AbsonteeShawne?  

Citizen  Potawatomi 

Mexican  Kickapoo  

204 
25,  774 

Five  Civilized  Tribes 

40,934 

Cherokee  Nation    

41,824 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

By  blood 

36,  432 
286 
187 
4,919 

8,703 

4,778 

23,424 

BV  intermarriage  

Delawares 

Freedmen  

Chickasaw  Nation  

10,966 

1,515 

966 

3,823 

By  blood  

5,659 
645 
4,662 

1,515 

966 

3,823 

By  intermarriage  
Freedmen  

'Choctaw  Nation  

26,828 

8,444 

2,473 

9,882 

By  blood 

17,488 
1,651 
1,660 
6,029 

18,761 

8,444 

2,473 

9,882 

Bv  intermarriage  

Mississippi  Choctaw  . 

Freedmen  

Creek  Nation  

...    --;_-TT-7 

6,858 

1,698 

3,396 

By  blood  

11,952 
6,809 

6,858 

1,698 

3,396 

Freedmen  

i 1916  report. 


76 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  30,  1917 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 
popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 

than 
half. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Five  Civilized  Tribes—  Continued. 
Seminole  Nation  

3,127 

1,254 

478 

409 

By  blood  

2,141 

1,254 

478 

409 

Freedmen                    .  . 

986 

6,612 

—        — 

1,160 
3,000 

437 
1,197 
818 
2  284 

2331 
21,246 

2,752 

964 
291 

504 
7,247 
5,636 

1,954 
1,898 

2216 
702 

Oregon    .                     

3,192 

545 
1,500 

226 
551 
370 

3,420 

2,635 

3,977 

3,909 

818 
1,500 

214 
591 

786 

1,681 

265 
1,125 

207 
52 
32 

1,022 

Klamath  School—  Klamath  Modoc, 
Pfliute  and  Pit  River.  . 

615 
1,500 

211 

646 

448 

518 
1,080 

184 
534 
319 

642 
1,920 

253 
663 
499 

77 
375 

16 
554 

Roseburg  School—  Scattered  Indi- 
ans on  public  domain  1  

Siletz  School—  Clackamas,  Rosue 
River,  Santiam,  Siletz,  Grande 
Ronde,  Umpqua,  etc  ... 

Umatilla    School—  Cav  use,    Uma- 
tilla,  and  Walla  Walla  

Warm     Springs     School—  Wasco, 
Tenino  and  Paiute 

Rhode  Island*  Not  under  agent 

South  Carolina:  Not  under  agent— 
Catawbas,  Cherokee,  Oneida,  and 
others.  .      .  . 

South  Dakota  

10,588 

10,658 

9,743 

1,235 

407 
107 

246 
3,310 
2,533 

968 
937 

11,503 

1,517 

557 
184 

258 
3,937 
3,103 

986 
961 

12,377 

•      --^—  — 

1,616 

708 
225 

231 

4,667 
3,186 

838 
906 

5,475 
======= 

574 

210 

66 

230 

1,326 
1,640 

797 
632 

3,394 

562 
46 

Cheyenne    River    School—  Black- 
feet,  Minicotrou,  Sans  Arc,  and 
Two  Kettle  Sioux  

1,384 

452 
154 

252 
3,640 
2,821 

997 
888- 

1,368 

512 

137 

252 
3,607 
2,815 

957 
1,010 

Crow  Creek  School—  Lower  Yank- 
tonia  Sioux 

Flandreu  Sfhool    Flandreau  Sioux 

Lower  Brule  School—  Lower  Brule 
Sioux 

43 
1,254 
810 

319 
360 

Pine  Ridse  School—  Oglala  Sioux.  .  . 
Rosebud  School  —  Rosebud  Sioux.. 
Sisseton  School—  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux  

Yankton  School—  Yankton  Sioux.  . 
Tennessee:  Not  under  agent  

Alabama. 

8  192 
*510 

2,854 

<153 
ISO 

1,155 

Koosati,    Seminole,    Isleta,    and 
others..  .  . 

Utah  

728 

80 
62 

586 

710 

640 

82~ 
56 

502 

798 
— 
71 
74 

653 

1,338 

153 

130 

79 

21 

'-"  —  ? 

Goshute  —  Paiute  and  others  

73 

68 

569~ 

Shivwits  School—  Paiute  

Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency.  .  . 

1,055 

79 

21 

UintaUte  

437 
438 
280 

2  1,  416 

206 
220 
160 

231 

218 
120 

— 

I      502 

653 

1,055 

79 

21 

Uncompahgre  Ute  

White  River  Ute 

Not    under    agent—  Paiute    and 
others  

Vermont:  Not  under  agent  

"26 
*539 

11,181 

Virginia:  Not  under  agent  

Washington.  . 

5,489 

5,599 
1,278 

4,831 

1,149 

===== 

6,257 

7,135 
1,467 

2..  551 

1,  402 
607 

Colville  School—  Confederated  Col- 
ville  

2,529 

1,251 

1,380 

455 

i  Estimated. 
2 1910  census. 


3  Special  agent's  report  1910. 

4  Does  not  include  305  Indians  of  scattered  bands. 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 


77 


TABLE  2. — Indian  population  of  the  United  States,  exclusive  of  Alaska,  June  80,  1917 — 

Continued. 


States,  superintendencies,  and  tribes. 

Total 

popula- 
tion. 

Male. 

Female. 

Minors. 

Adults. 

Full 
blood. 

Mixed  blood. 

One- 
half  or 
more. 

Less 
than 
half. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Cushman  School  

2,132 

1,085 

1,047 

978 

1,154 

1,330 

597 

205 

Chehalis  

111 
172 
83 
21? 
74 

1.480 

64 
75 
46 
104 
41 

755~ 

47 
97 
37 
108 

= 

50 
71 
25 

97 
35 

• 
700 

61 
101 
58 
115 
39 

68 
137 
53 
134 
38 

900~ 

43 
34 
20 
70 
30 

IT^T-A-"  . 

.     400 

Muckleshoot     

1 
10 
8 
6 

— 
180 

Nisqualli 

Skokomish  (Clallam) 

Squaxon  Island  

Unattached 

780 

Cowlitz 

490 
534 
t152 
304 

• 
697 

240 
288 
75 
152 

359~ 

250 
246 
77 
152 

338~ 

*700 
306~ 

»780 

•    •-" 

391 

»900 

MOO 

50~ 

a  180 

S3 

Clallain 

Puyallup  

Various  other  Indians 

Neah  Bay  School  

647 

Hoh    . 

52 
413 
13 
219 

28 
210 
5 
116 

24 

203 

103 

16 
193 

36 
220 
13 
122 

52 
365 
13 
217 

Makah  

48 

Ozette  

Quileute  

97 

2 

Spokane  School    Spokan 

603 

268 

335 

===== 
397 

246 

— 
327 

357 

327 

70 

206 

Taholah  School 

768 

371 

441 

459 

259 

50 

Queets  River  Reservation  

48 

20 

28 

11 

17 

=4 

13 

33 

—  '— 

13 
20 

46 

2 

Quileute  

15 
33 

4 
16 

13 
33 

2 

Quinaielt  

Quinaielt  Reservation—  Quinaielt 
Tulalip  School           

720 

351 

369 
679~ 

312 

====== 
639 

408 

===== 
720 

413 

905~ 

257 

420 

50 
34 

1,359 

680 

Lumrni  

504 
197 
222 

436 

251 
99 
111 

219 

It 

111 
217 

639 

720 

905 

420 
700 

34 
300 

Susquamish                      .... 

Swinomish 

Tulalip  (remnants  of  many  tribes 
and  bands)  

Yakima  School—  Confederated  Ya- 
kima 

3,000 
*93 

«36 
10,216 

1,372 
1,277 

2,351 

1,475 

1,525 

1,186 

1,814 

2,000 

Not  under  agent  

West  Virginia:  Not  under  agent  
Wisconsin 

5,223 

679 

622 

1,256 

... 
4,993 

693 
655 

1,095 

4,442 

545 

499 

1,087 

5,774 

5,423 

1,358 
223 

420~ 

2,696 

9 

881 

884~ 

1,491 

5 

173 

441 

Grand  Rapids  Agency—  Potawat- 
omi  and  VVinnebago 

827 

778 

1,264 

Hay  ward  School  —  Cnippewa  

Keshena  School 

Menominee 

1,745 
606 

=£= 

749 
335 

1,046 
2,575 
511 

1,674 
1,674 

941 
315 

351 

188 

527 

1,328 
272 

861 

804 
291 

398 
147 

519 
1,247 
239 

813 

813 
274 

932 
332 

.— 

469 

188 

607 
1,367 
274 

896 
896~ 

420 
(5) 

460 
335 

50 
2,575 
2 

1,199 

884 
(5) 

168 

441 

(5) 

121 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee4  

Lac  du  Flambeau  School—  Chip- 
pewa  

280 
147 

439 
1,208 
237 

778 

778~ 

Laona  Agency  —  Potawatomi  

La   Pointe  School—  Cnippewa  at 
Bad  River        

360 

636 

Oneida  School  —  Oneida  

Red  (Jliff  School  —  Cnippewa 

394 
261 

115 
214 
214 

10 

204 

Wyoming 

861 

813 

1,199 

261 

A  rap  ah  o 

840 
834 

432 
429 

408 
405 

415 
363 

425 
471 

714 

485 

116 
145 

Shoshoni  

1  Overestimated  previous  yerrs.       *  Estimated.       s  1910  census.       <  Now  citizens.      8  Unknown. 


78 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision — Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 

patents,  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Un- 
allotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restrictec 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patent 
for— 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Total  1917    .'  

309,409 
312,654 
309,911 
307,891 
30,,  433 
300,  930 
2J6,320 
24/,522 
230,437 

179,374 
184,  865 
182,  289 
180,  605 
183,  742 
177,626 
164,215 
64,  853 
15,  166 

67,  972 
72,  508 
68,  180 
69,  944 
72,411 
103,417 
88,  182 

3,495 
3,492 
2,623 
1,643 
1,420 
1,926 

107,  907 
108.865 
110,686 
109,  018 
109,911 
70,  904 
1  76,  033 

130,035 
126,  547 
126,379 
124,  797 
121.233 
120,876 
120,  780 

1915       

1914                 

1913 

1912          

1901  2      

18902  

Arizona                      .................... 

44,617 

5,233          5,233 

39,384 

Camp  Verde        

439 
1,207 
2  609 

439 

Colorado  River 

1,207 

1,207 

2,609 
173 
95 
1,536 
4,200 
12,  080 
3,010 
545 
2,659 
5,016 
457 
6,  565 

7,413 

Ha  >  astipai 

95 
1,536 

Kaibab           

Leupp  

4,200 

Navajo                       

12  C80 

Pirra3 

6,253 
1,232 
2  659 

3,243 
687 

3,243 
687 

Salt  Ri  er 

San  Xa  ir                      ..    

5,  112 
457 
6  565 

«96 

96 

California 

10,362 

2,949 

2,934 

15 

Bishop 

1,600 
233 
299 
756 
833 
629 
1,299 
629 
1,023 
1,700 

236 

234 

2 

1,364 
233 
299 
558 
105 
419 
464 
629 
837 
1,204 
921 
380 

687 

Campo  

Digger 

Fort  Bidwell 

1£8 
728 
210 
835 

198 
728 
210 
824 

Fort  Yuira          .... 

Gr^en  ille 

Hoopa  Valley  

11 

Malki 

Pala         

186 
496 

186 
494 

Round  Valley  

2 

Soboba       

921 
440 

898 

Tule  River         ... 

60 
211 

60 
211 

Colorado    ....................  . 

Southern  Ute 

372 
526 

586 
4,168 

211 

211 

161 
526 

586 
1,231 

Ute  Mountain    

Idaho  

2,937 

2,701 

37 

199 

Co?urd'Alene  ...... 

826 
1,769 

505 
1,591 
841 

434 
1,562 
705 

71 
29 
99 

321 
178 
732 

360 
667 

Fort  Hall  

Fort  Lapwai  ........... 

1,573 
360 
1,421 

37 

Kansas        ...      ..... 

754 

591 

87 

76 

Kickapoo  

640 
781 

1,097 
11,777 

288 
466 

73 

5,053 

238 
353 

73 

4,284 

12 
75 

38 
38 

352 
315 

1,024 
6,724 

Michigan;  Mackinac  

549 

220 

Fond  du  Lac 

1,056 
321 
1,770 

293 
164 
977 

274 
146 
938 

12 

7 
18 
35 

763 
157 
793 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake... 

4 

1  Includes  fee  patents  for  part  of  their  allotment. 

2  Only  items  reported. 


3 191 6  report. 

4  Erroneously  reported  last  year. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


79 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision —  Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Un- 
allotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Minnesota—  Continued. 
Nett  Lake       

607 
160 
1,492 

290 
42 

290 
42 

317 
118 
1,492 
3,084 

4,437 

Pip~stone  (Birch  Cooley) 

Red  Lake  

White  Karth 

6,371 
11,525 

3,287 
7,088 

2,594 
6,449 

533 
164 

160 
475 

Montana  

Blackfeet 

2,752 
1,710 

2,321 
1,234 
1,8.4 

2,319 
1,166 
1,487 

I 

28 

£ 

359 

431 
476 
536 
1,  2C6 
327 
1,461 

2,382 

Cro  'ft  

Flathrad  

2,410 
1  206 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck  

1,986 
1  461 

1,659 

1,477 

126 

56 

Tongue  River 

Nebraska  

3,617 

1,235 

592 

46 

597 

Omaha 

1,318 
1,194 
1,105 

7,944 

580 
314 
341 

1,452 

278 
125 
189 

1,447 

8 

14 

284 
175 
138 

5 

738 
880 
764 

6,492 

San  tee  '  

Winnebago 

Nevada    

Fallen  

429 
350 
120 
614 
706 
625 
5,100 

20,853 

319 
86 
108 

319 
86 
108 

110 
264 
12 
614 
377 
625 
4,490 

20,358 

Fort  McD  rrritt 

Moapa  River  

... 

Ne\  ada    

1 

Walker  River 

329 

329 

I 

West  rn  Shoshone  

j 

Reno  special  agsnt 

610 
495 

605 
495 

5 

New  Mexico  

Jicarilla 

645 
627 
2  724 

495 

495 

150 
627 
2.724 
8.700 
6,354 
1,803 

5,912 
2,282 
1,371 

Mescalero.     ... 

Pueblo  Bonito  * 

Pueblo  day  schools  

8,700 
6,354 

San  Juan  

Zuni  

1,803 
5,912 

New  York:  New  York  Agency  

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  

2,282 

North  Dakota  

8,903 

7,532 

6,439 

304 

789 

Fort  Berthold  2 

1,182 
1,002 
3,  455 
3,264 

116,419 

1,007 
438 
3,  257 
2,830 

110,443 

988 
308 
3,100 
2,043 

6,647 

17 
80 
92 
115 

901 

2 
50 
65 
672 

102,  895 

175 
564 
198 
434 

5,976 

Fort  Totten 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  mountain  .... 

Oklahoma  

Cantonment 

785 
1,252 
101,506 
4,554 
2,180 
518 
714 
1,045 
682 
758 
1,668 
<757 

373 
647 
101,  506 
3,077 
1,828 
311 
295 
617 
241 
420 
768 
360 

346 
514 

""2,"  862" 
1,387 
139 
240 
474 
102 
393 

6 
37 

"*59" 
441 
151 
16 
90 
16 
15 

21 
96 
»  101,  506 
156 

412 
605 

""i,"477 
352 
207 
419 
428 
441 
338 
900 
397 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

Five  Civilized  Tribes    . 

Kiowa 

Osage 

Otoe 

21 
39 
53 
123 
12 
768 
100 

Ponca 

Sac  and  Fox  

Seger.  ... 

Seneca 

Shawnee... 

190 

70 

1  Ponca  Indians  not  included. 
» 1916  report. 


8  29,719  restricted  Indians  as  to  alienation. 
<  Does  not  include  citizen  Potawatomi. 


80 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  3. — Indians  under  Federal  supervision —  Unallotted  and  holding  trust  and  fee 
patents,  June  30, 1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total 
Indians 
under 
Federal 
super- 
vision. 

Allotted. 

Un- 
allotted. 

Total 
allotted. 

Holding 
trust  or 
restricted 
fee 
patents. 

Holding  fee  patents 
for— 

Part  of 
allot- 
ment. 

Entire 
allot- 
ment. 

Oregon                                    

11,612 

3,969 

3,619 

18 

332 

7,643 

Klamath  

1,160 
18.000 
437 
1,197 
818 

21,246 

783 
2,000 
227 
518 
441 

17,984 

759 
1,977 
116 
330 
437 

15,640 

24 
23 
94 
187 
4 

1,099 

377 
6,000 
210 
679 
377 

3,262 

Roseburg                        .        ... 

Silctz 

17 
1 

Umatilla                         

Warm  Springs 

South  Dakota  .                            

1,245 

Cheyenne  River 

2,752 
964 
291 
504 
7,247 
5,636 
1,9.54 
1,898 

1,438 

2,715 
964 

2,610 
906 

38 

67 
57 

37 

Crow  Creek  .  .  . 

Flandreau 

291 

Lower  Brule  ...                            ... 

504 
6,424 
5,636 
950 
791 

620 

400 
5,768 
5,280 
438 
238 

616 

is 

598 
102 
291 
197 

2 

86 
58 
254 
221 
356 

2 

Pine  Ridge 

823 

Rosebud  .        

Sisseton 

1,004 
1,107 

818 

Yankton  

Utah 

Goshute  

153 
130 
1,155 

11,088 

153 
130 
535 

4,114 

Shivwits 

Uintah  and  Ouray  .  . 

620 
6,974 

616 
6,733 

2 

49 

2 
192 

Washington  

Colville  . 

2,529 
2,132 
697 
603 
768 
1,359 
3,000 

9,610 

2,478 
164 
276 
476 
507 
182 
2,891 

3,014 

2,423 
156 
276 
431 
507 
169 
2,771 

1,985 

55 

4 

51 
1.968 
421 
127 
261 
1,177 
109 

6,596 

Cushman  

4 

Neah  Bay    . 

Spokane 

4 

41 

Taholah  

Tulalip  . 

1 

40 

89 

12 

80 

940 

Yakima  

Wisconsin 

Grand  Rapids  

1,372 

1,372 
750 
1,745 
393 
335 

Hay  ward  (Lac  Courte  Oreille)  

1,277 
a  1,  745 

527 

514 

13 

Keshena  

Lac  du  Flambeau 

749 
335 
1,046 
2,575 
511 

1,674 

356 

342 

14 

Laona  

La  Pointe  . 

1,046 
959 
126 

1,358 

962 
76 
91 

1,283 

84 

807 
35 

71 

Oneida  

76 

1,616 
385 

316 

Red  Cliff.. 

4 

1  Includes  5,000  Indians  in  California. 

2  Does  not  include  Stockbridge  and  Munsee  citizen  Indians. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


81 


'SJ9JOA  9jy 


9qj  JO  SU355T1JO  9JV 


1 


£  -Stryqiop 


OJIJAV     pUB     PB01I 


C^COC 
Oi  Oi 


SJ22SSS 


Tf<NU5.-(        <N  00  O  di  <N  CJ  CO  .-H  rf  10     ,3 

f-Ti-T        i-TcfcT     <s'i-?r-?io'    co^  ^ 

I 

£ 


!SS8S8S8S8S8S 


£  . 

O    OT 

P 


ic  i— *  oo  *o  i— « ( 

^ssasi 


•  CO 

ON 


•srreipui  2uoraT5  sgqomqo 


««00  OCOCO 


Missionaries 
working 
among 
Indians. 


I! 
II 


s 


icot^cococoNcoes«os 


w 


IS323S 


7161  '08 
9tmf  Smistxa  coteuvm  irsrou 


•gjnpgoojd  JB39I 


C^COO^J-^l^jJO  1^1 
i—  iOi»—  '*—  tob^i^-oar—  tic 
U5  CO  <N  >C  •*  ub  ^H  00  t-  CO 


•rao^sno  tBqin  ^a 


1-1  I  & 


>.-liO«OtO     •     •     •     -NOiO 

i-H          »H       •       •       •       -CO          >O 


1 

.a 

«8 


streipuj 


l~    CC  U3  M<  CO  N  -H 


I 

n 
18404—17 6 


s:lls! 


82 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


•SJ8JOA  9JV 


sq;  jo  SUOZ^TD  9jy 


rH 


1 1>-  00  O  i 


io  t^  o  o 

OOO-^Tt* 


OC^iOCOl^-O        C^ 


O       S 
Si-l       i-H 


OJ     •»        iO 

"  ^    •  oo      10 

CM       (N 


!S    8 


tH  C*  (N  i-l  10  t-  00 


CO  CM  Ol        rH 


"6 

A 


I 


Missionar 
workin 
among 


Arres 
drun 
ne 


CM  rH          CM 


'saiiqAV 


r-l  (N  O  OJ  •*  O5      -COCO 


•S9jiqM  Xg 


.rH      -00      -ICrH 


'08 


0        ^ 


9jnp90oad  1^391  £9 


CO  r-l  N  TH  00  CO  00  •»*<  i 


•uio^sno  i^qu;  v£g 


„  . 

I  | 

'&  r=> 

a 


O  03 

ss 


sss  M 

oP^f*     « 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


rH         ^-1         CO 

co      »o     t^ 


i—  *  o 
<N  i~ 


»i~OO 
CO  t-  tO  i-l 


IQU)OO>O 

I-H  O  CO  r-( 


<N        10 

g^Tco" 


§OOOOO(MO 
i-H  lO  CO  £O  O  t—  1  O5 


CO  »O  OO        lO  O 


CO  CS        <3J        »O 


CM  N  CC  <M  00  CO        0 


rjt  c<»  i-H  i-l 


:  $ 


"  :  :^   « 


^~    I 
£  :£     £ 


£ 


i-tOJiOOi-H       <N-Ht^ 


05CO 

jp    ^ 


^^        CO  5OI 


il 

.si 
al 


II 


i* 


:fe«.( 


Il 


84 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


'SI91OA  9JV 


9q;  jo  sugzpp  eay 


•Sutqiop 


91UAV   PUB 


CO  <N 


t^^Hoo 

CO  t--  ?— * 


CS         C3         COC<JC<|iO^         OOCC^OiiOGOCC^fOOOOO'rH 


10        CM        00. 


i^COl-Tt^iocOCMtoiO        25  JO  25  <N  < 
r-TcM*"       CO*"       CM~ 


ITS  T-l  IO  TH  CM 


»-i  CM        OOi-l  !O 


a 

c^^     ° 


•suBipui  SuoraB  sgqoonqo 


lO        »-H        ^OiiClt^CO        CC-COTPCOCM 


'i-Hi-HCOCOCOCO        O5CM  ^^CM  CM  CO 


I  HI 


iCMOCrrCM        5O     •     -CMPO     • 


i-HOTfCM        O  CM  Tf  i-l  i-H  CM 


•S91TTIAV 


OCOTC-f 
i-lOO        CM 


iC  O  ^^      ^H  00  ^r-4  CM     ; 


C^rfT*     *^*  ***  ^ 


^^i-(       CM  OS  ^CO 


•^I6T  '08 


•rao^sno  i^qm  Xg 


1    J|pl     il§  .1  •  i  j  :|  :  :  j     \\^\  if 
I    sSSSa     :.§§  :  i  :«  :•«  ijl     ifilrf 


K 

I-&  o    ose 


fe5P    -g    ^""^    *' 

I"  I  i        s 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


85 


III! 


JH~<M~  t^irTi-H*  i-T 


i-tCNCN  rH  CO          Ci  r-<  1-1  i-i  i-H  C4  I-H 


(xTl-T  C^Tl-Tr-T 


O^        -rf  10        i-H  O  C*-  CO  1C  CO  ' 


CM  i-l  1O  IN  ^H  1-4 


^<        OiOiCOCi-^OOOOO 
»— I        CO  vri'  i— *  t^-  C<l  W  »o  ic  10  O 

otTi-T  CT  co^e^T 


C^ICO         ^t 


CCO 

»o  co  c 


CO^H  "  eoco»-i  1-1 


Irtg2rt( 


OIMIM      -rH      ."*rH 


«•*•««-•  1-1*1      .^H 


:    a 


8  :53    3 


§i«  i 
CO 


S  : 


ce<Ni-i    .    .    .10 


OCvf«fl^t>.      •i-tt^«5CO 
05<NrH  -ttl-^^lr-t 


N      •        Oi  O  IN  CO  iO  <N  to  r-t        TJ.  00  O  (N  CO  <N  IM  CO  C3        CO 
•       t-^  CN  t-H  »H  C<|       t>-  I-H  W  T-I  C< 


'§    S3* 


II 


SO-SO        bi, 

;  PU  •-  _,  fl 


86 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  reservations. 
Grand  total                                           

Number  al- 
lotments. 

Area,  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

220,016 

35,740,001 

35.  565.  517 

71,305,518 

Total  reservations                      

212,  368 
7,678 

34,636,721 
1.103  280 

35,565,517 

70,202,238 
1,103,280 

Total  public  domain                                         .... 

Arizona                            .                                      

1,743 

81,  489 

18,571,125 

18,652,614 

Camp  McDowell  (Salt  River)  

24,971 
234,820 
1,681,920 
31,328 
10,231 
371,422 
518 
730,  9<0 
138,2*0 
2,472,320 
8,774,397 
2,129.114 
114,348 
22,316 
1,834,240 

434,  866 

24,971 
2  tO,  699 
1,681,920 
31,3?8 
10  2.^1 
371J422 
518 
730,940 
138,240 
2,472,320 
8,783,997 
2,129,114 
155,954 
46,720 
1,834,240 

517.  038 

Colorado  River                                                        . 

588 

5,879 

Fort  Apache  

Fort  Mojave  (Colorado  River)  

Gila  Bend  (Pima)  

Gila  River  (Pima).  .     .                .           

Havasupai  CSuppai)  

Hualapai  (Truxton  Canon)  

Kaibab  

Moqui  (Hopi)  

Navajo  (see  New  Mexico  and  Utah)    

60 

9,600 

Papaeo  

Papaso  (San  Xavier) 

291 
804 

41.606 
24,404 

Salt  River  ...    . 

San  Carlos  

California.   . 

2,593 

82,  172 

Digger  

530 
99,051 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,6-^0 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21.520 
19,680 
1,280 
4,400 
1,920 
11,069 
3,084 
3,896 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
120 
15,012 
5,461 
370 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,806 

530 
128,142 

7,205 
616 
1,280 
18,880 
1,6-10 
15,080 
4,080 
760 
320 
3,679 
21,520 
19,680 
1,280 
4,^00 
1,920 
11,069 
4,480 
5,195 
8,329 
560 
2,554 
653 
2,200 
2,560 
120 
15,042 
5,461 
6^0 
20,800 
34 
480 
75,806 
42,106 
48,551 
39,386 

468,874 

TToopa  Valley 

639 

29,  091 

Mission— 
Agua  CaUente  (Malki)  

Augustine  (Malki).  ..                    .               ... 

Cabazon  (Malki)  

Cahui'la  (Soboba)  

Campo  

Capitan  Grande  (Pala)  

Cuvapipa  (Campo)  

Inaja  (Soboba)  

Lacuna  (Campo)  

La  Posta  (Campo)  

Los  Covotes  (Sot  oba)  

Manzanita  (Campo). 

Martinez  (Malki  )  

Mesa  Grande  (Soboba)  

Mission  Creek  (Malki)  

Morongo  (Malki)  

Pala.:  

177 

85 

1,396 
1,299 

Pechanga  or  Temecula  (Pala) 

Potrero  or  La  Jolla  (Pala).  . 

Ramona  (Soboba)  

Rincon  (Pala)  

San  Manuel  (Malki). 

San  Pascual  (Pala)  

Santa  Rosa  (Soboba)  

Santa  Ynez  Soboba  

Santa  Ysabel  (Soboba)  

Soboba  

Svquan  (Pala).  . 

17 

270 

Torres  (Malki)  

Tuolumne  

Twent  y-nine  Palms  (Malki)  

Paiute  

Round  Valley.. 

877 

42,106 

Tule  River  

48,551 
31,376 

396,  143 

Yuma  (Fort  Yuma)  

798 
372 

8,010 
72,731 

Colorado  

Ute  (Ute  Mountain  and  Southern  Ute).. 

371 

72,651 
80 

396,143 

468,794 
80 

23,542 

682,939 

Absentee  Wyandot  

Florida:  Seminole  

23,542 
54,841 

Idaho.      . 

4,377 

628,098 

Coeur  d'Alene.. 

638 
1,863 
1,876 

104.077 
345,209" 
178,812 

10»,077 
366,472 
212,390 

3.251 

Fort  Hall  .   . 

21,263 
33,578 

3.251 

Lapwai  (Nez  Perce)  

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox... 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


87 


States  and  reservations. 

Number  al- 
lotments. 

Area,  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Kansas  

3,079 

272,519 

272,  519 

Ohippewa  and  Munsee  (Potawatomi).  .  .. 

100 
143 
351 
2,363 
122 

2,648 

4,195 
11,769 
27,691 
220,785 
8,079 

153,227 

4,195 
11,769 
27,691 
220.  785 
8,079 

153,418 

Iowa  (  Kickapoo)  .... 

Kickapoo  

Potawatomi  

Sac  and  Fox  (Kickapoo)  . 

Michigan  

191 

Isabella  .  . 

1,913 
669 
36 

8,360 

98,395 
52,201 
2,631 

954,255 

191 

98,581 
52,206 
2,631 

1,508,153 

L'Anse 

Ontonagon  

Minnesota  

553,898 

Bois  Fort  (Nett  Lake) 

712 
4 
591 
304 
631 
135 

56,782 
296 
36,486 
24,191 
48,520 
12,582 

56,782 
296 
36,486 
24,  191 
48,520 
12,  582 
543,528 
1,080 
719,955 
64,733 

5,801,342 

Deer  Creek  (Nett  Lake)  

Fond  du  Lac.. 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake  

Mdewakanton  (Birch  Cooley) 

543,528 
1,080 
9,290 

Vermillion  Lake  . 

White  Earth 

5,157 
826 

6,913 

710,665 
64,733 

1,434,933 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chippewa  (Leech  Lake)  
Montana  . 

4,366,409 

Blackfeet  

7 
2,450 

2,220 
481,  109 

1,491,167 
1,  832,  104 
497,600 

1,493,387 
2,313,213 
497.  600 
723,  196 

228,408 
489,500 
56,038 

359,542 

Crow 

Fort  Belknap  

Fort  Peck 

2,028 
2,428 

723,  i% 

228,408 

Jocko  (Flathead) 

Northern  Cheyenne  (Tongue  River) 

489,500 
56,038 

6,118 

Rocky  Boy 

Nebraska  . 

4,037 

353,  424 

Omaha  ..           .     .                                      .... 

1,460 
168 
850 

130,  642 
27,236 
73,251 

4,380 

135,022 
27,236 
73,251 
640 
U23,393 

700,197 

Ponca  (Santee) 

Santee  (Niobrara)  

Sioux  (additional) 

640 
1,098 

686,064 

Winnebago  

1,559 
979 

1  122,  295 
14,133 

Nevada  . 

Duck  Valley  (Western  Shoshone)            

321,920 
523 
990 
322,000 
40,631 

3,951,049 

321,920 
1,128 
4.640 
322,000 
50,509 

4,624,224 

Moapa  T"1  iver 

117 
366 

605 
3,650 

Paiute  (Fallen)...              

Pyramid  Lake  (Nevada) 

Walker  River  

496 
2,800 

9,878 
673,  175 

New  Mexico 

Jicarilla  Apache                                                     .  . 

796 

353,812 

407,300 
474,240 
1,980,637 

95,  792 
24,256 
110,080 
42,359 
101,511 
150,000 
13,586 
17,461 
13,  520 
24,  187 
17,545 
34.767 
17,361 
49,369 
92.398 
17,515 
17,293 
17,361 
17,471 
215,040 

761,112 
474,240 
2,300,000 

95,792 
24,256 
110,080 
42,359 
101,511 
150,000 
13,  586 
17,461 
13,520 
24,187 
17,545 
34.767 
17,361 
49,369 
92,398 
17,515 
17,293 
17,361 
17,471 
215,000 

Mescalero  Apache 

Navaio  (see  Arizona  and  Utah)  

2,004 

319,363 

Pueblo— 
Acoma  (Albuquerque) 

Cochiti                                            

Isleta  (Albuquerque) 

Laguna  (Albuquerque)  .       .                  

Laguna  withdrawals  2 

Picuris 

San  Juan 

San  Felipe  (Albuquerque) 

Santa  Clara 

Santo  Domingo 

Sia                    

San  Ildefonso                                                .     .  . 

Zuni... 

» Includes  12,348  acres  purchased  from  the  Omaha  Indians.         *  Executive  orders  1910  and  1917 


88  COMMISSIONEB  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIES. 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Number  al- 

A 

rea,  in  acres 

lotments. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

New  York 

87  677 

87  677 

Allegany 

30  469 

30  469 

Cattaraugus  

21  680 

21*680 

Oil  Spring  ....... 

640 

640 

Oncida 

350 

350 

Onondaga  

6  100 

6  100 

14  640 

14  640 

Tonawanda 

7*549 

7  549 

Tuscarora  

6*249 

6  249 

North  Carolina:  Qualla  

63  211 

63  211 

North  Dakota 

8  380 

2  005  320 

100  000 

2  105  320 

Devils  Lake  ("Fort  Totten)  . 

1  189 

137  381 

137  381 

Fort  Berthold 

2  165 

435  708 

100  000 

535*  708 

Standing  Rock  

4*  700 

1  388*411 

1  388  411 

Turtle  Mountain 

326 

43  820 

43  820 

Oklahoma  

116  701 

19  548  888 

462  702 

20  Oil  590 

Cherokee  

40  193 

4  346  203 

4  346  203 

Chickasaw. 

10  955 

3  800  350 

721 

3  801  071 

Choctaw  

26  723 

4  291  036 

458  937 

4*  749*  973 

Creek  .   . 

18  710 

2  997  114 

2  495 

2  999  609 

Seminole  

3,118 

359.  535 

162 

'359*697 

Cherokee  Outlet  

62 

4  949 

4  949 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

3  331 

528  789 

528  789 

Iowa  (Sac  and  Fox)  

*108 

8  605 

8*605 

Kansa  (Kaw  now  Ponca) 

247 

99  644 

99  644 

Kickapoo  (Shawnee)  

280 

22.  650 

22  650 

Kiowa,  Comanche,  and  Apache 

3  451 

547  236 

547  236 

Modoc  (Seneca) 

68 

3  966 

3  966 

Oakland  (Ponca)  

73. 

11  456 

ll'456 

Osage  .  . 

2  230 

1  465  350 

1  465  350 

Otoe 

514 

128  351 

12S  351 

Ottawa  (Seneca)  .... 

160 

12'  995 

12  995 

Pawnee 

820 

112  701 

112  701 

Peoria  (Seneca)  

218 

43.  334 

43  334 

Ponca  

7^2 

100  745 

387 

101  132 

Potawatomi  (Shawnee)  

2.109 

291,736 

291,736 

Quapaw  (Seneca)  

248 

56  245 

56  245 

Sac  and  Fox 

548 

87  684 

87  684 

Seneca  

435 

41  813 

41*813 

Shawnee  .  . 

117 

12  745 

12  745 

Wichita  (  Kiowa)  

957 

152.  714 

152  714 

Wyandotte  (Seneca)  

244 

20  942 

20  942 

Oregon  

4  253 

508  657 

1  209  349 

1  718  006 

Grande  Ronde  (Siletz)  

269 

32,  9*3 

32,  983 

Klamath.  .  . 

1  351 

208  279 

812  707 

1  020  986 

Siletz 

551 

44  459 

44  459 

Umatilla 

1  115 

82  644 

74  130 

156  774 

Warm  Springs  ... 

'967 

140*  292 

322  512 

462*  804 

South  Dakota  

26  989 

6  190  527 

503  010 

6  693  537 

Cheyenne  River 

3  493 

061  figs 

249  145 

1  210  830 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winnebago 

1*460 

272  560 

16*  345 

'  288*  905 

Lake  Traverse  (Sisseton)  

2,006 

30X,  838 

308,  838 

Lower  B  rule  

868 

201.991 

37  520 

239,511 

Pine  Ridge  

8  062 

2  325  378 

200  000 

2  525  378 

Rosebud 

8  487 

1  851  812 

1  851  812 

Yank  ton  

2  613 

268,  263 

268  263 

Utah  

1  367 

111  947 

1  510  800 

1  622  747 

Goshute  and  Deep  Creek 

34  500 

34  500 

Navajo  (see  Arizona  and  New  Mexico)  

600,000 

600,  000 

Paiute  (Navajo)  

600  000 

600  000 

Shivwits 

26  880 

26  880 

Skull  Vallev... 

80 

80 

UintahVallev  

777 

39  620 

249  340 

288,  960 

Uncompahgre.  .  . 

590 

72.  327 

72,327 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  89 

TABLE  5. — Area  of  Indian  lands  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  reservations. 

Number  al- 
lotments. 

Area,  in  acres. 

Allotted. 

Unallotted. 

Total. 

Washington  

9,960 

1,019.079 

1,699,807 

2,718,886 

Chehalis  (Cushman) 

36 
35 
2,918 

3,799 
22,618 
332,  795 

3,799 
22,618 
1,342,375 
640 
4,629 
12,561 
23,040 
3,491 
4,717 

7,284 
17,463 
837 
223,543 
335 
7,803 
22,490 
147,  442 
1,494 
7,359 
864,326 

583,613 

Columbia  (Colville)  .  .  . 

Colville  

1,009,580 
640 
4,629 

Hoh  River  (Neah  Bav) 

Kalispel  (Cor  ur  d'Alene)  

Lummi  (Tnlalip)  

109 
373 
43 
30 

12,561 
3,728 
3,491 
4,717 

Makah  (Neah  Bav) 

19,312 

Muckleshoot  (Cushman)  

Nisqualli  (Cushman)  

O/ette  (Neah  Bav) 

640 

65 

Port  Madison  (Tiilalip)  

51 
167 

7,219 
17,463 

Puvallup  (Cushman)  

Quileute  (Neah  Bay) 

837 
168,553 
335 

Quinaielt  (Taholah)  

690 

54,990 

Shoal  water  

Skokomish  (Cushman)  

134 
164 

628 
23 

71 

4,488 

4,420 

7,803 
22,  166 
64,954 
1,494 
7,359 
451,922 

287,089 

Snohomish  (Tulalip)  . 

324 

82,488 

Spokane  ... 

Souaxon  Island  (Cushman)  

Swinomish  (Tulalip)... 

Yakima 

412,404 
296,  524 

Wisconsin  

Lac  Courte  Oreille  (Hayward)  

881 
600 
1,063 

68,910 
45,  756 
83,871 

540 
24,424 
39,880 
231,680 

69,  450 
70,  180 
123,  751 
231,680 
65,  466 
14,  166 
8,920 

829,998 
1,103,280 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River) 

Menomiuee  (  Keshena)  

Oncida 

1,504 
205 
167 

2,397 
7,678 

65,466 
14,  166 
8,920 

245,058 
1,103,280 

Red  (  liff 

Stockbridge  and  Munsee  (Keshena)     

Wyoming:  Wind  River  (Shoshone)  

584,  940 

Public  domain 

TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

ARIZONA. 

Camp  McDowell  

Acres. 
24,971 

Executive  order,  Sept.  15,  1903;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribe:  Mohave  Apache. 
Colorado  River  !        .          

23236  180 

p.  211.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1905,  p.  98.) 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1865,  vol.  13  p.  559;  Executive  orders,  Nov.  22, 

(Under      Colorado      River 
School.) 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Ka- 
wia,  Cocopa,4  Mohave. 

Fort  Apache     

8  1  681  920 

1873,  Nov.  16.  1874,  and  May  15,  1876.    (See  sec.  25,  Indian 
appropriation  act.  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  224.) 
Act  Apr.  30,  1908  (35  Stat.,  77);  act  Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat., 
273);  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1063);  act  Arg.  24,  1912)  37 
Stat.,  523):  Executive  order,  Nov.  22,  1915.   599  Indians 
allotted  5,990  acres. 
Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  July  21,  1874,  Apr.  27   1876, 

Under    Fort    Apache 
School.) 
Tribes:  Chilion,  Chirica- 
hua,     Coyotero,     Mim- 
brefio,     and    Mogollon 
Apache. 
Fort  Mojave            

31,328 

Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31,  1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p. 
469;  agreement  made  Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June 
10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p.  358.    (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30, 
p.  64.) 

Executive  orders,  Dec.  1,  1910,  and  Feb.  2,  1911.    Sec.  11,  act 

(Under  Fort  Mojave  School.) 
Tribe:  Apache. 
Gila  Bend                           

«  10,  231 

Jrne  25.  1910  (36  Stat.,  855-858).    (See  18579-1910.)    Area 
original  military  reservation,  14,000  acres. 
Exec1  tive  orders,  Dec.  12,  1882,  and  Jan.  17,  1909.    (See  4106, 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 
Gila  River 

»371  422 

1909.) 
Act  of  Feb.  28.  1859,  vol.  11.  p.  401;  Executive  orders,  Aug.  31, 

(Under  Pima  School.) 
Tribes:     Maricopa     and 
Pima. 

1876.  Jan.  10,  1879,  June  14,  1879,  Mav  5,  1882,  and  Nov.  15, 
1883:  Mar.  22,  Mav  8.  Jrly  31.  1911;  Dec.  16.  1911;  June  2, 
1913;  Aug.  27,  1914;  Mar.  18,  1915,  and  July  19,  1915. 

1  Partly  in  California.          »  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


» Surveyed. 


•  Not  on  reservation. 


'90 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  SO,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


ARIZONA— continued . 


.Havasupai  (Supai) 

(Under  Havasupai  School.) 
Tribe:  Havasupai. 

Hopi  (Moqui) 

(Under  Moqui  School.) 
Tribe:  Hopi  (Moqui)  and 
Navajo. 

Kaibab 

(Under  Kaibab  School.) 
Tribes:  Kaibab  and  San 
Juan  Paiute. 

Navajo* 

(Under     Leupp,     Navajo, 
Western    Aavajo,    San 
Juan  and  Pueblo  Bonito 
Schools.) 
Tribe:  Navajo. 


Acres. 
2,472,320 
138,240 
11,887,793 


Papago 

(Under  San  Xavier  School.) 
Tribe:  Papago. 


Salt  River 

(Under  Salt  River  School.) 
Tribes:     Maricopa     and 
Pima. 

San  Carlos 

(Under  San  Carlos  School.) 
Tribes:  Arivaipa,  Chilion, 
Chiricahna,  Coyotero, 
Mimbreno,  Mogollon, 
Mohave.  Pinal,  San  Car- 
los, Tonto,  and  Yuma 
Apache. 

Walapai 

(Under     Truxton     Canon 

School.) 
Tribe:  Walapai. 

Total... 


2, 443, 462 


22,317 


i  1,834,240 


730, 940 


21,885,882 


CALIFORNIA. 


Camp  or  Fort  Independence... 

Cold  Springs 

Colony  or  Nevada 

Digger 

(Under  a  farmer.) 
Tribe:  Digger. 


Guidiville  band 

Hoopa  Valley 

(Under  Hoopa  Valley 

School.) 

Tribes:  Hnnsatung,  Hu- 
pa,  Klamath  River, 
Miskut,  Red  wool, 
Saiaz,  Sermalton,  and 
Tishtanatan. 


360 

160 

75 

370 


160 
1399,051 


Executive  orders,  June  8  and  Nov.  23, 1880,  and  Mar.  31, 1882. 


Executive  order,  Dec.  16,  1882.    Act  of  Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat. 
L.,  1021.)    (See  45096-1910.) 


Secretary's  withdrawal,  Oct.  15,  1907.      (See  73684-1907.) 
Executive  order,  June  11, 1913. 


Treaty  of  June  1,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  667,  and  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  29,  1878,  Jan.  6,  1880,  two  of  May  17, 1884,  and  Nov.  19, 
1892.  1,769,600  acres  in  Arizona  and  967,680  acres  in  Utah 
were  added  to  this  reservation  by  Executive  order  of  May 
17,  1884,  and  46,080  acres  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  public 
domain,  but  again  reserved  by  Executive  orders,  Apr.  24, 
1886,  Jan.  8,  1900,  and  Nov.  14.  1901.  By  Executive  orders 
of  Mar.  10  and  May  15,  1905,  61,523  acres  were  added  to  res- 
ervation and  by  Execi  tive  order  of  Nov.  9, 19J7,  as  amended 
by  Execrtive  order  of  Jan.  28,  1908,  2,972,160  acres  were 
added.  2.064  Indians  have  been  allotted  328,963  acres  under 
the  act  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388).  as  amended.  By 
Execrtive  orders  of  Dec.  30, 1938,  and  Jan.  16, 1911,  the  sur- 
plus lands,  approximately  1,641, 180  acres,  in  that  part  of  the 
extension  in  New  Mexico  restored  to  the  p  iblic  domain 
(See  35  Stat.  L.,  457  and  787.)  (See  1277-9.)  Act  of  May  27, 
1902  (32  Stat.,  264),  and  Mar.  3,  1913  (37  Stat.,  1007),  R.  R. 
exchanges.  Execrtive  orders  May  24,  1911,  Feb.  17,  1912 
(2),  Feb.  1C,  1913  (2),  May  6,  1913,  Dec.  1,  1913,  July  23, 
1914,  and  Feb.  19,  1915.  Also  94,000  acres  set  aside  tempo- 
rarily for  allotment  by  Executive  order,  May  7,  1917. 

Execrtive  order,  Jvly  1,  1874,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  291.  41,606  acres  allotted  to  291  Indians,  and  14  acres 
reserved  for  school  site,  the  residue,  27,583  acres,  unallotted. 
(See  letter  book  208,  p.  408.)  Execrtive  orders,  June  16, 1911. 
and  May  28,  S^pt.  2,  Oct.  8,  and  Dec.  5,  1912,  Oct.  27,  1914, 
Jan.  14,  1916,  and  Feb.  1,  1917. 

Execrtive  orders,  June  14, 1879.  and  Oct.  20. 1910;  Sept.  28  and 
Oct.  23,  1911.  (See  26731-1910.)  (See  Senate  Doc.  90,  58th 
Cong.,  2d  sess.)  804  Indians  allotted  24,403  acres  under 
general  allotment  act. 

Executive  orders,  Nov.  9,  1871,  Dec.  14,  1872,  Aug.  5,  1873, 
J"ly  21,  1874,  Apr.  27  and  Oct.  30, 1876,  Jan.  26  and  Mar.  31, 
1877;  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  469;  agreement  made 
Feb.  25,  1896,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29,  p. 
35S.  (For  fuller  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doe.,  vol.  39,  p. 
35910.)  (See  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  64;  act  of  Mar.  2, 
1901,  vol.  31,  p.  952.)  Executive  order  of  Dec.  22, 1902. 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  4.  1883,  Dec.  22,  1898.  May  14,  1900, 
June  2,  1911,  May  29, 1912,  and  July  18,  1913. 


Executive  orders,  Oct.  28,  1915,  and  Apr.  29,  1916. 

Executive  order,  Nov.  10,  1914. 

Executive  order,  May  6.  1913. 

Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stats.,  612),  provides  for  purchase  of 
330  acres;  not  allotted.  40  acres  were  reserved  by  order 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  28,  1908,  for  Digger 
Indians.  (See  46597-1907,  71861-1908,  39245-1909.) 

Secretary's  withdrawal  for  wool  lot.    (See  22266-1909.) 

Act  of  Apr.  8,  1864.  vol.  13,  p.  39;  Executive  orders,  June  23, 
1876,  and  Oct.  16,  1891.  There  have  been  allotted  to  639 
Indians  29,143.38  acres,  reserve!  to  3  villages  68.74  acres, 
and  opened  to  settlement  under  act  of  June  17,  1892  (27 
Stats.,  p.  52),  15.096.11  acres  of  land  (formerly  Klamath 
River  Reservation).  (Letter  book  263,  p.  96;  3J2,  p.  480; 
383,  p.  170.) 


i  Outboundaries  surveyed.        *  Partly  in  New  Mexico.    (See  Table  5.)        »  Partly  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONEE  OF  INDIAN"  AFFAIRS. 


91 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tnbes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  80,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

CALIFORNIA  —continued  . 
Mission  (28  reserves) 

A  ores. 
181  844 

Executive  orders   Jan  31   1870   Dec  27   1875  May  15,  1876, 

(Under  Martinez,   Soboba, 
Pechanga,  Malki, 
Campo    and.    Volcan 
Schools.) 
Tribes:  Diegueno,  Kawia, 
San  Luis  Rey,  Serranos, 
and  Temecula. 

sChuckekansies  

IfiO 

May  3,  Aug.  25,  Sept.  29,  1877,  Jan.  17,  1880,  Mar.  2,  Mar.  9, 
1881,  June  27,  July  24,  1882,  Feb.  5,  June  19,  1883,  Jan.  25, 
Mar.  22.  1886,  Jan.  29,  Mar.  14,  1887,  and  May  6,  1889.    270.24 
acres  allotted  to  17  Indians  and  for  church  and  cemetery 
purposes  on  Syouan  Reserve  (letter  book  303,  p.  297),  and 
1,299  47  acres  allotted  to  85  Temecula  Indians,  2.70  acres 
reserved  for  school  purposes  (letter  book  351,  p.  312).    Ex- 
ecutive order,  Dec.  29,  1891.    Proclamations  of  President  of 
Apr.  16,  19C1,  vol.  32,  p.  1970,  and  May  29,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
2005;  act  of  Feb.  11,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  822.    174,936.73  acres  pat- 
ented by  the  Government  to  various  banas  under  acts  of 
Jan.  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712),  and  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L., 
1015-1022).    (bee  misc.  tract  book  36,  and  President's  proc- 
lamation, Aug.  31,  1915.) 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  24,  1912,  and  Aug.  14,  1914. 

Los  Coyotes 

3,840 

Executive  order,  Apr  13,  1914 

Morongo  

Proclamation  of  Nov.  12,  1913,  partly  canceling  Executive 

National  Forests  (Cal.): 
Cleveland  National  Forest 

order  withdrawal. 
119.92  acres  allotted  to  one  Indian  (76352-1911). 

Se  (uoia  National  Forest 

80  acres  allotted  to  one  Indian  (68231-1916) 

110  acres  allotted  to  two  Indians  (95949-  1915  and  129405-1914). 

Paiute  

i  75,  806 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  11,  1912,  May  9,  1912,  ,cept.  7,  1912, 

Pala 

Sept.  16,  1912,  Feb.  14,  1913,  and  July  22,  1915. 
119.99  acres  allotted  to  15  Indians  (letter  book  303  p  57)     162 

(Formerly  Warner's  Ranch 

Indians.) 

Round  Valley  

allotments  of  approximately  2  acres  of  irrigable  land  and  6 
acres  of  grazing  land  approved  and  patented  under  act  of 
Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.  L.,  388),  as  amended.    Lands  reserved 
under  authority  of  acts  of  Jan.  12,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  712\  and 
Mar.  1,  1907  (34  6tat.  L.,  1022),  and  bought  under  act  of  May 
8,  1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  257).    See  authority  7971  and  letter  book 
580,  p.  113.    Deed  recorded  in  Miscellaneous  Record  Book 
No.  5,  p.  193. 
Acts  of  Apr.  8,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  39,  and  Mar.  3,  1873,  vol.  17, 

(Under  Round  Valley 
School.) 
Tribes:  Clear  Lake,  Con- 
cow,  Little  Lake,  No- 
melaki,  Pit  River,  Pot- 
ter   Valley,     Redwood 
Wailaki,  and  Yuki. 

"Tule  River. 

48,551 

p.  634;  Executive  orders,  Mar.  30,  1870,  Apr.  8.  1873,  May 
18,  1875,  and  July  26,  1876:  act  of  Oct.  1,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  658. 
42,105.56  acres  allotted  to  1,034  Indians,  1,110  acres  reserved 
for  school  and  aeency  purposes  (72088-1907,  letter  books 
298,  p.  17,  and  395.  p.  260).    (See  act  of  Feb.  8,  19C5,  pro- 
viding for  a  reduction  of  area  of  reservation,  vol.  33,  p.  706.) 
36,692.23  acres  additional  allotments  made  to  619  Indians 
and  740  acres  reserved  for  school  purposes. 
Executive  orders,  Jan.  9  and  Oct.  3,  1873,  and  Aug.  3,  1878. 

(Under  Tule  River  School.) 
Tribes:     Kawia,s     Kines 
River,  Moache,  Tehon, 
Tule,  and  Wichumni.3 
Yuma 

30,  949 

Executive  order,  Jan.  9,  1884;  agreement,  Dec.  4,  1893,  rati- 

(Under Fort  Yuma  School.) 
Tribe:  Yuma-Apache. 

fied  by  act  of  Aue.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  332.    (See  sec.  25,  In- 
dian appropriation  act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33. 
?.  224.)    7,756.54  acres  imeable  land  opened  under  act  of 
une  17,  1902  (32  Stats.,  388),  act  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stats., 
1063).    8,110  acres  allotted  to  811  Indians. 

Total  

441,326 

COLORADO. 

HJte4 

396,143 

Treaties  of  Oct.  7,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  673,  and  Mar.  2,  1868,  vol. 

(Under    N  a  v  a  i  o    Springs 
and    Southern    Ute 
Schools.) 
Tribes:  Capote,   Moache, 
andJWiminuche  Ute. 

15,  p.  619,  act  of  Apr.  29,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  36:  Executive  or- 
ders, Nov.  22,  1875,  Aug.  17,  1876,  Feb.  7,  1879,  and  Aug.  4, 
1882,  and  act  of  Coneress  approved  June  15,  1880,  vol.  21, 
p.  199,  and  July  28,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  178,  May  14,  1884,  vol.  23, 
p.  22,  Aue.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  337,  Feb.  20,  1895,  vol.  28,  p. 
677.  72,651  acres  allotted  to  371  Indians  and  360  acres  re- 
served for  use  of  Government  (letter  book  321,  p.  86);  also 
7,360.32  acres  allotted  to  39  Indians  (letter  book  331,  p.  395). 
523,079  acres  opened  to  settlement  by  President's  proclama- 
tion dated  Apr.  13,  1899  (31  Stats.,  1947).  The  residue, 
375,960  acres,  retained  as  a  reservation  for  the  Wiminuche 
Utes.  Act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  82),  exchange  of  lands 
with  Indians.  Executive  order,  Nov.  12,  1915. 

Total  

396,143 

»  Partly  in  Nevada.     *  Outboundaries  surveyed.     *  Not  on  reservation.     *  Partly  in  New  Mexico. 


92 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


FLORIDA. 


Semin^le 

( Under  special  agent.) 


Acres. 
126,741 


Total.... 

IDAHO. 


Coeur  d'  Alene 

(Under  Coeur  d' Alene 

Agency.) 

Tribes:  Coeur  d'Alene, 
Kutenai,8  Pend 
d'Oreille,2  and  Spokan. 


26,741 


Fort  Hall 

(Under  Fort  Hall  School.) 
Tribes:    Bannock  and 
Shoshoni. 


121,263 


Lap  wai 

(Under  Fort  Lapwai 

School.) 
Tribe:  Nez  Perce. 


34,190 


Lemhi. 


Total, 


55,453 


IOWA. 


Fox 


Sank  and  Fox 

(Under  Sac  and 

Agency.) 
Tribes:  Potawatomi,  Sauk 
and  Fox  of  the  Missis- 
sippi and  Winnebago. 


Total , 


3,480 


KANSAS. 


Chippewa  an  1  Munsee 

(Under     Potawatomi 

School.) 

Tribes:  Chippewa  and 
Munsee. 


i  Surveyed. 


Acts  Aug.  15, 1894  (28  Stats.,  303),  Mar.  2, 1895  (28  Stat.,  892), 
June  10,  1896  (29  Stat..*  337),  June  7,  1897  (30  Stat.,  78), 
Mar.  1,  1899  (30  Stat.,  938),  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  302), 
Apr.  4,  1910  (36  Stat..  274).  23,061.72  acres  purchased  for 
Sera inole' Indians  in  Florida  under  acts  mentioned  (see 
Annual  Report  for  1900,  p.  101).  3,680  acres  reserved  by 
Executive  order  of  June  28, 1911.  (See  20817-1909.) 


Ececutive  orders  June  14,  1867,  and  Nov.  8,  1873;  agree- 
ments made  Mar.  26, 1887,  and  Sept.  9, 1889,  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol. 
26,  pp.  1026,  1029.  Agreement,  Feb.  7,  1894,  ratified  by 
act  of  Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  322.  638  Indians  have  been 
allotted  104,077  acres  and  1,906.99  acres  have  been  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  church  purposes  and  for  mill  sites. 
(See  86950-1908,  and  acts  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.  L., 
325-355),  Mar.  3,  1891  (26  Stat.  L.,  1026-1029),  Aug.  15,  1894 
(28  Stat.  L.,  322),  Mar.  27,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  561,  Apr.  30 
1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  78).  (President's  proclamation  issued 
May  22,  1909,  opening  224,210  acres  surplus  lands  to  settle- 
ment. (37  L.  D.,  698.) 

Treaty  of  July  3, 1868  vol.  15,  p.  673;  Executive  orders,  June 
14,  1867,  and  July  30.  1869;  agreement  with  Indians  made 
July  18,  1881.  and  approved  by  Congress  July  3,  1882,  vol. 
22,  p.  148;  agreement  of  May  27,  1887,  ratified  by  acts  of 
Sept.  1  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  452,  Feb.  23,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687, 
and  Mar.  3, 1891 ,  vol.  26,  p.  1011.  Agreement  made  Feb.  5, 
1898  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  672,  ceding 
416,000  acres,  of  which  6,298.72  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
79  Indians  (see  letter  book  527,  p.  478);  remainder  of  ceded 
tract  opened  by  settlement  June  17, 1902  (President's  proc- 
lamation of  May  7, 1902,  vol.  32,  p.  1997)  act  of  Mar.  30, 1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  153.  act  of  Mar.  3, 1911  (36  Stat..  1064);  1,863  allot- 
ments, covering  338909  acres,  approved  Oct.  28,  1914 
(37106-13). 

Treaty  of  June  9, 1863,  vol.  14,  p.  647;  agreement,  May  1, 1893, 
ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15, 1894  vol.  28,  p.  326.  178,812  acres 
allotted  to  1,876  Indians,  2,170.47  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  mission,  and  cemetery  purposes,  and  32,020  acres  of 
timberland  reserved  for  the  tribe;  the  remainder  restored  to 
public  settlement.  (President's  proclamation,  Nov.  8, 
1895,  29  Stats..  873.) 

Unratified  treaty  of  Sept.  24, 1868,  and  Executive  order,  Feb. 
12,  1875;  agreement  of  May  14,  18SO,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb. 
23, 1889,  vol.  25,  p.  687.  (See  34  Stat.  L.,  335,  and  agreement 
executed  Dec.  i8,  1905,  approved  by  President  Jan.  27, 
1906.)  Act  of  June  21, 1906  (34  Stat.,  334),  about  64,000  acres 
opened  in  1909.  (See  36809-1909.) 


By  purchase.  (See  act  of  Mar.  2, 1867  vol.  14,  p.  507. )  Deeds 
1857,  1865,  1867,  1868,  1869,  1876,  1880,  1882,  1883  1888,  June, 
July,  and  Oct.,  1892-1896.  (See  act  of  Feb.  13, 1891,  vol.  26, 
p.  749.)  (See  Ann.  Repts.,  1891,  p.  681;  1898,  p.  81.)  Deeds 
recorded,  vol.  6.  (See  95856-1907.) 


Treaty  of  July  16, 1859,  vol.  12,  p.  1105.  4,195.31  acres  allotted 
to  100  Indians;  the  residue,  200  acres,  allotted  for  missionary 
and  school  purposes.  Patents  issued  to  allottees;  balance 
of  allotments  sold  and  proceeds  paid  to  heirs.  (See  ninth 
section  of  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  92;  L.  B.,  332, 
p.  63.) 

» Not  on  reservation. 


COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


93 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

KANSAS—  continued. 
Iowa  \  

Acres. 

Treaties  of  Mav  17  1^54  vol   10  p  1069  and  of  Mar  6  1861 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Iowa. 

KicTcapoo  

vol.  12,  p.  1171.    11,768.77  acres  of  land  al'otted  to  143 
Indians;  162  acres  reserved  for  school  and  cemeterv  pur- 
poses.    (Letter  book  266,  p.  83.)    Acts  Mar.  3,  1885  (23  Stat., 
352),  and  Jan.  26,  18*7  (24  Stat.,  367). 
Treat  v  of  Tune  28  1862  vol  13  p  623     97  691  27  acres  allotted 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 
Tribe:  Kickapoo. 

Potawatomi  

to  351  Indians:'  245  acres  reserved  for  church  and  school; 
the  residue,  398.87  acres,  unallotted  (letter  books  304,  p.  480, 
and  772,  p.  54).     (Acts  of  Auer.  4,  1886  (24  Stat.,  219),  Feb. 
28,  1899,  vo'.  30,  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1007.) 
Treaties  of  June  5  1846  vo'  9  p  853'  ofNov  15  1861  vol  12 

(Under      Potawatomi 
School.) 
Tribe:    Prairie    Band    of 
Potawatomi. 

Sank  and  Fox  l  

p.  1191;  treatv  of  re  inquis'hment,  Feb.  27,  1867,  Vol.  15, 
p.  531.    220,785  acres  allotted  to  2,363  Indians;  319  acres 
reserved  for  schoo'  and  agencv,  and  1  acre  for  church.    (  Acts 
of  Feb.  28,  1899,  vo1.  30,  p.  909,  and  Mar.  3,  1903,  vo1.  32.  p. 
1007.)    980  acres  surplus  tribal  land  so:d  under  act  Feb.  28, 
1899. 
Treaties  of  Mav  18  1854  vol  10  p  1074  and  of  Mar  6  1861 

(Under  Kickapoo  School.) 

vol.  12,  p.  1171;  acts  of  June  10,  1872,'  vol.  17,  p.  391.  and 

Tribe:  flauk  and  Fox  of 
the  Missouri. 

Aug.  15,  1876,  vo'.  19,  p.  208.    2.843.97  acres  in  Kansas 
4,194.33  acres  in  Nebraska,  aggregating  7.038.30  acres,  allot- 
ted to  84  Indians,  and  under  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats., 
324-349),  960.91  acres  were  allotted  to  37  Indians,  leaving  57 
acres  unallotted.    (Letter  books  233,  p.  361;  383,  p.  37;  and 
512,  p.  110.) 

Total  

MICHIGAN. 

Isabella  »  

191 

Executive  order  May  14  1855*  treaties  of  Aug  2  1855  vol 

Tribe:  Chippewa  of  Sagi- 
naw,    Swan   Creek,   and 
Black  River. 
L'Anse  

11,  p.  633,  and  of  Oct.  18,  1864,  vol.  14,  p.  657.    98,395  acres, 
allotted  to  1,943  Indians. 

Treaty  of  Sept  30  1854  vol  10  p  1109     52  121  acres  allotted 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:  L'Anse  and  Vieux 
Desert  Bands  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 
1Ontona°ron  .      .          

to  668  Indians.    Pavment  for  lands  in  sec.  16,  see  93879- 
1907.    Unappropriated  tracts,  see  10293-1915. 

Sixth  clause  second  article  treaty  of  Sept  30  1854  vol  10 

(Under  special  agent.) 
Tribe:    Ontonagon   Band 
of   Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 
Ottawa  and  Chippewa  

p.  1109;  Executive  order,  Sept.  25,  1855.  '2,561.35  acres 
allotted  to  35  Indians. 

Treaty  July  31   1855     (11  Stat    621  )    120  470  acres  allotted 

to  1,818  Indians. 

Total  

191 

MINNESOTA. 

Bois  Fort 

Treaty  of  Apr  7  1866  vol  14  p  765'  act  of  Jan  14  1889  vol 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 

Deer  Creek                  

25,  p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.',  1st  sess.'f 
p.  63.)    56,467.20  acres  allotted  to  721  Indians  and  434.63 
acres  reserved  for  agency,  etc.,  purposes.    (L.  B.  359,382); 
residue,  51,863  acres,  opened  to  pubiic  settlement. 
Executive  order  June  30  1883'  act  of  Jan  14   1889  vol  25  p 

(Under  Nett  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:    Bois    Fort   Chip- 
pewa. 

Fond  du  Lac  

642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
63.)    295.55  acres  allotted  to  4  Indians;  residue.  22,744  acres, 
opened  to  public  settlement.    (Executive  order  of  Dec.  21. 
1858.) 
Treat}'  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109*  act  of  May  26  1872 

(Under  Fond  du  Lac  School.) 
Tribe:  Fond  du  Lac  Band 
of   Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

"Grand    Portage    (Pigeon 

vol.  17,  p.  190.    37,121  acres  allotted  to  593  Indians;  act  of 
Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  642.     (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p.  60.)    The  residue,  76,837  acres,  re- 
stored to  sett  ement.    Agreement  of  Nov.  21,  1889.    (See 
act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vo'.  25,  p.  642.)    Act  June  30,  1913  (Pub- 
lic No.  4),  and  Executive  order,  Mar.  4,  1915. 
Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109*  act  of  Jan  14   1889 

River). 
(Under    Grand    Portage 
agency.  ) 
Tribe:    Grand    Portage 
Band   of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 

vol.  25,  p.  642.     (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  p.  59.)    24,191.31  acres  allotted  to  304  Indians:  208.24 
acres  reserved  for  agency  and  wood  purposes:  residue, 
16,041.97  acres,  opened  to  pubiic  settlement.    Executive 
order,  Mar.  21,  1917,  setting  aside  two  small  unsurveyed 
islands  for  reservation  purposes. 

i  In  Kansas  and  Nebraska. 


»  Agency  abolished  June  30, 1889. 


94 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

MINNESOTA—  continued. 
Leech  Lake 

Acres. 

Treatv  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165:  Executive  orders, 

(Under  Leech  Lake  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cass  Lake,  Pil- 
lager, and  Lake  Wini- 
bigosHsh   Bands   of 
Chippewa. 

Mdewakanton 

Nov.  4,  1873,  and  May  26,  1874:  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 
p.  642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  p. 
49.)    48,446  acres  allotted  to  630  Indians  and  321.60  acres 
reserved  for  agency  and  school  purposes.    (Act  of  Tune  27, 
1902,  vol.  32,  p.  402.)    Minnesota  National  Forest  act,  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.,  268).    Executive  rrder  Feb.  16,  1911. 
By  purchase.    (See  acts  of  Julv  4,  1884,  Mar.  3,  1885,  May  15, 

(Under  Birch  Cooley  School.) 
Tribe:  Mdewakanton 
Sioux. 

Mille  Lac 

1886,  June  29,  1888  (25  Stat.,  228);  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.,  992), 
and  Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  349).    339.70  acres  deeded  to  47 
Indians:  12,242.76  acres  allotted  to  88  Indians  and  held  in 
trust  by  the  United  States,  8.90  acres  reserved  for  school. 
(See  Ann.  Rpt,.,  1891,  pp.  Ill  and  179,  and  schedule  an- 
proved  Nov.  21,  1904.)    Act  Mar.  4,  1917  (39  Stat.  L.,  1195). 
Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  article  12,  of  May 

(Under  White   Earth 
School.1) 
Tribe:   Mille  Lac  and 
Sna'*e  River  Bands  of 
Chippewa. 

Red  Lake                     

543  528 

7,  1861,  vol.  13,  pp.  693,  695;  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p. 
642.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247,  51st  Cong..  1st  scss..  p.  45.) 
Joint  resolution  (No.  5),  Dec.  19,  1893,  vol.  28,  p.  576,  and 
joint  resolution  (No.  40)  approved  Mav  17,  1898,  vol.  30r 
p.  745.    (See  Ann.  Kept.  1890,  pp.  38-43.)    Purchase  of 
land  act  of  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.,  591). 
Treaty  of  Oct.  2,  1863,  vol.  13,  p.  667:  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol. 

(Under  Red  Lake  School.) 
Tribe:   Red   Lake  and 
Pembina  Chippewa. 

Vermillion  Lake  

1  1,080 

25,  p.  642.    (See  agreement  July  8,  1889.  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No. 
247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  27  and  32),  and  Executive 
order,  Nov.  21,  1892.    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1009, 
and  act  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  ratifying  agreement  made  Mar.  10, 
1902,  vol.  33,  p.  46,  for  sale  of  2.56,152  acres.    Act  of  Feb.  8, 
1905,  vol.  33,  p.  708,  granting  320  acres  as  right  of  way  for  the 
Minneapolis,  Red  Lake  &  Manitoba  Ry.  Co.    Executive 
order,  Feb.  16,  1911. 
Executive  order,  Dec.  20,  1881,  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 

(Under  Vermillion  Lake 
School.) 
Tribe:    Bois  Fort  Chip- 
pewa. 
White  Earth  

9,290 

p.  642. 
Treaty  of  Mar.  19,  1867,  vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders, 

(Under  White  Earth  School  ) 

Mar  18  1879  and  July  13,  1883,  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25, 

Tribes:  Chippewa  of  the 
Mississippi,  Pembina, 
and  Pillager  Chippewa. 

White  Oak  Point  and  Chip- 

p. 642.    (See  agreement  Julv  29,  1889,  H.  Ex.  Doc.  No.  247, 
51st  Cong.,  1st  scss.,  pp.  34  and  36.)    Under  act  of  Jan.  14, 
1889  (25  Stat.,  642),  428,401.05  acres  have  been  allotted  to 
5,152  Indians,  and  1.899.61  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school, 
and  religious  purposes  and  under  act  of  Apr.  28,  1904  (33 
Stat.,  539).  246,956.13  acres  have  been  allotted  to  2,816 
Mississippi  and  Otter  Tail  Pillager  Chippewa,  being  addi- 
tional allotments  to  a  part  of  the  allottees  under  act  of  Jan. 
14,  1889,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  9,290  acres. 
Act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  353.) 
Treaties  of  Feb.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1165,  and  of  Mar.  19,  1867, 

pewa. 
(Under  Leech  Lake  A  gen- 
Tribes:  Lake  Wimbigo- 
shish  and  Pillager 
Bands  of  Chippewa  and 
White  Oak  Point  Band 
of  Mississippi  Chip- 
pewa. 

vol.  16,  p.  719;  Executive  orders,  Oct.  29,  1873,  and  Mav  26, 
1874:  act  of  Jan.  14,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  742.    (See  H.  Ex.  Doc. 
No.  247,  51st  Cong.,  1st  sess.,  pp.  42,  49.)    64,732  acres 
allotted  to  826  Indians;  the  residue  opened  to  public  settle- 
ment; 240  acres  reserved  for  ball  park.    (See  289-1908.) 

Total 

553  898 

MONTANA. 

Blackfeet.   . 

1,  491,  805 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657:  unratified  treaties  of 

(Under  Blackfeet  School.) 
Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Blood, 
and  Piegan. 

Julv  18,  1866,  and  of  Julv  13,  and  15  and  Sept.  1.  1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15. 
1874,  vol.  18,  p/28:  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Feb.  11,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  129;  agreement  made 
Sept.  26,  1895,  approved  by  act  of  June  10,  1896,  vol.  29, 
p.  353;  act  of  Feb.  27,  1905,  confirming  grant  of  356.11  acres 
of  land  and  120  acres  of  unsurveyed  land.    (See  vol.  33, 
p.  816.)    Act  of  Mar.  1,1907  (34  Stats.,  1035).    Seven  Indians 
allotted   2,220  acres.       44,240.07   acres  timber  reserved. 
(See  4021-1913.) 

1  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIES. 


95 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  net  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


MONTANA— continued. 


Crow 

(Under  Crow  S?hool.) 
Tribes:     Mountain    and 
River  Crow. 


A  cres. 
U,&32,269 


Fort  Belknap 

(Under    Fort    Belknap 

School.) 

Tribes:    Grosventre    and 
Assiniboin. 


2  497, 600 


Fort  Peck 

(Under  Fort  Peck  SchooU 
Tribes:  Assiniboin,  T>rule" 
Santee,   Teton,    Hunk- 
papa,    and    Yanktonai 
Sioux. 


Flathead 

(Under  Flathead  School.) 
Tribes:  Bitter  Root,  Car- 
los    Band,     Flathead, 
Kutenai,  Lower  Kalis- 
pel,  and  Pend  d'Oreille. 


Northern  Cheyenne 

Under       Tongue       River 

School.) 
Tribe:    Northern 

enne. 
Rocky  Boy 


Chey- 


»  489,500 


56,038 


Total 4,367,212 


Treaty  of  May  7,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  649;  agreement  made  June 
12,  1880,  and  approved  by  Congress  Apr.  11,  1882,  vol.  22, 
p.  42,  and  agreement  made  Aug.  22,  1881,  approved  by 
Congress  July  10,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  157:  Executive  orders, 
Oct.  20,  1875,  Mar.  8,  1876,  De".  7,  1886-  agreement  made 
Deo.  8, 1893:  ratified  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  a,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  10?9-1040;  agreement 
made  Aug.  27,  1892.  CSee  Ann.  Rept.,  1892,  p.  748;  also 
President's  proclamation,  Oct.  15,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1024.) 
Act  of  Apr.  27,  190-*,  vol.  as,  p.  ?52,  to  amend  and  ratify 
agreement  of  Aug.  14,  1899.  Under  a"t  Feb.  8,  1887  (24 
Stat.,  ?88'),  and  act  Feb.  28,  1891  C26  Stat.,  794\  and  Execu- 
tive order,  June  8,  1901  (modifying  Executive  order  of 
Mar.  25,  1901),  482,424  acres  have  been  allotted  to  2,452 
Indians,  and  1,822.61  acres  reserved  for  administration, 
church,  and  cemetery  purpose*,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  1,8^,269  a^res.;  14,711.96  acres  on  ceded  part 
have  been  allotted  to  81  Indians.  (See  T..  B.  74?,  p.  50; 
852,  p.  160,  and  95fi,  p.  416.)  37  Indians  (S"hedule  A)  have 
been  allotted  7,429.55  a  "res  under  a~ts  of  Apr.  11,  1882  (22 
Stat.,  42),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stat.,  ?88),  and  amendments 
thereto.  President's  proclamation,  May  24,  1906  (34  Stat., 
3200). 

Treaty  of  Oct.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  13  and  15  and  Sept.  1,  1868;  Exec- 
utive orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874;  act  of  Apr.  15, 
1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28:  Executive  orders,  Apr.  1?,  1875,  and 
July  13,  1880,  and  agreement  made  Jan.  21,  1887,  approved 
by  Congress  May  1,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  121;  agreement  made, 
Oct.  9, 1895,  approved  by  act  of  June  10, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  350. 

Treaty  of  Got.  17,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  657;  unratified  treaties  of 
July  18,  1866,  and  of  July  1?,  and  15  and  of  Sept.  1,  1868; 
Executive  orders,  July  5,  1873,  and  Aug.  19,  1874  art  of 
Apr.  15,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  28;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  13, 1875, 
and  July  13,  1880:  and  agreement  made  Dec.  28,  1886,  ap- 
proved by  Congress  Mav  1.  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  113,  act  May  30, 
1908  (35  Stat.,  558),  2,032  fndians  allotted  724,695.77  acres; 
1,225,849  acres  surplus  land  opened  to  settlement  and  entry 
by  President's  proclamation  July  25,  1913.  (See  42  L.  D.. 
264.)  1,032.84  acres  reserved  for  town  site,  religious,  and 
administrative  purposes.  Act.  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.  593), 
allotments  to  children.  Act.  Feb.  26, 1917  (Pub.  355).  Sale 
to  Great  Northern  R.  R.,  and  President's  proclamation 
Mar.  21,  1917,  rel.  homestead  entries  on  lands  classified  as 
coal. 

Treaty  of  July  16, 1*55,  vol.  12,  p.  975.  Under  acts  of  A  pr.  23, 
1904  (33  Stats.,  302),  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  and  Feb! 
28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  2,431  Indians  have  been  allotted 
227,113  acres,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  2,524.70  acres 
have  been  reserved  for  tribal  uses,  and  under  act  of  Apr.  23, 
1904,  as  amended  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1905  (33  Stats.,  1049- 1080), 
6,774.92  acres  have  been  reserved  for  agency  purposes, 
18,521.35  acres  reserved  for  Bison  Range  under  acts  of  May 
23,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  267),  and  Mar.  4,  1909  (35  Stats.,  927). 
See  51019-1908.  May  22, 1909,  proclamation  issued  by  Presi- 
dent opening  surplus  lands.  Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats. 
795).  45,714  acres  reserved  for  power  and  reservoir  sitesr 
act  Apr.  12,  1910  (36  Stats.,  863).  Executive  order  Jan.  14, 
1913.  Act  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  863). 

Executive  orders.  Nov.  26, 1884,  and  Mar.  19, 1900,  act  of  Mar. 
3, 1903,  vol.  32,  p.  1000. 


Part  of  Fort  Assinniboine  abandoned  military  reservation. 
Reserved  by  act  Sept.  7, 1916  (39  Stat.  739),  amending  act  of 
Feb.  11,  1915  (38  Stat.  807). 


1  Outboundaries  surveyed:  partly  surveyed. 


2  Surveyed. 


» Partly  surveyed. 


96 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


t\rea  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


NEBRASKA. 


Niobrara 

(Under  Santee  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Santee  Sioux. 


Acres. 


Omaha 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Omaha. 


4,420 


Ponca 

(Under  Santee  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 


Sioux  (additi-nai) 

(Under  Fine  Ridge  School.) 
Tribe:  Og.a.a  Sicux. 

Winnebago 

(Under  Winnebago  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Winnebago. 


Total 

NEVADA. 


Duck  Valley 

(Under  Western  Shoshone 

School.) 

Tribes:  Paiute  and  West- 
ern Shnshoni. 

Moapa  River 

(Under  Mcapa  River  School. 
Tribes:  Chemehuevi,  Kai- 
bab,    Pawipit,    Paiute, 
and  Shivwits. 


Paiute 

(Under  Fallen  School.) 


Paiute  and  Shoshone  scattered 

bands. 
Pyramid  Lake 

(Under  Nevada  School.) 
Tribe;  Paiute. 

Summit  Lake,  Paiute  and  Sho- 
shone. 

Walker  River 

(Under    Walker   River 

School.) 
Tribe:  Paiute. 


"Wlnnemucca  and   Battle 
bunds  of  Shoshcne. 


Total. 


640 


1,098 


6.158 


» 321, 920 


523 


120 
322,000 

6,025 
41,204 


840 


Act  of  Mar.  3,  1863,  vol.  12,  p.  819,  4th  paragraph,  art.  6; 
treaty  of  Apr.  29.  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  637;  Executive  orders, 
Feb.  27,  July  20,  1866,  Nov.  16,  1867,  Aug.  31.  1869,  Dec.  31. 
1873,  and  Feb.  9,  1885.  33,515.92  acres  selected  as  home- 
steads, 38,951.71  acres  selected  as  allotments,  and  1,087 
acres  selected  for  agency,  school,  and  mission  purposes:  un- 
rati^ed  agreement  of  Oct.  17.  1882.  (For  modification,  see 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624.  For  text,  see  misc.  Indian  doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305, 
Act  of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Executive 
order  Apr.  29,  1916. 

Treaty  of  Mar.  16,  1854,  vol.  10.  p.  1043:  se'ectrn  by  Indians 
with  President's  approval,  May  11,  1855;  treaty  of  Mar  6. 
1865,  vol.  14,  p.  667;  a"ts  of  June  10,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  391.  and 
cf  June  22, 1874,  vol.  !8,  p.  170;  deed  to  Winnebago  Indians, 
dated  Jmy  31,  1874;  a:-t  of  Aug.  7,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  311:  act 
of  Mar.  3,  18:>3  (27  Stats.,  p.  612);  130,602  acres  allotted  to 
1,460  Indians;  the  residue,  4,420  acres,  unalktted:  a:t  May 
6,  1910  (36  Stat.,  348),  taxation;  act  May  11,  1912  (37  Stats., 
Ill),  sale  of  surplus  land. 

Treaty  of  Mar.  12,  1858,  vol.  12,  p.  997,  and  supplemental 
treaty,  Mar.  10. 1865,  vol.  11,  p.  675:  a?t  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  sec. 

13,  vol.  25,  p.  892.    27,236  a:res  allotted  to  168  Indians;  160 
a  -res  reserved  and  occupied  by  agenjy  and  school  build- 
ings.   (See  letter  book  205,  p.  339;  a; so,  President's  procla- 
mati-n.  Oct.  23,  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1559.) 

Executive  order,  Jan.  21, 1882. 

Act  of  Feb.  21, 1863,  vol.  12,  p.  658:  treaty  of  Mar.  8, 1865,  vol. 

14,  p.  671:  art  of  June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  170;  deed  fr<m 
Omaha  Indians,  dated  July  31,  1874.    (See  vol.  6,  Indian 
deeds,  p.  215.)    122.374.20a  resall<  tted  to  1,559  Indians;  480 
acres  resen  ed  lor  agency,  etc.;  610.10  a;>res  s  Id;  act  July  4. 
18SS;  the  residue,  1,098  acres,  unallotted;  act  May  6, 1910  (36 
Stat.,  3 18)  taxation. 


Executive  orders,  Apr.  16, 1877,  May  4, 1886,  and  July  1, 1910. 


Executive  orders,  Mar.  12, 1873,  and  Feb.  12. 1874;  act  of  Mar. 
13, 1875,  vol.  18.  p.  445:  seiectr  n  approved  by  Secretary  of 
the  Intericr.  July  3, 1875;  Executive  orders  of  June  28,  1875, 
July  3,  1875,  July  31.  1903,  Oct.  28,  1912,  and  Nov.  26,1912. 
604.52  acres  of  irrigable  land  allotted  to  117  Indians  under 
general  allotment  act. 

7i  se.'tions  (4,640  a  res)  reserved  under  second  form  with 
drawal,  reclamation  act,  June  17, 1902  (32  Stats.,  388;,  for  re- 
allotment  to  Indians;  3,730  acres  have  been  ailctted  to  369 
Paiute  Indians  and  10  ajres  reserved  for  school  purposes 
(see  76082-1907);  960  a  res  unallotted  and  unreserved. 

Executive  order,  Sept.  16, 1912,  setting  aside  120  acres  f c  r  allot- 
ment purp  ses. 

Executive  order.  Mar.  23, 1874;  act  July  1, 1898  (30  Stats.,  594). 
(See  sec.  26,  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21, 
1904,  vol.  33.  p.  225.)  Executive  ord«r  Sept.  4, 1913,  creating 
bird  resen  e-out  of  Anaho  Island. 

Executive  order,  Jan.  1 «,  1913,  withdrawing  from  settlement 
for  use  of  Paiute-Shoshcno  5,025.98  a,  res. 

Executive  order,  Mar.  19,  1871;  j  int  resolution  of  June  19, 
1902,  vol.  32,  p.  744;  act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  pp.  245, 
2CO);  act  of  Mar,  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  pp.  982-997;  act  of  June  21, 
1906,  vol.  31,  p.  325:  proclamati  n  rf  President,  Sept.  26, 
1906,  opening  coded  part  to  sett;ement.  It  contained  2G8,- 
005.84  a.  res.  Alk  tted  to  496  Indians  9,878  acres;  reserved 
fcr  agency  and  school,  80  a  res;  reserved  f<  r  cemelery.  40 
acres:  reserved  for  grazing,  37,848.29  acres;  reserved  f(  r  tim- 
ber, 3,355.62  acres:  reserved  for  church  purposes,  160  acres. 
(L.  B.,  885,  p.  187.) 

Executive  order,  June  18  1917,  setting  aside  840  acres  of  public 
domain  for  2  bands  of  homeless  Indians. 


1  Surveyed;  partly  in  Idaho. 


COMMISSIONER  OP  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


97 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

NEW  MEXICO. 

Jicarilla  Apache 

Acres. 
407,300 

474,240 
49,244 

1  42,  359 
195,792 
117,545 
117,461 
134,767 
124,256 
192,398 
i  17,  361 
149,369 
117,471 
i  17,  293 
113,520 
i  17,  515 
i  24,  187 
1110,080 
113,586 
1101,511 
150,000 
117,361 
1215,040 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  25,  1874,  July  18,  1876,  Sept.  21,  1880, 
May  15.  1884,  and  Feb.  11,  1887;  129,313.35  acres  allotted  to 
845  Indians  and  280.44  acres  reserved  for  mission,  school, 
and  agency  purposes.    (L.  B.  335,  p.  323.)    Executive  or- 
ders of  Nov.  11,  1907.  and  Jan.  28,  1908.    The  above  men- 
tioned 845  allotments  have  been  canceled;  reallotments 
have  been  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.L., 
1413).    (See  64513-1909.)    (Allotments  to  797  Indians  cover- 
ing 354,294  acres  approved  Aug.  28,  1909.) 
Executive  orders,  May  29,  1873~  Feb.  2,  1874,  Oct.  20,  1875, 
May  19,  1882,  and  Mar.  24,  1883.    (See  25961,  48680,  75169, 
75469-1908,  and  14203,  26542-1909  and  Senate  bill  5602,  60th 
Cong.,  1st  sess.) 
Executive  order.  Jan.  15,  1917,  setting  aside  49,244  acres  for 
Navajo  and  other  Indians. 

Confirmed  by  United  States  patents  in  1864,  under  old  Span- 
ish grants;  acts  of  Dec.  22,  1858,  vol.  11,  p.  374,  and  June  21, 
1860,  vol.  12,  p.  71.    (See  General  Land  Office  Report  for 
1876,  p.  242.  and  for  1880,  p.  658.)    See  Executive  orders  of 
June  13  and  Sept.  4,  1902,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for 
San  Felipe  and  Nambe  Pueblos,  and  Executive  order  of 
July  29,  1905,  setting  apart  additional  lands  for  Santa  Clara 
Pueblo.    (See    60806-1905.)    Approximately    32,000    acres 
added.    Area  original  Santa  Clara  Pueblo,  17,368.52.    Ex- 
ecutive orders,  Dec.  19,  1906,  Sept.  1  1911,  and  Oct.  4  1915, 
withdrawing  23,900  acres  for  Jemez  Indians.    Area  ol  origi- 
nal Spanish  grant,  17,510  acres.    Executive  order,  July  1, 
1910,  28,800  acres.   Area  of  Pueblo  proper,  125,225.    (See 
55714-1910.)     Total  area  Pueblos,  including  Zuni  and  Ex- 
ecutive order  res'n,  1,008,346.    Resurveys  33149-14.    Execu- 
tive order  Mar  21   1917  setting  aside             acres  for  In- 

(Under Jicarilla  School.) 
Tribe:  Jicarilla  Apache. 

Mescalero  Apache  

(Under  MescaleroiBchool.) 
^Tribes:     Mescalero     and 
Mimbreno  Apache. 
Navajo                       

Pueblo: 
(Under  Santa  Fe  and  Albu- 
querque Schools.) 
Tnbe:  Pueblo— 
Jemez                

Acoma 

San  Juan  

Picuris                       ...  - 

San  Felipe 

Cochiti.               

Santo  Domingo 

Taos 

Santa  Clara             

Tesuque 

San  lldefonso  

Pojoaque 

Sia.              

San  Dia                 

Isleta 

Namoe  

Laguna 

Laguna  withdrawals  
Santa  Ana      

dians  of  Laguna  Pueblo. 

Executive  orders,  Mar.  16,  1877,  May  1,  1883,  and  Mar.  3,  1885. 
Irrigable  lands  surveved.     (Area  of  original  'Spanish  grant 
17,581.25  acres.) 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  of  May  20,  1842, 
vol.  7,  p.  587. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601;  June  30,  1802,  vol.  7, 
.  p.  70,  and  of  May  20,  1842,  vol.  7,  p.  587.    (See  Ann.  Rept., 
1877,  p.  164.) 

By  arrangement  with  the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann. 
Rept.,  1877,  p.  166.)    Seneca  agreement  of  Jan.  3,  1893, 
ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  470;  act  of  June  7, 
1897,  vol.  30,  p.  89. 
Treaty  of  Nov.  11,  1794,  vol.  7,  p.  44,  and  arrangement  with 
the  State  of  New  York.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  168.) 

Do. 

Treaty  of  May  13,  1796,  vol.  7,  p.  55.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877, 
p.  168.)    They  hold  about  24,250  acres  in  Canada. 

Treaties  of  Sept.  15,  1797,  vol.  7,  p.  601,  and  Nov.  5,  1857,  vol. 
12,  p.  991;  purchased  by  the  Indians  and  held  in  trust  by 
the  comptroller  of  New  York;  deed  dated  Feb.  14,  1862. 
(See  also  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  165.) 
Treaty  of  Jan.  15,  1838,  vol.  7,  p.  551,  and  arrangement  (grant 
and  purchase)  between  the  Indians  and  the  Holland  Land 
Co.    (See  Ann.  Rept.,  1877,  p.  167.) 

Zufii 

(Under  Zuni  School.) 
Tribe:  Zuni  Pueblo. 

Total     .            

2,019,656 

NEW  YORK. 

230,469 
221,680 
2640 

2350 
6,100 

14,640 

37,549 

6,249 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Onondago    and 
Seneca. 
C  attaraugus 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Cayuga,  Ononda- 
ga,  and  Seneca. 
Oil  Spring                         

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Seneca. 

Oneida 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 
Onondaga..             

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribes:   Oneida,  Ononda- 
ga, and  St.  Regis. 
St  Re°is 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Tribe:  St.  Regis. 
Tonawanda 

(Under  New  York  Agency.) 
Trioes:  Cayuga  and  Tona- 
wanda Bands  of  Seneca. 
Tuscarora                        

(  Under  New  York  Agency.  ) 
Tribes:     Onondaga     and 
Tuscarora. 

Total  

87,677 

i  Outboundaries  surveyed. 
18404—17 7 


2  Partly  surveyed. 


3  Surveyed. 


98 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


NORTH  CAROLINA. 


Qualla  boundary  and  other 

lands. 

(Under    Eastern   Cherokee 
School.) 

Tribe:  Eastern    Band    of 
Cherokee. 


Total 

NORTH  DAKOTA. 


Devils  Lake 

(Under  Fort  Totten  School.) 
Tribes:   Assiniboin,   Cut- 
head,  Santee,  Sisseton, 
Yankton,  and  Wahpe- 
ton  Sioux. 


FortBerthold 

(Under    Fort    Berthold 

School.) 

Tribes:     Arikara,     Gros- 
ventre,  and  Mandan. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
148,000 
115,211 


63,211 


Standing  Rock  ............... 

(Under    Standing    Rock 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Hunk- 
pa,  Upper  and  Lower 
anktonai  Sioux. 


pa 
Ya 


Turtle  Mountain 

(Under    Turtle    Mountain 


Tribe:  Pembina  Chippewa. 


Total. 


100,000 


100,000 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Held  by  deed  to  Indians  under  decision  of  U.  S.  circuit  court 
for  western  district  of  North  Carolina,  entered  at  November 
term,  1874,  confirming  the  award  of  Rufus  Barringer  and 
others,  dated  Oct.  23, 1874,  and  acts  of  Aug.  14, 1876,  vol.  19, 
p.  139,  and  Aug.  23, 1894,  vol.  28,  p.  441,  and  deeds  to  Indians 
from  Johnston  and  others,  dated  Oct.  9,  1876,  and  Aug.  14, 
1880.  (See  also  H.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  196,  47th  Cong.,  1st  sess.r 
and  No.  128,  53d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)  Now  held  in  fee  by  In- 
dians, who  are  incorporated.  Act  of  Mar.  3, 1903,  vol.  32,  p. 
1000.  (See  Opinions  of  Asst.  Atty.  Gen.,  Mar.  14, 1894,  and 
Feb.  3,  1904.)  35,000  acres  of  the  98,211  acres  sold.  Deeds 
dated  Oct.  4,  1906;  approved  Dec.  12, 1906. 


Treaty  of  Feb.  19,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505,  agreement  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  June 
22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337  Comp.  Indian 
Laws.)  137,381  acres  allotted  to  1,189  Indians;  727.83  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  193.61  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes.  Act  of  Apr.  27,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  319,  to 
amend  and  ratify  agreement  made  Nov.  2,  1901.  Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  June  2, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2368. 

Unratified  agreement  of  Sept.  17,  1851,  and  July  27,  1866  (see 
Laws  relating  to  Indian  Affairs,  Department  of  Interior, 
1883),  pp.  317  and  322;  Executive  orders,  Apr.  12,  1870,  July 
13, 1880,  and  June  17,  1892;  agreement  Dec.  14,  1886,  ratified 
by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  1032.  (See  Pres.  proc. 
May  20,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  979.)  229,634.91  acres  allotted  to 
1,379  Indians  (see  letter  book  445,  p.  311).  Under  acts  of 
Mar.  1, 1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1042),  and  June  1, 1910  (36  Stat.  L., 
455),  532  allotments,  aggregating  35,687  acres,  were  approved 
Aug.  15, 1910, 579  allotments,  aggregating  112,544  acres,  were 
approved  Apr.  5,  1912,  and  787  allotments,  aggregating 
206,154  acres,  were  approved  Nov.  29, 1915.  See  (61502-1910, 
proclamation  June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  151),  227,504  acres 
open;  see  H.  J.  Res.  Apr.  3, 1912  (37  Stat.  L.,  631),  and  procla- 
mation of  Sept.  17,  1915,  opening  surface  of  lands  classified 
as  coal  to  homestead  entry,  authorized  by  act  of  Aug.  3, 1914 
(38  Stat.  L.,  681). 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders 
Jan.  11-Mar.  16,  1875,  and  Nov.  28,  1876.  Agreement  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and  Executive 
orders  Aug.  9,  1879,  and  Mar.  20,  1884  (1,520,640  acres  in 
South  Dakota);  unratified  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882. 
(For  modification  see  sundry  civil  appropriation  act  ap- 
proved Mar.  3, 1883,  vol.  22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian 
Doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act  of  Congress  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol. 
25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Congress,  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol. 
25,  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 1890,  vol.  26, 

E.  1554.  Under  acts  Mar.  2,  1889,  supra,  Mar.  1,  1907  (34 
tat.  L.,  1041).  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451-460),  and  Feb. 
14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  675),  4,717  Indians  have  been  allotted 
1,388,612  acres.  Under  President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  19, 
1909  (36  Stat.  L.,  2500),  1,061,500  acres  were  opened  to  settle- 
ment. Remainder  of  lands  opened  to  settlement  by  proc- 
lamation Mar.  15,  1915,  as  authorized  by  act  Feb.  14,  1913 
(37  Stat.  L.,  675,680). 

Executive  orders  Dec.  21,  1882,  Mar.  29  and  June  3,  1884. 
Agreement  made  Oct.  2,  1892,  amended  by  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  and  ratified  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33, 
p.  194.  43,820  acres  allotted  to  326  Indians  and  186  acres 
reserved  for  church  and  school  purposes  under  the  above- 
named  act.  Allotments  to  2,667  members  of  this  band  on 
public  domain  aggregating  396,338.52  acres  have  been  ap- 
proved. 


Surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


99 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  ivhat  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

OKLAHOMA. 

Apache  

Acres. 

Formerlv  Fort  Sill.    (See  Executive  order  Feb.  26,  1897.T 
Act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173);  acr  June  28,  1902  (32  Stat.r 
467).    Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong.,  2d  sess.,  act  Aug.  24, 
1912  (37  Stat.,  534);  act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  92).    Lands? 
to  be  purchased  for  those  members  of  this  band,  some  80  in 
number,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma. 
Treaty  with  Western  Cherokees  at  city  of  Washington,  May  6r 
1828  (7  Stat.,  311)  as  amended  by  the  treaty  at  Fort  Gibson, 
of  Feb.  14,  1833  (7  Stat.,  414);  referred  to  in  treaty  with 
Cherokees  at  New  Echota,  Ga.,  Dec.  29,  1835  (7  Stat.,  478); 
July  19,  1866  (14  Stat.,  799),  as  supplemented  by  treaty  of 
Apr.  27,  1868  (16  Stat.,  727).    Agreement  of  July  1,  1902  (32 
Stat.,   716).    Approximately  41,824  Cherokees,  including 
4,919  freedmen,  were  allotted  an  average  of  110  acres.  40 
acres  of  which  was  a  homestead  to  be  nontaxable  while 
held   by   the   original   allottee.    Total   acreage  allotted, 
4,346,203;  sold,  50,985. 
Agreement  of  Dec.  19,  1891;  ratified  sec.  10  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 
1893  (27  Stat.,  640),  unoccupied  part  of  Cherokee  Outlet, 
not  included  in  Territory  of  Oklahoma  (26  Stat.,  81).    62 
Indians  allotted  4,949.45  acres  under  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893. 
Executive  order  Aug.  10,  1869;  unratified  agreement  with 
Wichita,  Caddo,  and  others,   Oct.  19,   1872.    (See  Ann. 
Kept.,  1872,  p.  101.)    Executive  orders  of  Apr.  18,  1882, 
and  Jan.  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Supply  Military  Reserve 
(relinquished  for  disposal  under  act  of  Congress  of  July  5, 
1894,  bv  authority  of  Executhe  order  of  Nov.  5,  1894;'see 
General  Land  Office  Report,  1899,  p.  158).    Executi  v  e  order 
of  July  17,  1883,  relative  to  Fort  Reno  Military  Reserve. 
Agreement  made  October,  1890,  and  ratified  and  confirmed 
in  Indian  appropriation  act  appro  ed  Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26. 
pp.    1022-1026.    528,789   acres   allotted  to  3,331   Indians; 
231,828.55  acres  for  Oklahoma  school  lands;  32,343.93  acres 
reserved  for  military,  agency,  mission,  etc.,  purposes;  the 
residue,   3,500,562.05   acres,  'opened  to  settlement.    (See 
Pres.  proc.  Apr.  12,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1018.)    Executive  order. 
July  12,  1895.    President's  proclamation  of  Aug.  12,  1903, 
vol.  33,  p.  2317.    Act  June  17,  1910  (36  Stat    533),  57,637-10. 
Executive  order  Dec.  29,  1915,  setting  aside  40  acres  for 
agency  and  school  purposes. 
Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611;  agreement  of  Apr.  23, 
1897,  ratified  bv  act  of  June  28.  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  505;  act  of 
Julv  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  641,  ratifying;  agreement  of  Mar.  21, 
1902;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,'p.  209;  act  of  Apr.  28,  1904, 
vol.  33,  p.  544.    10,966  Indians  have  been  allotted  3,  800,350 
acres;  sold,  869,384  acres;  unallotted  area,  721  acres. 
Treaty  of  June  22,  1855,  vol.  11,  p.  611.    Same  as  Chickasaw. 
Approximated  26,828  Indians  ha^e  been  allotted  4,291,036 
acres;  sold,  2,142,067  acres;  unsold,  458,937  acres,  which 
includes  400,800  acres  of  timber  and  50,200  acres  of  segregated 
coal  and  asphalt  land  and  500  acres  of  other  unallotted  land 
tobe  offered  for  sale  from  Oct.  15to31,  1917,  belonging  to  the 
Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Nations  jointly. 
Treaties  of  Feb.  14,  1883,  vol.  7,  p.  417,'  and  June  14,  1866, 
vol.  14,  p.  785,  and  the  deficiency  appropriation  act  of  Aug.  5, 
1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.    (See  Ann.  Rept.  1882,  p.  LIV.)    Agree- 
ment of  Jan.  19.  1889,  ratified  by  the  act  of  Mar.  1,  1889, 
vol.  25,  p.  757;  President's  proclamation,  Mar.  23,  1889,  vol. 
26,  p.  1544;  agreement  of  Sept.  27,  1897,  ratified  bv  act  of 
June  28,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  514;  agreement  of  Mar.  '8,  1900, 
ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  1,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  861;  President's 
proclamation  of  June  25,  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1971;  supplemental 
agreement  of  June  30,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  500;  President's  proc- 
lamation of  Aug.  8,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2021.    (See  act  of  May 
27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  258;  act  of  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  204.) 
Approximately  18,761  Indians  have  been  allotted  2,997,114 
acres;  sold,  63,470  acres. 
Executive  order,  Aug.  15,  1883;  agreement  Mav  20,  1890,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  753.    8,605  acres 
allotted  to  108  Indians;  20  acres  held  in  common  for  church, 
school,  etc.;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement.    Proclama- 
tion oi  President  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  989.    (See  Amu 
Rept.  1891,  p.  677,  and  letter  book  222,  p.  364.) 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 
Cherokee  

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes.) 

Cherokee  Outlet  

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  

(Under  Cheyenne  and  Arap- 
aho, Cantonment,  and 
Seger  Schools.) 
Tribes:  Southern  Arapaho 
and      Northern      and 
Southern  Cheyenne. 

Chickasaw  

721 

i  458,  937 

2,495 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,   Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Choctaw 

i  (Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Creek  .  .  . 

(Under  superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes,  Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

Iowa 

(Under  Sac  and  Fox  School.) 
Tribes:  Iowa  and  Tonka- 
wa. 

i  Partly  surveyed. 


100 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued  . 
Kansa  or  Kaw  

Acres. 

Act  of  June  5,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.    260  acres  reserved  for  ceme- 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Kansa  or  Kaw. 

Kickapoo  

terv,   school,   and  town  site.    Remainder,   99,644   acres, 
allotted  to  247  Indians;  act  of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  636, 
ratifying  agreement,  not  dated.   Act  Mar.  3,  1909.   (35  Stat., 
778.) 
Executive  order.  Aug.  15,  1883;  agreement  June  21,  1891;  rati- 

(Under Shawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Mexican  Kickapoo. 

Kiowa  and  Comanche 

fied  bv  act  of  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  557.    22,650  acres 
allotted  to  280  Indians;  479.72  acres  reserved  for  mission, 
agency,  and  school  purposes:  residue  opened  to  settlement 
bv  proclamation  of  the  President  May  18,  1895,  vol.  29,  p. 
868;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903.  vol.  32,  p.  1001.    June  21,  1906.    (34 
Stat.,  362.) 
Treaty  of  Oct.  21,  1867,  vol.  15,  pp.  581  and  589;  agreement 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:    Apache,  Coman- 
che,     Delaware,      and 
Kiowa. 

Fort  Sill  Apaches..  . 

made  Oct.  6,  1892;  ratified  by  act  of  June  6,  1900,  vol.  31, 
p.  676,  ceding  2,488,893  acres,  of  which  445,000  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  3,444  Indians;  11,972  acres  reserved  for 
agencv,  school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.    The  residue, 
2,033,583  acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  books  486,  p. 
440;  488,  p.  478).    President's  proclamation  of  July  4,  1901, 
vol.  32,  p.  1975;  June  23,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  2007;  Sept.  4,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  2026;  and  Mar.  29,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.    Of  the 
480,000  acres  grazing  land  set  apart  under  act  of  June  6, 
1900,  1,841.92  acres  were  reserved  for  town  sites  under  act 
Mai    20  1906  (34,  Stat.  L.,  801),  82,059.52  acres  were  allotted 
to  513  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  213), 
and  480  acres  allotted  to  3  Indians  under  act  of  June  5,  as 
amended  by  act  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1018).    The  Gen- 
eral Land  Office  reports  the  sale  and  entry  of  approximately 
401,465.92  acres  under  act  of  June  5,  and  of  21,251.75  acres 
under  act  of  June  28,  1906,  to  June  30,  1911  .    (See  87404-1909.) 
(See  75344-1908.)    Under  act  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.,  471), 
and  act  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  861),  20,498  acres  allotted  to 
169  Indians.    Sale  of  unused,  unreserved  lands,  act  Mar.  3, 
1911  (36  Stat.,  1069).    Act  Mar.  4,  1915,  Department  of 
Agriculture  experiment  station.    Sale  of  school  and  agency 
reserves,  act  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  92). 
Formerly  prisoners  of  war,  remnants  and  descendants  of 

(Under  Kiowa  School.) 
Modoc. 

Chief  Geronimo's  Band.    6,149  acres  of  inherited  Kiowa 
Comanche,  and  Apache  lands  were  purchased  by  the 
United  States  for  reallotment  to  81  Indians  and  3  whites 
of  this  band,  who  elected  to  remain  in  Oklahoma.    (187 
of  the  band  removed  to  Mescalero.    See  Ann.  Kept.  1913.) 
These  lands  were  purchased  under  the  acts  of  June  25, 
1910  (36  Stat.,  855),  Aug.  24,  1912  (37  Stat.,  534),  appro- 
priating $200,000;  June  30,  1913  (38  Stat.,  94),  appropriating 
$100,000;  and  Aug.  1,  1914  (38  Stat.,  587).    See  Executive 
order  Feb.  26,  1897,  act  Mar.  3,  1901  (31  Stat.,  1173);  act 
June  28,  1902  (32  Stat.,  467);  Ex.  Doc.  No.  117,  49th  Cong., 
2d  sess. 
Agreement  with  Eastern  Shawnees  made  June  23;  1874  (see 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Modoc. 

Oakland  

Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  271),  and  confirmed  in  Indian  appro- 
priation act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.    Lands 
all  allotted—  3,966  acres  allotted  to  68  Indians,  8  acres  re- 
served for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  2  acres  for  school 
and  24  acres  for  timber.    (Letter  book  220,  p.  102.)    Act 
Mar.  3,  1909.    (35  Stat.,  752.)    Ex.  order  Sept.  14,  1916,  ex- 
tending trust  period  10  years  with  exception  of  12  allottees. 
Act  of  May  27,  1878,  vol.  20,  p.  84.    (See  Ann.  Kept,  for  1882, 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribes:  Tonka  wa    and 
Lipan. 

p.  LXII).    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee, 
vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  476.)    (See  deed  from  Nez  Perce, 
May  22,  1885,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  504.)    11,456  acres 
allotted  to  78  Indians;  160.50  acres  reserved  for  Government 
and  school  purposes.    The  residue,  79,276.60  acres,  opened 
to  settlement.    (Letter  book  257,  p.  240.)    Agreement  made 
Oct.  21,  1891,  ratified  by  Indians  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.    (For  text,  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1893, 
p.  524.) 
Article  16,  Cherokee  treaty  of  July  19,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  804; 

(Under  Osage  School.) 
Tribes:  Greatjjand  Little 
Osage. 

order  of  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  27,  1871;  act  of  June 
5,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  228.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from 
Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  482.)    (See  act  of  June  28, 
.  1906  (34  Stats.,  539).  act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stats.,  787),  and 
Public  Resolution  No.  51,  approved  Feb.  28,  1909.)    2,230 
Indians  have  been  allotted  1,065,134.31  acres  (3  selections). 
Since  July  1,  1909,  these  2,230  Indians  have  been  allotted 
1,465,350  acres  from  surplus  lands,  and  5,178.53  acres  have 
been  reserved  for  church,  town-site,  and  railroad  purposes. 
Act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.,  778).    Act  Apr.  18.  1912  (37  Stat., 
86),  and  Executive  order  June  1,  1914,  rates  of  royalty  on  oil. 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


101 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Otoe  

A  cres. 

Act  of  Mar  3,  1881,  vol  21,  p  381;  order  of  the  Secretary  of 

(Under  Otoe  School.) 
Tribes:  Oto  and  Missouri. 

Ottawa  

the  Interior,  June  25,  1881.    (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883, 
from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  479.    Under  acts 
of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388),  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794), 
and  Apr.  21,  1904  (33  Stats.,  189),  128,251  acres  were  allotted 
to  514  Indians  (885  allotments—  see  letter  book  929,  p.  326), 
720  acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  cem- 
etery purposes,  and  640  acres  set  aside  for  tribal  uses.    Also 
act  June  22,  1910  (36  Stat.,  580-581.) 
Treaty  of  Feb    23    1867    vol    15    p    513*  12  995  acres  were 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:    Ottawa    of 
Blanchards    Fork   and 
Roche  de  Boeuf. 
Pawnee  

allotted  to  160  Indians;  557.95  acres  were  authorized  to  be 
sold  by  act  of  Mar.  3,  1891  (vol.  26,  p.  989).    The  residue, 
1,587.25  acres,  sold.    Letter  book  229.  p.  115,  and  act  Mar.  3, 
1909  (35  Stat,  752). 
Act  of  Apr  10  1876  vol  19  p  29     Of  this  230  014  acres  are 

(Under  Pawnee  School.) 
Tribe:  Pawnee. 

Peoria  

Cherokee  and  53,006  acres  are  Creek  lands'    (See  deed  dated 
June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee,  vol.  6,  Indian  Deeds,  p.  470.) 
112,701  acres  allotted  to  820  Indians;  840  acres  were  reserved 
for  school,  agency,  and  cemetery  purposes;   the  residue, 
169,320  acres;  opened  to  settlement.    (Letter  books  261, 
p.  388,  and  263,  p.  5.)    Agreement  made  Nov.  23,  1892, 
ratified  bv  act  of  Mar.  3.  1893,  vol.  27,  p.  644.    (For  text  see 
Ann.  Rept.,  1893,  p.  526.) 
Treaty  of  Feb  23  1867  vol  15  p  513     43  334  acres  allotted 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:     Kaskaskia,    Mi- 
ami,    Peoria,     Pianka- 
shaw,  and  Wea. 
Ponca  

!387 

to  218  Indians.  The  residue,  6,313.27  acres,  sold  unaer  act 
of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  245). 

Acts  of  Aug  15  1876  vol  19  p   192'  Mar  3   1877  vol  19  p 

(Under  Ponca  School.) 
Tribe:  Ponca. 

Potawatomi 

287;  May  27.  1878.  vol.  20,  p.  76;  and  Mar.  3,  1881,  vol.  2l!  p! 
4"22.     (See  deed  dated  June  14,  1883,  from  Cherokee,  vol  6, 
Indian  Deeds,  p.  473.)    There  have  been  allotted  to  782 
Indians  100,734  acres,  and  reserved  for  agency,  school,  mis- 
sion, and  cemetery  purposes  523.56  acres,  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  387  acres.    (letter  books  302,  p.  311,  and 
813,  p.  401.)    Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Apr.  21, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  217.     (See  38067-1915.) 
Treaty  of  Feb  27  1867  vol  15   p   531'  act  of  May  23   1872 

(Under  Shawnee  School.) 
Tribes:    Absentee  Shaw- 
nee   and  citizen   Pota- 
watomi. 

Quapaw...  . 

vol.  17,  p.  159.    (222  716  acres  are  Creek  ceded  lands;  3*65,851 
acres  are  Seminole  lands.)    Agreements  with  citizen  Pot- 
awatomi June  25  and  absentee  Shawnees  June  26,  1890; 
ratified  and  confirmed  in  the  Indian  appropriation  act  of 
Mar.  3.  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1016-1021.    215,899.42  acres  allotted 
to  1,490  Potawatomi,  and  70,791.47  acres  allotted  to  563 
absentee  Shawnees,  and  510.63  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settlement  by  the 
President's  proclamation  of  Sept.  18.  1891,  vol.  27,  p.  989. 
(See  letter  book  222,  pp.  442  444,  and  Ann.  Rept.  for  1891, 
p.  677.)    Executive  Order  Nov.  24,  1916  and  Jan.  15,  1917, 
extending  trust  period   10  years  with  exception  of  15 
absentee  Shawnees,  85  citizen  Potawatomi. 
Treaties  of  May  13,  1833,  vol  7,  p  424  and  of  Feb  23   1867 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Quapaw. 

Sauk  and  Fox 

vol.  15,  p.  513.    56,245.21  acres  allotted  to  248  Indians,  400 
acres  reserved  for  school  and  40  acres  for  church  purposes. 
(Letter  book  335,  p.  326.)    Agreement  of  Mar.  23,  1893, 
ratified  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  2.  1895, 
vol.  28,  p.  907.    Agreement  of  Jan.  2,  1899,  ratified  in  Indian 
appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1901,  vol.  31,  p   1067 
Act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997. 
Treaty  of  Feb   18   1867   vol   15   p   495'  agreement  June  12 

(Under  Sac  and  Fox  School.) 
Tribes:  Ottawa,  Sauk  and 
Fox  of  the  Mississippi. 

Seminole  ... 

162 

1890;  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  13,  1891,  vol.  26,  p.  749.   87,683.46* 
acres  allotted  to  548  Indians,  and  800  acres  reserved  for 
school  and  agency  purposes;  the  residue  opened  to  settle- 
ment by  the  President's  proclamation  Sept.  18,  1891,  vol 
27,  p.  989.    (See  letter  book  222,  p.  169,  and  Ann.  Rept. 
for  1891,  p.  677.)    Trust  period  extended  for  10  years  by 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  27,  1896;  again  by  Executive  order 
of  Aug.  28,  1906;  again  by  Executive  order  of  Aug.  1,  1916, 
with  exception  of  55  allottees. 
Treaties  of  Mar.  21,  1866,  vol.  14,  p.  755     (See  Creek  agree- 

(Under superintendent  Five 
Civilized  Tribes.   Musko- 
gee,  Okla.) 

ment  of  Feb.  14,  1881,  Ann.  Kept.  1882,  p.  54,  and  defi- 
ciency act  of  Aug.  5,  1882,  vol.  22,  p.  265.)    Agreement  of 
Mar.  16,  1889.    (See  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
Mar.  2,  1889.)    Agreement  recorded  in  the  treaty  booK,  vol 
3,  p.  35;  agreement  made  Dec.  16,  1897,  ratified  by  the  act 
of  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  567;  agreement  of  Oct.  7,  1899,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  June  2,  1900,  vol.  31,  p.  250.    Approximately 
3,127  Indians  have  been  allotted  359,535  acres;  sold,  4,223.74 
acres,  remaining  unsold,  162  acres. 

i  Surveyed. 


102 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

OKLAHOMA—  continued. 
Seneca                             .... 

Acres. 

Treaties  of  Feb  28  1831   vol  7  p  348-  of  Dec  29  1832  vol 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:    Seneca,   Eastern 
Shawnee,        Wyandot, 
Peoria,  etc. 

Shawnee 

7.  p.  411,  and  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.    41,813  acres 
allotted  to  435  Indians;    104.22  acres  reserved  for  Govern- 
ment, church,  and  school  purposes.    Agreement  of  Dec.  2, 
1901,  ratified  by  act  of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262;  Execu- 
tive order  Feb.  15,  1916,  extending  trust  period  for  10  years, 
with  exception  of  44  allottees. 
Treaties  of  July  20,  1831,  vol.  7,  p.  351;  of  Dec.  29,  1832,  vol. 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribes:   Seneca,  absentee 
Shawnee,  Mexican 
Kickapoo. 

Wichita 

7,  p.  411;  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513,  and  agreement 
with  Modocs.  made  June  23,  1874  (see  Ann.  Rept.,  1882, 
p.  271),  confirmed  by  Congress  in  Indian  appropriation 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  447.     12,745  acres 
allotted  to  117  Indians;  86  acres  reserved  for  agency  pur- 
poses (letter  books  208,  p.  266,  and  233,  p.  207);  the  residue, 
2,543  acres,  sold  (agreement  of  Dec.  2,  1901,  ratified  by  act 
of  May  27,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  262). 
(See  treaty  of  July  4,  1866,  with  Delawares,  art.  4,  vol.  14, 

(Under  Kiowa  Agency.) 
Tribes:  loni,  Caddo,  Co- 
manche,  Delaware,  To- 
wakoni   Waco,  and 
Wichita. 

Wyandot 

p.  794.)    Unratified  agreement,  Oct.  19,  1872.    (See  Ann. 
Rept.,  1872,  p.  101.)    Agreement  made  June  4,  1891,  rati- 
fied by  act  of  Mar.  2,  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  895.     152,714  acres 
allotted  to  957  Indians;  4,151  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
school,  religious,  and  other  purposes.    The  residue,  586,468 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  (letter  book  490,  p.  90).    Presi- 
dent's proclamation  of  July  4,  1901,  vol.  32,  p.  1975. 
Unoccupied  Chickasaw  and  Choctaw  leased  lands  west  of 
the  North  Fork  of  the  Red  River.    Act  of  May  4,  1896, 
vol.  29,  p.  113.    President's  proclamation,  Mar.  16,  1896, 
vol.  29,  p.  878.    Act  of  June  6,  1900  (31  Stat.,  680). 
Treaty  of  Feb.  23,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  513.    20,942  acres  allotted 

(Under  Seneca  School.) 
Tribe:  Wyandot. 

to  244  Indians,  16  acres  to  churches,  etc.,  leaving  534.72 
acres  unallotted  (letter  book  228,  p.  332).    Unallotted  land 
sold,  act  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.,  752).    Act  Apr.  28,  1904  (33 
Stat.,  519),  allotments   on   public   domain   to   absentee 
Wyandot. 

Total  

462,702 

OREGON. 

Grande  Ronde 

Treaties  of  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  10,  p.  1143,  and  of  Dec.  21,  1855, 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Kalapuya,  Clack- 
amas,  Cow  Creek,  Lak- 
miut,  Marys  River,  Mo- 
lala,    Nestucca,    Rogue 
River,  Santiam,  Shasta, 
Tumwater,  Umpqua, 
Wapato,  and  Yamhill. 
Klamath 

!812  707 

vol.  12,  p.  982;  Executive  order  June  30,  1857.     440  acres 
reserved  for  Government  use  and  32,983  acres  allotted  to 
269  Indians.    (See  letter  book  210,  p.  328.)    Act  of  Apr.  28, 
1904,  vol.  33,  p.  567.  amending  and  ratifying  agreement  of 
June  27,  1901  (33  L.  D.,  586).    Executive  order  Apr.  29 
1916,  extending  trust  period  10  years  with  exception  of  66 
allottees. 

Treaty  of  Oct  14  1864,  vol.  16  p.  707.    Act  June  10,  1896  (29 

(Under  Klamath  School.) 
Tribes:  Klamath,  Modoc, 
Paiute,  Pit  River,  Wal- 
pape.  and  Yahooskin 
Band   of   Snake    (Sho- 
shoni). 

Siletz 

Stat.,  321).    Act  of  May  27,  1902  (32  Stat.,  260).    208,278 
acres  allotted  to  1,345  Indians;  6,094.77  acres  reserved  for 
agency,  school,  and  church  purposes.    Indian  appropria- 
tion act  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  202;  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1905,  vol.  33,  p.  1033,  and  act  of  June  21,  1906  (34 
Stat.,  367).    (See  act  of  Mar.  3,  1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  752), 
removal  of  Modocs  in  Oklahoma  to  Klamath  and  allot- 
ments thereto.)    Boundary  dispute  (see  9881-1911). 
Unratified  treaty    ^.ug    11    1855'  Executive  orders  Nov.  9, 

(Under  Siletz  Agency.) 
Tribes:    Alsea,    Coquille, 
Kusan,  Kwatami, 
Rogue    River,    Skoton, 
Shasta,  Saiustkea,  Siu- 
slaw,  Tututni,  Umpqua, 
and  13  others. 

Umatilla.  .  . 

274,032 

1855,  and  Dec.  21,  1865,  and  act  of  Mar.  3,  1875,  vol.  18,  p.  446. 
Agreement  Oct.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  323.    44,459  acres  allotted  to  551  Indians.    Resi- 
due, 177,563.66  acres  (except  5  sections),  ceded  to  United 
States.    (See  letter  book  281,  p.  358.  )    President's  proclama- 
tion, May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  866.    Acts  of  May  31,  1900, 
vol.  31,  p.  233,  and  Mar.  3,  1901,  vol.  31,  p.  1085.    Act  of 
May  13.  1910  (36  Stat.,  367).    Executive  order  July  19,  1915. 
Treaty  01  June  9,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  945,  and  act  of  Aug.  5,  1882, 

(Under  Umatilla  School.) 
Tribes:  Cayuse.  Umatilla, 
and  Walla  walla. 

vol.  22,  p.  297;  Mar.  3,  1885,  vol.  23,  p.  340,  and  sec.  8  of  act 
of  Oct.  17,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  559.    (See  orders  Secretary  of 
Interior,  Dec.  4,  1888,  Ann.  Rept.,  1891,  p.  682.)    82,742 
acres  allotted  to  1,118  Indians,  980  acres  reserved  for  school 
and  mission  purposes.    (See  letter  book  255,  p.  132.)    Act 
of  July  1,  1902,  vol.  32,  p.  730;  act  Mar.  2,  1917  (40  Stat.), 
providing  for  allotments  as  long  as  any  land  is  available. 

Outboundaries  surveyed. 


2  Surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


103 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  191 7— Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 


OEEGON— continued. 

Warm  Springs 

(Under   Warm    Springs 

School.) 

Tribes:  Des  Chutes,  John 
Day,  Paiute,  Tenino. 
Warm  Springs,  and 
Wasco. 


Acres. 
'  322, 275 


Total. 


1,209,014 


SOUTH  DAKOTA. 

Crow  Creek  and  Old  Winne- 

bago. 

(Under  Crow  Creek  School.) 

Tribes:  Lower  Yanktonai, 

Lower  Brule,  Minicon- 

jou,    and    Two    Kettle 

Sioux. 


[Lake  Traverse 

(Under  Sisseton  School.) 
Tribes:  Sisseton  and  Wah- 
peton  Sioux. 


11,203 


Cheyenne  River 

(Under     Cheyenne     River 

School.) 

Tribes:  Blackfeet,  Mini- 
conjou,  Sans  Arcs,  and 
Two  Kettle  Sioux. 


Lower  Brule 

(Under  Lower  Brule  School. 

Tribes:  Lower  Brule  and 

Lower  Yanktonai  Sioux. 


250,202 


i  37, 525 


Treaty  of  June  25,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  963.  140,529  acres  allotted 
to  968  Indians  under  the  general  allotment  act  of  February, 
1887,  as  amended,  and  1,195  acres  reserved  for  church, 
school,  and  agency  purposes.  Boundary  dispute:  Acts 
Aug.  19,  1890  (26  Stat.,  355);  June  6,  1894  (28  Stat.,  86),  and 
Mar.  2,  1917  (40  Stat.,  — ). 


Order  of  department,  July  1,  1863  (see  Ann.  Rept.,  1863,  p. 
318);  treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive 
order,  Feb.  27, 1885  (see  President's  proclamation  of  Apr.  17, 
1885,  annulling  Executive  order  of  Feb.  27, 1885;  Ann.  Rept., 
1885,  p.  51);  act  of  Mar.  2,  1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888;  President's 
proclamations,  Feb.  10.  1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  There  have 
been  alloted  to  1,461  Indians  272,720  acres,  and  reserved 
for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes  1,076.90  acres. 

Treaty  of  Feb.  19,  1867,  vol.  15,  p.  505;  agreement,  Sept.  20, 
1872;  confirmed  in  Indian  appropriation  act  approved 
June  22,  1874,  vol.  18,  p.  167.  (See  pp.  328-337,  Comp.  In- 
dian Laws.)  Agreement,  Dec.  12,  1889,  ratified  by  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  vol.  26,  pp.  1035-1038.  308,838  acres  allotted 
to  2,006  Indians,  32,840.25  acres  reserved  for  State  school  pur- 
poses, 1,347.01  acres  for  church  and  agency  purposes;  the 
residue,  574,678.40  acres,  opened  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  Apr.  11,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  1017.) 
Trust  period  extended  10  years,  Executive  order  of  Apr.  16, 
1914. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders. 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20, 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22, 
p.  624,  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Doc.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10.) 
President's  proclamations  of  Feb.  7,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  2035, 
and  Mar.  30,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2340.    1,021,324.99  acres  have 
been  allotted  to  3, 687  Indians.    (See  L.  B.  828,  p.  321.)    Act 
of  May  29. 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  460).    Under  President's  procla- 
mation of  Aug.  19,  1909  (36  Stat.,  2500),  1,158,010  acres  were 
opened  to  settlement,  leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved 
250,202  acres. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29,  1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20, 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3,  1883,  vol.  22. 
p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act 
of  Apr.  30, 1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol.  29,  p.  10.) 
Agreement  made  Mar.  1, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899, 
vol.  30,  p.  1362  ceding  120,000  acres  to  the  United  States. 
202,992  acres  allotted  to  868  Indians,  and  964.06  acres  re- 
served for  agency,  school,  and  religious  purposes,  leaving 
unallotted  and  unreserved  37,525  acres.    (See  letter  book 
498,  p.  336.)    (See  act  of  Apr.  21,  1906,  34  Stats.,  124  and 
1048,  and  President's  proclamations  of  Aug.  12,  1907,  and 
Sept.  24, 1913.) 

i  Surveyed. 


104 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


SOUTH  DAKOTA— continued. 


Pine  Ridge 

(Under  Pine  Ridge  Agency.) 
Tribes:  Brule  Sioux, 
Northern  Cheyenne, 
and  Oglalla  Sioux. 


. 


Rosebud , 

(Under  Rosebud  School.) 
Tribes:  Loafer,  Minicon- 
jou,  Northern  Oglalla, 
Two  Kettle,  Upper 
Brule,  and  Wazhazhe 
Sioux. 


Yankton 

(Under  Yankton  School.) 
Tribe:  Yankton  Sioux. 


Total 

UTAH. 

Goshute  and  scattering  bands 
Paiutes 

Cedar  City  and  Indian  Peak 


Panguitch. 
Shivwits.. 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


Acres. 
200,000 


498,930 


34,500 
7,000 


126,880 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 1868,  vol .  15.  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders. 
Jan.  11,  Mar.  16, and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876:  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol .  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20, 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17, 1882.  (For  modification  see  sun- 
dry civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3, 1883 , 22  Stats., 
624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  14,  p.  305.)  Act  of 
Apr.  30, 1888  (25  Stats.,  94),  not  accepted.  Act  of  Mar.  2, 

1889,  vol.  25,  p.  888.    President's  proclamation  of  Feb.  10, 

1890,  vol.  26.  p.  1554.    (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896, 29  Stats.,  10.) 
A  tract  of  32,000  acres  in  Nebraska  was  set  apart  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Jan.  24,  1882,  and  was  restored  to  the  public 
domain  by  Executive  order  of  Jan.  25, 1904;  and  by  Execu- 
tive order  of  Feb.  20,  1904,  640  acres  of  this  land  was  set 
apart  for  Indian  school  purposes  and  is  called  the  Siou 
additional  tract.    (See  Nebraska.)    Act  of  Mar.  2,  1889 
(25  Stats.,  888),  authority  of  President  of  July  29,  1904, 
2,191.369  acres  have  been  allotted  to  8,074  Indians,  and 
11,333.68  acres  reserved  for  agency,  school,  and  church 
purposes,  aggregating  866,323.19,  leaving  unallotted  and 
unreserved  200,000  acres.    Lands  still  in  process  of  allot- 
ment under  acts  of  Mar.  2,  1889  (25  Stat.  L.,  888),  Mar.  1, 
1907  (34  tvtat.  L.,  1048),  and  May  29, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  451). 
Act  May  27,  1910  (36  Stat.,  440),  40,960  acres  State  school 
land;  22,434  acres  timber  reserved.    President's  proclama- 
tion, June  29,  1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  169,592  acres 
May  1, 1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  29, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  635,  and  Executive  orders, 
Jan.  11 ,  Mar.  16,  and  May  20, 1875,  and  Nov.  28, 1876;  agree- 
ment ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1877,  vol.  19,  p.  254,  and 
Executive  orders,  Aug.  9, 1879,  and  Mar.  20, 1884.  Unrati- 
fied  agreement  of  Oct.  17,  1882.  (For  modification  see- 
sundry  civil  appropriation  act  approved  Mar.  3, 1883,  vol. 
22,  p.  624;  for  text  see  Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol .  14.  p.  305.) 
Act  of  Apr.  30,  1888,  vol.  25,  p.  94,  not  accepted.  Act  of 
Mar.  2, 1889,  vol.  25:-  p.  888.  President's  proclamation  of 
Feb.  10, 1890,  vol.  26,  p.  1554.  (See  act  of  Feb.  20, 1896,  vol. 

29,  p.  10.)    1,853,605  acres  allotted  to  8,495  Sioux  Indians, 
416,000  acres  opened  to  settlement,  29,392.01  reserved  for 
Government  purposes,  churches,  cemeteries,  etc.    Agree- 
ment made  Mar.  10, 1898,  ratified  by  act  of  Mar.  3, 1899,  vol. 

30,  p.  1364.    Act  of  Apr.  23,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  254,  ratifying 
agreement  made  Sept.  14, 1901.    President's  proclamation 
of  May  16, 1904,  vol.  33,  p.  2354.    Act  Mar.  1 , 1907  (34  Stat., 
1048) ;  act  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stat. ,  1230) ;  act  May  29, 1908  (35 
Stat.,  451);  act  May  30,  1910  (36  Stat.,  448);  President's 
proclamation ,  Aug.  24, 1908  (35  Stat. ,  2203) ,  opening  838,000 
acres  in  Tripp  County.    President's  proclamation,  June 
29, 1911  (40  L.  D.,  164),  opening  300,000  acres  in  Mellette 
and  Washabaugh  Counties,  43,520  acres  State  school  land 
Executive  order,  July  6, 1912. 

Treaty  of  Apr.  19, 1858,  vol.  11,  p.  744.  268,263  acres  allotted 
to  2,613  Indians  and  1,252.89  acres  reserved  for  agency, 
church,  and  school  purposes.  (See  letter  book  207,  p.  1.) 
Agreement  Dec.  31,  1892,  ratified  by  act  of  Aug.  15,  1894, 
vol.  28,  p.  314.  The  residue  open  to  settlement.  (See 
President's  proclamation,  May  16,  1895,  vol.  29,  p.  865.) 
Executive  order  Apr.  20,  1916,  extending  trust  period  10 
years,  with  exception  of  162  allottees. 


Executive  order,  Mar.  23, 1914. 

Executive  order,  Aug.  2, 1915,  reserving  approximately  7,000 
acres  for  use  of  Cedar  City  and  Indian  Peak  Bands  of 
Paiutes. 

136.52  acres  in  Garfield  County,  Utah, purchased  Nov.  1, 1903. 

About  1  township  in  Washington  County,  Utah,  withdrawn 

.  by  departmental  order  based  on  office  recommendation  of 
Sept.  28,  1891  (L.  B.,  223,  p.  270).  Rights  of  squatters  in 
withdrawal  purchased  by  United  States.  (See  also  act  of 
Mar.  3,  1891,  26  Stat.  L.,  989-1005.)  Executive  order  Apr 
21,  1916,  withdrawing  26,880  acres  as  Shebit  or  Shivwite 
Reservation. 

i  Unsurveyed. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


105 


TABLE  6.— General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

UTAH—  continued. 
Uintah  Valley 

Acres. 
i  249  340 

Executive  orders  Oct  3  1861*  act  of  June  18  1878  (2  Stats 

(Under  Uintah  and  Ouray 
Agency.) 
Tribes:    Gosiute,  Pa  van  t. 
Uinta,   Yampa,    Grand 
River       Uncompahgre, 
and  White  River  Ute. 

Uncompahgre  

165);  acts  of  May  5,  1864,  vol.  13,  p.  63,  and  May  24,  1888,' 
vol.  25,  p.  157;  joint  resolution  of  June  19,  1902,  vol.  32,  p. 
744;  act  of  Mar.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  997;  Indian  appropriation 
act,  approved  Apr.  21,  1904,  vol.  33,  p.  207;  President's 
proclamations  of  July  14,  1905,  setting  aside  1,010,000  acres 
as  a  forest  reserve,  2,100  acres  as  town  sites.    1.004,285  acres 
opened  to  homestead  entry,  2,140  acres  in  mining  claims; 
under  act  May  27,  1902  (32  Stats.,  263).  99,407  acres  allotted 
to  1,284  Indians,  and  60,160  acres  under  reclamation,  the 
residue,  179,194.65  acres,  unallotted  and  unreserved.    (See 
letter  book  75,  p.  398.)    Executive  order,  Aug.  19.  1912,  re- 
storing lands  of  Fort  Duchesne  Military  Reservation  to  the 
supervision  of  Interior  Department. 
Executive  order  Jan  5  1882     (See  act  of  June  15  1880  rati- 

(Under Uintah  and  Ouray 
Agency.) 
Tribe:  Tabaquache  Ute. 

fying  the  agreement  of  Mar.  6,  1880,  vol.  21,  p.  199.)  12,540 
acres  allotted  to  83  Indians,  remainder  of  reservation  re- 
stored to  public  domain,  act  of  June  7,  1897,  vol.  30,  p.  62. 
(Letter  book  403,  p.  115.)  Joint  resolution  of  June  19,  1902, 
vol.  32,  p.  744. 

Total 

317  720 

WASHINGTON. 

Chehalis 

Order  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  July  8  1864'  Executive 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Chinook  (Tsinuk), 
Clatsop,  and  Chehalis. 

Columbia... 

order,  Oct.  1,  1886.    471  acres  set  aside  for'  school  purposes. 
The  residue,  3,753.63  acres,  restored  to  the  public  domain 
for  Indian  homestead  entry.    36  Indians  made  homestead 
selections,  covering  all  the  land.    (See  letter  book  152,  p. 
201,  and  153,  p.  45.) 
Executive  orders.  Apr.  19,  1879,  Mar   6   1880   and  Feb   23 

(Under  Colville  School.) 
Tribe:    Columbia   (Moses 
Band). 

Colville... 

U,009,580 

1883.    (See  Indian  appropriation  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23, 
p.  79.)    Agreement  made  July  7,  1883,  ratified  by  act  of 
July  4,  1884,  vol.  23.  p.  79.    Executive  order,  May  1,  1886; 
Executive  order  of  Mar.  9,   1894;  department  orders  of 
Apr.  11,  1894,  and  Apr.  20,  1894,  and  Executive  order  of 
Jan.   19,   1895.    26.218  acres  allotted  to  35  Indians  (see 
Executive  order  of  May  21,  1886,  and  act  of  Mar.  8,  1906,  34 
Stats.,  55). 
Executive  orders,  Apr.  9  and  July  2  1872-   agreement  made 

(Under  Colville  Agency.) 
Tribes:     Coeur    d'Alene, 
Colville,  Kalispel,  OHn- 
agan,     Lake    Methow, 
Nespelim,      Pend      d' 
OreUle,     Sanpoil,     and 
Spokan. 

Hoh  River  . 

640 

July  7.  1883,  ratified  by  act  of  July  4,  1884,  vol.  23,  p.  79. 
Act  of  July  1,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  62.    (See  acts  of  Feb.  20, 
1896,  vol.  29,  p.  9,  and  July  1,  1898,  vol.  30,  p.  593.)    51,653 
acres  in  north  half  allotted  to  660  Indians  (see  letter  book 
428,  p.  100);  remainder  of  north  half,  estimated  at  1,449,268 
acres,  opened  to  settlement  Oct.  10,  1900  (see  proclamation 
of  the  President,  dated  Apr.  10,  1900,  31  Stats.,  p.  1963). 
240  acres  have  been  reserved  for  town  sites.    2,750.82  acres 
temporarily  withdrawn  for  town  sites.    287,419  acres  al- 
lotted to  2,469  Indians.    The  residue,  1,009,580  acres  (esti- 
mated), unallotted.    Act  of  Feb.  7,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  803. 
Allotments  made  under  act  of  Mar.  22,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  80), 
and  act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.,  863).    President's  procla- 
mation, opening  reservation  dated  May  3,  1916  (39  Stat.,  p.  58 
of  proclamations),  act  Aug.  31,  1916  (39  Stat.,  672). 
Executive  order,  Sept  11,  1893 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Hoh. 
Kalispel 

4,629 

Executive  order,  Mar.  23,  1914 

(Under      Coeur      d'Alene 
Agency,  Idaho.) 
Klickitat 

6  townships  in  Gilliam  County,  Wash    set  aside  for  allotment 

(Nonreservation;  Roseburg, 
Oreg.) 
Lummi  .  . 

selection  by  about  200  Indians  under  sec.  4,  act  Feb.  8,  1887 
(24  Stat^  388),  as  amended.     (See  80088-1912.) 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol  12  p  927-  Executive 

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:   Dwamish,   Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
misn,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Makah  

2  19,  312 

order,  Nov.  22,  1873.  Allotted  12,560.94  acres  to  109  Indians; 
school  conducted  on  2-acre  tract  purchased  from  John 
Martin. 

Treaty  of  Neah  Bay,  Jan.  31,  1855,  vol.  12,  p  939-  Executive 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribes:  Makah  and  Qui- 
leute. 

orders,  Oct.  26,  1872,  Jan.  2  and  Oct.  21,  1873.  3,727  acres 
allotted  to  373  Indians.  (See  letter  book  960,  228  and  37679, 
1907.) 

i  Partly  surreyed. 


2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


106 


COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

WASHINGTON—  continued. 
Muckleshoot 

Acres. 

Executive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  Apr.  9,  1874.    44  Indians 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribe:  Muckleshoot. 
Nisqualli 

have  been  allotted  3,532.72  acres. 
Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek,  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10  p.  1132;  Exec- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:          Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualli,       Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stau- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 
Ozette                  

640 

utive  order,  Jan.  20,  1857.    Land  all  allotted.    4,718  acres  to 
30  Indians. 

Executive  order,  Apr.  12,  1893. 

(Under  Neah  Bay  School.) 
Tribe:  Ozette. 
Port  Madison     

1  65 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  order  of 

(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:  Dwamish,  Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Puyallup                                .  . 

the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Oct.  21,  1864.    7,219  acres 
allotted  to  51  Indians;  the  residue,  65  acres,  unallotted. 

Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek  Dec.  26,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Muckleshoot, 
Nisqualli,  Puyallup, 
Skwawksnamish,  Stail- 
akoom,  and  5  others. 

Quileute 

2  837 

ecutive  orders,  Jan.  20,  1857,  and  Sept.   6,   1873.    17,463 
acres  allotted  to  167   Indians.    Agreement  made  Nov.  21, 
1876,  ratified  by  act  of  Feb.  20,  1893  ,vol.  27,  p.  464.    (For 
text  see  annual  report  1893,  p.  518.)    The  residue,  599  acres 
laid  out  as  an  addition  to  the  city  of  Tacoma,  has  been  sold, 
with  the  exception  of  39.79  acres  reserved  for  school,  and 
19.43  acres  for  church  and  cemetery  purposes,  under  acts  of 
Mar.  3,  1893  (27  Stat.,  633,  June  7,  1897)  (30  Stats.,  62),  and 
act  of  June  21,  1906  (34  Stats.,  377). 
Executive  order  Feb.  19,  1889. 

(Under  Neah  Bav  School.) 
Tribe:  Quileute. 
Quinaielt  

1  168,553 

Treaties  of  Olympia,  July  1,  1855,  and  Jan.  25,  1856,  vol.  12 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Quaitso  and  Quin- 
aielt. 

Shoalwater 

i  335 

p.  971:  Executive  order,  Nov.  4,  1873.    Under  acts  of  Feb. 
8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388).  and  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  690 
Indians  have  been  allotted  54,989.80  acres  and  456.56  have 
been  reserved  for  agency,  lighthouse,  and  other  purposes, 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  168,553  acres.    Act  Mar. 
4,  1911  (36  Stat.,  1545.) 
Executive  order   Sept   22   1866  55  535-7-1909. 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Shoalwater    and 
Chehalis. 
Skokomish 

Treaty  of  Point  No  Point   Jan.  26,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  933;  Ex- 

(Under Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:    Clallam,    Skoko- 
mish, and  Twana. 

Snohomish  or  Tulalip  
(Under  Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:   Dwamish,   Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish, Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Spokane 

1324 
82  327 

ecutive  order,  Feb.  25,  1874.    Allotted  in  treaty    reserve 
4,990  acres;  residue,  none.    (See  L.  B.,  895,  p.  268.)    Allot- 
ted in  Executive  order  addition,  known  as  the  Fisher  ad- 
dition, 814  acres;  residue,  none.    (L.  B.,  895,  p.  285.)    62 
allotments. 
Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol  12,  p  927;  Execu- 
tive  order,   Dec.   23,    1873.    22,166   acres   allotted   to   164 
Indians. 

Executive  order,  Jan    18,  1881     Agreement  made  Mar    18, 

(Under  Spokane  Agency.) 
Tribe:  Spokan. 

Squaxon  Island  (Klahchemin) 

1887,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriation  act  approved  July 
13,  1892,  vol.  27,  p.  139.    (For  text  see  Ann.  Kept.,  1892, 
p.  743.)    Joint  resolution  of  Congress  of  June  19,  1902,  vol 
32,  p.  744.    Under  act  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  458) 
approximately  628  Indians  have  been  allotted  65,114  acres, 
and  1,247.30  acres  set  aside  for  church,  school,  agency,  and 
town-site  purposes.    By  proclamation  of  May  22,  1909,  the 
President  opened  the  surplus  lands  to  settlement.    5,781 
acres  classified  as  agricultural  land,  82,647.50  acres  classi- 
fied as  timber  reserved  for  tribal  use. 
Treaty  of  Medicine  Creek  Dec.  26  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1132;  land 

(Under  Cushman  School.) 
Tribes:  Nisqualli,  Puyal- 
lup,    Skwawksnamish, 
Stailakoom.and  5  others. 

all  allotted,  1,494.15  acres,  to  23  Indians. 

Surveyed. 


2  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS 


107 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  ivhat  ageny  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 

Area  (unal- 
lotted). 

Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 
reserves. 

WASHINGTON—  continued. 
Swinomish  (Perrys  Island).. 

Acres. 

Treaty  of  Point  Elliott,  Jan.  22,  1855,  vol.  12,  p.  927;  Execu- 

(Under Tulalip  School.) 
Tribes:   Dwamish,   Etak- 
mur,    Lummi,    Snoho- 
mish,  Sukwamish,  and 
Swiwamish. 
Yakima  

1  412,  404 

tive  order,  Sept.  9,  1873.    Allotted,  7,359  acres  to  71  Indians; 
reserved  for  school,  89.80  acres. 

Treaty  of  Walla  Walla,  June  9,  1855  vol  12  p.  951.    Agree- 

(Under Yakima  School.) 
Tribes:    Klikitat,  Paloos, 
Topnish,    Wasco,    and 
Yakima. 

ment  made  Jan.  13,  1885,  ratified  by  Indian  appropriatior 
act  approved  Mar.  3,  1893,  vol.  27/p.  631.    (For  texts  sec 
Misc.  Indian  Docs.,  vol.  41,  p.  227;   see  also  Ann.  Rept., 
1893,  pp.  520-521,  and  S.  Ex.  Docs.  No.  21,  49th  Cong.,  1st 
sess.,  and  No.  45,  50th  Cong.,  1st  sess.)    Executive  order 
Nov.  28,  1892.    Agreement,  Jan.  8,  1894,  ratified  by  act  of 
Aug.  15,  1894,  vol.  28,  p.  320.    296,407  acres  allotted  to  3,137 
Indians,  and  1,020.24  acres  reserved  for  agency,  church,  and 
school  purposes.    (See  letter  books  354,  p.  419;   416.  p.  263, 
and  879,  p.  213.)    Act  of  Dec.  21,  1904  (33  Stats.,  595),  recog- 
nizing claim  of  Indians  to  293,837  acres  additional  land,  sub- 
ject to  the  right  of  bona  fide  settlers  or  purchasers,  acquired 
prior  to  Mar.  5,  1904.    (See  39848,  1909.)    Act  Mar.  6,  1906 
(34  Stat.,  53),  and  act  May  6,  1910  (36  Stat.,  348),  under 
which  158,102  acres  were  allotted  to  1,369  children.    (See 
9262-14.) 

Total 

1,699,646 

WISCONSIN. 

Lac  Court  Oreille  

2  540 

Treaty  of  Sept.  30,  1854  vol.  10,  p  1109'  lands  withdrawn  by 

(Under  Hayward  School.) 
Tribe:    Lac  Court  Oreille 
Band   of  Chippewa   of 
Lake  Superior. 
Lac  du  Flambeau  . 

24,  424 

General  Land  Office,  Nov.  22,  1860,  Apr.  4,  1865.    (See  re- 
port by  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mar.  1,  1873.)    Act  of  May 
29,  1872,  vol.  17,  p.  190.    68,511  acres  allotted  to  872  Indians. 
Act  of  Feb.  3,  1903,  vol.  32,  p.  795.    (See  95927-1915.) 
Treatv  of  Sept.  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109   lands  selected  by 

(Under  Lac  du  Flambeau 
School.) 
Tribe:  Lac  du  Flambeau 
Band   of  Chippewa  of 
Lake  Superior. 

La  Pointe  (Bad  River)  

46,  613 

Indians.    (See  report  of  Supt.  Thompson,  Nov.  14,  1863, 
and  report  to  Secretarv  of  the  Interior,  June  22,  1866.    De- 
partment order  of  June  26,  1866.    Act  of  May  29,  1872, 
vol.  17,  p.  190.    45,756  acres  allotted  to  600  Indians;  act  of 
Feb.  3,   1903  (32  Stats.,   795),  leaving  unallotted  24,424 
acres. 
Treatv  of  Sept  .  30,  1854,  vol.  10,  p.  1109.    368.91  acres  patented 

(Under  La  Pointe  Agency.) 
Tribe:    La  Pointe  Band 
of  Chippewa   of   Lake 
Superior. 

Potawatomi 

under  art.  10;  195.71  acres  fishing  ground.    83,871  acres  allot- 
ted to  1,063  Indians.    (See  letter  to  General  Land  Office, 
Sept.  17,  1859,  and  letter  book  381,  p.  49.)    Acts  of  Feb. 
11,  1901  (31  Stats.,  766),  and  Mar.  2,  1907  (34  Stats.,  1217), 
leaving  unallotted  and  unreserved  46,613  acres. 
Act  June  30   1913  (38  Stats     77  102)   which  authorized  the 

(Under  Carter  School.) 
Red  Cliff 

purchase  of  land  in  Wisconsin  and  Michigan  for  $150,000. 
Treaty  of  Sept   30   1854   vol   10   p   1109'   Executive  order 

lUnder  Red  Cliff  Agency.) 
Tribe:    La  Pointe  Band 
(Buffalo  Chief)  of  Chip- 
pewa of  Lake  Superior. 

Menominee  .  .  . 

3  231,  680 

Feb.  21,  1856.    (See  Indian  Office  letters  of  Sept.  3,  1858,  and* 
May  25.  1863,  and  General  Land  Office  letter  of  May  27, 
1863.    See  Executive  orders.    See  report  of  Supt.  Thomp- 
son, May  7,  1863.    Lands  -withdrawn  by  General  Land 
Office  May  8  and  June  3,  1863.)    2,535.91  acres  allotted 
to  35  Indians  under  treaty;   of  the  residue  11,566.90  acres 
were  allotted  to  169  Indians  under  joint  resolution  of  Feb. 
20.  1895,  vol.  28,  p.  970,  and  40.10  acres  were  reserved  for 
school  purposes. 
Treaties  of  Oct   18  1848  vol  9  p  952'   of  May  12  1854   vol 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribe:  Menominee. 
Oneida 

10,  p.  1064,  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679,  and  May  18,'  1916 
(39  Stats  ..123-153). 
Treatv  of  Feb  3   1838  vol   7  p  566     65  428  13  acres  allotted 

(Under  Oneida  School.) 
Tribe:  Oneida. 
Stockbridge 

to  1,*502  Indians;  remainder,  84.08  acres,  reserved  for  school 
purposes. 
Treaties  of  Nov  24  1848  vol  9  p  136'   Feb  5  1856    vol  11 

(Under  Keshena  School.) 
Tribes:    Stockbridge  and 
Munsee. 

p.  663,  and  of  Feb.  11,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  679;  'act  of  Feb.  6, 
1871,  vol.  16,  p.  404.    (For  area,  see  act  of  June  22,  1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  174.)    167  Indians  allotted  8,920  acres.    Patents  in 
fee,  act  June  21,  1906  (34  Stat.,  382).    Act  of  Mar.  3,  1893  (27 
Stat.,  744). 

Total  

303,257 

i  Partly  surveyed. 


8  Surveyed. 


•  Outboundaries  surveyed. 


108 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  6. — General  data  for  each  Indian  reservation,  under  what  agency  or  school,  tribes 
occupying  or  belonging  to  it,  area  not  allotted  or  specially  reserved,  and  authority  for 
its  establishment,  to  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Name  of  reservation  and 
tribe. 


WYOMING. 


Wind  River , 

(Under  Shoshone  School.) 
Tribes:  Northern  Arapaho 
and   Eastern   Band   of 
Shoshoni. 


Total 

Grand  total . 


Area  (unal- 
lotted). 


A  cres. 
1584,940 


584.940 


35,775,829 


Treaties,  laws,  or  other  authorities  relating  to 


Treaty  of  July  3, 1868,  vol.  15,  p.  673;  acts  of  June  22, 1874,  vol. 
18,  p.  166,  and  Dec.  15, 1874,  vol.  18,  p.  291;  Executive  order. 
May  21,  1887.  Agreement  made  Apr.  21,  1896,  amended 
and  accepted  by  act  of  June  7, 1896  (vol.  30,  p.  93);  amend- 
ment accepted  by  Indians  July  10,  1897.  (See  Land  Div. 
letter  book  359,  p.  468.)  Act  of  Mar.  3,  1905,  ratifying  and 
amending  agreement  with  Indians  of  Apr.  21,  1904.  (See 
vol.  33,  p.  1016.)  President's  proclamation  June  2,  1906, 
opening  ceded  part  to  settlement.  It  contained  1.472,844.15 
acres.  (See  letter  book  866,  p.  157.)  Reserved  for  Mail 
Camp,  120  acres;  reserved  for  Mail  Camp  Park,  40  acres; 
reserved  for  bridge  purposes,  40  acres.  Subject  to  disposi- 
tion under  President's  proclamation,  1,438,633.66  acres. 
246,822  acres  were  allotted  to  2,401  Indians,  and  1,792.05 
acres  were  reserved  for  agency,  school,  church,  and  ceme- 
tery purposes,  under  acts  of  Feb.  8,  1887  (24  Stats.,  388). 
as  amended  by  act  of  Feb.  28,  1891  (26  Stats.,  794),  and 
treaty  of  July  3,  1868  (15  Stats.,  673),  leaving  unallotted 
and  unreserved  584,940  acres.  Act  of  Aug.  21, 1914  (39  Stat., 
511),  mining,  oil,  and  gas  lands. 


1  Partly  surveyed. 

TABLE  7. — Lands  set  apart  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917,  for  temporary  use 
and  occupancy  by  mission  organizations. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act  and  citation. 

Warrant 
for 
action. 

Acre- 
age. 

Arizona: 
Navajo 

Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions 

Policy 

40  00 

Do  

St.  Michael's  Catholic  Mission 

do 

10  00 

Pima  (Gila  River)  .  . 

Franciscan  Fathers  of  Arizona 

do 

12  50 

San  Xavier  (Vamori 

Board  of  Home  Missions  of  Presby- 

do 

5  00 

Papago  Village). 
Western  Na  vaj  o.  .  .     . 

terian  Church  in  the  United  States 
of  America. 
General  Conference  of  Mennonites  of 

do 

1  88 

Minnesota:  NettLake.... 

North  America. 
Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions... 

do 

.08 

Nevada:  Western     Sho- 

Board of  Home  Missions  of  Presby- 

  do... 

4.98 

shone. 
Washington:  Colville  

terian  Church  hi  the  United  States 
of  America. 
Roman  Catholic  Mission  

Mar.  22,  1906  (34 

..  ..do... 

12.50 

Stat  L    62) 

Total  

86  94 

TABLE  8. — Patents  in  fee  issued  to  mission  organizations  during  fiscal  year  ended  June 

30,  1917. 


States  and  reservations. 

Organization. 

Act. 

Citation. 

Acre- 
age. 

Minnesota:  Nett  Lake.. 

Northern  Minnesota  Conference  of  the 

May   18,1916 

39  Stat  

40.00 

Nebraska:  Winnebago.. 
North  Dakota:      Fort- 

Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
Woman's  Board  of  Domestic  Missions, 
Reformed  Church  in  America. 
Bureau  of  Catholic  Indian  Missions  

Mar.    3,  1909 
do  

35  Stat.,  814... 
do  

15.00 
160.00 

Berthold. 
South  Dakota: 
Cheyenne  River  

Domestic    and    Foreign    Missionary 
Societv  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal 

May   29,1908 
or  Mar.  3 

Stat  

35  Stat.  814 

10.00 

Rosebud  . 

Church   in   the    United    States   of 
America. 
American  Missionary  Association 

1909. 
Mar      3  1909 

do 

132  32 

Total  

357  32 

COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


109 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Total,  1917... 

26,657 

$1,315,112 

1916...     . 

26,956 

1,  206,  826 

1915 

27,927 

1,177,600 

1914  

22,968 

1,  194,  185 

1913  

24,490 

1,316,298 

1912 

22,564 

1,211,335 

1911 

21  235 

847,  456 

1900  

177,  169 

1890 

131,374 

Arizona  

8,208 

490,865 

Camp  Verde 

Basket  making 

60 

450 

Woodcutting  

3 

75 

Total 

63 

525 

Colorado  River 

Basket  making  

20 

500 

Bead  work 

75 

1,500 

Woodcutting  

120 

15,000 

Total 

215 

17,000 

Fort  Apache                      .... 

Basket  making  

40 

600 

Bead  work 

25 

50 

Woodcutting 

200 

4,200 

Total 

265 

4,850 

Havasupai                       ..... 

Basket  making  

40 

600 

W  ood  cutting 

12 

140 

Total  

52 

740 

Kaibab  

Basket  making  

5 

100 

I^eupp 

Blanket  weaving 

450 

18,500 

Woodcutting  

50 

750 

Others                   

100 

5,000 

Total  

600 

24,250 

Moqui  .                   

Basket  making  .'  

75 

900 

Blanket  weaving  

250 

20,577 

Pottery 

30 

600 

Woodcutting 

60 

1.268 

Others         

635 

63,255 

Total  

1,050 

86,600 

Navajo  J 

Blanket  weaving 

750 

190,000 

Woodcutting  

60 

56,000 

Total 

810 

246,000 

Pima1 

Basket  making  

1,050 

10,500 

Pottery 

200 

350 

Woodcutting  

450 

7,500 

Total 

1,700 

18,350 

Salt  River 

Basket  making  

126 

2,700 

Pottery 

7 

150 

tr     .- 

Woodcutting  

300 

9,500 

Total  

433 

12,350 

San  Carlos 

Basket  making  

150 

500 

Bead  work 

100 

150 

Woodcutting 

200 

11,200 

Total  

450 

'    11,850 

San  Xavier                                               ..- 

Basket  making  

700 

7,000 

Pottery                         

50 

400 

W  oodcutting 

400 

36,000 

Others  

12 

600 

Total  

1,162 

44,000 

i 1916  report. 


110 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9  —Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Arizona—  Continued. 

Basket  making  

30 

$200 

Truxton  Canon  

Woodcutting        

30 

3,000 

Others  

103 

3,400 

163 

6,600 

Basket  making  

75 

250 

Blanket  weaving  
Woodcutting                  .  . 

1,000 
40 

15,000 
900 

~»  . 

Others  

125 

1,500 

1,240 

17,650 

1,306 

34,990 

Basket  making  

30 

600 
9ftO 

Beadwork  
Woodcutting  

25 

3,000 

65 

3,800 

Woodcutting  

6 

800 

Basket  making  

8 

140 

Fort  Bidwell           -  

Basket  making  

50 

500 

OK(\ 

Beadwork  
Others  

35 

800 

Tntftl 

105 

1,550 

Beadwork  

30 

2,000 

1    900 

Pottery  
Woodcutting               

125 

5,000 

Others  

2 

1,000 

Tntal 

163 

9,200 

Basket  making  

60 

300 
80 

Beadwork  
Fishing                   

150 

700 

Woodcutting  

130 

500 

350 

1,580 

Basket  making  

75 

1,000 

Fishing  2  

Woodcutting 

200 
40 

2,000 

Others  

5 

1,000 

320 

5,000 

Malki  

Basket  making  

20 
31 

205 
3,320 

Woodcutting  

51 

3,525 

Palo                                     

Basket  making  

47 

1,490 

Lace  making  
Pottery              

21 
5 

33 

Woodcutting          

12 

450 

Others  

1 

12 

/T\nfa1                                                                              

86 

2,060 

Basket  making  

35 

908 
1  673 

Lace  making  
Pottery        

2 

4 

W  ood  cutting 

35 

2,128 

Fishing                     

1 

150 

Others  

4 

1,560 

108 

6,423 

1 1916  report. 


2  Overestimated  last  year. 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ill 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

California  —  Continued. 
Tule  River  

Basket  making 

24 

$192 

Woodcutting  

20 

720 

Total  

44 

912 

Idaho 

255 

38  600 

Coeur  d'Alene 

Breadwork 

3 

-     200 

W  oodcutting 

25 

10,  000 

Others  

7 

15,100 

Total 

40 

25  300 

Fort  Hall 

Basket  making 

20 

200 

Breadwork 

45 

600 

Others  

150 

12,500 

Total  

215 

13  300 

Iowa 

70 

2  750 

Sac  and  Fox 

Bead  work 

25 

250 

Others     .  . 

45 

1        2,500 

Total 

70 

2  750 

Kansas:  Potawatomi 

Others 

3 

3  100 

Michigan  

480 

15  200 

Mackinac  

Basket  making. 

35 

300 

Bead  work 

25 

300 

Fishing  

110 

3,000 

Woodcutting 

75 

2  000 

Others  

235 

9,600 

Minnesota  

2  4f86 

75  462 

Grand  Portage  

Fishing 

20 

6  000 

Woodcutting  

6 

116 

Others 

78 

4  000 

Total 

104 

10  116 

Leech  Lake 

Bead  work 

100 

2  000 

Lace  making  

25 

'531 

Fishing 

400 

7  500 

Woodcutting  

50 

1,500 

Others 

600 

17  700 

Total  

1,175 

29  231 

Nett  Lake 

Woodcutting 

5 

315 

Others 

112 

2  500 

Total  

117 

2  815 

Pipestone  (Birch  Cooley) 

Others 

5 

1  500 

Red  Lake 

B  eadwork 

125 

1  000 

Fishing  

250 

8  000 

Woodcutting 

50 

4  500 

Total  

425 

13  500 

White  Earth 

Basket  making 

50 

100 

Beadwork  

100 

3  000 

Lace  making 

10 

200 

Fishing  

300 

5  000 

Woodcutting 

200 

10  000 

Total... 

660 

18.300 

112 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Montana 

487 

$42,600 

Blackfeet               

Woodcutting  

25 

5,030 

Crow  

Others  

2 

C1) 

Flathead 

B  asket  making 

4 
48 
4 
11 
33 

100 
3,000 
600 
4,400 
8,000 

3p$T 

Total  

B  eadwork 

Fishing  

Woodcutting 

Others  

100 

16,100 

Fort  Belknap 

Woodcutting 

30 

2,100 

Fort  Peck 

Beadwork  

35 
45 
65 

375 
1,700 
16,000 

Total  

Woodcutting 

Others  

145 

18,075 

425 
900 

Tongue  River 

Beadwork 

160 
25 

Total    .-  

Woodcutting  

185 
73 

1,325 
39,280 

Omaha 

Others  

12 

61 

396 

9,080 
30,200 

8,655 

Santee 

do 

Nevada 

Fort  McDennitt 

Woodcutting  

25 
31 

900 
455 

Total 

Others 

56 

1,355 

Moapa  River 

B  asket  making  

15 
1 

750 
75 

Total 

Others 

16 

825 

Nevada 

Basket  making  

30 
30 
50 
4 

500 
300 
2,000 
21,000 

Total 

B  eadwork 

Fishing         

Others 

114 

3,800 

Walker  River     .  .                     ....         

Basket  making  

100 
50 
50 

1.000 
100 
1,500 

Total 

Beadwork               

Fishing  .. 

200 

-  —  J_'.."  — 

10 
4,389 

2,600 
75 
159,875 

Western  Shoshone                    

Basket  making  

New  Mexico 

Jicarilla 

Basket  making 

50 
40 
12 

800 
225 
400 

Total  

Beadwork  

Woodcutting  

102 

1,425 

Mescalero 

Basket  making 

30 
30 
50 

25 

600 
250 
1,400 
150 

Total                                  

Beadwork  

Woodcutting  

Others  .  . 

135 

2,400 

Pueblo  Bonito  3  .  . 

Woodcutting 

50 

10,000 

i  Unknown.                            *  Estim 

ated.                          !»1916r 

eport. 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


113 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintend  encies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

New  Mexico—  Continued. 
Pueblo  day  schools 

12 

$500 

Beadwork 

97 

1,750 

Blanket  weaving  

28 

1,650 

Lace  making  ...  . 

140 

900 

Pottery  .  . 

1.550 

12,000 

Woodcutting... 

32 

2,000 

Others.. 

8 

2,350 

Total  

1,867 

21,150 

San  Juan  . 

Basket  making 

25 

i  200 

Blanket  weaving  

2,000 

120,000 

Total 

2,025 

»  120,  200 

Zuni    .              .                        

Beadwork... 

50 

200 

Pottery  .  . 

100 

500 

Woodcutting  

60 

4,000 

Total 

210 

4,700 

Oklahoma                                             .  . 

399 

9,920 

Cantonment       .  .  .         

Beadwork  

200 

(8) 

Woodcutting 

15 

(») 

Total                      

215 

(3) 

Kiowa 

Woodcutting 

30 

3  000 

Others  

4 

1,920 

Total 

34 

4  920 

Seger 

Beadwork 

150 

5  000 

Oregon  .  . 

2,267 

169,  175 

Klamath  .  .                                    

Basket  making  

200 

1,000 

Woodcutting.  " 

10 

2,150 

Total                                      .              .    .  .. 

210 

3,150 

Roseburg                                  

Fishing 

300 

8,000 

Woodcutting 

350 

1,200 

Others  .  . 

1  150 

150  000 

Total  

1,800 

159,200 

Siletz                                                             .... 

Basket  making  

20 

300 

Beadwork 

10 

100 

Lace  making  

14 

200 

Woodcutting            

8 

525 

Others  .  . 

30 

1,200 

Total  

82 

2,325 

Warm  Springs                                          

Beadwork  

50 

500 

Woodcutting 

50 

3,000 

Others  .  . 

75 

1  000 

Total                       

175 

4,500 

South  Dakota  

435 

8,073 

Crow  Creek  

Beadwork  

60 

250 

....do.... 

6 

200 

Others  .  . 

5 

500 

Total  

11 

700 

Beadwork  

28 

50 

...do... 

312 

6,100 

Others 

24 

973 

Total... 

336 

7,073 

i  Estimated. 
18404—17 8 


2  1916  report. 


8  Unknown. 


114 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Utah 

127 

$3  715 

Goshute  .                .               •    .  .             ... 

Basket  making  

32 

1  75 

Beadwork 

32 

1  100 

Total 

64 

175 

Shivwits              

Basket  making  

22 

160 

Woodcutting 

15 

1,680 

Total           

37 

1,840 

Uintah  and  Ouray  

Basket  making  

5 

100 

Beadwork.  .  . 

15 

1,000 

Wood  cutting 

6 

600 

Total 

26 

1,700 

Washington 

1  395 

143  547 

Colville  

Basket  making  

58 

760 

Beadwork    . 

65 

650 

Woodcutting 

27 

4  000 

Others 

12 

17  740 

Total 

162 

23  150 

Cushman 

Basket  making 

48 

742 

Fishing  

22 

750 

Woodcutting 

6 

1,000 

Others  .  . 

20 

700 

Total                    .  .. 

96 

3,192 

Neah  Bay 

Basket  making 

140 

3  703 

Fishing  

92 

28*738 

Woodcutting.  .  . 

75 

Others 

48 

12  000 

Total 

281 

44  516 

Spokane 

Woodcutting 

25 

2  400 

Taholah  

Basket  making 

74 

2  500 

Fishing  

90 

13,  503 

W  oodcutting 

13 

353 

Others  

22 

575 

Total  

199 

16,931 

Tulalip 

Basket  making 

30 

350 

Fishing 

51 

11  974 

Woodcutting  

57 

32,  334 

Others  

24 

1  200 

Total  ..  . 

162 

45  858 

Yakima  

Basket  making 

50 

400 

Beadwork  

300 

1,600 

Fishing        

100 

1,000 

W  oodcutting 

20 

4  500 

Total  

470 

7  500 

Wisconsin  

3  721 

60  505 

Grand  Rapids  

Basket  making 

25 

650 

Beadwork 

10 

40 

Fishing  

10 

650 

Woodcutting 

35 

1  400 

Others 

300 

2  000 

Total  

380 

4,740 

Hay  ward  

Basket  making 

60 

525 

Fishing       ... 

450 

600 

W  oodcutting 

50 

2  000 

Others  

675 

2,025 

Total  

1  235 

5  150 

Estimated. 


COMMISSIONER   OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


115 


TABLE  9. — Indians  engaged  in  industries  other  than  farming  and  stock  raising  during 
fiscal  year  ended  June  80,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Industry. 

Number 
engaged. 

Value  of 
products. 

Wisconsin—  Continued. 
Keshena  

Basket  making 

20 

$100 

Beadwork                   .     ... 

20 

200 

Fishing 

50 

400 

Woodcutting  

100 

6,000 

Others    

367 

3,000 

Total  

557 

9  700 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

Basket  making 

150 

1  500 

Beadwork 

300 

2  500 

-*,•  •                                                             •  »  .  ;  ', 

Fishing  

300 

1,020 

Woodcutting         

75 

7,500 

Others 

500 

2  790 

Total  

1  325 

15  310 

La  Pointe  

Basket  making 

5 

100 

Beadwork  

10 

325 

Fishing      ....          .  . 

5 

6  000 

Woodcutting 

6 

2  000 

Others  

10 

!2,000 

Total  

36 

10  425' 

Oneida 

Basket  making 

50 

i  200 

Lace  making 

75 

2  500 

Others 

3 

(1) 

"" 

Total  

128 

2  700 

Red  Cliff 

Basket  making 

1 

Beadwork 

3 

50 

Lace  making 

10 

100 

Fishing  

15 

6,000 

Woodcutting 

10 

6  000 

Others  

21 

320 

Total  

60 

12  480 

Wyoming  

160 

8  800 

Shoshone  

Beadwork 

50 

(3) 

Woodcutting 

50 

1  800 

Others 

60 

7  000 

RECAPITULATION. 


Total  

Basket  making 

4  091 

47  935 

Beadwork           

2,859 

36,  870 

Blanket  weaving  

4,478 

365,  727 

Fishing  

3,020 

114,085 

"\  ^  ?-          _•  <:"\  •-  -••'••; 

Lace  making  

326 

6  179 

Pottery 

1  950 

15  237 

Woodcutting..     

4,084 

308,  199 

Others    

5  849 

420  880 

Grand  total           

26  657 

1  315  112 

Estimated. 


2  Not  reported. 


8  Unknown. 


116 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


SgllJ 

3 1  ill 


O  CSi 


iiOt^OO  :»>  < 


Sic  »o  e<i  as  os 
co  jo  I-H  cc  oo 

t^*  IO  GO  OC  CO  •**«  * 


t^  ^H  1-1  O5  <O  1C  O  JT' 

tH  N  1^  ^H  ^H  t^  i-l  ^ 

-- 


^H  t^  i-l 

i-i-^'O 


S"""" 


S£ 


to  o  jo  <N  oo  oo « 
oc<  ooo  10  c<i  > 


cfeo" 


(N  CM  r~  r-(  rH  < 


[EISS3SS 


(N  <N  i-H  i-H 


111 


i  ,_(  ,-H  so  i— 1 1>-  c 


trawHi 


ssisg^sss 


>  O  O  O 

5  TT  *O  O 


<  «O  T-I  t^.  {>«  Wj 

5i— (t-HTt«r^CC 
CO(MOOrHi-l 


12 

-2  o 


SSS^ 

CO  to  >-t  I 


i201S'H2    5? 


)  N  O  N  O  Q 

>  rH  O  i-H  O  O 

)  ^H  TP  O  (N  -I 


COOOiOJ        »O 


fjf 


>  i— I  TF  rf  CO  C3  CS  CO 
•  Ol  Tfi  CO  O5  CO  «O  -V 


5C  «O  Tfl  OO  M  rH  < 


!N8i 


il|Jlilli 

1  I 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


117 


e^O  Is-  1s-  i 
^00, 


ill 


coo? 


I  1 


ass's" 


S10  :: 


isa  ;i  j  II 

SRS  13  :  "- 


ii!    i    i 

:«r  :     :     : 


3    ?S    S 


E  i 


-a"  a" 


of     eo 


1  I 


oo"     cf 


I  § 


>&)O     r~«o 
ioS     oio 


- 


)r-(Q<N  ^H< 


5E58S88   §• 

S  £H  S       S          .2 


»   g 


>t-iOI>  O  O» 
3  CM  t^  O  CO  Ci 
)  CO  l^»  CO  T-H  ^J< 


.83 


gl  I 

ill 

IS  O         08 

a       ss 


IJ! 


i  |§  j  !| 

illiil 

!Sll^ 


118 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIBS. 

11  5  i  s     s™-2  :  :  2 


;      r 


Intere 
on  tru 


SS 


o  N  >«     oo 
co'co~o'     i-T 


»     *T 


®  > 

flip 


i-T    «* 


:g 

-00 


S51 


i  r- 1>- 

!S2 
r«r«- 


nd  supe 
dences. 


«       g- 
^       § 


^. 


ld 
n 


ock 
ain 


^    5    5 


tho 
ten 
R 
ou 


Sit 

«  «  o 

IPQEH 

lii 

Wfefe 


fl^-2 

|S| 
alj 

S?^ 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


119 


SSS8SSSS 

o  10  1^»  ^H  -^  <^ 


wo    -oo 


119 


rfcO-tp'x' 


00 

3 


t 


CO        -."• 


*S|  O 


Is 


CO  CO  CO  ?5  i-l 


55     oSr-iS; 

»    S3gf2( 


T-H  O  V?  t^  O  O 
4  CO  P«  i-H  00  >O  rH 


o  o  o 

IIs 


^T—  1C<ICO»OC 

s  oo  •*  X  c*  < 


00  CO  I-H  10  -*  TJ^  r»< 


tOOOCO-fCOOOOiO'O 

r^oV^Tio  co^co^co  t-^"c^T 


OC  -*1  »O  < 
i—  *  i-H  Tfi 
»O  t-^-  O  C 


"i— Too"covtcTt^'     cT     c^T 
>co      cooico      •*      oo 


co"c^f<N'(NVV' 


t- 

Soi       !-! 

t»  »H        CO 


x  ::::::;:::: 

l|  ' 

lkis 

00 


:§  :§ 


•• 


g  5       ;gw  c 

g  ||lll|  I  «  if  IS  ISIS- 

gj  wtt5Stop  S    5    ooo^^PMP^tf 

£  g     g 

O  frn       CQ 


120 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


a  I  il 


113 


i  1 


S    fc 


00~ 


§1 

^•3. 


fcO  CC  iO  Oi  S  ^        t^* 
CO  ^H  »H  O         *O          CO 


CD  I>  O  C*fl  T-H 

S«9N  Q 

oO  O>oo  O  O 

£ s  »  s 


5§  g 

'"S    S" 


>  <N  rH  O  t^  "3  ••*  I 

I  O  O  C§  O  T™*  ^  * 

>  25  C<5  r- 06  05  05 


S  2 


S^O 
K( 


g 


i 


S8S8    S 


2"   gf 


grf  O  O  «O  OOO  TJI 
i-teoi-i      «o  eoi-t 


§S838|§    § 


3  e<»  i^  eo  oo  < 


-lCO»»O«O»O<-H 


.T3 

I!  i 


•^-i     •  o     '     •     • 

l4JI-ji-i 


COMMISSIONEK  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


121 


ot 
co 


Num 
of  lea 


Number 
of  allot- 
ments. 


V,or 

?es 
ses- 


•Nr 
of 


l^il 

*  a& 


<Si  CD  ?5  1^-  i>- 


oo  c<i  ^*  r^  ^  os  10 
£  coV-'Vfo  »"<N~ocr 


1C  CO  i 


l>-  10  CO  *C  *C  O  ^ 


wo 


O  O  O  ^  C<l  P*  i-H 

S  3;  t^  0  -*  CO  05 

0^^<(»<-<t~«co»o 


» afto  « < 


o 

3 

.-    .9 


ll 


So2o 


OQOCQOOQCQ 
OO  OOOO5  OOO  »OO 


cf    ^oT^ 


:     I 


"S  c  «  | 


122 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


' 

1.1 

tf 

8  :  :  :2  :  : 

Sill 

1 

1 

CO  CO  TJ<         C<l         CO 

11 

:  :  :      :  : 

50  :  :    ~ 

CO 

oo      g; 

"V 

1 

I 
i 

8 

i 

a 

1 

Income. 

§ 

co- 

Q      •       >       -U3       •       • 
.        .       •„         •       • 

Mi  i1 

1 

1 

co  co  T»<              co 

11 

•       '•       *       '       '          ~ 

1 

CgOO^;                    g 

88 

1. 

co 

§  :      :|  :  : 

:|  :  :    | 

§ 

•8 

Sg|          § 

?3J5 

:     :M  :  : 

r  •  •  ^ 

§ 

f-l:        co 

o>oo 

•  • 

'.  '. 

^oS 

1 

;;•!  iSM 

•  00     •     •       00 

oo 

! 

III     1 

1 

Number 
of  leases. 

1 

HI  i1!! 

is  i  :    °° 

oo 

5 

111      S 

CS  CM 

fjf 

l°i§ 

i 

o-*ico  o  -*i  o  oco  oo«j  co  o     eq 

lO  CO  •*  OO  00  1C  O  iO  CO  OC  CO  O3        Oi 

0(N        CO       g< 
OO  i-H         OO         t>- 

^•«  «  1 

21  ^ 

tffl 

1 

gSS£3£22S?SKg    S 

Sr^      ic 
^H         t^ 

s 

SS3  §  8 

SSI 

Cultivated  by 
Indians. 

II 

^^ 

§*    i|i| 

11    * 

M» 

O        1C       O 

1 

|! 

o      oooooo      coc^ 

i    1 

1 

1 

US       2 

il  1 

i-H                 i-H  ^H          i-H          »H»-I 

!         M 

dl 

Jj 

oo  t>-  co              «• 

^2 

Area  of  lands. 

ll 

,| 

iii^  IS111 

11     « 

«     § 

<N 

i 

§00      o 
oo  o      e<i 

Is 

oo"                       r-Tco'co" 

CO 

M 

3 

^1 

i  Sslil  11  i     i 

1 

i 

||2          | 

11    1 

•^ 

to          tooo      .-H 

rt  IO 

.               CO 

CO 

S 

388          ff 

*L 

ll 

1" 

1 

:^;  •  •  >. 

iyi 

a  Iii3s|ii 

2     .2g.5fSg2ol3 

S    pq^PfefcoKIs 

8 

!li.!     HI     Ijl! 

^i!  •  H  I    i!!  1 

'io-S'i      ^      s-2      «               S"fe"o     m      2 

£«£EH     §    5^    S    o    £££     a    g 
1            S    2               II 

Kickapoo  
Potawatomi  

Michigan:  Mackinac. 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


123 


ff    g 


:IS  ss|  g 


®    . 


5<  <N  iO  < 


|gS 


ISI§§  § 


:8 


t~-  CO  O      -CO      • 

-HiotN  >a  • 


S23 


sss  -" 

iO        CD 


^  s" 


i 


111 


t 


<N^T 


-    gf »v      8 


S"8-5» 


o  >> 


§8     g 


0£gt  „ 

|         I  III  i          f         f 

III          P        I 


£&S«3 
<BS|S 


124 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 


o>  *o 

*O  f-t 

cs  co 

sg  s 


;S 


S" 


^  ec      «o 


ui 


--^ 


SJ58?:gSfefe   8 

^*  '^        r^  rH  CO        ^J1 


>coo      c 


IIQ^OOOOOO 


I 


8  2 


uit^eoc* 


3    2 


a  id 
Sfl. 


15    S 


•S    WH|® 

ft  1111  1  Jg^? 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


125 


1 


£88S 


15    53 


11111    § 
roo^oraT  «r 


i  O     •      •  O     •     • 

•  O     •     •  O     •     • 

•  <N    •     o    • 


I  rH  OO         (M 


OOO         <-H 

"a  s 


SO  O  ^t*  CO  »-H  < 
<rcO<Noooo< 


111 

IW 

ta£u 


OSOOrHI^^         O 

•««  _  cp^-tco      ^- 


:s«® 

s2«  ecaaj 


£-§2: 

ill- 


« 


126 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


1 


>  t~-eoi>  ^> 


I* 


co  Co 


OiOJOOOOOOiOOl 


>" 


I  r-H  C^  <?5  S.  00 


§§§ 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

W  1C        Q        <N 

e$£     g     S 


127 


sils 


as 


III 

a  >  ™ 

£o<j 


(N 


85 


8SSS 


^  O        t-- 


i 
£  1 


§1 


§§§ 


G 
19 


a 


« 


128 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


1^1 
la! 


I  1 


3!  !!!: 


tm  i 


!2i3; 


** 


I 


=  s 


SS|S    § 


^H   T-l  00 


°         S3 


)  ,0  ,0  »-»  .« 

LSigg 


1  1  Bfi 


:Sj 


tllj 


(NO51-IT-IOO        00        OOcOiC 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 
MM! 


129 


*o  co*i-H*t-Too'»-roo*     i-T 
<N          o»f~      e* 


3 


SS     S 


11 


p    ..<»...      op 


as- 


II1S 


>f)  •*        (Ml         <N 


11  I 


8 


»O»C^CO 


8§§ 


(MiOCOOMOOO        t-- 

IN  CD  r^  co  co  oo  c^i       w 


'iooo      o 

t~-  CO        (N 


t^  O  CO  I-H  IN  N  00        CO 
jH'Hc,   ^t-   '-'S        N 


I  K»«2fi 

ir       t^^b^oc^o^ 
W       a)^{?(-HC/3c/3H 

£i  2  o.a  o  co  a 
6     SGt.$A««o5>< 


^3 

:"5S    « 


18404—17 9 


130  COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  13 .—Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Total  1917  

24,932 
25,  948 
25,  681 
23,440 
22,  793 
22,424 
11,  781 
2,901 

5,  148 

$2,  506,  957 
2,  378,  377 
2,304,339 
2,  127,  403 
2,  065,  124 
1.  940,  414 
1,  861,  630 
953,  573 

461,552 

2,137 
2,  115 
2,533 
2,  319 
2,271 
2,516 
1,995 
2,094 

~327 

$979,  783 
922,  736 
940,  013 
810,  950 
762,  264 
732,  526 
687,  039 
749,  148 

135,  415 

12,321 
14,  587 
13,968 
13,  218 
12,290 
12,420 
6,582 
(2) 

1^20 

$363,  873 
427,  689 
414,422 
505,492 
414,  706 
432,470 
582,  919 
(2) 

8,  215 
6,992 
6,899 
5,553 
5,  585 
5,113 
3,204 

J!L 
2,077 

$1,  009,  935 
882,  784 
828,  218 
689,  517 
778,117 
673,  289 
591,  672 
177,  169 

213,  535 

2,259 
2,  254 
2,281 
2,350 
2,647 
2,375 

%r 

$153,  366 
145,  168 
121,  686 
121,444 
110,037 
102,  129 

27,  256 

1916     

1915 

1914  
1913 

1912 

1911     

1900 

Arizona  

79,  973 

430 

32,  629 

Camp  Verde 

139 
220 
636 
98 
78 
68 
171 
59 
245 
329 
775 
81 
538 
614 
849 
162 
86 

2,811 

23,  240 
37,  085 
25,008 
26,  780 
3.133 
4;  187 
12,  961 
8,188 
44,  198 
22,327 
57,  328 
5,839 
45,  131 
•52,  877 
75,  499 
11,122 
6,649 

338,  955 

4 
21 
-36 
5 
2 
2 
17 
31 
62 
16 
38 
10 
10 
37 
12 
3 
15 

98 

1,560 
10,  440 
15,808 
2,280 
600 
780 
5,  562 
7,100 
31,024 
5,  945 
19,  568 
4,930 
3,  660 
15,800 
4,378 
600 
5,380 

33,518 

135 
75 

21,  680 
23,  220 

Colorado  River    .  . 

114 
600 

1,984 
9,200 

10 

1,441 

Fort  Apache  
Fort  Mojave        

93 
58 
12 
56 

24,500 
2,  395 
300 
1,550 

Havasupai 

18 
54 
72 
28 
895 
196 
«482 
71 
10 
500 
21 
39 
20 

262 

138 
3,107 
4,763 
1,088 
8  6,  760 
2,003 
8  24,  510 
909 
471 
23,  267 
371 
1,082 
320 

8,017 

Kaibab 

Leupp        

26 

1,086 

Moqrn 

Navajo 

888 
117 
8135 

s  6,414 
14,379 
88,000 

Phoenix        

Pima 

8120 

85,250 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River 

518 
77 
816 
117 

41,000 
13,810 
70,  750 
9,080 

San  Carlos 

San  Xavier       

Truxton  Canon 

3 
51 

651 

360 
949 

53,028 

California 

1,800 

244,392 

Bishop 

25 
45 
52 
263 
385 
486 
326 
350 
178 
52 
430 
142 
77 

553 
96 
457 

90 

352 
69 
257 
26 

34 
121 

3,660 
8,475 
16,500 
4,432 
39,  807 
113,962 
26,  787 
41,617 
22,570 
2,439 
17,  238 
36,199 
5,269 

19,  721 
5,451 
14,  270 

9,000 

34,  519 
15,542 
13,  966 
5,011 

5,178 
13,  198 

7 
4 

1,872 
1,775 

1 

8 

17 
20 

1,980 
2,200 

Campo 

21 
52 

235 
264 
386 
222 
293 
163 

4,500 
16,  500 
2,300 
31,  555 
84,  925 
20,000 
36,240 
17,360 

Digger     

Fort  Bidwell 

2 
12 
I 

19 
8 
12 
6 
9 
17 
1 

16 
9 
•  7 

800 
3,552 
1,000 
5,100 
2,508 
4,100 
1,914 
4,500 
6,057 
540 

6,800 
3,920 

2,880 

26 
84 
9 
76 
4 
1 
46 

1,332 
1,700 
1,037 
1,207 
44 
750 
525 

Fort  Yuma  

25 
90 
9 
45 
2 

3,000 
27,000 
480 
2,825 
360 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley  
Malki... 

Pala     

Round  Valley 

Sherman  Institute  
Soboba  

3421 
22 

8  12,  738 
2,445 

9 
6 

537 
87 
450 

1,285 
129 

12,  921 
1,531 
11,390 

94 
70 

26,412 
4,600 

Tule  River 

Colorado     

Southern  Ute 

Ute  Mountain  

Florida  :  Seminole  

90 

49 
49 

9,000 

12,530 
12,530 

Idaho  

34 

7 
19 

| 

12 
19 

12,920 
2,664 
5,595 
4,661 

5,040 
10,033 

269 
13 

238 

18 

22 
11 

9,069 
348 
8.371 
350 

138 
110 

Ooeur  d'Alene 

Fort  Hall  

Fort  Lapwai 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Kansas  

91 

3,055 

Haskell  Institute  

97 
21 
3 

14 

7.795 
4',  083 
1,320 

5,684 

6 
10 
3 

14 

4,740 
3,  973 
1,320 

5,  684 

91 

3,055 

Kickapoo  

11 

110 

Potawatomi  

Michigan  

Mackinac  

i 

13 

879 

574 
5,110 

101,  218 

1 
13 

137 

574 
5,110 

62,  616 

Mount  Pleasant  

Minnesota 

592 

14,  382 

146 

24,  070 

4 

150 

Cass  Lake  

49 
10 

2,221 
4,100 

10 

1,391 
4.100 

44 

830 

Fond  du  Lac  

1  Included  with  adults  by  private  parties. 


2 No  data  available. 


1916  report. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  131 

TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Contd. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United 
States  Indian  Service. 

Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em 
ployees. 

Irregular  em- 
ployees. 

Adults. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num-     Earn- 
ber.        ings. 

Num 
ber. 

Earn 
ings. 

Num 
ber. 

-   Earn- 
ings. 

Num-     Earn- 
ber.  i     ings. 

Num 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Minnesota  —  Continued. 

i 

18, 
7 
4 
36 
2. 
12 

1,34, 

2         $1,44 
3         23,  981 
3!           4,  40 
2i          9,  22 
il        32,  13( 
Ji          4,  20( 
I         19,  50( 

5       187,23, 

)        2 

7         1 
3         3 
) 
)         3 

5       16( 

$96 
11,14 
2,7<X 
6,96( 
15,03 
3,9tt 
16,42( 

74,58 

! 

a 

& 

13K 
1, 
ft 

74' 

)         $48f 
j          63] 
l!       1,  705 
B          38< 
i6,96C 
30C 
3,08C 

47,  915 

i 

Leech  Lake 

ios     $i2,m 

)  

Nett  Lake 

Pipestone 

19|          1,  73 

24         10,  14 

$150 

Red  Lake 

Vermillion  Lake  .  .  . 
White  Earth  

Montana 

43 

2         64,74 

Blackfeet 

15( 
17' 

19; 

26' 
15] 
41( 

5' 

)         33,  10 
I         40,  73 
15,56 
19,72? 
50,91 
27,  18 

20,49 

3 
3 
1 
1 
2 
3 

3 

14.60( 
15,  01 
8,14 
6,96 
13,  02( 
16,82 

16,03 

185 
13£ 
K 
34 
6f 
37* 

17 

15.215 
25,715 
2,212 
1,91C 
2,50C 
10,  361 

860 

i  33       1  13,  29( 

Crow 

Flathead 

1271          5,  21 
2151        10,  85( 
57         35,39( 

Fort  Belknap 

Fort  Peck 

Tongu?  River 

Nebraska 

9i          3,60( 

Genoa 

15 

2] 
IS 

1,033 

6,18 
2,04 
4,50C 
7,76o 

119,18 

49 

6,18 
1,86C 
3,90C 
4,0& 

15,63 

Omaha  

1 

14 

2 

192 

180 
600 
80 

6,407 

San  tee 

<«)            (2) 
9           3,60C 

727         93,  73 

(2) 

(2) 

Winnebago 

Nevada..  .. 

6. 

3,400 

Carson 

103 
188 
165 
69 
20 
306 
181 

1,744 

10,56 
22,17 
29,  2b 
4,45 
3,87 
39,266 
9,59 

194,  244 

12 

3  •) 

i! 
i( 

187 

5,96 
56 
95 
55 
3,31 
1,82 
2,46 

76,836 

26 

i 

30 
'-« 

28 
94 

821 

1,200 
12 
106 
300 
560 
704 
3,525 

20,205 

65 

3,400 

Fallon     . 

186         21,  600 
155         28,  200 
36           3,  600 

1 

Fort  McDermitt 

Moapa  River 

Nevada 

Walker  River 

27; 

7 

411 

i         36,  73 
'           3,  600 

84,605 

Western  Shoshone  .  .  . 
New  Mexico  

325 

12,598 

Albuquerque 

176 
287 
80 
15 
447 
331 
199 
202 

29 

232 

159 

10,  692 
29,832 
9,115 
4,400 
94,044 
21,  407 
11,321 
13,433 

203 

18,393 
82,  610 

14 
29 
20 
15 
39 
39 
18 
13 

6,609 
16,080 
6,840 
4,400 
12,  640 
15,  558 
7,669 
7,040 

34 
180 
50 

613 
5,947 
1,800 

128 
6 

3,470 
325 

Jicariila.... 

72 
10 

7,480 
475 

Mescalero 

Pueblo  Bonito  

Pueblo  day  schools  
San  Juan 

111 
255 
50 
141 

29 

57 
934 

2,974 
4,211 
367 
4,293 

203 

2,060 
18,  758 

274 

74,550 

23 
37 
131 

3,880 
1,638 
3,285 

Santa  Fe  

Zuni  .  v 

55 

2,100 

New  York: 
New  York  Agency  

North  Carolina: 
Cherokee 

13 
145 

5,308 
57,727 

157 
75 

10,900 
6,000 

5 
5 

125 
125 

North  Dakota 

Bismarck. 

10 
448 
43 
560 
89 
9 

716 

2,345 
20,514 
11,513 
36,930 
8,121 
3,187 

208,  119 

5 
22 
26 
64 
19 
9 

275 

2,220 
8,958 
11,100 
25,  722 
6,540 
3,187 

96,  194 

5 

125 

Fort  Berthold  

351 
17 

496 
70 

i  5,  556 
413 
11,208 
1,581 

175 

16,000 

Fort  Totten  

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

(2) 

Wahpeton. 

Oklahoma  

354 

4,598 

26 

5,590 

61 

1,737 

Cantonment  

36 
30 
205 
102 
181 
15 
4 
13 
8 

6,952 
10,  019 
13,631 
95,  170 
22,773 
12,280 
3,180 
7,611 
3,240 

7 
16 
17 
102 
46 
15 
3 
9 
8 

4,020 
9,840 
10,  240 
95,  170 
21,  977 
12,  280 
2,700 
4,910 
3,240 

6 
14 
127 

42 
179 

23 

2,890 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 
Chiiocco 

1  654    .- 

61 

1,737 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.. 
Kiowa  

135 

796    . 

Osage 

Otoe  

1 
1 

480  i  

Pawnee 

1          3 

2,700 

Ponca... 

1916  report. 


2  Unknown. 


'Three  temporary. 


132 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  13. — Employment  of  Indians  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Contd. 


States  and  superin- 
tendencies. 

Total  em- 
ployed. 

Indians  employed  by  United   ^m^\n    A-^    ^-     <         <.< 
States  Indian  Service.         Employed  by  private  parties. 

Regular  em- 
ployees. 

IrX£T"          Malta. 

Minors  or  out- 
ing pupils. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

Num-     Earn- 
ber.        ings. 

Num- 
ber. 

Earn- 
ings. 

O  klahoma—  Continued  . 
Sac  and  Fox 

13 
32 

8 
13 

56 

$5,  135 
3,857 
6,550 
7,140 

6 
9 
8 
13 

$4,779 
3,640 
6,550 
7,140 

•—  ' 

9,717 

7 
23 

$365 
217 

! 

Seger  

Seneca 

Shawnee  

Five  Civilized  Tribes 
schools  

864 

===== 

10,581 

16 

40 

| 

Armstrong  Acad- 
emy   

13 
12 

17 
8 

4 
2 
351 

3,538 
1,984 
1.824 
1,900 

35 
1,300 
37,077 

4 
4 
3 
3 

3,  345 
1,800 
1,477 
1,795 

9 
8 
14 
5 

4 

193 
184 
347 
105 

35 

Cherokee  Training 
Jones  Academy... 
Nuyaka  Boarding. 
Tuskahoma  Acad- 
emy   

Wheelock    Acad- 

2 

66 

1,300 
29,857 

285 

7,220 

Klamath 

160 
35 
15 
14 
127 

633 
2,421 

11,683 
8,696 
2,559 
5,920 
8,219 

49,453 

235,298 

15 
14 
6 
12 
19 

7 
305 

7,594 
8,  597 
2,318 
4,820 
6,528 

4,185 
117,935 

145 
21 
9 
2 
108 

142 
1,640 

4,089 
99 
241 
1,100 
1,691 

3,172 
51,590 

Salem 

1 

StletK 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  
South  Dakota  

484 
26 

$42,096 
1,473 

450 

$64,  300 

Chevenne  River  

548 
160 
71 
60 
24 
682 
28 
758 
34 
2 
54 

409 

38,878 
12,112 
9,987 
8,495 
2,  927 
90,672 
4,562 
49,  866 
10,937 
840 
6,022 

21,001 

44 
20 
19 
12 

5 
96 
11 
62 
20 
2 
14 

26 

19,236 
8,312 
7,010 
6,545 
2,570 
31.590 
4;  400 
21,266 
10,  480 
840 
5,686 

10,413 

504 
140 
26 
47 
19 
283 
17 
550 
14 

19,642 

1 

Crow  Creek 

3,800 
1,504 
1,450 
357 
6,882 
162 
17,000 
457 

Flandreau 

26 

1,473 

1 

500 

Pierre 

Pine  Ridge 

303 

52,200 

Rapid  City 

Rosebud 

146 

11,600 

Springfield 

Yankton 

40 
251 

336 

4,988 

Utah 

127 

5,000 

5 

600 

Goshutp 

190 
89 
130 

778 

4,568 
3,174 
13,259 

97,372 

1 
2 
23 

87 

495 
324 
9,594 

44,  168 

109 
35 
107 

411 

873 
450 
3,665 

12,450 

75 
52 

2,600 
2,400 

5 

600 

Shivwits 

Uintah  and  Ouray  
Washingtoft 

280 

40,754 

Colville 

353 
164 
124 
36 
25 
52 
24 

2,  242 

45,488 
16,  568 
7,726 
3,662 
1,734 
9,418 
12,  786 

184,023 

15 
11 
5 
11 
5 
17 
23 

101 

9.038 
8,933 
1,208 
2,997 
1,404 
8,174 
12,414 

45,753 

303 
30 
17 
25 

9,410 
545 
214 
665 

35 
123 
102 

C1) 

20 

27,  040 
7.090 
6,304 
0) 
320 

Neah  Bay 

Spokane 

Taholih 

Tulalip 

35 
1 

702 

1,244 
372 

14,589 

Yakima 

Wisconsin 

1,333 

121,  481 

106 

2,200 

Hay  ward  

701 
615 
24 
59 
577 
15 
225 
15 
11 

781 

35,920 
25,502 
6,301 
1,720 
62,807 
5,915 
38,941 
2,917 
4,000 

63,  230 

12 
33 
11 
1 
5 
15 
5 
8 
11 

28 

5,270 
15,  540 
5,998 
720 
2,850 
5,915 
2,820 
2,640 
4,000 

13,  130 

25 
582 
13 

600 
9,962 
303 

584 

28,200 

80 

1,850 

Keshena 

Lac  du  Flambeau  
Laona  

58 
500 

1,000 
56,  556 

La  Pointe 

72 

3,401 

Oneida 

Red  Cliff  _  

3  i          46 
7  i        277 

191 

35,  725 

26 

350 

Tomah  .  . 

"Wittenberg 

-•' 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

726     44.250  j       26 

5.700           1 

i 

150 

1  Unknown. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


133 


lies  living 
in— 


III    S 


ni 


00  CO  O  O      'M^iO      '^O         i-H 
'—  l^fOO      'i-Hl>-      •CS-<tt        CO 


^s^  :  ;ass 


<M  Oi  1C  i-H  CO  -t*  CO  O  CO  OO  O 


COC^C^         ^iOCOt^-t^-CMCOOOi 


l-HCOC^I-Hl-HCO 


t-it^oe^ooocjjfc 


e^i  e*  10  co  os  <M  eo  «*  j 
i-Hr-ccoeo      i-d-icc 


i-l»CC>ItC^>O5lO 


T*  C^  <N  ^H  ^H  1-H  CO 


UJO 


co  cc  co  05  ic     05  •*  ,-H  ^H  I 


ccc^iocsccoo 


I-H  10  co  t^-  1-1  w  oo  ^ 


. 


i  i  i=5  i  :&  i  i«  i  : 

i  l 


al*Sl&4K«£*f£ 

u       ^       ^^^,^,QP'giKg_iijwr^X-^      .^      ^  g  ijt+j  ^  -gj  g-,^  53  g  o  ® 

0  §  !s£!fl3iiss!!!ijl  1  sl^^Jllllsl 


134 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


-af 
SlM 


Families  living 
in- 


"    «  ° 

If* 


s 


*- 


tube 
los 


rH    A       ' 


S?g    8 


i-HOO          rH          CO 

^ 


3S 


:1    1 


o    •  co  o  o      co 

00     •  <N  O3  iC       f 
CM  >O        O 


.-<  >O  O  CO  i-H  (N 

^H  T-H  TJ(  O5 


>O  O>  <S 


CO  t-rH 

1M  C^l  1-H 


CO  t-rH        IM 


S8 


& 

U 

O  +J 

PH 


o  *-H 

Sg2 


^H  O  t^-  O  CQ  rH  iO 

(M  t^  O  cc  O  I>        JN 


- 

* 


fi 


Si 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIKS. 


135 


00     I    CO  O  (M  I 

f.       I     u^  ,_,,_,< 


858S? 

ro  co  (N 


32     :     :     :     :     : 


IM        <N        00  1C        00 


O«5iO-*C»O 

e^cot^cooo 
IM" 


gsss  i 


,-H  CO  r*  10  . 
rH  CO  O  OO  » 


O  CO  00  O  00  1O 
CO  C<l  i-l  IM  r-H  "«• 


iO  •* 


5J  CO  »O  CO 


O        CO 
-H        »0 


CO  (N  i-l  O  -f  IM  "5 


O5  iO  CO        (M 

«-«« 


fe  g 


. 


IO     oo      >o     co 


SO  O  iH          I-- 
0000        .-H 


00  ^t<  iO        TJ< 


^ttr^ 

toto 


M"oo"to"-H"    10"    IN"    06" 


tO  00  iH  i-l 
tOi-H  >OI> 


«<£§ 


«'1 


Omaha 
Santee  3 
Winne 

ada 


ig 

If  III 


S    .: 


T3        o+- 

is«l 

11^ 
St|S  1 

o  oS  3      o 

^fe^p,    -g 

g 


136 


a! 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

§ISI 


lies  l 
in  — 


»-l  I  IN  1C  O  •*  O  < 
t*~  J  C^  »— <  CO  i— I  C$  < 
05  t-(N^-IINrH( 


isa  g 


ot-  o 

<N  M 


OOOT*.     o 

T-H   l-H   Oi  !-H 


Estimated  h 
ing— 


ict>-      oo 


>CO 

-^ 


1 


S2S 


( 


1! 

p- 


IO-*        O 

* 


^        ^       JO 


COOOO5       CO 


SS^S    53 


SS^SS 

^T«T    * 


»COO5 


COO«3 
>OCO  «5 


®&A  • 


« 


i 


OM  o  ro 
i— t  co  io  o 
i-icoic  es 


t.0^00 


COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

o  o  T-H  Tj<      or 
^  o  •*  t^      i 

1C  Ol-H 


137 


3  CO  >C  i-H  O5  i-H 


O5  O3  C<3  O  O 

eo  i-H  ic  e«  »H 


^a   a  ^Ifafi'i'Si   M 

5  S  « S       '""        rtp^^t-!«    — 

L«3«     5 


^ 


»J^«  . 


138 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

PS 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


139 


Tt<         IN          -rt-          O       'i-HTfOJ          10 


8888    S 

i-H  i-H  Is*  CO 


5  I 


:  :« 


g'C 


.   '.    '.  PQ  <j  PP  fe  PQ  02 


a   '   '   : 

:  : 

.•  a   :   • 

iiliii 

1 

J 

£• 
1    ?" 

.  ;*•"' 

•<  fl-l  : 

Sanatoriur 
Agency  .  . 
do*  
School... 

it 

School... 
Sanatoriur 
School  .  .  . 
Agency  .  . 

:  : 

1 

! 

:     :  : 

Illiyilili 

4  1 

r 
— 

j 

O  «-'     !     i  r; 

c3  ,»     •     -^ 

:      :  : 

;  11 

j  :  :  :«|  i  i  i  i    6 

.1 

i 
§ 
1 

03 
| 

'1 

^gs& 
If  15  1   1 

o     "do 

Q        03  & 

li 

Carson  
Do.5... 
Fort  McDe 
Western  SI 

w  Mexico  .  . 

H,          0-CMCO      CON      ^ 

o  >» 


K 

Mi 


140 


fffij 

Bxi.B" 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

£•*' 


His 


CO  10 


S050IMO        i-l        O 
)»C  OSt^OO         CO         O 


1O  t—  •*  <£>  O  i-H  ^H        «5 
25  •*  Q  id  i-l  <N  b-        C& 


, 

o  *f  o3  o 
co  <!  co  02 


s 


¥5*14  -§ 


o  o"     o 

•a  a    -^ 


III 


El,  *  m 


S3  ;  : 


m 

2o-tf    5 
SSw^«P5'd^    .3 

l^^l^s-as  6 


PH      CO 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


141 


~sr: 


142 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


°£ 

! 

| 

1 

C?S 

8       gJ§ 

i  i 

CO                          C 

jl     § 

|^2 

1 

i 

n 
It 

1 

cr 
c 

g| 

t 

S 

s 

ss 

C*           i-H  ^ 

£ 

S 

-  s 

*^- 

>«l 

1 

S 

OS 

>-1 

i 

rd 

11 

s 

^  : 

S 

^^s 

^ 
1 

1 

^ 

3J 

t 

-  OO  C 

?     J2 

5 

i 

I 

§ 

3turn  for  labo 

st 

If 

1 

^ 
•  '-  « 

5 

•Tr-To 

i  Tfl  -^ 

:   5? 

:g§  : 

f 

'ndians  re 

£ 

9 
fc 

P£ 
»;s 

1 

r§s 

1  i 

£8    g 

sss* 

-y 

1  ! 

>   3 

^p— 

1 

i 

s  a 
>l 

S 

tn* 

'     rH 

- 

1-1 

1-1 

^ 

1 

w  . 
f| 

K 
t^ 

*  *rT  - 

,    S 

SS    5 

^s^s 

i           * 

J  i 

sss 

& 

fa 

s§ 

§ 

00 

i 

"Sg 

1 

§ 

§ 

S^  lOC^  r^ 

I 

!S§! 

i 

il  i 

§ 

i 

t^  CO  rH          <C> 

3 

II 

K*    *-> 

« 

05 

•^iC1       00 

CO 

1 

£ 
i 

Si 

15 

1 

S 

S^^cQ00 

s 

""s" 

?l 

fc§  1 

£ 

— 

OSjH^J          CCCO 

g 

2 

CO 

«5<0      • 

TJ1 

t-o 

^ 

CO-H              • 

1C 

CM 

CO     •      •           .     > 

s 

§ 

g 

£ 

is 

f^-o 

^ 

r* 

1 

1 

eceiving  rati 

1 
i 

Value  of  J 
rations.  b( 

1 

lilfi 

18 

~vi     ^ 

^ 

S 

d 

In  return  f 

1 
S 

3 

* 

j!]j» 

^ 

1 

e 
S4 

| 

Value  of 
rations. 

* 

g 

? 

8SS88 

1 

W888 

N 

oT 

11    1 

TjTirT     «T 

! 

S 

rH 

! 

^ 

Receiving 
rations. 

? 

5! 

1-t 

%Z%$™ 

^ 

sasss 

1 

COCO       Q 

i 

S 

SSo^     ^ 

S 

i 

i  T 

!* 

ft 

C 

s 

CM 

s! 

•  1 

"- 

OOC«OOp 

t^  •*  o  oo  o 

1 

H88- 

8 

*     89 

! 

1 

^ 
i 

i 

3 

fl'i 

I 

:  :  :  :  : 

:  :  >>  :  : 

«;  si    .  :     P 

«:  i  i1  i  I 

i 

5C5 

i—  1 

H 

»-J 
CQ 

H 

States  and  res 
vations. 

Arizona  —  Contin 
San  X  avier. 

Truxton  Can 
Western  Nai 

California  

5 

(-*  fer-*^>  -*J  a? 
B  brj-  «-  o> 

55i2£o 

« 

^3 
S 

•  -53  •  t. 

•    -os    •_  a> 

lllll 

Colorado  

Southern  Ut 
Ute  Mountai 

Idaho:  Fort  Hal 
Michigan:  Mack 

C3 
1 

Fond  du  La< 

Siiif 

||||S|| 

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


143 


S    S 


CN        CO        i-l 


i-H  CO 


S  g 


(N        CN 

s? 


CO  1C  O5  r-H  O  00          CN          »O 
-*T  O  CO  CM  CM  CN         CO         "^ 


1-1  CO  O  00        «-i        C<» 


CNOOi-(        I-H 


OS         «-H  COO  OO          .-H 


11s  § 


O  ^ 


eo          r-i 


S    S 


>OC^  O  O> 
I^iO  >O  O5 
»O  CD  CO 


»O  O  •*  Ol>  CN        CN 


f;! 

te 


1* 


.§  _« 


I 

!  fe 
«  ll! 


«I 


fii 


° 


144 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


ing 


Value  of 
supplies. 


Value  of 
supplies. 


Receiving 
supplies. 


Valu 
ratio 


ng 
s. 


I  «: 
I  £ 


9F 


<N         1O 
C^l        CO 


Si 


co  co  o  to 


s   s? 

10       -1 


§ 


IM  O5O 


I  I 


' 


COMMISSIONEE   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

S2S5333 

O  O  OO  ^-t  CO  ^*  i— I 


145 


s 

§ 


11 


i ^Ht^-c^     c<r    •  I-H 


g     S 


R-fiS 


. 
I 


a 


Illll 


18404—17 10 


esgscoqja.gsofo^LOCstoo^-H 


13S823 


}2^S^f2? 


»OCOlO^Hl 


l_j    I 


•  O     •  O< 

•  w    -55< 


2o 

S.a 


« 
1-5 


fl- 


146 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


s> 
I 

«1 

^.2 


ce,  u 
June  30 


ble  for 
ing  fisc 


O       Q       r-1 

35      35      i-- 


38 


Pi! 


flj 
ll 


Missi 
pri 


sft 

- 


i-l      •<£> 
<N       «0 


STfl 


COO  Oi     • 

T-H  ?—  1  • 


38 


3 


i  -r  IQ       i— i 

fT-H    C*  O 


8  : 


28 


Sis  s  S 


S    2 


i-H  t^  t^.          »C          CO 

ass  s  s 


1- 


2E^ 


iiii 


•a  & 

£      T3 


US 


111 

Wf^ca 


i! 


COMMISSIONER   OP   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


147 


<N  Q  O  O5 


:  X 


9 


sg  * 

^to     g 


":  B. 


. 

•a  2 


iSScS 


M  of  of 


g 


O  QO 
CO  rH 


CO  OJW 


^-1  IN -H  t-t  t-H 


J  J^<    CJ  ' 

ISS 


1  SI^-S 

G 


'  ll  fil  f 


lie    I    tillljl    i 


i 


II 


148 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


•s, 


«'£ 


8    3§3S§  :    3 

CO         iH  CO  "C  <N 


ission  and 
private. 


l 


gx-9 


a"3 


O5    O5  O 


1C   O  'O 


CO  O  00  O  CS 
^ 


U^. 


t^  O5  OO  IM 
^.HO 


>c  oo   i 

0  00  ^ 


CNO"^l'vf^^»C^t1OCO 

T-H  10  ^  Ci  co  >o  to  oo  co 


•  o 

•  »c 


lOOCOO-^fC3|C1rHOO 


8    S§ 
<N"  co" 


coo 

-ICO'-H 


<N(N;2;<MOOt^<NOOa3iC-tf'     ICO 


T—  1  i—  «  -^  OO  1C  CC  1C 


if 


1 


d  Tri 

Nati 
w  Na 
w  Nati 


-3 


:  a  -^  as 

^:  >  ill 

c3  O  43    X!    J3 

-g  a;  O    Q    O 

P-i  > 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


149 


:    S 


S    S 


JCN?J?0        ^ 
3  FH  (M  T-H  1-- 


;§iSs 


00  CO  O  C<1  -*1      •        OO 


r~   C  C^  O3  i-H        ' 
i-H  O  -^  <-H  00        • 


?5  CO  r-t  ^H 


F-I  O  t^  t^  C<  to  O  CO  00 


rH  Tf(  CO  CO 


I  1 


C^gi 


&m  a 

Jl! 

f\     r«  ^      O* 


^    S| 


;      & 


:  g 


Ol  Ol  1^  ( 
(N  CO  CO  < 

of  oi* 


2| 

rM     S 

ss 

55 


I  I 

ft    ' 

£ 


««  I 

II  1 


i« 

ill  i  iir 

w  021— 


150 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


•§1 

• 


i 


,ion 


^c.a- 


- 


-O     • 

-^<    • 


co^ 


it!! 


'' 


»-  i 


S  : 


on  School. 
not  includ 


Attend  St.  Mary 
Nonreservation 


pupils  off 
ac  du  Fla 


Inc 
Att 


!& 

.Sjc 


Atten 
Inclu 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS 


151 


Ji 


152 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 

year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 

ity 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Grand  total     .                

33,996 

34,595 

29,718 

25,294 

Arizona                   

5,670 

5,622 

5,010 

4,489 

Camp  Verde  superintendency  .  .  . 

60 

74 

68 

52 

Camp  Verde 

30 

25 

22 

17 

Day. 

Clarksdale  

30 

49 

46 

35 

yDo. 

Colorado  River 

80 

103 

94 

89 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fort  Apache  superintendency.  .  . 

372 

437 

418 

398 

Fort  Apache  

200 

251 

242 

237 

Do. 

Canon 

42 

42 

38 

35 

Day. 

Cibecue  

50 

35 

34 

31 

yDo. 

East  Fork               

40 

43 

40 

38 

Do. 

Cibecue 

20 

32 

30 

26 

Mission     day;     Evangelical 

East  Fork 

20 

34 

34 

31 

Lutheran. 
Do. 

Fort  Mojave  

200~ 

158~ 

TT 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Havasupai 

35 

29 

28 

26 

Day. 

Kaibab  

22 

19 

15 

13 

Do. 

Leupp  superintendency  

183 

138 

128 

115 

Leupp 

163 

113 

103 

91 

Reservation  boarding. 

Tolcnaco  

20 

25 

25 

24 

Mission  boarding;   Evangeli- 

Moqui  superintendency 

591 

419 

406 

356 

Moqui  1 

125 

Reservation  boarding. 

Chimopovy  

55 

43 

43 

38 

Day. 

Hoteville-Bicabi           

65 

115 

110 

105 

Do. 

Oraibi 

156 

75 

72 

69 

Do. 

Polacca    .          

100 

116 

112 

99 

Do. 

Second  Mesa 

90 

70 

69 

45 

Do. 

Navajo  superintendency  

1,076 

~I7086~ 

9?T 

886~ 

Navajo  

350 

302 

268 

257 

Reservation  boarding. 

Chin  Lee 

166 

195 

162 

142 

Do. 

Tohatchi 

250 

215 

196 

188 

Do. 

Cornfields         

25 

30 

27 

16 

Day. 

Luki  Chuki 

60 

27 

22 

13 

Do. 

Ganado 

35 

47 

42 

38 

Mission  day;  Presbyterian. 

Rehoboth        

40 

70 

69 

63 

Mission  boarding;  Christian 

St  Michael's 

150 

200 

185 

169 

Reformed. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Phoenix 

700 

942 

716 

631 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Pima  superintendency 

819 

851 

770 

674 

Pima                             .      .   . 

218 

298 

268 

241 

Reservation  boarding. 

Blackwater 

36 

43 

41 

29 

Day. 

Casa  Blanca  

40 

54 

51 

38 

*Do. 

Chiu  Chuischu 

40 

23 

20 

14 

Do. 

Cocklebur 

40 

13 

12 

9 

Do. 

GilaBend               

30 

34 

23 

17 

Do. 

Gila  Crossing 

40 

39 

36 

31 

Do. 

Maricopa  

40 

36 

36 

34 

Do. 

Quajote  2 

Do. 

Santan 

40 

30 

29 

17 

Do. 

St.  Ann's  (Guadalupe)  
St.  John's 

35 
235 

23 

258 

19 
235 

15 
229 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Michael's1 

25 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

Rice  Station 

216 

253 

225 

201 

Reservation  boarding. 

Salt  River  superintendency  

158 

•    118 

105 

89 

Salt  River  

88 

85 

74 

64 

Day. 

Camp  McDowell  2 

40 

Do. 

Lehi  

30 

33 

31 

25 

Do. 

Not  in  operation. 


2  Not  reported 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


153 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Arizona  —  -Continued. 
San  Carlos  superintendency 

165 

176 

168 

155 

San  Carlos 

100 

101 

95 

90 

Day. 

Bylas 

40 

51 

49 

45 

Do. 

Rice  

25 

24 

24 

20 

Mission    day;       Evangelical 

San  Xavier  superintendency  

480 

476 

429 

358 

San  Xavier 

155 

124 

109 

96 

Day. 

Indian  Oasis 

30 

26 

16 

12 

Do. 

Santa  Rosa  

30 

20 

20 

13 

Do. 

Tucson  . 

35 

40 

28 

20 

Do. 

Lourdes 

30 

35 

34 

19 

Mission  day;  Catholic. 

St.   Anthony's  

30 

44 

44 

31 

Do. 

San  Miguel     .. 

20 

23 

22 

16 

Do. 

San  Solano             . 

20 

17 

16 

14 

Do 

Tucson  .  .          .                

130 

147 

140 

137 

Mission  boarding;     Presby- 

Truxton Canon 

140 

107 

105 

101 

terian. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Western  Navajo  superintendency 

373 

236 

217 

204 

Western  Navajo 

308 

165 

147 

137 

Do. 

Marsh  Pass 

30 

32 

31 

29 

Do. 

Moencopi  

35 

39 

39 

38 

Day. 

California 

1  980 

2  061 

1,778 

1  499 

Bishop  superintendency      

140 

130 

112 

94 

Bishop  

60 

65 

54 

44 

Day. 

Big  Pine 

30 

20 

18 

16 

Do. 

Independence 

20 

17 

14 

11 

Do 

Pine  Creek  

30 

28 

26 

23 

Do. 

Campo 

30 

11 

11 

11 

Do 

Fort  Bidwell  superintendency... 

160 

149 

123 

109 

Fort  Bidwell 

98 

105 

92 

87 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Alturas 

24 

12 

7 

4 

Day 

Likely  

20 

17 

12 

9 

Do. 

Lookout 

18 

15 

12 

9 

Do 

Fort  Yuma  superintendency  

220 

234 

219 

199 

Fort  Yuma  

180 

203 

195 

177 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cocopah 

40 

31 

24 

22 

Dav 

Greenville.  .  . 

90 

122 

101 

88 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Hoopa  Valley 

165 

201 

156 

143 

Reservation  boarding 

Malki  superintendency:  St.  Boni 

100 

125 

125 

90 

Catholic  Mission.boarding. 

PaJa  superintendency 

98 

79 

70 

55 

Pala 

30 

29 

25 

22 

Dav 

Capitan  Grande  

24 

15 

12 

9 

bo. 

La  Jolla 

30 

22 

20 

14 

Do. 

Rincon 

i          14 

13 

13 

10 

Do 

Round  Valley  superintendency.  . 

151 

!          94 

66 

50 

Round  Valley  

80 

29 

22 

15 

Do. 

Potter  Valley 

16 

12 

11 

9 

Do 

Ukiah  

25 

23 

15 

12 

Do. 

Upper  Lake 

30 

30 

18 

14 

Do. 

Sherman  

650 

787 

680 

577 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Soboba  superintendency  

90 

48 

43 

35 

Cahuilla 

30 

11 

10 

9 

Dav 

Mesa  Grande  

30 

14 

12 

11 

Do. 

Volcan  

30 

23 

21 

15 

Do. 

Tule  River  superintendency  

86 

:           81 

72 

48 

'Pule  River 

30 

17 

16 

10 

Do 

A  ubcrry  

32 

34 

27 

20 

Do. 

Burrough  .  .  . 

24 

30 

29 

18 

Do. 

154 


COMMISSION EK    OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Colorado                     

105 

129 

108 

96 

Southern  Ute  superintendency  .  .  . 

80 

99 

82 

74 

Southern  Ute 

50 

83 

68 

60 

Reservation  boarding. 

Allen  

30 

16 

14 

14 

Day. 

Ute  Mountain 

25 

30 

26 

22 

Do. 

Idaho 

640 

642 

515 

388 

Coeur  d'Alene  superintendency.. 

140 

126 

107 

90 

Kalispel 

30 

24 

19 

12 

Do. 

Kootenai 

30 

27 

25 

23 

Do. 

De  Smet  

80 

75 

63 

55 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Hall  superintendency  

270 

292 

209 

148 

Fort  Hall 

200 

240 

158 

116 

Reservation  boarding. 

Skull  Valley  

20 

14 

13 

8 

Day. 

Good  Shepherd          

30 

22 

22 

16 

Mission     boarding;    Episco- 

Presbyterian Mission  

20 

16 

16 

8 

palian. 
Mission  day:  Presbvterian. 

Fort  Lapwai  superintendency.  .  . 

230 

224 

199 

150 

Sanatorium  and  school 

80 

124 

103 

84 

Boarding. 

Kamiah                    

50 

25 

21 

14 

Day. 

St  Joseph's 

100 

75 

75 

52 

Mission  boarding:  Catholic. 

Iowa 

150 

97 

94 

71 

Sac  and  Fox  superintendency.  .  . 

1.50 

97 

94 

71 

Sanatorium  and  school  

80 

46 

46 

35 

Boarding. 

Fox 

40 

20 

19 

15 

Day. 

Mesquakie  

30 

31 

29 

21 

Do. 

Kansas  

771 

914 

794 

707 

Haskell 

700 

824 

711 

628 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Kickapoo        .           

71 

90 

83 

79 

Reservation  boarding. 

Michigan               

702 

595 

558 

522 

Mackinac  superintendency 

352 

221 

208 

196 

Baraga  (Holv  Name) 

152 

90 

83 

73 

Mission  boarding  and  day; 

Harbor  Springs  (Holy  Child- 
hood). 

200 

131 

125 

123 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Mount  Pleasant 

350 

374 

350 

326 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Minnesota 

1,409 

1,414 

1,236 

1,077 

Cass  Lake     -•  

40 

50 

45 

43 

Reservation  boarding. 

Fond  du  Lac  superintendency... 

74 

38 

29 

18 

Fond  du  Lac  .        

40 

18 

13 

8 

Day. 

Normantown 

34 

20 

16 

10 

Do. 

Grand  Portage        

20 

21 

18 

13 

Do. 

Leech  Lake 

116 

135 

101 

86 

Reservation  boarding. 

Nett  Lake  •  

60 

44 

41 

33 

Day. 

Pipestone  superintendency  

248 

225 

203 

189 

Pipestone 

212 

218 

196 

185 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Birch  Cooley 

36 

7 

7 

4 

Day. 

Red  Lake  superin  tendency  

188 

•    257 

234 

200 

Red  Lake      

75 

91 

79 

67 

Reservation  boarding. 

Cross  Lake 

43 

59 

57 

55 

Do. 

St.  Mary's  

70 

107 

98 

78 

Contract   mission   boarding 

Catholic. 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


155 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

M  inn  eso  ta  —  Contin  ued  . 
Vermillion  Lake  

White  Earth  su  perin  tendency  ..  . 

110 
553~ 

133 
511 

124 
441 

117 

378~ 

Reservation  boarding. 

White  Earth   . 

250 

256 

211 

193 

Do. 

Beaulieu  

30 

35 

31 

26 

Elbow  Lake  

30 

l*i 

13 

10 

Day. 

Pine  Point 

53 

40 

32 

21 

Do 

Round  Lake  

30 

25 

22 

16 

Do. 

Twin  Lake  .  .     . 

30 

32 

28 

23 

Do. 

St  Benedict's 

130 

108 

104 

89 

Mission  boarding'  Catholic 

Montana  .  . 

1  838 

1  588 

1  329 

1  137 

Blackfeet  superin  tendency.  .  .  

349 

325 

253 

214 

.  *     ' 

Blackfeet  

144 

152 

128 

111 

Reservation  boarding. 

Heart  Butte  
Old  Agency,  Badger  Creek  .  . 
Holy  Family  

30 
30 
145 

27 
32 
114 

21 
26 

78 

15 
21 
67 

Day. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Crow  superintendency  

442 

359 

325 

286 

Crow 

100 

84 

70 

57 

Reservation  boarding. 

Pryor  Creek  
Black  Lodge 

47 
30 

46 

28 

40 

28 

33 
24 

Do. 
Mission  day;  American  Mis- 

Lodge Grass 

50 

31 

28 

24 

sionary  Society. 
Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Reno 

35 

80 

71 

71 

Mission  day  American  Mis- 

St. Ann's 

25 

17 

17 

13 

sionary  Society. 
Mission  day;  Catholic. 

San  Xavieri  

125 

58 

56 

55 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Wyola 

30 

15 

15 

9 

Mission  dav;  Baptist. 

Flathead  superintendency  

300 

168 

138 

130 

St.  Ignatius  

300 

168 

138 

130 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Fort  Belknap  superintendency.  . 

251 

235 

188 

152 

Fort  Belknap 

51 

82 

65 

51 

Reservation  boarding. 

Lodge  Pole  

40 

32 

26 

17 

Day. 

St.  Paul's 

160 

121 

97 

84 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic, 

Fort  Peck  superintendency  

280 

285 

242 

204 

Fort  Peck  .  .  . 

, 
120 

134 

118 

105 

Reservation  boarding. 

No.  1 

30 

21 

16 

11 

Day. 

No.  2... 

30 

34 

24 

17 

Do. 

No.3  

No  4 

30 
30 

7 
29 

6 
23 

5 

18 

Do. 
Do. 

Wolf  Point  

40 

60 

55 

48 

Mission  boarding  and    day 

Presbyterian. 

Tongue  River  superintendency.. 

216 

216 

183 

151 

Tongue  River  

69 

86 

70 

56 

Reservation  boarding. 

Birney 

47 

50 

42 

34 

Day 

Lamedeer 

40 

38 

30 

24 

Do 

St.  Labre's  

60 

42 

41 

37 

Contract  mission   boarding; 

Nebraska 

647 

667 

569 

527 

Catholic. 

-     Genoa  

400 

482 

395 

368 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Santee  su  perin  tendency  —  Santee 
Normal  Training. 
Winnebago    superintendency— 
St.  Augustine. 

Nevada 

125 
122 

650 

152 
33 

633 

141 
33 

566 

129 
30 

498 

Mission  boarding  and  day; 
Congregational. 
Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Carson  

286 

323 

298 

280 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Fallon  superintendency  

65 

31 

24~ 

14 

Fallen 

40 

16 

12 

5 

Dav 

Lovelocks  

25 

15 

12 

9 

Do. 

156 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Nevada—  Continued. 
Fort  McDermitt      

80 

53 

40 

32 

Day. 

Moapa  River 

20 

19 

18 

16 

Do. 

Nevada     

70 

72 

68 

64 

Reservation  boarding. 

Walker  River 

60 

38 

33 

24 

Day. 

Western  Shoshone  superintend- 
ency. 

69 

97 

85 

68 

No.  1 

35 

51 

43 

33 

Do. 

No.2  

34 

46 

42 

35 

Do. 

New  Mexico 

2,792 

3,  263 

2,9.11 

2,606 

Albuquerque 

400 

473 

447 

430 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Jicarilla  

108 

101 

94 

86 

Reservation  boarding. 

Mescalero  

100 

119 

116 

113 

Do. 

Pueblo  Bonito  superin  tendency.  . 

210 

190 

179 

174 

Pueblo  Bonito 

180 

168 

158 

156 

Do. 

Pinedale  

30 

22 

21 

18 

Day. 

Pueblo  day  school  superintend- 
ency. 

1,166 

1,308 

1,164 

975 

Albuquerque— 
Ac'Oinita 

32 

28 

25 

21 

Do. 

Encinal  

Isleta 

30 
120 

23 
112 

20 

107 

15 
91 

Do. 
Do. 

Laguna  

34 

61 

49 

39 

Do. 

MeCarty  s  . 

38 

34 

30 

24 

Do. 

Mesita 

38 

40 

33 

29 

Do. 

Pagnate  

Paraje 

60 

20 

81 
39 

75 
38 

61 
33 

Do. 
Do. 

San  Felipe  

60 

59 

58 

46 

Do. 

Seama 

28 

37 

32 

26 

Do. 

Bernalillo 

125 

150 

110 

101 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Santa  Fe— 
Cochiti.. 

28 

32 

26 

22 

Day. 

Jemez 

120 

86 

82 

59 

Do. 

Picuris  

24 

26 

25 

25 

Do. 

San  Ildefonso 

40 

22 

20 

14 

Do. 

San  Juan  

70 

60 

54 

46 

Do. 

Santa  Clara 

40 

62 

53 

35 

Do. 

Santa  Domingo  

50 

79 

70 

65 

Do. 

30 

17 

17 

15 

Do. 

Taos 

70 

98 

83 

57 

Do. 

Jemez  ...  

34 

2 

2 

2 

Mission  day. 

St  Catherine's 

75 

160 

155 

149 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

San  Juan  superintendency  .  . 

230 

306 

237 

190 

San  Juan     

150 

259 

195 

151 

Reservation  boarding. 

Toadlena 

80 

47 

42 

39 

Do. 

Santa  Fe  .  .                      

350 

408 

363 

352 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Zuni  superintendency  

228 

358 

311 

286 

Zuni 

80 

140 

117 

110 

Reservation  boarding. 

Do                    

118 

181 

157 

142 

Day. 

Christian  Reformed 

30 

37 

37 

34 

Mission  day;  Christian  Re- 

North Carolina     .                         ... 

310 

358 

317 

243 

formed. 

Cherokee  superintendency  

310 

358 

317 

243 

160 

253 

233 

194 

Reservation  boarding. 

Big  Cove  .   .           

40 

21 

16 

10 

Day. 

Birdtown 

40 

39 

31 

18 

Do. 

Little  Snowbird 

30 

18 

13 

Q 

Do. 

Snowbird  Gap..., 

40 

27 

24 

13 

Do. 

COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


157 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average     Average 
1    enroll-    \   attend- 
ment.         ance. 

Class  of  school. 

North  Dakota 

1,509 

1,857 

1,484 

1,014 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 

Mission  boarding. 
Mission  boarding;  Congrega- 
tional. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Do. 
Do. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 
Mission  boarding. 

Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 
Reservation  boarding. 

Do. 
Mission  day;  Episcopal. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Mission  boarding;  Reformed 
Presbyterian. 
Mission  day;  Baptist. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Contract   Mission   boarding; 
Catholic. 
Reservation  boarding. 

DO. 

Day. 
Reservation  boarding. 
Do. 

Do. 
Contract   mission  boarding; 
Catholic. 

)t  in  operation. 

Bismarck  

80 

isT 

138 
165~ 

99               72 
133              103 

Fort  Berthold  superintendency.  . 
No  1 

30 
36 
30 
75 
13 

22 
25 
27 
79 
12 

17 
22 
24 
58 
12 

12 
18 
22 
41 
10 

No.  2... 

No.  3. 

Fort  Berthold  i  

Congregational  J  .  . 

Fort  Totten  

323 

538 

401 

202 

Standing  Rock  superintendency. 
Standing  Rock 

562 

547 

487 

418 

202 
100 
40 
40 
30 
40 
24 
20 
50 
16 

244 
107 
34 
30 
18 
23 
11 
15 
52 
13 

211 
103 
29 
28 
17 
20 
11 
10 
45 
13 

184 
91 
25 
20 
13 
15 
10 
8 
41 
11 

Martin  Kenel.  . 

Bullhead..  . 

Cannon  Ball 

Grand  River  

Little  Oak  Creek 

Porcupine  .  .  . 

No.  1.     ... 

St  Elizabeth's 

Standing  Rock  Mission  . 

Turtle    Mountain    superintend- 
ency. 
No  1 

160 

253 

184 

94 

40 
30 
30 
30 
30 

46 
67 
32 
75 
33 

m~ 

4,589 

29 
48 
24 
58 
25 

180~ 
3,989 

20 
22 
15 
25 
12 

125" 
3,607 

No.  2... 

No.  3. 

No  4 

No.  5.     .       .   . 

Wahpeton  

200 
4,194 

Oklahoma 

Cantonment 

90 

128 

110 

85 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  superin- 
tendency. 
Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

195 

123               109 

108 

150 
45 

500~ 

123 

109 

108 

St.  Luke's*  

Chilocco  . 

676 
665" 

598 
617~ 

529 
567 

Kiowa  superintendency 

683 

Anadarko  

110 
160 
155 
168 
50 

40 

143 
175 
167 
164 
16 

135 
171 
146 
151 

14 

121 
168 
124 
140 
14 

.    Fort  Sill 

Rainy  Mountain  

Riverside  . 

Cache  Creek 

Red  Stone  3 

Osage  superintendency  .  . 

190 

149 

128 

109 

Osage  

115 
75 

129 
20 

112 
16 

95 
14 

St.  Louis's.. 

Otoe  

80 
100 
90 
65 
80 
79 

150 

84 
73 
126 
36 

88 
97 

77 
68 
115 
29 
64 
84 

70 
66 
108 
24 
53 
77  1 

Pawnee 

Ponca 

Red  Moon    . 

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger 

Seneca  superintendency 

204 

181 

171 

Seneca  . 

100  I        154 
50            50 

»  Abolish* 

139 

42 

>d. 

132 
39 

St  Mary's 

i  Report  of  1916. 

3N< 

158 


COMMISSIONER  OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

O  klahoma—  Continued. 
Shawnee  superintendency  

310 

272 

225 

207 

Shawnee 

110 

144 

114 

100 

Sacred  Heart  (St.  Benedict's) 
Sacred  Heart  (St.  Mary's)  .  .  . 

100 
100 

43 

85 

40 
71 

37 

70 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 
Do. 

Total,  Western  Oklahoma. 

2,612 

2,721 

2,405 

2,174 

Five  Civilized  Tribes  

1,582 

1,868 

1,584 

1,433 

Cherokee  Nation;   Cherokee 
Orphan  School. 

110 

170 

143 

126 

Tribal  boarding. 

Creek  Nation  

327 

374 

341 

321 

Euchee  

100 

124 

116 

110 

Do. 

Eufaula 

112 

124 

111 

106 

Do 

Nuyaka  

115 

126 

114 

105 

Do. 

Chickasaw  Nation  

35 

45 

45 

39 

Collins  l 

Do 

El  Meta  Bond  College... 

35 

45 

45 

39 

Contract;  private  boarding. 

Choctaw  Nation  

550 

708 

576 

523~ 

Armstrong  Male  Acade- 
my. 
Jones  Male  Academy  
Tuskahoma  Academy  .  .  . 
Wheelock  Academy  
OldGoodland  

120 

100 
110 
100 
80 

142 

125 
123 
129 
124 

112 

111 
112 
101 

85 

95 

103 
103 
95 
76 

Tribal  boarding. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Contract;    mission  boarding; 

St.  Agnes  Mission 

40 

65 

55 

51 

Presbyterian. 
Contract'   mission  boarding' 

Chickasaw     and     Choctaw 
Nation. 

460 

430 

363 

324 

Murray  School  of  Agri- 
culture. 
Oklahoma  Presbyterian 
College. 
St.  Agnes  Academy 

150 
50 
160 

103 
58 

178 

98 
47 
134 

82 
41 
122 

Contract;  mission  boarding; 
private. 
Contract;  mission  boarding; 
Presbyterian. 
Contract'  mission  boarding; 

St.  Elizabeth's  

70 

68 

61 

57 

Catholic. 
Do. 

St.  Joseph's  

30 

23 

23 

22 

Do. 

Seminole  Nation 

100 

141 

116 

100 

Mekusukey  

100 

141 

116 

100 

Tribal  boarding 

Oregon 

1  335 

1  383 

1  044 

852 

Klamath  superintendency  

262 

246 

156 

123 

Klamath 

112 

165 

94 

78 

Reservation  boarding 

Modoc  Point  

30 

19 

15 

10 

Day. 

Yainax  

30 

15 

11 

7 

Do. 

No  1 

30 

21 

15 

11 

Do 

No.  2  

30 

11 

8 

5 

Do. 

No.  3 

30 

15 

13 

12 

Do. 

Salem  

650 

764 

578 

456 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Siletz 

50 

31 

26 

18 

Dav 

Umatilla  superintendency 

243 

212 

174 

156 

Umatilla  

93 

142 

121 

109 

Reservation  boarding. 

St.  Andrew's  (Kate  Drexel). 

150 

70 

53 

47 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Warm  Springs  superintendency. 

130 

130 

110 

99 

Warm  Springs 

100 

109 

92 

85 

Reservation  boarding 

Simnasho 

30 

21 

18 

14 

Dav 

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle... 

757 

821 

706 

438 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

i  Buildings  burned  May  9, 1916;  abolished  Oct.  12, 1917. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIES. 


159 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South  Dakota  

4,126 

3,928 

3,303 
229~ 

2,676 
194~ 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Contract;   mission  boarding; 
Catholic. 
Nonreservation  boarding. 
Reservation  boarding. 
Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Contract  mission  boarding; 
Catholic. 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Reservation  boarding. 
Day. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Cheyenne  River  superintendency 
Cheyenne  River 

242 

257 

180 
20 
22 
20 

200 
19 
18 
20 

180 
16 
15 

18 

156 
13 
10 
15 

No.  2 

No.  7... 

No.  8 

Crow  Creek  superintendency  
Crow  Creek  

157 

143 

129 

123 

82 
75 

92 
51 

80 
49 

76 
47 

Immaculate  Conception 

Flandreau  

360 
100 
250 

402 
82 

298 

334 
70 
227 

230 
64 
195 

Lower  Brule  .... 

Pierre 

Pine  Ridge  superintendency  
Pine  Ridge  .  .  . 

1,273 

1,088 

859 

653 

210 
25 
23 
30 
30 
30 
33 
33 
30 
33 
30 
30 
24 
22 
24 
36 
30 
33 
30 
24 
30 
27 
30 
33 
30 
30 
20 
23 
30 
20 
240 

308 
24 
6 
23 
37 
23 
27 
1 
21 
24 
9 
16 
13 
15 
19 
25 
28 
26 
24 
25 
18 
20 
14 
31 
8 
22 
15 
15 
11 
15 
225 

223 
20 
6 
21 
31 
19 
20 
1 
16 
17 
8 
12 
11 
12 
15 
19 
21 
22 
15 
21 
14 
15 
13 
24 
8 
17 
12 
13 
10 

P 

191 

166 
15 
4 
19 
26 
13 
14 
1 
12 
12 
6 
9 
7 
7 
13 
9 
15 
17 
10 
16 
10 
5 
9 
12 
7 
12 
9 
10 
7 
6 
175 

No.  1... 

No  -3  ! 

No.  4... 

No.  5. 

No  6 

No.  7... 

No  8i. 

No.  9  

No.  10  ... 

No  11 

No.  12  

No.  13 

No.  14  

No.  15  

No  16 

No.  17  

No.  18 

No.  19  

No.  20  ... 

No  21 

No  22 

No.  23  

No.  24 

No.  25... 

No.  26 

No.  27... 

No.  28  

No  29 

No.  30  

Holy  Rosary 

Rapid  City 

300 

322 

266 

191 

Rosebud  superintendency  

1,136 

991              888 

753 

Rosebud  

200 
20 
32 
40 
24 
27 
24 
26 
26 
27 
29 
26 
25 
23 
23 
25 
26 
21 
26 
19 
27 

277 
28 
5 
23 
16 
27 
13  i 
22  | 
5 

250 
26 
4 
17 
15 
24 
12 
17 
5 

227 
22 
4 
12 
13 
20 
11 
14 
5 

Black  Pipe 

Bull  Creek  i  

Corn  Creek 

Cut  Meat  

He-Doers  Camp 

Ironwood  

Little  Crow's  Camp 

Little  White  River  i  

Lower  Cut  Meat  *  

Milk's  Camp 

21 
24 
28 
14 
6 
9 
14 
14 
16 
14  i 
6 

18 
20 
20 
12 
6 
8 
13 
11 
11 
10 
6 

13 
15 
14 
10 
5 
7 
11 
9 
6 
7 
5 

Oak  Creek 

Pine  Creek..    . 

Red  Leaf  

Ring  Thunder  i  .  . 

Rosebud 

Spring  Creek  

Upper  Cut  Meat 

Whirlwind  Soldier... 

White  Lake  

White  Thunder  2... 

i  Abolished  during  fiscal  year. 


2  Not  in  operation. 


160 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917— Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

South  Dakota—  Continued,. 
Rosebud  superintendency—  Con. 

25 

20 

18 

16 

Days 

St.  Mary's  

70 

59 

56 

47 

Mission  boarding;  Episcopal. 

St.  Francis's 

325 

330 

309 

260 

Contract   mission   boarding" 

Catholic. 

Sisseton              ... 

133 

147 

132 

125 

Reservation  boarding 

Springfield 

60 

75 

68 

60 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Yankton  

115 

123 

101 

88 

Reservation  boarding 

Utah  

137 

113 

96 

79 

Goshute  i 

30 

Dav 

Shivwits  

40 

28 

22 

15 

Do 

Uintah 

67 

85 

74 

64 

Reservation  boarding. 

Washington 

1,537 

1,438 

1  186 

970 

Colville  superintendency.    . 

355 

282 

225 

177 

No.l... 

25 

22 

16 

10 

Day. 

No.  3 

30 

31 

23 

18 

Do 

No  4 

30 

33 

25 

16 

Do 

No.  5 

30 

28 

23 

19 

Do 

No  6 

25 

23 

19 

11 

Do 

No.  9     ... 

25 

23 

20 

18 

Do 

Sacred  Heart  .  .  . 

90 

39 

30 

24 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

St.  Mary's      .     .      . 

100 

83 

69 

61 

Do. 

Cushman  superintendency  

515 

526 

411 

344 

Cushman 

350 

363 

284 

240 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

Jamestown 

30 

22 

17 

14 

Day 

Port  Gamble  

25 

25 

20 

15 

Do. 

Skokomish 

40 

30 

18 

8 

Do 

St.  George's  

70 

86 

72 

67 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Neah  Bay  superintendency  

120 

111 

100 

74 

Neah  Bay 

60 

63 

57 

39 

Day 

Quileute  

60 

48 

43 

35 

Do. 

Spokane  superintendency  

90 

68 

55 

3<T 

No.  1 

33 

17 

14 

12 

Do. 

No.2  

32 

34 

27 

15 

Do. 

•     No.  8 

25 

17 

14 

9 

Do. 

Taholah  superintendency  

76 

56~ 

49~ 

42 

Taholah  

36 

41 

40 

34 

Do. 

Queets  River 

40 

15 

9 

8 

Do. 

Tulalip  superintendency  

250 

268 

228 

202 

Tulalip  

180 

208 

183 

170 

Reservation  boarding. 

Lummi 

40 

36 

24 

14 

Day. 

Swinomish  

30 

24 

21 

18 

Do. 

Yakima 

131 

127 

118 

95 

Reservation  boarding. 

Wisconsin     

2,437 

2,191 

1,853 

1,566 

Hayward  superintendency  

305 

343 

285 

195 

Havward 

231 

293 

240 

159 

Nonreservation  boarding. 

La  Courte  Oreille  

74 

50 

45 

36 

Day. 

Keshena  superintendency  

590 

573 

500 

424 

Keshena 

170 

185 

164 

147 

Reservation  boarding. 

Neopit  

80 

43 

30 

17 

Day. 

St  Joseph's     .              ..  .  . 

220 

243 

215 

192 

Contract  mission  boarding: 

St.  Anthony's  

120 

102 

91 

68 

Catholic. 
Mission  day;  Catholic. 

i  Not  in  operation. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


161 


TABLE  18. — Location,  capacity,  enrollment  and  attendance,  etc.,  of  schools  during  fiscal 
year  ended  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Superintendencies  and  names  of 
schools. 

Capac- 
ity. 

Total 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
enroll- 
ment. 

Average 
attend- 
ance. 

Class  of  school. 

Wisconsin—  Continued. 
Lac  du  Flambeau 

160 

151 

139 

131 

La  Pointe  superintendency  

690 

344 

278 

250 

Odanah  Mission... 

490 

78 

78 

50 

Mission  day  Catholic 

St.  Mary's 

200 

266 

200 

200 

Mission  boarding*  Catholic 

Oneida  superintendency  

190 

203 

200 

186 

Oneida  

140 

162 

159 

150 

Reservation  boarding 

Adventist  Mission 

25 

25 

25 

20 

Mission  day  Adventist 

TTnharf.  Mission 

25 

16 

16 

16 

Red  Cliff  superintendency  

117 

67 

64 

56 

Red  Cliff  

52 

32 

29 

22 

Day 

Bayfield  (Holy  Family)  

65 

35 

35 

34 

Mission  boarding;  Catholic. 

Tomah  

275 

374 

262 

204 

Nonreservation  boarding 

Wittenberg  

110 

136 

125 

120 

Do 

Wyoming 

300 

292 

i*c» 

272 

232 

Shoshone  superintendency 

300 

292 

272 

232 

Shoshone  

135 

167 

157 

143 

Reservation  boarding 

Arapaho 

25 

26 

21  i 

15 

Day 

St.  Stephen's  . 

120 

83 

78  ! 

59 

Contract  mission  boarding* 

Shoshone  Mission  

20 

16 

16 

15 

Catholic. 
Mission  boarding*  Episcopal 

TABLE  19. — School  statistics  for  41  years.1 

INDIAN   SCHOOLS  AND  AVERAGE  ATTENDANCE  FROM  1877  TO   1917. 


Year. 

Boarding  schools. 

Day  schools.8 

Total. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

Number. 

Average 
attendance. 

1877  

48 
49 
52 
60 
114 
140 
157 
153 
167 
158 
156 
»170 
•  £88 
«166 
«160 
«162 
•160 

102 

119 
107 
109 
86 
106 
125 
154 
145 
227 
227 
242 
230 
233 
228 
238 
234 

150 

168 
159 
169 
200 
246 
282 
307 
312 
385 
383 
412 
398 
399 
388 
400 
394 

3,598 
4,142 
4,448 
4,651 
8,143 
12,232 
18,188 
21,568 
25,455 
24,  945 
23,647 
26,281 
25,830 
26,  127 
26,128 
425,303 
425,294 

1878 

1879 

1880  

1885 

6.201 
9,865 
15,061 
17,  708 
21,812 
20,106 
18,  774 
20,973 
20,607 
20,858 
20,  702 
*  20,  083 
420,368 

1,942 
2,367 
3,127 
3,860 
3,643 
4,839 
4,873 
5,308 
5,223 
5,269 
5,426 
<5.220 
<  <  925 

1890  

1895  

1900 

1905  

1910  . 

1911 

1912  

1913 

1914 

1915  

1916 

1917  

1  For  other  years  see  1913  report. 

2  Indian  children  in  public  schools  under  contract  are  included  in  the  average  attendance,  but  the  schools 
are  not  included  in  the  number  of  schools. 

8  Includes  Five  Tribes,  boarding  schools. 

4  The  decrease  in  attendance  is  due  to  a  different  method  of  computation.  Formerly  the  average  attend- 
ance was  the  average  of  three-quarters  having  the  greatest  attendance.  The  year's  attendance  has  been 
computed  for  10  months,  including  September,  when  the  attendance  is  always  small. 


18404—17- 


-11 


162 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  19. — School  statistics  for  41  years — Continued. 


APPROPRIATIONS  MADE  FOR  SCHOOLS  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  SINCE  1876. 


Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

Year. 

Appropria- 
tion. 

Per  cent 
increase. 

1877  

$20,000 

1899  

$2,  638,  390 

0.25 

1878          

30  000 

50.00 

1900  

2  936  080 

11  28 

1879 

60  000 

100  00 

1901 

3  080  367 

4  91 

1880 

75  000 

25  00 

1902 

3  244  250 

5  32 

1881          

75  000 

1903  

3.531  250 

8  84 

1882                         .       .     .     . 

135  000 

80  00 

1904  ...              

3  522  950 

i    23 

1883 

487  200 

260  00 

1905 

3  880  740 

10  15 

lgS4      

675  200 

38.00 

1906  

3  777*100 

1  2  67 

1885 

992  800 

47  00 

1907     

3  925  830 

3  93 

1886 

100  065 

10  00 

1908 

4  105  715 

4  58 

1887  

,21l!  415 

10.00 

1909     

4  008*825 

12  36 

1888 

179  916 

12  60 

1910 

3  757  909 

i  g  2& 

1889 

348  015 

14  00 

1911 

3  685  2^0 

i  1  03 

1890  

364*568 

1.00 

1912  

3  757*495 

1.96 

1891 

842  770 

35  00 

1913 

4  015  720 

6  87 

1892 

2  291  650 

24  30 

1914 

2  4  403  355 

9  55. 

1893  

2*315  612 

1.04 

1915  

8  4*  678*  627 

6  25 

1894 

2  243  497 

i  3  50 

1916 

4  4  391  155 

i  6  14 

1895  

2.  060.  695 

18.87 

1917  

*  4,  701,  903 

7.08 

1896      

2  056  515 

12.00 

1918     

»»5  185  290 

10  28 

1897 

2  517  265 

22  45 

1898  

2,  631,  771 

4.54 

Total  since  1876  

103  942  195 

i  Decrease . 

*  Includes  $400,000'for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

*  Includes  $440,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 
« Includes  $430,000  for  Indian  school  and  agency  buildings. 

5  Includes  $300,000  for  Indian  school  buildings,  Sioux  reservations,  North  and  South  Dakota. 

TABLE  20. — Demonstration  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of  tools 
and 
imple- 
ments. 

Employees  en- 
gaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total 

1,465 

$54,040 

— 

$7,562 
= 
1,140 

16 
3~ 

$3,740 
830~ 

$5,535 



820 

$3,193 
40~ 

$224 

$2,  118 
780 

Arizona  

Kaibab... 

0) 
(») 

3 

200 
48 

110 

8 

120 
3,270 
960 

9,750 

520 
620 

1 
2 

200 
630 

San  Xavier 

820 
400 

40 

400 

780 

California:  Campo  

Idaho:  Fort  Hall  3  

Montana:  Blackfeet 

605 
3,522 

Nebraska  

2 

600 

997 

472 

90 

435 

Santee  

20 
90 

638 

410 

40 
6 

2,100 
7,650 

6,380 

32,800 
400 
360 

Winnebago    . 

3,522 
445 

2 

8 

600 
1,050 

997 
3,028 

472 
1,991 

90 
134 

435 

903 

North  Dakota:  Fort  Berth- 
old  «    . 

Oklahoma:    Cheyenne   and 
Arapaho  3  

1,850 

2 

1 

1,080 
180 

290 

290 

Utah:  Shivwits  

i  Not  reported. 


s  Leased. 


*  Only  items  reported. 


<  1916  report. 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  163 

TABLE  21. — Experimentation  farms,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superintendences. 

Acre- 
age. 

Value. 

Value 
of  tools 
and 
Imple- 
ments. 

Employees  en- 
gaged. 

Value  of  products. 

Num- 
ber. 

Wages. 

Raised. 

Con- 
sumed. 

t 

Sold. 

On 
hand. 

Grand  total  

59 

$993 

500 
50 

418 
25 

7 

5 
1 

1 

$425 

250~ 
25 

150 

$350 

100~ 
250 

$100 

ibo" 

$250 

Arizona'  Salt  River 

UO 

1 

47 
1 

(2) 

=== 

Montana*  Crow 

250 

New   Mexico:   Pueblo   day 

North     Dakota:     Standing 
Rock.     . 

1  Borrowed  Indian  lands. 


8  Agency  tools  used. 


164 


^ 

I 


^ 

g 


^ 

», 

1 

§3 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

«     •  •<*<  00  CO  <*  CO  •**  CN 
2      •  5C  i— *  iH  i-H         CN 


1 


i 


* 


'3.3 


OG  »-H  f-n  o  co  T-H  10 

r-l  CM  CS  CO  CM  CO  CO 


W  CO  "•**  t"-  i—  1 

>  S3  &i  ao  oo  CM 

i  t—  1  C3  1C  •**«  CO 


1-H  i-H  IM  O5  »O 


ft  CO  00  O5  l-H  •*  CO 


co  CM  co  co  I-H  co  eo 


§*vorrc^rco"cTts-"sov 
OOOOiCcOOO 


1C  O  OS  O5  10 


rji  t^. 


•       i  rH       *       *       «       t  •       •         &  • 


cocog 


rt<  oo  os  CM  eo  01  i-i 


iO*       iC*^* 


oo  co  co  CM  e 


CO^t^^        g,^ 


««0<0^ 


(NCMCO       CM  CMCO 


OCMiC^iOCOCOOOOOcO 
OOCO»O        1CCM        OOO*"H 


ill 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


165 


^ 


1' 


CO 


* 


&9 


£  he 


Si  -  ' 


:    § 


I  & 


n-  o<N     I-H 

rH  SO  M1        g. 


1  I  1  I 


ls 


166 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


Ji 


t^i-H  i-H          t^ 


Sgg 


«?«*       t-~ 


.5853    £ 


00         CO 


I  fiisPlI 


33  °  ® 

|  ££  ^ 

03  <D 

K  * 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 

HI  :  :  :    gs   §  |8: 

CC         OO      •      '  •        i— 1        t>-     I          < 


167 


;-? 


SS    8 


SS8    8 


2  i 


2    8 


cT    ^    «T 


I. 


1C  t>  iO 

<M  ooeo 


S8S 


:S 
:  :S 


O  <O  Ttn-H  CO  O5  CO         00 

oeq      cc  >o  o  c»s     "5 


(  O  O  OO  O5  < 

sl^o  »n  t>-  c 


ig&j 

®  §B3rt-§ 


o 
MrtcoPF 


168 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


oo  co 

Sl-H-stl 


0^06* 

O  IO  i 

i—  »  oo 


"^  s  s 


co*      ccToo"'or    oo~ 


•V^c^io"  10"  o** 

I  *3<  i-H 


TN  O3i6  (N  C^I 

OSIM  00  lOOO  C 

T-l  IO  i-H  CO  i-H   ( 


I 

<2  J 

^ 


:3 


<N        O  O  Tji        CO 


00       OfNO^iO 
00       t^  t^  00  t^  OO  t 


«D        •*  r-l  CD  IM 


s  s^s 


C<         •Oi-*'<o 
•pH         i-l  00         rH 


iO  (M  I-  <N  t-t 

CO  >O  r-l  "^  CO 


OOOO  O       iO  O 

se^* 


O  co  iO 


<N  "3       (Mi-^rH 


•3     ^ 

OTJ  O 

s§l 


I! 


§8?! 


00  .  T-H  rf  rf  t^  10  i 


OOt^       00050^ 

T— t  O  t^  C^  T— (  T— ( 


i??00  :™     :$ 


*  rf  !>•  "<*i  O  rH  iO  Ci 

I  lo'T-Tr-T^r     cc'oo' 


•*  KOOOINCOCO 


:>S  :  ;  :  :gf 
1 


^-1     •'  >» 


la> 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

3 


169 


S£[S 

82 


2  §§ 


11 


CN  OS  C^  Oa  -^  I  - 


238S 

o  >o  •* « 


llO.-ljHQOOS          10 


M  cq  co  >o  co 


1  § 


:  ^H  CO  CS)  CO  <N  O        >n 

)  1C  LO   IO  -^H  CO  Tt* 


p,    . 
03  03     . 


)  i-tcO  1C        t-- 


S18 


>O  CO        »O 

!^^  s§ 


O  CO  CO        O 

cow*      c- 


eo  i-<     t-i« 


IIS 


i    1 


I 


3    I  1 
g     ^  M 

I  J  i 


1 1 


o 


.1 


:    2' 


s  Illiill  -s  ilaillll  »  siiiss 

^      CQQfe^fH^fH       c3       *gN      foSJz;^^       ^      Kgp-,pHtt!N! 

I  I  °  I 


170 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


-3 

V 

£ 

.3 


III   g 


s?  *  g 


ooc»< 


i— t  O        i— I 
•*  t~        Oi 


Sf 


8    8 


§    5 


28    ?§ 


II 

co 


So 
o 


S3     3 


^•0«    3 


II 


.     o 


£3 

C3-73 

a^ 


•    §    O    -g  OQ 

5§§§  «> 

_>;  -g  -3  '^  .3 

0002>  § 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INEHAN   AFFAIRS. 


171 


3RS 


>OOC  **        CO 


~    " 


00"       rt"^ 


•SS 


>^HiOO 


r-ICO  00  CO  i-H 


i  co  Ses  cooo      t^ 


OOO  COO  O  IO< 


I3SS8S    55 


,3.  M  ,H^CD(N  •Q'  001 


O  O  >O  f— I  C<I 


(NOOCO^HrH         T-I 


2S28S 


111' 


1«      • 


S   - 

I3 


iooeo      (Oj-t 


oo 


(NtOQOOr-((N 


SSS3 


i  too  • 


l-Hr-IC<        O         050U500 


|?P     =  ijipf 

d 


:>  5S8 
«g    03  8  8 


172 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

§ 


coe  et-c       *-H 

CO  CO  t-»  r-t  CO 


-T     cT 


s£5     §     1 

*-    a'  § 


O  Ci  O  "^        t>- 

»O  O  M1  *O        O 


?  §  s 


i8"¥  £ 


!SS    S 
i-T^r   c<r 


B§' 


I  s 


r  ^  s" 


eo"     — 


Btss 


ISllli 

<!  a  3^  3^ 


s  I 


|S 


W 


§  I  I 
3  I  I 


Uftif 


frill 

IS   :*p  « 

J                ^J      J-4     C  O 

'  p,"i  &  -2  'x 


a  | 

55 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN    AFFAIHS. 


173 


oo* 


8"    Sf 


0  o 

tj        W 

001  o" 


tif 


ggO 


H  a 


S    58" 


111 


sai  -a  -i  a* 

Owt>     -S     QM>H 


Eg 

oo: 


174 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  26. — Allotments  approved  by  the  department  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30* 

,  and  made  in  the  field. 


States  and  tribes  or  reservations. 

Approved  by  de- 
partment. 

Made  in  the  field. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Total  

1,134 

175,  456 

4,688 

397,  103 

72 

720 

3,773 

186,380 

72 

720 

2 
3,771 

20 
186,360 

Pima  (Gila  River)                                        .         

4 

9 
2 

310 
720 
120 

Michigan  

I/Anse  and  Vieux  Desert 

1 
1 

11 

40 
80 

861 

Minnesota  

Fond,  du  L/ac 

8 
3 

133 

621 
240 

17,192 

Leech  Lake                                   

Montana  

492 

135,996 

Absentee  Wyandot  (public  domain) 

13 

80 
2,242 

Crow 

Fort  Peck                                            

456 
36 

131,836 
4,160 

Turtle  Mountain 

119 

1 
6 
4 

14,870 
41 
115 
798 

Nebraska*  Winneba°ro                              

North  Dakota  

Standing  Rock                                    .              

2 
2 

1 
10 

478 
320 

120 
1,427 

Turtle  Mountain  (public  domain) 

Oklahoma*  Potawatomi                                        

31 

4,656 

Klamath                 '.  

6 
2 
1 

1 

874 

905 
200 
160 
162 

152,393 

31 

4,656 

South  Dakota                                                           

392 

70,071 

Cheyenne  River                               

246 
25 
192 
411 

1 
6 

39,850 
4,136 
40,658 
67,749 

160 
479 

193 
4 
195 

30,996 
640 
38,435 

Pine  Ridge                    

Wisconsin  

1 
5 

80 
399 

COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  175 

TABLE  27. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales.1 

Inherited-land  sales.2 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Grand  total  

3,995 

440,837.92 

$7,176,570.14 

9,000 

1,110,366.14 

$17.426.504.34 

Total  1917 

588 
583 
422 
529 
208 
324 
494 
520 
235 
92 

69,849.00 
54,958.62 
34,429.09 
45,526.31 
20,778.80 
34,391.11 
56,  197.  98 
82,  655.  80 
34,060.33 
7,990.88 

1,040,202.00 
969,611.24 
584,  724.  56 
779,526.14 
407,315.56 
568,  880.  75 
978,  588.  27 
1,245,639.96 
442,  762.  85 
159,318.81 

655 
324 
393 
418 
109 
392 
638 
873 
753 
768 
820 
643 
978 
1,236 
(5) 

75,892.00 
35,  762.  25 
68,  245.  45 
45,241.99 
10,797.94 
43,  652.  27 
79,  665.  66 
129,359.61 
102,  708.  00 
91,302.57 
106,359.25 
64,447.67 
90,214.97 
122,  222.  52 
44,493.99 

1,546,965.00 
694,241.48 
715.568.52 
773,309.16 
285,097.72 
889,285.02 
1,503,960.38 
1,956,315.92 
1,321,258.72 
1,302,508.94 
1,248,793.34 
981,430.87 
1,393,131.52 
2,057,464.50 
757,  173.  25 

1916  

1915 

1914  

1913  

1912 

1911  3  

1910s 

1909  *  

1908  

1907 

1906  

1905 

1904  

1903 

California:  Fort  Bidwell  

1 
6 
4 

80 
480 
241 

320 
2,055 

8,235 

1 

12 
19 

2 
1,475 
1,391 

106 
8,687 
45,376 

Colorado:  Southern  Ute  

Idaho 

Coeur  d'Alene     .  .          . 

4 
15 

10 

637 
754 

550 

16.  645 
28,731 

22,433 

Fort  Lapwai 

4 
14 

241 

498 

8,235 
26,193 

Kansas 

Kickapoo  

4 
10 

1 

19 

122 
376 

40 

941 

10,768 
15,425 

801 
15,244 

5 
5 

310 
240 

11,110 
11,323 

Potawatomi  

Michigan:  Mackinac  

Minnesota  

21 

1,188 

14,566 

Fond  du  Lac  

1 
13 
5 

58 

6 
495 
440 

10,054 

120 
6,007 
9,117 

95,660 

2 
18 
1 

114 

81 
1,027 
80 

15,537 

2.475 
10,071 
2,020 

200,040 

Leech  Lake 

White  Earth  

Montana 

Crow     .    .  . 

22 
15 
21 
49 

3.131 
941 
5,982 
2,403 

28,  128 
23,725 
43,  807 
181,  595 

81 
28 
5 
90 

11,602 
2,277 
1,658 
6,304 

115,510 
68,153 
16,377 
427,  554 

Flathead 

Fort  Peck 

Nebraska 

Omaha 

18 
19 
12 

84 

1,078 
909 
416 

9,736 

113,077 
38,  409 
30,109 

111,382 

44 
23 
23 

42 

2,796 
2,188 
1,320 

6,148 

246,  421 
83,175 
97,958 

54,053 

Santee  

Winnebago  

North  Dakota... 

Fort  Bert  hold... 

16 
26 
16 
26 

183 

1,719 
1  924 
2,509 
3,584 

24,589 

26,536 
36,994 
17,503 
30,349 

293,  790 

4 
19 

7 
12 

169 

480 
1,757 
1,593 
2,318 

21,846 

8,490 
27,595 
5  226 
12,742 

418,  969 

Fort  Totten. 

Standing  Rock 

Turtle  Mountain  .  . 

Oklahoma 

Cantonment 

17 
34 
23 
84 
11 
1 
1 

1.478 
6,421 
1,869 
12,336 
845 
40 
80 

25,530 
60,576 
45,538 
109,624 
15.078 
827 
1,600 

31 
63 
37 
8 
13 
1 
1 
1 
4 
9 
1 

3,907 
8,632 
5,312 
1,068 
1,277 
110 
2 
160 
520 
698 
160 

67,589 
167,  372 
119,703 
9,805 
24,000 
3,200 
125 
2,325 
11,765 
11?  725 
1.360 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho  
Kiowa  

Osage  . 

Pawnee 

Ponca... 

Sac  and  Fox 

Red  Moon  

Seger  

10 
1 
1 

1,200 
240 
80 

25,592 
4,812 
4,613 

Seneca 

Shawnee... 

1  Under  act  of  Mar.  1,  1907  (34  Stat.  L.,  1015-1018),  modified  by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444). 
June  25. 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

2  Under  act  of  May  27, 1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  245-275),  mo  lifted  by  acts  of  May  8, 1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182),  May  29, 
1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444),  June  25. 1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855-856),  and  Feb.  14,  1913  (37  Stat.  L.,  678-679). 

« Includes  sales  of  lands  of  Kaw,  Csage,  and  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
*  Includes  sales  of  Five  Civilized  Tribes. 
«  Unknown. 


176  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  27. — Sales  of  Indians'  allotted  lands  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1917. — Con. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Noncompetent  sales. 

Inherited-land  sales. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds. 

Num- 
ber of 
tracts. 

Acreage. 

Proceeds 

Oregon  

10 

1,400 

$14,  164 

11 

1,155 

$17,  120 

Klamath 

1 

5 
1 
4 

103 

160 
720 
40 
235 

16,409 

950 
2,116 
1,200 
12,  854 

248,201 

Roseburg  . 

9 

1,360 

12,  143 

Siletz 

Umatllla       

1 
108 

40 
15,  827 

2,021 
232,005 

South  Dakota  

Cheyenne  River 

16 
48 
14 
25 

12 

8 

1 
2 

955 
165 
3,253 
9,075 
800 
1,  579 

754 
351 

6,610 
421 
15,  625 
119,530 
21,218 
68,  601 

13,  764 
15,187 

3 

16 
8 
39 
11 
26 

9 
14 

1,117 
2,799 
2,458 
7,036 
918 
2,081 

557 
907 

6,146 
19,965 
10,927 
95,175 
30,260 
85,728 

10,240 
36,386 

Crow  Creek 

Pine  Ridge  

Rosebud 

Sisseton.  .     . 

Yankton 

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray  . 

Washington  

Colville 

60 
41 

800 
2,250 

2 
1 

1 
9 

21 

120 
12 
80 
2 
693 

780 

3,840 
811 
4,000 
142 
27,  593 

23,945 

Cushman  

Taholah 

Tulaip  

Yakima. 

5 
3 

250 
98 

12,  137 
1,519 

Wisconsin  

La  Pointe  

1 
1 
1 

89 
8 
1 

899 
320 
300 

Oneida  . 

19 

700 

23,  195 

Red  Cliff  

Tomah.. 

2 
19 

80 
1,643 

750 
19,299 

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

28 

2,357 

28,  288 

TABLE  28.—  Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182},  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444},  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855.} 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1917. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1917. 

Original  allotments'. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Total 

13,902 

1,470,285.08 

2,527 

277,393.86 

2,500 

297 

2,203 

265,544.00 

Arizona:  San  Xavier  
California  

1 

22 

40.00 
1,388.00 

1 

12.40 
10.00 

Bishop 

2 
16 

224 

280.00 
80.00 
963.00 
65.00 

30,968.86 

Greenville  

Hoopa  Valley 

Round  Valley  

1 

58 

10.00 
3,732.18 

Idaho 

78 

3 

75 

11,580.00 

Cour  d'  Alene 

122 
54 

48 

165 

18,930.97 
8,775.94 
3,261.95 

11,193.63 

5 

787.  65 

41 

27 
10 

90 

2 

39 
27 
9 

77 

6,289.00 
4,558.00 
733.00 

5,164.00 

Fort  Hall  

Fort  Lapwai 

53 

87 

2,944.53 
7,416.69 

1 
13 

Kansas   

Kickapoo  

96 
69 

5,816.14 
5,377.49 

50 
37 

4,332.30 
3.084.39 

67 
23 

2            65 
11  !          12 

4,403.00 
761.00 

Potawatomi... 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


177 


TABLE  28. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182],  as  modified 
by  octx  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444],  and  June  25,~1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  555)— 
Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Patents  hi  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1917. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 
1917. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

4 
20 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Michigan:  Mackinac  and 
Mount  Pleasant  

17 
3,682 

1,283.28 
294,769.23 

202.24 
1,304.50 

1 
40 

1 

12 

Minnesota 

28 

2,087.00 

Fond  du  Lac 

20 
23 
54 
12 
3,573 

674 

1,508.50 
1,929.32 
4,416.52 
1,074.89 
285.840.00 

104,226.60 

7  1         360.00 
3  !         240.00 
6            398.00 
4  1         306.50 

4 
13 
20 
3 

1 

5 
6 

3 
8 
14 
3 

231.00 
643.00 
973.00 
240.00 

Grand  Portage 

Leech  Lake  

Nett  Lake 

White  Earth  

Montana 

294 

40,669.51 

195 

51 

144 

30,768.00 

Blackfeet 

4 

75 
402 
193 

1,056 

920.97 
14,812.47 
35,814.61 
52,678.55 

71,720.02 

2 
34 
45 
114 

102 

2 
4 
4 
41 

30 

Crow... 

209 
49 
36 

512 

25,526.20 
3,983.31 
11,160.00 

46,931.04 

30 
41 

73 

72 

5.877.00 
3,462.00 
21,429.00 

4,995.00 

Flathead 

Fort  Peck  

Nebraska 

Omaha   . 

572 
26 
280 
178 

3 
1,201 

36,996.94 
3,365.06 
21,229.80 
10,128.22 

360.00 
216,919.00 

191 

24,811.00 

16 

2 

14 

720.00 

San  tee  

268 
53 

18,708.00 
3,412.04 

28 
58 

2 

26 

26 
32 

2,458.00 
1,817.00 

Winnebago.  

Nevada:  Carson 

North  Dakota.. 

180 

29,  516.  47 

234 

32 

202 

40,853.00 

FortBerthold... 

33 
83 
296 
789 

2,549 

7,  088.  90 
7,  632.  80 
93,938.85 
108,258.45 

220,874.28 

3 
39 
52 

86 

404 

324.00 
3,  150.  67 
10,  142.  21 
15,899.59 

42,027.16 

16 
33 
55 
130 

830 

16 
29 
55 
102 

780 

5,  156.  00 
2,960.00 
18,577.00 
14,  160.  00 

64,103.00 

Fort  Totten 

4 

Standing  Rock  

Turtle  Mountain  
Oklahoma  

28 
50 

Cantonment 

53 

339 
155 
95 

74 
106 
196 
43 
857 
631 

345 

7,415.88 

33,  797.  98 
19,  775.  14 
10,  915.  79 
8,356.31 
9,  121.  01 
21,  792.  86 
4,357.77 
52,  139.  08 
53,202.46 

26,  690.  75 

28 

17 
23 
17 
34 
28 
31 
2 
189 
35 

87 

4,252.66 

2,  993.  49 
3,677.86 
2,213.74 
2,918.58 
3,343.36 
3,967.07 
560.00 
12,  429.  46 
5,  670.  94 

8,  101.  62 

8 

195 
3 
3 
29 
39 
90 
9 
308 
146 

56 

8 
8 

Cheyenne  and  Ara- 
paho. 

187 
3 
1 
18 
32 
84 
7 
305 
143 

47 

14,683.00 
400.00 
80.00 
1,615.00 
4,016.00 
10,  109.  00 
640.00 
17,  409.  00 
15,151.00 

4,596.00 

Kiowa  

Otoe...  . 

2 
11 

7 
6 
2 
3 
3 

9 

Pawnee 

Ponca  

Sac  and  Fox 

Seger  

Seneca  

Shawnee 

Oregon  

Klamath  

39 
15 
21 
265 
5 

2,376 

5,912.27 
2,  147.  09 
1,438.78 
16,512.61 
680.00 

407,292.32 

5 
10 
16 
51 
5 

342 

802.72 
1,511.29 
1,460.72 
3,  566.  89 
760.00 

61,635.04 

14 

6 

8 

1,280.00 

Roseburg 

Siletz 

9 
31 

2 

663 

9 

28 
2 

577 

878.00 
2,  118.  00 
320.00 

88,060.00 

Umatilla. 

3 

Warm  Springs 

South  Dakota 

86 

Cheyenne  River  
Crow  Creek 

279 
90 
95 
553 
351 
203 
805 

4 

-12 

80,  807.  84 
14,  687.  26 
24,  299.  15 
105,  446.  52 
78,  725.  25 
20,  821.  72 
82,504.58 

240.00 

27 
57 
'  6 
156 
69 
9 
18 

4,791.86 
9,242.47 
1,050.00 
31,922.29 
12,  193.  54 
884.  14 
1,  550.  74 

105 
40 
26 
102 
17 
70 
303 

1 
2 

104 
38 
26 
36 
10 
67 
296 

31,568.00 
6.  629.  00 
5,452.00 
6,  776.  00 
2,096.00 
8,  113.  00 
27,  426.  00 

Lower  Brule 

Pine  Ridge     . 

66 

7 
3 

7 

Rosebud 

Sisseton  

Yankton  

Utah:  Uintah  and  Ouray 
18404—17  

178 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  28. — Patents  in  fee  issued  under  act  of  May  8,  1906  (34  Stat.  L.,  182},  as  modified 
by  acts  of  May  29,  1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  444},  and  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855}— 
Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Patents  in  fee  issued  from  May  8,  1906,  to 
June  30,  1917. 

Applications  for  patents  in  fee  dur- 
ing fiscal  year  ended  June  30r 
1917. 

Original  allotments. 

Inherited  land. 

Re- 
ceived. 

Denied. 

Approved. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Num- 
ber. 

Acreage. 

Washington  

260 

20,539.09 

271 

21,428.51 

55 

9 

46 

3,227.00 

Colvillo  

68 
6 
46 

5,534.30 
570.  00 
4,066.50 

2 
3 

160.00 
153.90 

17 

2 

15 

1,258.00 

Spokane 

15 

4 

11 

824.00 

Taholah 

1 
1 

264 

230 

80.66 
163.  85 
20,  870.  76 

12,  164.  85 

Tulalip 

14 
126 

1,24S 

1,814.36 
8,553.93 

53,872.04 

3 

20 

119 

1 
2 

1 

2 
18 

118 

136.  00 
1,009.00 

6,  111.  00 

Yakima 

Wisconsin 

Hay  ward 

16 
12 

100 
1,083 
38 

74 

1,161.04 
874.  14 
7,881.53 
41,  596.  03 
2,359.30 

7,907.98 

12 
4 
29 
55 
19 

37 

12 
3 
29 
55 
19 

37 

788.  00 
243.00 
2,290.00 
1,697.00 
1,093.00- 

4,000.00 

Lac  du  Flambeau  
La  Pointe  . 

7 
18 
204 
1 

36 

538.  10 
1,650.54 
9,  896.  21 
80.00 

2,241.65 

1 

Oneida 

RedClifl  

Wyoming:  Shoshone  

SUMMARY  OF  PATENTS  IN  FEE  ISSUED  UNDER  ACT  OF  MAY  8,  1906. 


Applica- 
tions ap- 
proved. 

Acreage 
approved. 

1907                                                                                      

889 

92,  132.  50 

1908                                      

1,987 

153,991.78 

1909                                                              

1,166 

133,331.79 

1910                                                                                                         

955 

99,  339.  10 

1911                                       

1.011 

115.  575.  37 

1912                                                                                          

344 

45,529.49 

1913                     

520 

67.477.49- 

1914                                                                        .   ...   

1,148 

152,  405.  44 

1915                                                                                       

940 

124,114.86 

1916                                               

934 

130,  980.  43 

1917                                                                               

2,203 

265,  440.  00 

Total                                          

12,097 

1,380,318.25 

COMMISSIONER    OP    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  29. — Removals  of  restrictions. 


179 


Fiscal  year. 

Quapaw  (Seneca), 
Okla.i 

Five  Civilized  Tribes.2 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate 

520 

26,726.40 

9,923 

659,737.74 

1917 

20 
30 
25 
72 
37 
53 
68 
215 

916.  88 
1.401.45 
1,095.28 
3,889.35 
1,930.00 
3,218.28 
4,104.91 
10,170.25 

1,438 
697 
786 
1,106 
956 
652 
953 
1,470 
1,865 

155,  403.  17 
42,103.60 
50,077.33 
81,034.72 
60,532.64 
45,  075.  51 
84,679.34 
88,070.34 
52,761.09 

1916                                                                                          .   . 

1915 

1914 

1913 

1912  

1911                                               .                  

1910 

1909          

1  Act  of  Mar.  3, 1909  (35  Stat.  L.,  751). 

2  Act  of  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312);  by  departmental  approval. 

"  NOTE.— Act  of  Congress  dated  May  27, 1908  (35  Stat.  L.,  312),  removing  restrictions  from  all  lands  of  inter- 
married whites,  freedmen,  and  Indians  of  less  than  half  Indian  blood,  and  from  all  lands  except  homesteads 
of  Indians  having  half  or  more  than  half  and  less  than  three-quarters  Indian  blood,  operated  to  remove 
restrictions  from  the  lands  of  70,000  Indians,  who  held  8,000,000  acres. 

TABLE  30. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 1917,  under 
act  of  June  25,  1910  (36  Stat.  L.,  855),  to  Indians  holding  fee  patents  with  restrictions 
as  to  alienation. 


Indians  to  whom  issued. 


!  Number.   Acreage. 


Aggregate 

343 

30  376 

Total,  1917 

65 

4  440 

1916  

90 

9,042 

1915           

65 

5  616 

1914 

33 

3  951 

1913  

23 

1,600 

1912              i*...  ............ 

25 

1  917 

1911 

42 

3  810 

Fort  Hall  Idaho 

1 

180 

Seneca,  Okla  

15 

750 

Tulalip,  Wash             

3 

160 

"Fond  r|n  T,ap.   Minn 

4 

270 

Hay  ward  .  Wis  

11 

600 

Lac  du  Flambeau,  Wis 

4 

320 

La  Pointe  Wis 

27 

2  160 

TABLE  31. — Certificates  of  competency  issued  to  Kaw  and  Osage  Indians. 


Fiscal  year. 

Ka 

w.i 

Osa 

ge.* 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Number. 

Acreage. 

Aggregate  

59 

17,  904 

482 

1917... 

7 

1,120 

21 

10  395 

1916  

4 

1  960 

1915 

5 

800 

12 

5  880 

1914  

12 

1,904 

4 

1*960 

1913  

1 

400 

23 

10  890 

1912 

1 

480 

22 

10  890 

1911  

84 

41  '  160 

1910  

293 

143  570 

1909 

20 

8  000 

19 

9  310' 

1908 

6 

2  400 

1907  

6 

2'  400 

1906 

1 

400 



i  Act  July  1, 1902  (32  Stat.  L.,  636). 


2  Act  June  28, 1906  (34  Stat  L.,  539). 


180 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


32-2 


•§, 


s 

I 


ii 


s  G 

e<T     in 


<N 


a   oo 


*i 

a  I 

>    r1 


3  I 


:gi 


IS2 


t--  O  QO  O  < 

(MOCOOOC 
lO  i-l  l>          C 


•IS 


fe8    g 

09S     10 


ITf  1-1  (N 


:  :888  :  :  :  : 


OO  i-H  r-l 
r-TcO~C<r 


-co  w 


NfOIMOiCO^  •*• 
r-l  CO  •*  CO  CO  OO  ^H  O1 
rH  O  OO  i4  CO  (N  CC  CO 


~cT£Ni^«-rto'< 
tn^Ls     oo 


ooo 


2.2 


ooo 


^sg.'S    a 

"jig  w"o?  ft      w 

o5i5<  S 


11 


!Ufj 

fl^^'3^-^ 

ooSoo 


||1 

I  I  & 


=0 


s  s 


COMMISSIONEB  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.  181 

TABLE  33. — Buildings,  etc.,  completed  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  SO,  1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total 

$306,331.05 

Arizona: 
Colorado  River 

Repairing  employees'  quarters  .  . 

1,184.4S 
4,375.44 
18,  342.  00 
1,990.00 
2,938.00 
6,985.33 
8,875.84 
8,811.83 
22,602.00 

510.00 
14,051.51 
4,000.00 
3,374.00 

600.00 
812.54 
800.00 

4,067.82 
17,400.00 
2,787.00 
5,500.00 
18,947.00 
878.00 
915.85 
2,065.00 
910.00 

5,868.80 
747.00 
1,777.00 

1,025.00 
5,362.58 
2,225.00 
11,955.59 
3,150.00 
7,550.00 
5,600.00 
1,247.00 
1,199.00 

793.00 
8,514.90 
1,700.00 
15.858.39 
2,600.00 
6,499.00 
558.30 
2,  950.  59 
5,184.90 
710.06 
525.00 
5,079.00 

5,550.00 
2,745.00 
1.450.00 
13,229.45 
2.743.00 
2,612.47 
1,580.00 
996.70 
2,652.00 
1,535.00 
1.894.00 
1,686.00 
3,  532.  10 
1,190.00 
718.00 
848.88 

560.00 
708.00 
754.71 
3,486.00 

1,083.97 
2,372.00 

Leupp  

Two  stone  cottages  

Do 

Additions  to  stone  dormitory.  .  . 

Navajo  (Tohatchi) 

Framp.  nomrrmsary  building" 

Pima  ... 

School,  No.  90  (adobe)  

San  Xavier 

Day  school,  Indian  Oasis 

Do... 

Day  school,  Quojote  

Do 

Day  school,  Vamori.  ... 

Western  Navajo  

Employees'  stone  mess,  stone  gas  house,  two  stone  cottages, 
addition  to  stone  boilerhouse,  addition  to  school  buildings. 

Two-room  building  for  kitchen  and  dining  room 

California: 
Campo 

Hoopa  Valley. 

Hospital,  No.  48  ...  

Pala  .. 

Sewer  svstem  .  . 

Round  Valley  

Schooltiouse,  No.  63  (Yokia,  day)  

Minnesota: 
Fond  du  Lac 

Log  house  for  John  Ojibway 

Red  Lake.  .  . 

Police  quarters  

Do 

Steam  boiler     . 

Montana: 
Crow 

Heating  plant  .   • 

Do 

Brick  schoolhouse 

Crow  (Pryor) 

Laundry  and  employees'  quarters      .  .  . 

Crow 

Frame  office  building 

Fort  Belknap 

Brick  laundry  and  heating  plant  

Sewer  system                    "  * 

Do  

Material  for  school  building  and  cottage  

Fort  Peck 

Steel  water  standpipe       .    .               " 

Tongue  River  .      ... 

Two  spiral  fire  escapes  

Nebraska: 
Santee 

Do    . 

Office  building 

Nevada:  Moapa  River  .  ... 

One  frame  school  building  

New  Mexico: 
A  Ibuquerque 

Heating  system  for  sewing  room  and  laundry 

Do... 

Sewing  room  and  laundry  

Do 

Two  steel  tanks 

Jicarilla  

Frame  hospital,  No.  48  

Pueblo  Bonito 

Water  tank  and  tower    ... 

Do... 

Brick  industrial  building,  No.  12  

Do 

Frame  schoolhouse,  quarters,  barn,  and  three  outhouses  
Pt.p.am  hp.at  for  dormitory 

Do 

North  Carolina:  Cherokee  
Oklahoma: 
Chilocco  

Refrigerating  plant  

Fire  escapes  

Bloomfield 

Remodeling  main  building  and  two  dormitories 

Do  

Water  mains  

Chevenne  Arapaho 

Frame  sanatorium,  No.  41  

Eucnee  School.  
Kiowa  

Superintendent's  cottage 

Two  frame  quarters  

Do 

Repairs  to  hospital  roof  

Seger 

Office  building 

Shawnee  .  . 

Frame  schoolhouse...    . 

Do 

Heating  and  plumbing  supplies 

Oregon:  Klamath. 

Bridge,  60-foot  span,  Williamson  River  

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle 

Stokers  

South  "Dakota: 
Canton  Asvlum. 

Dairy  barn..  

Cheyenne  River 

Cottage,  stable,  and  coal  house 

Crow  Creek 

Two  frame  cottages 

Do 

Frame  hospital,  No.  48... 

Do 

Frecting  three  bridges 

Do... 

Two  frame  cottages  

Pierre 

Steel  water  tank  

Rapid  City 

Extension  to  sewer  svstem 

Rosebud  .  . 

Frame  dairv  barn,  No.  51              

Do 

Frame  school  building  and  outhouse 

Rosebud  (Okreeh,  day)... 
Rosebud  .  . 

Frame  cottage  and  barn  

Exhibit  building,  stock  shed,  and  two  outhouses 

Do 

Frame  cottage 

Springfield 

Electric  lighting  plant  

Yankton 

Boiler  etc    . 

Do 

Cement  walks 

Washington: 
Cushrnan 

Constructing  concrete  basement 

Do 

School  building  (Jamestown  day) 

Do 

Coal  house  

Tulalip 

Employees'  cottage,  No.  86     .... 

Wisconsin: 
Hay  ward  

Office  and  warehouse  

Tomah 

Electric  generator  and  switchboard                       . 

182 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  34. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  or  contract  during  fiscal    year  ended 

June  SO,  1917. 


State  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Total 

$283,825.46 

Arizona: 
Fort  Apache  

Frame  dormitory,  completing  

1,000.00 
15,000.00 
1,974.00 
2,504.22 
3,  105.  76 
6,  228.  97 
3.  159.  65 
9,358.00 
1,  900.  00 
3,  170.  00 
1,405.20 

650.00 
2,084.50 
1,115.00 
1,352.54 
3,750.00 
1,261.00 
322.  50 
1,000.00 

1,726.81 
2,296.81 
3,907.00 

5,500.00 
2,000.00 
1,000.00 
4,666.00 
1,307.00 
1,696.54 

1,  223.  50 
1,999.00 
1,022.35 
3,580.00 

2,099.29 
30,000.00 
690.00 
53,780.00 
1,  173.  60 
1,377.00 
3,510.76 
2,400.00 
1,  200.  00 

1,990.00 
2,  000.  00 
6,794.35 
807.00 

560.00 
1,025.00 
5,  986.  67 
3,  780.  69 

7,200.00 
4,  700.  00 
600.  00 

1,  094.  50 
665.00 
2,  000.  00 
975.00 
485.  00 
5,000.00 
7,000.00 
2,  385.  55 
4,095.00 
3,750.00 

1,455.00 
1.033.00 
2.511.00 
1,  199.  00 
800.00 
2,303.70 

Leupp  (Winslow)  

Bridge  .            '          *         "       ..         

Pima 

Three  cottages 

Do 

Employees'  quarters 

Do 

Superintendent's  cottage 

Do 

Warehouse 

Do      

Office  

Phoenix 

Infirmary 

Rice  Station 

Concrete  reservoir 

Salt  River  

Farmer's  cottage,  barn,  and  tank  

San  Carlos 

Piping,  water  main 

California: 
Campo 

Two  three-room  frame  buildings  

Fort  Bidwell 

Lavatory  annex,  girl's  building. 

Greenville... 

Concreting  bottom  of  reservoir  

Do 

Addition  to  hospital      .                 

Do 

Heating  plant 

Do 

Addition  to  reservoir  

Round  Valley 

Remodeling  mess  hall 

Schoolhouse  at  Nokomis  day  school 

Idaho: 
Fort  Lapwai  Sanatorium.. 
Do 

Repairs  to  cottages  and  office 

Repairs  to  buildings     .  .         

Kansas  Haskell 

Stone  and  concrete  work  for  barn   .               ..            ..... 

Minnesota: 
Pipestone 

Septic  tank  and  sewer    .             

Digging  big  ditch 

Do 

Building  roadway  

White  Earth 

Building  roadway                                

Do 

Addition  to  Twin  Lake  school 

Do 

Dairy  barn                        

Montana: 
Fort  Belknap 

School  building  (lodge  pole) 

Tongue  River 

Dairy  barn                                  

Fort  Belknap 

One  cottage  (lodge  pole) 

Nebraska:  Genoa 

Boiler,  water  and  sewer  

New  Mexico: 

Cottage  No  94 

Navajo  (Tohatchi) 

Schoolhouse  No.  81                  

Navajo  School 

Completing  boys'  dormitory      .         .                   

Pueblo  Bonito 

San  Carlos 

Repairs  to  San  Carlos  Bridge  

Ice  plant                                                                  

Do 

Do 

Material  for  two  cottages                 

North  Dakota:  Turtle  Moun- 
tain. 
Oklahoma: 

Cisterns  for  schools  Nos  1  2,  and  5 

Kiowa  (Riverside) 

Hot-water  heat,  painting,  and  electric  light,  principal's  cot- 
tage. 

Kiowa  (Rainy  Mountain). 

Ponca 

Bridge  over  Salt  Fort  (Whiteagle)  

Do 

Oregon: 

Salem 

Two  boilers  and  remodeling  the  power  house  

Do 

South  Dakota: 

Do 

Do 

Repairs  to  bridge  at  Whitehorse  

Do 

Y  anKton  -  

Utah*  Uintah 

Washington: 

Do 

Water  and  sewer  Jamestown  day  school  

TnlaliT> 

T)n 

Cottage          

Colville... 

Farmer's  cottage  

COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


183 


TABLE  34. — Buildings,  etc.,  under  construction  or  contract   during  fiscal  year  ended 

June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


State  and  superintendencies. 

Improvement. 

Cost. 

Wisconsin: 
Lac  du  Flambeau 

Employe-is  cottage    

$9  780.00 

Dairy  barn 

3  200  00 

Wyoming: 

Steel  span  bridge              

4  180.00 

Do 

Hospital  (remodeling  trader's  store)       ...    ... 

3  000  00 

Do 

1  272  90 

Western  Shoshone 

Employees'  quarters  No  109  .......  .......................... 

1,700.00 

184 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


*§> 
I 


ISSi 


§00  r* I-** 
CO  »Ce* 

gfsfSSf 


t~     •  CT) 

00      '"^ 


•CO 
•CSJ 


•  iO 


O     -CO 

O      'C^C 


•  0  1O      •  C^l        -*f< 


S      :°, 

ifisT"" 


•  -COCOU3      •      •  iO  O     •      'OO     ..... 

•  •  o  o>  t^-    •    •  i^»  10    •    «oo    ..... 

•  -oeoco    •    •  oc  «5    •    •r-f.    ..... 


::::::  :g88  :  :  :&  :  :  :  :8 

.......  OOO      •      ••!-!•••      -O 


i- 

r-tC^v-trH 
l  i-H  CO  CO  -^ 


°S5 
Oa« 


§1 


O  CO  COO  u 
00*N|>-"'t-"N"5>C 


>t-m<oi 

r-^co^irTi 

jt^r-t, 


ir-ic^e<i' 


si§ 


s  : 


N  N  CO  tn  rH 


Si 


i§ 


l^O       CO 
CO  >O        •«*! 


li~-" 


1111 


111 
«T« 


s 


lOC^O^GO?— (    II  O    *   OOiOOOOOOOOC^iOOOOiOF'-OOiO 

BSlg^HS    ?5^1?§S8^§c5S;^l§5§§^^ 


-HOilOi—  <iOOOCOOClOC^>OO5^fC<>OOOOlO< 
P-  rH  T}<  rH  rH  rH  rH  OJ  CO  rH  1C  rH  <N  f-  CO  rH  CO 


I  j 


m     co^     ^     £     pqj 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


185 


5                   iO  to  O             O  O        rH 

c^  ^  co          t~  d      Tt< 

2     1 

§ 

||       ,| 

1    1 

0 
CO 

§ 

i-l  rH  r-t               CO               rH 

J    8    £§£§    SJ§ 

S 

p 

g    « 

g 

2 

:     :  : 

Tt<      w  o>  us  rH      osco 

Tt<          O5  CO  tOrH           COin 

2 

oo  to              u 

s§ 

g 

S? 

& 

4rM- 

:S 

ns 

<"  :     :g  :  :  :£  :    s 

s 

S 

* 

B 

10 

S 

o»      «« 

•^ 

"00 

c^          CD  cc    '00    •  (•»          o 

J 

fl 

5 

S 

a 

2 

-  s 

S 

2 

i   i  ;  ;  ;  :  ;  i  ;  g 

jg 

i 

S 

<N 

(N 

P 

10     i  ! 

n 

•     *•* 

1     11  •!£!     1 

|g    ' 

i 

§§      i 

i 

§ 

S 

g   11 

i 

*  "i 

-, 

cTco 

1 

S 

1551  3 
estimates 

<D 

0 

CO             5OO5t^CiCiOO        Q 
rH  rH                O 

•  00 

S 

2S88- 

S 

O100 

1 

co      •* 

" 

8 

O         O  !>•  *O  CO  O  CO  O         O 
'"'         S  3  §3  0  ^  CO  °          3 

1       8 

g 

1111 

| 

"1 

S 

S" 

r1 

Si 

^SSgg|gSg|    § 

S                  <N" 

CO  0 

c<r 

5 

rH-^'2    rH~ 

1 

gg    S 

g 

*     ^ 

§ 

"•  i 

rH          Tfl 

«8S 

S 

r 

g 

to  cs 

to 

1 

§§ 

££      £ 

1 

2         8         S 

^v(N        00 

1 

2S 

5 

S  IS 

5 

rf       r& 

I 

ONlOCrHOCD          TO         CM 
C<l  rH  N  TH  00  CO  t>-          O  rH          CO 

SI     « 

I 

S  !  a 

g 

pip 

i 

CO         ^rHrH 

s 

O      rH 

illlfii  §1  1 

I"3    1 

2 

S§         S         r^ 

s 

t< 

IS    8 

^ 

CO  CM  rH  rH  C< 

S 

1 

00        *O  (N  iO  t*-        COi-H 

" 

*: 

2-    S    - 

g 

gOO       (N 

si 

CO          rH 

oo 

" 

OOOO'-HC^^Ht^-COO        *C 

8S8SSrH§gS5^          g 

Sis  1 

1 

I2SI  S 

§ 

IS       1 

s 

llssi 

;*a 

g 

TJ?rH~ufo'rc'>lo"Vo"l>%r^        00" 

1-4  (N  »O          Tf1 

1C    'C    T—  ( 

rHCO 

"^ 

1  192 

ribal  stock  also 

?  ^:  :|  :  it  i  -:  j 
l=-f>  i  !>lj^ 

outhernUte  
te  Mountain  
Tribal  

la:  Seminole.... 

PH            I           I  *3                fc* 

^-'1    1 
l«l^     1 

lif  s  « 

a 

rickapoo  
otawatomi  

gan:  Mackinac... 

S 

Jllil 

ills! 

r 

/"hite  Earth  
1  Includes  some  t 

.2 
£ 

j| 

O2  03 
II 

aE 

po 

a>  >> 
flS 


I 


JT3  STJ 

5  SB  3 

"O  0*3*0 


IS 


186 


COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


1 


i 


•!)§ 


I    2 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS 

i  § 


187 


i  i  il  §  i  i 


8 


il  :2S  i 


Iff 


w~~w~ 

o          co 


111  I      I 


S    S 


HIS  I  8 


flTf 


s      s 


»coo 


Is 

us'eo' 


CO—TOO  0 


S3    J2 

Oi       U5 

us* 


111    i  ill!  1  g 


1  § 


^00  O        !>• 

>^?^      op 


a§ll  ila 

oo^cfesTcq"   '<<fc? 


s 


coo 


<    •    •    •  cq  IM 


OOTfi        S  M  CO  00  rH  •*  05  S-  <N 

o  'O      t>«  t*»  co  o5  T-H  i>»  oo  co  O5 
i"''>>"'x"' 


o  fl  2 

£t>hH 

332 


CO  i-* 


ijfl 

i  ni1 

o      ®  o  o^ 
•^     PQHS  o 


!?     S     PH 


illi5 


IM 

OT   O   to  O-O 

"a  ^3  S*§ 


188 


31 


<w  v 

II 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

:S    2  I S5 


|l 


i 


I    I 


1 


111 


lllftg 


I  !I8I 

Slc^t-To? 
ti-i 


&1I 


8 


5  :S  :gS8"  8 


I8! 


eff 


Ill 


:2*    S 


:§§    S 


11    S 


gi  i 


r.00       CO 


'CO         O3 


:  :| 


N  oo     01 
i-ir^      «o 


-Sf   2 


s  a 


TT 


-§  § 


<1-l  •* 

rj«       00 


PI  i 

« s 


ssa  i 


•        I-H        JC      •  3 

I  §2§1« 

i  r« 

I 


Ouray 


I !  $ 


'Sco 


:  :  :g  :  :|2 

•    •    •  t*    •    •  CD  r* 


G 
S 
U 


COMMISSIONER    OF    INDIAN    AFFAIRS. 


189 


Sis 


oo  c<l  i«  eo  fi  c*5 


o-*      « 


8  ! 
2 


255 


190  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30,  1917. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Grand  total  
Arizona  

$37,209,436 

$3,579,521$1,349,207 

$18,375 

$15,125,625 

$1,705,682 

$1,153,084 

$14,277,942 

3,019,030 

307,07l|      213,814         350 

16,  105 

209,884 

34,  193 

2,237,613 

Camp  Verde 

34,035 
88,200 
373,641 
97,815 
8,075 
5,640 
96,  156 
201,  600 
474,610 
734,987 
243,066 
109,  608 
37,  150 
145,  654 
60,309 
148,041 
160,443 

979,  050 

29,  150 
5,260 
68,758 
1,350 
2,755 
1.457 
12,  330 
26,200 
42,075 

!300 
895 
12,050 
5,800 
240 
60 
6,265 
28,800 
48,000 
66,614 
19,075 
4,825 

4,585 
70,655 
260,280 
80,275 
3,160 
4,  123 
70,  325 
139,  750 
373,  414 
668,  373: 
115,  767 
104,  783 
20,  205 
31,  344 
34,  769 
138,  540 
117,265 

723,  94S 

Colorado  River... 
Fort  Apache  
Fort  Mojave 

11,390 

12,881 
10,390 
1,920 

19,672 

Havasupai 

Kaibab 



Leupp 

3,550 

3,686 
6,850 
8,500 

Moqui 

2,621 

Phoenix 

Pima1 

.     3,437 

350 

12,555 

91,882 

Rice  Station 

Salt  River  

11,  750 
84,960 
9,843 
3,176 
4,570 

72,513 

3,475 
5,000 

1,72C 

San  Carlos 

12,450 
15,  697 

11,900 

San  Xavier 

Truxton  Canon.  . 
Western  Navajo.. 

California  

6,325 
6,090 

48,540 

275 

43,461 

32,518 
85,380 

4,933 

Bishop 

32,933 
11,668 
9,435 
80,972 
88,419 
56,  378 

1,280 
2,285 
9,435 
650 
750 

100 
200 

125 

440 
1,100 

30,  988 
8,083 

Digger 

FortBidwell  
Fort  Yuma 

675 

150 

79,  497 
87,  669 
51,858 
62,897 
1,110 
10,  57& 
76,501 

283,  129 
18,  181 
13,457 

49,462 

Greenville 

4,520 
16,275 
110 
1,620 
425 

24,365 
250 

Hoopa  Valley  
Malki 

97,547 
17,050 
70,724 
85,331 

371,376 

10,500 
13,930 
12,780 
5,012 

6,075 

1,800 

1,900 

Pala 

41,486 

4,260 
488 

63,  882 

Round  Valley  
Sherman     Insti- 
tute   

2,905 

41,451 
15,766 

102,450 

13,  885 
2,006 

34,009 

9,135 

Tule  River 

75 
2,140 

228 

Colorado 

2,989 

60 

13,790 

Southern  Ute  
Ute  Mountain  

Florida:  Seminole  
Idaho  

66,  628 
35,822 

75 
468,902 

20,323 
13,686 

75 
88,020 

1,850 
1,139 

60 

2,140 

42,255 
7,207 

13,790 

38,180 

27,293 

92,721 

1,570 

221,  118 

Coeurd'Alene  
Fort  Hall 

62,  990 
256,905 
149,  007 

49,902 
38,  118 

1,635 
11,445 
25,100 

980 
21,275 
70,466 

570 

9,903 
158,  774 
52,441 

6,296 
409,  143 

27,293 

Fort  Lapwai  

1,000 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox... 

88,636 

568,808 

82  340 

9,150 

24,588 

125,927 

Haskell  Institute. 

476,680 
78,  106 
14,022 

237,127 

24  388 

119,  797 
6,130 

332,  495 
71,776 
4,872 

225,302 

200 

9,150 
310 

Michigan 

11,515 

Mackinac 

2,385 
234,742 

802,  782 

310 

2,075 
223,  227 

557,933 

Mount  Pleasant.. 
Minnesota 

11,515 
87,683 

121,231 

4,519 

31,416 

Cass  Lake  

16,010 
36.  889 
9,482 
105,938 
30,334 
166,301 
147,374 
80,  480 
209,974 

16,010 
4,160 

Fonddu  Lac  
Grand  Portage... 
Leech  Lake  
Nett  Lake 

7,525 
9,132 
32,336 
4,200 

""22,"  947 

25,124 

80 

350 

6,262 
175 
5,500 
.24,297 

67,  340 
25,688 
160,  801 
88,  896 
56,  480 
138,558 

271 

Pipestone 

Red  Lake 

4,439 

6,795 
24,000 

Vermillion  Lake. 
White  Earth  

45,091 

26,325 
i  1916  re] 

sort. 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  191 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1917 — Continued. 


States  and 
superintendences. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga" 
tion. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Montana 

$1  551  218 

$376  473 

$64  437 

$740 

$386  926 

$114  445 

$19  340 

$588,  857 

Blackfeet.  .    . 

177  070 

38,  494 

23  417 

6  225 

108,934 

Crow 

343  362 

121  316 

20  165 

62  617 

24  725 

475 

114,  064 

Flathead  

404  558 

76,873 

945 

314,  601 

700 

10,  865 

574 

Fort  Belknap  .... 

347  580 

66  200 

1,950 

8  208 

47,970 

5,000 

1218,252 

Fort  Peck 

155  153 

50  840 

15  310 

740 

12  985 

75,  278 

Tongue  River  

123,  495 

22,  750 

2,650 

1,500 

21,  840 

3,000 

71,755 

Nebraska 

428  200 

80  820 

8  418 

23  485 

315,  477 

Genoa  

316  956 

6,423 

310,533 

Omaha 

29  040 

5  555 

23  485 

Santee  

24  080 

23.  385 

695 

Winnebago  

58  124 

51,880 

1,300 

4,944 

Nevada 

330  183 

49  310 

31  298 

23 

330 

44  121 

205  101 

Carson 

129  174 

1  921 

20  223 

29  635 

77,  395 

Fallon  

11.387 

11,387 

Fort  McDerraitt.. 

16  930 

3,825 

800 

70 

3,785 

8,450 

Moapa  River  

6.845 

300 

495 

110 

5,940 

Nevada    

76  624 

8,599 

68,025 

Walker  River  

20,617 

4,525 

1,850 

6,026 

8,216 

Western  Sho- 

61  164 

22  766 

7  ggs 

150 

4  675 

25  688 

Reno,  special 
agent 

7  442 

i  7  374 

45 

23 

New  Mexico.... 

1  540  415 

81,399 

86,904 

250 

12,  595 

155,722 

29,677 

1,173,868 

Albuquerque.  .  .  . 

321,415 

9,220 

11,  270 

48,940 

251,985 

JicariHa 

165  492 

35,  876 

20,  777 

14,034 

11,677 

83,  128 

Mescalero  .  

152,  443 

14,  698 

19,045 

14,905 

10,650 

93,  145 

Pueblo  Bonito  .. 

145  438 

1,300 

250 

9,040 

134,848 

Pueblo    day 
schools. 

140  004 

1,725 

16,  224 

13,430 

108,625 

San  Juan 

240  733 

19  630 

6  700 

29,723 

7,350 

177,330 

Santa  Fe 

223  150 

2  750 

220,  400 

Zuni 

151  '740 

250 

8,838 

12,  595 

25,650 

104,407 

New  York  Agency  .  .  . 

710 

135 

575 

North  Carolina:  Cher- 
okee 

124  425 

330 

180 

3,150 

120,  765 

North  Dakota  . 

1  019  717 

161,  930 

79,  489 

313 

81,496 

696,489 

84  361 

84,361 

Fort  Berthold2  . 

80?828 

44,  695 

1,777 

313 



25,993 

8,050 

Fort  Totten  

196,074 

7,729 

6,185 

4,310 



177,  850 

Standing  Rock. 

342,  139 

69,  302 

31,775 

48,  108 

192,954 

Turtle  Mountain  . 

84,765 

34,256 

19,587 

3,085 

27,837 

231  550 

5  948 

20  165 

205  437 

Oklahoma 

3  272  116 

208  474 

137  062 

75 

251,844 

2,674,661 

Cantonment 

109  168 

5  525 

75 

64,035 

39,  533 

Cheyenne    and 
Arapaho 

407  700 

23,  439 

20,803 

87,984 

275,474 

Chilocco 

793  045 

793  045 

Five    Civilized 
Tribes 

65  985 

15  035 

50  950 

Kiowa 

580  075 

42  950 

59  950 

77  324 

399  851 

Osage 

226'  340 

42,090 

1,040 

»  1,000 

182,  210 

Otoe 

63  000 

63,000 

Pawnee 

136,  184 

31,  531 

375 

104,  /  78 

Ponca 

83  351 

16  755 

300 

5,503 

60,  793 

53  815 

14  425 

39  390 

Seger 

178  957 

10,414 

3,101 

900 

164,542 

Seneca 

27  521 

27,  521 

Shawnee  

113,698 

6,310 

107,388 

—         

=  — 

===== 

Increase  due  to  land. 


2 1916  report. 


»  As  reported. 


192  COMMISSIONER  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1917 — Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Oklahoma—  Contd. 
Five   Civilized 
Tribes  schools. 

$433,277 

$543 

$15,  098 

8417,636 

Arms  trong 
MaleAcad- 

52,  836 

52,836 

B  1  o  o  mfleld 
Seminary 

i  35,  196 

. 

35,196 

Cherokee 
Orphan 
School 

49,  556 

49,556 

Collins  Insti- 
tute 

18,325 

18,325 

E  u  c  h  e  e 
Boa  rding 
School 

50  088 

$11,563 

38,525 

E  u  f  a  u  1  a 
Boarding 
School 

36  615 

$150 

3,  535 

32,930 

Jones  Male 

31  500 

31,500 

M  e  k  usukey 
Academy 

56  014 

318 

55,696 

N  u  y  a  k  a 
Boa  rding 
School 

29  286 

75 

29,211 

T  u  s  kahoma 
Female 

39,855 

39,855 

Wheelock 
Female 
Academy 

34,006 

34,006 

Oregon 

752  469 

$19,  731 

7  935 

30 

$9,319 

14,735 

$37,760 

662,959 

Klamath 

163,220 

6,755 

2,440 

9,319 

11,735 

25,260 

107,711 

2  280 

2  200 

30 

' 

50 

Silem 

344'  323 

344,323 

Siletz 

16'  916 

6  501 

1  650 

8,765 

Umatilla 

127  000 

300 

1  400 

600 

124,700 

98  730 

3  975 

!2  445 

3,000 

11,850 

77,460 

Pennsylvania:    Car- 
lisle 

559  367 

27  525 

91,593 

440,249 

South  Dakota  

2,864,967 

627,877 

297,876 

6,610 

27,700 

290,314 

189,  132 

1,425,458 

Canton  Asylum  .  . 

144,042 
376  161 

""  183  676 

144,042 
41  581 

"i'845 

"~i  266 

43  eio 



""i6i,"249 

124'  622 

30'  826 

17'  571 

J225 

11  930 

64,  070 

Flandreau 

252'  326 

6*640 

4'  300 

57,  565 

183,821 

132  5^1 

64  626 

6  275 

8  850 

52,780 

Pierre 

267*  050 

i  600 

26,500 

47,938 

185,012 

Pine  Ridge 

690*  067 

196  800 

21  547 

500 

28  805 

2189,057 

253,  358 

Rapid  City 

261  5921 

4  190 

5'  105 

64  781 

187,845 

409*  838 

86'  742 

47'  581 

1  040 

25  310 

75 

249,090 

79'  461 

19  361 

450 

59,  650 

Springfield 

32'  196 

32,  196 

Yankton 

94'  752 

35  016 

1  824 

1,525 

56,387 

Utah  

403,018 

295,478 

6,960 

37,971 

6,200 

5,080 

51,329 

Goshute 

2  970 

2,970 

Shivwits 

9  .355 

230 

145 

8,980 

Uintah  and  Ouray 

390'  693 

295,248 

6,815 

37,971 

6,200 

5,080 

39,379 

Washington  

1,  692,  607 

781,339 

59,277 

67,790 

51,778 

732,423 

Colville 

192  458 

67  607 

4  968 

59,  180 

35,258 

25,445 

441  489 

2  555 

11  000 

427,934 

Neah  Bay 

9  095 

4  16) 

4,  935 

71  1'  040 

«  655'  276 

33  229 

6,850 

15,685 

Taholah 

20  935 

'       800 

750 

19,385 

Tulalip 

209'  036 

27  941 

6  555 

1,415 

173,125 

Yakima.  .  . 

108^554 

23',  800 

2.725 

8,610 

7,505 

65,914 

1  As  reported.          'Includes  forest  reserve.         8  Includes  value  land  and  old  Spokane  Sanatorium. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS.  193 

TABLE  36. — Distribution  of  Government  property  valuations,  June  30, 1917 — Continued. 


States  and 
superintendencies. 

Total 
value. 

General 
adminis- 
tration. 

Health. 

Allot- 
ting. 

Irriga- 
tion. 

Farming. 

Forestry. 

School. 

Wisconsin  

$1,423,124 

$43,650 

$25,237 

$665 

$27,366 

$726,555 

$599,  651 

Grand  Rapids 

962 

237 

725 

Hay  ward  

123,297 

2,536 

4,875 

20,761 

.      . 
25 

95,100 

Keshena  

878.  831 

31,330 

11,847 

3,710 

726,290 

105,  654 

Lac  du  Flambeau 

88  002 

750 

1  370 

85,882 

Laona 

1  500 

1  215 

285 

8  122 

7'  142 

125 

665 

150 

40 

Oneida 

69'  607 

1  460 

68,  147 

Red  Cliff  

3,520 

440 

540 

2,020 

200 

'320 

Tomah 

185  738 

4  735 

181  003 

Wittenberg 

63,  545 

63,  545, 

Wyoming:  Shoshone. 
State  totals  

359,928 
22,589,324 

158,432 
3,517,757 

6,565 
1,349,207 

9,391 

$12,421 
576,261 

4,170 
1,705,682 

18,500 
1,153,084 

159,84Q 
14,277,942 

Miscellaneous  

14,620,112 

61,764 

8,984 

14,549,364 

Warehouses  

12,884 

12,884 

Liquor   suppres- 
sion 

1650 

1  650 

Allotting  service. 

18,984 

18,984 

Irrigation  service 
(cost) 

14  549  364 

14  549  364 

Indian  Office  

58,230 

58,230 

18404—17- 


-13 


1 1916  report. 


194 


ffi>  O 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


§        11   i§ 


!rH  T-H  O  t>-  Tt* 
OI-H  <N  (N  (N 


00  ^O  » 

•^  r-H 


131811; 


>  CO  r-i  CO  O3 
r5  t^  O  t^ 
05  O  05  CO 


o  c-       r- 


§ 


IO  CO  rH  £H  r-g  •*  •<*  CO  O  O  CO  g>  IO         £- 


•*  O3  T-H  cq  co      co  < 


r-i  t-     •*     us 


I 


.al^JS      SJSa 

_  rrt  ^5  C  •*-?  r*    *^  .? 


t^  co*  cT  co"  ccT  i^  cc* 

§8S§S5SS2 


T-H  r-l  O  >O  CO  00  CO 
10  ^  !N  •*  O  «0  T-H 

>ONc<roo>r-r«ro6vcc 


saj 

r-Tr^c 


»o    « 

00     • 


or^e^T      t-^  rt?-**?  *&!{$' c*?<x^c<£'    ** 


)iOC<IOOOC5l^-Ot^O 


.^    .    .      to 


II 


§S  o  N  < 
000  COt 


C<1  00  ^  PQ  t^ 
i-H  •*  00  1C  >O 


iiyi    II* 

^—    ^    pi   ^-LI     •      •  ••K>^HJ>JH—  ^^r^K*".!^'-;^ 

Illlllllllllll  |  Illlllllllll 


-*  CO         ^ 


§     il     § 


§ ; 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

IS    5    £    SS?    £    S3     SSgS^     8    $     §    §83! 

IT*        O        "5        O^1        Tfi        1O 


§ 


)  i-H  1C  O 
!  COr4  r* 
t^CO  CO 


ac       to      o 

CO  CO        CO        i-H 


III  1  B 


£g~ 

co  co  oo 


§  !8 


2    S 


!£    8 


CM  CO  1C  CO 


t*  00  CO 

£3£ 

e^TioV" 


;&  s  §8 

)  CD        O5        !>• 


100        US 

)  1-H  IO 


8    £ 


3 


18  § 


SSI 


8    3    £ 


^    SJ^S 


<  »O  OJ  OO  TP  • 

_;  ^      _, . 

(       <N 


SOO  O5  O 
c^  -^  t^- 

!        (MCO 


§  1 


1  S 


rH  Ov  CO  CO  '•'f  »O  ( 


CO  <N  K5 
»O        CO 

co"     oT 


s§ 


^H  00  C 
OS  00  ' 


OJ  TJ<  CO  Oi  O5  I 
T-H  O  OO  OO  CO  ' 


CO  t>  CO  US        CO 


'8    g 


858 


<M  CO  CO  ^H  I 
oTlM*'<N"'co"Wco' 


:'      « 


. 

II 


Ml! 


•S  : 

Jx! 


195 


196 


COMMISSIONER   OF    INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


111 

I  M 


111 


8    -    | 


8  2000 
o  ci  o  o 

i  •*  O  t-~O  10 


slS 


O  O  g  O  CO  CO 
(M  O»O  CO>O  1C 


§§  I 


ill 


>^o>      o 

3  rH  00         l>- 


t^T*  tOr-H- 


S?  00 


s  i 

•N  •» 

t^ 


O'S 


Mil 

:  :  :  :<»    $ 


IM        «O 

CO        CO 


C$  O  t~- 

J3r^r2 

*O*     co^ 


O  CO  O  t>-  OO  QO 

S3SS38S 
Sg'^g'sl " 


s  s 


1  I 


Sill 


"1 — S~ 
5    8" 


:  ooio      i-i      oo 
?  c^i  o      c^      c^ 

1  CO  O        «3         (N 


111  i 


~    gf 


ss 


I?  Ill 


III  I  a  Illlil 


II 
III 

2  fl'3      S     o      Q 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


197 


iS^*»a£^ 

>  COi-H        eoSlx 


I! 


i-t  CC 


oio      00000*0000 

O  ^         OOOOOOiO^CiO 
O  i— <        OOOCMOOO^HCOO* 


^H  oo  oo  co  O  oo  e^i  <N  >o  22  co      t~ 
w^oo^S^ooSscoiow     o 


1  -8 


C<5  t^  CO  O  i-l  t-l  <N         rHCOr-l 


I  rf  OOOC  OCO 


?O  T-H  T-H  i— I 


.-!  o  oo  I-H  t 


ill  S 


Bllli 


ooc 


1O  t-        00 

O  rH          "^ 


lilll  S 


1 

^"  T*  ^T 


(N  us  CO' 


<N  N       03 


s  s 

<M        <N 


&»  i-H  <M 


C  O  O  iO  <N  - 

'-o  S 10  oo  -*<  t 


§!§§§§§! 

8  S  ^S 


no  p  o  > 
1 1-1  c5  ic 


^H  o  co  pjp  ^ 
o'e?     cfeo' 


^      c 


111 


il 


l 
ill 


t"  O  0« 

111,9 


ii 


linms 

§io^j  is^. 


198 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


i 


ISSli 


if 


§283    8 

l-H          1C 


III 

&-s 


3l3ii 


t-H  Oi  CO  OO  t^-  , 
LO  iO  to  O  t-  CO 
O  CM  O  rH  CO  -# 


10  o 

Oi  CO 


5  O  O  < 

>  to  O  < 

>  t>-  O  i 

&-*": 


rH  lO         Oi  CO  ^f  to         CS 


CM  O   CO 


OO  COO5  <N  1C  < 
OO  CO  GO  iO  Oi  ( 

o       ^^r- 


mm 

fft^' 


leife'J  •:  :  :          ^^ca'S  :®  :«    S 
sSp^S'Sifl  S^cr3J-So3~     .. 

S^jg^-S^.S       .S       'c^^'^C(2-'2  fi 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


199 


TABLE  38. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1917. 


States  and  superin  tendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ployees 

Indi- 
ans. 

Non- 
Indi- 
ans. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Grand  total  

5,334 

2,137 

3,197 

$3,589,887 

3,481 

82,530,122 

1,853 

$1,059,765 

Total  schools 

2,817 
2,517 

781 
1,356 

2,036 
1,161 

1,919,313 

1,670,574 

1,264 
2,217 

1,070,608 
1,459,514 

1,553 
300 

848,705 
211,060 

Total  agencies  

Arizona 

708 

321 

387 

450,953 

452 

308,073 

256 

142,880 

Camp  Verdo  schools  
'  Camp  Verde  A^enc'*'. 

4 
5 
13 
22 
30 
42 
16 
3 
2 
3 
2 
J2 
16 
39 
34 
68 
47 
73 
43 
41 
23 
6 
12 
10 
51 
10 
19 
14 
5 
23 
20 

303 

..... 

6 
15 
10 
26 
5 
1 
1 

4 
1 
7 
7 
20 
16 
11 
2 
1 
3 

3,140 
2,090 
8,550 
14,415 
19,115 
25,280 
10,680 
2,220 
1,400 
2,320 
780 
8,520 
8,730 
21,290 
20,392 
43,220 
26,  3S5 
54,740 
27,830 
27,  875 
15,940 
4,335 
6,290 
7,690 
30,  223 
7,220 
10,330 
9,510 
3,120 
15,880 
11,443 

186,107 

3 
4 
5 
19 
17 
39 
6 
2 
2 
1 
2 
4 
16 
15 
28 
28 
42 
33 
19 
33 
11 
3 
11 
3 
48 
4 
16 
4 
4 
10 
20 

188 

2,840 
1,490 
4,320 
11,775 
12,  835 
23,  700 
5,220 
1,920 
1,400 
1,300 
780 
3,900 
8,730 
11,300 
16,582 
20,940 
23,045 
28,070 
16,700 
22,575 
7,900 
3,135 
5,690 
4,030 
28,423 
4,460 
8,710 
3,960 
2,520 
8,380 
11,443 

122,732 

1 
1 

8 
3 
13 
3 
10 
1 

300 
600 
4,230 
2,640 
6,280 
1,580 
5,  460 
300 

Colorado  River  School  

Colorado  River  Agency  
Fort  Apache  schools 

Fort  Apache  Agency  

Fort  Mojnve  schools 

Havasupai  School  
Havasupai  Agencv  

Kaibab  School 

2 

1,020 

Kaibab  Agency  

2 
5 
12 
15 
16 
30 
32 
16 
12 
26 
10 
1 
9 
4 
33 
1 
11 
3 

Leupp  School         

7 
4 
24 
18 
38 
15 
57 
31 
15 
13 
5 
3 
6 
18 
9 
8 
11 
5 
18 
10 

205 

8 

4,620 

Leupp  Agency  

24 
6 
40 
5 
40 
24 
8 
12 
3 
1 
7 
3 
6 
3 
10 
1 
13 

9,990 
3,810 
22,280 
3,340 
26,670 
11,130 
5,300 
8,040 
1,200 
600 
3,660 
1,800 
2,760 
1,620 
5,550 
600 
7,500 

Mot)ui  Agency        

Phoenix  Schoo'          -   -  .  - 

Pirna  Agency       

Rice  Station  School  .  .  . 

Salt  River  schools 

Salt  River  Agency  

San  Carlos  schools         -  . 

San  Carlos  Agency 

San  Xavier  schools  

San  Xavier  Agency  
Truxton  Canon  School  .  .  . 
Trnxton  Canon  Agency.  . 
Western  Navajo  schools.  . 
Western  Navajo  Agency.    . 

California          

5 
10 

98 

115 

63,375 

Bishop  schools           .  . 

10 
6 
5 
2 
2 
20 
7 
21 
10 
14 
19 
17 
1 
16 
9 
15 
8 
16 
63 
9 
22 
7 
4 

47 

2 
5 
2 
2 

8 
1 
3 

""2" 
20 

5 
15 
4 
13 

8 
9 
1 
8 
7 
5 
8 
10 
54 
7 
7 
7 
3 

31 

6,195 
2,760 
3,430 
960 
1,720 
12,455 
4,340 
14,100 
5,512 
9,940 
12,  190 
8,873 
1,400 
6,045 
5,710 
7,733 
6,140 
8,805 
46,220 
5,910 
9,640 
4,000 
2,029 

32,  440 

4 
5 
2 
2 
1 
9 
7 
9 
8 
7 
6 
17 
1 
14 
4 
14 
4 
14 
29 
3 
22 
3 
3 

35 

3,555 
2,160 
1,880 
960 
1,000 
6,680 
4,340 
7,150 
4,192 
5,980 
5,370 
8,  873 
1,400 
4,865 
3,610 
7,013 
4,220 
7,125 
25,310 
3,240 
9,640 
2,440 
1,729 

26,350 

6 
1 
3 

2,640 
600 
1,550 

Compo  School      

1 
11 

720 

5,775 

Fort  Bid  well  schools  

Fort  Bid  well  Agency  

2 

6 

6 

11 

8 

Fort  Yuma  schools  
Fort  Yuina  \gency  

12 
2 

7 
13 

6,950 
1,320 
3,960 
6,820 

Greenville  School 

Hoopa  Valley  School  

Hoopa  Valley  Agency  

Malki  School  

Malki  \gency      

8 
2 
10 
...„ 

9 
2 
15 

"T 

16 

2 

5 
1 
4 
2 
34 
6 

1,180 
2,100 
720 
1,920 
1,680 
20,910 
2,670 

Pal  a  schools 

Round  Valley  schools  
Round  Valley  Agency.  . 

Sherman  Institute  

Soboba  schools  

Soboba  Agenc  v  

Tule  River  sch'ools 

4 
1 

12 

1,560 
300 

6,090 

Tule  River  Agency  

Colorado     

Southern  Ute  schools  
Southern  Ute  Agency  
Ute  Mountain  School  
Ute  Mountain  Agency  

Idaho                t  

11 
17 
3 
16 

107 

2 
7 
..... 

34 

9 
10 
3 
9 

73 

8,230 
10,270 
2,740 
11,200 

74,104 

5 
15 

1 
14 

79 

5,  350              6 
9,370              2 
1,750              2 
9,8SO              2 

57,524             28 

2,880 
900 
990 
1,320 

16,580 

Coeur  d'  Alene  schools  
Coeur  d'  Alene  Agency  
Fort  Hall  schools... 

5 
18 
20 

..„. 

5 

5 
11 
15 

3,540 
12,  754 
14.480 

3 
16 
12 

2,940              2 
11,434              2 
9.800               8 

600 
1,320 
4  680 

200 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  38. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ployees 

*  5 

Salaries  . 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary, 

Idaho—  Continued  . 
Fort  Hall  Ygencv 

23 
28 
13 

24 

14 
3 

5 

12 

9 
25 

8 

12 

$14,  808 
17,040 
11,  482 

15,650 

22 
13 
13 

10 

$13,  808 
8,060 
11,482 

8,270 

1 
15 

$1,000 
8,980 

Fort  Lapwai  School 

Fort  Lapwai  Agency  
Iowa.. 

14 

7,380 

Sac  and  Fox  Sanatorium.  . 
Sac  and  Fox  Agency  

21 
3 

89 

10 
2 

19 

11 
1 

70 

13,950 
1,700 

68,  152 

7 
3 

48 

6,570 
1,700 

40,612 

14 

7,.380 

Kansas  

41 

27,540 

Haskell  Institute  

66 
13 
2 

7 
41 

6 

8 
2 

""3" 
14 

60 
5 

"i 

4 

27 

52,320 
8,290 
1,697 
1,500 
4,345 

28,910 

33 
6 
2 
1 
6 

18 

29,340 
4,450 
1,697 
1,500 
3,625 

14,980 

33 

7 

22,980 
3,840 

Kickapoo  School 

Kickapoo  Agency  

Potawatomi  School  

Potawatomi  Agency  

1 

23 

720 
13,930 

Michigan  

Mount  Pleasant  School  
Mackinae  Agency  

Minnesota  

37 
4 

267 

13 
1 

137 

21 
3 

130 

25,110 
3,800 

173,828 

15 
3 

177 

11,900 
3,080 

125,968 

22 
1 

90 

13,210 
720 

47,860 

Cass  Lake  School  

6 
5 
16 
3 
5 
13 
39 
3 
10 
26 
21 
32 
14 
36 
38 

350 

5 
1 

9 

""3" 

4 
23 
1 
8 
12 

4 

3 

20 

166 

1 
4 
7 
3 
2 
9 
16 
2 
2 
14 
12 
9 
6 
25 
18 

184 

3,340 
3,440 
10,885 
2,270 
2,620 
9,120 
27,  388 
2,220 
6,192 
17,  410 
12,240 
19,  873 
8,980 
23,670 
24,180 

230,255 

2 

3 
11 
1 
4 
5 
37 
1 
9 
14 
10 
26 
5 
15 
34 

284 

1,600 
2,840 
8,225 
1,200 
2,220 
4,680 
26,  108 
1,200 
5,592 
10,550 
6,690 
16,573 
3,980 
13,  030 
21,480 

193,230 

4 
2 
5 
2 
1 
8 
2 
2 
1 
12 
11 
6 
9 
21 
4 

66 

1,740 
600 
2,660 
1,070 
400 
4,440 
1,280 
1,020 
600 
6,860 
5,550 
3,300 
5,000 
10,640 
2,700 

37,025 

Fond  du  Lac  schools  
Fond  du  Lac  Agency  
Grand  Portage  School  
Grand  Portage  Agency.  .  .  . 
Leech  Lake  school5* 

Leech  Lake  Agency 

Nett  Lake  School  

Nett  Lake  Agency.   .  .  . 

Pipestone  schools 

Red  Lake  schools  

Red  Lake  \gency 

Vermillion  Lake  School  
White  Earth  schools  .   .  . 
White  Earth  Agency  

Montana 

Blackfeet  schools  

20 
52 
24 
65 
2 
33 
11 
31 
20 
34 
19 
39 

84 

6 
29 
5 
34 

'"u 

2 

16 
9 
19 

7 
25 

31 

14 
23 
19 
31 
2 
19 
9 
15 
11 
15 
12 
14 

53 

13,040 
31,125 
17,360 
40,253 
3,200 
24,633 
8,185 
19,  913 
13,380 
20,833 
12,750 
25,  583 

61,900 

8 
48 
13 
61 
2 
32 
4 
30 
8 
33 
9 
36 

56 

7,020 
28,905 
10,860 
37,  433 
3,200 
23,913 
4,300 
19,  193 
7,340 
19,933 
7.710 
23,  423 

44,530 

12 

4 
11 

4 

6,020 
2,220 
6,500 
2,820 

Blackfeet  Agency 

Crow  schools 

Crow  Agency  

Flathead  School. 

Flathead  Agency  

1 
7 
1 
12 

1 
10 
3 

28 

720 
3,885 
720 
6,040 
900 
5,  040 
2,160 

17,370 

Fort  Belknap  schools 

Fort  Belknap  Agency 

Fort  Peck  schools  
Fort  Peck  Agency. 

Tongue  River  schools  
Tongue  River  Agency  

Nebraska  

Genoa  School  

42 

8 
1 
9 
2 
21 

118 

12 

30 
1 
4 
1 
2 
2 
13 

69 

28,  930 
1,600 
5,^97 
1,700 
6,325 
2,800 
14,648 

77,  258 

23 
1 
7 
1 
9 
2 
13 

69 

17,460 
1.600 
5,297 
1,700 
6,325 
2,800 
9,348 

50,303 

19 

11,470 

Omaha  School  

Omaha  Agency 

4 

1 

600 

Santee  School  .'  

Santee  Agency  

7 

Winnebago  School  

'"& 

49 

"5,'300 
26,955 

Winnebago  Agency  . 

8 
49 

Nevada 

Carson  School  

32 
9 
3 

7 
2 
4 
3 
10 

12         20 
9 
2  !        1 
3  !        4 
2  I  
4 
3    
4          6 

25,550 
5,265 
1,370 
4,685 
624 
3.  180 
552 
6,120 

10 
5 
3 
4 
2 
1 
3 
2 

12,940 
3,320 
1,370 
3,185 
-      624 
1,500 
552 
1,900 

22 
4 

12,610 
1,945 

Fallen  schools 

Fallen  Agency  

Fort  McDenriitt  School  
Fort  McDermitt  Agency.  .  . 
Moapa  River  School  

3 

1,500 

3 
..... 

1,680 
""4."  220 

Moapa  River  Agency.  .  . 

Ne  vada  schools.  .  . 

COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


201 


TABLE  38. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  SO,  1917— Continued. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ployees 

Indi- 
ans. 

Non- 
Indi- 
ans. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Nevada  —  Continued. 
Nevada  Agencv  

11 
4 
11 
8 
14 

425 

44 
16 

51 
10 
33 
24 
17 
50 
40 
26 
41 
40 
21 
12 

3 
35 

8 
"'5' 

.    i 

9 

187 

3 
4 
6 

7 
5 

238 

$6,089 
3,220 
6,  734 
5,520 
8,349 

267,980 

9 
2 
10 
6 
12 

265 

$4,769 
2,120 
6,074 
4,920 
7,029 

178,435 

2 
2 

1 
2 
2 

160 

$1,320 
1,100 
660 
600 
1,320 

89,545 

Walker  Ri  \rer  School 

Walker  River  Agency  
Western  Shoshone  schools.. 
Western  Shoshone  Agency. 

New  Mexico  

Albuquerque  School 

14 

5 
24 
3 
17 

6 
9 
14 
25 

8 
31 
18 
7 
6 

30 
11 

27 

16 
18 
8 
36 
15 
18 
10 
22 
14 
6 

3 
22 

31,110 
10,800 
28,330 
7,140 
20,820 
15,100 
11,350 
29,805 
27,722 
17,310 
20,598 
26,370 
12,940 
8,585 

2,250 
21,587 

22 
6 
50 
3 
29 
7 
17 
14 
29 
11 
40 
19 
S 
10 

2 
21 

17,280 
5,200 
27,  610 
3.180 
18^460 
6,520 
11,350 
11,860 
20,  762 
9,120 
19,878 
14,270 
5,800 
7,145 

1,650 

12,787 

22 

10 
1 

7 
4 
17 

13,830 
5,f>00 
720 
3,960 
2,360 
8,580 

Jioarilla  School  

Jicarilla  Agencv  

Mescalero  School 

Mescalero  Agency  

Pueblo  Bonito  schools  
Pueblo  Bonito  Agency  
Pueblo  da  y  schools  

36 
11 
15 
1 
21 
13 
2 

1 
14 

17,945 
6,960 
8,190 
720 
12,100 
7,140 
1,440 

600 
8,800 

Pueblo  day  schools  agency 
San  Tuan  schools 

San  Juan  \gency 

Santa  Fe  School  

Zuni  schools.    . 

Zuni  Agency 

New  York  Agency     . 

North  Carolina 

13 

Cherokee  schools     .  . 

29 

6 

278 

10 
3 

145 

19 
3 

133 

17,610 
3,977 

161,346 

16 
5 

175 

9,530 
3,257 

108,686 

13 

1 

103 

8,080 
720 

52,660 

Cherokee  Agency  
North  Dakota. 

Bismarck  School  

13 

7 
32 
44 
12 
46 
67 
11 
22 
24 

926 

5 
1 
21 

19 

7 
15 
49 
1 
18 
9 

275 

8 
6 
11 
25 
5 
31 
18 
10 
4 
15 

651 

8,400 
5,120 
17.925 
26,290 
7,620 
28,855 
33,063 
6,825 
10,  728 
16,520 

747,  184 

5 
3 
30 
17 
11 
17 
56 
6 
19 
11 

580 

3,800 
3,470 
16,065 
12,260 
6,960 
14,835 
27,343 
5,325 
9,568 
9,060 

527,  149 

8 
4 
2 
27 
1 
29 
11 
5 
3 
13 

346 

4,600 
1,650 
1,860 
14,030 
660 
14,020 
5,720 
1,500 
1,160 
'    7,460 

220,035 

Fort  Berthold  schools  
Fort  Berthold  Aeency  
Fort  Totten  schools  

Fort  Totten  Agencv 

Standing  Rock  schools  
Standing  Rock  Agencv  
Turtle  Mountain  schools.  .  . 
Turtle  Mountain  Agency.  .  . 
Wahpeton  School  .  !"  

Oklahoma 

Cantonment  School 

11 

12 

17 

21 
55 
72 
62 
28 
39 
12 
7 
16* 
10 
16 
10 
5 
1 
12 
18 
11 
16 
5 
19 
8 

4 
3 

8 

8 
17 
14 
32 
7 
8 
1 
2 
5 
4 
5 
3 
1 

7 
9 

9 

13 
38 
58 
30 
21 
31 
11 
5 
11 
6 
11 
7 
4 
1 
6 
15 
6 
11 
2 
11 
3 

7,020 
8,760 

11,300 

15,  322 
40,300 
45,  100 
38,650 
19,940 
48,830 
8,020 
4,860 
11,  160 
7,325 
10,090 
8,167 
1,900 
1,650 
8,565 
11,200 
6,995 
11,190 
3,060 
12,280 
4,955 

4 
10 

7 

16 
31 
33 
48 
7 
33 
6 
6 
6 
8 
7 
9 
3 
1 
10 
7 
8 
8 
4 
10 
7 

3,300 
7,140 

5,400 

12,  122 
25,000 
24,660 
30,790 
10,740 
42,930 
4,740 
4,140 
5,400 
5,705 
6,220 
7,567 
1,300 
1,650 
7,005 
5,180 
5,675 
6,420 
2,340 
7,520 
4,355 

7 
2 

10 

5 
24 
39 
14 
21 
6 
6 

10 
2 
9 
1 
2 

3,720 
1,620 

5,900 

3,200 
15,300 
20,440 
7,860 
9,200 
5,900 
3,280 
720 
5,760 
1,620 
3,870 
600 
600 

Cantonment  Agency  

Chevenne    and    Arapaho 
School  ... 

Cheyenne     and     Arapaho 
Agencv  

Chilocco  School  . 

Kiowa  schools 

Kiowa  Agency 

Osage  School 

Osage  Agency 

Otoe  School  

Otoe  Agency. 

Pawnee  School  

Pawnee  Agency  

Ponca  School  

Ponca  Agency 

Red  Moon  School  

Sac  and  Fox  School  

Sac  and  Fox  Agency  .  .  . 

6 
3 
5 
5 
3 
8 
5 

2 
11 
3 

8 

9 

1 

1,560 
6,020 
1,320 
4,770 
720 
4,760 
600 

Seger  School  

Seger  Agency 

Seneca  School  

Seneca  Ajgency 

Shawnee  School  

Shawnee  Agency. 

202 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  38. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  191 7— Continued. 


States  and  superlntendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ployees 

Indi 
ans. 

Non- 
Indi- 
ans. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Oklahoma—  Continued. 
Five  Civilized  Tribes  

443 

118 

325 

$400,545 

291 

S289,850 

152 

$110,695 

Muskogee  Agency 

283 
12 
16 
1 
15 
12 
14 
14 
14 
16 
15 
15 
16 

183 

98 
4 
4 
...„ 

..... 
..... 

"T 

66 

185 
8 
12 
1 
11 
12 
14 
14 
11 
16 
12 
15 
14 

117 

•292,712 
13,050 
10,420 
1,500 
9,700 
7,560 
9,293 
8,580 
9,720 
9,840 
9,375 
9,270 
9,525 

134,335 

230 
8 
7 
1 
5 
7 
5 
2 

6 
6 
4 
3 

116 

241,  762 
8,610 
5,470 
1,500 
3,670 
4,620 
4,133 
960 
5,700 
4,275 
4,530 
3,120 
1,500 

93,775 

53 

4 
9 

50,950 
4,440 
4,950 

Schools—  supervisor  
Armstrong  Academy.  .  . 
Bloomfield  Seminary... 
Cherokee  Training  
Collins  Institute 

10 
5 
9 
12 
7 
10 
9 
11 
13 

67 

6,030 
2,940 
5,160 
7,  620 
4,020 
5,565 
4,845 
6,150 
8,025 

40,560 

Euchee  Boarding 

Eufaula  Boarding  

Jones  Academy  .  .  . 

Mekusukey  Academy.  . 
Nuyaka  Boarding 

Tuskahoma  Academy.  . 
Wheelock  Academy  

Oregon.  . 

Klamath  schools  . 

24 
32 
1 

4 
11 

20 
21 

6 
39 
1 
2 

7 
4 
9 

7 

60 
382 

15,530 
27,048 
1,600 
6,500 
39.  910 
2.270 
4,125 
8,960 
5,669 
9,720 
13,003 

51,430 
392,774 

11 

27 
1 
4 
27 
2 
6 
5 
8 

18 
37 
459 

9,060 
23,048 
1,600 
5,200 
23,660 
2,270 
3,405 
4,320 
3,929 
5,720 
11,563 

30,530 
273,  354 

13 
5 

6,470 
4,000 

Klamath  Agency  

Roseburg  School  1  

Roseburg  Agency 

6 
53 
2 
7 
13 
10 
15 
20 

67 

687 

2 

26 

1,300 
16,  250 

14 

5 
6 
6 
6 
13 

7 
305 

Siletz  schools  

Siletz  Agency 

1 

8 
2 
8 
2 

30 
228 

720 
4,640 
1,740 
4,000 
1,440 

20,900 
119,420 

Umatilla  School  

Umatilla  Agency 

Normal  Springs  schools  
Warm  Springs  Agency  

Pennsylvania:  Carlisle  School.  . 
South  Dakota  

Canton  Asylum 

25 
26 
58 
13 
30 
41 
12 
19 
25 
90 
99 
33 
68 
79 
18 
11 
8 
15 
17 

61 

25 
21 
19 
9 
14 
22 
9 
10 
20 
73 
20 
22 
59 
26 
7 
2 
6 
6 
12 

35 

15,360 
17,880 
18,843 
9,170 
•  18,  101 
28,140 
8,220 
11,  789 
17,250 
54,540 
46,  191 
21,730 
46,850 
33,  480 
11,990 
6,430 
5,420 
10,060 
11,330 

42,681 

12 
12 
54 
6 
24 
16 
5 
18 
11 
43 
95 
16 
35 
68 
9 
10 
2 
7 
16 

51 

9,380 
10,630 
16,923 
5,280 
13,961 
13,900 
4,440 
10,889 
9,420 
34,320 
43,091 
12,090 
31,  670 
26,480 
7,180 
5,650 
1,500 
5,940 
10,610 

37,  801 

13 

14 
4 
7 
6 
25 
7 

14 
47 
4 
17 
33 
11 
9 
1 
6 
8 
1 

10 

5,980 
7,250 
1,920 
3,890 
4,140 
14,  240 
3,780 
900 
7,830 
20,220 
3,100 
9,640 
15,  180 
7,000 
4,810 
780 
3,920 
4,120 
720 

4,880 

Cheyenne  River  schools  
Cheyenne  River  Agency.  .  . 
Crow  Creek  School 

5 
39 
4 
16 
19 
3 
9 
5 
17 
79 
11 
9 
53 
11 
9 
2 
9 
5 

26 

Crow  Creek  Agency  .  .  . 

Flandreau  School 

Lower  Brule  School  

Lower  Brule  Agency 

Pierre  School 

Pine  Ridge  schools  

Pine  Ridge  Agency 

Rapid  City  School  

Rosebud  schools  . 

Rosebud  Agency 

Sisseton  School  

Sisseton  Agency 

Springfield  School  

Yankton  School  

Yankton  Agency 

Utah  

Goshute  School  

2 
3 
3 
3 
12 
38 

244 

2 
2 
3 

1 
7 
20 

157 

1,300 
1,610 
2,220  i 
824 
9,330 
27,397  I 

173,  581 

1 
2 
2 
3 

6 
37 

178 

1,000 
1,310 
1,920 
824 
6,070 
26,677 

135,721 

1 

1 
1 

300 
300 
300 

Goshute  Agency  .  . 

1 

Shivwits  School 

Shivwits  Agency  

2 
5 

18 

87 

Uintah  and  Ouray  School.. 
Uintah  and  Ouray  Agency. 

Washington. 

6 
1 

66 

3,260 
720 

37,860 

Colville  schools  

15 
37 
36 

7 
7 
4 

3 
12 

8 
3 
2 
3 

12 
25 
28 
4 
5 
1 

10,  690 
27,563 
27,260 
4,860 
4,820 
1.800 

9 
35 
20 
6 
5 
3 

8,390 
25,943 
18,040 
3,660 
3,530 
1.200 

6 
2 
16 
1 
2 
1 

2,300 
1,620 
9,220 
1,200 
1,290 
600 

Colville  Agency  .  . 

Cushman  schools  

Cushman  Agency  

Neah  Bay  schools 

Neah  Bay  Agencv.  .  . 

i  No  school;  paid  from  school  appropriation. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


203 


TABLE  38. — School  and  agency  employees  in  Indian  Service,  based  on  salary  list  in  effect 

June  30,  1917— Continued. 


State  and  svperintendencies. 

Total. 

Male. 

Female. 

Em- 
ployees. 

Indi- 
ans. 

Non- 
Indi- 
ans. 

Salaries. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Washington—  Continued. 
Spokane  schools 

7 
23 
3 
10 
29 
20 
18 
28 

222 

2 
9 

5 
14 
3 
5 
20 
12 
8 
15 

121 

$4,620 
13,383 
3,280 
7,059 
20,470 
13,625 
13,  050 
21,  101 

148,222 

4 
18 
3 
10 
14 
19 
8 
24 

128 

$3,720 
11,003 
3,280 
7,059 
11,540 
13,025 
7,410 
17,921 

97,382 

3 
5 

$900 
2,380 

Spokane  Agency  

Taholah  schools  .  .     .  . 

Taholah  Agency 

5 
9 
8 
10 
13 

101 

Tulalip  schools  

15 
1 
10 

4 

94 

8,930 
600 
5,640 
3,180 

50,840 

Tulalip  Agency  .  .  . 

Yakima  School 

Yakima  Agency  

Wisconsin  

Grand  Rapids  School  1  
Grand  Rapids  Agency 

1 

4 

1 
4 
17 
3 
14 
9 
11 
3 
1 
3 
1 
9 
9 
3 
3 
22 
8 

37 

1,600 
3,140 
15,350 
4,025 
16,  175 
20,798 
12,280 
4,424 
1,600 
3,520 
2,750 
11,295 
13,  830 
2,375 
4,980 
19,  170 
10,910 

46,960 

1 
3 
10 
7 
9 
28 
9 
5 
1 
4 
1 
14 
10 
1 
7 
11 
7 

53 

1,600 
2,540 
7,340 
3,365 
9,940 
17,038 
7,420 
3,044 
1,600 
3,520 
2,750 
11,295 
7,090 
1,400 
4,260 
8,600 
4,580 

40,280 

1 
14 
1 
12 
7 
9 
2 

600 
8,010 
660 
6,235 
3,760 
4,860 
1,380 

Hay  ward  schools 

24 
8 
21 
35 
18 
7 
1 
4 
1 
14 
24 
3 
8 
30 
19 

65 

7 
5 
7 
26 
7 
4 
..... 

""5" 

15 

Hay  ward  Agency  
Keshena  schools 

Keshena  Agency  

Lac  du  Flambeau  School... 
Lac  du  Flambeau  Agency.. 
Laona  School 

Laona  Agency 

La  Pointe  School  

La  Pointe  Agency 

Oneida  School  ,  . 

14 
2 
1 
19 
12 

12 

6,740 
975 
720 
10,570 
6,330 

6,680 

Red  Cliff  School 

Red  Cliff  Agency 

5 
8 
11 

28 

Tomah  School 

Wittenberg  School 

W  y  oming 

Shoshone  School  

Shoshone  Agency 

19 
46 

3 

25 

16 
21 

14,760 
32,200 

10 
43 

10,000 
30,280 

9 
3 

4,760 
1,920 

1  No  school;  paid  from  school  appropriation. 
TABLE  39. — Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  30,  1917. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  investigating  and  supervising  force. 
Total 

122 

r 

4 
24 
9 
25 

8 

1 
3 

7 
21 
10 

1 
1 

$189,  700 

20 

$43,850 

102 

6 
3 
23 

8 
24 

7 

$145,850 

13,500 
5,300 
30.190 
13,900 
32  920 
14,300 

Inspection  .  . 

17,000 
7,800 
32,190 
16.650 
35,920 
17,300 

3,000 
3,700 

0) 

13,550 
21,970 
17,  120 

2,000 
1,500 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

1 
1 

1 

1 
1 

7 

1 
1 

3,500 
2,500 
2,000 
2,750 
3,000 
3,000 

3,000 
2,000 

m 

3,000 
1,600 
14,000 

2,000 
1.500 

Special  supervisors  

Liquor  

Construction 

Health 

Schools  

Industries: 
Farming  

Employment 

2 

1,700 

Live  stock  

Forestry: 
Field  supervising  officers  

6 
20 
3 

10,550 
20  370 
3,120 

Menominee  

Special  agents 

Commissioner  to  negotiate  with  Seminole  In- 
dians   

Attorney  for  Pueblo  Indians.  .  . 

1  $10  a  day  when  actually  employed. 


204  COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 

TABLE  39. — Miscellaneous  field  employees,  June  30,  1917 — Continued. 


Designation. 

Total. 

Chief  officer. 

Others. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Num- 
ber. 

Salary. 

Field  irrigation  service. 
Total 

232 

$293,930 

•14       $27,  700 

218 

§266,230 

Chief  inspector 

1 

8 

5 

4,000 
18,500 

4,500 

1 
1 

2 

4,000 
2,500 

2,700 

Superintendents  of  irrigation  

7 
3 

16,000 
1,800 

Arizona  .  . 

Pima  

4 

1 

i  74 
14 
15 

3,300 
1,200 

71,400 
12,445 
18,805 

1 
1 

2 
1 
2 

1,500 
1,200 

4,000 
1,600 
3,000 

3 

1,800 

Salt  River 

California:  Miscellaneous  work  

172 
13 
13 

67,400 
10,845 
15,805 

Idaho:  Fort  Hall 

Montana  

Billings  

1 

8 
5 
1 

20 
56 

1,500 
9,580 
7,425 
300 

29,850 
62,250 

1 

7 
4 
1 

19 
54 

1,500 
8,080 
5,925 
300 

27,850 
58,450 

Crow 

1 
1 

1,500 
1,500 

Fort  Belknap  .  .                                . 

Tongue  River 

New  Mexico:  Albuquerque 

1 
2 

2,000 
3,800 

Utah  

Salt  Lake... 

U7 
19 

143 
16 

16 

30,300 
25,950 

55,100 
17,080 

13,935 

1 

1 

1 
1 

2 

1,800 
2,000 

2,100 
2,000 

1,080 

i  16 
18 

142 
15 

14 

28,500 
23,950 

53,000 
15,080 

12,855 

Uintah 

Washington:  Yakima 

Wyoming:  Shoshone 

Field  allotment  service. 
Total 

Special  allotting  agent  

1 
3 

(2) 
2,700 

1 

(") 

Arizona  . 

3 

2,700 

Leupp  .  .  . 

1 
2 

1 
1 
3 
4 

720 
1,980 

765 
900 
2,670 
3,720 

1 
2 

1 
1 
3 
4 

720 
1,980 

765 
900 
2,670 
3,720 

Pima 

Montana:  Blackfeet  

North  Dakota*  Turtle  Mountain 

Oregon:  Umatilla. 

South  Dakota  

Pine  Ridge  

2 
2 

3 
54 
20 
35 

2,100 
1,620 

3,180 
59,400 
50,000 
35,640 

2 
2 

2 

36 

2,100 
1,620 

2,100 
27,000 

Rosebud. 

Wisconsin:  La  Pointe 

1 
18 
20 
3 

1,080 
32,400 
50,000 
6,200 

Heirship  work. 
Examiners 

Probate  work. 
Attorneys 

Warehouses. 
Total...   . 

32 

29,440 

Chicago 

21 
6 

8 

21,450 
6,170 
8,020 

1 
1 
1 

2,200 
2,000 
2,000 

20 
5 

7 

19,250 
4,170 
6,020 

San  Francisco 

St.  Louis 

i  Temporary  or  for  emergency. 


2  $8  a  day  when  actually  employed. 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 
TABLE  40. — Recapitulation  of  all  Indian  Service  employees. 


205 


Designation. 


Number. 


Salaries. 


Total. 


6,075 


4,570,742 


School. 
Agency.. 


Field  investigating  and  supervising  force 

Irrigation  service >. 

Allotment  service 

Heirship  work 

Probate  work 

Warehouses 

Indian  Office  employees,  exclusive  of  commissioner  and  assistant  commissioner. 


i  2, 817 

12,517 

122 

232 

16 

54 

20 

35 

262 


1,919,313 

1,670,574 

189,700 

293,930 

13,935 

59,400 

50,000 

35,640 

338, 250 


1  School  and  agency  includes  2,137  Indians  earning  $979,783. 

TABLE  41. — Commissioner's  account  for  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 

[Checks,  drafts,  and  other  instruments  of  exchange,  drawn  to  the  order  of  the  commissioner,  are  received 
in  the  office  as  deposits  with  bids  for  tribal  leasing  privileges,  guaranties  for  right  of  way  across  Indian 
lands,  and  for  various  other  purposes.  For  such  receipts  the  commissioner  renders  monthly  accounts 
as  required  by  sec.  3622,  Rev.  Stats.] 

On  hand  July  1, 1916 $7,664.42 

Received: 

July,  1916 $882, 670. 19 

August,  1916 74.  85 

September,  1916 100. 63 

October,  1916 59.51 

November,  1916 13. 07 

December,  1916 11. 49 

January,  1917 196. 01 

February.  1917 57, 297. 21 

March,  1917...  50,649.33 

April,  1917 21,730.91 

May,  1917 ...  15, 055. 33 

June,  1917 22,851.99 

1,050,710.52 

Total  on  hand  and  received 1 , 058, 374. 94 

Disbursed  and  deposited: 

July,  1916 $881,845.00 

August,  1916 t 

September,  1916 61.96 

October,  1916 16.26 

November,  1916 4,072.77 

December,  1916 11.49 

January,  1917 4.01 

February,  1917 265.36 

March,  1917 25.  20 

April,  1917 17,396.06 

May,  1917 130.87 

Jane,  1917 99. 30 

903, 928. 28 

Bulance  on  hand  June  30, 1917 154,446.66 


206 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


CO  l'          OC   C—   X  I  —  O  rH  Uj>  rH       rH  CO 


co  t>-      co  cq  21  co 


rHt>-  CS 


t-  FH  00 


S2o     8oc3SoS 
co  o      coo  co  3  10 


•3 


CO  CO      OO 


is"    S 


8    85  SSS 

d      co    co-i 


(M  <M  O5t^rHt^OO<N          rH  TI 


IO  00  rH  00 


S    S3    5!  SS 


M    TH  ( 


t^.     t^ 
CO     t^- 


lOHOTrtl-^OOOOC 

i^gsi^s10^ 


)OcOO(MCOO(NOOOCOOprH( 


:    :  :     ::::::  :  :  :    : 

of  fund. 

1 

| 

! 

• 

i 

S 

^ 

\ 

P 

s  :  : 

.    •    • 

P 

S      •   •  •   •    "3   •   •   • 

6 

p 

it 

* 

£ 

£      .  .  ;  .    o  ;  .  . 

& 

a 
f 

c 
C 
t 

d 
f 

5 

g 

£ 

a 

' 

S 

c 

! 

*    -* 

~ 

i 

a 

: 

\ 

a 

'     | 
I 

5 
g 

i 

1    £ 

i 

§ 
i 

cc 

S 

1 

8 

p 

1 

s 
• 
g 

:i 

Coeur  d'Alene  3  per  cent  fund  
Fort  Berthold  Reservation  3  per  cent  i 
Kansas  Consolidated  fund  
Kiowa  Agency  Hospital  4  per  cent  fun 

Osn.fffl  fund 

Pine  Ridge  Reservation  3  per  cent  fun 
Puyallup  4  per  cent  school  fund  
Rosebud  Reservation  3  per  cent  fund  . 

Round  Vallev  general  fund  .  .  . 

£ 
1 

i 

B 

pc 

-   •£ 

c 

1 

Standing  Rock  Reservation  3  Der  cent 

Umatilla  general  fund  
Ute,  Confederated  Bands  of,  4  per  cen! 
Proceeds  of  — 
Colville  Reservation,  Wash  
Crow  ceded  lands,  Mont  
Devils  Lake  Reservation,  N.  Dak. 
Flathead  Reservation,  Mont  
Fort  Peck  Reservation,  Mont  
Irrigable  land,  Yuma  Reservation 
Lower  Bruie  Reservation,  S.  Dak. 
Omaha  Reservation,  Nebr  
Red  Lake  Reservation,  Minn  

Rosebud  Reservation,  S.  Dak.  .  . 

COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS, 


207 


'  rl  ?•!  P1  n  "3  < 


8£S§S3S?3§ 

id      c-i      -<r      co      <N      o4      <N      co 
c^      r»      co      co      o      t~-      -<f 


888  :8  :  :  S 

00  O  O      •  Ol      •      !     C«3 

03C»O      .«0      .      .     CO 


eo      CM    •  co 


O        OJ        O        iO 

oo      co      o      eo 


S          S 


2  c^2  3 

^    co  IN'    co 


fe    S    2    S    « 

o?      oo      cj      cc      o5 


OOCOO:  OO  CO  •*  CO  COt-- 
10  .-ICM  ^H  .-c  CO  CO  CO  1-1  CO 
»— I  CO  CO  i— t 


|^    ^ 

>"S  "a       >> 


-3  -^ 


$  I 


i    « 


-SS^'E'aS  S 


1       1 


IllP'illiitl    S    S    I    I     2     £     1      § 

cccccGcorcE-E^    P   |>J>    hHUOOOOOco 


x  v: 


sag 

oca 

33^ 
oo^ 

^ 

•s-sS 


55  SJ 

t^Tcf-g 

ss£ 


208 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


:o  »o  «no>          T-I  o 

^js^s""  S^^isj* 

^^^S'oM'o     'o'o'o'o  " 


COMMISSIONEK   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIBS. 


209 


es              *»      o 

N                   iO       O 

rs 

ao     cT 
n 

3 

iO~                  us"       -. 

rH                          i—  t            ^ 

•3           ig 

I    i 

I        °   1 

I  ?5 

"£                ia       ^ 

to                to  ^  "£ 

W            W     <! 

1 

1 

o 

*         -                    W             Q> 

m        CO      . 

&    1  i! 

1     |  |l 

•^                    'S         0)  *»" 

•2            "^     "^"S 

I     |  |5 

g           |    2  If 

|      S\gS 

a           £     1-S 
S          1    |l 
|           |    || 

fe          N    << 

1®  a 

(Hi    i 

itiiQ  Q 
EI 

18404—17 14 


210 


COMMISSIONER  OF   INDIAN  AFFAIRS. 


TABLE  44. — Pro  rata  shares  of  tribal  trust  funds  settled  during  fiscal  year  ended  June  30, 

1917. 


States  and  superintendencies. 

Tribes. 

Indians 
paid. 

Average  pro 
rata  share. 

Amount  paid. 

Total 

3  733 

«Q«1   noq  07 

Idaho:  Coeur  d'Alene 

Coeur  d'Alene 

49 

$294  42 

14  426  58 

Iowa:  Sac  and  Fox  

Sac  and  Fox 

9 

1  079  57 

9  716  13 

Kansas  

36 

18  067  45 

Kickapoo        

Kickapoo 

29 

577  37 

16  743  73 

Potawatomi 

1 

189  10 

1   "VX\  72 

Montana:  Flathead 

Confederated  Flathead 

370 

111  76 

41  351  20 

Nebraska:  San  tee  

Ponca 

30 

65  68 

1  970  40 

New  York:  New  York  

Tonawanda  (Seneca) 

16 

159  21 

2  547  40 

North  Dakota:  Standing  Rock  

Sioux  

183 

154  81 

28  331  59 

Oklahoma  

747 

411  915  51 

Cantonment 

1" 

Cheyenne  and  Arapaho 

do 

Red  Moon 

do 

,™ 
100 

310.  76 

31,  076.  90 

Seger 

do 

' 

Kiowa  !  

Apache     Kiowa     and    Co- 

416 

326  27 

135  728  32 

Do.2  

manche. 
do            .     . 

109 

768  17 

83  730  60 

Pawnee     

Pawnee 

23 

500  64 

11  514  72 

Ponca 

Ponca 

18 

47  33 

'  860  94 

Osage  

Osage 

61 

3  819  76 

129  237  13 

Sac  and  Fox 

Sac  and  Fox 

20 

988  34 

19  766  90 

Oregon  

98 

21  468  39 

Klamath  . 

Klamath  

71 

208  39 

14  795  89 

Umatilla 

Umatilla 

27 

247  12 

6  672  50 

South  Dakota    

1  850 

400  166  34 

Cheyenne  River  l  .  .  . 

Sioux 

40 

114.41 

4  576  78 

Do  » 

..  .  do 

248  14 

17  121  66 

Crow  Creek 

do 

116 

166  76 

19  344  75 

Lower  Brule 

....  do 

7 

138.81 

'971  67 

Pine  Ridge 

do 

504 

117  60 

59  272  64 

Rosebud  

do  

127 

122.  37 

15.541.82 

Sisseton    

Sisseton  and  Wahpeton 

916 

292.  35 

267  792  60 

Yankton 

Sioux 

71 

218  93 

15  544  42 

Utah:  Uintahand  Ouray 

Ute 

1 

240.  07 

240.07 

Wisconsin  

344 

10,  828.  91 

Keshena 

Menominee 

52 

84  11 

4  373  85 

Do  

do      

292 

22.10 

6,  455.  06 

1  5  per  cent. 


2  4  per  cent. 


3  3  per  cent. 


TABLE  45. — Tribal  funds  of  the  Five  Civilized  Tribes  in  State  and  National  banks  of 

Oklahoma.1 


Tribes. 

On  deposit  June  30,  1917. 

Interest. 

Total. 

Principal. 

Interest. 

Paid  in  the 
United  States 
Treasury. 

Total  paid 
and  due. 

Total  

$3,369,290.42 

$3,289,347.75 

$79,942.67 

$1,046,723.10 

$1,  126,  665.  77 

Choctaw 

1,  800,  907.  64 
.618,666.99 

1,759,620.26 
602,  885.  95 

41,287.38 
15,781.04 

603,  673.  00 
200,  004.  12 
31,897.28 
204,  731.  78 
6,  416.  92 

644,960.38 
215,  785.  16 
31,  897.  28 
226,  656.  14 
7,  366.  81 

Chickasaw 

Cherokee        

Creek 

917,815.90 
31,  899.  89 

895,  891.  54 
30,  950.  00 

21,  924.  36 
949.89 

Seminole 

i  The  deposits  are  made  under  the  act  of  Mar.  3,  1911  (36  Stat.  L.,  1058-1070),  in  223  banks, 
interest  are  from  4  to  5|  per  cent. 


The  rates  of 


COMMISSIONER   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


211 


TABLE  46. —  Volume  of  business  in  Indian  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


Warehouses. 

Freight  shipments. 

Express  shipments. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Number. 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago 

161,096 
52,628 
38,009 

Pounds. 
1  47,  129,  727 
5,901,296 
136,932,018 

$1,345,621.59 
291,253.27 
329,992.54 

224 

(!)s» 

Pounds. 
9,013 
(2) 
1,891 

$3,092.73 
(2) 
1,  222.  56 

San  Francisco 

St.  Louis  

Total 

251,  733 

89,963,041 

1,966,867.40 

Warehouses. 

Packages  mailed. 

Percentage  of  increase  of 
totals  over  previous  year. 

Number. 

Weight.           Value.       j  Number. 

1                       i 

Weight. 

Value. 

Chicago 

7,276 
126 
2,209 

Pounds. 
28,720 
278 
5,910 

$19,918.97 
233.17 
3,342.14 

Per  cent. 
26.9 
310.3 
349.7 

Per  cent. 
15.3 

311.2 

34.8 

Per  cent. 
65.8 
12.2 
322.8 

San  Francisco  

St  Louis4 

Total  

9,611 

34,908 

23,494.28 

10.3 

2.4 

15.9 

1  A  considerable  part  of  this  weight  is  coal,  handled  in  car  lots. 

2  Included  with  freight. 

3  Decrease. 

*  Closed  Mar.  31;  from  Apr.  1  to  June  30  all  business  was  handled  by  Chicago  warehouse. 

Total  number  of  shipments  (packages) 261, 598 

Total  weight 90,008,853 

Total  value $1,994,676.97 

TABLE  47. — Expense  at  warehouses,  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1917. 


Warehouses. 

Rent. 

Light 
and 
fuel. 

Employees 
andinspec-     Miscella- 
tion  of          neous. 
supplies.1 

Cost  of  maintenance. 

Total. 

Per  cent.2 

Chicago    .                

$3,950.00 
2,400.00 
1,508.33 

$239.82 
13.00 
186.  17 

$20,621.46       $4,475.58     $29,286.86 
7,598.00        1,116.07       11,127.07- 
11,502.36  j      2,055.41       15,252.27 

2.14 
3.81 
<4.55 

San  Francisco 

St.  Louis  3  

Total 

7,858.33 

438.99 

39,721.82        7,647.06 

55,666.20 
61,116.23 

2.74 
3.53 

Total,  1916  

Saving  over  1916 

j 

5,450.03 

.79 

i 

1  Includes  cost  of  letting  annual  contracts  for  supplies. 

2  Shows  the  relation  of  the  total  maintenance  cost  to  the  value  of  goods  handled  as  set  out  in  the  pre- 
ceding table. 

a  Closed  Mar.  31, 1917. 

*  Increase  due  to  cost  of  transferring  employees  to  Chicago  and  Washington  and  expenses  for  con- 
duct!*1 g  the  annual  letting  during  the  months  of  May  and  June. 


INDEX  TO  STATISTICAL  TABLES. 


A. 

Page 

Able-bodied  male  adults 121 

Account,  commissioner's,  1917 205 

Agricultural  lands 121 

acreage 121 

cultivated  by  Indians 121 

irrigation 171 

Allotments: 

acreage  allotted 86 

acreage  unallotted 86 

approved 174 

Indians  without 78 

irrigation 171 

leased 121,126 

number 86 

number  made 1~4 

patents  in  fee  issued 176 

removal  of  restrictions  on  sale  lands 179 

timber  on 165 

under  ditch 171 

used  for  grazing 126 

Allottees: 

living  on  reservations 78 

lands  cultivated  by 121 

sale  of  inherited  lands  by 175 

Area  of  Indian  lands 86,89 

B. 

Basketry 109 

Beadwork 109 

Births 133 

Blanket  weaving 109 

Buildings: 

erected 181 

under  construction 182 


Cattle.    See  Stock. 

Churches  among  Indians 81 

Church-going  Indians 81 

Citizen  Indians 81 

Clothing,  citizen  Indians  who  wear 81 

Commissioner's  account,  1917 205 

Competency  certificates  issued 179 

Crimes  by  Indians  and  whites 81 

Crops 116, 171 

See  also  Products. 

D. 

Deaths 133 

Disbursements 206 

Disease 133 

Indians  examined  for 133 

Dress,  citizen  Indians  who  wear 81 


E. 

Page. 

Employees  in  Indian  Service: 

female 199 

male 199 

miscellaneous  field 203 

Office  of  Indian  Affairs 69.205 

recapitulation 205 

school  and  agency 199 

Employment  of  Indians 130 

wages  earned 116, 130 

F. 

Farming  by  Indians 121 

crops  raised 116, 171 

See  also  Agricultural. 

Farms: 

demonstration 162 

experimentation 163 

Federal  supervision,  Indians  under 78 

Fishing 109 

Five  Civilized  Tribes: 

incomes 119 

population 69, 75 

production,  minerals  and  royalty 180 

removal  restrictions  and  disposal  lands . .  179 

tribal  funds  in  Oklahoma  banks 210 

Forestry.     See  Timber. 

Freedmen 69,75, 179 

Full  blood,  populations 70 

Fnnds: 

in  bank,  individual 194 

in  treasury,  tribal 194 

Five  Civilized  Tribes,  in  banks 210 

treaty  liabilities,  United  States  to  Indian  208 

tribes 210 

trust,  interest  on 116 

payments  made 116 

tribal,  pro  rata  shares  paid 210 

JSee  also  Moneys. 

G. 

Grazing 126 

acreage  used  by  Indians 126 

lands,  area 126 

leased 126 

H. 

Hospitals 138 

capacity 138 

patients  treated 138 

Housing  of  Indians 133 

families  living  in  houses 133 

families  living  in  tents,  tepees 133 

213 


214 


COMMISSIONED   OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


I. 


Implements  belonging  to  Indians,  value —  194 

Incomes  of  Indian  tribes 116 

Industries,  native 109, 116 

Inherited  land: 

patents  issued. . .....; 176 

sale 176 

Irrigated  lands: 

cultivated  by  Indians 171 

cultivated  by  whites 171 

leased 171 

Irrigation: 

areas  irrigable 168 

expenditures 168 

lands  cultivated. . . T 171 

miles  of  ditches  on  reservations 171 

projects,  area  under 168 

Issues  to  Indians: 

miscellaneous  supplies 116, 141 

rations 116, 141 

L. 

Labor,  Indian  moneys,  proceeds  from 116 

Lace  making 110 

Lands: 

agricultural 121 

area 86 

assigned  to  mission  organizations  tem- 
porarily.   108 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 194 

cultivated 121 

grazing 126 

patented  to  missionary  organizations 108 

proceeds  of  sales 116, 206 

receipts  and  disbursements,  1917 206 

removal  of  restrictions 179 

sales 175 

See  also  Grazing,  Inherited,  Irrigation, 
Leases,  Mineral,  Reservations,  Timber. 


allotted  lands 121,126 

income  from 116, 121, 126 

irrigated  lands 171 

mining 180 

triballands 121,126 

Liabilities,  treaty,  of  United  States  to  Indian 
tribes 116,208 

Liquor: 

sale  to  Indians;   convictions  and  sen- 
tences       164 

seizures  made 164 

suppression 164 

Live  stock.    See  Stock. 

Logging.    See  Timbers. 

M. 

Marriages : 

legal 81 

plural 81 

tribal  custom 81 

Mineral  lands: 

leased 180 

production  and  royalty 180 

Missionaries  among  Indians,  number 81 

Missionary  organizations: 

lands  assigned  for  temporary  use 108 

lands  patented  to 108 

Moneys,  individual  Indian 194 

See  also  Funds. 


N. 
Noncompetents,  sale  of  lands  of. 


Page. 
175 


O. 

Office  Indian  Affairs: 

employees 69, 205 

work  and  force  since  1899  compared 69 

Oil,  production 180 


Patents  in  lee 176 

applications  for 176 

Indians  under  Federal  jurisdiction  hold-  • 

ing 78 

issued  missionary  organizations 108 

issued  to  Indians 176 

Population 69,116,145 

Pottery 109 

Poultry.    See  Stock. 

Products.  See  Crops. 

Property: 

individual 194 

tribal 194 

Government,  valuation 190 

Q. 

Quapaw,  removal  restrictions  from  disposal 

lands 179 

R. 

Rations: 

Indians  receiving 141 

value  of  those  issued 141 

Reservations: 

areas  unallotted 86,89 

authority  for  establishing 89 

See  also  Lands. 

Restrictions  on  sale  lands,  removal 179 

S. 

Sales  of  land: 

noncompetent  sales 175 

inherited-land  sales 175 

Sanatoria 138 

Sawmills 165 

Schools: 

appropriations  for,  since  1876 162 

attendance,  1917 152 

attendance,  1877  to  1917.-. 161 

capacity  and  enrollment 152 

children  eligible  to  attend 145 

children  ineligible  to  attend 145 

children  in  school 145 

Indians  of  school  age 145 

population 145 

recapitulation 151 

Sheep  raising 184 

Stock: 

belonging  to  Indians 184 

milch  cows,  number  of  families  using 133 

purchased 184 

slaughtered 184 

sold H6,184 

tribal 184,185 

Stock-raising  industry 126 


COMMISSIONER    OF   INDIAN   AFFAIRS. 


215 


T. 

Timber:  Page. 

acreage 165 

belonging  to  Indians,  value 165, 194 

cut,  value 116, 165 

cut,  quantity  and  value 165 

on  allotments 165 

on  unallotted  lands 165 

quantity  and  stumpage  value 165 

Tents,  tepees.    See  Housing. 

Trachoma 133 

Treaties,  obligations  arising  from 116, 208 

Trust  fund.    See  Funds. 

Tuberculosis...  133 


V. 


Valuation  of  property.    See  Property. 

Vital  statistics 

Voting  Indians 


Page. 

.      133 

81 


W. 


See  Employment. 
Wagons  belonging  to  Indians,  value . 
Warehouses,  Indians: 

volume  of  business 

expense 


194 

211 
£211 


O 


