■& 4£-  » 


22101570028 


f R • HRT 


v “K.HW. 


t 


\ ' ‘ ^r\  ‘ 

4 • ' 


i 

| 


% 


Japanese 


smokers. 


THE 


SEVEN  SISTERS 


POPULAR  HISTORY  OP  THE  SEVEN  PREVAILING 
NARCOTICS  OF  THE  WORLD. 


DIRECTOR  OP  THE  METROPOLITAN  SCHOLASTIC  MUSEUM. 


“ 1 How  many  are  you,  then  ? ’ said  I. 

' 0 Master,  we  are  seven.’  ” 

Wordsworth. 


To  ro-create  lor  man,  whate’er 
Was  lost  in  Paradise." 

Southev's  TnAEAni. 


LONDON: 

JAMES  BLACKWOOD,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


OF 


BY 


M.  C.  COOIE 


[ The  right  of  Translation  is  reserved .] 


fcF  /COo 


jliHfdnrn. 


TO  ALL  LOVERS  OF  TOBACCO,  IN  ALL  PARTS  OF  THE  WORLD, 
JUVENILE  AND  SENILE,  MASCULINE  AND  FEMININE ; 

AND  TO  ALL'  ABSTAINERS, 

VOLUNTARY  AND  INVOLUNTARY— 

TO  ALL  OPIOPHA5I,  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD, 
WHETHER  EXPERIENCING  THE  PLEASURES,  OR  PAINS 
OF  THE  SEDUCTIVE  DRUG— 

TO  ALL  HASCHISCHANS,  EAST  AND  WEST, 
IN  WHATEVER  FORM  THEY  CHOOSE 
TO  WOO  THE  SPIRIT  OF  DREAMS— 

TO  ALL  BUYEROS,  MALAYAN  OR  CHINESE, 
WHETHER  THEIR  SIRI-BOXES  ARE  FULL,  OR  EMPTY— 

TO  ALL  COQUEROS,  WHITE  OR  SWARTHY, 
FROM  THE  BASE  TO  THE  SUMMIT 
OF  THE  MIGHTY  CORDILLERAS— 

TO  ALL  VOTARIES  OF  STRAMONIUM  AND  HENBANE, 
HIGHLANDER,  OR  LOWLANDER— 

AND 

TO  ALL  SWALLOWERS  OF  AMANITA, 
EITHER  IN  SIBERIA  OR  ELSEWHERE— 

THESE  PAGES  COME  GREETING 
WITH  THE  BEST  WISHES 

OF  THEIR  OBEDIENT  SERVANT, 


J3ke  ^fluikat 


1 


Wellcome  Library 
for  the  History 
and  Understanding 
of  Medicine 


PREFATORY  PREMONITION. 


“A  certain  miller  was  much  annoyed  by  a 
goblin,  who  used  to  come  and  set  his  mill  at 
work  at  night  when  there  was  no  grain  to  be  , 
ground,  greatly  to  the  danger  of  the  machinery, 
so  he  desired  a person  to  watch.  This  person, 
however,  always  fell  asleep,  but  once  woke  up 
from  a nap  time  enough  to  see  the  mill  in  full 
operation,  a blazing  fire,  and  the  goblin  himself, 
a huge  hairy  being,  sitting  by  the  side  thereof. 
Pat  s yer  name  ? ’ said  the  Highlander. 
Ourisk,  said  the  unwelcome  guest;  c and  what 
is  yours  ? ‘ Myself,’  was  the  reply  ; ‘ her  nain- 

sell/  The  goblin  now  went  quietly  to  sleep,  and 
the  Highlander,  taking  a shovel  of  hot  coals, 
hung  them  into  the  hairy  lap  of  the  goblin,  who 
was  instantly  in  a blaze.  Out  ran  the  monster  to 


VI 


PREFATORY  PREMONITION. 


his  companions,  making  as  much  noise  as  he 
could.  ‘ Well,’  said  they, ‘ who  set  you  on  fire  ?’ 

< Myself,’  said  the  unlucky  monster.  c Well,  then, 
you  must  put  it  out  yourself,’  was  the  consoling 
rejoinder.” 

Some  of  my  readers  may  arrive  at  the  con- 
clusion, that  I,  like  the  Ourisk,  have  trespassed 
upon  other  people’s  property,  and  ground  my  corn 
at  their  milk  Let  it  not  be  assumed,  on  my 
account,  inasmuch  as  I do  not  myself  make  that 
assumption,  that  I have  journeyed  from  Cornhill 
to  Cathay,  in  search  of  those  who  habituate 
themselves  to  the  indulgences  herein  set  forth. 
Others  have  laboured,  and  I have  eaten  of  the 
fruits  of  their  labours.  Travellers  numberless 
have  contributed  to  furnish  my  table,  in  some 
instances,  without  even  thanks  for  their  pains. 
This  is  the  way  of  the  world,  and  I am  not  a 
whit  better  than  my  neighbours.  Let  it,  there- 
fore, be  understood,  that  I make  no  pretensions 
to  aught  beyond  the  form  in  which  these 
numerous  contributions  are  now  presented  to  the 
reader.  The  tedium  of  wading  through  volume 
after  volume  in  search  of  information  on  these 


PREFATORY  PREMONITION. 


VII 


subjects  has  been  performed  for  him,  and  com- 
pacted together  into  a pocket  companion,  saving, 
thereby,  to  him,  a large  amount  of  trouble,  and 
a small  amount  of  vexation.  Private  corre- 
spondence has  furnished  a portion  of  the  infor- 
mation. Those  who  may  recognise  my  own 
poaching  pranks  upon  their  domains  may  throw 
coals  of  fire  upon  my  lap,  and  leave  “Myself”  to 
extinguish  the  flame. 

Herein  the  reader  will  find  only  a popular 
history  of  the  most  important  Narcotics  indulged 
in,  and  the  customs  connected  with  that  indulgence. 
Mere  statistical  details  have  as  much  as  possible 
been  avoided,  and  those  calculated  to  interest  the 
more  matter-of-fact  reader  added  in  a tabulated 
form,  as  an  appendix.  The  majority  of  these 
tables  have  been  compiled  from  official  documents, 
trade  circulars,  or  commercial  returns,  and  care 
has  been  taken  to  render  them  correct  up  to  the 
period  of  their  dates.  In  this  department  I am 
largely  indebted  to  the  valuable  assistance  of  P.  L. 
Simmonds,  Esq.,  F.S.S.,  to  whom  I thus  tender 
my  thanks. 

Those  who  are  desirous  of  seeing  specimens  of 


vm 


PREFATORY  PREMONITION. 


the  narcotics  named,  in  the  following  pages,  can 
visit  either  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  Botanic 
Gardens  at  Kew,  the  East  India  House  Museum, 
the  Food  Department  in  the  gallery  of  the  South 
Kensington  Museum,  or  the  Industrial  Museum 
in  the  gallery  of  the  central  transept  of  the  Crystal 
Palace,  in  each  of  which  they  will  meet  with  some 
of  the  articles  named,  though  in  none  of  them  will 
they  discover  all.  In  the  former  two  are  illustra- 
tions of  the  opium  manufacture,  and  at  Kensington 
an  interesting  series  of  tobaccos,  and  other  articles 
connected  with  the  indulgence  therein,  and  also 
with  opium-smoking  in  China,  together  with  some 
of  the  tobacco  substitutes  and  sophistications. 
Hone  of  these  collections  are  so  complete  as  they 
might  be.  Public  museums  of  this  kind  have 
every  facility  for  doing  more  to  instruct  the  public 
on  the  common  things  of  every-day  life : why  they 
do  not  accomplish  this,  is  as  much  a fault,  perhaps, 
of  the  public  as  of  themselves.  There  are  hopes, 
however,  to  be  entertained  that  one,  at  least,  of 
these  institutions  will  exhibit,  in  a complete  and 
collected  form,  the  principal  narcotics  and  their 

substitutes. 

Why  I should  have  chosen  such  a title  for  my 


PREFATORY  PREMONITION.  ix 

volume,  and  wherefore  invested  it  with  a legend, 
is  matter  of  little  importance.  It  was  a fancy  of 
my  own,  and  if  any  think  fit  to  quarrel  with  it, 
they  may  do  so,  without  disturbing  my  peace  of 
mind.  The  reply  of  the  Ourisk  to  his  companions, 
as  to  who  set  him  on  fire,  was,  “ Myself.” 

Parents  seldom  baptize  their  children  with  a 
name  pleasing  to  all  their  friends  and  relatives, 
yet  the  child  manages  to  get  through  the  world 
with  it,  and — dies  at  last. 

M.  C.  C. 


Lambeth. 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  I. — Somewhat  Fabulous.  page 

The  Seven  Sleepers  of  Ephesus ; Legend  of  the  Seven  Sisters  of 
Sleep ; Laureates  of  Sleep  ; Necessity  of  Sleep  ; Pleasures  of 
Sleep  ; Sanctity  of  Sleep  ; The  “ Last  Sleep  of  Argyle Death 
of  Sleeping  Duncan;  Desdemona  and  Othello  ; Drowsiness, 
fatal  alike  to  Devotion  and  Instruction 1 

Chapter  II. — The  Sisters  of  Old. 

Hemp  amongst  the  Scythians ; Intoxicating  vapours  of  the  Massa- 
geta: ; the  Nepenthes  of  Homer ; the  Secret  of  Egyptian  Thebes  ; 

The  Poppy  of  the  Ancients  ; Secret  Poisoning  of  Aratus  of 
Sicyon ; The  Acts  of  Locusta ; Death  of  Britannicus ; The 
Delphic  Oracle;  Arabian  Nights;  Another  Nepenthes; 
Antony’s  Retreat ; Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand ; Something 
unknown  i n 


Chapter  III.— The  “ Wond’rous  Weed.” 

Legendary  origin  of  Tobacco ; Use  in  Hispaniola ; Names  for 
Tobacco ; First  Discovery  by  Europeans  ; Introduction  into 
France,  Tuscany,  Spain  and  Portugal,  England ; Complaints 
against  it ; Smoking  taught  to  the  Dutch ; Studenten  Kneipe ; 
Tobacco  in  the  East;  Progress  in  England;  Opposition  by 
James  I.  and  other  monarchs  in  Russia,  Italy,  Persia,  Turkey 
Tuscany,  &c. ; Raleigh  and  Queen  Elizabeth;  Lovers  of 
Tobacco ; The  Distribution  of  the  Tobacco  Plant ; Consump- 
tion of  Tobacco  ; Curious  use  of  the  Flowers;  Tobacco  Poison ; 
Antidote  to  Arsenic ; Finance  questions ; Religious  prohibi- 
tions ; King  J ames’a  “ Counterblaste.” 


Chapter  IV. — The  Cabinet  of  Cloudeand. 

A Premier ; Lord  Mayor  Staines;  Smoking  the  Plague;  A First 
Cigar;  Infant  Smokers  at  Vizagapatam;  Burtnah;  Female 
Smokers  in  China;  Smokers  in  Persia,  Siam,  Japan,  Nicaragua 
on  the  Amazon,  in  New  Guinea,  Havana,  Manilla ; The 
Linua  of  Johore;  Signor  Calistro’s  Story;  Cigars  on  the 
Orinoco ; In  Chili ; The  Court  of  Montezuma ; Panama  Smoke- 
blowers;  Rocky  Mountain  Indians;  Salvation  Yeo;  Yemen 
Smokers  ; Smoking  in  Austria ; Turkish  Cloudland ; Defeat  of 
. apoleon ; Curious  Legend;  Old  Epigram;  Cost  of  Puffing - 

inTheCStateCU  aUOnS ! Smoking  in  New  York;  Cigar-makiug 

a 68 38 


CONTENTS. 


xii 


Chapter  Y. — I'ipeology.  page 

Philosophy  in  a pipe  ; St.  Omer  pipes ; English  pipes ; Curious 
Indian  pipe ; Turkish  howls  ; Meerschaum ; Massa  bowls  ; 
Amber  mouth-pieces;  Origin  of  amber;  Modern  Egyptian 
pipes ; The  Shibuk  ; The  Nargeeleh  ; The  Gozeh  ; Egoodu  of 
the  Zulus;  Hubble-bubble  of  the  Delagoans;  Kaffir  bowls; 
Sailors’  pipes;  Bamboo  pipes;  Winna  of  British  Guiana; 
Shell  pipes ; Chinese  pipes ; Metallic  pipes  ; Ode  to  a Tobacco- 
pipe  • Red  pipe-stone  quarry ; Stone  pipes  of  Rocky  Mountains  ; 

The  “ Calumet ;”  The  Sultan’s  pipe-bearer  ; Wooden  pipes; 
Modern  pipeology ; Pipes  in  Australia • • • 


Chapter  VI. — Sniffing  and  Sneeshin. 

The  Eranciscan  of  Sterne;  Etymology  of  Snuff;  Pouncet-boxes ; 
The  “ Niopo”  of  the  Ottomacs ; The  “ Curupa”  of  the  Omaguas  ; 
Snuffing  in  Iceland;  Zulu  Calabashes;  Early  Snuff-taking 
Apparatus;  Origin  of  the  “ Mull ;”  Magnificent  Mull;  Mon- 
grabin  Cases ; Strong  Snuff  of  the  Sahara ; Plugging  and 
Ouidding;  Snuff- taking  Estimates;  Snuff  dipping;  Death  in 
the  Box ; Adulterated  Snuff ; Snuff  Scents ; Substitutes  for 
Snuff  - Lead  Poison;  Advice  Gratis;  Gold  Snuff-boxes ; Amber 
Snuff-boxes;  Boxes  of  Hard-shelled  Seeds;  Chinese  Flasks; 
Chinese  Snuffing;  A Snuff-stick;  Birch-bark  Boxes ; Sco  ch 
Snuff-boxes;  Introduction  of  Snuffing;  Varieties  of  Snu  « 
Hardham’s  37  ; Gossip  on  Sneezing ; Pseudo-philosophy  of  a 
Sneeze 


73 


Chapter  VII.— -Quid  pro  Quo. 

Eccentricities  of  Taste;  Miles  of  Pig-tail;  Tobacco  Md  Tea  Calcu- 
lations- Chewing  Ladies  of  Paraguay;  Tchuktehi  Chewers , 
Tobacco  and  Nation  Quids;  Taking  the  “ Bucca ;”  Chewing 
Snuff-  Quidding  in  Washington;  Dignified  Proceedings  in  the 
Senate  House ; The  Kou  of  the  Hottentots;  Angelica  Root; 
Chewing  Dulse ; A Quidding  Monkey  

Chapter  VIII.— A Race  of  Pretenders. 

Adulterated  Tobacco  ; Substitutes;  Coltsfoot ; Milfoil ; Rhubarb; 
Bo<rbean-  Sage;  Mountain  Tobacco;  Cossena,  Sumach, 
Bearberry ; Maize  Husks;  Pimento ; CasoariUa  B^k ; Poly- 

Jon™"  wild  ^gga-,culen;  Purplnok ; Rope- 
smoking Chaplain ; FarewcU  to  Tobacco  

Chapter  IX.— “Mash  Allah  ’’—The  Gift. 

What  is  Opium?  Indian  Cultivation;  The  Nushtur;  < Cutting  the 
n , . Collecting  the  Juice;  Use  of  the  Refuse;  Fo.t , 

Bofsa-  Poppy  Trash;  Pussewali  and  Lewah  ; Different  Forms 
of  Preparation  ; Chandu ; Its  Preparation  in  Singapore  ; Sm 
aular  Workman ; Adulterations ; Tye  and  Samshing ; Egyptian 
Conserves  "Cordials  Modes  of  taking  Opium ; Immense  Doses ; 
Opiumin’the  « Fei  Country;”  The  Crow  and  the  Pigeon;  ^ 
Estimate  of  Opium  Consumption  


CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


Chapter  X. — The  Gates  of  Paradise.  tage 

Paradise  of  the  Moslems  ; Siamese  Opium-pipes  ; Chinese  Opium- 
pipe  ; Smoking  the  Drug  ; Its  Effects  ; An  Old  Malay  ; Opium 
Experiences ; Dr.  Madden’s  Trial ; The  Habit  in  China ; Dr. 
Medhurst’s  Keport ; Victims  at  Slianghae ; Percentage  of 
Smokers  ; Amongst  the  Shikhs ; Influence  on  those  engaged  in 
its  preparation ; Chinese  petition ; Results  in  China  ; Opium- 
eating poultry  132 

Chapter  XI. — Revels  and  Reveries. 

Mahomet’s  Ascent  into  Heaven ; Mental  Effects  of  Opium ; An 
Opium-eater’s  Reverie  ; At  the  Opera ; Peeping  into  the  Stores 
at  Hong-Kong ; Opium-shops  ; Papan  Mera  ; Stores  in  Singa- 
pore ; Opium  in  China ; Remarks  of  M.  Abbd  Hue  149 

Chapter  XII. — Pandemonium. 

Running  amol;  in  Java — in  Singapore — in  Batavia;  Pains  of 
opium ; Piranesi’s  dream  ; Confessions  of  crocodile  visions ; 
Horrible  dreams  ; Fever  phantasmagoria  of  “ Alton  Locke 
A fable;  Chinese  opium- smoker ; Mustapha  Shatoor;  The 
Theriakis  ; Heu  Naetse’s  opinion;  Experiences  of  a surgeon  at 
Penang ; Testimonies  of  Abbd  Hue  ; Ho  King  Shan ; Oppen- 
heim  ; Dr.  Madden  ; Dr.  Oxley;  Dr.  Little;  Opium  and  In- 
surance ; Another  side  of  the  question  163 


Chapter  XIII. — Opium:  Morals. 

Examination  of  Criminals  at  Singapore  ; Income  and  expenditure  ; 
Opium-smoking  and  crime ; Examination  of  transports  ; Drun- 
kenness compared  with  opium-smoking ; De  Quincey’s  com- 
parison ; Abuse  of  opium  the  source  of  poverty ; The  diseased 
poor  of  Singapore ; Their  consumption  of  opium ; Cooly 
smokers ; Difficulty  of  discarding  the  habit  of  opium-smoking  • 
Opinion  of  Dr.  Eatwell 

Chapter  XIV. — False  Prophets. 

Preparations  of  opium ; History  of  lettuce ; Lactucarium  ; Narcotic 
effects  of  Lettuce  ; Lacticiferous  plants  ; Dutchman’s  laudanum; 
Syrian  rue ; Sterculia  seeds ; Beah  leaves ; Adulterations  • 
Imitation  opium-balls  


Chapter  XV. — Nepenthes. 

Influence  of  climate  on  plants  ; Native  home  of  hemp ; Properties 
of  hemp-seed  ; Distribution  of  hemp;  Scythian  hemp;  Anti- 
quity of  hemp ; Churrus,  or  hemp  resin  ; Homeca ; Gunjah  ; 
Bang,  or  Guaza;  Majoon ; Haschisch ; Dawamese ; Hasch- 
asheens  and  Assassins;  Berch ; Dacha;  Hemp  in  India — in 
Egypt  > Use  of  Stimulants  


Chapter  XVI. — Gunja  at  Home. 

At  home;”  Influence  of  hemp  extract;  Intoxication;  Annihila- 
tion of  time;  Happiness;  M.  de  Saulcey’s  trial ; Extraordinary 
delusions  ; History  of  Genii ; The  Slieykli’s  jinnee ; Mr.  Lane’s 
cook  and  the  efreet ; The  captain’s  sheep ; Mansour’s  jinnee ; 
Experiments;  The  impromptu  rajah  ; The  fosterer  of  supersti- 
tion amongst  the  Arabs  1 


230 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  XVII.— Hobble-Bubble.  page 

Dakka  smoking  at  Ambriz ; Busbmen  smokers ; Curious  method  of 
the  Bechuanas  ; Egoodu  of  the  Zulus ; Snuffing  hemp ; Hubble- 
Bubble  of  the  Delagoans;  Haschishans  of  Constantine;  Gunjah 
in  India ; Predilection  of  “Young  America”  for  Bang 250 

Chapter  XVIII. — Seri  and  Pinang. 

The  Malayan  race ; Areca  palm  ; Qualities  of  nuts ; Produce  of 
trees  ; a mi  n at  production  ; Preparation  ; How  used  ; Local 
names;  Chinese  consumption;  Cinghalese  instruments;  Con- 
firmed habits ; Estimates  of  consumption ; The  palm  in 
Sumatra;  Substitutes  in  the  Philippines— in  Ceylon Poetical  ^ 

votaries  

Chapter  XIX. — Under  the  Palms. 

The  betel  peppers ; Their  cultivation ; Chenai  of  Penang ; Poly- 
nesian ava ; Chewing  cava  at  Tongataboo  ; Pipula  moola ; 
Cfambir  preparation ; “ Kutt,”  or  cutch  ; Story  of  an  Indian 
“kutt”  maker;  Areca  cutch;  Statistics  of  the  catechu  and  ^ 

gambir  trade 

Chapter  XX. — Chewing  the  Coon. 

In  Burmali;  The  Manilla  doctor;  Yankee  adventure;  Teeth 
colouring  properties  ; Custom  in  Sumatra ; Betel-stand  of  the 
Sultan  of  Moco-moco  ; Of  the  Sultan  of  Sooloo  ; Betel  a correc- 
tive of  over-doses  of  opium ; Tagali  maidens  ; A Tagal  wedding ; 
Making  the  buy  os  ; Mahomedan  abstinence;  Ofter  to  Lady 

Baffles “ 

Chapter  XXI.— Our  Ladt  of  Yongas. 

Coca  under  the  Incas  ; Origin  of  the  name ; Early  history;  The 
coca  shrub ; The  harvest ; Estimated  production  ; Estimated 
consumption  and  consumers;  Spanish  protection  ; Method  ot 
using  the  coca;  How  to  enjoy  it;  Stimulating  effects;  Coca 
tea-parties;  Confirmed  coqueros;  The  virtues  of  coca  - The 
vices  of  coca;  Power  of  allaying  hunger;  Questionable  nutri- 
tive properties  ; Devotion  of  Peruvians  to  it ; Narcotio  rliodo-  ^ 

dendrons *" 

Chapter  XXII.— Whitewash  and  Clay. 

Lime-eating  at  Paria;  Among  the  Guajiros ; White  mud  of  the 
Kiver  Mackenzie  ; Edible  clay  of  the  Guanos  and  Ott  omacs  , O 
Banco  • Caouac  of  Western  Africa;  Tanaampo  and  ampo  of 
Sa;’ Edible  stone  of  New  Caledonia;  Lime  at  » 
Lcche  de  llauka  of  Quito  ; Kussiau  stone 

and  bergbutter  of  Germany  ; Bergmelil  of  Sweden , 1 ossil 
infusoria^-  MM.  Cloquet  and  Breschets  experiments  i Bucaro 
Sy  of  Portugal  and  Spain  ; Bahaa  of  La  Paz ; Chaco  of  ^ 
Cliiquisaca ; Bed  earth  of  Sikkim •• 

Chapter  XXIII.— Precious  Metals. 

Wherein  metals  are  precious;  Cumulative  action ‘ 

poisons  ; Use  of  corrosive  sublimate ; A”em°?“lCd  °bac£0  of 
in  Canada;  Benefits  claimed  for  it;  Arsemated 

China  ; Effects  of  Arsenic  ; Uses  of  Arsenic  at  home 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


Chapter  XXIV. — Datcra  and  Co.  page 

Solanaceous  plants  and  their  properties  ; The  thorn-apple  of  India ; 

The  Florispondio  of  Peru ; Its  superstitious  uses ; Indulgence 
therein  in  New  Granada;  Effects  of  thorn-apple  on  the  Jamaica 
soldiers ; Origin  of  Belladonna ; Its  effects  as  a poison  ; Influence 
on  the  brain ; A family  beneath  the  spell ; Henbane  and  its 
effects;  Jealousy  caused  and  cured ; Foxglove  leaves 323 

Chapter  XXV. — The  Exile  of  Siberia. 

Kamtschatdale  prospects ; Poisonous  fungi ; The  amanita-eater  in 
Eussia ; Fatal  effects  of  amanita ; Description  ; Preparation  of 
the  fungus ; Method  of  indulging  therein ; Effects  produced ; 

Its  singular  properties;  “Sucking  the  monkey;”  Narcotic 
symptoms  of  poisonous  fungi ; Narcotism  of  puff-ball  ........  336 

Chapter  XXVI. — Odds  and  Ends. 

Gathering  the  crumbs  ; Smoke  vision  of  life  ; The  Canadian  herb 
Legend  of  St.  Betsy ; Two  Ottoman  swains ; Story  of  Abou 
Gallioun ; Chinese  designations ; Smoke  doth  follow  the  fairest ; 

The  broken  pipe  of  Saladin ; Clerical  authority ; The  Angel  of 
Sleep  and  the  Angel  of  Death 346 

Appendix. 

Tables  of  chronology  of  tobacco ; Of  consumption  of  tobacco ; 
Duties  on  importation  of  tobacco ; Profits  of  the  French  Kegie ; 
Consumption  of  tobacco  in  Britain  ; Consumption  of  tobacco  in 
the  Austrian  Empire ; Exports  from  the  United  States  in  1855  ; 
Disposition  of  the  growth  of  the  United  States  in  1840  and 
1850  ; Exports  from  America  in  decennial  periods ; Analysis  of 
tobacco ; Ketum  of  opium  exports ; Income  of  East  India  Com- 
pany from  opium  monopoly  ; Opium  statistics  of  Great  Britain  ; 
Analysis  of  opium  ; Prisoners  sentenced  to  the  House  of  Cor- 
rection, and  their  opium  habits ; Opium  consumed  in  the 
Singapore  Hospital ; Keports  of  opium  smoking  in  China ; 
Professor  Johnston’s  estimates  ; Synopsis  of  narcotics  with  their 
substitutes  357 


THE  SEVEN  SISTEES  OF  SLEEP. 


CHAPTER  I. 

SOMEWHAT  FABULOUS. 

“ Oh  sleep ! it  is  a gentle  thing. 

Beloved  from  pole  to  pole.” — Coleridge. 

During  the  Decian  persecution,  seven  inhabitants 
of  Ephesus  retired  to  a cave,  six  were  persons  of 
some  consequence,  the  seventh  was  their  servant ; 
from  hence  they  despatched  the  attendant  occa- 
sionally to  purchase  food  for  them.  Decius,  who 
like  most  tyrants  possessed  long  ears,  hearing  of 
this,  ordered  the  mouth  of  the  cave  to  he  stopped 
up  while  the  fugitives  were  sleeping.  After  a 
lapse  of  some  hundred  years,  a part  of  the  masonry 
at  the  mouth  of  the  cave  falling,  the  light  flowing 
in  awakened  them.  Thinking,  as  Rip  Van  Winkle 
also  thought,  that  they  had  enjoyed  a good  night’s 
rest,  they  despatched  their  servant  to  buy  provi- 
sions. All  appeared  to  him  strange  in  Ephesus- 
and  a whimsical  dialogue  took  place,  the  citizens 
accusing  him  of  having  found  hidden  treasure  he 
persisting  that  he  offered  the  current  coin  of  the 
realm.  At,  length,  the  attention  of  the  emperor 
was  excited,  and  he  went,  in  company  with  the 
bishop,  to  visit  them.  They  related  their  story  and 
shortly  after  expired. 

Thus  much  chroniclers  narrate  of  the  seven 
sleepers  of  Ephesus.  All  are  not  agreed  as  to  the 
place  where  this  extraordinary  event  occurred.  It 


2 THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

has  been  assigned  also  to  the  “ mountain  of  the 
seven  sleepers,”  near  Tersous.  It  may  have  been 
claimed  by  the  citizens  of  twenty  other  ancient 
cities,  for  aught  we  can  tell:  Faith  removes 

mountains.  But  the  number  remains  intact. 
Mahomet  wrote  of  seven  heavens — no  Mahometan 
takes  the  trouble  to  believe  in  less.  The  “wise 
men  were  but  seven  there  were  seven  poets  of 
the  age  of  Theocritus ; seven  of  the  daughters  of 
Pleione  elevated  to  the  back  of  Taurus ; and 

“ There  were  seven  pillars  of  gothic  mould, 

In  Chillon’s  dungeon,  dark  and  old  j” 

and  wherefore  not  seven  sleepers  at  Ephesus  or 
Tersous  ; or  seven  sisters  of 

« Nature’s  sweet  restorer,  balmy  sleep  1” 


Although  not  to  be  found  in  Livy,  or  Hesiod  or 
Ovid  or  any  of  the  fathers  ot  history  01  fable, 
there  is  a legend  of  the  latter  seven,  which  may  be 
considered  in  the  light  of  an  abstract  of  title  ot 
certain  seven  sisters,  to  be  included  in  the  list  o 
immortal  sevens  who  have  honoured  the  earth  by 

making  it  their  abode.  . 

It  is’  many  thousands  of  years  since  bleep 
received  from  her  parent,  as  a dowry  of  love,  an 
empire,  unequalled  in  extent  by  any  other  which 
the1  earth  ever  acknowledged.  Her  domain  em- 
braced “ the  round  world,  and  they  that  dwell 
therein.”  From  pole  to  pole,  and  from  ocean  to 
ocean,  she  swayed  her  sceptre.  And  it  was 
assigned  her  that  man  should  devote  one-tlnrd  of 
his  existence  in  paying  homage  at  the  foot  of  1 e 
throne.  All  monarchs  from  Ninue 1 to  ^apoteon 
have  done  her  honour.  All  ladies  from  Rhodope 
to  Cleopatra,  and  from  Helen  to  Clotlnldc,  have 
admitted  her  claim  to  ascendency.  And  all  serfs. 


SOMEWHAT  FABULOUS.  3 

and  all  captives,  from  Epictetus  to  Abd-el-Kader, 
have  forgotten  their  bonds  and  their  captivity,  and 
bowed,  on  an  equality  with  kings,  beneath  her  nod. 

Sleep  had  seven  sisters.  Envious  of  her  throne 
and  jealous  of  her  power,  they  complained  bitterly 
that  no  heritage,  and  no  government,  and  no 
homage  was  theirs.  Then  they  strove  to  deceive 
men,  and  counterfeit  the  blessings  which  Sleep 
conferred,  and  thus  to  steal  the  affections  of  her 
subjects  from  the  universal  monarch,  and  transfer 
them  to  themselves.  Herein  they  toiled  and  in- 
vented many  strange  devices;  and  though  they 
beguiled  many,  these  all  fell  back  again  to  the 
allegiance  they  had  sworn  of  old. 

‘‘  0 my  sisters  !”  said  Sleep,  “wherefore  do  you 
stiive  to  instil  discontent  into  the  hearts  of  my 
subjects  and  breed  discord  in  my  dominions  ? 
Know  ye  not,  that  all  mortals  must  fain  obey  me, 
or  die  ? Your  enchantments  cannot  diminish  my 
votaries,  and  only  serve  to  increase  my  power.  And 
men,  who  for  a while  are  cheated  of  the  blessings 
I confei,  woo  me  at  last  with  increased  ardour 
and  with  songs  of  gratitude  fall  at  my  feet/’  ’ 
Morphina  first  replied— 

. “ We  know  full  well,  proud  sister,  how  wide 
is  your  empire,  and  how  great  your  power,  ’but  we 
too  must  reign,  and  our  kingdoms  will  soon  coim- 
pare  with  yours.  Let  us  but  share  with  you  in 
ruling  the  world,  or  we  will  rule  it  for  ourselves.” 
‘Sisters!  let  us  be  at  peace  with  each  other 
Is  there  not  two-thirds  of  the  life  of  man  free  from 
my  control  ? Why  should  you  not  steal  from  iron- 
handed  care  enough  of  power  to  make  you  queens 
as  potent,  or  little  less  than  me  ? My  minister  of 
dreams  shall  aid  you  by  his  skill,  and  visions  more 
gorgeous,  and  illusions  more  splendid,  than  ever 
visited  a mortal  beneath  my  sway,  shall  attend  the 
ecstacies  ot  your  subjects.” 

B 2 


4 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP] 

The  sisters  were  reconciled  henceforth.  And 
anon  thousands  and  millions  of  Tartar  tribes  and 
Mongolian  hordes  welcomed  Morphina,  and  blessed 
her  for  her  soothing  charms  and  benignant  rule — 
blessed  her  for  her  theft  from  the  hours  of  sorrow 
and  care — blessed  her  for  the  marvels  of  dreams 
the  most  extravagant,  and  visions  the  most  gor- 
geous that  ever  arose  in  the  brain  of  dweller  in  the 
glowing  East. 

More  extended  became  the  sway  of  the  golden- 
haired Virginia,  until  four-fifths  of  the  race  of 
mortals  burned  incense  upon  her  altars,  or  silently 
proffered  thank-offerings  from  their  hearts.  Curl- 
ing ever  upwards  from  the  hearth  of  the  Bi  iton 
and  the  forest  of  the  Brazilian— from  the  palaces 
of  Ispahan  and  the  wigwams  of  the  Missouri — 
from  the  slopes  of  the  eternal  hills  and  the  bosom 
of  the  mighty  deep,  arose  the  fragrant  odours  of 
her  votaries,  mingled  with  the  hum  of  pasans  in 

her  praise.  . 

Beneath  the  shadow  of  palms,  in  the  sultry 
regions  of  the  sun,  the  dark  impetuous  Gunja 
held  her  court.  There  did  the  sons  of  the  Ganges 
and  the  Nile,  the  Indus  and  the  Niger,  own  her 
sovereignty  5 and  there  did  the  swarthy  Hindoo 
and  the  ebon  African  hold  festivals  in  her 
honour.  And,  though  the  hardy  Norseman 

scorned  her  proffered  offices,  she  established  her 
throne  in  millions  of  ardent  and  affectionate 

llCNot  far  away,  the  red-lipped  Siraboa  raised  her 
graceful  standard  from  the  summit  of  a feathery 
palm ; and  the  islanders  of  the  Archipelago  m 
proa  and  canoe,  hastened  to  do  her  homage,  ihe 
murderous  Malay  stayed  his  uplifted  weapon,  to 
bless  her  name ; and  savage  races,  that  ne  er  bowed 

before,  fell  prostrate  at  her  feet.  . 

Honoured  by  the  Incas,  and  flattered  bj  priests 


SOMEWHAT  FABULOUS. 


5 


persecuted  by  Spanish  conquerors,  but  victorious, 
Erythroxylina  established  herself  in  the  Bolivian 
Andes  and  the  Cordilleras  of  Peru.  With  subjects  the 
most  devoted  and  faithful,  she  has  for  ages  received 
the  homage  of  a kingdom  of  enthusiastic  devotees. 

Two,.  less  favoured,  less  beautiful,  and  less 
successful  of  the  sisters,  pouting  and  repining  at 
the  good  fortune  that  had  attended  the  others, 
secluded  themselves  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
rushed  into  voluntary  exile.  Datura,  ruddy  as 
Bellona,  fled  to  the  Northern  Andes  ; and  in  those 
mountainous  solitudes  collected  a devoted  few  of 
frantic  followers,  and  established  a miniature 
court.  The  pale  and  dwarfish  Amanita,  turning 
her  back  on  sunny  lands  and  glowing  skies,  sought 
and  found  a home  and  a refuge,  a kingdom  and  a 
court,  in  the  frozen  wastes  of  Siberia. 

And.  now . in  peace  the  sisters  reign,  and  the 
world  is  divided  between  them.  When  care,  or 
woe,  or  wan  disease,  steals  for  a time  the  mortal 
from  his  allegiance  to  the  calm  and  blue-eyed 
Sleep,  then  do  the  sisters  ply  their  magic  arts  to 
win  him  back  again,  and,  by  their  soothing  in- 
fluence, lull  him  to  rest  once  more,  and  again 
unlock  the  portals  of  the  palace  of  dreams ; then 
issues  from  the  trembling  lips  the  half-heard 
murmur  of  a whispered  blessing  on  the 


In  all  times  Sleep  has  been  a fertile  theme  with 
poets  one  on  which  the  best  and  worst  has  been 


SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP.* 


•vrraius  uae  -laates  ol  the  creation:” 
especially 


and  in  this  matter 


"We  have  a vision  of  our  own. 
And  why  should  we  undo  it  ?” 


6 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


written.  All  forms  in  heaven  and  in  earth  have  sub- 
mitted themselves  to  become  similes ; and  columns 
of  adjectives  have  done  duty  in  the  service  since 
Edmund  Spenser  raised  his  House  of  Sleep,  where 

“ careless  Quiet  lyes, 

Wrapt  in  eternal  silence,  farre  from  enimyes.” 

No  monarch  has  numbered  so  many  odes  in  his 
praise,  or  had  so  many  poet  laureates  “all  for 
love.”  These,  though  not  so  long,  are  quite  as 
worthy  as  the  one  we  heard  when  George  III.  was 
no  longer  king.  Perhaps  that  same  little  tyrant, 
Love,  has  come  in  for  even  a larger  share  of  what 
some  would  call  “twaddle.”  In  the  sunny  mom 
of  youth,  these  hung  upon  our  lips,  and  dwelt  in  our 
hearts,  with  less  of  doubt  than  disturbs  their  present 
repose.  Old  age  makes  us  sleepy,  and  we  sing — 

“ O magic  sleep  ! 0 comfortable  bird, 

That  broodest  o’er  the  troubled  sea  of  the  mind 
Till  it  is  hushed  and  smooth  ! 0 unconfined 

Restraint,  imprisoned  liberty,  great  key 
To  golden  palaces,  strange  minstrelsy, 

Fountains  grotesque,  new  trees,  bespangled  caves, 

Echoing  grottoes,  full  of  tumbling  waves 
And  moonlight ; aye,  to  all  the  mazy  world 
Of  silvery  enchantments  !” — Endymion. 

“ God  gave  sleep  to  the  bad,”  said  Sadi,  ‘ in 
order  that  the  good  might  be  undisturbed.”  Yet 
to  good  and  bad  sleep  is  alike  necessary.  During 
the  hours  of  wakefulness  the  active  brain  exerts  its 
powers  without  cessation  or  rest,  and  during  sleep 
the  expenditure  of  power  is  balanced  again  by 
repose.  The  physical  energies  are  exhausted  by 
labour,  as  by  wakefulness  are  those  of  the  mind ; 
and  if ’sleep  comes  not  to  reinvigorate  the  mental 
powers,  the  overtaxed  brain  gives  way,  and  lapses 
into  melancholy  and  madness.  Men  depnv  ed  of 
rest,  as  a sentence  of  death,  have  gone,  trom  tho 
world  raving  maniacs ; and  violent  emotions  of  tho 


SOMEWHAT  FABULOUS. 


7 


mind,  without  repose,  have  so  acted  upon  the  body, 
that,  as  in  the  case  of  Marie  Antoinette,  Ludovico 
Sforza,  and  others,  their  hair  has  grown  white  in  a 
single  night- — 

“ As  men’s  have  grown  from  sudden  fears.  ” * 


Mind  and  body  alike  suffer  from  the  want  of 
sleep,  the  spirit  is  broken,  and  the  fire  of  the  ardent 
imagination  quenched.  Who  can  wonder  that 
when  disease  or  pain  has  racked  and  tortured  the 
frame,  and  prevented  a subsidence  into  a state  so 
natural  and  necessary  to  man,  he  should  have  re- 
sorted to  the  aid  of  drugs  and  potions,  whereby  to 
lull  his  pains,  and  dispel  the  care  which  has 
banished  repose,  and  woo  back  again — 


“ the  certain  knot  of.  peace, 

The  baiting  place  of  wit,  the  balm  of  woe  ; . 1 

The  poor  man’s  wealth,  the  prisoner’s  release, 

Tk’  indifferent  judge  between  the  high  and  low.” 

* A correspondent  of  the  Medical  Times  having  asked  for 
authentic  instances  of  the  hair  becoming  grey  within  the  space 
of  one  night,  Mr.  D.  F.  Parry,  Staff-Surgeon  at  Aldershott, 
transmitted  the  following  account,  of  which  he  made  memor- 
andum shortly  after  its  occurrence.  “ On  February  19,  1858, 
the  column  under  General  Franks,  in  the  south  of  Oude,  was 
engaged  with  a rebel  force  at  the  village  of  Chainda,  and  several 
prisoners  were  taken . One  of  them,  a sepoy  of  the  Bengal 
army,  was  brought  before  the  authorities  for  examination,  and  I, 
being  present,  had  an  opportunity  of  watching  from  the  com- 
mencement the  fact  I am  about  to  record.  Divested  of  his 
uniform,  and  stripped  completely  naked,  he  was  surrounded  by 
the  soldiers,  and  then  first  apparently  became  alive  to  the 
danger  of  his  position  ; he  trembled  violently,  intense  horror 
and  despair  were  depicted  in  his  countenance,  and  although  he 
answered  all  the  questions  addressed  to  him,  he  seemed  almost 
stupified  with  fear ; while  actually  under  observation,  within 
the  space  of  half-an-hour,  his  hair  became  grey  on  every  por- 
tion of  his  head,  it  having  been,  when  first  seen  by  me,  the 
glossy  jet  black  of  the  Bengalee,  aged  about  twenty-four.  The 
attention  of  the  bystanders  was  first  attracted  by  the  serieant 
whose  prisoner  he  was,  exclaiming,  ‘ He  is  turning  grey  •’  and 
7 , several  other  persons,  watched  its  progress.  Gradually 
but  decidedly,  the  change  went  on,  and  a uniform  greyish 
colour  was  completed  within  the  period  above  named.” 


8 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Leigli  Hunt  has  well  said,  “ It  is  a delicious 
moment  that  of  being  well  nestled  in  bed,  and  feel- 
ing that  you  shall  drop  gently  to  sleep.  The  good 
is  to  come,  not  past ; the  limbs  have  just  been  tired 
enough  to  render  this  remaining  in  one  posture 
delightful ; the  labour  of  the  day  is  gone — a gentle 
failure  of  the  perceptions  creeps  over  you — the 
spirit  of  consciousness  disengages  itself  once  more, 
and  with  slow  and  hushing  degrees,  like  a mother 
detaching  her  hand  from  that  of  a sleepiug  child, 
the  mind  seems  to  have  a balmy  lid  closing  oyer 
it,  like  the  eye — it  is  closed — the  mysterious  spirit 
has  gone  to  take  its  airy  rounds.” 

It  is  this  .universal  sense  of  the  blessing  of  sleep 
which  takes  hold  of  the  mind  with  such  a religious 
feeling,  that  the  appearance  of  a sleeping  form, 
whether  of  childhood  or  age,  checks  our  step,  and 
causes  us  to  breathe  softly  lest  we  disturb  their 
repose.  We  can  scarce  forbear  whispering,  while 
standing  before  the  well-known  picture  of  the 
“ Last  Sleep  of  Argyle,”  lest  by  louder  or  more  dis- 
tinct articulation,  we  should  rob  the  poor  old  man 
of  a moment  of  that  absence  of  sorrow  which  sleep 
has  brought  to  him  for  the  last  time. 

Shakespeare  has  made  the  murder  of  Duncan  to 
seem  the  more  revolting  in  that  it  was  committed 
while  he  slept.  Macbeth  himself  must  have  felt 
this  while  exclaiming — 

“ Methongbt  I heard  a voice  cry,  1 Sleep  no  more  . 

Macbeth  does  murthcr  sleep,  the  innocent  sleep  , 

Sleep,  that  knits  up  the  ravelled  sleavc  of  care, 

The  death  of  each  day’s  life,  sore  labours  bath, 

Balm  of  hurt  minds,  great  nature’s  second  course, 

Chief  nourisher  in  life’s  feast.’  ” 

Had  Desdemona  been  sent  to  her  last  account 
at  once,  when  her  lord  entered  the  room  and  kisset 
her  as  she  slept,  we  feel  that  all  our  pity  for  the 
Valous  Moor  would  have  been  turned  to  hate,  and 


SOMEWHAT  FABULOUS. 


9 


our  detestation  of  him  been  so  great  that  no  room 
bad  been  left  for  execration  of  the  villanous  Iago, 
who  now  seems  to  be  the  Mephistopheles,  the  evil 
genius,  of  the  work. 

“A  blessing,”  says  Sancho  Panza,  “ on  him  who 
first  invented  sleep ; it  wraps  a man  all  round  like 
a cloak.”  But  neither  Sancho  nor  any  one  else  will 
give  us  a blessing  if  we  suffer  ourselves  to  go  to 
sleep  in  thinking  over  it,  at  the  very  threshold  of 
our  enterprise,  and  before  indulging  in  communion 
with  the  seven  sisters  of  whom  we  have  spoken. 
It  was  a trite  remark  of  a divine  that  “ where 
drowsiness  begins,  devotion  ends,”  and  needs  appli- 
cation as  much  to  book  writers  as  to  sermon 
preachers.  Although  we  may  not  have  the  power 
to  check  an  occasional  yawn,  in  which  there  may  be 
as  much  temporal  relief  as  in  a good  sneeze,  let  us 
avoid  the  premonitory  sinking  of  the  upper  eyelids, 
by  calling  in  the  aid  of  Francesco  Berni  to  release 
us  from  the  spell  of  sleep,  and  introduce  us  to 
“the  sisters”  of  the  olden  time. 

“ Quella  diceva  cli’era  la  piu  bella 

Arte,  il  piu  bel  mestier  che  si  facesse ; 

II  letto  er’  una  veste,  una  gonella 
Ad  ognun  buona  che  se  la  mettesse.” 

OniiAND.  Innamou,  lib.  iii.  cant.  vii. 


CHAPTER  II. 


THE  SISTERS  OF  OLD. 


“ What  are  these, 

So  -withered,  and  so  wild  in  their  attire ; 

That  look  not  like  the  inhabitants  o’  the  earth. 

And  yet  are  on’t  ?” — Macbeth. 

There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  ancients 
were,  in  a manner,  acquainted  with  some  of  the 
narcotics  known  to  us,  although  they  did  not 
indulge  in  them  as  stimulants  or  luxuries.  The 
antiquarian,  it  is  true,  has  failed  to  unearth  the 
tobacco-box  of  Claudius,  or  the  pipe  of  Nero — 
however  much  the  latter  may  have  been  given  to 
smoke.  And  no  one  has  as  yet  discovered  a snuff- 
box bearing  the  initials  of  Marc  Antony,  whence 
the  taper  fingers  of  Egypt’s  queen  drew  a pinch  of 
Princess’  Mixture  or  Taddy’s  Violet,  gazing  with 
loving  eyes  on  Antony  the  while.  In  those  remote 
times  the  hemp  and  the  poppy  were  not  unknown  ; 
and  there  is  reason  for  believing  that  in  Egypt  the 
former  was  used  as  a potion  for  soothing  and  dis- 
pelling care. 

Herodotus  informs  us  that  the  Scythians  culti- 
vated hemp,  and  converted  it  into  linen  cloth, 
resembling  that  made  from  flax ; and  he  adds  also, 
that  “ when,  therefore,  the  Scythians  have  taken 
some  seed  of  this  hemp,  they  creep  under  the 
cloths,  and  then  put  the  seed  on  the  red  hot 
stones ; but  this  being  put  on  smokes,  and  pro- 
duces such  a steam,  that  no  Grecian  vapour-bath 
would  surpass  it.  The  Scythians,  transported  with 


THE  SISTERS  OF  OLD. 


11 


the  vapour,  shout  aloud.”  * The  same  author 
also  states  that  the  Massagetse,  dwelling  on  an 
island  of  the  Araxes,  have  discovered  “ trees  that 
produce  fruit  of  a peculiar  kind,  which  the  inhabi- 
tants, when  they  meet  together  in  companies,  and 
have  lit  a fire,  throw  on  the  fire  as  they  sit  round 
in  a circle ; and  that  by  inhaling  the  fumes  of  the 
burning  fruit  that  has  been  thrown  on,  they 
become  intoxicated  by  the  odour,  just  as  the  Greeks 
do  by  wine,  and  that  the  more  fruit  is  thrown  on, 
the  more  intoxicated  they  become,  until  they  rise 
up  to  dance,  and  betake  themselves  to  singing.”  f 
Homer  also  makes  Helen  administer  to  Tele- 
machus,  in  the  house  of  Menelaus,  a potion  pre- 
pared from  nepenthes , which  made  him  forget  his 
sorrows. 

“Meanwhile  with  genial  joy  to  warm  the  soul, 

Bright  Helen  mix’d  a mirth-inspiring  bowl ; 

Temper’d  with  drugs  of  sovereign  use  to  assuage 
The  boiling  bosom  of  tumultuous  rage  ; 

To  clear  the  cloudy  front  of  wrinkled  care, 

And  dry  the  tearful  sluices  of  despair  ; 

Charm’d  with  that  virtuous  draught,  the  exalted  mind 
All  sense  of  woe  delivers  to  the  wind  : 

Though  on  the  blazing  pile  his  parent  lay, 

Or  a loved  brother  groan’d  his  life  away, 

Or  darling  son,  oppress’d  by  ruffian  force, 

Pell  breathless  at  its  feet  a mangled  corse  ; 

From  morn  to  eve,  impassive  and  serene 

The  man  entranced  would  view  the  deathful  scene. 

These  drugs,  so  friendly  to  the  joys  of  life, 

Bright  Helen  learn’d  from  Thone’s  imperial  wife, 

Who  sway’d  the  sceptre  where  prolific  Nile 
With  various  simples  clothes  the  fatten’d  soil. 

With  wholesome  herbage  mixed,  the  direful  bane 
Of  vegetable  venom  taints  the  plain  ; 

From  Paeon  sprung,  their  patron-god  imparts 
lo  all  the  Pharian  race  his  healing  arts.” 

Pope’s  Homer's  Odyssey , b.  iv. 

* Herod.,  lib.  iv.  cap.  74-75. 
t lb.,  lib.  i.  cap.  202. 


12 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Diodorus  Siculus  states  that  the  Egyptians  laid 
much  stress  on  the  circumstance  that  the  plant 
used  by  Helen  had  been  given  her  by  a woman  of 
Egyptian  Thebes,  whence  they  argued  that  Homer 
must  have  lived  amongst  them,  since  the  women 
of  Thebes  were  celebrated  for  possessing  a secret 
whereby  they  could  dissipate  anger  or  melancholy. 
This  secret  is  supposed  to  have  been  a knowledge 
of  the  narcotic  properties  of  hemp.  The  plant 
was  known  to  the  Romans,  and  largely  used  by 
them  in  the  time  of  Pliny  for  the  manufacture  of 
cordage,  and  there  is  scarce  a doubt  that  they 
were  acquainted  with  its  other  properties.  Galen 
refers  to  the  intoxicating  power  of  hemp,  for  he 
relates  that  in  his  time  it  was  customary  to  give 
hemp-seed  to  the  guests  at  banquets  as  a promoter 
of  hilarity  and  enjoyment.  Slow  poisons  and  secret 
poisoning  was  an  art  with  which  the  Romans  were 
not  at  all  unfamiliar.  What  the  medium  was 
through  which  they  committed  these  criminal  acts, 
can  only  be  conjectured  from  the  scanty  informa- 
tion remaining.  Hemp,  or  opium,  or  both,  may 
have  had  some  share  in  the  work,  since  the  poppy 
was  sacred  to  Somnus,  and  known  to  possess 
narcotic  properties. 

The  latter  plant  is  one  of  the  earliest  described. 
Homer  speaks  of  the  poppy  growing  in  gardens, 
and  it  was  employed  by  Hippocrates,  the  father  of 
physic,  who  even  particularizes  two  kinds,  the 
black  and  the  white,  and  used  the  extract  of 
opium  so  extensively,  as  to  he  condemned  by  his 
contemporary  Diagoras.  Dioscorides  and  Pliny 
also  make  mention  of  it  ] and  from  their  time,  it 
lias  been  so  commonly  used,  as  to  be  incorporated 
in  all  the  materia  medicas  of  subsequent  medical 

^Plutarch  tells  us  that  a poison  was  administered 
to  Aratus  of  Sicyon,  not  speedy  and  violent,  but  ol 


THE  SISTERS  OF  OLD. 


13 


that  kind  which  at  first  occasions  a slow  heat  in 
the  body,  with  a slight  cough,  and  then  gradually 
brings  on  consumption  and  a weakness  of  intellect. 
One  time  when  Aratus  spat  up  blood,  he  said, 
“ This  is  the  effect  of  royal  friendship.”  And 
Quintilian,  in  his  Declamations,  speaks  of  this 
poison  in  such  a manner  as  proves  that  it  must 
then  have  been  well  known. 

The  infamous  acts  of  Locusta  are  noticed  by 
Tacitus,  Suetonius,  and  Juvenal.  This  poisoner 
seems  to  have  been  a type  of  such  a character  as 
the  traditions  of  a later  age  embodied  in  the 
person  and  under  the  name  of  Lucretia  Borgia. 

Agrippina,  being  desirous  of  getting  rid  of 
Claudius,  but  not  daring  to  despatch  him  sud- 
■ anC^  ^ Ashing  not  to  leave  him  time 
sufficient  to  make  new  regulations  concerning  the 
succession  to  the  throne,  made  choice  of  a poison 
which  should  deprive  him  of  his  reason  and  gra- 
dually consume  him.  This  she  caused  to  be 
prepared  by  an  expert  poisoner,  named  Locusta 
who  had  been  condemned  to  death  for  her  infamous 
actions,  but  saved  that  she  might  be  employed  as 
a state  engine.  The  poison  was  given  to  the  em- 

as,  on  account 

of  his  irregular  manner  of  living  it  did  not 
produce  the  desired  effect,  it  was  assisted  by  some 

iW  fir°n?er  nature*  We  are  a]so  further  told 
tnat  this  Locusta  prepared  the  drug  wherewith 

whomhi^n'i611  B‘itan,nicus'  the  son  of  Messalinu, 
father,  Claudius,  wished  to  succeed  him 

dvlnwhr°ne'i  AS  this  poison  occasioned  only  a 
) entcry,  and  was  too  slow  in  its  operation  the 

emperor  compelled  Locusta,  by  blows  and  bv 

threatening  her  with  death,  to  prepare  in  hL  nre 

sence  one  more  powerful.  It  w!ns  first  tried  on  a 

ud,  but  as  the  animal  did  not  die  till  the  end  of 

five  hours,  she  boiled  it  a little  longer unlit  it 


14 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


instantaneously  killed  a pig  to  which  it  had  been 
given,  and  this  poison  despatched  Britannicus  as 
soon  as  he  had  tasted  it.  For  this  service  the 
emperor  pardoned  Locusta,  rewarded  her  liberally, 
and  gave  her  pupils,  whom  she  was  to  instruct  in 
her  art,  in  order  that  it  might  not  be  lost. 

The  pupils  of  Locusta  have  not  left  us,  however, 
the  secret  which  their  mistress  confided  to  them. 
The  demand  made  of  the  apothecary  in  “ Romeo 
and  Juliet”  would  have  suited  Nero’s  case,  in  the 
latter  instance. 


“ Let  me  have 

A dram  of  poison  ; such  soon  speeding  geer 
As  will  disperse  itself  through  all  the  veins, 

That  the  life-weary  taker  may  fall  dead  ; 

And  that  the  trank  may  be  discharged  of  breath 

As  violently,  as  hasty  powder  fired 

Doth  hurry  from  the  fatal  cannon’s  mouth.” 


What  connection  the  narcotic  hemp  had  with 
the  famous  oracle  of  Delphi  is  not  altogether  cer- 
tain, but  it  has  been  supposed,  and  such  supposition 
contains  nothing  of  heresy  in  these  days,  that  the 
ravin ^s  of  the  Pythia  were  the  consequences  ot  a 
good  dose  of  haschish,  or  bang.  The  non-classical 
readers  will  allow  us  to  inform  them,  and  the 
classical  permit  us  to  remind  them,  that  the  oracle 
at  Delphi  was  the  most  celebrated  in  all  Greece. 
That  it  was  related  of  old,  that  a certain  shepheid, 
tending  his  flocks  on  Mount  Parnassus,  observed, 
that  the  steam  issuing  from  a hole  m the  rock 
seemed  to  inspire  his  goats,  and  cause  them  to  frisk 
about  in  a marvellous  manner,  that  this  same 
shepherd  was  tempted  to  peep  into  the  hole  him- 
self and  the  fumes  rising  therefrom  filled  him  with 
such  ecstacy,  that  he  gave  vent  to  wild  and  extrava- 
gant expressions,  which  were  regarded  as  prophe- 
tical. This  circumstance  becoming  known,  the 
place  was  revered,  and  thereon  a temple  was 


THE  SISTERS  OF  OLD. 


15 


afterwards  erected  to  Apollo,  and  a priestess 
appointed  to  deliver  the  oracles.  This  priestess 
of  Apollo,  Pythia,  was  seated  over  the  miraculous 
cavity  upon  a tripod,  or  three-legged  stool,  and  the 
tumes  arising  were  supposed  to  fill  her  with  in- 
spiration, and  she  delivered,  in  bad  verses,  the 
oracles  of  the  deity.  During  the  inspiration,  her 
eyes  sparkled,  her  hair  stood  erect,  and  a shivering 
ran  over  the  whole  body.  Under  the  convulsions 
thus  produced,  with  loud  howlings  and  cries,  she 
delivered  the  messages,  which  were  carefully  noted 
down  by  an  attendant  priest.  Plutarch  states, 
tdat  one  of  the  priestesses  was  thrown  into  such  an 
excessive  fury,  that  not  only  those  who  came  to 
consult  the  oracle,  but  the  priests  in  attendance 

WT.xS0,tfri5ed’  that  they  forsook  her  and  fled’ 
and  that  the  fit  was  so  violent,  that  she  continued 
several  days  m agony,  and  finally  died.  It  has 
been  believed  that  these  fumes,  instead  of  proceeding 
iiom  the  earth,  were  produced  by  the  burning  of  some 
narcotic  herb,  probably  hemp.  Who  shall  decide  ? 

^ In  later  times  <( bang”  is  referred  to  in  the 
Arabian  Nights.  In  one  of  the  tales,  two  ladies 
la  conversation,  and  one  enquires  of  the  other 
It  the  queen  was  not  much  in  the  wrong  not  to 
love  so  amiable  a prince?”  To  which  the  ntW 
replied,  “ Certainly,  I know  not  why  she  goes  out 
every  night  and  leaves  him  alone.  Is  it  possible 
that  he  does  not  perceive  it  ? ” “ Alas  ! ” says  the 
fiist,  how  would  you  have  him  to  perceive  it? 
fehe  mixes  every  evening  with  his  drink  the  juice 
o a certain  herb,  which  makes  him  sleep  so  sound 
a night,  that  she  has  time  to  go  where  she  pleases 
and  as  day  begins  to  appear,  she  comes  to  him 
agam,  and  awakes  him  by  the  smell  of  somethin 
she  puts  under  his  nose.” 

The  Caliph  Haroun  al  Easchid  indulged  too  in 
bang/  and  although  somewhere  we  have  seen 


16 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


this  word  rendered  “henbane,”  we  still  adhere  to 
the  “ bang  ” of  the  text,  and  think  the  evidence  ia 
in  favour  of  the  Indian  hemp.  Further  accounts 
of  the  early  history  of  this  plant  we  will  not 
however  forestal,  as  it  will  occur  more  appro- 
priately when  we  come  to  speak  of  it  in  particular. 
Henbane  has  been  long  enough  known  ; but  it  has 
always  had  the  misfortune  either  of  a positive  bad 
name,  or  no  one  would  speak  much  in  its  favour, 
and  therefore  it  has  never  risen  in  the  world. 

The  lettuce,  which  has  not  been  known  to  us 
three  hundred  years,  was  also  known  to . the 
ancients,  and  its  narcotic  properties  recognized. 
Dioscorides  writes  of  it,  and  so  also  Theophrastus.- 
It  is  referred  to  by  Galen,  and,  if  we  mistake  not, 
spoken  of  by  Pliny.  It  was  certainly  wild,  in  some 
of  its  species,  on  the  hills  of  Greece,  and  was  culti- 
vated for  the  tables  of  the  salad-loving  Greeks  and 
Komans.  It  had  been  better  that  some  of  them 
had  spent  more  of  their  time  in  eating  lettuce 
salads,  and  by  that  means  had  less  time  to  spare 
for  other  occupations  of  a far  more  reprehensible 


k^The  “ nepenthes  ” of  Homer  has.  already  been 
shown  to  have  found  a representativ  e in . hemp. 
There  have  also  been  claims  made'  for  considering 
it  as  the  crocus,  or  the  stigmas  of  that  flower  known 
to  us  as  saffron.  Pliny  states  that  it  has  the  power 
of  allaying  the  fumes  of  wine,  and  preventing 
drunkenness  ; and  it  was  taken  m drink  by  great 
winebibbers,  to  enable  them  to  drink  largely 
without  intoxication.  Its  properties  are  of  a 
peculiar  character,  causing,  in  large  doses,  fits  of 
immoderate  laughter.  The  evidence  m favour 
of  this  being  the  t ue  “nepenthes  is,  however, 
we  consider  very  incomplete,,  and  not  so  satisfac- 
tory, by  any  means,  as  that  given  on  behalf  ot  tlio 

Indian  hemp. 


THE  SISTERS  OF  OLD. 


17 


When  the  Eoman  soldiers  retreated  from  the 
Parthians,  under  the  command  of  Antony, 
Plutarch  narrates  of  them  that  they  suffered 
great  distress  for  want  of  provisions,  and  were 
urged  to  eat  unknown  plants.  Among  others, 
they  met  with  a herb  that  was  mortal ; he  that 
had  eaten  of  it  lost  his  memory  and  his  senses, 
and  employed  himself  wholly  in  turning  about  all 
the  stones  he  could  find,  and,  after  vomiting  up 
bile,  fell  down . dead.  Attempts  to  unravel  the 
mysteries  of  this . plant  have  ended,  in  some  cases 
at  least,  in  referring  it  to  the  belladonna,  a plant 
common  enough  in  these  our  days,  and  known  to 
possess  poisonous  properties  of  a narcotico-acrid 
character. 


An  analogous  circumstance  occurred  in  the 
retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand,  as  related  by  Xeno- 
phon. A ear  Trebizond  were  a number  of  bee- 
hives, and  as  many  of  the  soldiers  as  ate  of  the 
honeycombs  became  senseless,  and  were  seized 
with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  and  not  one  of  them 
could  stand  erect.  Those  who  had  swallowed  but 
little  looked  very  like  drunken  men,  those  who 
ate  much  were  like  madmen,  and  some  lay  as  if 
tying;  and  thus  they  lay  in  such  numbers,  as  on 
a field  of  battle  after  a defeat.  And  the  conster- 
nation was  great;  yet  no  one  was  found  to  have 
died : all  recovered  their  senses  about  the  same 

WH°ni  th®  follo'vln£  day;  and  on  the  third  or 

l?UFth  id?7  th®[eafJer>  theT  rose  up  as  if  they  had 
suffered  from  the  drinking  of  poison. 

1 his  poisonous  property  of  the  honey  is  said  to 
be  derived  by  the  bees  from  the  flowers  of  a species 
of  rhododendron  (Azalea  pontica),  all  of  whTch 
possess  narcotic  properties 

.Supposing  that  blind  old  Homer— if  ever  there 
was  an  old  Homer,  and  if  blind,  no  matter— knew 
the  secret  of  Egyptian  Thebes,  and  the  power  oT' 


18 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


the  narcotic  hemp,  and  yet  never  smoked  a hubble- 
bubble,  it  is  of  little  consequence,  except  to  the 
Society  of  Antiquaries,  and  certainly  makes  no 
difference  to  Homer  now.  Although  Diagoras 
condemned  Hippocrates  for  giving  too  much 
opium  to  his  patients,  we  are  not  informed 
whether  it  was  administered  in  the  shape  of 
« Tinctura  opii,”  or  “Confectio  opii  ” or  “ Extractum 
opii,”  or  “ Godfrey’s  cordial,”  or  “ Paregoric  elixir.” 
The  discovery  would  not  lengthen  our  own  lives, 
and  therefore  we  do  not  repine.  We  think  that 
we  have  some  consolation  left,  in  that  we  are  wiser 
than  Homer  or  Hippocrates  in  respect , of  that 
particular  vanity,  called  “ shag  tobacco,  which, 
we  venture  to  suggest,  neither  of  those  veneiable 
sages  ever  indulged  in  during  the  period  of  their 
natural  lives.  And  although  Herodotus  found  the 
Scythians  using,  in  a strange  manner,  the  tops  of  the 
hemp  plant,  he  never  got  so  far  as  Ivamtschatka, 
and  therefore  never  saw  a man  getting  drunk  upon 
a toadstool.  If  he  bad  ever  seen  it,  he  had  never 
slept  till  he  had  told  it  to  that  posterity  which  he 
has  left  us  to  enlighten. 


THE 


CHAPTEK  III. 


wond’rous  weed. 

“ Canst  thou  not  minister  to  a mind  diseased  ; 
Pluck  from  the  memory  a rooted  sorrow ; 

Kaze  out  the  written  troubles  of  the  brain  ; 
And,  with  some  sweet  oblivious  antidote, 
Cleanse  the  stuff  ’d  bosom  of  that  perilous  stuff, 
Which  weighs  upon  the  heart  ? ’’—Macbeth. 


Amongst  Mahometans,  the  following  legend  is 
said  to  be  accepted  as  an  account  of  the  miraculous 
introduction  of  the  “ wond’rous  weed  ” to  the  world. 

“ Mahomet,  passing  the  desert  in  winter,  found 
a poor  viper  frozen  on  the  ground ; touched  with 
compassion,  he  placed  it  in  his  sleeve,  where  the 
warmth  and  glow  of  the  blessed  body  restored  it  to 
Me.  No  sooner  did  the  ungrateful  reptile  find  its 
health  restored,  than  it  poked  forth  its  head,  and 
said — 5 


“ ‘ Oh,  Prophet,  I am  going  to  bite  you.’ 
‘“Give  me  a sound  reason,  0 snake,  and  I 
be  content.’ 


will 


» i 


Your  people  kill  my  people  constantly,  there 
18  a? 1 '■)e^ween  your  race  and  mine.’ 

Your  people  bite  my  people,  the  balance 
Detween  our  kindred  is  even,  between  you  and  me  * 
Day,  h is  in  my  favour,  for  I have  done  you  good.’ 

And  that  you  may  not  do  me  harm,  I will 
bite  you.  ’ 


you. 

“ 1 Do  not  be  so  ungrateful.’ 

c 2 


20 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


“‘I  will ! I have  sworn  by  the  Most  High  that 
I will.’ 

“At  the  Name  the  Prophet  no  longer  opposed  the 
viper,  but  bade  him  bite  on,  in  the  name  of  God. 
The  snake  pierced  his  fangs  in  the  blessed  wrist, 
which  the  Prophet  not  liking,  shook  him  off,  but 
did  him  no  further  harm,,  nor  would  he  suffer 
those  near  him  to  destroy  it,  but  putting  his  lips 
to  the  wound,  and  sucking  out  the  poison,  spat  it 
upon  the  earth.  From  these  drops  sprang  that 
wond’rous  weed,  which  has  the  bitterness  of  the 
serpent’s  tooth,  quelled  by  the  sweet  saliva  of  the 

Prophet.”*  , , , A1  , 

Happy  Moslem ! you  have  solved  the  mystery, 

and  your  heart  feels  no  doubt ; but  Christian  dogs 
despairingly  sigh  for  some  revelation  from  the 
past,  whether  through  history  or  tradition,  ot  the 
first  use  of  this  plant.  In  vain  we  enquire  who  it 
was  that  first  conceived  and  put  in  practice  the 
idea  of  burning  the  large  leaves  of  a .weed,  and 
drawing  in  the  smoke  to  spit  it  out  again  . W h o 

it  was  that  discovered  pleasure  or  amusement  m 
tickling  the  nose  with  that  “titillating  dust  to 
enjoy  the  luxury  of  a sneeze  or  find  employment 
in  blowing  it  out  again?  \e  shades  ot  heroes 
departed,  that  hover  around  the  pine-woods  ot  the 
Saskatchewan,  sail  over  the  rolling  prames  of 
Illinois,  or  roam  along  the  strands  of  \ lrgmia,  tell 
us  to  what  illustrious  progenitor  of  Oree  or 
Mohawk  we  are  to  accord,  the  honour  of  a dis- 
covery more  popular  than  any  since  the  days  when 

“ Adam  delved  and  Eve  spau  * . 

In  default  of  the  shades  giving  us  the  required 

information,  we  must  resort  to  the  faint  lootst^P® 
which  “ the  habit  ” has  left  imprinted  on  the  sands 
of  Time.  Even  the  name  by  which  it  is  called, 

• The  Ansayrii  and  the  Assassins,  by  the  Hon.  F.  Walpole. 


THE  “WONDROUS  WEED." 


21 


has  been  disputed  and  even  denied,  as  of  right, 
belonging  to  tobacco.  This  word,  Humboldt 
informs  us,  like  the  words  savannah,  maize , maguey , 
and  vianati , belong  to  the  ancient  language  of 
Hayti  or  St.  Domingo,  and  did  not  properly  denote 
the  herb,  but  the  pipe  through  which  it  was  smoked. 
Tobacco,  according  to  Oveido,  was  indigenous  in 
Hispaniola,  and  much  used  by  the  native  Indians, 
who  smoked  it  from  a tube  in  the  shape  of  the 
letter  Y,  the  two  branches  being  inserted  in  the 
nostrils,  and  the  stem  placed  in  the  burning  leaves. 
The  plant  was  called  the  cohiba , and  the  rude 
instrument  by  which  it  was  inhaled  tabaco. 

Other  fabulous  accounts  of  the  origin  of  this 
mystic  name,  which  opens  the  heart  and  hand  of 
the  savage  more  readily  than  that  of  gold,  trace  it 
to  Tabacco,  a province  of  Yucatan  in  Hew  Spain, 
whence  it  is  stated  to  have  been  first  brought  to 
Europe.  Or  affinity  is  claimed  for  it  with  the  Island 
,°f  Tobago,  one  of  the  Caribbees,  where  it  grew  wild 
in  abundance.  Or  its  derivation  is  traced  to 
Tobasco,  in  the  island  of  Florida.  In  Mexico  it 
was  called  yetl:  and  in  Peru  sagri,  meaning 
in  those  languages  “the  herb,”  or  the  herb  par 
excellence,,  worthy  of  superiority  over  all  other 
herbs  which  the  earth  ever  produced  from  her 
bosom. 

It  seems  surprising  that  a vegetable  production 
so  universally  spread  should  have  different  names 
among  neighbouring  people.  In  North  America 
the  Algonlun  name  is  serna , and  the  Huron 
oyngoua , and  the  same  dissimilarity  exists  in  the 
languages  of  South- American  tribes ; the  Oinamia ' 

f Terr\j-l  itlle  Maypm'e>  jema  ; the  Chiquifo,  mils  ’• 
the  Vilela,  tump ; and  the  Tamanac,  cavai.  One 
would  have  expected  to  have  found  names  with  less 
variation  among  such  neighbours.  It  might  be 
urged,  perhaps,  that  these  are  all  independent 


22 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


ancient  names  given  by  each  tribe  to  the  plant 
before  they  became  acquainted  with  the  existence 
of  their  neighbours,  and  an  evidence  that  its  use 
was  not  derived  from  each  other,  nor  from  travellers 
passing  among  them.  To  these  speculations  the 
theorist  is  welcome. 

There  is  little  reason  to  doubt  that  tobacco  is  a 
plant  indigenous  to  the  New  World.  With  the 
era,  therefore,  of  Columbus,  our  knowledge  of  it  will 
necessarily  commence.  When  the  Spaniards  landed 
with  that  navigator  in  Cuba  in  1492,  they  found 
the  Cubans  doing  the  same  kind  of  thing  as  the 
voyager  would  now  find  them  occupied  in,  making 
and  smoking  cigars.  In  the  latter  act,  these 
Spaniards  soon  followed  the  Cuban  example,  as  did 
those  also  who  landed  in  1518,  with  Fernando 
Cortez,  in  the  island  of  Tobago,  to  a still  greater 
extent.  The  honour  of  introducing  this,  the  fairest 
of  “ the  Seven  Sisters  of  Sleep,”  to  European 
society  and  soil,  is  due,  perhaps,  to  Hernandez,  the 
naturalist,  who  brought  the  first  seeds  from  Mexico 
(Humboldt  states,  from  the  Mexican  province  of 
Yucatan),  in  1559,  and  conveyed  them  to  Spain. 
About  the  same  time  some  unknown  Flamingo  in- 
troduced the  illustrious  visitor  to  Portugal. 

Of  the  introduction  of  tobacco  into  France,  the 
more  commonly-received  opinion  is,  that  the  first 
seeds  were  sent  to  Catherine  de  Medici  from  Por- 
tugal in  1560,  by  Jean  Nicot,  the  French  ambas- 
sador to  that  country,  and  ever  since  it  has  borne 
as  its  generic  name  a memento  of  its  patron.  Other 
accounts  attribute  to  Father  Andre  Thevet,  or  some 
friend  of  his,  the  honour  of  introducing  the  raw 
material  to  the  most  accomplished  snuff-takers  in 
Europe,  and,  perhaps,  the  first  who  ever  indulged 
in  it  to  any  extent. 

In  Tuscany,  tobacco  was  first  cultivated  under 
Cosmo  de  Medici,  who  died  in  1574.  It  was  origin- 


THE  “WOND’ROUS  WEED.” 


23 


ally  raised  by  Bishop  Alfonso  Tournabuoni,  from 
seeds  received  from  his  nephew,  Nicolo  Tourna- 
buoni, then  ambassador  at  Paris.  After  him  it 
bore  the  name  of  Erba  Tournabuoni,  as  in  France 
it  was  called  Herbe  de  la  Reine.  Very  early, 
before  1589,  the  Cardinal  Santa  Croce,  returning 
from  his  nunciature  in  Spain  and  Portugal  to  Italy, 
carried  with  him  thither  tobacco  ; but  he  can  scarce 
claim  the  honour  of  its  introduction,  although  the 
exploit  was  commemorated  by  Castor  Duranti  in 
Latin  verse.  Thus  it  would  appear  that  this 
plant  was  brought  from  Mexico  to  Spain,  whence 
it  passed  into  France,  and  thence  into  Italy,  during 
the  early  part  of  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth 
century. 

The  first  introduction  of  tobacco  into  England 
has  been  claimed  for  a trinity  of  valiant  knights — 
Sir  Francis  Drake,  Sir  John  Plawkins,  and  Sir 
Walter  Raleigh.  In  Bancroft’s  “ History  of  the 
United  States,”  it  is  said — “ The  exiles  of  a year 
had  grown  familiar  with  the  favourite  amusement 
of  the  lethargic  Indians,  and  they  introduced  into 
England  the  general  use  of  tobacco.”  These  exiles 
were  brought  home  by  Drake  before  Raleigh  visited 
the  New  World,  and  the  period  for  the  introduction 
of  tobacco  into  this  country  by  Sir  Francis,  claims 
the  date  of  1560.  For  Sir  John  Hawkins’  intro- 
duction, the  time  has  been  fixed  at  1565;  whilst 
the  earliest  date  assigned  for  its  introduction  by 
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  is  1584,  the  same  year  in  which 
a proclamation  was  issued  in  England  against  it. 
Humboldt  states  that  the  celebrated  Raleigh  con- 
tributed most  to  introduce  the  custom  of  smoking 
among  the  nations  of  the  North.  When  Raleigh 
brought  tobacco  from  Virginia  to  England,  whole 
fields  of  it  were  already  cultivated  in  Portugal.  It 
was  also  previously  known  in  France,  where  it  was 
brought  into  fashion  by  Catherine  de  Medicis.  As 


24  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

early  as  tlie  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  bitter 
complaints  were  made  in  England  of  this  imitation 
of  the  manners  of  a savage  people.  It  was  feared, 
that  by  the  practice  of  smoking  tobacco,  English- 
men would  degenerate  into  a barbarous  state.* 
The  cultivation  of  this  narcotic  plant  preceded 
that  of  the  potato  in  Europe  120  or  140  years. 

Camden,  who  informs  us  of  these  fears  for  the 
civilization  of  England,  also  states  that  Eichard 
Fletcher,  Bishop  of  London,  a courtly  prelate  (who 
died  in  1596),  by  the  use  of  tobacco  “ smothered 
the  cares  he  took  by  means  of  his  unlucky  mar- 
riage.” According  to  Aubrey,  the  pipe  was  handed 
from  man  to  man  round  the  table  ; and  this  bears, 
certainly,  a great  resemblance  to  the  custom  of 
the  North- American  Indians — the  chief  smoking 
two  or  three  whiffs,  then  passing  it  to  his  neigh- 
bour*, until  from  one  to  another  it  passes  round  the 
circle,  and  comes  back  to  the  first  smoker  again. 

M.  Jorevin,  a Frenchman,  who  visited  England 
in  Charles  the  Second’s  time,  says  that  the  women 
smoked  tobacco  as  well  as  the  men. 

From  England  the  practice  of  smoking  was  car- 
ried to  the  Continent.  Dutch  students  were  first 
taught  the  art  of  smoking  at  tire  University  of 
Leyden  by  students  from  England ; hence  the 
greatest  smokers  in  Europe  derived  their  know- 
ledge of  the  use  of  the  pipe  from  the  English. 

Lilly,  in  his  autobiography,  informs  us  that 
when  committed  to  the  guard-room  in  Whitehall, 
he  thought  himself  in  regions  far  below,  where 
Orpheus  sang,  and  Pluto  reigned,  for  “ some  were 

* “ Ex  illo  sane  tempore  [tabacum]  usn  cepit  esse  creberrimc 
in  Anglifi,  et  magno  pretio  dum  quam  plurimi  graveoleutem  illius 
fumutn  per  tubulum  tcstaceum  hauriunt  et  mox  e naribus 
efliant ; adco  ut  Anglorum  corporum  in  barbaroram  naturam 
degenerasse  videantur  quum  iidem  ac  barbari  dclectentur.” — • 
Camden,  Annal.  Elizab.,  p.  143.  (15S5.) 


THE  “ wond’hous  weed.” 


25 


sleeping,  others  swearing,  others  smoking  tobacco  ; 
and  in  the  chimney  of  the  room  were  two  bushels 
of  broken  tobacco-pipes.”  Good  friend  Lilly,  what 
wouldst  thou  have  thought  of  a visit  to  a Studenten 
Kneipe,  where  a crowd  of  students,  amid  fumes 
dense  as  a London  fog  in  November,  scream  and 
growl  the  well-known  song — 

“And  smokes  the  Fox  tobacco  1 

And  smokes  the  Fox  tobacco  ? 

And  smokes  the  leathery  Fox  tobacco  ? 

Sa!  Sa! 

Fox  tobacco. 

And  smokes  the  Fox  tobacco. 

“ Then  let  him  fill  a pipe  ! 

Then  let  him  fill  a pipe  ! 

Then  let  him  fill  a leathery  pipe  ; 

Sa  ! Sa ! 

Leathery  pipe. 

Then  let  him  fill  a pipe  !” 

And  then  perhaps — but  let  the  reader  enquire  for 
himself  of  some  descendant  from  the  ancestors  of 
the  renowned  Wouter  Van  Twiller,  the  worthy 
head  of  the  long-pipe  faction.  In  1601,  tobacco 
was  carried  to  Java,  whence  it  spread  over  the 
East.  It  was  also  conveyed  to  Turkey  and  Arabia 
m the  beginning  of  this  century.  El-Is-hakee 
states  that  the  custom  of  smoking  tobacco  began  to 
be  common  in  Egypt  between  the  years  of  the 
flight,  1010  and  1012  (a.d.  1601-1603).  And 
from  Persian  writers  on  J\fateiia  medica , it  appears 
to  have  been  introduced  into  India  in  A.n.  1014 
(a.d.  1605),  towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Jcla- 
ladeen  Akbar  Padshaw.  From  India,  tobacco 
probably  found  its  way  to  the  Malayan  Peninsula 
and  China ; although  Pallas,  Loureiro,  and  Kum- 
phuis  think  that  tobacco  was  known  in  China 
before  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  and  that 


26 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


the  Chinese  tobacco  plant  is  indigenous  to  that 
country. 

From  “Notes  and  Queries”  we  learn  that 
u tobacco  was  first  cultivated  in  this  country  at 
Winchcombe  in  Gloucestershire,  and  that  the 
natives  did  suck  thereout  no  small  advantage  J 
and  before  the  time  of  James  II.  the  best  Vir- 
ginia was  but  two  shillings  the  pound,  and  two 
gross  of  the  best  glazed  pipes,  and  a box  with 
them,  three  shillings  and  fourpence.”  Tobacco 
became  almost  a necessary  among  the  upper 
classes;  nor  could  the  parliamentary  representa- 
tives of  the  city  of  Worcester  be  despatched  up  to 
town  until  the  “ collective  wisdom  ” had  smoked 
and  drunk  sack  at  the  “ Globe,”  or  some  other 
hostelry.  As  early  as  1621,  it  was  moved  in  the 
House  of  Commons  by  Sir  William  Stroud,  that 
“he  would  have  tobacco  banished  wholly  out  of 
the  kingdom,  and  that  it  may  not  be  brought  from 
any  part,  nor  used  amongst  us.”  And  by  Sir  ; 
Grey  Palmes,  “ that  if  tobacco  be  not  banished, 
it  will  overthrow  100,000  men  in  England,  for  it 
is  now  so  common,  that  he  hath  seen  ploughmen  j 
take  it  as  they  are  at  the  plough.”  At  a later  period 
of  the  same  century,  so  inveterate  had  the  practice 
become,  that  an  order  appears  on  the  journals  of 
the  House,  “That  no  member  in  the  House  do 
presume  to  smoke  tobacco  in  the  gallery^ or  at  the 
table  of  the  House  sitting  at  Committees.  . 

But  tobacco  did  not  come  into  general  use  in 
Europe  without  great  and  strenuous  opposition. 
All  kinds  of  weapons  were  called  in  requisition  to 
stay  its  progress.  Persuasion  and  force  were  alike 
essayed  without  effect.  A German  writer  has 
collected  the  titles  of  a hundred  different  works 
condemning  its  use,  which  were  published  within 
half  a century  of  its  introduction  into  Europe. 
The  pen  was  wielded  by  royal  as  well  as  plebeian 


THE  “WOND’rOUS  WEED.” 


27 


fingers,  and  the  famous  diatribe  of  the  British. 
Solomon,  King  James  I.,  of  blessed  memory, 
defender  of  the  faith,  and  antagonist  of  tobacco, 
keeps  his  memory  still  green  in  the  hearts  of 
Englishmen.  In  Russia,  the  snuff-taker  was  ingeni- 
ously cured  of  the  habit,  by  having  his  nose  cut 
off,  while  smokers  had  a pipe  bored  through  the 
same  useful  projection.  Michael  Feodorovitch 
Tourieff  kindly  offered  a bastinado  to  the  Musco- 
vites for  the  first  offence,  cutting  off  the  nose  for 
the  second,  and  the  head  for  the  third.  In  1590 
Pope  Innocent  XII.  took  the  trouble  to  excommu- 
nicate all  who  used  tobacco  in  any  form  in  the 
church  of  St.  Peters  in  Pome.  And  in  1624, 
Pope  Urban  VII.,  the  old  woman,  fulminated  a bull 
against  all  persons  found  taking  snuff  during 
divine  service;  and  old  women,  in  the  spirit  of 
opposition,  have  been  fond  of  snuff  ever  since. 
The  sultans  and  priests  of  Persia  and  Turkey 
declared  smoking  a sin  against  their  religion. 
Amurath  IV.  of  Persia  published  an  edict,  making 
the  smoking  of  tobacco  a capital  offence.  Shah 
Abbas  II.  punished  such  delinquents  equally 
severely.  When  leading  an  army  against  the 
Cham  of  Tartary,  he  proclaimed  that  every  soldier 
in  whose  possession  tobacco  was  found,  would  have 
his  nose  and  lips  cut  off,  and  afterwards  be  burnt 
alive..  El-Gabartee  relates,  that  about  a century 
ago,  in  the  time  of  Mohammed  Basha  El-Yedek- 
shee,  who  governed  Egypt  in  the  years  of  the 
flight,  1156-8,  it  frequently  happened  that,  when 
a man  was  found  with  a pipe  in  his  hand  in 
Cairo,  he  was  made  to  eat  the  bowl  with  its 
burning,  contents.  This  may  seem  incredible 
but  a pipe  bowl  may  be  broken  by  strong  teeth* 
particularly  if  it  be  of  meerschaum.  In  Tuscany* 
the  growth  of  tobacco  was  prohibited,  except  in  a 
tew  localities,  where  it  was  allowed,  under  certain 


28 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


restrictions,  from  1645  to  1789,  when  the  Grand 
Duke  Peter  Leopold  declared  its  cultivation  free 
all  over  the  country.  Ferdinand  III.  afterwards 
restricted  it  to  its  former  localities.  The  number 
of  these  were  reduced  in  1826,  and  in  1830  its 
growth  was  entirely  prohibited.  In  Transylvania 
the  penalty  for  growing  tobacco  was  a total  confis- 
cation of  property ; and  for  the  use  of  the  weed,  a i 
fine  of  from  three  to  two  hundred  florins.  In 
1661,  the  Canton  of  Berne  introduced  an  eleventh 
commandment  to  the  decalogue,  and  this  was 
inserted  after  the  seventh,  “ Thou  shalt  not 
smoke!”  In  1719,  the  wise  senate  of  Strasburg 
prohibited  the  cultivation  of  tobacco,  fearing  lest 
it  should  interfere  with  the  growth  of  com. 
Prussia  and  Denmark  contented  themselves  with 
prohibiting  its  use.  This  brings  us  back  again  to 
England,  and  the  days  of  “ good  Queen  Bess.” 
That  lady,  who  is  said  to  have  prohibited  the  use 
of  tobacco  in  churches,  according  to  certain  chro- 
niclers, was  wont  to  banter  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  on 
his  affection  for  his  protege.  It  is  said,  that  on  one 
occasion,  when  Raleigh  was  conversing,  with  his 
royal  mistress  upon  the  singular  properties  of  this 
new  and  extraordinary  herb,  he  assured  her 
Majesty  that  he  had  so  well  experienced  the 
nature  of  it,  that  he  could  tell  her  of  what  weight  I 
even  the  smoke  would  be  in  any  quantity  pro-  \ 
posed  to  be  consumed.  Her  Majesty,  deeming  it  \ 
impossible  to  hold  the  smoke  in  a balance,  must  ] 
needs  lay  a wager  to  solve  the  doubt.  Raleigh  • 
procured  the  quantity  agreed  upon,  he  thoroughly  I 
smoked  it,  and  weighed  the  ashes;  pleading  at  the  I 
same  lime  that  the  weight  now  wanting  was  the  1 
wei-dit  of  the  smoke  dissipated  in  the  process. 
The  Queen  did  not  deny  the  doctrine  of  her  . 
favourite,  saying  “that  she  had  often  heard  or 
those  who  had  turned  their  gold  into  smoke,  but  - 


THE  “WOND’ROUS  WEED.”  29 

Raleigh  was  the  first  who  had  turned  his  smoke 
into  gold.” 

The  Star  Chamber  levied  a heavy  duty,  and 
Charles  II.  prohibited  its  cultivation  in  England. 
Tobacco  was  first  put  under  the  excise  in  1789. 
It  was  not  at  first  allowed  to  be  smoked  in  ale-houses. 
“ There  is  a curious  collection  of  proclamations, 
&c. says  Brand,  “in  the  archives  of  the  Society 
of  Antiquaries  of  London.  In  vol.  viii.  is  an  ale- 
house licence,  granted  by  six  Kentish  justices  of 
the  peace,  at  the  bottom  of  which  is  the  following 
item,  among  other  directions  to  the  inn-liolder  : — 
i Item. — You  shall  not  utter,  nor  willingly  suffer 
to  be  uttered,  drunke,  or  taken,  any  tobacco  ■within 
your  house,  cellar,  or  other  place  thereunto  be- 
longing.’ ” 

notwithstanding  oppositions,  imposts,  anathe- 
mas, counterblasts,  and  persecutions,  tobacco 
gradually  and  rapidly  arose  in  popular  esteem. 
The  first  house  in  which  it  was  publicly  smoked 
in  Britain  was  the  Pied  Bull,  at  Islington ; but 
this  was  “alone  in  its  glory”  for  a very  brief 
period  of  time.  “ Is  it  not  a great  vanity,”  saith 
Royal  James,  u that  a man  cannot  heartily  wel- 
come his  friend  now,  but  straight  they  must  be  in 
hand  with  tobacco  ? And  he  that  will  refuse  to 
take  a pipe  of  tobacco  amongst  his  fellows  is 
accounted  peevish,  and  no  good  company;  yea, 
the  mistress  cannot  in  a more  mannerly  kind 
entertain  her  servant  than  by  giving  him  out  of 
her  fair  hand  a pipe  of  tobacco.”  Raleigh  smoked 
m his  dungeon  in  the  Tower,  while  the  headsman 
was  grinding  his  axe.  Cromwell  loved  his  pipe 
and  dictated  his  despatches  to  Milton  over  some 
burning  Trinidado,  or  sweet-smelling  nicotine. 
Ben.  Johnson  affirmed  that  tobacco  was  the  most 
precious  weed  that  the  earth  ever  tendered  to  the 
tse  of  man.  Dr.  Radcliffb  recommended  snuff  to 


30 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


his  brethren.  Dr.  Johnson  kept  his  snuff  in  his 
waistcoat  pocket ; and  so  did  Frederick  the  Great. 
Robert  Hall  smoked  in  liis  vestry,  and,  it  would 
seem,  in  other  places  as  well,  for  Gilfillan  informs 
us,  that  when  on  a visit  to  a brother  clergyman, 
he  went  into  the  kitchen  where  a pious  servant 
girl,  whom  he  loved,  was  working.  He  lighted 
his  pipe,  sat  down,  and  asked  her — “ Betty,  do  you 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?”  I hope  I do,  sir, 
was  the  reply..  He  immediately  added,  “ Betty, 
do  you  love  me  ?”  They  were  married.  And 
Napoleon  took  rappee  by  the  handful.  And  poets 
wrote,  and  minstrels  sang,  in  the  praise  of  the 
“ Divine  Virginia.” 

“ Thou  glorious  weed  of  a glorious  land, 

I would  not  be  freed  from  thy  magical  wand— 

Though  a slave  to  thy  fetters,  and  bound  in  thy  chain, 
Despairing  of  freedom,  I cannot  complain. 

“ Tobacco,  I love  thee— I bow  at  thy  shrine  ! 

The  longer  I prove  thee,  the  less  I repine. 

The  affection  I cherish,  no  time  can  assuage— 

Thy  joys  do  not  perish,  like  others,  with  age. 

The  mailed  Spaniard  and  red-plumed  Indian 
have  fought  around  it ; and  gold-seekers  have 
drenched  "it  with  the  gore  of  negroes.  One  whole 
continent  has  been  enriched  by  it ; and  to  cultivate 
it  another  continent  has  been  depopulated.  Ne- 
m-oes  have  prayed  to  their  Fetishes  beside  it— 
many  a Cacique  now  dead  smoked  it  at  the  war- 
council,  and  many  a grave,  grey-bearded  Spaniard, 
who  had  fought  at  Lepanto,  or  bled  in  the  Low 
Countries.  Old  soldiers  of  Cromwell  have  smoked 
it  • and  while  Indians  have  bartered  their  gold  tor 
English  beads,  the  swarthy  Buccaneers  looked  on, 
handling  their  loaded  muskets.  Tobacco  was  for 
some  time  used  as  currency  in  Virginia,  as,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Galton,  is  the  case  now  among  the 


THE  “ WONDROUS  WEED.” 


31 


Damaras,  Ovampo,  and  other  tribes  of  South- 
Western  Africa. 

Forty  varieties  of  tobacco  have  been  described  ; 
but  the  differences  are  mainly  the  result  of  climate, 
and  the  mode  of  culture.  It  grows  well  in  almost 
every  part  of  the  world.  The  northern  limit  in 
Scandinavia  is  62°-63°  N.  L.  The  different  parts 
of  America  in  which  it  is  grown  include  Canada, 
New  Brunswick,  United  States,  Mexico,  the 
Western  Coast,  as  far  as  40°  S.  L.  In  Africa 
it  is  cultivated  by  the  Bed  Sea  and  Mediter- 
ranean, in  Egypt,  Algeria,  the  Canaries,  the 
Western  Coast,  the  Cape,  and  numerous  places 
in  the  interior.  In  Europe,  it  has  been  raised 
successfully  in  almost  every  country ; in  Hungary, 
Germany,  Flanders,  and  France,  it  forms  an 
important  agricultural  product.  In  Asia,  it  has 
spread  over  Turkey,  Persia,  India,  Thibet,  China, 
Japan,  the  Philippines,  Java,  and  Ceylon.  In 
paits  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  From  the 
Equator  to  50°  N.  L.,  it  may  be  raised  without 
difficulty.  The  finest  qualities  are  raised  between 
15°  and  35°  N.L. 

The  most  noted  tobacco  is  that  of  Cuba;  and 
the  most  extensive  growers  are  the  Americans  of 
me  United  States.  Two-thirds  of  our  supply  is 
doubtless  derived  from  the  latter  source. 

In  1665,  Virginia  exported  to  England  60,000 
pounds.  Twenty-five  years  afterwards,  our  total 
imports  were  double  that  amount ; while  in  1858 
they  amounted  to62,217,705  pounds, including  snuff 
and  cigars;  hence,  we  may  fairly  calculate  that, 
in  '-rreat  Britain,  eight  millions  of  pounds  sterling 
are  annually  spent  in  tobacco. 

has  been  computed  that  eight  hundred  mil- 

nnS\°u  ;h®  human  race  are  consumers  of  tobacco, 
that  the  average  annual  consumption  is  70 
ces  per  head.  The  total  consumption  would, 


32 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


therefore,  approximate  to  two  millions  of  tons. 
The  average  annual  consumption  of  every  male 
over  eighteen  years  of  age,  in  each  of  the  following 
countries  of  Europe,  as  collected  from  returns,  is, 
in  Austria,  108  ounces;  Zollverein,  156  ounces; 
Steurverein,  including  Hanover  and  Oldenburg, 
200  ounces ; France,  88  ounces ; Russia,  40  ounces ; 
Portugal,  56  ounces;  Spain,  76  ounces;  Sardinia, 
44  ounces ; Tuscany,  40  ounces ; the  Papal  States, 
32  ounces ; England,  60  ounces ; Holland,  132 
ounces ; Belgium,  144  ounces ; Denmark,  128 
ounces ; Sweden,  70  ounces ; and  Norway,  99 
ounces.  In  the  United  States  of  America,  the 
consumption  is  122  ounces ; and  in  New  South 
Wales,  where  there  are  no  restrictive  duties,  it  is 
declared  to  exceed  400  ounces. 

“ Jamie,  thou  shouldst  been  living  at  this  hour, 

Europe  hath  need  of  thee.” 

To  what  a height  of  royal  indignation  the 
“ Misocapnos”  would  have  risen,  had  its  author 
postponed  its  publication  250  years,  and  re- 
appeared, a “new  avater,”  to  see  it  through  the 
press  in  these  latter  days.  He  had  then  required 
no  Spanish  matches  to  set  him  on  fire;  and  the 
« horrible  Stygian  smoake”  would  have  required 
the  addition  of  all  Catesby’s  gunpowder  to  have 
made  the  simile  worthy  of  its  royal  master,  im- 
lcss,  peradventure,  the  weight  of  five  millions  of 
"olden  sovereigns  from  the  Inland  Revenue  Office 
had  pressed  heavily  upon  his  conscience,  and  he 
had  purchased  himself  a new  pair  of  silk  stockings, 
and  rested  in  peace;  then  he  could  have  returned 
the  old  pair  lie  borrowed  in  his  Scotch  capital,  m 
which  to  meet  his  English  Coui  t at  London. 

Since  the  days  when  the  green  leaf  of  tobacco 
was  used  as  a sovereign  application  for  wounds 
and  bruises  and  the  bites  of  poisonous  serpents,. 


THE  “WONDROUS  WEED.” 


33 


there  has  been  no  more  singular  use  discovered  for 
any  part  of  this  plant  than  that  of  certain  African 
tribes,  who,  Denham  says,  “ colour  their  teeth  and 
lips  with  the  flowers  of  the  goorjee  tree  and  the 
tobacco  plant.  The  former,  he  saw  only  once  or 
twice ; the  latter,  was  carried  every  day  to  market 
at  Bornou,  beautifully  arranged  in  large  baskets. 
The  flowers  of  both  these  plants  rubbed  on  the  lips 
and  teeth  give  them  a blood-red  appearance,  which  is 
there  thought  a great  beauty.”  That  the  poison  of 
tobacco  should  have  been  turned  to  account  is  not 
surprising ; and  we  are  more  prepared  to  hear  of  the 
bushmen  of  South  Africa  poisoning  the  heads  of 
their  arrows,  not  with  nicotine,  but  with  a poison 
taken  from  the  head  of  the  yellow  serpent.  These 
serpents  they  kill  with  the  oil  of  tobacco,  one 
drop  or  two  producing  spasms  and  death.  Count 
Bocarme  effectually  settled  the  question  of  the 
poisonous  property  of  nicotine,  some  years  since  at 
Mons.  It  remained  for  future  experimentalists  to 
discover  that  as  well  as  a bane,  tobacco  was  an 
antidote. 

A young  lady  in  New  Hampshire  fell  into  the 
mistake  ot  eating  a portion  of  arsenic,  which  had 
been  prepared  for  the  destruction  of  rats.  Painful 
symptoms  soon  led  to  the  discovery.  An  elderly 
lady,  then  present,  advised  that  she  should  bemade 
to  vomit  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  as  the  unfor- 
tunate victim  had  always  exhibited  a loathing  for 
tobacco  in  any  shape,  that  was  suggested  as  a 
ready  means  of  obtaining  the  desired  end.  A pine 
was  uSed  but  this  produced  no  nausea.  A large 
p jition  of  strong  tobacco  was  then  chewed,  and 

sensation  7r  °VCn  this  *d  no 

“ f®,0  disgust.  A strong  decoction  was  then 

wUhouTtod4  Wter’  0f  this  drank  half  a pint 

emetic  torP  ™«C‘1?  nal'.soa  01'  Si(MineS3,  or  any 
emetic  or  cathartic  action.  The  pains  gradually 


34 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


subsided,  and  she  began  to  feel  well.  On  the 
arrival  of  physicians,  an  emetic  was  administered. 
Tlie  patient  recovered,  and  no  ill  consequences 
were  experienced.  Another  case  occurred  a few 
years  subsequent  at  the  same  place,  when  tobacco 
was  administered  and  no  other  remedy.  In  this 
instance  there  was  complete  and  perfect  recovery. 
From  this  it  may  be  reasonably  concluded,  that 
tobacco  is  an  antidote  of  very  safe  and  ready 
application  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  arsenic. 

Financiers  and  Chancellors  of  Exchequers  or 
Ministers  of  Finance,  look  with  particularly 
favourable  eyes  upon  the  “ Indian  Weed/’  Our 
own  official  in  that  department,  can  now  calculate 
on  nearly  six  millions  of  safe  income  in  his  esti- 
mates for  a year,  from  this  fertile  source.  Our  near 
neighbours  of  France  consider  four  millions  too 
good  an  addition  to  the  revenue,  to  denounce  its 
use.  Austria  and  Spain  each  manages  to  supply 
the  state  coffers  with  a million  and  a half  of 
money  from  the  tobacco  monopoly.  Russia,  the 
Zollverein,  Portugal,  Sardinia,  and  the  Papal 
States,  individually  realizes  from  three  to  four 
hundred  thousands  of  pounds  every  year,  from  the 
use  or  abuse  of  this  most  popular  plant  in  the 
world. 

Although  this  habit,  in  its  increase,  may  cause 
throbs  of  ecstatic  -joy  in  the  breasts  of  certain 
officials,  there  are  other  sections  of  society  holding 
antagonistic  opinions.  The  Maine  Conference  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  at  a late  session, 
passed  the  following  preamble  and  resolutions 
AVhcrGcis — The  use  ot  tobcicco  pre\nils  to  & 
prodigious  extent  in  our  country,  as  indicated  m 
the  reports  of  our  national  treasury,  and  other 
authentic  documents,  from  which  it  appears  tha 
over  100,000,000  pounds  of  this  article  are  con- 
sumed in  the  United  States  annually,  at  a cost  to 


THE  “WONDROUS  WEED.” 


35 


the  consumers  of  over  20,000,000  dollars,  and 
whereas,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  its  use  is 
rapidly  increasing,  and  that  even  ministers  of  the 
Gospel  are  becoming,-  to  a great  extent,  guilty  of 
this  debasing  indulgence ; therefore — 

£'  I. — Resolved.  That  we  view  these  facts  as  a 
matter  of  profound  alarm,  and  such  an  evil  as  to 
demand  the  serious  attention  of  the  Church. 

“II- — Resolved.  That  we  regard  the  use  of 

tobacco  as  an  expensive  and  needless  indulgence, 
unfavourable  to  cleanliness  and  good  manners, 
unbecoming  in  Christians,  and  especially  in 
Christian  Ministers,  and,  like  the  use  of  alcohol,  a 
violation  of  the  laws  of  physical,  intellectual,  and 
moral  life. 

III. — Resolved.  “ That  we  will  discountenance 
the  use  of  that  injurious  narcotic,  except  as  a 
medicine  prescribed  by  a physician,  by  precept 
and  example,  and  by  all  proper  means.” 

De  Lagny  states  that  the  “Old  Believers”  a sect 
of  dissenters  from  the  Greek  Church  in  Russia 
look  wi th  horror  on  the  use  of  tobacco.  The 
Wahhabees,  a Pharasaical  sect  of  strict  Moslems 
are  rigid  in  their  condemnation  of  tobacco,  and  in 
their  adherence  to  the  precepts  of  the  Koran,  and 
the  traditions  of  the  Prophet. 

There  are  to  be  met  with  nearer  home,  those 
who  are  inveterate  against  its  use,  and  who  wil- 
J01n  with  Cowper  in  denouncing  the 

“Pernicious  weed  which  banishes  for  hours, 

That  sex  whose  presence  civilizes  ours.” 

w_fn- °fCc^ion1al  pamphlet  or  letter,  makes  its 
nt°  the  hands  of  speculative  publishers  or 
m “uC  T paP?ra'  S‘™S  gratuitous  advice,  and 

which  is  bvT,CT0ry  lan®uagc’  aSainst  a kabit 
too  mom  by  f -t0°  ^eral,  and  has  been  tested  by 
too  many  experiments  not  to  be  well  known,  and 

d 2 


36 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


equally  well  understood.  These  “counterblasts’ 
differ  but  little  from  the  model  one  which  each 
would  seem  to  aim  at  imitating — the  quaint 
expressions,  the  only  redeeming  quality  in  the 
original,  alone  being  wanting. 

“ Surely,”  saith  the  high  and  mightie  Prince 
James,  ££  smoke  becomes  a kitchen  farre  better  than 
a dining  chamber ; and  yet  it  makes  a kitchen 
oftentimes  in  the  inward  parts  of  men,  soyling  and 
infecting  them  with  an  unctuous  and  oyly  kind  of 
soote,  as  hath  been  found  in  some  great  tobacco 
takers,  that  after  their  death  were  opened.  Now, 
my  good  countrymen,  let  us  (I  pray  you),  consider 
what  honour  or  policie  can  move  us  to  imitate  the 
barbarous  and  beasflie  manners  of  the  wild,  god- 
lesse,  and  slavish  Indians,  especially  in  so  vile  and 
filthy  a custome.  Shall  we,  that  disdain  to  imitate 
the  manner  of  our  neighbour,  France  (having  the 
style  of  the  greate  Christian  langdome),  and  that 
cannot  endure  the  spirit  of  the  Spaniards,  (their 
king  being  now  comparable  in  largenesse  of 
dominions  to  the  greatest  Emperor  of  Turkey), 
shall  we,  I say,  that  have  been  so  long  cmll  and 
wealthy  in  peace,  famous  and  invincible  in  war, 
fortunate  in  both— we  that  have  been  ever  able  to 
aid  any  of  our  neighbours  (but  never  deafened 
any  of  their  ears  with  any  of  our  supplications  for 
assistance),  shall  we,  I say,  without  blushing,  abase 
ourselves  so  far  as  to  imitate  these  beasthe  Indians, 
slaves  to  the  Spaniards,  the  refuse  of  the  worlde 
and,  as  yet,  aliens  from  the  holy  covenant  of  God  ? 
Why  do  we  not  as  well  imitate  them  in  walkm0 
naked  as  they  do,  in  preferring  glasses  fathers 
and  toys,  to  gold  and  precious  stones,  as  they  do  t 
Yea  why  do  we  not  deny  God,  and  adore  the 
devils,  as^hey  do?  Have  you  not,  then,  reasons 
to  forbear  this  filthie  noveltie,  so  basely  grounded 
so  foolishly  received,  and  so  grosslie  mistaken  m 


THE  “WOND’ROUS  WEED.” 


37 


the  right  use  thereof  ? In  your  abuse  thereof, 
sinning  against  God,  harming  yourselves  both  in 
person  and  goods,  and  raking  also,  thereby,  the 
marks  and  notes  of  vanitie  upon  you,  by  the 
custom  thereof,  making  yourselves  to  be  wondered 
at  by  all  forreine  civill  nations,  and  by  all  strangers 
that  come  among  you,  to  be  scorned  and  con- 
temned ; a custom  loathsome  to  the  eye,  hateful  to 
to  the  nose,  harmfull  to  the  braine,  dangerous  to 
the  lungs,  and,  in  the  blacke  stinking  fume  thereof, 
nearest  resembling  the  horrible  Stygian  smoake  of 
the  pit  that  is  bottomless.” 

Wise  and  worthy  king,  adieu.  Gold  stick,  lead 
the  way.  We  hasten  from  your  royal  presence  to 
join  the  Cabinet  of  Oloudland.  Vive  la  Virginie! 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


“ A magnificent  array  of  clouds ; 

And  as  the  breeze  plays  on  them,  they  assume 
The  forms  of  mountains,  castled  cliffs,  and  hills, 

And  shadowy  glens,  and  groves,  and  beetling  rocks; 
And  some,  that  seem  far  off,  are  voyaging 
Their  sunbright  path  in  folds  of  silver.” 


u Right,”  said  I to  myself,  as  I lay  down  the 
volume  of  Hyperion,  in  which  I had  been  glancing 
for  repose.  u I,  too,  have  a friend,  not  yet  a sexa- 
genary bachelor,  but  a bachelor  notwithstanding. 
He  has  one  of  those  well  oiled  dispositions  which 
turn  upon  the  hinges  of  the  world  without  creak- 
ing, except  during  east  winds,  and  when  there  is 
no  butter  in  the  house.  The  hey-day  of  life  is 
over  with  him ; but  his  old  age  (begging  his 
pardon)  is  sunny  and  chirping,  and  a merry  heart 
still  nestles  in  his  tottering  frame,  like  a swallow 
that  builds  in  a tumble-down  chimney.  He  is  a 
professed  Squire  of  Dames.  The  rustle  of  a silk 
^own  is  music  to  his  ears,  and  his  imagination  is 
continually  lantern-led  by  some  wiU-witb-the-wisp 
in  the  shape  of  a lady’s  stomacher.  In  his  devo- 
tion to  the  fair  sex — the  muslin,  as  lie  calls  it  he 
is  the  gentle  flower  of  chivalry.  It  is  amusing  to 
see  how  quickly  he  strikes  into  the  scent  of  a lady’s 
handkerchief.  ' When  once  fairly  in  pursuit,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  throwing  him  out.  His  heart 
looks  out  at  his  eye ; and  Ins  inward  delight 
tingles  down  to  the  tail  of  his  coat.  He  loves  to 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


39 


bask  in  the  sunshine  of  a smile;  when  he  can 
breathe  the  sweet  atmosphere  of  kid  gloves  and 
cambric  handkerchiefs,  his  soul  is  in  its  element ; 
and  his  supreme  delight  is  to  pass  the  morning,  to 
use  his  own  quaint  language,  c in  making  dodging 
calls,  and  wriggling  round  among  the  ladies/  ” Yet 
there  are  a few  little  points  in  the  picture  which 
want  retouching,  and  beyond  all,  one  great  omission 
to  be  remedied.  It  is  the  pipe.  What  would  the 
worthy  Abbot  be  without  his  pipe  ? Just  as  un- 
comfortable as  we  should  presume  a dog  to  be 
without  his  tail.  As  incomplete  as  a sketch  of 
Napoleon  without  his  boots  and  cocked-hat.  See 
hira  in  a cloud,  and  he  seems  the  very  Premier  of 
Cloudland.  It  was  said  of  Staines,  Lord  Mayor  of 
London,  that  he  could  not  forego  his  pipe  long 
enough  to  be  sworn  into  office,  without  a whiff; 
and  a print  was  published  representing  his  lordship 
smoking  in  his  state  carriage  ; the  sword  bearer 
smoking — the  mace  bearer  smoking — the  coach- 
men smoking — the  footmen  smoking — the  posti- 
lions smoking — and,  to  crown  the  whole — all  the 
six  horses  smoking  also.  The  ninth  of  November 
on  which  this  event  occurred,  must  needs  have 
been  a cloudy  day. 

Another  cloudy  day  arose  upon  London  when 
the  great  plague  broke  out,  and  on  this  occasion, 
the  smoke  of  tobacco  mingled  with  the  gloom.  In 
Reliquiae  Hearnianae,  it  is  stated  that  “ none  who 
kept  tobacconist’s  shops  had  the  plague.  It  is  cer- 
tain that  smoking  was  looked  upon  as  a most  ex- 
cellent preservative,  insomuch,  that  even  children 
were  obliged  to  smoke.  And  I remember  ” con- 
tinues the  writer,  « that  I heard  formerly  Tom 
Kogers,  who  was  yeoman  beadle,  say,  that  when  he 
was  that  year  when  the  plague  raged,  a schoolboy 
t Lton,  all  the  boys  of  that  school  were  obliged 
to  smoke  in  the  school  every  morning,  and  that  he 


40  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

was  never  whipped  so  much  in  his  life  as  he  was 
one  morning  for  not  smoking.”  We  may  imagine 
the  experiences  of  some  of  these  urchins  at  their 
first  or  second  attempt,  and  in  remembrance,  it 
may  be,  of  some  similar  experience  of  our  own,  see 
no  cause  for  wonder  at  Tom  Rogers  not  liking  to 
elevate  his  yard  of  clay,  and  view  the  curls  of 
smoke  arise  from  the  ashes  of  the  smouldering 
weed.  Another  amateur  who  flourished  after  the 
great  fire  had  burnt  out  all  traces  of  the  great 
plague,  has  left  us  the  record  of  his  “ day  of  smoke,” 
and  the  cudgelling  he  received  for  doing  that  which 
Tom  Rogers  was  whipped  for  not  doing — 

“ I shall  never  forget  the  day  when  I first 
smoked.  It  was  a day  of  exultation  and  humilia- 
tion. It  was  a Sunday.  My  uncle  was  a great 
smoker.  He  dined  with  us  that  day ; and  after  the 
meal,  he  pulled  out  his  cigar  case,  took  a cheroot, 
and  smoked  it.  I always  liked  the  fumes  of  tobacco, 
so  I went  near  him  and  observed  how  he  put  the 
cheroot  into  his  mouth,  the  way  he  inhaled  the 
smoke,  how  he  puffed  it  out  again,  and  the  other 
coquetries  of  a regular  smoker.  I envied  my  uncle, 
and  was  determined  that  I would  smoke  myself. 
Uncle  fell  asleep.  How,  thought  I,  here’s  an 
opportunity  not  to  he  lost.  I quietly  abstracted 
three  cigars  from  the  case  which  was  lying  on  the 
table,  and  sneaked  off.  Being  a lad  of  a generous 
disposition,  I wislicd  that  my  brothers  and 
cousins  should  also  partake  of  the  heneiits  of  a 
smoke,  so  I imparted  the  secret  to  them,  at 
which’  they  were  highly  pleased.-  When  and 
where  to  smoke  was  the  next  consideration.  It 
was  arranged  that  when  the  old  people  had  gone 
to  church  in  the  evening,  we  should  smoke  ni 
the  coach-house.  We  were  six  in  number.  I 
divided  the  three  cigars  into  halves,  and  gave 
each  a piece.  Oh,  how  our  hearts  did  palpitate 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


41 


with  joy ! Fire  was  stealthily  brought  from 
the  cook-house,  and  we  commenced  to  light 
our  cigars.  Such  puffing  I never  did  see.  After 
each  puff  we  would  open  our  mouths  quite  wide, 
to  let  the  smoke  out.  At  the  performance  of  the 
first  puff  we  laughed  heartily — the  smoke  coming 
out  of  our  mouths  was  so  funny.  At  the  second 
puff  we  didn’t  laugh  so  much,  but  began  to  spit ; 
we  thought  the  cigars  were  very  bitter.  After  the 
third  puff  we  looked  steadfastly  at  each  other — 
each  thought  the  other  looked  pale.  I could  not 
give  the  word  of  command  for  another  pull.  I felt 
choked,  and  my  teeth  began  to  chatter.  There 
was  a dead  silence  for  a second.  We  were  ashamed, 
or  could  not  divulge  the  state  of  our  feelings. 
Charlie  was  the  first  who  gave  symptoms  of  re- 
bellion in  his  stomach.  Then  there  was  a general 
revolt.  What  occurred  afterwards  I did  not  know, 
till  I got  up  from  my  bed  next  morning,  to  expe- 
rience the  delights  of  a sound  flagellation.  After 
that  I abhorred  the  smell  of  tobacco — would  never 
look  at  a cigar  or  think  of  it.”  All  this  happened, 
as  the  narrator  informed  us,  at  the  age  of  seven— 
an  early  age,  some  may  imagine,  who  do  not  know 
that  in  Yizagapatam  and  other  places  on  the  same 
coasts,  where  the  women  smoke  a great  deal,  it  is 
a common  thing  for  the  mothers  to  appease  their 
squalling  brats  by  transferring  the  cigar  from  their 
own  mouths  to  that  of  their  infants.  These  young- 
sters being  accustomed  to  the  art  of  pulling,  suck 
away  gloriously  for  a second,  and  then  fall  asleep. 

Howard  Malcom  states,  “that  in  Burmah  the 
consumption  of  tobacco  for  smoking  is  very  great, 
not  in  pipes,  but  in  cigars  or  cheroots,  with 
wrappers  made  of  the  leaves  of  the  Then-net  tree. 
In  making  them,  a little  of  the  dried  root,  chopped 
nne,  is  added,  and  sometimes  a small  portion  of 
sugar,  ihese  are  sold  at  a rupee  per  thousand. 


42 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Smoking  is  more  prevalent  than  c chewing  coon  ’ 
among  both  sexes,  and  is  commenced  by  children 
almost  as  soon  as  they  are  weaned.  I have  seen,” 
he  continues,  “ little  creatures  of  two  or  three  years, 
stark  naked,  tottering  about  with  a lighted  cigar 
in  their  mouth.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  them  to 
become  smokers  even  before  they  are  weaned — the 
mother  often  taking  the  cheroot  from  her  mouth 
and  putting  it  into  that  of  the  infant.” 

In  China,  the  practice  is  so  universal,  that  every 
female,  from  the  age  of  eight  or  nine  years,  as  an 
appendage  to  her  dress,  wears  a small  silken  pocket 
to  hold  tobacco  and  a pipe. 

The  use  of  tobacco  has  become  universal  through 
the  Chinese  empire;  men,  women,  children,  every- 
body smokes  almost  without  ceasing.  They  go 
about  their  daily  business,  cultivate  the  fields,  ride 
on  horseback,  and  write  constantly  with  the  pipe  in 
their  mouths.  During  their  meals,  if  they  stop  for 
a moment,  it  is  to  smoke  a pipe  ; and  if  they  wake 
in  the  night,  they  are  sure  to  amuse  themselves  in 
the  same  way.  It  may  easily  be  supposed,  there- 
fore, that  in  a country  containing,  according  to  M. 
Hue,  300,000,000  of  smokers,  without  counting 
the  tribes  of  Tartary  and  Thibet,  who  lay  in  their 
stocks  in  the  Chinese  markets,  the  culture  of 
tobacco  has  become  very  important.  The  cultiva- 
tion is  entirely  free,  every  one  being  at  liberty  to 
plant  it  in  his  garden,  or  in  the  open  fields,  in 
whatever  quantity  he  chooses,  and  afterwards  to 
sell  it,  wholesale  or  retail,  just  as  he  likes,  without 
the  Government  interfering  with  him  in  the 
slightest  degree.  The  most  celebrated  tobacco  is 
that  obtained  in  Leao-tong  in  Mantchuria,  and  in 
the  province  of  Sse-tchouen.  The  leaves,  before 
becoming  articles  of  commerce,  undergo  various 
preparatory  processes,  according  to  the  practice  of 
the  locality.  In  the  South,  they  cut  them  into  ex- 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


43 


tremely  fine  filaments;  tlie  people  of  the  North 
content  themselves  with  drying  them  and  rubbing 
them  up  coarsely,  and  then  stuff  them  at  once  into 
their  pipes. 

According  to  etiquette  and  the  custom  of  the 
court,  Persian  princes  must  have  seven  hours  for 
sleep.  When  they  get  up,  they  begin  to  smoke  the 
narghile  or  shishe,  and  they  continue  smoking  all 
day  long.  When  there  is  company,  the  narghile 
is  first  presented  to  the  chief  of  the  assembly,  who, 
after  two  or  three  whiffs,  hands  it  to  the  next,  and 
so  on  it  goes  descending;  but  in  general,  the 
great  smoke  only  with  the  great,  or  with  strangers 
of  distinction.  The  Schali  smokes  by  himself,  or 
only  with  one  of  his  brothers,  the  tombak,  the 
smoke  of  which  is  of  a very  superior  kind,  the 
odour  being  exquisite.  It  is  the  finest  tombak  of 
Shiraz. 


Mr.  Neale  says — c‘  Talk  about  the  Turks  being 
great , smokers ; why,  the  Siamese  beat  them  to 
nothing.  I have  often  seen  a child  only  just  able 
to  toddle  about,  and  certainly  not  more  than  two 
years  of  age,  quit  its  mother’s  breast  to  go  and  get 
a whiff  from  papa’s  cigaret,  or,  as  they  are  here 
termed,  borees— cigarets  made  of  the  dried  leaf  of 
the  plantain  tree,  inside  of  which  the  tobacco  is 
rolled  up.” 

In  Japan,  after  tea.  drinking,  the  apparatus  for 
smoking  is  brought  in,  consisting  of  a hoard  of 
wood  or  brass,  though  not  always  of  the  same 
structure,  upon  which  are  placed  a small  fire-pan 
with  coals,  a pot  to  spit  in,  a small  box  filled  with 
tobacco  cut  small,  and  some  long  pipes  with  small 
brass  heads,  as  also  another  japanned  board  or 
cush,  with  socano — that  is,  sometliing  to  eat,  such 
as  tigs,  nuts,  cakes,  and  sweetmeats.  “ There  are 
no  other  spitting  pots,”  says  Kocmpfer,  “brought 
nto  the  room  but  those  which  come  along  with  the 


44 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


tobacco.  If  there  be  occasion  for  more,  they  make 
use  of  small  pieces  of  bamboo,  a band  broad  and 
high  being  sawed  from  between  the  joints  and 
hollowed.” 

In  Nicaragua,  the  dress  of  the  urchins,  from 
twelve  or  fourteen  downwards,  consists  generally 
of  a straw  hat  and  a cigar — the  latter  sometimes 
unlighted  and  stuck  behind  the  ear,  but  oftener 
lighted  and  stuck  in  the  mouth  — a costume 
sufficiently  airy  and  picturesque,  and  excessively 
cheap.  The  women  have  their  hair  braided  in 
two  long  locks,  which  hang  down  behind,  and 
and  give  them  a school-girly  look,  quite  out  of 
keeping  with  the  cool  deliberate  manner  in  which 
they  puff  their  cigars,  occasionally  forcing  the 
smoke  in  jets  from  their  nostrils.* 

On  the  Amazon,  all  persons — men  and  women — 
use  tobacco  in  smoking  ; when  pipes  are  wanting, 
they  make  cigarillos  of  the  fine  tobacco,  wrapped 
in  a paper-like  bark,  called  Toware ; and  one  of 
these  is  passed  round,  each  person,  even  to  the 
little  boys,  taking  two  or  three  puffs  in  his  turn.f 
The  Papuans  pierce  their  ears  and  insert  in 
the  orifice,  ornaments  or  cigars  of  tobacco,  rolled  in 
pandan  leaf,  of  which  they  are  great  consumers. 

A Spaniard  knows  no  crime  so  black  that  it 
should  be  visited  by  the  deprivation  of  tobacco. 
In  the  Havana,  the  convict  who  is  deprived  of 
the  ordinary  comforts,  or  even  of  the  necessaries  of 
life,  may  enjoy  his  cigar,  if  he  can  beg  or  borrow 
it ; if  he  stole  it,  the  offence  would  be  considered 
venial.  At  the  doorway  of  most  of  the  shops 
hang  little  sheet-iron  boxes  filled  with  lighted 
coals,  at  which  the  passer-by  may  light  cigars; 
and  on  the  balustrade  of  the  staircase  of  every 

* Squier’s  “ Nicaragua.” 
t Edwards’  “ Voyage  up  the  Amazon.” 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


45 


house  stands  a small  chafing  dish  for  the  same 
purpose.  Fire  for  his  cigar,  is  the  only  thing  for 
which  a Spaniard  does  not  think  it  necessary  to 
ask  and  thank  with  ceremonious  courtesy.  If  he 
has  permitted  his  cigar  to  go  out,  he  steps  up  to 
the  first  man  he  meets — nobleman  or  galley  slave, 
as  the  case  may  be — and  the  latter  silently  hands 
his  smoking  weed ; for  it  is  impossible  that  two 
Spaniards  should  meet  and  not  have  one  lighted 
cigar  between  them.  The  light  obtained,  the 
lightee  returns  the  cigar  to  the  lighter  in  silence. 
A shorthand  suddenly  checked  motion  of  the  hand, 
as  the  cigar  is  extended,  is  the  only  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  courtesy.  This  is  never,  however, 
omitted. . Women  smoke  as  well  as  men ; and  in 
a full  railroad  car,  every  person,  man,  woman,  and 
child,  may  be  seen  smoking.  To  placard  “ no  smok- 
ing allowed;''  and  enforce  it,  would  ruin  the  road. 

A regular  smoker  in  Cuba  will  consume  perhaps 
twenty  or  thirty  cigars  a day,  but  they  are  all 
fresh.  What  we  call  a fine  old  cigar,  a Cuban 
would  not  smoke. 


At  Manilla,  the  women  smoke  as  well  as  the 
men.  One  manufactory  employs  about  9,000 
women  in  making  the  Manilla  cheroots ; another 
establishment  employs  3,000  men  in  making  paper 
cigars  or  cigarettes.  The  paper  cigars  are  chiefly 
smoked  by  men ; the  women  prefer  the  “ puros  ” 
the  largest  they  can  get.  5 

The  Binua  of  Johore,  of  both  sexes,  indulge 
rrv.C  ^ tobacco.  It  is  their  favourite  luxury. 
1 he  women  are  often  seen  seated  together  weaving- 
mats;  and  each  with  a cigar  in  her  mouth.  When 
speaking,  it  is  transferred  to  the  perforation  in 
he  ear.  When  met  paddling  their  canoes  the 
cigar  is  seldom  wanting.  The  Mintira  women 

smoke°itmUC  1 addlcted  to  tobacco>  but  they  do  not 


46 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


In  South  America,  many  of  the  tribes  are  free 
indulgers  in  tobacco ; and  this  extends  also  to  the 
female  and  juvenile  sections  of  the  community. 
A story,  which  Signor  Calistro  narrated  to  Mr. 
Wallace  whilst  travelling  in  the  interior  of  Brazil, 
shows  that  it  was  nothing  but  a common  occur- 
rence for  little  girls'  to  smoke.  This  story  is  in 
itself  interesting  considered  apart  from  all  circum- 
stances of  veracity.  “ There  was  a negro  who  had 
a pretty  wife,  to  whom  another  negro  was  rather 
attentive  when  be  had  an  opportunity.  One  day 
the  husband  went  out  to  hunt,  and  the  other  party 
thought  it  a good  opportunity  to  pay  a visit  to 
the  lady.  The  husband,  however,  returned  rather 
unexpectedly,  and  the  visitor  climbed  up  on  the 
rafters  to  be  out  of  sight,  among  the  old  boards 
and  baskets  that  were  stowed  away  there.  The 
husband  put  his  gun  by  in  a corner,  and  called  to 
his  wife  to  get  Ins  supper,  and  then  sat  down  in 
his  hammock.  Casting  his  eyes  up  to  the  raffers,  he 
saw  a leg  protruding  from  among  the  baskets,  and 
thinking  it  something  supernatural,  crossed  himself, 
and  said,  ‘ Lord  deliver  us  from  the  legs  appearing 
overhead  !’  The  other,  hearing  this,  attempted  to 
draw  up  his  legs  out  of  sight;  but,  losing  his 
balance,  came  down  suddenly  on  the  floor  in  front 
of  the  astonished  husband,  who,  half-frightened, 
asked,  c Where  do  you  come  from  ?’  ‘ I have  just 

come  from  heaven,’  said  the  other,  k and  have 
brought  you  news  of  your  little  daughter  Maria. 

‘ Oh,  wife,  wife ! come  and  see  a man  who  has 
brought  us  news  of  our  little  daughter  Maria!’ 
then,  turning  to  the  visitor,  continued,  ‘and  what 
was  my  little  daughter  doing  when  you  left?’ 
‘ Ob,  she  was  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  Virgin  with 
a golden  crown  on  her  head,  and  smoking  a golden 
pipe  a yard  long.’  ‘ And  did  she  send  any  message 
to  us  P’  ‘ Oh,  yes ; she  sent  many  remembrances, 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


47 


and  begged  you  to  send  her  two  pounds  of  your 
tobacco  from  the  little  rhoosa  ; they  have  not  got 
any  half  so  good  up  there.’  ‘ Oh,  wife,  wife,  bring 
two  pounds  of  our  tobacco  from  the  little  rhoosa, 
for  our  daughter  Maria  is  in  heaven,  and  she  says 
they  have  not  any  half  so  good  up  there.’  So  the 
tobacco  was  brought,  and  the  visitor  was  departing, 
when  he  was  asked, 1 Are  there  many  white  men  up 
there?’  ‘Very  few,'  he  replied;  ‘they  are  all  down 
below  with  the  diabo.’  ‘ I thought  so,’  the  other 
replied,  apparently  quite  satisfied ; ‘ good  night.’  ” 
On  the  Orinoco,  tobacco  has  been  cultivated  by 
the  native  tribes  from  time  immemorial.  The 
amanacs  and  the  Maypures  of  Guiana  wrap  maize 
leaves  around  their  cigars  as  did  the  Mexicans  at 
the  time  of  the  arrival  of  Cortes  ; and,  as  in  Chili 
is  done  at  the  present  day.  The  Spaniards  have 
substituted  paper  for  the  maize  husks,  in  imitation 
of  them.  1 he  little  cigarettes  of  Chili  are  called 
Ao/ztas  They  are  about  two  inches  and  a half 
long,  filled  with  coarsely  powdered  tobacco.  As 
eir  use  is  apt  to  stain  the  fingers  of  the  smoker 
the  fashionable  young  gentlemen  carry  a pair  of  de- 
licate gold  tweezers  for  holding  them.  The  cinar 
p 80  Snia11  tllat  & requires  not  more  than  three&or 

i tervAn,UteS  t0  Sm°ke  °na  The7  serve  t0  AH  up  the 
ttetpn  ® conversation.  At  tertulias,  the  gen- 
craen  sometimes  retire  to  a balcony  to  smoke  one 
or  two  cigars  after  a dance. 

knmv°  1,001  1{ndians  of  tbe  forests  of  the  Orinoco 
MonfpWe  1 “ Cud  the  Sreat  nobles  of  the  Court 
excellent  zuma’.that  the  smoke  of  tobacco  is  an 
So  af»rCOUO  ; ”d  they  "se  it.  “Ot  only  to  pro 
wiescencp  Aap’  bllt  alsr>  to  lndlloe  a state  o£ 

lien  At  tl  n "'-v  cail  dreaming  with  the  eyes 
If  ^ourt.of  Montezuma  the  pipe  was 
with  'a,K  . wdile  the  nostrils  were  stopped 

wrth  the  other.  m order  that  the  smote  ndght  be 


48 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


more  easily  swallowed.  Bernal  Diaz  also  informs 
us,  that  after  Montezuma  had  dined,  they  presented 
to  him  three  little  canes,  highly  ornamented,  con- 
taining liquid  amher,  mixed  with  a herb  they  call 
tobacco,  and  when  he  had  sufficiently  viewed  and 
heard  the  singers,  he  took  a little  of  the  smoke  of 
one  of  these  canes,  and  then  laid  himself  down  to 
sleep.  A tribe  of  Indians  originally  inhabiting 
Panama,  improved  upon  this  method,  which  occu- 
pied both  hands,  and  involved  considerable  trouble  ; 
the  method  adopted  by  the  chiefs  and  great  men  of 
this  tribe,  was  to  employ  servants  to  blow,  tobacco 
smoke  in  their  faces,  which  was  convenient  and 
encouraged  their  indolence  ; they  indulged  in  the 
luxury  of  tobacco  in  no  other  way. 

Amongst  the  Bocky  Mountain  Indians,  it  is  a 
universal  practice  to  indulge  in  smoking,  and  when 
they  do  so  they  saturate  their  bodies  in  smoke. 
They  use  but  little  tobacco,  mixing  with  it  a plant 
which  renders  the  fume  less  offensive.  It  is  a 
social  luxury,  for  the  enjoyment  of  which,  they 
form  a circle,  and  only  one  pipe  is  used.  Ihe 
principal  chief  begins  by  drawing  three  whiffs,  the 
first  of  which  he  sends  upward,  and  then  passes 
the  pipe  to  the  person  next  in  dignity,  and  in  like 
manner  the  instrument  passes  round  imtil  it  comes 
to  the  first  chief  again.  He  then  draws  four  whiffs, 
the  last  of  which  he  blows  through  his  nose,  in  two 
columns,  in  circling  ascent,  as  through  a double 
fined  chimney  ; and  their  pipes  are  not  of  the  race 
stigmatized  by  Knickerbocker  as  plebeian.  None  ot 
the  smoke  of  those  villanous  short  pipes,  con- 
tinually ascending  in  a cloud  about  the  nose, 
penetrating  into  and  befogging  the  cerebellum, 
drying  up  all  the  kindly  moisture  of  the  brain,  ana 
rendering  the  people  who  use  them  vapourish  and 
testy  ; or,  what  is  worse,  from  being  goodly,  burly, 
sleek-conditioned  men,  to  become  like  the  Dutcli 


THE  CABINET  OP  CLOUDLAND. 


49 


yeomanry  who  smoked  short  pipes,  a lantern-jawed, 
smoke-dried,  leathern-hided  race.  The  red  people, 
whether  of  the  Rocky  mountains  or  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, belonged  to  the  aristocracy  of  the  long  pipes. 
Let  us  hope  that  they  have  not  degenerated,  and 
become  followers  of  the  customs  of  the  barbarian 
ultra-marines. 

Turn  over  the  leaves  of  “Westward  Ho  !”  until 
you  reach  the  end  of  the  seventh  chapter,  and 
then  read  of  Salvation  Yeo  and  his  fiery  repu- 
tation, and  his  eulogium — “ for  when  all  things  were 
made,  none  was  made  better  than  this;  to  be  a 
lone  man’s  companion,  a bachelor’s  friend,  a hun- 
gry man’s  food,  a sad  man’s  cordial,  a wakeful 
man’s  sleep,  and  a chilly  man’s  fire,  sir ; while,  for 
stanching  of  wounds,  purging  of  rheum,  and  settling 
of  the  stomach,  there’s  no  herb  like  unto  it  under 
the  canopy  of  heaven.”  The  truth  of  which  eulogium 
Amyas  testeth  in  after  years.  But,  “ mark  in  the 
meanwhile,”  says  one  of  the  veracious  chroniclers 
from  whom  I draw  these  facts,  writing  seemingly 
in  the  palmy  days  of  good  Queen  Anne  and  “ not 
having  (as  he  says)  before  his  eyes  the  fear  of  that 
misocapnic  Solomon  James  I.  or  of  any  other  lyin°- 
Stuart,”  “ that  not  to  South  Devon,  but  to  North* 
not  to  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  but  to  Sir  Amyas 
Leigh ; not  to  the  banks  of  the  Dart,  but  to  the 
banks  of  iorndge,  does  Europe  owe  the  dayspring 
ot  the  latter  age,  that  age  of  smoke  which  shall 
endure  and  thrive  when  the  age  of  brass  shall  have 
vanished,  like  those  of  iron  and  of  gold,  for  whereas 
tr.  Lane  is  said  to  have  brought  home  that  divine 
weed  (as  Spenser  well  names  it),  from  Virginia  in 
ie  year  1584,  it  is  hereby  indisputable  that  full 
Tn!irra  earlier>  by  UUge  of  Mford  in  the 
hermit?  (whlch  a11  true  smokers  shall 

• i C.  tci  T18^  as  a hallowed  spot  and  point  of 
pilgrimage)  first  twinkled  that  fiery  beacon  and 


50 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


beneficent  loadstar  of  Bidefordian  commerce,  to 
spread  hereafter  from  port  to  port,  and  peak  to 
peak,  like  the  watch-fires  which  proclaimed  the 
coming  of  the  Armada  and  the  fall  of  Troy,  even 
to  the  shores  of  the  Bosphorus,  the  peaks  of  the 
Caucasus,  and  the  farthest  isles  of  the  Malayan 
sea;  while  Bideford,  metropolis  of  tobacco,  saw 
her  Pool  choked  up  with  Virginian  traders,  and 
the  pavement  of  her  Bridgeland  Street  groaning 
beneath  the  savoury  bales  of  roll  Trinidado,  leaf,  ) 
and  pudding ; and  the  grave  burghers,  bolstered  } 
and  blocked  out  of  their  own  houses  by  the  scarce 
less  savoury  stockfish  casks  which  filled,  cellar, 
parlour,  and  attic,  were  fain  to  sit  outside  the  ; 
door,  a silver  pipe  in  every  strong  right  hand,  and  • 
each  left  hand  chinking  cheerfully  the  doubloons 
deep  lodged  in  the  auriferous  caverns  of  their 
trunkhose ; while  in  those  fairy  rings  of  fragrant  • 
mist,  which  circled  round  their  contemplative  I 
brows,  flitted  most  pleasant  visions  of  Wiltshire  f 
farmers  jogging  into  Sherborne  fair,  their  heaviest  I 
shillings  in  their  pockets  to  buy  (unless  old 
Aubrey  lies)  the  lotus  leaf  of  Porridge  for  its  ' 
weight  in  silver,  and  draw  from  thence,  after  the  I 
example  of  the  Caciques  of  Dariena,  supplies  of  f 
inspiration  much  needed  then,  as  now,  in  those  | 
Gothamite  regions.  And  yet  did  these  improve,  ; 
as  Englishmen,  upon  the  method  of  those  heathen 
savages;  for  the  latter  (so  Salvation  Yeo  reported ■ 
as  a truth,  and  Dampier’s  surgeon,  Mr  Wafer,  1 
after  him),  when  they  will  deliberate  of  war  or 
policy,  sit  round  in  the  hut  of  the  chief ; where 
being  placed,  enter  to  them  a small  boy  with  a 
cigarro  of  the  bigness  of  a rolling  pm,  and  pulls 
the  smoke  thereof  into  the  face  of  each  warrior, 
from  the  eldest  to  the  youngest;  while  they, 
putting  their  hand  funnel-wise  round  their  mouths, 
draw  into  the  sinuosities  of  the  brain,  that  more 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


51 


than  Delphic  vapour  of  prophecy ; which  boy  pre- 
sently falls  down  in  a swoon,  and  being  dragged 
out  by  the  heels  and  laid  by  to  sober,  enter  another 
to  puff  at  the  sacred  cigarro,  till  he  is  dragged  out 
likewise,  and  so  on  till  the  tobacco  is  finished,  and 
the  seed  of  wisdom  has  sprouted  in  every  soul  into 
the  tree  of  meditation,  bearing  the  flowers  of 
eloquence,  and,  in  due  time,  the  fruit  of  valiant 
action.”  And  with  this  quaint  fact,  narrated  in 
the  bombastic  style  of  chronicles,  close th  the 
seventh  chapter  of  the  voyages  and  adventures  of 
Sir  Amyas  Leigh,  under  the  style  and  title  already 
mentioned,  and  after  which  digression  the  course  of 
our  narrative  proceedeth  as  before. 

The  inhabitants  of  Yemen  smoke  their  well- 
loved dschihschi  pipes,  with  long  stems  passed 
through  water,  that  the  smoke  may  come  cold  to 
the  mouth ; and  which,  when  a few  inveterate 
smokers  meet  together,  keep  up  a boiling  and 
bubbling  noise,  not  unlike  a distant  corps  of 
drummers  in  full  performance. 

. ^ke  Austrian  dominions,  the  lovers  of  the 
pipe  may  be  found  amongst  all  classes  of  the 
community.  Kohl  writes,  that  after  taking  two 
or  three  pipes  of  tobacco  with  the  pasha  at  New 
Ursova,  he  went  into  the  market-place,  where  he 
round  several  merchants  who  invited  him  to  sit 
own,  and  again  he  was  presented  with  a pipe. 

f/om  this  place  he  went  to  a mosque,  calling  in 
at  a schoo1  on  hig  way._«The  little  Turkish 

dents  were  making  a most  heathenish  noise, 

JZ  c°ntrasted  arausing1.7  with  the  quiet  and 

. , demeanour  of  their  teacher,  who  lay 

Sne  nnd  XXVT  C\bench’  where  he  sraoked  kis 
to  look  otSatl  He  afterwards  went  to 

saw  ')  Inf  iie  dedications,  and  here  and  there 

Pipe' in  thT  Vrith  hLs  musket  in  one  hand  and 
PTe  m the  other.  « Twenty-five  soldiers  were 

e 2 


52 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


seen  smoking  under  a shed,  and  on  the  ground  lay 
a number  of  shells  or  hollow  halls,  which  they 
assured  us  wore  filled  with  powder  and  other 
combustibles,  yet  the  soldiers  smoked  among 
them  unconcernedly,  and  allowed  us  to  do  the 
same/’  A gentleman  from  Constantinople  told 
him  that  he  had  seen  worse  instances  of  careless- 
ness, in  Asia  Minor.  He  had  there  been  one  day  in 
the  tents  of  a pasha,  where  some  wet  powder  was 
drying  and  being  made  into  cartridges,  and  the 
men  engaged  in  the  work  were  smoking  all  the 
■while. 

In  the  “ Stettin  Gazette,”  lately  appeared  a 
notification  that  the  Prussian  clergy  had  privately 
been  requested  by  the  higher  authorities  to  abstain 
from  smoking  in  public.  We  are  not  accustomed 
to  it,  and  should  certainly  think  it  odd  to  see 
clergymen  perambulating  the  streets  with  shoit  I 
pipes  in  their  mouths. 

In  all  parts  of  the  Sultan’s  dominions,  the  pipe 
or  narghile  has  a stem  generally  flexible,  about 
six  feet  in  length;  and  at  this  the  owner  wilil 
suck  for  hours.  You  may  see  a man  travelling, 
mounted  aloft  on  a tall  camel,  with  his  body 
oscillating  to  and  fro  like  a sailor’s  when  he  I 
rows,  but  still  that  man  has  his  two  yards  ot  pipe 
before  him.  lrou  may  see  two  men  caulking  a 
ship’s  side  as  she  lies  careened  near  the  shore. 
Up  to  their  waists  in  water,  they  act  up  to  t he 
principle  of  division  of  labour ; for  one  will  smoke 
as  the  other  plies  the  hammer,  and  then  the 
worker  takes  his  turn  at  the  narghile.  Arabs 
sitting  at  work,  fix  their  pipes  m the  sand  In 
the  potteries  both  hands  must  be  employed— how, 
then,  can  the  potter  smoke?  Necessity  is  the 
mother  of  invention.  One  end  of  the  pipe  is  sus- 
pended by  a cord  from  the  ceiling,  the  other  is 
in  the  potter’s  mouth. 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


53 


In  smoking,  Lane  informs  us,  the  people  of 
Egypt  and  other  countries  of  the  East  draw  in 
their  breath  freely,  so  that  much  of  the  smoke 
descends  into  the  lungs  ; and  the  terms  which 
they  use  to  express  “ smoking  tobacco,”  signify 
“ drinking  smoke,”  or  “ drinking  tobacco for  the 
same  word  signifies  both  smoke  and  tobacco.  Few 
of  them  spit  while  smoking  ■ he  had  seldom  seen 
them  do  so. 

It  was  something  like  drinking  of  smoke  that 
Napoleon  accomplished  in  his  unsuccessful  smoking 
campaign.  He  once  took  a fancy  to  try  to  smoke. 
Everything  was  prepared  for  him,  and  his  Majesty 
took  the  amber  mouth-piece  of  the  narghile  be- 
tween his  bps;  he  contented  himself  with  open- 
ing and  shutting  his  mouth  alternately,  without  in 
the  least  drawing  his  breath.  “ The  devil,”  he  re- 
plied—why,  there’s  no  result ! ” It  was  shewn  that 
he  made  the  attempt  badly,  and  the  proper  method 
practically  exhibited  to  him.  At  last  he  drew  in 
a mouthful,  when  the  smoke — which  he  had  dis- 
covered the  means  of  drawing  in,  hut  knew  not 
to,  exPel— found  its  way  into  his  throat,  and 
thence  by  Ins  nose,  almost  blinding  him.  As  soon 
as  he  recovered  breath,  he  cried  out— “ Awav  with 

it ! What  an  abomination  ! Oh  ! the  lion my 

stomach  turns  ! ” In  fact,  the  annoyance  continued 
lor  an  hour,  and  he  renounced  for  ever  a habit 

W ahu  1G  was  ^ on^  amuse  sluggards. 

Although  Napoleon  managed  to  fail,  thousands 
less  mighty  have  managed  to  succeed.  There  is  a 
curious  kind  of  legend  mentioned  in  Brands 
Antiquities,  by  way  of  accounting  for  the  frequent 
use  and  continuance  of  taking  tobacco,  for  the 
eracity  of  which  he  declares  that  he  will  not 
Amp  " ' ^Gn  the  Christians  first  discovered 

flip  nCai  t evil  was  afraid  of  losing  his  hold  of 
the  people  there  by  the  appearance  of  Christianity. 


54 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


He  is  reported  to  have  told  some  Indians  of  his 
acquaintance,  that  he  had  found  a way  to  he  re- 
venged on  the  Christians  for  beating  up  his 
quarters,  for  he  would  teach  them  to  take  tobacco, 
to  which,  when  they  had  once  tasted  it,  they  should 
become  perpetual  slaves.” 

y Without  venturing  to  authenticate  this  strange 
story,  in  the  moral  of  which  Napoleon  would  have 
concurred — with  a mental  reservation  in  favour  of 
snuff — after  the  above  defeat,  let  us  console  tobacco 
lovers,  that  whilst  the  success  of  the  first  temptation 
closed  the  gates  of  Paradise,  the  success  of  the 
second  opens  them  again. 

The  following  from  an  old  collection  of  epigrams 
is,  in  every  respect,  worthy  of  the  theme. 

“ All  dainty  meats  I do  defie, 

Which  feed  men  fat  as  swine  ; 

He  is  a frugal  man  indeed 
That  on  a leaf  can  dine. 

He  needs  no  napkin  for  his  hands 
His  fingers’  ends  to  wipe, 

That  keeps  his  kitchen  in  a box, 

And  roast  meat  in  a pipe.” 

In  Hamburg,  40,000  cigars  are  smoked  daily  in 
a population  scarcely  amounting  to  45,000  adult 
males.  And  in  London,  the  consumption  must  be 
considerable  to  furnish,  from  the  profits  of  retail- 
ing, a living  to  1566  tobacconists.  In  England, 
we  may  presume  that  the  largest  smoker  of  tobacco 
must  be  the  Queen,  since  an  immense  kiln  at  the 
docks,  called  the  Queen’s  pipe,  is  occasionally 
lighted  and  primed  with  hundredweights  of 
tobacco,  sea  damaged  or  otherwise  spoiled,  at  the 
same  time  blowing  a cloud 

“ Wrhich  Turks  might  envy,  Africans  adore.” 

The  total  number  of  cigars  consumed  in  France 
in  1857  is  stated  to  have  been  523,636,000 ; and 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


55 


the  total  revenue  of  the  French  Government  from 
the  tobacco  monopoly  is  estimated  at  £7,320,000 
annually.  In  Russia  the  revenue  is  £7,200,000 
annually ; and  in  Austria  near  £3,000,000.  These 
are  large  sums  to  pay  for  the  privilege  of  puffing. 

The  Buffalo  Democracy  estimates  the  annual 
consumption  of  tobacco  at  4,000,000,000  of  pounds. 
This  is  all  smoked,  chewed,  or  snuffed.  Suppose  it 
all  made  into  cigars  100  to  the  pound,  it  would 
produce  400,000,000,000  of  cigars.  These  cigars5 
at  the  usual  length,  four  inches,  if  joined  together, 
would  form  one  continuous  cigar  25,253,520  miles 
long,  which  would  encircle  the  earth  more  than 
1000  times.  Cut  up  into  equal  pieces,  250,000 
miles  in  length,  there  would  be  over  1000  cigars 
which  would  extend  from  the  centre  of  the  earth 
to  the  centre  of  the  moon.  Put  these  cigars  into 
boxes  10  inches  long,  4 inches  wide,  and  3 inches 
high,  100  to  the  box,  and  it  would  require 
4,000,000,000  boxes  to  contain  them.  Pile  up 
these  boxes  in  a solid  mass,  and  they  would  occupy 
a space  of  294,444,444  cubic  feet ; if  piled  up  20 
feet  high,  they  would  cover  a farm  of  338  acres  ; 
and  if  laid  side  by  side,  the  boxes  would  cover 
nearly  20,000  acres.  Allowing  this  tobacco,  in  its 
unmanufactured  state,  to  cost  sixpence  a pound 
and  we  have  100,000,000  pounds  sterling  expended 
yearly  upon  tins  weed ; at  least  one-and-a-half  times 
as  much  more  is  required  to  manufacture  it  into  a 
marketable  form,  and  dispose  of  it  to  the  consumer. 
At  the  very  lowest  estimate,  then,  the  human  family 
expend  every  year  £250,000,000  in  the  gratified 
won  ot  an  acquired  habit,  or  a crown  for  every  man 
woman,  and  child  upon  the  earth.  This  sum  the 
writer  calculates,  would  build  2 railroads  round  the 

from  .t\C,°,8t  ?-f  f >°?°  I'cr  « 16  railroads 

100  000  f pAt  untlC  to  -the  1Jacific-  If  would  build 
100,000  churches,  costing  £2,500  each,  or  1,000,000 


56  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

dwellings  costing  £25  each  (rather  small !)  It 
would  employ  1,000,000  of  preachers  and  1,000,000 
of  teachers,  giving  each  a salary  of  £125.  It  would 
support  3.(  millions  of  young  men  at  college,  allow- 
ing to  each  £75  a year  for  expenses. 

What  a cloud  the  “ human  family  ” would  blow  if 
they  had  each  his  share  of  the  4,000,000,000  pounds 
dealt  out  to  him  in  cigars  on  the  morning  of  the 
25th  of  December,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1860. 
One  feels  dubious  as  to  the  number  who  would 
refuse  to  take  their  quota,  if  there  were  nothing  to 
pay. 

Dr.  Dwight  Baldwin  states,  that  in  1851,  the 
city  of  New  York  spent  3,650,000  dollars  for 
cigars  alone,  while  it  only  spent  3,102,500  dollars 
for  bread.  The  Grand  Erie  Canal,  364  miles 
long,  the  longest  in  the  world,  with  its  eighteen 
aqueducts,  and  eighty-four  locks,  was  made  in  six 
years,  at  a cost  of  7,000,000  dollars.  The  cigar 
hill  in  the  city  of  New  York  would  have  paid  the 
whole  in  two  years. 

The  number  of  cigar  manufactories  in  America 
is  1,400,  and  the  number  of  hands  employed  in 
them  7,000  and  upwards.  The  total  estimated 
weekly  produce  of  these  manufactories  is  1 1 -V 
millions,  and  the  yearly  840  millions.  At  7 dollars 
per  1,000,  these  would  be  worth  5 million  dollars, 
and  adding  50  per  cent,  for  jobber  and  retailer, 
the  total  cost  to  consumers  would  be  7^  million 
dollars— add  to  this  the  sum  paid  for  imported 
cigars,  6 million  dollars,  and  we  ha\c  1 3 1 million 
dollars,  the  value  of  cigars  consumed  yearly  in  the 
United  States,  without  adding  profit  to  the  im- 
ported cigars ; so  that,  including  the  amount  ex- 
pended in  tobacco  for  smoking  and  chewing,  an 
in  snuff,  the  annual  cost  ol  the  tobacco  consumed 
vearly,  is  not  less  than  30  million  dollars  or 
£6,000,000.  This  is  but  little  more  than  is 


THE  CABINET  OF  CLOUDLAND. 


57 


realized  annually  in  Great  Britain  by  the  excise 
duty  alone  on  the  tobacco  consumed  at  home ; but 
it  must  be  remembered,  that  in  America  tobacco 
is  free  of  the  duty  of  three  shillings  and  twopence 
per  pound,  and  free  of  charges  for  an  Atlantic 
passage,  so  that  the  tobacco  represented  by  6 
millions  there,  would  be  represented  here  by  at 
least  six  times  that  amount. 

_ Cloudland  costs  something  to  keep  up  its  dig- 
nity after  all,  but  beauty  is  seductive,  and  so  is 
tobacco. 

Yes!  St.  John  (Percy,  we  mean — not  “the 
Divine”),  there  must  be  “magic  in  the  cigar.” 
Then,  to  the  sailor,  on  the  wide  and  tossing  ocean, 
what  consolation  is  there,  save  in  his  old  pipe  ? 
While  smoking  his  inch  and  a half  of  clay,  black 
and  polished,  his.  Susan  or  his  Mary  becomes 
manifest  before  him,  he  sees  her,  holds  converse 
with  her  spirit— in  the  red  glare  from  the  ebony 
bowl,  as  he  walks  the  deck  at  night,  or  squats  on 
the  windlass,  are  reflected  the  bright  sparkling 
eyes  of  his  sweetheart.  The  Irish  fruit-woman^ 
the  Jai  vie  without  a fare,  the  policeman  on  a quiet 
beat,  the  soldier  at  his  ease,  all  bow  to  the  mystic 
power  of  tobacco* — all  acknowledge  the  infatua- 
tions of  Cloudland. 


* Bentley’s  Magazine. 


CHAPTER  Y. 


PIPEOLOGY. 


“ It  was  his  constant  companion  and  solace.  IVas  he  gay,  he  smoked 
—was  he  sad,  he  smoked— his  pipe  was  never  out  of  his  mouth— it 
was  a part  of  his  physiognomy ; without  it  his  best  friends  would  not 
know  him.  Take  away  his  pipe— you  might  as  well  take  away  his  nose." 

. — Knickerbocker’s  New  York. 

Semele,  in  a deatli  by  fire,  became  a martyr  to 
love.  Thus  Virginia  suffers  herself  to  he  burnt 
for  the  good  of  the  world.  From  the  ashes  of  the 
old  Phoenix  the  young  Phoenix  was  horn.  From 
the  smoke  of  the  Havana  spring  new  visions,  and 
eloquent  delights.  As  the  altars  of  the  gods  re- 
ceived honour  from  men,  and  the  censers  from 
whence  ascended  the  burning  incense  were  sacred 
to  the  deities,  wherefore  should  not  the  pipe 
receive  honour,  as  well  as  the  man  who  uses  it, 
or  the  odorous  weed  consumed  within  it.  An 
enthusiast  writes  of  it  thus— “ Philosophers  have  • 
drawn  their  best  similes  from  their  pipes.  How 
could  they  have  done  so,  had  their  pipes  first  been  t 
drawn  from  them  ? We  see  the  smoke  go  up-  • 
wards — we  think  of  life ; we  see  the  smoke- wreath 
fade  away— we  remember  the  morning  cloud. 
Our  pipe  breaks— we  mourn  the  fragility  of  earthly 
pleasures  We  smoke  it  to  an  end,  and  tapping : 
out  the  ashes,  remember  that  ‘Dust  we  are,  and’, 
unto  dust  we  shall  return.’  If  we  are  in  love,  we. 
garnish  a whole  sonnet  with  images  drawn  from 
smoking,  and  first  tiff  our  pipe,  and  then  tune  it. 


PIPEOLOGY. 


59 


That  spark  kindles  like  her  eye,  is  ruddy  as  her 
lip;  this  slender  clay,  as  white  as  her  hand,  and 
slim  as  her  waist ; till  her  raven  hair  grows  grey 
as  these  ashes,  I will  love  her.  This  perfume  is 
not  sweeter  than  her  breath,  though  sweeter  than 
all  else.  The  odour  ascends  me  into  the  brain, 
fills  it  full  of  all  fiery  delectable  shapes,  which 
delivered  over  to  the  tongue,  which  is  the  birth 
become  delectable  wit.” 

The  instruments  by  which  the  <c  universal  weed” 
is  consumed,  are  almost  as  variable  in  form  and 
material  as  the  nations  indulging  in  their  use. 
The  pipe  of  Holland  is  of  porcelain,  and  that  of 
our  own  island  of  unglazed  clay.  These  latter  are 
made  in  large  quantities,  both  at  home  and 
abroad*  One  factory  at  St.  Omer  employs  450 
work-people,  and  produces  annually  100,000  gross, 
or  nearly  fifteen  millions  of  pipes  ; and  another 
factory  at  the  same  place  employs  850  work-people, 
and  produces  200,000  gross,  or  nearly  thirty  mil- 
lions of  pipes,  consuming  nearly  eight  thousand 
tons  of  clay  in  their  manufacture.  The  quantity 
of  pipes  used  annually  in  London  is  estimated  at 
364,000  gross,  or  52,416,000  pipes ; it  requires 
300  men,  each  man  making  20  gross  four  dozen 
per  week,  for  one  year,  to  make  them  ; the  cost  of 
winch  is  £40,950.  The  average  length  of  these 
pipes  is  twelve  and.  a half  inches;  and  if  laid  down 
in  a horizontal  position,  end  to  end  together,  they 
would  reach  to  the  extent  of  10,340  miles,  1,600 
yauls  ; if  they  were  piled  one  above  another  per- 
pendicularly they  would  reach  135,138  times  as 
g as  bt.  Pauls;  they  would  weigh  1,137  tons, 

indebted  to'  ®*>™e  tobacco P'P®  ot  <%.  the  Dutch  are 

rof,0,Owl,!ch- Mr- 

of  the  Gouda  Tine  Work ' m 1^?8’states  tliat  the  master 
Principal  **  - 


60  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

10  cwts.,  and  it  would  require  104  tons,  9 cwts., 
32  lbs.  of  tobacco  to  fill  them.  In  1857  we  im- 
ported clay  pipes  to  the  value  of  £7,614,  which 
cannot  be  short  of  121,000  gross,  or  seventeen  and 
a half  millions.  But  even  with  us,  pipes  were  not 
always  of  clay.  The  earliest  pipes  used  in  Britain 
are  stated  to  have  been  made  from  a walnut-shell 
and  a straw.  Dr.  Boyle  describes  a very  primitive 
kind  of  clay  pipe  used  by  some  of  the  natives  of 
India — it  is  presumed  only  in  cases  of  necessity. 
“ The  amateur  makes  two  holes,  one  longer  than 
the  other,  with  a piece  of  stick  in  a clay  soil,  in- 
clining the  stick  so  that  they  may  meet ; into  the 
shorter  hole  he  places  the  tobacco,  and  applies  his 
mouth  to  the  other,  and  thus,  as  he  lies  upon  the 
around,  luxuriates  in  the  fumes  of  the  narcotic 

herb/’  j ] 

Turkish  pipe-bowls,  or  Lules,  are  composed  of 
the  red  clay  of  Nish,  mixed  with  the  white  earth 
of  the  Roustchouck.  They  are  very  graceful  in 
form,  and  are  in  some  cases  ornamented  with  gild- 
ing. The  u regular  Turk”  prefers  a fresh  bowl 
daily ; therefore  the  plain  ones  are  resorted  to  on 
the  score  of  economy.  In  Turkey  and  some  other 
parts  of  the  Orient,  it  is  not  unusual  to  compute 
distances,  or  rather  the  duration  of  a journey,  by 
the  numbers  of  pipes  which  might  be  smoked  in 
the  time  necessary  to  accomplish  it. 

The  pipe  of  the  German  is,  almost  universally, 
the  Meerschaum,  that  pipe  of  fame  so  coveted  by 
the  Northern  smoker.  These  articles  are  composed 
of  a kind  of  magnesian  earth,  known  to  the  Tar- 
tars of  the  Crimea  as  kef -til.  Pallas  erroneously 
supposed  that  this  kind  of  earth  was  so  denomi- 
nated from  Caffa,  and  therefore  the  name  signified 
“ Caffa  earth.”  From  “ Memnski  s Oriental  Dic- 
tionary” it  would  appear  to.  be  a derivation  of  two 
Turkish  words  which  signify  u foam  or  “froti 


PIPEOLOGY. 


61 


of  the  “ earth.”  The  French  name,  ecume  de  mer , 
or  “ scum  of  the  sea,”  and  the  Germans  “ sea  foam,” 
have  doubtless  an  intimate  relationship  with  this 
same  “ keff  til”  of  the  Crimean  Tartars. 

_ Meerschaum  earth  is  met  with  in  various  locali- 
ties in  Spain, 'Greece,  Crimea,  and  Moravia.  The 
greatest  quantity  is  derived  from  Asia  Minor,  it 
being  dug  principally  in  the  peninsula  of  Natolia, 
near  the  town  of  Coniah.  Before  the  capture  of 
the  Crimea,  this  earth  is  stated  to  have  formed  a 
considerable  article  of  commerce  with  Constanti- 
nople, where  it  was  used  in  the  public  baths  to 
cleanse  the  hair  of  women.  The  first  rude  shape 
was  formerly  given  to  the  pipe-bowls  on  the  spot 
where  the  mineral  was  dug,  by  pressure  in  a mould ; 
and  these  rude  bowls  were  more  elegantly  carved 
and  finished  at  Pesth  and  Vienna.  At  the  present 
time,  the  greater  part  of  the  meerschaum  is  ex- 
ported in  the  shape  of  irregular  blocks ; these  un- 
dergo  a.  careful  manipulation^  after  having  been 
soaked  in  a preparation  of  wax  and  oil.  After 
being  finished,  and  sold  at  the  German  fairs,  some 
of  them  have  acquired  such  an  exquisite  tint 
thiough  smoking,  in  the  estimation  of  connoisseurs, 
that  they  have  realized  from  £40  to  £50. 

Attempts  have  not  been  wanting  to  imitate  this 
material,  hitherto  not  very  successfully.  The  large 
quantity  of  parings  that  are  left  in  trimming  up 
the  bowls,  has  been  rendered  available  for  the 
manufacture  of  what  are  called  “ massa  bowls,”  but 

e)  ( o not  enjoy  the  reputation  of  the  genuine 
meerschaum  bowls. 

is  yet  another  mineral  production,  the  use 
which  Turkish  smokers,  at  any  rate,  know  how 
o appreciate.  This  is  amber.  The  Turk  will 
expend  an  almost  fabulous  sum  in  an  amber  mouth- 

.u,s.  nar9h^eh.  Four  valuable  articles  of 
this  description  were  exhibited  in  the  Turkish  de- 


62 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


partment  of  the  Exhibition  of  1851,  which  were 
worth  together  £1000,  two  of  them  being  valued 
at  £305  each.  There  is  a current  belief  in  Turkey 
that  amber  is  incapable  of  transmitting  infection ; 
and  as  it  is  considered  a great  mark  of  politeness 
to  offer  the  pipe  to  a stranger,  this  presumed  pro- 
perty of  amber  accounts  in  some  measure  for  the 
estimation  in  which  it  is  held. 

The  knowledge  of  amber  extends  backwards  to 
a remote  antiquity,  as  the  Phoenicians  of  old  fetched 
it  from  Prussia.  Since  that  period  it  has  been 
obtained  there  uninterruptedly,  without  any  dimi- 
nution in  the  quantity  annually  collected.  The 
greatest  amount  of  amber  is  found  on  the  coast  of 
Prussia  proper,  between  Konigsherg  and  Dantzic. 
From  the  amber-beds  on  the  coast  of  Dirschkeim, 
extending  under  the  sea,  a storm  threw  up,  on  the 
1st  of  January,  1848,  no  less  than  800  pounds.  The 
amber  fishery  of  Prussia  formerly  produced  to  the 
king  about  25,000  crowns  per  month.  After  a 
storm,  the  amber  coasts  are  crowded  with  gatherers, 
large  masses  of  amber  being  occasionally  cast  up 
by  the  waves.  In  digging  for  a well  in  the  coal- 
mines near  Prague,  the  workmen  lately  discovered, 
between  the  bed  of  gritstone  which  forms  the  roof 
of  that  mine  and  the  first  layer  of  coals,  a bed  of 
yellow  amber,  apparently  of  great  extent.  Pieces 
weighing  from  two  to  three  pounds  ha\  e been  ex- 
tracted. There  are  two  kinds— the  terrestrial, 
which  is  dug  in  mines,  and  the  marine,  which  is 
cast  ashore  during  autumnal  storms. 

Opinions  vary  as  to  the  origin  of  amber.  Tacitus 
and  others  have  considered  it  a fossil  resin  exhaled 
by  certain  coniferous  trees,  traces  of  which  are  fre- 
quently observed  among  the  amber,  whilst  other 
theorists  contend  that  it  is  a species  of  wax  or  lat, 
having  undergone  a slow  process  ot  putrefaction, 
this  latter  view  being  based  upon  the  fact  that 


PIPEOLOGY. 


63 


chemists  are  able  to  convert  fatty  or  cerous  sub- 
stances into  succinic  acid  by  artificial  oxidation. 
One  thing  is,  however,  certain,  that  amber,  at  some 
period  of  its  history,  must  have  existed  in  a state 
of  fluidity,  since  numerous  insects,  especially  of  the 
spider  kind,  are  found  imbedded  in  it ; and  a spe- 
cimen has  been  shown  enclosing  the  leg  of  a toad. 
Toads  are  in  the  habit  of  living  for  centuries,  we 
are  informed,  cooped  up  in  stone  and  rock ; but  we 
are  not  aware  that  hitherto  any  of  these  extraordi- 
nary reptiles  have  been  found  buried  alive  in  a mass 
of  amber.  Masses  of  amber  have  been  found  weigh- 
ing from  4 lbs.  to  6 lbs. — more  than  large  enough 
to  contain  a toad  or  two  of  ordinary  dimensions. 

F or  a knowledge  of  the  pipes  of  modern  Egypt, 
we  must  resort  for  information  to  Mr.  Lane,  from 
whom  we  gather  the  following  notes.  The  pipe 
(which  is  called  by  many  names,  as  “shibuk,” 
“ood,  ’ &c.)  is  generally  between  four  and  five  feet 
long.  Some  pipes  are  shorter,  and  some  of  greater 
length.  The  most  common  kind  used  in  Egypt  is 
made  of  a kind  of  wood  called  “ garmashak.”  The 
giealu  pait  of  the  stick  is  covered  with  silk,  which 
is  confined  at  each  extremity  by  gold  thread,  often 
intertwined  with  coloured  silks,  or  by  a tube  of 
gilt  silver;  and  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the 
covering  is  a tassel  of  silk.  The  covering  was 
originally  designed  to  be  moistened  with  water  in 
order  to  cool  the  pipe,  and  consequently  the  smoke 
by  evaporation;  but  this  is  only  done  when  the 
pipe  is  old,  or  not  handsome.  Cherrystick  pipes 
w nch  are  never  covered,  are  used  by  some  persons’ 
particularly  in  the  winter.  In  summer,  the  smoke 

r?  -T1  from  .the  cherrystick  pipe  as  from 
ttc  k‘„d  heforc  mentioned.  The  bowl  is  of  baked 
earth,  coloured  red  or  brown.  The  mouthpiece  is 

coloured1  °VW°  ^ “°re  pieCCS  °f  °Pa(lue>  Hght- 
d amber,  mterjoincd  by  ornaments  of  en- 


04  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

amelled  gold,  agate,  jasper,  carnelion,  or  some 
other  precious  substance.  This  is  the  most  costly 
part  of  the  pipe.  Those  in  ordinary  use  by  persons 
of  the  middle  classes  cost  from  £1  to  £3  sterling. 
A wooden  tube  passes  through  it;  this  is  often 
changed,  as  it  becomes  foul  from  the  oil  of  the 
tobacco.  The  pipe  also  requires  to  be  cleaned  very 
often,  which  is  done  with  tow,  by  means  of  a long 
wire.  Many  poor  men  in  Cairo  gain  a livelihood 
by  cleaning  pipes.  Some  of  the  Egyptians  use  the 
Persian  pipe,  in  which  the  smoke  passes  through 
water.  The  pipe  of  this  kind  most  commonly 
used  by  persons  of  the  higher  classes  is  called 
“ nargeeleh,”  because  the  vessel  that  contains  the 
water  is  the  shell  of  a cocoa-nut,  of  which  “ nar- 
geeleh” is  an  Arabic  name.  Another  kind  which 
has  a glass  vase,  is  called  “ sheesheh,”  from  the 
Persian  word  signifying  “ glass.”  Each  has  a very 
long,  flexible  tube. 

A kind  of  pipe  commonly  called  “ gozeh,”  which 
is  similar  to  the  nargeeleh,  excepting  that  it  has 
a short  cane  tube,  instead  of  the  snake,  and  no 
stand.  This  is  used  by  men  of  the  lowest  class 
for  smoking  both  the  “ turabak " or  Persian 
tobacco,  and"  the  narcotic  hemp. 

The  Zoolus  of  Southern  Africa  have  a kind  of 
pipe  or  smoking  horn  called  “ Egoodu,'  which  is 
constructed  on  a similar  principle  to  the  Persian 
pipe.  The  herb  is  placed  at  the  end  of  a reed  in- 
troduced into  the  side  of  an  oxhorn,  which  is  filled 
with  water,  and  the  mouth  applied  to  the  upper  or 
wide  part  of  the  horn,  the  smoke  passing  down 
the  reed  and  through  the  water. 

The  Delagoaus  of  Eastern  Africa  smoke  the 
“ hubble-bubble,”  a similar  instrument,  having  the 
upper  part  of  the  horn  closed,  excepting  a small 
orifice  in  the  centre  of  the  covering  through  which 
the  smoke  is  inhaled. 


riPEOLOC  Y. 


65 


The  Kaffirs  form  pipe  bowls  from  a black,  and 
also  from  a green  stone  ; they  are  in  shape  similar 
to  the  Dutch  pipes,  and  without  ornament.  The 
negroes  of.  Western  Africa  have  pipes  of  a reddish 
earth,  some  of  them  of  very  uncouth  and  singular 
forms,  others  close  imitations  of  European  pipe 
bowls.  One  kind  of  pipe  consists  of  two  bowls 
placed  side  by  side  upon  a single  stem.  Old 
Indian  pipes  have  been  found  in  America,  also 
fashioned  out  of  green  stone. 

The  natives  of  the  South-West  coast  of  Africa, 
near  Elizabeth’s  Bay,  use  pipes  in  the  shape  of  a 
cigar  tube  formed  of  a mottled  green  or  white 
mineral  of  the  magnesian  family,  externally  carved 
or  roughly  ornamented. 

. Sailors,  when  on  a voyage,  are  often  in  difficui- 
ties  for  the  want  of  pipes.  Under  such  circum- 
stances,  numerous  contrivances  have  at  different 
times  been  resorted  to  to  remedy  the  defect ; such 
as  pipes  cast  out  of  old  lead,  or  cut  out  of  wood. 

he  sailors.  belonging  to  H.M.S.  Samarcmg  bavin o- 
lost  their  pipes  in  the  Sarawak  river,  set  to,  and  in 
a very,  little  while,  manufactured  excellent  pipes 
li’om  different  sized  internodes  of  the  bamboos  that 
grew  around  them.  In  India,  simple  pipes  are 
used  composed  of  two  pieces  of  bamboo,  one  for 

the  bowl  cut  close  to  a knot,  and  a smaller  one  for 
the  tube. 


the  aborigines  of  British  Guiana  use  a pipe,  or 
rather  a tube,  called  a “ Winna.”  It  resembles  a 
cneroot  m outward  appearance,  but  is  hollow,  so  as 
to  contain  the  tobacco.  It  is  said  to  be  made  from 
c nnd  of  the  fruit  of  the  manicot  palm,  growing 
on  the  river  Berbice.  Forasmuch  as  it  pleaseth  us 
• r™w  fashions  from  nations  barbarous  as  well 

“Winnf"^  a v°rm  °f  itllbe  much  resembling  the 

nist  shn™  nbeei1  fatle  and  sold  in  the  tobacco- 
nist shops  of  the  metropolis  of  old  England. 


F 


66 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Among  the  Bashee  group,  and  particularly  on 
the  island  of  Ibayat,  the  natives  form  very  elegant 
and  commodious  pipes  from  different  species  of 
shells,  the  columella  and  septa  of  the  convolutions 
being  broken  down,  and  a short  ebony  stem 
inserted  into  a hole  at  the  apex  of  the  spire. 
These  are  more  generally  formed  of  the  shells 
known  as  the  Bishop’s  mitre  (Mitra  episcopate) 
and  the  Pope’s  mitre  (Mitra  papalis )._  Species  of 
Terebra  and  Turbo  are  also  converted  into  pipes. 

In  China,  where  M.  Bondot  calculates  that  there 
are  not  less’ than  100  millions,  and  Abbe  Hue  300 
millions  of  smokers,  pipes  are  made  in  immense 
numbers.  Of  tbese  there  ure  three  kinds;  the 
water  pipe,  the  straight  pipe,  and  the  opium  pipe. 
Chinese  pipes,  and  indeed  those  of  all  the  Indc- 
Chinese  races,  including  the  Tartars,  Chinese, 
Koreans,  and  Japanese,  are  provided  with  a smaU 
metallic  bowl,  and  usually  a long  bamboo  stem ; 
for  with  persons  who  are  in  the  habit  of  smoking, 
at  short  intervals,  all  day  long,  a large  bowl  would 
be  inadmissable.  By  inhaling  but  a pinch  Oi 
tobacco  on  one  occasion,  they  extend  the  influence 
of  a larger  pipe  over  a greater  space  ot  time.  In 
such  cases  they  suffer  no  inconvenience  from  the 
nature  of  the  material  of  which  the  bowl  is  com- 
posed. Nations  that  smoke  larger  pipes  adopt 
some  other  substance,  as  metal  would  become^ too 
hot ; hence  we  have  pipes  of  “ Samian  ware  m 
Turkey,  “ Meerschaum”  in  Germany  and  Clay 
iu  England  and  other  places.  My  Uncle  Toby 
would  have  burnt  liis  Augers  with  a Chinese  pipe 
of  nickel  silver  many  a tune  and  often  - and  it 
would  have  required  a large  amount  of  logic  to 
have  induced  Doctor  Kiccabocca  to  have  exchanged, 
his  companion  (his  pipe,  not  his  umbrella)  for  a 
bowl  of  Japanese  manufacture.  ,, 

Isaac  Browne  thought,  a century  ago,  that  there 


PIPEOLOGY. 


67 


was  something  in  a pipe  worth  writing  about,  or 
he  had  never  given  us  the  following 


“ODE  TO  A TOBACCO  PIPE. 


“ Little  tube  of  mighty  power, 
Charmer  of  an  idle  hour, 

Object  of  my  warm  desire, 

Lip  of  wax,  and  eye  of  fire ; 

And  thy  snowy  taper  waist, 

With  thy  finger  gently  braced  ■ 

And  thy  pretty  swelling  crest, 

With  thy  little  stopper  prest  ; 

And  the  sweetest  bliss  of  blisses 
Breathing  from  thy  balmy  kisses. 
Happy  thrice,  and  thrice  again, 
Happiest  he  of  happy  men  ; 

Who,  when  again  the  night  returns 
When  again  the  taper  burns, 

When  again  the  cricket’s  gay 
(Little  cricket  full  of  play), 

Can  afford  his  tube  to  feed’ 

With  the  fragrant  Indian  weed  • 
Pleasure  for  a nose  divine, 

Incense  of  the  god  of  wine. 

Happy  thrice,  and  thrice  again 
Happiest  he  of  happy  men.” 


, 7 u'gmia’s  native  country,  the  nine  sHpPr 

closer  to  a man  than  his  boot  An^neS 
s no  more  furnished  without  his 

To  thi  °T  18  (U1'".ished  "iflxwt  a looking  glass’ 
nil ? n ?tlVe  Indlan’  ifc  supplies  an  important 

We  If  w°°mTet  •hlSt,tre?tl'  of  Peace — his  chal- 
rufi-  u War‘  18  ^le  instrument  of  a solemn 

potest  comehofZ  rltpea0f  Z ,T  *°  the 

every  warrior  ..V  Con1tment,  which  has  visited 

stem  the  irrevoenhl  paS!!£d  ?rouSh  its  reddened 
’ urevocable  oath  of  war  and  desolation 
f 2 


68 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


And  here,  also,  the  peace  breathing  calumet  was 
horn  and  fringed  with  the  eagle  s quills,  which 
has  shed  its  thrilling  fumes  over  the  land,  and 
soothed  the  fury  of  the  relentless  savage  lhe 
Great  Spirit,  at  an  ancient  period,  hem  called  to- 
gether the  Indian  warriors,  and  standing  on  the 
precipice  of  the  red-pipe  stone  rock,  broke  from  its 
wall  a piece,  and  made  a huge  pipe,  by  turning  it 
in  his  hand,  which  he  smoked  over  them,  and  to 
the  north,  the  south,  the  east,  and  the  west;  and 
told  them  that  this  stone  was  red — that  it  was 
their  flesh— that  they  must  use  it  for  their  pipes 
of  peace,  that  it  belonged  to  them  all,  and  that  the 
war  club,  and  the  scalping  knife  must  not  be 
raised  on  its  ground.  At  the  last  wlnft  of  his 
nine,  his  head  went  into  a great  cloud,  and  the 
whole  surface  of  the  rock,  for  several  miles,  was 
melted  and  glazed.  Two  great  ovens  were  opened 
beneath,  and  two  women,  guardian  spirits  ot  the 
place,  entered  them  in  a blaze  of  fire,  and  they  are 
heard  there  yet,  answering  to  the  invocations  ot 
the  priests  or  medicine  men,  who  consult  them 
when  they  are  visitors  to  this  sacred  place. 


“ Prom  the  red  stone  of  the  quarry 
With  his  hand  he  broke  a fragment, 
Moulded  it  into  a pipe  head, 

Shaped  and  fashioned  it  with  figures. 
From  the  margin  of  the  river 
Took  a long  reed  for  a pipe  stem. 

With  its  dark  green  leaves  upon  it ; 
Filled  the  pipe  with  hark  of  willow  ; 
With  the  bark  of  the  red  willow  ; 
Breathed  upon  the  neighbouring  forest, 
Made  its  great  boughs  chafe  together, 
Till  in  flame  they  burst,  and  kindled  ; 
And  erect  upon  the  mountains, 

Gitche  Manito,  the  mighty, 

Smoked  the  calumet,  the  Peace  1 ipe, 
As  a signal  to  the  nations,”  &c. 


* Catlin's  North  American  Indians,  vol.  ii.,  PP-  160. 


PIPEOLOGY. 


69 


The  tribes  of  the  Missouri  make  their  pipes  of  a 
kind  of  stone  called  Catlinite,  from  the  red  pipe 
stone  quarries  upon  the  head  waters  of  that  river, 
the  colour  of  which  is  brick  red.  These  stones, 
when  first  taken  out  of  the  quarry  are  soft,  and 
easily  worked  with  a knife,  but  on  exposure  to  the 
air  become  hard  and  take  a good  polish.  The 
pipes  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Indians  are  some  of 
them  wrought  with  much  labour  and  ingenuity  of 
an  argillaceous  stone  of  a very  fine  texture,  found 
at  the  north,  of  Queen  Charlotte’s  Island.  This 
stone  is  of  a blue  black  colour,  and  in  character 
similar  to  the  red  earth  of  the  Missouri  quarry. 

The  Calumet  or  “ pipe  of  peace”  of  the  Sioux 
Indians  is  thus  described  by  Irving.  “The  bowl 
was  of  a species  of  red  stone  resembling  porphyry, 
the  stem  was  six  feet  in  length,  decorated  with 
tufts  of  horse  hair  dyed  red.  The  pipe  bearer 
stepped  within  the  circle,  lighted  the  pipe,  held  it 
towards  the  sun,  then  towards  the  different  points 
of  the  compass,  after  which  he  handed  it  to  the 
principal  chief.  The  latter  smoked  a few  whiffs 
then,  holding  the  head  of  the  pipe  in  his  hand, 
oifered  the  other  end  to  their  visitor,  and  to  each 
one  successively  in  the  circle.  When  all  had 
smoked,  it  was  considered  that  an  assurance  of 
good  faith  and  amity  had  been  interchanged.”  The 
use  of  the  Uspogan  or  Calumet  among  the 
-Lythinyuwak,.  appears  not  to  have  been  an 
original  practice  of  the  Tinne,  but  was  introduced 
p,.  tobacco  by  Europeans;  while  among  the 

nppeways,  the  plant  has  been  grown  from  the 
noost  ancient  times. 

Among  the  most  uncultivated  and  uncivilized  of 
„•  J'?ns’  W InPe  is  an  object  upon  which  is  exer- 

sed  alt  their  ingenuity,  and  in  the  decoration  of 

almoi1piC0“ren+ti!ate(i  a11  their  taste-  0ne  might 
almost  classify  the  races  of  the  world  by  means  of 


70  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

a good  collection  of  their  pipes,  and  not  stray  very 
far  from  the  order  resulting  from  more  scientific 
processes. 

In  the  East,  there  is  existing  an  almost  incessant 
habit  of  smoking ; and  the  pipe  is  the  prelude  of 
all  official  acts,  of  all  conversations,  and  of  all 
social  relations.  The  Oriental  seizes  his  pipe  in 
the  morning,  and  scarcely  relinquishes  it  till  he 
goes  to  bed.  Here  there  is  generally  a special 
functionary  — the  pipe-hearer  — as  an  appendages 
to  all  officials.  When  the  Sultan  goes  abroad,  his 
pipe-bearer  is  with  him.  In  families  of  respec- 
tability, the  care  of  the  pipes  is  the  exclusive 
attribute  of  one  or  more  servants,  who  occupy  the 
highest  grade  of  the  domestic  establishment ; and 
thus  dignity  is  given  to  the  pipe,  even  in  a country 
where  less  dignity  is  allowed  to  the  fairer  portion 
of  the  community  than  in  more  highly  cultivated 
countries. 

In  the  Museum  of  the  Botanic  Gardens  at  Hew, 
are  pipes  and  stems  carved  out  of  boxwood,  as  used 
in  Sweden;  also  pipe-bowls  of  pine  and  other 
woods  made  by  the  native  Indians  near  Sitka  in 
North-West  America,  and  brought  home  from.  a 
late  expedition.  The  latter  are  rude,  but  quite 
equal  in  elegance  to  many  which  adorn  the  win- 
dows of  fancy  tobacconists  and  cigar  divans  in  this 
metropolis  of  the  civilized  world. 

From  a schism  in  tobacco-pipes,  Knickerbocker 
dates  the  rise  of  parties  in  the  Niew  Nederlandts. 
« The  rich  and  self-important  burghers,  who  had 
made  their  fortunes,  and  could  afford'  to  be  lazy, 
adhered  to  the  ancient  fashion,  and  formed  a kind 
of  aristocracy,  known  as  the  Long-pipes while  the 
lower  order,  adopting  the  reform  of  William  Kieft, 
as  more  convenient  in  their  handicraft  employ- 
ments, were  branded  with  the  plebeian  name  of 
Short-pipes”  Who  may  be  considered  as  the 


PIPEOLOGY. 


71 


founder  of  the  English  Short-pipe  school,  is  more 
difficult  to  determine ; it  is  nevertheless,  of  late 
years,  a very  popular  one,  and  considerably  out- 
numbers the  aristocracy  of  Long-pipes.  The 
variety  of  these  instruments  is  almost  infinite.  There 
are  all  kinds  of  short  clays,  cutties,  St.  Omer, 
Gambier,  meerschaum  washed,  coloured  clay,  and 
fancy  clay  of  all  shapes,  grotesque,  uncouth,  stupid, 
and  in  some  instances  graceful.  Pipes  also  of 
wood,  of  black  ebony,  green  ebony,  brier-root — 
whatever  that  may  be — cherry-root,  tulip-wood, 
rosewood,  &c.  Glass  pipes,  with  reservoirs  and 
without,  smokers’  friends,  and,  if  we  may  judge 
from  their  size,  tobacconists’  friends ; meerschaum 
bowls,  massa  bowls,  porcelain  bowls,  clay  bowls, 
of  uncouth  and  monstrous  heads,  with  eyes  of  glass 
and  enamelled  teeth,  together  with  short  stems 
and  mounts  for  broken  clays.  Add  to  these,  one 
knows  not  how  many  kinds  of  tobacco-pots,  from 
a smiling  damsel  in  all  the  glories  of  crinoline,  to 
the  dissevered  head  of  Poor  Dog  Tray.  The 
windows  of  retail  tobacconists  now-a-days  more 
resemble  a toy-shop,  or  a fancy  stall  from  an  arcade 
or  bazaar,  than  the  sober-looking  windows  of  a 
retailer  halt  a century  ago.  Mr.  Frank  Fowler 
informs  us  that  the  same  tastes  have  migrated  to 
Australia.  ^ “ The  cutty  is  of  all  shapes,  sizes,  and 
shades.  _ Some  are  negro  heads,  set  with  rows  of 
very  white  teeth;  some  are  mermaids,  showing 
their  more  presentable  halves  up  the  front  of  the 
bowls,  and  stowing  away  their  weedy  extremities 
under  the  stems.  Some  are  Turkish  caps,  some 
are  Russian  skulls,  some  are  houris,  some  are 
hrn presses  of  the  French,  some  are  Margaret 
t/atchpoles,  some  arc  as  small  as  my  lady’s  thimble 
others  as  large  as  an  old  Chelsea  tea-cup.  Every- 
ody  has  one,  from  the  little  pinafore  schoolboy 
*ho  has  renounced  his  hardbake  for  his  Hard  ham’ s’ 


72 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


to  the  old  veteran  who  came  out  with  the  second 
hatch  of  convicts,  and  remembers  George  Barring- 
ton’s prologue.  Clergymen  get  up  their  sermons 
over  the  pipe;  members  of  parliament  walk  the 
verandah  of  the  Sydney  House  of  Legislature,  with 
the  black  bowl  gleaming  between  their  teeth  One 
of  the  metropolitan  representatives  was  seriously 
ill  just  before  I left,  from  having  smoked  forty 
pipes  of  Latakia  at  one  sitting.  A cutty  bowl, 
like  a Creole’s  eye,  is  most  prized  when  blackest. 
Some  smokers  wrap  the  bowls  reverently  in  leather 
during  the  process'  of  colouring ; others  buy  them 
ready  stained,  and  get  (I  suppose)  the  reputation 
of  accomplished  whiffers  at  once.  Every  young 
swell  glories  in  his  cabinet  of  dirty  clay  pipes.  A 
friend  of  mine  used  to  call  a box  of  the  little  black 
things  Iris  £ Stowe  collection.’  Tobacco,  I shonld 
add  here,  is  seldom  sold  in  a cut  form ; each  man 
carries  a cake  about  with  him,  like  a card-case  ; 
each  boy  has  his  stick  of  Cavendish,  like  so  much 
candy.  The  cigars  usually  smoked  are  Manillas, 
which  are  as  cheap  and  good  as  can  be  met  with 
in  any  part  of  the  world.  Lola  Montez,  during 
her  Australian  tour,  spoke  well  of  them.  What 
stronger  puff  could  they  have  than  hers  ? 


CHAPTER  VI. 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


“ *’Ti8  most  Excellent,’  said  the  monk.  ‘ Then  dome  the  favour  ’ I 
replied,  ‘to  accept  of  the  box  and  all ; and  when  you  take  a pinch  out 
o it,  sometimes  recollect  that  it  was  the  peace-offering  of  a man  who 
once  used  you  unkindly,  but  not  from  the  heart.’  ” 

Sterne’s  Sentimental  Jour ney. 


Everybody,  of  course,  knows  all  about  the  Fran- 
ciscan and  his  snuff-box,  with  which  this  chapter 
begins.  Sterne  narrates  it  in  his  happiest  vein, 
and  all  who  read  it  are  somehow  sure  to  remember 
it;  Boxes  are  exchanged ; the  traveller  is  left  to 
himself.  Row  he  moralises : “ I guard  this  box 
as  I would  the  instrumental  parts  of  my  religion 
to  help  my  mind  on  to  something  better.  In  truth’ 
1 seldom  go  abroad  without  it ; and  oft  and  many 
a,,  !'nc  have  I called  up  by  it  the  courteous  spirit 
ot  its  owner  to  regulate  my  own  in  the  iustlings  of 
e world.  They  had  found  full  employment  for 
R aIm  learned  fi;om  his  story,  till  about  the 
i.  1 1 . year  of  his  age,  when,  upon  some  mili- 

d1)  services  ill-requited,  and  meeting  at  the  same 
ime  with  a disappointment  in  the  tenderest  of 
passions,  he  abandoned  the  sword  and  the  sex 
gether,  and  took  sanctuary,  not  so  much  in  his 
convent  as  in  himself.” 

antW-W°rtd  f 8nuSf”  is  6tated  V competent 
verb  lnflectlon  of  t,ic  old  nortliern 

before  ff’  yb  ich  latter  word  was  in  existence  long 
oelore  the  invention  or  knowledge  of  the  substanc! 


74 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


to  which  it  now  gives  its  name.*  In  its  earlier 
signification,  it  was  expressive  of  strong  inhalation 
through  the  nostrils,  or  descriptive  of  any  impa- 
tience. Hence  arose  the  the  expressions  in  use  in 
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  to  “ snuff 
pepper”  or  “ take  in  snuff.’'  Shakespeare  makes  a 
similar  use  of  the  phrase  in  H mry  IV.,  in  con- 
nection with  a small  box  of  perfume  displayed  by 
a courtier  to  the  annoyance  of  Hotspur. 

“ He  was  perfumed  like  a milliner  ; 

And,  ’twixt  his  finger  and  his  thumb,  he  held 
A pouncet  box,  which  ever  and  anon 
He  gave  his  nose,  and  took’t  away  again  ; 

Who,  therewith  angry,  when  it  next  came  there, 

Took  it  in  snuff.” 

In  this  quotation  we  also  meet  with  the  u pouncet 
box,”  which  seems  to  have  been  a small  box  having 
a “ pounced”  or  perforated  cover,  containing  per- 
fumes, the  scent  of  which  escaping  from  the  open 
work  at  the  top  was  regarded  as  a preservative 
against  contagion.  From  the  pouncet  box  the 
perfumes  were  inhaled.  It  was  probably  not  till  a 
century  after  the  introduction  of  tobacco,  that  the 
triturated  dust  was  commonly  in  use,  and  there 
became  any  occasion  for  the  snuff-box.  _ 

Humboldt  gives  an  account  ot  a curious  kind  of 
snuff,  as  well  as  an  extraordinary  method  ot  in- 
haling it,  which  came  under  his  notice  while 
travelling  in  South  America.  “The  Ottomacs 
he  days,  “ throw  themselves  into  a peculiar  state  ot 
intoxication,  we  might  say  ot  madness,  by  the  use 
of  the  powder  of  niopo.  They  gather  the  long  pods 
of  an  acacia  (made  known  by  him  under  the  name 
of  Acacia  niopo),  cut  them  into  pieces  moisten 
them,  and  cause  them  to  ferment.  When  tne 

* Tooke  says  “ Snufv  is  the  past  participle  of  to  sniff,  that 
which  is  sniffed .” 


SNUFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


75 


softened  seeds  begin  to  grow  black,  they  are 
kneaded  like  paste,  mixed  with  some  flour  of  cas- 
sava. and  lime  procured  from  the  shell  of  a helix 
(snail),  and  the  whole  mass  is  exposed  to  a very 
brisk  fire,  on  a gridiron  made  of  hard  wood.  The 
hardened  . paste  takes  the  form  of  small  cakes. 
When  it  is  to  be  used,,  it  is  reduced  to  a fine  pow- 
der, and  placed  on  a dish,  five  or  six  inches  wide. 
The.  Ottomac  holds  this  dish;  which  has  a handle 
m his  right  hand,  while  he  inhales  the  niopo  by 
the  nose,  through  the  forked  bone  of  a bird,  the 
two  extremities  of  which  are  applied  to  the5 nos- 
trils. This  bone,  without  which  the  Ottomac 
believes  that  he  could,  not  take  this  kind  of  snuff 
is  seven  inches  long;  it  appears  to  be  the  leg  bone 
ot  a large  species  of  plover.  The  niopo  is  so  stimu- 
lating, that  the  smallest  portions  of  it  produce  violent 
sneenugm  those  who  are  not  accustomed  to  its  use 55 
ather  Gum  ill  a says,  “ this  diabolical  powder  of  the 
Uttomacs,  furnished  by  an  aborescent  tobacco  plant 
intoxicates  them  through  the  nostrils,  deprives 
them  ot.  reason  for  some  hours,  and  renders  them 
furious  m battle.” 

A custom  analagous  to  this,  La  Condamine  ob- 
served  among  the  natives  of  the  Upper  Maranon. 

rnrf  °™aguas  a tnhe  wbose  name  is  intimately 
onnected  with  the  expeditions  in  search  of  El 

hav&>  hlf®  tbe  Ottomacs,  a dish,  and  the 

whiT  I00®  °f  a bird’  and  a P°wder  called  cunwa, 
which  , they  convey  to  their  nostrils  by  means  of 

^ ri1?anner  identical  with  that  of  the  Otto- 

Pr°Wde-  is  als°  obtained  from  the 

if  nn+  fho  d °f  aCaCia’  apparently  closely  allied  to, 
n not  the  same  as  the  niopo. 

and  Omilar  ins,trum™t  the  bone  of  the  Ottomacs 
usein?rgUaS-  ilas/  ready  been  refen'e<l  to  as  in 

Z mfcU’  “““S  trough  the  nostrils 
nioke  of  burning  tobacco  leaves. 


76 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


The  method  of  taking  snuff  in  Iceland  is  de- 
scribed by  Made.  Pfeiffer  as  differing  from  the 
methods  above  detailed,  but  equally  singular.  Most 
of  the  peasants,  and  many  of  the  priests,  have  no 
proper  snuff-box,  but  only  a box  made  of  bone, 
and  shaped  like  a powder  flask.  When  they  take 
snuff,  they  throw  back  the  head,  insert  the  point 
of  the  flask  in  the  nose,  and  shake  a dose  of  snuff 
in  it.  They  then  offer  it  to  their  neighbour,  who 
repeats  the  performance,  passes  it  to  his,  and  thus 
it  goes  the  round,  until  it  reaches  its  owner  again. 
Had  this  been  the  custom  in  the  days  of  the 
“ Eape  of  the  Lock,”  Belinda  had  not  so  readily  sub- 
dued the  baron,  as  with  one  finger  and  a thumb — 
“ Just  where  the  breath  of  life  his  nostrils  drew, 

A charge  of  snuff  the  wily  virgin  threw  ; 

The  gnomes  direct,  to  every  atom  just, 

The  pungent  grains  of  titillating  dust. 

Sudden,  with  starting  tears  each  eye  o’erflows, 

And  the  high  dome  re-echoes  to  his  nose.” 

The  Zoolus  of  Southern  Africa  use  a small  gourd 
to  carry  their  snuff,  and  a small  ivory  spoon  with 
which  to  ladle  out  the  dust.  We  remember  many 
years  ago  an  elderly  gentleman  who  practised  on 
the  Zoolu  plan,  his  snuff  was  carried  loose  in  his 
waistcoat  pocket,  whence  it  was  conveyed  to  his 
nose  by  means  of  a small  silver  spoon,  which  was 
always  at  hand  for  the  purpose. 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


77 


As  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
James  I.,  a “ taker  ol  tobacco”  was  furnished 
with  an  apparatus  resembling  that  of  a modern 
Scotch  mull,  when  supplied  with  all  the  necessary 
implements.  In  1609,  Dekker,  in  his  “Gull’s 
Horn  Book,  says  — “ Before  the  meat  come 
smoking  to  the  hoard,  our  gallant  must  draw  out 
his  tobacco-box,  the  ladle  for  the  cold  snuff  into  the 
nostril,  the  tongs  and  priming  iron;  all  which 
artillery  may  he  of  gold  or  silver,  if  he  can  reach 
the  price  of  it.”  In  1646,  Howell  describes  the 
apparatus  and  practice  of  snuff  taking  as  quite 
common  in  other  countries  ; since,  he  says — “ The 
Spaniards  and  Irish  take  tobacco  most  in  powder 
or  smutchin,  and  it  mightily  refreshes  the  brain  ■ 
and  I believe  there’s  as  much  taken  this  way  in 
Ireland,  as  there  is  in  pipes  in  England.  One 
shall  commonly  see  the  serving  maid  upon  the 
washing  block,  and  the  swain  upon  the  plough- 
share when  they  are  tired  of  their  labour,  take 
oih  their  boxes  of  smutchin,  and  draw  it  into 
their  nostrils  with  a quill,  and  it  will  beget  new 

spirits  m them  with  a fresh  vigour  to  fall  to  their 
work  again.” 

The  word  printed  “smutchin”  by  Howell,  is 
stated  to  be  more  accurately  “sneeshin,”  a vulvar 
snuff  winch  causes  sneezing;  and  hence 
• b,n1ees“m  miH  (sometimes  corrupted  into  “mull”') 
is  the  Scottish  name  for  snuff-box.  Dr.  Jameson’s 
Etymological  Dictionary  may  be  considered  as  an 
authority  m these  matters ; and  from  it  we  learn 

snuff  WW°rd  “T11”  iS  Vulgar  name  for  a 
snuti-box,  especially  one  of  a cylindrical  form  or 

resembling  an  inverted  cone/  No  other  name 

s formerly  in  use  in  Scotland ; and  the  reason 
ssigned  for  it  is,  that  when  tobacco  was  first 

have^nuff  ^ c?UIltrJ’  those  who  wished  to 
snuff,  were  accustomed  to  toast  the  tobacco 


78 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


leaves  before  the  fire,  and  then  bruise  them  with  a 
piece  of  wood  in  the  box,  which  was  thence  called 
a “ mill,”  because  the  snuff  was  ground  in  it.  From 
all  this,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how  a ram’s  horn, 
from  its  conical  shape,  became  one  of  the  primitive 
forms  of  the  Scottish  snuff-box,  although  latterly 
it  is  often  one  of  the  most  costly  and  luxurious. 

In  confirmation  of  the  latter  remark,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  refer  to  an  example  in  the  Exhibition 
of  1851.  Mr.  W.  Baird  of  Glasgow,  exhibited  a 
ram’s  head  beautifully  mounted,  as  a snuff-box  and 
cigar  case.  When  alive,  he  must  have  been  a 
noble  sheep,  for  the  circular  horns  measured  no 
less  than  3 feet  4 inches  from  root  to  tip.  The 
cigar  case  was  beautifully  mounted,  having  on  the 
top  a splendid  Scotch  amethyst,  surmounted  with 
thistle  wreaths  in  gold  and  silver,  and  set  out  with 
many  fine  cairngorms  and  small  amethysts.  The 
snuff-box  cavity,  occupied  the  centre  of  the  fore- 
head, the  lid  surmounted  by  a splendid  cairngorm, 
and  clustered  with  gold  and  silver  wreaths  and 
small  precious  stones.  In  fact,  the  head  presented 
a perfect  flourish  of  the  most  beautiful  and  grace- 
fully disposed  ornaments,  and  altogether  the  article 
was  most  unique.  Attached  thereto  was  a fine 
ivory  hammer  and  silver  spoon,  pricker  and  rake, 
with  a silver  mounted  hare’s  foot.  It  ran  on  ivory 
castors  upon  a rosewood  platform,  surmounted  by 
a glass  shade.  There  were  not  less  than  nine  hun- 
dred separate  pieces  of  precious  stones  and  metals 
used  in  the  construction  of  this  ornate  article. 

Down  to  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
the  “sneeshin  horn,”  with  spoon  and  hare’s  foot 
attached  to  it  by  chains,  appears  to  have  been 
regarded  as  so  completely  a national  charac- 
teristic, that  when  Baddeley  played  Gibby  in  “ The 
Wonder,”  with  Garrick,  he  came  on  the  stage 
with  such  an  apparatus. 


SPIFFING  AND  SNEESH1N. 


79 


The  Mongrabins  and  other  African  races,  ac- 
cording to  Werne,  are  much,  addicted  to  snuff 
taking.  The  snuff  they  usually  carry  in  small 
oval-shaped  cases  made  out  of  the  fruit  of  the 
Doum  palm ; these  have  a very  small  opening  at 
one  end,  stopped  up  by  a wooden  peg ; and  the 
snuff  is  not  taken  in  pinches,  hut  shaken  out  on 
the  back  of  the  hand.  Mr.  Campbell,  while 
travelling  in  South  Africa,  gave  a Bushman  a 
piece  of  tobacco.  It  was  speedily  converted  into 
snuff.  One  of  the  daughters,  after  grinding  it 
between  two  stones,  mixed  it  with  white  ashes 
from  the  fire  ; the  mother  then  took  a large  pinch 
of  the  composition,  putting  the  remainder  into  a 
piece  of  goat’s  skin,  among  the  hair,  and  fold  in  cr 
it  up  for  future  use. 

The  snuff  in  use  in  Africa  is  not  always  made 
from  tobacco.  Mr.  Hutchinson  states  that  he  saw 
at  Panda,  on  the  western  coast,  snuff  made  of  the 
powdered  leaves  of  the  monkey  fruit  tree  (Adan- 
sonia  digitate, ).  dhat  of  the  Zoolus  is  composed  of 
the  dried  leaves  of  the  dacca  or  narcotic  hemp 
mixed  with  the  powder  of  burnt  aloes.  Whether 
or  not  this  was  the  kind  of  snuff  which  Mr 
Richardson  was  knocked  down  with  in  his  journey 
across  the  Great  Desert,  we  are  not  in  a position  to 
determine ; whatever  it  was,  it  appears  to  have 
been  extremely  powerful.  “ A merchant,”  he  says 
offered  me  a pinch  of  snuff,  and  to  please  him  I 
took  a large  pinch,  pushing  a portion  of  it  up  mv 
nostrils.  Immediately  I fell  dizzy  and  sick,  and 
m a short  time  vomited  violently.  The  people 
stared  at  me  with  astonishment,  and  were  terrified 
out  of  their  wits,  and  thought  I was  about  to  give 
np  the  ghost.  _ They  never  saw  snuff  before  pro- 
uce  such  terrible  effects.  After  some  time  I got 
a little  better  and  returned  home.  This  snuff 
was  from  Souf,  and  is  called  war  (difficult).  I 


80 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


had  been  warned  of  it,  and  therefore  paid  richly 
for  my  folly ; indeed,  the  Souf  snuff  is  extremely 
powerful.”  Some  of  the  strict  Mahometans  of 
Ghadames  consider  snuffing,  as  well  as  smoking, 
prohibited  by  their  religion,  and  therefore  do  not 
indulge  in  it.  The  South  American  traveller 
which  Mr.  Lizars,  the  tobacco  antagonist,  once 
fell  in  with,  was  evidently  not  a strict  Mahometan, 
for  he  first  filled  his  nostrils  with  snuff,  which  he 
prevented  falling  out  by  stuffing  shag  tobacco 
after  it,  and  this  he  termed  “ plugging then  put 
in  each  cheek  a coil  of  pig-tail  tobacco,  which  he 
named  “ quidding lastly,  he  lit  a Havannah 
cigar,  which  he  put  into  his  mouth,  and  thus 
smoked  and  chewed  — puffing  at  one  time  the 
smoke  of  the  cigar,  and  at  another  time  squirting 
the  juice  from  his  mouth.  What  a phenomenon ! 
That  gentleman  should  have  politely  thanked  the 
South  American  for  permitting  him  to  view  an 
exliibition,  such  as  he  may  never  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  again.  And  what  a capital  illustration 
ready  made  to  his  hands.  It  is  almost  equal  to 
those  elaborate  calculations  which  are  based  upon 
the  amount  of  time  consumed  in  taking  so  many 
pinches  of  snuff  during  the  day,  and  so  many 
repetitions  of  the  operation  of  blowing  the  nose.* 


* Lord  Stanhope  makes  the  following  curious  estimate  : — 
“ Every  professed,  inveterate,  and  incurable  snuff-taker,  at  a 
moderate  computation,  takes  one  pinch  in  ten  minutes.  Every 
pinch,  with  the  agreeable  ceremony  of  blowing  and  wiping  the 
nose,  and  other  incidental  circumstances,  consumes  a minute 
and  a half.  One  minute  and  a half  out  of  every  ten,  allowing 
sixteen  hours  to  a snuff-taking  day,  amounts  to  two  hours  and 
twenty  minutes  out  of  every  natural  day,  or  one  day  out  of 
every  ten.  One  day  out  of  every  ten  amounts  to  thirty-six 
days  and  a half  in  the  year ; hence,  if  we  suppose  the  practice 
to  bo  persisted  in  for  forty  years,  two  entire  years  of  the  snuff- 
taker’s  life  will  be  dedicated  to  tickling  his  nose,  and  two  more 
to  blowing  it.”  The  expense  of  snuff,  snuff-boxes,  and  hand- 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


81 


A correspondent  of  the  « Petersburg  (Ya) 
Express  ” says : — “ There  are,  perhaps,  in  our 
state  125,000  women,  leaving  out  of  the  account 
those  wfio  have  not  cut  their  teeth,  and  those  who 
have  lost  them  from  age.  Of  this  number,  eighty 
pei  cent,  may  be  safely  set  down  as  snuff-dippers. 
Every  five  of  these  will  use  a two-ounce  paper  of 
snuff  per  day  that  is  to  the  100,000  dippers 
2,500  lbs.  a day,  amounting  to  the  enormous 
quantity  of  912,000  lbs.  In  this  number  of 
snuff-cuppers  are  included  all  ages,  colours,  and 
conditions.  This . practice  is  generally  prevalent 
m the  pme  districts  of  North  Carolina,  and  in 
many  parts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Alabama, 
Florida,  and  Eastern  Tennessee.  It  may  be  thus 
described : A female  snuff-dipper  takes  a short 
stick  and,  wetting  it,  dips  it  into  her  snuff-box, 
and  then  rubs  .the  gathered  dust  all  about  her 
mouth,  into  the  interstices  of  her  teeth,  &c.,  where 
she  allows  it  to  remain  until  its  strength  has  been 
fully  absorbed  Others  hold  the  stick  thus  loaded 
with  snuff  m the  cheek,  a la  quid  of  tobacco,  and 
?iUc.  1 ,yith  a decided  relish,  while  engaged  in 
their  ordinary  avocations  ; while  others  simply  fill 
the  mouth  with  the  snuff,  and  thus  imitate?  to  all 
tents  and  purposes,  the  chewing  propensities  of 
nW  i lU-th-e  abs-e?f  °f  snuff,  tobacco,  in  the 

1 5?  or  M is  invariably  resorted  to  as  a substi- 

to  “snuffdipping”  Wi“S  iS  elegant'  COmPaIed 
• y,hefm(ist  uncomfortable  reflection  to  the  snuffer 
sunfini  concerns  the  probability  of  his  con- 
° himself  by  a condition  of  slow  poisoning, 

Woceilnnr  a“d  t0  5 and  ifc  is  calculated  that  “by  a 
a £ h°n  °f  thr  tim°  and  monG^  fchus  tost  to  the  public 

debt"  g b°  C°nstltuted  for  the  discharge  of  the  national 


82 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


not  the  result  of  the  pure  tobacco,  hut  its  impure 
associates  in  the  box.  In  boxes  lined  with  very 
thin  lead,  but  especially  in  cases  where  the  leaden 
lining  is  thicker,  and  which  are  much  used  by  the 
Paris  retailers,  a chemical  action  takes  place,  the 
result  of  which  is  to  charge  the  snuff  with  sub- 
acetate of  lead.  This  result  was  suspected  by 
Chevalier,  and  has  been  confirmed  by  JBoudet  of 
Paris,  and  Mayer  of  Berlin,  by  careful  experiments. 
Mayer  traces  several  deaths  and  cases  of  saturnine 
paralysis  to  the  patient’s  having  taken  snuff  from 
packets,  the  inner  envelope  of  which  was  thin 
sheet  lead,  in  constant  contact  with  the  powdered 
weed.  The  cry  once  heard  of  “ death  in  the  pot,” 
requires  now  to  he  exchanged  for  “death  in  the 
box,”  and  Holbein  to  give  us  a new  plate  of  the 
skeleton  form  emerging  from  a packet  or  snuff-box 
containing  the  scented  rappee.  . 

Late  investigations  have  shown  that  no  small 
amount  of  adulteration  is  practised  with  snuff,  and 
this  in  some  instances  of  a most  dangerous  kind. 
Out  of  forty-three  samples  of  snuff  examined  by 
Dr.  Hassell,  the  majority  were  adulterated  consi- 
derably. Chromate  of  lead,  oxide  ot  lead,  and 
bichromate  of  potash,  all  highly  poisonous,  were 
detected.  Mr.  Phillips  also  stated  to  the  com- 
mittee of  adulteration,  that  he  had . found  in 
different  samples  common  peat,  such  as  is  obtained 
from  the  bogs  of  Ireland,  starch,  ground  wood  of 
various  kinds,  especially  fustic,  extract  of  logwood, 
chromate  of  lead,  bichromate  of  potash,  and  ■wmous 
ochreous  earths.  Samples  of  spurious  snuff,  it  is 
presumed  for  the  purpose  of  mixing,  were  found 
to  be  composed  of  sumach,  umber,  Spanish  brown, 
and  salt ; another  kind  was  made  up  of  ground 
peat,  yellow  ochre,  lime,  and  sand,  all  ot  these 

being  more  or  less  scented.  . 

Tiie  numerous  varieties  of  snuff  owe  their  clia- 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


83 


racter  principally  to  the  peculiarity  of  scent  and 
the  method  of  preparation.  The  perfumes  used 
are  either  the  essential  oil  of  bergamot  or  otto  of 
roses,  and  in  some  cases  powdered  orris  root  or 
Tonquin  beans.  The  powdered  leaves  of  the 
sweet-scented  woodruff  and  the  fragrant  melilot 
have  been  alluded  to  as  used  for  the  same  purpose, 
also  the  dried  leaves  of  some  species  of  orchis 
( Orchis  fusca,  cfc.J 

As  a substitute  for  snuff,  either  in  preference 
or  in  cases  where  tobacco  snuff  could  not  be  readily 
obtained,  different  vegetable  productions  have  come 
into  use.  In  India  the  powdered  rusty  leaves  of 
a species  of  rhododendron  (R : ccimpanulatum), 
and  in  the  United  States  the  brown  dust  found 
adhering  to  the  petioles  of  several  species  of  kalmia 
and  rhododendron,  all  of  which  possess  narcotic 
properties,  are  used  for  this  purpose.  The  pow- 
deied  leaves  of  asarabacca  have  been  named  as 
the  base  of  some  kind  of  cephalic  snuff.  “ Grim- 
stone’s  eye  snuff”  has  long  enjoyed  a certain 
amount  of  popularity,  although,  it  does  not  con- 
tain a particle  ot  tobacco,  but  is  composed  mainly 
ot  such  harmless  ingredients  as  powdered  orris 
root,  savory,  rosemary,  and  lavender. 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  deleterious 
adulteration,  we  find  in  Dr.  Hassell’s  “Adultera- 
tions detected  in  Food  and  Medicine”  several 
pages  occupied  with  this  really  important  subject. 

. ust  comes  the  narration  of  a case  of  slow  poison- 
ing, on  the  authority  of  Professor  Erichsen  bv 
means  of  snuff  containing  as  an  adulteration  D2 

RfV  <Ue  °1  Then  folloWB  ««» 

Ji.  nosbioke,  of  injuries  sustained  from  snuff 
containing  lead.  These  are  followed  by  other 
ms  anccs  showing  that  all  the  combinations  of 

symptoms^  Ui)1|ed  dangerous  and  disastrous 
y l toms,  if  indulged  m,  when  mingled  with 

g 2 


84 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


snuff,  as  too  often,  unfortunately,  is  the  case,  as 
an  adulteration,  or,  as  before  shown,  liable  as  a 
result  of  packing  tke  snuff  in  lcad;  or  keeping  in 
boxes  lined  with  lead.  . 

Advice  Gratis. — Give  up  taking  snuff , or,  it 
you  should  propose  slight  objections  to  this  course, 
then  purchase  leaf  tobacco,  and  manufacture  your 
own  snuff,  and  having  done  so,  keep  it  in  a gold 
snuff-box,  or  if  you  have  weighty  reasons  for  pre- 
ferring silver,  there  is  no  objection  to  that  metal, 
or  even  the  homely  horn  of  the  Franciscan  ot 

Oalais 

Our  forefathers  thought  of  the  box,  as  wed  as  of 
the  snuff,  and  sometimes  paid  for  their  thought. 
In  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  fashion- 
able snuff-boxes  had  reached  the  highest  point  of 
luxury  and  variety.  The  Toiler  of  Marc  7,  < > 

notices  several  gold  snuff-boxes  which  ‘-  came  out 
last  term,”  but  that  “ a new  edition  would  be  put 
out  on  Saturday  next,  which  would  be  the  only 
one  in  fashion  until  after  Easter.  The  gentle- 
man,” continues  the  notice,  “that  gave  £50 for  the 
box  set  with  diamonds,  may  show  it  till  Sunday, 
provided  he  goes  to  church,  but  not  after  that 
time,  there  being  one  to  be  published  on  Mon  .-y 
that  will  cost  fourscore  guineas.  These  costly 
articles,  so  happily  satirized  by  Steele,  aie  lepie- 
sented  as  the  productions  of  a fashionable  toyman, 
named  Charles  Mather,  popularly  known  under 

the  name  of  “ Bubble  Boy.  « 

Nor  must  we  forget  the  amber  snuff-box  ot 

which  Sir  Plume,  in  the  “ Rape  of  the  Lock,  was 
so  justly  vain ; in  1711  he  “ spoke,  and  rapped  the 
hnl  ” In  1733,  Dodsley  mentions  boxes  made  of 
shell  mounted  in  gold  and  silver.  Latterly^ 
have’ made  tile  acquaintance  of  several  sheU  snuff- 
boxes  • some  of  these  were  made  of  the  tiger 
cowry,’  mounted  in  silver;  of  a small  species  of 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


85 


Turbo,  cleaned  and  polished,  and  of  harp  shells, 
either  mounted  in  silver  or  in  baser  metal.  In 
different  parts  of  the  globe,  tastes  differ  as  to  the 
materials  of  which  snuff-boxes  should  be  composed. 
A gentleman  sent  a piece  of  cannel  coal  from  Eng- 
land to  China,  to  be  there  carved  by  the  ingenious 
Chinese  into  a snuff-box;  this  task  was  accom- 
plished, and  the  box  was  shown  in  the  Exhibition 
of  1851 ; also,  in  the  Turkish  department,  a snuff- 
box of  bituminous  shale.  Perhaps  in  the  new 
Exhibition  of  1862,  there  may  be  found  a similar 
article,  carved  out  of  Gravesend  flint,  by  natives  of 
the  Orange  Eiver  Territory;  or  one  of  Suffolk 
coprolite,  executed  by  rebellious  sepoy  women 
imprisoned  in  the  hulks  at  Portsmouth. 

In  India,  snuff-boxes  are  made  of  polished 
cocoa-nut  shell,  or  of  the  seeds  of  Entada  gigalo- 
bium,  or  purscetha ; or  in  Nepal,  of  a small  kind  of 
calabash  or  gourd,  apparently  resembling  those 
used  for  the  same  purpose,  at  the  distance  of  5,000 
miles,  in  the  South  of  Africa ; excepting,  that  in 
some  instances,  the  gourds  of  Nepal  and  of  Scinde, 
are  ornamented  with  mountings  of  gold  or  silver, 
a luxury  in  which  the  African  dobs  not  indulge! 
In  the  same  part  of  Africa,  among  the  Zoolu 
-Kaffirs,  other  kinds  of  snuff-boxes,  of  smaller  size 
are  m common  use.  _ These  are  made  of  the  seeds 
oi  a species  of  Zamia,  ornamented  with  strings  of 
small  beads,  and  are  worn  suspended  as  earrings, 
from  the.  ears  of  the  natives. 

In  China,  flasks  are  used,  the  form  and  size  of  a 
smelling  bottle;  these  are  of  different  kinds  of 
aterial,  some  being  cut  out  of  rock  crystal,  and 
ners  made  of  porcelain  and  similar  plastic  sub- 
ances.  bnuff-takers  are  less  numerous  in  China 
_ an  smokers  of  tobacco;  in  powder,  or  as  the 

evineftSaI’  “smoke  for  the  no<  is  little  used, 
ept  by  the  Mantchoo  Tartars  and  Mongols,  and 


86 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


among  the  Mandarins  and  lettered  classes.  The 
Tartars  are  real  amateurs,  and  snuff  is  with  them 
an  object  of  the  most  important  consideration. 
For  the  Chinese  aristocracy,  on  the  contrary, _ it  is 
a mere  luxury — a habit  that  they  try  to  aequo  e 
a whim.  The  custom  of  taking  snuff  was  intro- 
duced  into  China  by  the  old  missionaries  who 
resided  at  the  Court.  They  used  to  get  the  snuff 
from  Europe  for  themselves,  and  some  ot  the 
Mandarins  tried  it,  and  found  it  good.  . l>y 
degrees  the  custom  spread;  people  who  wished 
to  appear  fashionable,  liked  to  be  taking  tins 
“smoke  for  the  nose;’1  and  Pekm  is  stdlpur 
excellence,  the  locality  of  snuff-takers.  The  hist 
dealers  in  it  made  immense  fortunes.  The  French 
tobacco  was  the  most  esteemed ; and  as  it  hap- 
pened at  this  time,  that  it  had  for  a stamp  the 
ancient  emblem  of  the  three  fieur  de  hs,  the  mark 
has  never  been  forgotten,  and  the  three  jiewr  de  Its 
are  stiff  in  Pekin,  the  only  sign  of  a dealer  m 
tobacco.  The  Chinese  have  now,  for  a long  time 
manufactured  their  own  snuff,  but _ they  r do  not 
subject  it  to  any  fermentation,  and  it  is  not . worth 
much.  They  merely  pulverize  the  leaves,  sift  the 
powder  tiff  it  is  as  fine  as  flour,  and  afterward^ 
perfume  it  with  flowers  and.  essences  A curious 
method  of  snuffing,  requiring  neither  box  no 
flask  is  noticed  in  the  “Voyages  and  Researches  of 
the  Adventure  and  Beagle ” At  Otaheite,  a su  - 
stance  not  unlike  powdered  rhubarb  m apix.n 
-nice  but  of  a very  pleasant  fragrance,  is  rubbed 
on  a' niece  of  shark's  skin  stretched  on  wood , and 
■m  old  man  who  had  one  of  these  snuff  sticks  in 
r^on,  valued  it.  so  highly,  that  he  could 

not  be  induced  to  part  with  it. 

Boxes  of  very  rude  construct  101 J mai-e jn 
France  and  Germany  from  birch  barl^  and  ^ 
in  the  streets  of  Paris  and  other  continental  cities, 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


87 


for  about  one  halfpenny  each.  These  have  lately 
been  seen  in  the  shops  of  London  tobacconists, 
under  the  name  of  “ German  boxes,”  at  about  three 
times  the  above  price.  They  are  used  abroad 
either  for  tobacco  or  snuff.  Boxes  are  also  made 
of  horn,  either  black  buffalo  or  transparent  pressed 
horn — the  latter  at  a much  cheaper  rate  than  the 
former.  St.  Helena  contributed  to  the  Great 
Exhibition  snuff-boxes  made  from  the  willow 
under  which  the  remains  of  Napoleon  reposed, 
until  their  removal  to  France,  and  also  from  a 
willow  planted  by  him  at  Longwood.  Van  .Die- 
man’s  Land  contributed  a box  made  from  the 
tooth  of  the  Sperm  whale,  as  well  as  boxes  from 
several  native  woods. 

The  Scotch  snuff-boxes  are  justly  celebrated  for 
the  perfection  of  their  hinge,  and  close  fitting 
cover.  They  were  originally  made  at  Lawrence- 
kirk,  but  the  manufacture  has  now  spread  to 
various  parts  of  Scotland.  The  wood  employed 
principally  in  the  manufacture  of  these  boxes  is 
the  sycamore  (or  plane  of  the  Scotch).  Mr. 
W.  Chambers  states,  “ that  from  a rough  block  of 
this  wood,  worth  twenty-five  shillings,  snuff-boxes 
may  be  made  to  the  value  of  three  thousand 
pounds.” 

The  modus  operandi  in  making  these  boxes  is 
described  as  follows : — The  box  is  made  from  a 
solid  block  of  wood ; the  first  operation  consists  in 
making  a number  of  circular  excavations  in  close 
contiguity  to  each  other,  by  means  of  a centre-bit, 
or  a clrill  running  in  a lathe ; the  interior  is  then’ 
squared  out  by  means  of  gouges  and  chisels,  and 
is  afteT wards  smoothed  with  files  and  glass-paper, 
-the  celebrated  hinge  is  formed  partly  out  of  the 
substance  of  the  box,  and  partly  out  of  that  of  the 
tu,  the  greatest  attention  being  paid  in  its  con- 
struction to  the  accurate  fitting  of  the  various  parts 


88 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


one  into  the  other.  The  box  is  lined  in  the  inside 
with  stout  tin-foil,  and  is  painted  on  the  outside 
with  several  coats  of  colour,  each  of  which  is  rubbed 
down  smooth  with  glass-paper  before  the  succeed- 
ing coat  is  applied.  It  is  then  ready  to  receive  the 
various  styles  of  ornament,  which,  in  some  cases, 
are  produced  by  the  hand  of  the  artist,  and  in 
others  by  mechanical  means.  The  most  usual 
decoration  consists  of  the  tartan  patterns,  the  com- 
ponent lines  of  which  are  drawn  separately,  by 
pens  fixed  in  a ruling  machine,  on  to  the  box  itself, 
if  bounded  by  planes  or  slightly  curved  surfaces ; 
although  such  lines  were  also  formerly  drawn  by 
means  of  a rose  engine  on  circular  boxes,  it  is  now 
found  a more  convenient  practice  to  rule  the  lines 
on  paper,  and  then  to  attach  the  paper  to  the 
boxes.  Another  style  of  ornamentation,  known  as 
the  Scoto-Russian,  is  of  more  recent  introduction, 
and  imitates,  in  a remote  degree,  the  beautiful 
enamelled  silver  snuff-boxes  for  which  Russia  has 
long  been  famous.  In  these,  the  outside  of  the 
box  is  first  covered  with  stout  tin-foil,  then  com- 
pletely painted  all  over  the  surface,  and  afterwards 
placed  in  the  ruling  machine,  which  traces  upon  it 
an  intricate  pattern  of  curved  and  straight  lines, 
by  means  of  a sharp  flat  tool.  This  instrument 
penetrates  completely  through  the  paint,  hut  only 
scrapes  the  tin-foil,  which  is  left  very  bright,  and 
resembles  inlaid  silver.  Several  coats  of  copal 
varnish,  each  of  which  is  successively  polished 
down,  are  then  applied  to  complete  the  snuff- 
box. 

Box-wood,  box-root,  king-wood,  ebony,  and  all 
kinds  of  hard  wood ; tin,  brass,  pewter,  lead,  silver, 
and  all  sorts  of  metals,  are  used  for  snuff-boxes, 
some  of  these  cheap  and  rudely  fashioned,  others 
elaborate  and  expensive ; some  lined  with  tortoise- 
shell or  horn,  others  with  tin  or  lead-foil ; and 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


89 


invention  has  been  taxed  to  produce  all  kinds  of 
ornamentation. 

The  practice  of  using  snuff  is  said  to  have  come 
into  England  after  the  Eestoration,  and  to  have 
been  brought  from  France  ; but  it  is  well  known 
that  the  habit  of  mere  snuff-taking  did  not  ori- 
ginate with  the  introduction  of  tobacco,  since  there 
are  recipes  for  making  snuff  from  herbs  in  the 
oldest  medicinal  works  extant.  The  use  of  tobacco 
snuff  has  been  referred  to  the  age  of  Catherine 
de  Medicis,  and  it  was  recommended  to  her  son, 
Charles  IX.,  for  his  chronic  headaches.  Snuff- 
taking was  formerly  characteristic  of  the  medical 
piofession ; and  the  gold-headed  cane  and  gold 
snuff-box  came  to  be  the  peculiar  emblems  of  those 
who  were  learned  in  the  healing  art. 

There  are  almost  an  endless  variety  of  snuffs 
as  of  noses,  the.  purest  kind  being  the  cc  Scotch  ” 
made  either  entirely  from  the  stalks  removed  from 
the  leaf  in  the  course  of  its  preparation  for  the  cigar 
f C?  stalks  with  a small  quantity  of  leaf.  The 

Welsh  and  “ Lundyfoot”  are  affirmed  to  owe  their 
qualities  chiefly,  if  not  altogether,  to  the  circum- 
stance of  then’  being  dried  almost  to  scorching  * 
hence  they  have  received  the  appellation  of  “ high- 
dried  snuffs.  The  “ Kappees”  and  other  dark  snuffs 
are  manufactured  from  the  darker  and  ranker  leaves, 
ocenting,  which  the  dark  snuffs  undergo,  also  fur- 
nish names  and  procure  customers  for  numerous 
varieties  There  is  a story  current,  that  the  cele- 
biated  Lundyfoot”  had  its  origin  in  an  accident 
one  version  affirming  that  the  man  who  was  attend- 
ing to  the  batches  got  drunk,  neglected  his  dutv 
and  made  his  master’s  fortune;  another,  that  an 
accidental  fire  did  that  for  the  firm  which  in  the 
o her  case  it  is  affirmed  that  an  extra  glass  of  grog 
Accomplished.  There  is  nothing  surprising  in  this 
and  either  narrative  may  be  true ; mosSS 


90 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


of  this  kind,  like  the  claying  of  sugar,  had  their 
origin  in  accidents.  A certain  quantity  of  snuff, 
in  the  preparation,  gets  overdone  in  some  of  the 
steps  of  the  process,  at  some  time  or  other,  and 
the  firm  resolves,  perhaps,  as  it  is  not  altogether 
useless,  to  try  and  realize  something  for  it.  The 
peculiarity  just  tickles  certain  noses,  and  for  the 
future  they  wish  for  none  but  spoilt  snuff  ; that 
which  was  at  first  spoilt  accidentally,  is  now  spoilt 
for  the  purpose,  to  supply  the  demands  of  the 
market  at  even  a higher  rate  than  ordinary,  and 
the  name  of  Lundyfoot  becomes  immortalized 
amongst  old  ladies  through  all  succeeding  genera- 
tions. What  other  experiments  and  other  acci- 
dents of  over-salting  or  over-liming  may  have 
done,  has  not  transpired;  and  who  may  be  the 
next  so  to  turn  circumstances  to  account,  that 
what  would  ordinarily  be  considered  a misfortune, 
shall  be  turned  to  good  fortune,  time  alone  will 


1 John  Hardham  was  Garrick’s  under-treasurer, 
and  kept  a snuff-shop  in  Fleet  Street,  at  the  sign 
of  the  Red  Lion,  where  he  contrived  to  get  into 
hio'h  vo<me,  a particular  poudre  de  tcibac,  still  known 
as°Hardham?s  37.  Stevens,  while  daily  visiting 
Johnson  in  Bolt  Court,  on  the  subject  of  their  joint 
editorship  of  Shakespeare,  never  failed  to  replenish 
his  box  at  the  shop  of  a man  who  was  for  years 
the  butt  of  his  witticisms.  Hardham  died  a 
bachelor,  September  20,  1772  and  bequeathed 
£(5000 — the  savings  of  a busy  life — for  the  benefit 
of  the  poor  ot  his  native  city,  Chestei . 

As  a pinch  of  snuff  ends  in  a sneeze,  so  sniffing 
ends  in  sneezing,  and  with  a hearty  sneeze  we 
brinn'  our  pinch  ot  snuff  to  a sudden  ending. 
What  comfort  and  consolation  there  is  sometimes 
in  a hearty  sneeze,  no  one  knows  better  than  him 
who  has  ‘just  made  two  or  three  attempts,  and 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


91 


ingloriously  failed.  With  half  closed  eyes,  and  open 
mouth,  and  bated  breath — once — twice — thrice — • 
no ! it  will  not  he  beguiled — psh-h-h-h-haw ! “ God 
bless  you ! ” 

“ The  year  750,”  says  a writer  in  the  Gentlemans 
Magazine , “is  commonly  reckoned  the  era  of  the 
custom  of  saying  God  bless  you  to  one  who  hap- 
pens to  sneeze.”  It  is  said  that,  in  the  time  of  the 
pontificate  of  St.  Gregory  the  Great,  the  air  was 
filled  with  such  a deleterious  influence,  that  they 
who  sneezed  immediately  expired.  On  this  the 
devout  pontiff  appointed  a form  of  prayer,  and  a 
wish  to  be  said  to  persons  sneezing  for  averting 
them  from  the  fatal  effects  of  this  malignancy. 
A fable  contrived  against  all  the  rules  of  proba- 
bility, it  being  certain  that  this  custom  has  from 
time  immemorial,  subsisted  in  all  parts  of  the 
known  world.  According  to  mythology,  the  first 
sign  of  life  Prometheus’s  artificial  man  gave,  was 
by  sternutation.  This  supposed  creator  is  said  to 
have  stolen  a portion  of  the  solar  rays,  and  filling 
a phial  with  them,  sealed  it  up  hermetically.  He 
instantly  flew  back  to  his  favourite  automaton,  and 
opening  ■ the  phial,  held  it  close  to  the  statue,  the 
rays  still  retaining  all  their  activity,  insinuated 
themselves  through  the  pores,  and  set  the  facti- 
tious man  a sneezing.  Prometheus  transported 
with  success,  offered  up  a prayer  with  wishes  for  the 
preservation  of  so  singular  a being.  The  auto- 
maton observed  him,  remembering  his  ejaculations, 
was  careful,  on  like  occasions  to  offer  these  wishes 
in  behalf  of  his  descendants,  who  perpetuated  it 
from  . father  to  son  in  all  their  colonies.  The 
Pabbis,  also,  fix  a very  ancient  date  to  the  custom. 
Pliny  says,  that  to  sneeze  to  the  right  was  deemed 
fortunate ; to  the  left,  and  near  a place  of  burial, 
the  reverse.  Tiberius,  otherwise  a sour  man,  would 
perform  this  right  of  blessing  most  punctually  to 


92 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


others,  and  expect  the  same  from  others  to  himself. 
Aristotle  has  a problem,  “ Why  sneezing  from  noon 
to  midnight  was  good,  but  from  night  to  noon 
unlucky.”  St.  Austin  tells  us  that  the  ancients 
were  accustomed  to  go  to  bed  again,  if  they  sneezed 
while  they  put  on  their  shoe. 

When  Themistocles  sacrificed  in  his  galley  be- 
fore the  battle  of  Xeres,  one  of  the  assistants  upon 
the  right  hand  sneezed,  Euphrantides  the  sooth- 
sayer, presaged  the  victory  of  the  Greeks,  and  the 
overthrow  of  the  Persians. 

When  the  Greeks  were  consulting  concerning 
their  retreat  in  the  time  of  Cyrus  the  Younger,  it 
chanced  that  one  of  them  sneezed,  at  the  noise 
whereof,  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  called  upon  Jupiter 
Soter. 

Brand  tells  us,  that  when  the  king  of  Mesopo- 
tamia sneezes,  acclamations  are  made  in  all  parts 
of  his  dominions.  The  Siamese  wish  long  life  to 
persons  sneezing.  And  the  Persians  look  upon 
sneezing  as  a happy  omen,  especially  when  re- 
peated often. 

A writer  lately  gives  us  the  following  “ Philo- 
sophy of  a sneeze”  for  which  he  alone  is  responsible. 
“ The  nose  receives  three  sets  of  nerves — the  nerves 
of  smell,  those  of  feeling , and  those  of  motion.  The 
former  communicate  to  the  brain,  the  odorous  pro- 
perties of  substances  with  which  they  may  come 
in  contact,  in  a diffused  or  concentrated  state ; the 
second,  communicate  the  impressions  of  touch ; 
the  third,  move  the  muscles  of  the  nose ; but  the 
power  of  these  muscles  is  very  limited.  When  a 
sneeze  occurs,  all  these  faculties  are  excited  to  a 
high  degree.  A grain  of  snuff  excites  the  olfactory 
nerves,  which  despatch  to  the  brain  the  intelligence 
that : snuff  has  attacked  the  nostril.’  The  brain 
instantly  sends  a mandate  through  the  motor 
nerves  to  the  muscles,  saying  ‘ cast  it  out  1 ’ and 


SNIFFING  AND  SNEESHIN. 


93 


the  result  is  unmistakable.  So  offensive  is  ■ the 
enemy  besieging  the  nostril  held  to  be,  that  the 
nose  is  not  left  to  its  own  defence.  It  were  too 
feeble  to  accomplish  this.  An  allied  army  of  mus- 
cles join  in  the  rescue — nearly  one-half  the  body 
arouses  against  the  intruder — from  the  muscles  of 
the  lips  to  those  of  the  abdomen,  all  unite  in  the 
effort  for  the  expulsion  of  the  grain  of  snuff.” 


CHAPTER  VII. 


QUID  PEO  QUO. 

“A  third  party  sprang  up,  headed  hy  the  descendants  of  Eobert 
Chetvit,  the  companion  of  the  great  Hudson.  These  discarded  pipes 
altogether,  and  took  to  chewing  tobacco;  hence,  they  were  called  • 
Quids." — Knickerbocker's  New  York. 

'r'i  H 

Any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  read  through 
the  “Curiosities  of  Food,”  will  soon  become  con- 
vinced, from  the  examples  which  Mr.  P.  L.  Sim- 
monds  has  collected  so  assiduously  from  all  parts 
of  the  world,  that  there  is  no  accounting  for  tastes. 
What  extraordinary  tilings  men  will  admit  between 
their  teeth  to  gratify  their  appetites,  is  almost 
enough  to  set  one’s  own  teeth  on  edge.  Tobacco  is 
certainly  not  more  nauseous  or  revolting,  than  to 
us  would  be  many  of  the  delicacies  dished  up  tor 
dinner  by  some  of  the  bipedal  race.  “ Some  Euro- 
peans,” observes  the  author,  “chew  tobacco,  the 
Hindoo  takes  to  betel  nut  and  lime,  while  the 
Patagonian  finds  contentment  in  a bit  of  guano, 
and  "the  Styrians  grow  fat  and  ruddy  on  arsenic. 
English  children  delight  in  sweetmeats  and  sugar- 
candy,  while  those  of  Africa  prefer  rock  salt.  A 
Frenchman  likes  frogs  and  snails,  and  we  eat  cels, 
oysters,  and  whelks.  To  the  Esquimaux,  train  oil 
is  your  only  delicacy.  The  Russian  luxuriates 
upon  his  hide  and  tallow;  the  Chinese  upon  iats, 
puppy  dogs,  and  shark’s  fins;,  the  Kaffir  upon 
elephant’s  foot  and  trunk  or  lion  steaks , wni  e 


QUID  PRO  QUO. 


95 


the  Pacific  islander  places  cold  missionary  above 
every  other  edible.  Why  then  should  we  be  sur- 
prised at  mens  feeding  upon  rattle  snakes  and 
monkeys,  and  pronouncing  them  capital  eating  ?”* 
Nothing  is  more  extraordinary  than  the  habit  of 
dirt-eating  and  chewing  of  lime,  either  by  them- 
selves or  in  combination  with  other  substances. 
But  more  of  this  anon.  Tobacco,  as  a masticatory, 
might  equally  cause  surprise  did  it  not  daily  occur 
at  our  doors.  The  quantity  used  in  this  form  will 
not  bear  comparison  with  that  consumed  in  smoke, 
but  even  this  is  considerable.  In  America,  the 
custom  is  carried  to  a very  unpleasant  extent,  and 
were  it  the  only  form  in  which  the  plant  could  be 
indulged,  there  is  good  ground  for  presuming  that 
it  would  fall  very  far  short  of  the  popularity  which 
it  has  attained. 


Somebody,  with  a strong  antipathy  to  pig-tail  and 
fine  cut,  has  entered  into  certain  investigations 
and  calculations  in  the  Philadelphia  Journal , which 
has  resulted  in  this  wise.  It  a tobacco  chewer 
chews  for  fifty  years,  and  uses  each  day  of  that 
peiiod  two  inches  of  solid  jilug,  he  will  consume 
nearly  one  mile  and  a quarter  in  length  of  solid 
tobacco,  half  an  inch  thick  and  two  inches  broad 
costing  2,094  dollars,  or  about  £500.  Plug  ugly’ 
sure  enough ! By  the  same  process  of  reasoning’ 
s statist  calculates,  tliat  if  a man  ejects  one  pint 
ot  saliva  per  day  for  fifty  years  (a  feat,  one  would 
presume,  it  would  require  a Yankee  to  accomplish) 
the  total  would  swell  into  nearly  2,300  gallons’ 
quite  a respectable  lake,  and  almost  enough  to 
float  the  “ Great  Eastern”  in!  Truly,  Brother 
Jonathan,  there  are  more  things  in  heaven  and 
earth  than  are  dreamt  of  in  our  philosophy 
Another  calculation  shows,  that  if  ah  the  tobacco 


Curiosities  of  Food,  by  P.  L.  Sirumonds.  Bentley,  1859. 


96  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEF. 

which  the  British  people  have  consumed  during 
the  last  three  years  were  worked  up  into  pig-tail 
half  an  inch  thick,  it  would  form  a line  99,470 
miles  long;  or  enough  to  go  nearly  four  times 
round  the  world  ;*  or  if  the  tobacco  consumed  by 
the  same  people  in  the  same  period  were  to  he 
placed  in  one  scale,  and  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral  and 
Westminster  Abbey  in  the  other,  the  ecclesiastical 
buildings  would  kick  the  beam. 

“ Oh,  the  nasty  creatures  1”  some  lady  exclaims. 
“Who  could  suppose  that  they  would  do  such  a 
thing,  and  to  such  an  extent  too,  as  to  burn  and 
chew  and  smoke  in  three  years  enough  tobacco  to 
reach  round  the  world  four  times  !”  It  is  astonish- 
ing, my  dear  Mrs.  Partington,  we  must  confess ; 
but  let  us  compare  therewith  the  tea  consumption! 
for  the  same  period,  and  we  shall  find  that  during 
the  past  three  years,  we  have  consumed  about 
205,500,000  of  pounds  of  tea,  which,  if  done  up  in 
packages  containing  one  quarter  of  a pound  each — 
such  packages  being  4\  inches  in  length  and  2^ 
inches  in  diameter — these  placed  end  to  end,  would 
reach  59,428  miles ; or,  upon  the  same  principles 
as  those  adopted  for  the  pig-tail,  would  girdle  the 
earth  twice  with  a belt  of  tea  21  inches  in 
diameter,  or  twenty-five  times  that  of  the  aforesaid 
pig-tail.  Enough  to  make  rivers  ot  tea  strong 
enough  for  any  old  lady  in  the  kingdom  to  enjoy, 
and  deep  enough  for  all  the  old  ladies  in  the  king- 
dom to  bathe  in. 

* Tobacco  entered  for  Lome  consumption- 

1856  1857  1858 

32,579,166  lbs.  32,851,365  lbs.  34,110,850  lbs. 

Total  99,541,381  lbs.— or  44,43S  tons. 

t Tea  entered  for  home  consumption  in- 

1856  1857  1858 

63,295,643  lbs.  69,159,640  lbs.  73,217,483  lbs. 


QUID  PKO  QUO. 


97 


All  this,  we  are  free  to  confess,  does  not  make 
the  habit  of  quidding  either  more  justifiable  or  re- 
spectable, although  indulged  in  by  some  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  gentler  sex.  In  Paraguay,  for  instance, 
an  American  traveller  informs  us  that  everybody 
smokes,  and  nearly  every  woman  and  girl  more  than 
thirteen  years  old  chews  tobacco.  A magnificent 
Hebe,  arrayed  in  satin  and  flashing  in  diamonds, 
puts  you  back  with  one  delicate  hand,  while  with 
the  fair  taper  fingers  of  the  other  she  takes  the 
tobacco  out  of  her  mouth  previous  to  your  saluting 
her.  An  over  delicate  foreigner  turns  away  with  a 
shudder  of  loathing  under  such  circumstances,  and 
gets  the  epithet  of  “the  savage”  applied  to  him  by 
the  offended  beauty  for  his  sensitive  squeamishness. 
However,  one  soon  gets  used  to  these  things  in 
Paraguay,  where  one  is,  per  force  of  custom, 
obliged  to  kiss  every  lady  one  is  introduced  to,  and 
one  half  of  those  you  meet  are  really  tempting 
enough  to  render  you  reckless  of  consequences. 

Suppose  not  that  Paraguay  is  a solitary  instance 
in  which  ladies  have  a predilection  for  this  mas- 
ticatory. In  Siberia,  which  is  far  enough  geogra- 
phically to  prevent  any  collusion,  or  the  influence 
of  example  to  exert  its  power,  Captain  Cochrane 
says  that  the  Tchuktchi  eat,  chew,  smoke,  and 
snuff  at  the  same  time.  He  saw  amongst  them, 
boys  and  girls  of  nine  or  ten  years  of  age  who  put 
a large  leaf  of  tobacco  into  their  mouths  without 
permitting  any  saliva  to  escape,  nor  would  they  put 
aside  the  tobacco  should  meat  be  offered  to  them, 
but  continued  consuming  both  of  them  together. 

The  Mintira  women  and  other  races  of  the  great 
Indian  Archipelago  are  addicted  to  chewing  tobacco. 
Amongst  the  Nubians,  the  custom  is  more  common 
than  smoking.  Of  the  South  American  tribes,  the 
Sercucumas  of  the  Erevato,  and  the  Caura  neigh- 
bours of  the  whitish  Taparitos,  swallow  tobacco 

n 


98 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


chopped  small,  and  impregnated  with  some  other 
stimulant  juices. 

In  Africa,  the  habit  is  not  at  all  an  uncommon 
one.  The  Turks  and  Arabs  of  Egypt,  are  great 
smokers,  but  not  so  with  the  other  tribes.  The 
Mongrabins,  scarcely  know  the  use  of  a pipe,  or 
the  method  of  manufacturing  a cigar,  yet  tobacco 
is  well  known,  and  chewing  is  the  order  of  the  day. 
With  them  each  piece  of  tobacco  is  mixed  with  a 
portion  of  natron.  Master  and  servant,  rich  and 
poor,  all  carry  about  them  a pouch  of  tobacco,  with 
pieces  of  natron  in  it.  These  people  do  not  carry 
the  quid  in  their  cheek,  as  do  the  Europeans  who 
indulge  in  the  habit,  but  in  front,  between  the 
teeth  and  the  upper  lip.  I 

The  blacks  of  Gesira  have  another  method  of 
enjoying  this  luxury.  They  make  a cold  infusion 
of  tobacco,  and  dissolve  the  natron  in  it.  This 
mixture  is  called  “ bucca.”  The  natives  take  a 
mouthful  of  it  from  the  bucca  cup,  which  they 
keep  rinsing  and  working  about  in  their  mouths 
for  a quarter  of  an  hour  before  they  eject  it.  So 
much  do  they  delight  in  it,  that  it  is  considered  the 
highest  treat  a man  can  offer  to  his  dearest  friends, 
to  invite  them  to  sip  the  bucca  with  him.  Bucca 
parties  are  given,  as  in  some  localities  tea  parties 
are  honoured.  All  sit  in  solemn  silence  as  the  cup 
goes  round,  each  taking  a mouthful,  and  nothing 
is  heard  save  the  gurgling  and  working  inside  the 
closed  mouths.  On  such  occasions  the  most  impor-  • 
tant  questions  receive  no  reply,  for  to  open  the  i 
mouth  and  answer  would  be  to  lose  the  cherished 
“ bucca.” 

In  Iceland,  tobacco  is  chewed  and  snuffed  as 
assiduously  as  it  is  smoked  in  other  countries ; and  I 
in  the  northern  states  of  Europe,  or  some  of  them, 
the  powdered  leaf,  which,  with  most  people  is- 
deemed  a preparation  for  the  nose,  is  placed,  a 


QUID  PRO  QUO. 


99 


pinch  at  a time,  upon  the  tongue.  Of  Joubert’s 
statement  we  scarce  know  what  opinion  to  hold. 
He  says,  “ When  a stranger  arrives  in  Greenland, 
he  is  immediately  surrounded  by  a crowd  of  the 
natives,  who  ask  the  favour  of  sucking  the 
empyreumatic  oil  in  the  reservoir  of  his  pipe.  And 
it  is  .stated  that  the  Greenlanders  smoke  only  for 
the  pleasure  of  drinking  that  detestable  juice  which 
is  so  disgusting  to  European  smokers.”  The  Fin- 
lander delights  in  chewing.  He  will  remove  his 
quid  from  time  to  time,  and  stick  it  behind  his 
ear,  and  then  chew  it  again.  This  reminds  us  of 
a circumstance  narrated  by  a friend,  which  occurred 
when  he  was  a boy.  His  master  was  a chewer. 
After  a “quid”  had  been  masticated  for  some  time, 
it  was  removed  from  his  mouth,  and  thrown 
against  the  wall,  where  it  remained  sticking ; the 
apprentice  was  then  called  to  write  beside  it  the 
date  at  which  it  was  flung  there,  so  that  it  might 
be  taken  down  in  its  proper  turn,  after  being 
thoroughly  dried,  to  be  chewed  over  again. 

“ And  then  he  tried  to  sing  All’s  well, 

But  could  not  though  he  tried  ; 

His  head  was  turned,  and  so  he  chewed 
His  pig-tail  till  he  died.” 

Of  all  tobacco  chewers,  none  can  compete  with 
the  Yankee — not  even  our  own  Jack  Tars.  They 
are  the  very  perfection  of  masticators,  and  of 
spitters,  also,  if  the  narratives  of  travellers  in 
general,  and  of  Dickens  in  particular,  are  to  be 
relied  on.  “As  Washington  may  be  called  the 
head-quarters  of  tobacco-tinctured  saliva,  the  time 
is  come  when  I must  confess,  without  any  disguise, 
that  the  prevalence  of  these  two  odious  practices 
of  chewing  and  expectorating  began,  about  this 
time,  to  be  anything  but  agreeable,  and  soon 
became  most  offensive  and  sickening.  In  all  the 

h 2 


100  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

public  places  of  America,  this  filthy  custom  is 
recognized.  In  the  courts  of  law,  the  judge  has 
his  spittoon,  the  crier  his,  the  witness  his,  and  the 
prisoner  his,  while  the  jurymen  and  spectators  are 
provided  for,  as  so  many  men  who,  in  the  course 
of  nature,  must  desire  to  spit  incessantly.  In  the 
hospitals,  the  students  of  medicine  are  requested 
by  notices  upon  the  wall,  to  eject  their  tobacco  ' 
juice  into  the  boxes  provided  for  that  purpose,  and 
not  to  discolour  the  stairs.  In  public  buildings  * 
visitors  are  implored,  through  the  same  agency,  to 
squirt  the  essence  of  their  ‘quids’  or  ‘plugs,’  as 
I have  heard  them  called  by  gentlemen  learned  in 
this  kind  of  sweetmeat,  into  the  national  spittoons, 
and  not  about  the  bases  of  the  marble  columns. 
But  in  some  parts  this  custom  is  inseparably  mixed 
up  with  every  meal  and  morning  call,  and  with  all 
the  transactions  of  social  life!  The  stranger  who 
follows  in  the  track  I took  myself,  will  find  it  in  its 
full  bloom  and  glory  at  Washington;  and  let  him 
not  persuade  himself  (as  I once  did  to  my  shame) 
that  previous  tourists  have  exaggerated  its  extent. 
The  thing  itself  is  an  exaggeration  of  nastiness 
which  cannot  be  outdone. 

“ On  board  the  steamboat  there  were  two  young 
gentlemen,  with  shirt  collars  reversed,  as  usual, 
and  armed  with  very  big  walking  sticks,  who 
planted  two  seats  in  the  middle  of  the  deck,  at 
a distance  of  some  four  paces  apart,  took  out  their 
tobacco  boxes,  and  sat  down  opposite  each  other 
to  chew.  In  less  than  a quarter  of  an  hour’s  time, 
these  hopeful  youths  had  shed  about  them  on  the  i 
clean  boards,  a copious  shower  of  yellow  rain, . 
clearing  by  that  means  a kind  of  magic  circle, 
within  "whose  limits  no  intruders  dared  to  come, 
and  which  they  never  failed  to  refresh  and! 
refresh  before  a spot  was  dry.  This  being  before 
breakfast,  rather  disposed  me,  I confess,  to 


QUID  PKO  QUO. 


101 


nausea, ; but  looking  attentively  at  one  of  the 
expectorators,  I plainly  saw  that  he  was  young  at 
chewing,  and  felt  inwardly  uneasy  himself.  A 
glow  of  delight  came  over  me  at  this  discovery, 
and  as  I marked  his  face  turn  paler  and  paler,  and 
saw  the  ball  of  tobacco  in  his  left  cheek  quiver 
with  his  suppressed  agony,  while  yet  he  spat  and 
chewed,  and  spat  again,  in  emulation  of  his  older 
friend,  I could  have  fallen  on  his  neck  and 
implored  him  to  go  on  for  hours. 

“ The , senate  is  a dignified  and  decorous  body, 
and  its  proceedings  are  conducted  with  much 
gravity  and  order.  Both  houses  are  handsomely 
•carpetted ; but  the  state  to  whicli  these  carpets 
are  reduced  by  the  universal  disregard  of  the 
spittoon,  with  which  every  honorable  member  is 
accommodated,  and*  the  extraordinary  improve- 
ments on  the  pattern  which  are  squirted  and 
dabbled  upon  it  in  every  direction,  do  not  admit 
of  being  described.  I will  merely  observe,  that  I 
strongly  recommend  all  strangers  not  to  look  at 
the  floor ; and  if  they  happen  to  drop  anything, 
though  it  be  their  purse,  not  to  pick  it  up  with  an 
ungloved  hand  on  any  account.  It  is  somewhat 
remarkable,  too,  to  see  so  many  honorable  mem- 
bers with  swelled  faces;  and  it  is  scarcely  less 
remaikable  to  discover,  that  this  appearance  is 
caused  by  the  quantity  of  tobacco  they  contrive 
to  stow  within  the  hollow  of  the  cheek.  It  is 
strange  enough,  too,  to  see  an  honorable  gentle- 
man leaning  back  in  his  tilted  chair,  with  his  le°-s 
on  the  desk  before  him,  shaping  a convenient 
plug  with  his  penknife,  and  when  it  is  quite 
ready  for  use,  shooting  the  old  one  from  his  mouth 
as  from  a pop-gun,  and  clapping  the  new  one  in 
its  place  I was  surprised  to  observe,  that  even 
steady  old  chewers  of  great  experience  are  not 
always  good  marksmen,  which  has  rather  inclined 


102  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

me  to  doubt  that  general  proficiency  with  the  rifle 
of  which  we  have  heard  so  much  in  England. 
Several  gentlemen  called  upon  me,  who,  in  the 
course  of  conversation,  frequently  missed  the 
spittoon  at  five  paces ; and  one  (hut  he  was  cer- 
tainly short-sighted)  mistook  the  closed  sash  for 
the  open  window  at  three.  On  another  occasion 
when  I dined  out,  and  was  sitting  with  two  ladies 
and  some  gentlemen  round  a fire  before  dinner,  one 
of  the  company  fell  short  of  the  fireplace  six  dis-  j 
tinct  times.  I am  disposed  to  think,  however,  that  j 
this  was  occasioned  by  his  not  aiming  at  that  oh-  j 
ject,  as  there  was  a white  marble  hearth  before  the 
fender,  which  was  more  convenient,  and  may  have 
suited  his  purpose  better.” 

At  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  grows  a plant,  allied 
to  the  iceplant  of  our  greenhouses,  and  which  is  a 
native  of  the  Karroo*  which  appears  to  possess 
narcotic  properties.  The  Hottentots  know  it  under  ; 
the  name  of  Kou,  or  Kauw-goed.  They  gather  and  ( 
beat  together  the  whole  plant,  roots,  stem,  and  < 
leaves,  then  twist  it  up  like  pig-tail  tobacco , alter  | 
which  they  let  the  mass  ferment,  and  keep  it  by 
them  for  chewing,  especially  when  they  are  thirsty. 
If  it  be  chewed  "immediately  after  fermentation,  it 
is  narcotic  and  intoxicating.  It  is  called  cannar 
root  by  the  colonists. 

In  Lapland,  Angelica-root  {Archangehca  ojficu J 
nalis,  Linn.)  is  dried  and  masticated  in  the  same 
way  and  answers  the  same  purpose  as  tobacco.  It 
is  warm  and  stimulating,  and  not  narcotic,  nor 
does  it  leave  those  unpleasant  and  unsightly  evi- 
dences of  its  use  which  may  be  observed  about  the 
mouth  of  the  true  votary  ot  the  quid. 

Theareca  nut  and  the  betle-pepper,  which  m 
the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  other  parts  ot  the 

* Mesembryanthemum  tortuosum,  Linn. 


QUID  PRO  QUO. 


103 


East,  are  used  as  a masticatory,  will  receive  special 
notice  hereafter. 

Lightfoot  says  that  the  Scotch  are  very  fond  of 
“dulse,”  but  they  prefer  it  dried  and  rolled  up, 
when  they  chew  it  like  tobacco,  for  the  pleasure 
arising  from  the  habit.  This  is  the  only  reference 
to  the  custom  that  we  have  met  with,  and  requires 
further  confirmation. 

The  Duke  of  Marlborough  has  the  credit  of 
being  the  first  distinguished  man  who  made  the 
chewing  of  tobacco  famous;  who  was  the  last  is 
not  so  readily  declared,  since  distinguished  men 
generally  do  not  distinguish  themselves  much  in 
this  department  of  the  “fine  arts.”  It  is  related 
of  a monkey,  that  while  on  the  voyage  home  from 
some  tropical  clime  in  which  he  had  been  made  a 
prisoner,  he  noticed  a sailor  who  was  in  the  habit 
of  going  to  his  trunk  and  taking  out  a quid,  roll  it 
up,  and  place  it  in  his  mouth.  Finding,  one  day, 
that  the  course  was  clear,  and  the  box  unfastened, 
Jocko  helped  himself  to  a very  respectable  twist, 
which  he  put  into  his  mouth,  and  scampered  there- 
with upon  deck.  He  soon  commenced  chewing 
and  spitting,  and,  unsuccessful  in  the  experiment, 
the  quid,  which  was  not  found  to  be  so  pleasant  as 
was  anticipated,  was  thrown  away.  The  poor 
animal  soon  became  dreadfully  sick,  held  its 
stomach,  and  moaned  piteously,  but  ultimately 
recovered.  He  learnt  a lesson,  however,  the  impres- 
sion of  which  never  passed  away ; for  ever  after  he 
shunned  the  box,  and  the  sight  or  smell  of  tobacco 
sent  him  scampering  into  the  shrouds. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


A RACE  OP  PRETENDERS. 


“ I grant  your  worship  that  he  is  a knave,  sir ; but  yet.  Heaven 
forbid,  sir,  but  a knave  should  have  some  countenance  at  his  friends 
request.  An  honest  man,  sir,  is  able  to  speak  for  himself,  when  a knave 
is  not.” — King  Henry  IV.,  part  2. 


It  is  the  misfortune  of  kingdoms  to  be  subject  to  j 
rebellions,  and  of  monarchs  to  behold  the  advent 
of  pretenders,  as  it  is  the  fate  of  gold  to  be 
imitated  in  baser  metals,  and  bank  notes  to  be 
forged.  A rule  is  supposed  to  be  strengthened  by 
an  exception,  and  tried  gold  to  shine  in  greater 
splendour  beside  its  counterfeit — 


“ Than  that  which  hath  no  foil  to  set  it  off.” 


So,  tobacco,  in  the  midst  of  all  its  success  and 
prosperity,  has  been  envied  and  imitated  by  duller 
pretenders  to  the  virtue  it  boasts,  from  among  tire 
meaner  denizens  of  the  vegetable  world.  Of  course 
these  pretenders  have  been  unsuccessful ; for  had 
they  been  successful,  they  had  no  longer  been 
branded  with  the  baser  name,  but  had  risen  to 
the  rank  of  benefactors  and  patriots.  Such  is  the 
custom  of  the  world. 

The  following  are  the  substances  which  arc 


A RACE  OF  PRETENDERS. 


105 


stated  to  be  used  for  the  adulteration  of  tobacco, 
principally  in  the  form  of  “ cut”  and  “ roll.”  Dr. 
Hassell  divid.es  them — 

First,  into  vegetable  substances,  as  the  leaves  of 
the  dock,  rhubarb,  coltsfoot,  cabbage,  potato, 
chicory,  endive,  elm,  and  oak;  malt  cummings, 
that  is  the  roots  of  germinating  malt ; peat,  which 
consists  chiefly  of  decayed  moss ; seaweed,  roasted 
chicory  root,  wheat,  oatmeal,  bran,  catechu  or  terra 
japonica,  oakum,  and  logwood  dye. 

Secondly,  into  saccharine  substances,  as  cane- 
sugar,  treacle,  honey,  liquorice,  and  beetroot  dregs. 

Thirdly,  into  salts  and  earths,  as  nitre,  common 
salt,  sal  ammoniac,  or  hydrochlorate  of  ammonia, 
nitrate  of  ammonia,  carbonate  of  ammonia,  the 
alkalies,  as  potash,  soda,  and  lime ; sulphate  of 
magnesia,  sulphate  of  soda  or  glauber  salts,  yellow 
ochre,  umber,  fuller’s  earth,  Venetian  red,  sand, 
and  sulphate  of  iron. 

And  the  experience  of  the  excise,  as  may  bo 
gathered  from  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Phillips  before 
the  committee  of  adulteration,  harmonizes  with 
the  above  list.  “ With  regard  to  tobacco,”  he  says, 
“we  have  found  in  cut  tobacco,  sugar,  liquorice, 
gum  catechu,  saltpetre,  and  various  nitrates ; yellow 
ochre,  Epsom  salts,  glauber  salts,  green  copperas, 
red  sandstone,  wheat,  oatmeal,  malt  cummings, 
chicory,  and  the  following  leaves — coltsfoot,  rhu- 
barb, chicory,  eudive,  oak,  elm;  and  in  fancy 
tobacco,  I once  found  lavender,  and  a wort  called 
mugwort.  It  is  a fragrant  herb,  suggestive  rather 
of  the  nutmeg.  In  roll  tobacco  we  have  found 
rhubarb  leaves,  endive  and  dock  leaves,  sugar, 
liquorice,  and  a dye  made  of  logwood  and  sulphate 
of  iron." 

Let  consumers  of  tobacco  console  themselves, 
however,  in  the  face  of  this  formidable  list,  by  the 
assurance  of  the  eminent  experimenter  on  articles 


106  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

of  food,  &c.,  before  named,  that  “ not  one  of  the 
forty  samples  of  manufactured  cut  tobacco  which 
he  examined  was  adulterated  with  any  foreign 
leaf,  or  with  any  insoluble  or  organic  extraneous 
substance  of  any  description  other  than  with  sugar, 
or  some  other  saccharine  matter,  which  was  pre- 
sent in  several  instances.” 

Leaving  adulterations  to  take  care  of  themselves, 
we  find  that  an  article,  of  very  ancient  use,  is  still 
occasionally  smoked  instead  of  the  Virginian  weed. 
The  plant  referred  to  is  coltsfoot  ( Tussilago  farfar , 
Linn),  a very  common  weed  on  chalky  and  gravelly 
soils.  Pliny  refers  to  it,  and  directs  that  the  foliage 
should  be  burned,  and  the  smoke  arising  from  it 
drawn  into  the  mouth  through  a reed  and  swal- 
lowed. These  leaves  have  long  been  smoked  for 
chest  complaints,  and  are  said  to  form  the  chief 
ingredient  in  British  herb  tobacco. 

The  leaves  of  milfoil  or  yarrow  ( Achilloea  mille- 
folium)),  another  plant  equally  common  with  the 
last,  have  been  recommended  to  smokers  in  lieu  of 
tobacco,  and  occasionally  used  for  that  purpose. 
Added  to  beer,  they  render  it  heady  or  more 
intoxicating. 

Leaves  of  rhubarb  are  occasionally  smoked  by 
those  who  are  too  poor  to  furnish  themselves  with 
a regular  supply  of  tobacco,  and  those  who  have 
used  them  state,  that,  although  devoid  of  strength, 
they  are  not  a bad  substitute  when  tobacco  is  not 
to  be  obtained.  For  the  same  purpose  they  are 
collected  and  used  in  Thibet,  and  on  the  slopes  of 
the  Himalayas. 

The  leaves  of  a plant  common  in  marshes  and 
boggy  soils  in  Europe  and  North  America,  called 
Bogbean  ( Menyanthes  trifoliata , Linn.)  are  used  in 
the  north  of  Europe  when  hops  are  scarce,  to  give 
a bitter  flavour  to  beer,  and  have  been  recom- 
mended and  adopted  as  a tobacco  substitute. 


A RACE  OF  PRETENDERS. 


107 


An  agricultural  labourer  near  Blois,  pretends 
that  the  leaves  of  the  beet  make  an  excellent 
tobacco. 

Undescribed  plants  called  Aldl  and  Trouna,  are 
used  by  the  Arabs  of  Algeria  to  render  their 
tobacco  milder. 

In  some  parts  of  Europe,  the  leaves  of  the  com- 
mon garden  sage  has  served  the  same  purpose ; 
whilst  in  some  parts  of  Switzerland,  the  leaves  of 
mountain  tobacco  ( Arnica  montana , Linn.)  are 
collected  for  use  as  tobacco,  or  dried  and  powdered 
to  be  used  as  snuff.  This  is  no  doubt  a virulent 
plant,  and  has  the  reputation  of  being  a powerful 
acrid  narcotic. 

The  tobacco  substitutes  in  North  America  are 
more  numerous  than  we  should  have  expected  to 
have  found  in  the  native  land  of  the  true  tobacco. 
A decoction  of  the  holly-leaves  ( Ilex  vomitoria, 
Linn.)  are  drunk  by  the  native  Creek  Indians, 
under  the  name  of  “ black  drink,”  at  the  opening 
of  their  councils,  on  account  of  its  peculiar  pro- 
perties. This  shrub  is  also  called  Cossena  by  the 
Indians,  and  the  leaves  are  used  for  smoking  as  a 
substitute  for  tobacco.  “Often,”  says  one  of  the 
early  settlers,  “ I have  smoked  a pipe  of  cossena 
with  their  majesties  Toma  Chaci  and  Senoaki  his 
queen,  at  their  mud-palace,  about  three  miles  from 
Savanacke.” 

The  Virginian  or  Stag’s  Horn  Sumach,*  which 
is  met  with  almost  over  the  whole  of  the  United 
States,  supplies  leaves  which  are  dried  and  used 
by  some  of  the  native  tribes  as  tobacco. 

The  Indians  of  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri  use 
the  leaves  of  another  Sumach  ( Rhus  copallina ) and 
Indian  tobacco  ( Lobelia  inflata,  Linn.)  is  supposed 
to  be  indebted  for  its  name  to  the  fact  that  it  was 


Rhus  typhina. 


108  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

one  of  the  plants  smoked  by  the  Indians  instead  of 
the  geuuine  <c  weed.”  Under  the  name  of  a tom- 
beki,”  the  leaf  of  a species  of  Lobelia  is  smoked  in 
parts  of  Asia.  It  is  smoked  in  a narghile,  and  is 
exceedingly  narcotic,  so  much  so,  that  it  is  usually 
steeped  in  water  to  weaken  it  before  being  used ; 
and  it  is  always  smoked  whilst  damp. 

Not  many  years  since,  a patent  was  taken  out  at 
Washington  for  fabricating  tobacco  from  maize- 
husks,  steeped  in  a solution  of  cayenne.  It  was 
stated  to  be  equal  in  flavour  to  true  tobacco,  and 
without  any  of  the  deleterious  properties  which 
have  been  attributed  to  that  plant. 

The  Miliceti  Indians,  New  Brunswick,  scrape 
the  bark  from  the  young  twigs  of  the  birch,  and 
when  dry,  mix  it  with  their  tobacco  for  smoking. 
They  are  very  partial  to  the  admixture,  the  odour 
of  which,  it  is  affirmed,  is  much  more  agreeable  than 
that  of  pure  tobacco. 

Mr.  Molhausen  smoked  willow-leaves  among  the 
Bocky  Mountains ; and  the  use  of  these  leaves  for 
the  same  purpose  is  mentioned  in  “ Hiawatha.” 

The  Bearberry  ( Arctostaphylus  uva  ursi ) com- 
mon in  many  parts  of  North  America,  is  found  in 
the  valley  of  the  Oregon,  where  the  leaves  are 
collected  by  the  Chenook  Indians,  who  mix  them 
with  their  tobacco.  The  Crees  also  use  them  for 
the  same  purpose,  and  with  them  it  is  called 
Tchakaslie-pukh.  The  Chepewyans,  who  name  it 
Kleh,  and  the  Eskimos  north  of  Churchill  (by 
whom  it  is  termed  Attung-a-wi-at)  turn  it  to  a 
like  account.  From  the  custom  of  the  Hudson’s 
Bay  Company’s  officers  carrying  it  in  bags  for  the 
same  use,  the  voyagers  gave  it  the  appellation  of 
Sac-a-commis. 

Latterly  a writer  in  a West  Indian  paper,  called, 
attention  to  a novel  application  of  the  berries  of 
the  Pimento  (. Eugenia  pimento),  known  commerci- 


A RACE  OP  PRETENDERS. 


109 


ally  by  tliat  name  or  as  Allspice.  “I  have  been,” 
he  says,  “ a smoker  for  the  past  twenty  years,  and 
have  consumed  many  pounds  of  honey-dew  within 
that  period ; but  it  was  only  a short  time  ago  that 
I discovered  that  Pimento  forms  by  far  a more 
agreeable  article  for  smoking ; and  any  person  who 
knows  nothing  of  the  fragrance  of  a Pimento  walk 
when  in  full  bloom,  may  form  some  idea  of  it  by 
a pipe  charged  and  lighted  with  the  dried  berry, 
simply  crushed  in  coarse  bits.  Every  lady  has  a 
dislike  to  the  smell  of  tobacco.  While  she  may 
be  driven  by  its  fumes  and  smell  from  the  draw- 
ing-ioom,  the  Pimento  would,  on  the  contrary 
■invite  her  presence.  By  way  of  experiment  on  the 
taste  of  other  smokers,  I may  mention  that  I had 
the  other  day  two  men  (great  lovers  of  tobacco) 
employed  in  my  garden.  £ J oseph,’  I said,  ‘ where 
is  your  pipe  to-day?’  ‘Out  of  tobacco,  massa' 
was  his  reply.  /Well,  here  is  some  very  costly- 
give  me  your  opinion  of  it  when  you  have  tried  it/ 
To  prevent  deception,  I charged  his  pipe  myself 
and  directed  him  to  light  it.  He  did  so,  and  up 
ascended  a graceful  curl  of  smoke.  Joseph  was 
not  a little  pleased,  and  thanking  me  for  this  costly 
tobacco,  said  it  was  ‘first-rate,’  and  desired  I 
should  inform  him  what  per  pound  it  could  have 
cost.  I told  him  it  grew  pretty  near  his  hut,  and 
on  opening  my  pouch,  and  disclosing  to  him  that 
tills  first-rate  tobacco/ was  nothing  more  than 
aned  pimento,  you  may  imagine  his  surprise  ‘ A 
man  is  neber  too  old  to  larn,’  he  exclaimed,  and 
soon  imparted  the  good  news  to  his  fellow-labourer  ” 
t ltht  a11  deference  to  the  opinion  of  both 
Joseph  and  his  master,  we  have  experimented  on 
this  wonderful  pretender,  and  hold  the  opinion  that 
is  unworthy  of  their  joint  encomiums.  A friend 
! ha,s  al®°  tested  it,  thinks  it,  however,  very 
pleasant,  and  a fair  substitute.  It  would  appear, 


110 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


therefore,  that  there  is  something  to  he  said  on  both 
sides 

Cascarilla  hark,  the  produce  of  the  Croton  elm- 
teria  in  the  Bahamas,  was  first  used  to  mix  with 
tobacco,  on  account  of  the  pleasing  odour  which  it 
diffuses  in  burning.  It  is  supposed  also  to  possess 
narcotic  properties,  when  used  in  this  way.  In 
South  America,  Humboldt  states  that  the  leaves  of 
Polygonum  hispida  are  used  as  a tobacco  substitute. 

The  African  contributions  to  our  list  are  also 
rather  extensive,  especially  from  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Cape.  The  leaves  of  a certain  plant  (Tar- 
chonanthus  camphoratus , Linn.)  possessing  a cam- 
phorated odour,  are  chewed  by  the  Mahometans, 
and  smoked  by  the  Hottentots  and  Bushmen,  in- 
stead of  tobacco,  and,  like  the  uDagga;’  exhibit  slight 
narcotic  symptoms.  This  may  be  owing  to  the 
camphor  which  they  contain.  The  common  cam- 
phor, in  quantities  a little  beyond  a . medium  dose, 
will  produce  indistinctness  of  ideas.,  incoherence,  of 
language,  an  indescribable  uneasiness,  shedding 
of  tears,  a sensation  of  fear  and  dread ; then  the 
body  feels  lighter  than  usual — an  idea  exists  that 
flying  will  not  only  he  easy,  but  a source  of 


1 rphe  Wild  Dagga  (. Leonotis  leonurus,  P.  Br.) 
grows  wild  on  the  sandy  Cape  flats.  It  has  a 
peculiar  scent,  and  a nauseous  taste,  and  seems  to 
produce  narcotic  effects  if  incautiously  used.  The 
Hottentots  are  particularly  fond  of  it,  and  smoke 
it  as  tobacco.  In  the  eastern  districts  of  the  Cape, 
an  allied  species  (. Leonotis  ovata ) has  a similar 
reputation,  and  is  used  for  a like  purpose. 

In  the  Mauritius  the  leaves  of  the  CulenlPso- 
ralea  glandulosa ) are  dried  and  smoked,  whale : on 
the  western  coast  of  South  America  they  are  used 
in  decoction  as  a beverage,  instead  of  tea. 

In  Asia,  tobacco  substitutes  have  but  one  or  two 


A RACE  OF  PRETENDERS. 


Ill 


representatives.  One  of  these  has  been  already 
alluded  to,  auother  consists  of  the  long  leaves  of  a 
species  of  Tupistra , called  “ Purphiok,"  which  are 
gathered  in  Sikkim,  chopped  up,  and  mixed  with 
tobacco  for  the  hookah.  The  leaves  of  the  water- 
lily  are  dried,  and  used  in  China  to  mix  with 
tobacco  for  smoking,  to  render  it  milder. 

Cigars  of  stramonium,  henbane,  and  bella-donna, 
may  he  purchased  at  the  same  rate  as  those  made 
of  genuine  tobacco,  in  chemists’  and  herbalists’ 
shops— never  having  tried  them,  we  have  no  ex- 
perience of  their  flavour. 

The  majority  of  the  substitutes  for  tobacco  are, 
after  all,  very  poor  pretenders — capable,  perhaps,  of 
raising  a smoke,  but  possessed  of  neither  aro- 
matic nor  stimulating  properties ; and  those  which 
contain  any  active  properties  at  all,  are  of  a 
character  so  dangerous,  as  to  make  their  extensive 
use  extremely  hazardous.  In  the  former  class,  we 
may  rank  coltsfoot,  sage,  milfoil,  rhubarb,  and 
hogbean  ; and  in  the  latter,  stramonium,  henbane, 
bella-donna,  arnica,  and  lobelia.  Those  who  have 
been  long  accustomed  to  the  use  of  tobacco,  sel- 
dom, except  in  times  of  scarcity  or  deprivation  of 
that  plant,  resort  to  the  use  of  any  other.  This  is 
the  case  at  home.  In  the  Cape  Colony,  the  united 
testimony  of  travellers  proves  that  the  Kaffirs  are 
ready  to  make  any  sacrifices  for  tobacco,  and 
prefer  it  to  any  of  their  own  indigenous  substi- 
tutes. 

When  the . tobacco  has  been  found  to  be  too 
strong,  incipient  smokers  have  been  known  to 
counteract  its . effects,  and  lessen  its  power,  by 
mixing  therewith  the  flowers  of  chamomile,  which 
once  enjoyed  great  reputation  as  a useful  medicine: 
Others,  in  the  absence  of  tobacco,  have  resorted  to 
brown  paper  or  tow,  which,  being  smoked  through 
an  old  or  foul  pipe,  is  said  to  carry  with  its  smoke 


112 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


some  of  the  tobacco  flavour,  and  to  be  infinitely 
better  than  no  smoke  at  all.  Juveniles  will  some- 
times, with  a piece  of  cane,  or  a strip  of  clematis, 
imitate  their  elders,  and,  in  imagination,  enjoy  the 
luxury  of  an  Havannab  cigar. 

A curious  anecdote  of  a Buckinghamshire  parson 
occurs  in  “ Lilly’s  History  of  his  Life  and  Times,” 
to  which  we  have  before  referred.  “ In  this  year, 
also,  William  Breedon,  parson  or  vicar  of  Thornton 
in  Bucks,  was  living,  a profound  divine,  but  abso- 
lutely the  most  polite  parson  for  nativities  in  that 
age,  strictly  adhering  to  Ptolemy,  which  he  well 
understood  ; he  had  a hand  in  composing  Sir 
Christopher  Heydon’s  4 Defence  of  Judicial 
Astrology,'  being  at  that  time  his  chaplain;  he 
was  so  given  over  to  tobacco  and  drink,  that 
when  he  had  no  tobacco  (and  I suppose  too 
much  drink)  he  would  cut  the  bell-ropes  and 
smoke  them.” 

Having  unmasked  the  “ the  race  of  pretenders,” 
and  shown  the  titles  upon  which  they  seek  to 
establish  their  claims,  with  Charles  Lamb  we  now 
bid  farewell  to  Tobacco. 

“ For  I must,  (nor  let  it  grieve  tliee, 

Friendliest  of  plants,  that  I must)  leave  thee  ; 

For  thy  sake,  Tobacco,  I 
Would  do  anything  but  die  ; 

And  but  seek  to  extend  my  days 
Long  enough  to  sing  thy  praise. 

But  as  she,  who  once  hath  been 
A king’s  consort,  is  a queen 
Ever  after,  nor  will  bate 
Any  tittle  of  her  state, 

Though  a widow,  or  divorced, 

So  I,  from  thy  converse  forced, 

The  old  name  and  style  retain, 

A right  Katherine  of  Spain  ; 

And  a seat,  too,  ’mongst  the  joys 
Of  the  blest  Tobacco  boys  ; 

Where,  though  I,  by  sour  physician, 


A RACE  OF  PRETENDERS. 


113 


Am  debarred  the  full  fruition 
Of  thy  favours,  I may  catch 
Some  collateral  sweets,  and  snatch 
Sidelong  odours,  that  give  life, 

- Like  glances  from  a neighbour’s  wife  ; 
And  still  live  in  tbe  by-places, 

And  the  suburbs  of  thy  graces  ; 

And  in  thy  borders  take  delight, 

An  unconquered  Canaanite.” 


6 


1 


CHAPTER  IX. 

“MASH  ALLAH  !” — THE  GIFT. 

(i  Farewell  ye  odours  of  earth  that  die, 

Passing  away  like  a lover’s  sigh  ; 

My  feast  is  now  of  the  Tooba  tree,  * 

Whose  scent  is  the  breath  of  eternity.” 

Moore’s  Lalla  BooJch. 

That  opium  is  the  milky  juice  of  the  capsules  of  a 
species  of  poppy,  evaporated  by  exposure  to  light 
and  air,  is  a tact  so  well  kuown,  as  scarce  to  require 
repetition.  This  species  of  poppy  contains  two 
well  marked  varieties,  the  black  and  the  white , a 
circumstance  noticed  by  Hippocrates  long  enough 
ago.  The  black  variety  derives  its  name  from  the 
colour  of  its  seeds.  The  original  home  of  the 
poppy  is  Asia  and  Egypt.  But  jt  is  extensively 
cultivated  for  the  sake  of  its  juice  in  British  India, 
Persia,  Egypt,  and  Asia  Minor,  and  might  be  cul- 
tivated, were  it  more  remunerative,  in  England, 
France,  and  Germany,  where  good  samples  of 
opium  have  been  obtained  experimentally.  Dr. 
Royle  states  that  the  black  variety  is  cultivated  in 
the  Himalayas,  but  generally  the  white  is  pre- 

* “ The  tree  Tooba  that  stands  in  Paradise,  in  the  palace  of 
Mahomet.”  — Sale.  “Tooba  signifies  beatitude  or  eternal 
happiness." — D'Herbelot. 


“mash  allah!” — the  gift. 


115 


ferred.  The  poppy  is  grown  in  Europe  for  the 
sake  of  the  capsules  and  seed : from  the  latter  a 
mild  oil  is  extracted. 

The  cultivation  of  the  poppy  in  British  India  is 
confined  chiefly  to  the  large  Gangetic  tract,  about 
six  hundred  miles  in  length,  and  two  hundred 
miles  in  depth,  extending  from  Goruckpore  in  the 
north  to  Hazareebaugh  in  the  South;  and  from 
Dingepore  in  the  East,  to  Agra  on  the  West.  This 
extent  of  country  contains  the  two  agencies  of 
Behar  and  Benares,  the  former  sending  to  the 
market  about  treble  the  quantity  of  the  latter.  In 
the  Benares  agency,  there  are  about  21,500  culti- 
ators,  and  the  total  number  of  under  cultivators 
of  the  opium  poppy  106,147. 

After  all  the  preliminaries  of  preparing  the  land, 
sewing,  and  cultivating  the  plant,  all  of  which  are 
much  more  interesting  to  the  parties  concerned 
than  ourselves,  if  all  goes  well,  the  whole  field  of 
poppies  presents  a sheet  of  white  bloom,  which 
generally  occurs  about  the  month  of  February. 
When  nearly  ready  to  fall,  the  white  petals  are 
gathered,  and  made  into  circular  cakes  ; these  are 
preserved  to  form  the  outer  coverings  of  the  balls 
of  opium.  In  a few  days  after  the  “ leaves  ” of  the 
flower  are  collected,  the  capsules  or  poppy  heads 
are  ready  for  operation.  At  from  three  to  form 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  individuals  go  into  the 
fields  and  scratch  or  cut  the  poppy  heads  with  iron 
instruments  called  “nushturs.”  This  instrument 
consists  of  three  ov  four  thin  narrow  strips  of  iron 
about  six  inches  in  length,  and  about  the  thickness 
and  width  of  a pen-knife  at  one  end,  but  extending 
m width  to  nearly  an  inch  at  the  opposite  ex- 
tremity, where  it  is  deeply  notched.  These  plates 
are  bound  together  by  means  of  thread,  each  plate 
being  kept  a little  distance  from  its  neighbour  bv 
means  ol  thread  passed  between  them.  Thus  com- 


116 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


pleted,  it  has  the  appearance  of  a scarificator  with 
four  parallel  blades.  This  instrument,  which  has 
the  angles  sharpened,  has  one  of  its  sets  of  points 
drawn  down  the  poppy  capsule  from  top  to  bottom, 
or  rather  upwards  from  the  base  to  the  summit, 
making  three  or  four  parallel  incisions,  correspond- 
ing to  the  number  of  blades  in  the  poppy  head. 
These  only  pass  through  the  outer  coating  or  peri- 
carp. Each  capsule  is  scarified  from  two  to  six 
times,  according  to  its  size,  two  or  three  days  inter- 
vening between  each  operation.  In  Asia  Minor,  a 
different  course  is  pursued.  One  horizontal  inci- 
sion is  made  nearly  round  the  capsule,  with  a 
single  blade.  After  the  scarification  of  the  capsules, 
the  juice  exudes  and  thickens  on  them  during  the 
night,  which  is  collected  early  the  next  morn- 
ing, by  means  of  little  iron  instruments  called 
“ seetooahs,”  and  which  resemble  small  concave 
trowels.  When  sufficient  is  collected  into  the 
trowel,  it  is  emptied  into  an  earthen  pot  which  the 
collector  carries  at  his  side. 

When  all  the  opium  is  collected  which  the 
plants  will  yield,  the  capsules  are  gathered  and 
broken,  and  the  seed  preserved  for  the  extraction 
of  their  oil.  Of  these  seeds  comfits  are  also  made 
resembling  carraway  comfits,  and,  without  doubt, 
great  comforts  they  are  to  naked  little  squalling 
Hindoos  whenever  they  can  be  obtained.  After  the 
extraction  of  the  oil,  the  dry  cake,  called  Khari,  is 
either  made  into  unleavened  cakes  for  the  very  in- 
digent, or  cattle  are  fed  upon  them,  or  when  neces- 
sity requires,  it  is  converted  into  poultices  after  the 
manner  of  linseed  meal. 

In  poor  districts,  where  the  people  cannot  aftoid 
the  luxury  of  opium,  the  broken  capsules  are  made 
into  a decoction  and  drank  instead,  says  Mr. 
Impey.  This  liquid  is  termed  “ post,'  from  the 
Persian  name  of  the  capsule.  There  is  also  another 


“mash  allah!” — the  gift.  117 

use  for  the  capsules.  They  are  ground  into  fine 
powder,  and  sold  under  the  name  of  “ boosa,”  and 
sprinkled  over  the  buttees  of  opium  to  prevent  their 
adhesion.  In  the  Benares  agency,  the  stems  and 
leaves,  when  perfectly  dry,  are  collected  and  crushed 
into  a coarse  powder  called  “ poppy  trash”  which 
is  employed  in  packing  the  opium  cakes.” 

One  acre  of  well-cultivated  ground  will  yield 
from  70  to  100  lbs.  of  “chick”  or  inspissated 
juice,  the  price  of  which  varies  from  six  shillings 
to  twelve  shillings  per  pound ; so  that  an  acre  will 
yield  from  twenty  to  sixty  pounds  worth  of  opium 
at  one  crop.  Three  pounds  of  chick  will  produce 
one  pound  of  opium,  from  a third  to  a fifth  of  the 
weight  being  lost  in  evaporation. 

When  freshly  collected,  the  mass  of  juice  is  of 
a pinkish  colour.  This  is  placed  in  shallow  ves- 
sels to  drain.  A coffee-coloured  liquid,  called 
“ pussewah”  is  drained  off,  which  is  used  to  cement 
the  poppy-leaves  round  the  cakes  of  opium,  under 
the  name'  of  lewah.  After  exposure  to  the  air  in 
the  Benares  agency,  the  opium  is  made  up  into 
balls.  In  Turkey  it  is  the  custom  to  beat  up  the 
juice  with  saliva.  In  Malwa  it  is  immersed  as 
collected  in  linseed  oil.  In  Benares  it  is  brought 
to  the  required  consistence  by  exposure  in  the 
shade  only. 

Opium  is  prepared  in  different  forms,  in  the 
various  localities  for  market.  Bengal  opium  is 
made  into  balls  of  about  3 Jibs,  weight,  and  packed 
in  chests,  each  containing  forty  balls.  They  are 
about  the  size  of  a child’s  head,  coated  externally 
with  poppy  petals,  agglutinated  with  lewah  to  the 
thickness  of  about  half  an  inch.  Garden  Patna 
opium  is  in  square  cakes,  about  three  inches  in 
diameter,  and  one  inch  thick,  wrapped  in  thin 
P ates  of  mica.  Malwa  opium  is  in  round  flat- 
tened cakes,  of  about  ten  ounces  in  weight,  packed 


118  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

in  “ boosa,”  or  in  coarsely-powdered  poppy-petals, 
or  in  some  instances  without  any  coating  at  all. 
Cutch  opium  is  in  small  cakes,  rather  more  than 
an  inch  in  diameter,  enclosed  in  fragments  of  leaves. 
Kandeish  opium  is  imported  in  round  flattened 
cakes,  of  about  half  a pound  weight.  Egyptian 
opium  occurs  in  round  flattened  cakes,  about  three 
inches  in  diameter,  covered  with  the  vestiges  of 
some  leaf.  This  kind  is  very  dry,  but  it  is  con- 
sidered inferior  in  quality  to  the  Turkish  kinds. 
Persian  opium  is  in  the  form  of  sticks,  about  six 
inches  in  length,  and  half  an  inch  in  diameter, 
enveloped  in  smooth  shining  paper,  and  tied  with 
cotton.  Smyrna  opium  occurs  in  regular  rounded 
or  flattened  masses,  of  various  sizes,  rarely  exceed- 
ing two  pounds  in  weight,  sometimes  covered  with 
the  capsules  of  a species  of  dock.  Constantinople 
opium  is  either  in  large  irregular  cakes,  or  small, 
regular,  lenticular-formed  cakes,  covered  with 
poppy-leaf,  and  from  two  to  two  and  a half  inches 
in  diameter. 

Formerly  the  balls  of  Bengal  opium  were  co- 
vered with  tobacco-leaves;  but  Mr.  Flemming 
introduced  the  practice  of  covering  them  with 
poppy-petals,  which  service  the  Court  of  Directors 
of  the  East  India  Company  acknowledged  by  pre- 
senting him  with  50,000  rupees.  Sometimes  these 
balls  are  so  soft  as  to  burst  their  skins,  when  much 
of  the  liquid  opium  is  lost.  The  quantity  of  opium 
produced  annually  in  Bengal  exceeds  five  millions 
of  pounds,  and  the  income  derived  by  the  Hon. 
East  India  Company  from  this  source  is  not  less 
than  £5,003,162. 

The  kinds  of  opium  most  approved  in  the  Eng- 
lish market  is  the  Smyrna,  and  in  China  and  the 
East  generally,  the  preference  is  given  to  the  pro- 
duce of  India.  Before  used  by  the  opium-smoker, 
the  extract  undergoes  a course  of  preparation,  the 


“hash  allah!” — the  gift.  119 

following  being  the  method  pursued  in  Singapore, 
as  described  by  Mr.  Little. 

Between  three  and  four  o’clock  in  the  morning 
the  fires  are  lighted.  A chest  is  then  opened  by 
one  of  the  officers  of  the  establishment  of  the 
opium  farmer,  and  the  number  of  balls  delivered 
to  the  workmen  proportioned  to  the  demand.  The 
balls  are  then  divided  into  equal  halves  by  one 
man,  who  scoops  out  with  his  fingers  the  inside  or 
' soft  part,  and  throws  it  into  an  earthen  dish, 
frequently  during  the  operation  moistening  and 
washing  his  hands  in  another  vessel,  the  water  of 
which  is  carefully  preserved.  When  all  the  soft 
part  is  carefully  abstracted  from  the  hardened 
skins  or  husks,  these  are  broken  up,  split,  divided, 
and  torn,  and  thrown  into  the  earthen  vessel,  con- 
taining the  water  already  spoken  of,  saving  the 
extreme  outsides,  which  are  not  mixed  with  the 
others,  but  thrown  away,  or  sometimes  sold  to 
adulterate  chandu  in  Johore  and  the  back  of  the 
island. 

The  second  operation  is  to  boil  the  husks  with 
a sufficient  quantity  of  water  in  a large,  shallow, 
iron  pot,  for  such  a length  of  time  as  may  be  requi- 
site to  break  down  thoroughly  the  husks,  and 
dissolve  the  opium.  This  is  then  strained  through 
folds  of  China-paper,  laid  on  a frame  of  basket- 
work,  and  over  the  paper  is  placed  a cloth.  The 
strained  flnid  is  then  mixed  with  the  opium  scooped 
out  in  the  first  operation,  and  placed  in  a large 
iron  pot,  when  it  is  boiled  down  to  the  consistence 
of  thickish  treacle.  In  this  second  operation,  the 
refuse  from  the  straining  of  the  boiled  husk  is 
again  boiled  in  water,  filtered  through  paper,  and 
the  filtered  fluid  added  to  the  mass,  to  be  made 
into  chandu.  The  refuse  is  thrown  outside,  and 
little  attended  to.  It  is  dried  and  sold  to  the 
Chinese  going  to  China  for  from  ten  to  seventeen 


120  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

shillings  the  hundredweight,  who  pound  it,  and 
adulterate  good  opium  with  it.  The  paper  that  has 
been  used  in  straining  contains  a small  quan- 
tity of  opium,  it  is  carefully  dried  and  used 
medicinally  by  the  Chinese. 

In  the  third  operation,  the  dissolved  opium  being 
reduced  to  the  consistence  of  treacle,  is  seethed 
over  a fire  of  charcoal,  of  a strong  and  steady,  but 
not  fierce  temperature,  during  which  time  it  is 
most  carefully  worked,  then  spread  out,  then 
worked  up  again  and  again  by  the  superintending 
workman,  so  as  to  expel  the  water,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  avoid  burning  it.  When  it  is  brought 
to  the  proper  consistence,  it  is  divided  into  half-a- 
dozen  lots,  each  of  which  is  spread  like  a plaister 
on  a nearly  flat  iron  pot,  to  the  depth  of  from  half 
to  three-quarters  of  an  inch,  and  then  scored  in  all 
manner  of  directions  to  allow  the  heat  to  be  ap- 
plied equally  to  every  part.  One  pot  after  another 
is  then  placed  over  the  fire,  turned  rapidly  round, 
then  reversed,  so  as  to  expose  the  opium  itself  to 
the  full  heat  of  the  red  fire.  This  is  repeated 
mree  times,  the  length  of  time  requisite,  and  the 
proper  heat  are  judged  of  by  the  workman,  from 
the  effluvium  and  the  colour,  and  here  the  greatest 
dexterity  is  requisite,  for  a little  more  fire,  or  a 
little  less  would  destroy  the  morning’s  work,  or 
eighty  or  a hundred  pounds’  worth  of  opium.  The 
head  workmen  are  men  who  have  learned  their 
trade  in  China,  and  from  their  great  experience, 
receive  high  wages. 

The  fourth  operation  consists  in  again  dissolving 
this  fired  opium  in  a large  quantity  of  water,  and 
boiling  it  in  copper  vessels  till  it  is  reduced  to  the 
consistence  of  the  chandu  used  in  the  shops.  The 
degree  of  tenacity  being  the  index  of  its  complete 
preparation,  which  is  judged  of  by  drawing  it  out 
with  slips  of  bamboo. 


‘‘mash  allah!” — the  gift.  121 

By  this  long  process,  many  of  the  impurities  in 
the  opium  are  got  rid  of,  and  are  left  in  the  refuse 
thrown  out,  such  as  vegetable  matter,  part  of  the 
resin  and  oil,  with  the  extractive  matter.  By  the 
seething  process,  the  oil  and  resin  are  almost  en- 
tirely dissipated,  so  that  the  chandu,  as  compared 
with  the  crude  opium,  is  less  irritating  and  more 
soporific.  The  quantity  of  chandu  obtained  from 
the  soft  opium  is  about  seventy-five  per  cent.,  but 
from  the  opium,  including  the  husk,  not  more  than 
50  to  54  per  cent. 

The  heat  to  be  endured  by  the  men  during  this 
operation  is  very  great,  and  can  only  be  tolerated 
when  custom  has  inured  them  to  it.  One  of  these 
men,  Mr.  Little  graphically  describes.  He  was 
quite  a character  in  his  way.  “ From  three  in  the 
morning  till  ten  in  the  forenoon  he  stands  before 
the  boiling  cauldron,  with  a fan  in  one  hand,  and 
a feather  in  the  other  ; with  the  latter  he  scoops 
off  the  scum  that  forms,  while,  with  the  fan,  lie 
prevents  the  fluid  from  boiling  over.  He  never 
speaks,  but  is  always  smiling ; nor  does  he  move, 
except  to  quench  his  thirst,  from  a bucket  of  water- 
placed  beside  him.  His  trowsers  are  his  only 
article  of  dress,  the  floor  his  bed,  a little  rice  his 
food.  When  his  labour  is  finished,  his  enjoyment 
is  to  drink  arrack  till  he  is  insensible,  from  which 
he  is  wakened  in  the  morning  to  his  work.  He 
has  but  one  idea,  and  that  is,  the  prospect  of  get- 
ting drunk  on  his  favourite  beverage ; for  his  work 
is  mechanically  done,  and  costs  him  not  a thought, 
no  more  than  it  does  the  dog  that  turns  the  spit. 
But  he  smiles,  as  he  thinks  of  the  revel  for  the 
night;  and  with  his  whole  soul  wrapped  up  in 
that  fancied  bliss,  he  heeds  not  the  days  that  go  by. 
He  is  a singular  being,  and  in  another  country 
would  be  the  inmate  of  a mad-house.” 

The  method  of  preparation  in  China  and  Hong- 


122 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Kong,  is  identical  with  that  pursued  at  Singapore. 
When  the  chandu  or  prepared  extract  of  opium  ig 
consumed,  it  leaves  a refuse  consisting  of  charcoal, 
empyreumatic  oil,  some  of  the  salts  of  the  opium, 
and  part  of  the  chandu  not  consumed.  One  ounce 
of  the  chandu  gives  nearly  half  an  ounce  of  the 
refuse  called  Tye  or  Tinco.  This  is  smoked  or 
swallowed  by  the  poorer  classes,  who  cannot  afford 
the  pure  extract,  and  for  this  they  only  pay  half 
the  price  of  chandu.  Wheu  smoked,  it  yields  a 
further  refuse  called  Samshing,  which  contains  a 
very  small  quantity  of  the  narcotic  principle.  This 
last  is  never  smoked,  as  it  cannot  furnish  any  smoke, 
but  is  swallowed,  and  that  not  unfrequently  mixed 
with  arrack.  Samshing  is  used  by  the  very  poorest 
and  most  indigent  class — by  beggars  and  outcasts,  | 
and  those  who,  from  long  habit,  are  unable  to 
exist  without  some  stimulus  from  the  drug,  but 
are  unable  to  supply  themselves  with  any  but  the 
cheapest  form  in  which  any  of  the  effects  of  the 
narcotic  can  be  obtained. 

Opium  is  called  in  Arabic  “ Afiyoon,”  and  the 
opium-eater  “ Afiyoonee."  In  the  crude  state,  i 
opium  is  generally  taken  by  those  who  have  not 
long  been  addicted  to  its  use,  in  the  dose  of  three 
or  four  grains,  and  the  dose  is  increased  by  degrees. 

The  Egyptians  make  several  conserves  com- 
posed of  hellebore,  hemp,  and  opium,  and  several 
aromatic  drugs  which  are  in  much  more  common 
use  than  the  simple  opium.  One  of  these  con- 
serves is  called  “magoon,"  and  the  person  who 
makes  or  sells  it,  is  called  “ magoongee”  The 
most  common  kind  is  called  “ harsh'’  or  “ berck.” 
There  is  one  kind  which,  it  is  said,'  makes  the 
person  who  takes  it  manifest  his  pleasure  by 
singing,  another  which  will  make  him  chatter, 
a third  which  excites  to  dance,  a fourth  which  par- 
ticularly effects  the  vision  in  a pleasurable  manner, 


“ MASH  ALLAH  I ” — THE  GIFT. 


123 


and  a fifth,  which  is  simply  of  a sedative  nature. 
These  are  sold  at  certain  kind  of  shops  called 
“ mahsheshehs,”  solely  appropriated  to  the  sale  of 
intoxicating  preparations. 

Thus,  in  different  countries,  we  find  opium  used 
in  different  ways.  In  Great  Britain,  for  instance, 
it  is  either  used  in  the  solid  state,  made  into  pills, 
in  which  form  it  is  somewhat  extensively  employe 
in  certain  of  our  manufacturing  districts,  where 
druggists  are  affirmed  to  keep  a supply  of  thes 
pills  ready  made  to  meet  the  demand,  or  it  i 
used  in  the  form  of  tincture  in  the  common  state 
of  laudanum,  in  which  form  it  is  not  only  used 
medicinally,  but  to  our  knowledge,  somewhat 
largely  as  a means . of  indulgence,  or,  we  should 
rather  say,  with  somewhat  of  qualification,  largely 
for  a country  in  which  many  are  fain  to  suppose 
that  it  is  not  used  for  those  purposes  at  all.  It  is 
also  used  in  the  form  of  Paregoric  elixir,  and  is 
given  insiduously  to  children  under  a variety  of 
quack  forms,  such  as  Godfrey’s  cordial,  &c.  Gn 
the  authority  of  a reverend  gentleman,  it  is  stated 
that  in  the  town  of  Preston,  in  1843,  there  were 
upwards  of  sixteen  hundred  families  in  which 
Godfrey  s cordial  was  habitually  employed,  or 
some  other  equally  injurious  compound.  Pro- 
fessor J ohnston  has  noticed  a communication  which 
appeared  in  the  “ Morning  Chronicle,”  describing 
the  effects  of  opium  upon  the  health  of  children 
“ The  child  sinks  into  a low  torpid  state! 
wastes  away  into  a skeleton,  except  the  stomach 
producing  what  is  known  as  pot-belly.  One 
woman  said,  £ The  sleeping  stuff  made  them  that 
toey  were  always  dozing,  and  never  cared  for  food 

died7’  ”med  aWay  ’ theil’  heads  g0t  bigj  ancl  tbey 

In  India,  the  pure  opium  is  either  dissolved  in 
water,  and  so  used,  or  rolled  into  pills.  It  is 


124 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


there  a common  practice  to  give  it  to  children 
when  very  young,  by  mothers  who  require  to  work, 
and  cannot  at  the  same  time  nurse  their  offspring. 
The  natives  of  the  western  coast  of  Africa  have  a 
curious  mechanical  contrivance,  by  means  of  which 
they  get  rid  of  the  necessity  for  opium  in  these 
cases.  The  girls  wear  a “ kankey,”  or  artificial 
hump  on  their  backs  as  soon  as  they  can  walk,  in 
order  to  learn  betimes  to  carry  their  juniors,  who 
ride  astride  on  the  said  projections.  The  useful- 
ness of  them  consists  in  enabling  the  mothers  to 
work  with  their  infants  in  this  way  on  their  bach, 
while  in  England  they  excuse  themselves  from 
work  on  the  plea  of  an  infant  in  arms , or  else  the 
helpless  little  creatures  are  drugged  with  sleeping 
stuff,  and  their  heads  grow  big,  and  they  die. 

In  China,  opium  is  either  swallowed  or  smoked 
in  the  shape  of  Tye.  In  Bally  it  is  first  adulterated' 
with  China  paper,  and  then  rolled  up  with  the 
fibres  of  a particular  kind  of  plantain.  It  is  then 
inserted  into  a hole  made  at  the  end  of  a small 
bamboo  and  smoked.  In  Java  ami  Sumatra 
it  is  often  mixed  with  sugar  and  the  ripe  fruit  of 
the  plantain.  In  Turkey  it  is  usually  taken  in 
pills,  and  those  who  do  so,  avoid  drinking  any 
water  after  having  swallowed  them,  as  this,  is  said 
. to  produce  violent  colic ; but  to  make  it  more 
palatable,  it  is  sometimes  mixed  with  syrups  or 
thickened  juice ; in  this  form,  however,  it  is  less 
intoxicating,  and  resembles  mead.  It  is  then 
taken  with  a spoon,  or  is  dried  in  small  cakes, 
with  the  words  “Mash  Allah,”  the  “Work  ot 
God,”  or  the  “Gift  of  God”  imprinted  on  them. 
When  the  dose  of  two  or  three  drams  a day  no 
longer  produces  the  beatific  intoxication  so  eagerly 
sought,  they  mix  corrosive  sublimate  with  the 
opium  till  the  quantity  reaches  ten  grains  a day. 

In  Singapore  there  are  representatives  ot  almost 


u MASH  ALLAH  ! ” — THE  GIFT.  125 

every  Eastern  nation,  indulging  in  the  luxury 
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  country  of  which 
he  is  a native.  The  Hindoo,  fresh  from  the  con- 
tinent, prefers  the  mode  there  in  use,  and  swallows 
the  soul-soothing  pill ; while  the  Chinese,  with  a 
gusto  which  no  worshipper  of  the  meerschaum  can 
compete  with,  inhales  the  smoke,  not  only  into  his 
mouth,  but  into  his  lungs,  where  it  becomes  breath 
of  his  breath,  and  where  retained,  it  acts  on  the 
nervous  fibres  that  are  spread  over  the  extensive 
membrane  which  lines  every  cell  of  the  lungs 
until  exhaled  through  nose  and  mouth — yea,  even 
in  some  cases,  through  ear  and  eye,  it  is  replaced 
by  another  puff. 

As  the  body  becomes  accustomed  by  habit  to 
bear  larger  doses  of  opium  than  before  the  habit 
has  been  formed,  the  enormous  quantity  which 
some  persons  have  taken  are  startling  and  sur- 
prising. Dr.  Christison,  in  his  work  on  Poisons, 
refers  to  some  of  these  cases.  “ A female  who  died 
of  consumption  at  the  age  of  forty-two,  had  taken 
about  a dram  of  solid  opium  daily  for  ten  years.  A 
well-known  literary  character,  about  fifty  years  of 
age,  has  taken  laudanum  for  twenty-five  years,  with 
occasional  short  intermissions,  and  sometimes  an 
enormous  quantity,  but  enjoys  tolerable  bodily 
health.  A lady  about  fifty-five,  who  enjoys  good 
health,  has  taken  opium  many  years,  and  at  pre- 
sent uses  three  ounces  of  laudanum  daily.  Lord 
Mar,  after  using  laudanum  for  thirty  years,  at 
times  to  the  amount  of  two  or  three  ounces  daily, 
died  at  the  age  of  fifty-seven,  of  jaundice  and 
dropsy.  A woman  who  had  been  in  the  practice 
oi  taking  about  two  ounces  of  laudanum  daily  for 
very  many  years,  died  at  the  age  of  sixty  or  up- 
wards. An  eminent  literary  character  who  died 
lately,-  about  the  age  of  sixty-three,  was  in  the 
practice  of  drinking  laudanum  to  excess  from  the 


126 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


age  of  fifteen,  and  liis  daily  allowance  was  some- 
times a quart  of  a mixture  consisting  of  three  parts 
laudanum  and  one  of  alcohol.  A lady  now  alive, 
at  the  age  of  seventy-four,  has  taken  laudanum  in 
the  quantity  of  half  an  ounce  daily  between  thirty 
and  forty  years.  An  old  woman  died  not  long 
ago  at  Leith  at  the  age  of  eighty,  who  had  taken 
about  half  an  ounce  of  laudanum  daily  for  nearly 
forty  years,  and  enjoyed  tolerable  health  all  the 
time.  Visrajee,  a celebrated  Cutchee  chief  men- 
tioned by  Dr.  Burnes,  had  taken  opium  largely  all 
his  life,  and  was  alive  at  the  age  of  eighty,  with 
his  mind  unimpaired.”  To  these  examples  we  may 
add  the  confession  of  De  Quincey : “ I,  who  have 
taken  happiness  both  in  a solid  and  a liquid  shape, 
both  boiled  and  unboiled,  both  East  Indian  and 
Turkish — who  have  conducted  my  experiments 
upon  this  interesting  subject  with  a sort  of  gal- 
vanic battery,  and  have,  for  the  general  benefit  of 
the  world,  inoculated  myself,  as  it  were,  with  the 
poison  of  eight  thousand  drops  of  laudanum  a day 
— I,  it  will  be  admitted,  must  surely  now  know 
what  happiness  is,  if  anybody  does.  Fifty  and  two 
years’  experience  of  opium,  as  a magical  resource 
under  all  modes  of  bodily  suffering,  I may  now 
claim  to  have  had.  According  to  the  modern 
slang  phrase,  I had,  in  the  meridian  stage  of  my 
opium  career,  used  ‘fabulous’  quantities.  Statiug 
the  quantities — not  in  solid  opium,  but  in  the  tinc- 
ture (known  to  everybody  as  laudanum) — my  daily 
ration  was  eight  thousand  drops.  If  you  write 
down  that  amount  in  the  ordinary  way  as  8000, 
you  see  at  a glance  that  you  may  read  it  into  eight 
quantities  of  a thousand,  or  into  eight  hunched 
quantities  of  ten ; or,  lastly,  into  eighty  quantities 
of  one  hundred.  Now,  a single  quantity  of  one 
hundred  will  about  fill  a very  old-fashioned  ob- 
solete teaspoon,  of  that  order  which  you  find  still 


MASH  ALLAH  ! ”■ 


•THE  GIFT. 


127 


lingering  amongst  the  respectable  poor.  Eighty- 
such  quantities,  therefore,  would  have  filled  eighty 
of  such  antediluvian  spoons,  that  is,  it  would  have 
been  the  common  hospital  dose  for  three  hundred 
and  twenty  adult  patients/'  And  he  adds  solemnly, 
that  “ without  opium,  thirty-five  years  ago,  beyond 
all  doubt,  I should  have  been  in  my  grave.” 

It  is  not  a very  easy  task  to  ascertain  the  full 
extent  of  opium  indulgence  at  home ; but  there  is 
more  of  truth  than  fiction  in  that  passage  in  “ Alton 
Locke,”  where  the  hero,  on  his  way  to  Cambridge, 
meets  with  a ride  in  the  vehicle  of  a certain  yeo- 
man of  the  Fen  country,  and  enters  into  conversa- 
tion with  him,  in  the  course  of  which  the  following 
dialogue  takes  place. 

“ Love  ye,  then  ! they  as  dinnot  tak’  spirits  down 
thor,  tak'  their  pennord  o’  elevation,  then — women 
folk  especial.” 

“ What’s  elevation  ?” 

; “Oh!  ho!  ho!  Yow  goo  into  druggist’s  shop 
o’  market  day,  into  Cambridge,  and  you'll  see  the 
little  boxes,  doozens  and  doozens,  a’  ready  on  the 
counter ; and  never  a ven-man’s  wife  goo  by,  but 
what  calls  in  for  her  pennord  o'  elevation,  to  last 
her  out  the  week.  Oh  ! ho  ! ho  ! Well,  it  keeps 
women  folk  quiet,  it  do ; and  it’s  mortal  good  agin 
ago  pains.” 

“ But  what  is  it  ?” 

“Opium,  bor’  alive,  opium  !” 

“But  doesn’t  it  ruin  their  health?  I should 
think  it  the  very  worst  sort  of  drunkenness.” 

C<  Ow,  well,  yow  moi  say  that — mak’th  'em  cruel 
thin,  then,  it  do ; but  what  can  bodies  do  i’  th’ 
ago  ? But  it’s  a bad  thing,  it  is.” 

The  fact  is  well  known,  that  in  the  Fen  country 
opium  is  extensively  used  under  the  presumption 
or  excuse  that  it  is  good  for  the  ague.  In  VVis- 
beach,  as  we  ascertained  from  certain  official 


128 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


medical  documents,  more  opium  is  sold  and 
consumed,  in  proportion  to  the  population,  than  in 
any  other  part  of  the  kingdom.  In  other  parts  of 
Cambridgeshire  and  Lincolnshire,  large  quantities 
of  opium  are  regularly  and  habitually  sold  in  small 
doses  amongst  the  labouring  population.  In 
Manchester  some  years  ago,  a similar  run  upon 
opium  was  experienced,  but  not  as  a cure  for  ague. 
Several  cotton  manufacturers  stated  to  our  autho- 
rity, that  their  work-people  were  rapidly  getting 
into  the  practice  of  opium-eating ; so  much  so,  that 
on  a Saturday  afternoon  the  counters  of  the  drug- 
gists were  strewed  with  pills  of  one,  two,  or  three 
grains,  in  preparation  for  the  known  demand  of 
the  evening.  The  immediate  occasion  of  this 
practice  was  stated  to  be  the  lowness  of  wages, 
which,  at  that  time,  would  not  allow  them  to  in- 
dulge in  ale  or  spirits ; hence  they  adopted  opium 
as  a substitute. 

There  was  a sin  of  which  we  were  guilty  in  the 
age  of  Butler,  and  from  which  we  are  not  yet  freed ; 
probably,  it  is  somewhat  of  a universal  one. 
Whether  or  no,  there  are  certainly  not  a few 
who — • 

“ Compound  for  sins  they  are  inclined  to, 

By  damning  those  they  have  no  mind  to.” 

Opium  indulgence  is,  after  all,  very  un-English, 
and  never  has  been,  nor  ever  will  be,  remarkably 
popular ; and  if  we  smoke  our  pipes  of  tobacco 
ourselves,  while  in  the  midst  of  the  clouds,  wc 
cannot  forbear  expressing  our  astonishment  at  the 
Chinese  and  others  who  indulge  in  opium.  Pity 
them  we  may,  perhaps,  looking  upon  them  as 
miserable  wretches  the  while,  but  they  do  not 
obtain  our  sympathies.  Philanthropists  at  crowded 
assemblies  denounce,  in  no  measured  terms,  “ the 
iniquities  of  the  opium  trade,”  and  then  go  home 
to  their  pipe  or  cigar,  thinking  them  perfectly 


“mash  allah!” — the  gift. 


120 


legitimate,  whether  the  produce  of  slave  labour  or 
free.  It  is  the  same  sort  of  feeling  that  the 
Hashasheens  of  the  East  inspire,  and  indeed  all, 
who  have  a predilection  for  other  narcotics  than 
those  which  Johnny  Englishman  delights  in,  come 
in  for  a share  of  his  contempt. 

A carrion  crow  was  once  indulging  in  a feast 
upon  the  carcase  of  a nice  fat  rat  which  had  just 
been  caught  in  a neighbouring  barn  and  thrown 
out  into  the  road.  A wood  pigeon,  who  had 
finished  his  meal  in  a field  of  peas  hard  by,  came 
past  at  the  time  and  saw  his  friend  the  crow  in 
full  enjoyment  of  his  rat.  “I  cannot  imagine,” 
said  the  pigeon,  “ how  you  can  eat  such  a disgust- 
ing creature  as  that  on  which  you  are  making  your 
breakfast — the  sight  of  it  turns  my  stomach.”  “ It 
is  quite  a matter  of  taste,”  said  the  crow,  “ and  I 
think  that  I have  the  advantage,  my  food  is  juicy 
and  sweet,  this  rat  has  lived  upon  the  best  of  the 
farmer’s  corn,  and  the  farmer  would  enjoy  the  treat 
himself,  I am  confident,  if  he  only  knew  what  a 
delicious  breakfast  it  would  make.  You  should 
be  welcome  to  an  acre  of  peas  every  day,  if  you 
would  bring  me  such  a dish  as  this.  Besides,  if  I 
did  not  eat  it,  it  would  soon  putrefy,  and  fill  the  air 
with  disgusting  smells,  so  that  I am,  in  myself,  a 
perfect  board  of  health,  working  for  the  good^of 
society,  you,  no  better  than  a vagabond,  stealing 
from  society  your  daily  bread.”  “I  have  heard  it 
said,”  added  the  pigeon,  “ that  it  was  you  and  your 
companions  that  destroyed  a whole  field  of  turnips 
in  grubbing  after  the  worms — I suppose  that  was 
a benefit  to  society.”  “ Go  and  eat  your  peas,” 
said  the  crow,  “and  leave  me  to  enjoy  my  rat  in 
peace." 

Calculations  as  to  the  number  of  persons  in- 
dulging in  the  use  of  opium  are  necessarily  liable  to 
objections  ; one  person  asserting  that  in  China,  for 

K 


130 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


instance,  not  less  than  twenty  millions  of  people 
indulge  in  opium,  whilst  others  consider  that  two 
millions  and  a half  are  all  that  can  he  calculated 
upon.  The  number  which  Johnston  estimates  as 
the  proportion  of  the  human  race  using  opium  is 
four  hundred  millions,  or  about  half  the  number  of 
those  who  indulge  in  tobacco.  This  is,  perhaps,  as 
near  an  approximation  as  can  be  made,  but  one 
which  must  he  based  on  the  quantity  produced, 
deducing  therefrom  the  number  required  to  con- 
sume it,  rather  than  on  any  details  of  consumption, 
which  cannot  he  arrived  at. 

There  is  one  important  and  well-authenticated 
fact  with  regard  to  the  Chinese  consumption  of 
opium,  that  in  the  year  1854,  the  value  of  opium 
imported  into  China  exceeded  the  value  of  all  the 
tea  and  silk  exported  from  China  to  Great  Britain 
and  her  colonies. 

As  we  take  farewell  of  the  “ gift  of  God  ” to  pass 
through  the  portals  of  Paradise,  let  us  do  so  in  the 
words  of  that  most  celebrated  of  English  opium 
eaters,  Thomas  de  Quincey : — “ 0 just,  subtle,  and 
all-conquering  opium ! that,  to  the  hearts  of  rich  and 
poor  alike,  for  the  wounds  that  will  never  heal,  and 
for  the  pangs  of  grief  that  ‘tempt  the  spirit  to 
rebel/  bringest  an  assuaging  halm ; eloquent 
opium!  that  with  thy  potent  rhetoric  stealest  away 
the  purposes  of  wrath,  pleadest  effectually  foi  re- 
lenting pity,  and  through  one  night  s heavenly 
sleep,  tallest  hack  to  the  guilty  man  the  visions  of 
his  infancy,  and  hands  washed  pure  from  blood. 
0 just  and  righteous  opium  ! that  to  the  clianceiy 
of  dreams,  summonest  for  the  triumphs  of  despair- 
ing innocence,  false  witnesses,  and  confoundest 
perjury,  and  dost  reverse  the  sentences  of  un- 
righteous judges ; thou  buildest  upon  the  bosom 
of  darkness,  out  of  the  fantastic  imagery  of  t he 
brain,  cities  and  temples,  beyond  the  art  of  Phidias 


“MASH  ALLAH  I” — THE  GIFT.  131 

and  Praxiteles — beyond  the  splendours  of  Babylon 
and  Hekatompylos ; and  from  the  c anarchy  of 
dreaming  sleep,’  callest  into  sunny  light  the  faces 
of  long-buried  beauties,  and  the  blessed  household 
countenances,  cleansed  from  the  1 dishonours  of  the 
grave/  Thou  only  givest  these  gifts  to  man,  and 
thou  hast  the  keys  of  Paradise,  0 just,  subtle,  and 
mighty  opium !” 


CHAPTER  X. 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


“ Thou  only  givest  these  gifts  to  man ; and  thou  hast  the  keys  of 
Paradise,  O just,  subtle,  and  mighty  opium.”  — Confessions  of  an 
Opium-Eater. 


According  to  the  common  opinion  of  the  Arabs, 
there  are  seven  heavens,  one  above  another.  The 
upper  surface  of  each  is  believed  to  be  nearly  plaue, 
and  generally  supposed  to  be  circular,  five  hundred 
years’  journey  in  width.  The  first  is  described  to 
he  formed  of  emerald  ; the  second  of  white  silver ; 
the  third  of  large  white  pearls ; the  fourth  of  ruby; 
the  fifth  of  red  gold ; the  sixth  of  yellow  jacinth ; 
and  the  seventh  of  shining  light.  Some  assert 
Paradise  to  be  in  the  seventh  heaven  ; others  state 
that  above  the  seventh  heaven  are  seven  seas  of 
Ijo-ht,  then  an  undefined  number  of  veils,  or  separa- 
tions of  different  substances,  seven  of  each  kind, 
and  then  Paradise,  which  consists  of  seven  stages, 
one  above  another.  The  first  is  the  mansion  of 
glory,  of  white  pearls ; the  second,  the  mansion  of 
peace,  of  ruby;  the  third,  the  garden  of  rest,  of 
green  chrysolite ; the  fourth,  the  garden  of  eternity, 
of  green  coral ; the  fifth,  garden  of  delight,  of  white 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


133 


silver ; the  sixth,  the  garden  of  Paradise,  of  red  gold; 
the  seventh,  the  garden  of  perpetual  abode  or  Eden, 
of  large  pearls — this  overlooking  all  the  former,  and 
canopied  by  the  throne  of  the  Compassionate. 

The  most  direct  road  and  speediest  conveyance 
to  Paradise,  according  to  the  testimony  of  all  con- 
firmed opiophagi,  is  by  means  of  that  subtle  drug, 
opium.  The  most  common  form  in  which  it  is 
taken  is  that  of  vapour,  inhaled  through  a pecu- 
liarly-constructed pipe.  Those  used  by  the  Siamese 
resemble  in  form  the  common  narghile,  or  hubble- 
bubble  of  the  Levant.  They  consist  of  an  empty 
cocoa-nut  shell,  in  an  orifice  in  the  top  of  which  a 
hollow  wooden  tube  is  inserted,  and  the  opening 
hermetically  closed,  so  as  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
either  air  or  smoke.  In  another  hole  in  the  side 
of  the  cocoa-nut  shell,  a common  little  bamboo 
tube,  about  eighteen  inches  long,  is  tightly  fixed ; 
a little  earthen  bowl,  perforated  at  the  bottom  like 
a sieve,  is  filled  with  opium,  aud  one  or  two  pieces 
of  fire  being  placed  thereon,  this  bowl  is  fitted  on 
the  top  of  the  wooden  tube.  The  man  who  hands 
round  this  pipe  holds  with  one  hand  the  bottom  of 
the  cocoa-nut  (which  is  half  full  of  water),  and 
with  the  other  hand  he  presents  the  bamboo  tube 
to  the  smoker,  who,  putting  it  to  his  mouth, 
inhales  three  or  four  whiffs  of  this  most  intoxicating 
narcotic.  The  effect  is  almost  instantaneous.  He 
sinks  gently  against  the  cushion  set  at  his  back, 
becomes  insensible  to  what  is  passing  around. 
•The  pipe  is  passed  round  from  mouth  to  mouth, 
so  that  half  an  hour  generally  intervenes  be- 
tween the  first  whiff  taken  by  the  first  smoker, 
and  the  last  sigh  heaved  by  the  last  man’ 
as  he  rev^ves/(om  his  short,  pleasant  dream,  into 
. uch  the  whiffing  has  thrown  him.  One  old  and 
inveterate  Siamese  smoker  declared  to  a recent 
resident  among  them,  that  if  he  knew  his  life 


134 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


would  be  forfeited  by  the  act,  he  could  no  more 
resist  the  temptation  than  he  could  curb  a fiery 
steed  by  a thread  bridle.  It  carried  him  into  the 
seventh  heaven — he  heard  and  saw  things  no  tongue 
could  utter,  and  felt  as  though  his  soul  soared  so 
high  above  things  earthly,  during  those  precious 
moments  of  oblivion,  as  to  have  flown  beyond  the 
reach  of  its  heavy,  burthensome  cage. 

Opium  smoking  is  not  generally  conducted  on  a 
plan  so  social.  The  Siamese  may  be  considered 
as  an  exception  to  the  general  rule.  The  method 
pursued  at  Hong-Kong,  of  which  we  have  received 
an  account  from  a competent  authority,  is  more  a 
type  of  the  opium-smoker  in  general,  and  the 
method  he  pursues. 

In  a reclining  position,  on  boards  placed  on 
tressels,  ranged  around  long,  disgustingly  dirty 
rooms,  may  be  seen,  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  hag- 
gard beggars,  with  putrefying  sores,  whose  miser- 
able feelings  of  desperation  and  woe  drive  them 
here  to  obtain  a partial  alleviation,  by  steeping 
their  senses  in  forgetfulness.  The  stem  of  the 
pipe  used  for  smoking  is  made  of  hard  wood,  and 
would  be  taken  for  an  English  paper-ruler,  about 
eighteen  inches  long,  and  an  inch  in  diameter.  The 
earthenware  bowl  or  head  screws  on  and  off,  at 
about  three  inches  from  the  end.  An  assistant  of 
the  divan,  sitting  in  a corner  of  the  room,  is  con- 
stantly engaged  in  scraping  and  cleaning  these 
heads,  which,  from  the  small  size  of  the  hole 
through  which  the  opium  is  inhaled  (about  the 
size  of  a pin’s  head),  are  apt  to  get  clogged.  The 
quantity  of  opium  intended  to  be  smoked,  varying 
at  a time  from  twenty  to  a hundred  grains,  is 
dipped  carefully  out  of  small  gallipots,  laid  on  a 
leaf,  and  charged  for  at  the  rate  of  a dollar  per 
ounce.  The  opium  is  used  by  dipping  into  it  the 
pointed  end  of  a small  wire,  which  is  then  applied 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


135 


to  the  flame  of  a lamp.  In  ignition  it  inflates  into 
a bubble,  and  is  then,  with  a dexterity  obtained 
only  by  constant  practice,  rolled  on  the  pipe  head 
until  it  assumes  the  shape  and  size  of  a small 
orange-pip  cut  in  half,  and  of  the  hardness  of 
wax.  It  is  then  placed  over  the  orifice  in  the  head 
of  the  pipe,  like  a small  chimney,  through  which 
the  flame  of  the  lamp  is  drawn  into  the  bowl,  con- 
verting the  opium,  in  its  passage,  into  a blue  smoke, 
which  is  inspired  by  long  continuous  whiffs,  and 
without  removal  of  the  pipe  from  the  mouth, 
respired  through  the  nostrils.  Two  or  three  pipes 
m?y  be  taken  by  persons  unaccustomed  to  the 
habit  without  leaving  any  other  unpleasant  feeling 
than  a harshness  in  the.  throat.  There  are  in 
Hong-Kong  ten  regular  licensed  divans  for  the 
smoking  of  opium,  and  nearly  all  these  are  in  the 
Chinese  portion  of  the  town. 

• 'This  picture  would,  however,  be  incomplete, 
without  a few  more  particulars  concerning  the 
individuals  who  give  themselves  up  to  indulgence 
in  the  drug.  And  for  this  we  must  again  seek 
the  aid  of  an  experienced  medical  man,  who  for 
years  lived  and  laboured  in  the  midst  of  opium 
smokers.  “Nothing  on  earth,”  he  states,  “can 
equal  the  apparent  quiet  enjoyment  of  the  opium 
smoker.  As  he  enters  the  miserable  scene  of  his 
future  ecstasy,  he  collects  his  small  change,  the 
labour,  or  begging,  or  theft  of  the  day,  with  which 
he  supplies  himself  with  his  quantity  of  Chandu ; 
then  taking  the  pipe,  which  is  furnished  gratis, 
he  reclines  on  a board  covered  with  a mat,  and 
with  his  head  resting  on  a wooden  or  bamboo 
pillow,  he  commences  filling  his  pipe.  As  he  en- 
tered, his  looks  were  the  picture  of  misery,  his  eyes 
were  sunk,  his  gait  slouched,  his  step  trembling, 
and  his  voice  quivering,  with  a sallow  cast  of 
countenance,  and  a dull  unimpressive  eye.  He 


136 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


who  runs  might  read  that  he  is  an  opium-smoker, 
and,  diving  still  deeper  below  appearances,  would 
declare  him  an  opium  sufferer.  But  now  with 
pipe  in  hand,  opium  by  his  side,  and  a lamp  before 
him,  his  eye  already  glistens,  and  his  features 
soften  in  their  expression,  while  he  is  preparing 
the  coming  luxury.  At  last  it  is  ready,  and  the 
pipe  being  applied  to  the  lamp,  there  is  heard  a 
soughing  noise,  as  with  a full  and  hearty  pull,  he 
draws  in  all  that  opium  and  air  can  give.  Slowly 
is  the  inspiration  relaxed,  but  not  until  all  the 
opium  that  is  in  the  pipe  is  consumed ; then, 
allowing  the  vapour,  impregnated  with  the  narcotic 
influence,  to  remain  in  his  chest  until  nature  com- 
pels him  to  respire,  he  gently  allows  it  to  escape, 
seeming  to  grudge  the  loss  of  each  successive 
exit,  until  all  is  gone,  when  exhausted  and 
soothed — 

“ 1 Like  one  who  wraps  the  drapery  of  his  couch 
About  him,  and  lies  down  to  pleasant  dreams,’ 

he  withdraws  the  pipe,  reclines  his  head,  and  gives 
himself  up  to  the  first  calming  effect  of  the  drug. 
His  next  attempt  confirms  the  comfort,  and  now- 
no  longer  does  he  complain  of  racking  limbs  or 
aching  bones  ) no  longer  does  the  rheum  run  from 
his  eyes,  and  relaxed  is  the  tightness  of  the  chest, 
as  he  dwells  with  fond  affection  on  the  inspiring 
pipe.  His  second  pipe  being  finished,  he  can  now 
look  round,  and  has  time  to  gaze  on  what  is  going 
on  ; but  his  soul  is  still  wrapped  in  the  bliss  that 
is  anticipated  from  what  remains  of  his  allowance, 
for  not  until  a third  or  fourth  whiff  do  the  feelings 
of  positive  pleasure  arise.  Then  is  felt  a lightness 
of  the  head,  a tingling  in  every  limb— the  eyes  seem 
to  be  enlarged,  and  the  ears  sharpened  to  hearing, 
an  elasticity,  an  inclination  to  mount  on  high  is 
experienced — all  pains  are  gone,  and  pleasure  now 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


137 


remains — all  weariness  has  left,  and  freshness  takes 
its  place.  The  loathing  of  food  that  was  lately- 
experienced  is  changed  to  a relish  for  what  is 
piquant,  and  a great  desire  is  frequently  felt  for 
some  particular  food.  The  tongue  is  now  loosened, 
and  tells  its  tale.  For  whatever  is  secret  becomes 
open,  and  what  was  intended  for  one  becomes 
known  to  all.  Still  there  is  no  excitement,  but  a 
calmness,  soft,  soothing,  and  sedative.  He  dreams 
no  dreams,  nor  thinks  of  the  morrow  but  with  a 
smile  in  his  eye ; he  fills  his  pipe  with  the  last  of 
his  allowance ; slowly  inhaling  it,  he  seems  to 
brighten  up.  The  smile  that  was  sparkling  in  his 
eye,  extends  to  other  features,  and  his  appearance 
is  one  of  complete,  yet  placid  enjoyment.  Pre- 
sently the  pipe  is  slowly  displaced,  or  drops  by  his 
side  ; his  head,  if  raised,  is  now  laid  on  the  pillow — 
feature  after  feature  gives  up  its  smile — the  eye 
becomes  glazed  — now  droops  the  upper  eyelid, 
and  falls  the  chin  with  the  lower  lip,  deeper  and 
deeper  inspirations  follow — all  perception  is  gone ; 
objects  may  strike  the  eye,  but  no  sights  are  seen  ; 
sounds  may  fall  on  the  ear,  but  no  sensations  are 
excited.  So  he . passes  into  sleep,  disturbed  and 
broken,  from  which  the  wretched  being  awakes  to 
a full  conception  of  his  misery.  ‘ To  sleep,  per- 
chance to  dream!’— and  what  dreams  ! — what 
ecstatic  delights  ! — what  ravishments  ! — what  illu- 
sions ! 


‘“Things 

Seen  for  the  first  time,  and  things,  long  ago 
Seen,  which  lie  ne’er  again  shall  see,  do  blend 
Strangely  and  brokenly  with  ghastly  things 
Such  as  we  hear  in  childhood,  scorn  in  youth, 
And  doubt  in  manhood,  save  when  seen.’  ” 


In  the  narrative  of  the  voyage  of  H.M.S.  Santa- 
ran9 , ^r-  A.  Adams  informs  us,  that  in  a large 


138 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


caravansary  belonging  to  the  Malay  village  near 
Singapore,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  the 
effects  of  opium  on  the  physical  aspect  of  the 
Malay.  One  of  these  was  a feeble,  worn  out  old 
man,  with  an  unearthly  brilliancy  in  his  eye.  His 
body  was  bent  forwards  and  greatly  emaciated — 
his  face  was  shrunken,  wan,  and  haggard — his  long 
skinny  arm,  wasted  fingers,  and  sharp  pointed 
nails  resembled  more  the  claw  of  some  rapacious 
bird,  than  the  hand  of  a lord  of  the  creation — his 
head  was  nodding  and  tremulous — his  skin  wrinkled 
and  yellow,  and  his  teeth  were  a few  decayed, 
pointed,  and  black  stained  fangs.  As  he  was 
approached,  he  raised  his  body  from  the  mat 
on  which  he  was  reposing.  There  was  something 
interesting  and  at  the  same  time  melancholy  in 
the  physique  of  the  old  man,  who  now  in  rags, 
appeared  from  the  silver  ornaments  he  wore,  and  by 
his  embroidered  jacket,  to  have  been  formerly  a 
person  of  some  distinction ; but  the  fascinating 
influence  of  the  deadly  drug  had  fastened  on  him, 
and  a pallet  in  a caravansary  was  the  reward  of 
self-indulgence.  “In  my  experience  of  opium,” 

says  Mr. , “which  has  not, however,  been  very 

extensive,  I cannot  say  I have  found  as  much 
pleasure  as  the  English  opium-eater  in  his  Confes- 
sions would  lead  us  to  believe  fell  to  his  lot.  After 
three  or  four  Chinese  opium  pipes,  I found  my 
brain  very  much  unsettled,  and  teeming  with 
thoughts  ill-arranged,  and  pursuing  each  other  in 
wanton  dreamy  play,  without  order  or  connection, 
the  circulating  system  being  at  the  time  much 
excited,  the  frame  tremulous,  the  eyeballs  fixed, 
and  a peculiar  and  agreeable  thrilling  sensation 
extending  along  the  nerves.  The  same  succession  of 
image  crowding  upon  image,  and  thoughts  revelling 
in  strange  disorder,  continues  for  some  time,  during 
which  a person  appears  to  be  in  the  condition  of 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


139 


the  madman  alluded  to  by  Dryden  in  his  play  of 
the  ‘ Spanish  Fryar.’ 

“ ‘ He  raves,  his  words  are  loose, 

As  heaps  of  sand,  and  scattering  wide  from  sense 
So  high  he’s  mounted  on  his  airy  throne, 

That  now  the  wind  has  got  into  his  head, 

And  turned  his  brains  to  frenzy.’ 

Unutterable  melancholy  feelings  succeed  to  this 
somewhat  pleasurable  period  of  excitement,  but  a 
soft  languor  steals  shortly  across  the  senses,  and 
the  half-poisoned  individual  falls  asleep.  The 
next  day  there  is  great  nausea  and  sickness  of 
stomach,  headache,  and  tormenting  thirst,  which 
makes  you  curse  opium,  and  exclaim,  with  Shake- 
speare’s £ King  J ohn,’ 

“‘And  none  of  you  will  bid  the  winter  come 
To  thrust  his  icy  fingers  in  my  maw  ; 

Nor  let  my  kingdom’s  rivers  take  their  course 
Thro’  my  burnt  bosom,  nor  entreat  the  North 
To  make  his  bleak  winds  kiss  my  parched  lips, 

And  comfort  me  with  cold.’  ” 

Dr.  Madden  tried,  experimentally,  the  effects  of 
opium — he  commenced  with  a grain,  which  pro- 
duced no  perceptible  effect,  to  this  he  afterwards 
added  another  grain.  After  two  hours  from  com- 
mencing the  operation,  his  spirits  became  excited. 
“My  faculties,”  he  writes,  <£ appeared  enlarged, 
everything  I looked  at  seemed  increased  in  volume. 

I had  no  longer  the  same  pleasure  when  I closed 
my  eyes  which  I had  when  they  were  open ; it 
appeared  to  me  as  if  it  was  only  external  objects 
which  were  acted  on  by  the  imagination,  and 
magnified  into  images  of  pleasure ; in  short,  it  was 
the  faint  exquisite  music  of  a dream  in  a waking 
moment.  I made  my  way  home  as  fast  as  possible, 
dreading,  at  every  step,  that  I should  commit  some 


140  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

extravagance.  In  walking,  I was  hardly  sensible 
of  my  feet  touching  the  ground — it  seemed  as  if  I 
slid  along  the  street,  impelled  by  some  invisible 
agent,  and  that  my  blood  was  composed  of  some 
ethereal  fluid,  which  rendered  my  body  lighter 
than  air.  I got  to  bed  the  moment  I reached 
home.  The  most  extraordinary  visions  of  delight 
filled  my  brain  all  night.  In  the  morning  I rose 
pale  and  dispirited,  my  head  ached,  my  body  was 
so  debilitated,  that  I was  obliged  to  remain  on  the 
sofa  all  day,  dearly  paying  for  my  first  essay  at 
opium-eating.”  Thus  far,  the  opium-eater  and  the 
opium-smoker  seem  to  agree  in  the  principal 
results  from  the  use  of  the  drug. 

From  the  communications  of  Dr.  Medhurst 
may  be  learnt  many  important  facts  relative  to  this 
habit  in  China.  Day  by  day,  and  year  by  year, 
the  practice  of  opium-smoking  prevails  more  and 
more  among  this  people,  and  by  and  by  it  will 
doubtless  have  a powerful  effect  upon  the  destinies 
of  the  country.  It  is  said,  that  the  late  Emperor 
used  the  drug;  it  is  certain  that  most  of  the 
government  officers  do,  and  their  innumerable 
attendants  are  in  the  same  category.  Opium  is  used 
as  a luxury  by  all  classes,  and  to  a great  extent, 
indeed  so  great,  that  it  cannot  fail  to  exhibit  its 
effects  speedily  upon  the  mass  of  the  inhabitants. 
In  rich  families,  even  if  the  head  of  the  house  does 
not  use  the  drug,  the  sons  soon  learn  to  use  it,  and 
almost  all  are  exposed  to  the  temptation  of 
employing  it,  as  many  of  their  friends  and  acquain- 
tances are  in  the  habit  of  smoking;  and  it  is 
considered  a mark  of  politeness  to  offer  the  pipe 
to  a friend  or  visitor.  Many  persons  fly  to  the  use 
of  the  pipe  when  they  get  into  trouble,  and  when 
they  are  afflicted  with  chronic  or  painful  diseases, 
sleeplessness,  &c.  Several  persons  who  have  been 
attended  for  malignant  tumours  were  made  victims 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE.  141 

of  the  drug,  by  the  use  of  it  to  appease  the  pain 
and  distress  they  had  to  endure.  The  beggars  are, 
to  a great  extent,  under  its  influence ; but  they  use 
the  dregs  and  scrapings  only  of  the  half-consumed 
drug,  which  is  removed  from  the  pipe-head  when 
it  is  cleaned.  The  most  common  cause  of  the 
Chinese  resorting  to  the  use  of  the  opium-pipe  is 
their  not  knowing  how  to  employ  their  leisure 
hours  when  the  business  of  the  day  is  over — there 
is  no  periodical  literature  to  engage  their  attention. 
Their  families  do  not  present  sufficient  attractions 
to  keep  them  at  home,  and  sauntering  about  of  an 
evening,  with  nothing  to  employ  the  mind,  they 
are  easily  tempted  into  the  opium  shops,  where  one 
acquaintance  or  another  is  sure  to  be  found,  who 
invites  to  the  use  of  the  drug. 

Many  of  the  middling  classes  dissipate  their 
money  in  this  indulgence,  and,  among  the  lower 
classes,  those  who  indulge  in  the  use  of  opium  are 
reduced  to  abject  poverty.  Having  no  property, 
furniture,  or  clothes  to  dispose  of,  their  wives  and 
children  are  sold  to  supply  their  ever-increasing 
appetite  for  the  drug;  and  when  these  are  gone 
with  greatly  diminished  strength  for  labour,  they 
can  no  longer  earn  sufficient  for  their  own  wants, 
and  are  obliged  to  beg  for  their  daily  bread.  As 
to  the  supply  of  opium,  they  must  depend  on  the 
scrapings  of  other  men’s  pipes,  and  as  soon  as  they 
are  unable,  by  begging,  to  obtain  the  necessaries 
ot  life,  together  with  the  half-burnt  opium,  on 
which  their  very  life  depends,  they  droop  and  die 
by  the  roadside,  and  are  buried  at  the  expense  of 
the  charitable. 

Two  respectable  young  men,  the  sons  of  an 
officer  of  high  rank,  well  informed,  having  received 
a good  education,  accustomed  to  good  society  and 
who  excited  great  interest  in  the  minds  of  those 
with  whom  they  came  in  contact,  lately  died.  So 


142 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


inveterate  was  tlieir  habit  of  opium-smoking,  and 
so  large  the  quantity  necessary  to  keep  up  the 
stimulus,  that  their  funds  were  exhausted.  Friends 
assisted  them,  and  relieved  their  necessities  again 
and  again;  but  it  was  impossible  to  give  them 
bread  and  opium  too,  and  they  subsequently  died, 
one  after  the  other,  in  the  most  abject  and  destitute 
condition. 

At  Shanghae,  just  inside  the  north  gate,  in  front 
of  a temple,  one  of  such  destitute  persons,  unable 
to  procure  either  food  or  opium,  was  lying  at  the 
last  gasp,  while  two  or  three  others  with  drooping 
heads  were  sitting  near,  who  looked  as  if  they 
would  soon  be  prostrated  too.  The  next  day,  the 
first  of  the  group  lay  dead  and  stiff,  with  a coarse 
mat  wound  round  his  body  for  a shroud.  The  rest 
were  lying  down  unable  to  rise.  The  third  day 
another  was  dead,  and  the  remainder  nearly  so. 
Help  was  vain,  and  pity  was  the  only  feeling  that 
could  be  indulged. 

It  may  be  judged  of  the  extent  of  opium-smoking 
in  China  from  the  reports  of  the  native  Teapoas, 
inclosures  in  Sir  J.  Bowing’s  Report.  The 
inhabitants  in  the  Chung- wan  (Centre  bazaar) 
are  about  5,800.  The  number  that  smoke  opium, 
merely  because  they  like  it,  are  upwards  ot 
2,600.  In  the  Hall-wan  (Canton  bazaar)  there  are 
upwards  of  1,200.  The  number  that  smoke 
opium,  merely  because  they  like  it,  are  upwards 
of  600.  At  Sheong-wan  the  number  of  male  resi- 
dents are  13,000;  there  are  3,000  opium-smokers. 
At  Tai-ping-shan  the  number  of  inhabitants  are 
5,300  men  ; of  these  upwards  of  1,200  smoke  opium 
because  they  like  it.  The  number  of  inhabitants 
in  Ting-loong-  chow  are  2,500;  the  number  of 
opium-smokers  are  reported  at  400.  Thus,  out  of 
27,800  inhabitants,  7,800  of  whom,  or  26  per  cent., 
are  smokers  of  opium. 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


143 


Dr.  McPherson,  in  writing  of  the  Shikhs,  informs 
us  that  most  of  the  Shirdars  are  under  the  influ- 
ence of  spirits  or  of  opium  for  eighteen  hours  out 
of  the  twenty-four.  Their  early  use,  both  of  the 
spirit  and  the  drug,  renders  them  indispensable 
through  life.  If  deprived  of  their  usual  dose,  the 
Shikh  is  one  of  the  most  wretched  beings  imagin- 
able. Before  engaging  in  any  feast,  the  Shikh 
takes  his  opium,  by  which  he  is  for  a time  excited, 
and  this  is  soon  followed  by  languor  and  inactivity. 
Talking  of  Runjeet  Sing,  who  was  at  that  time 
labouring  under  paralysis,  from  which  eventually 
he  died,  he  says  he  still  used  opium,  so  that  little 
could  be  expected  from  remedial  means. 

The  Shikhs  are  forbidden  the  use  of  tobacco  by 
the  tenets  of  their  religion,  but  find  a ready  sub- 
stitute for  it  in  opium,  which  is  consumed  in  great 
quantities  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Punjaub, 
as  well  as  among  the  protected  Shikh  states.  While 
under  the  effects  of  this  drug,  the  Shikh  is  a very 
different  person  to  the  same  individual  before*  he 
has  taken  it.  In  the  former  instance,  he  is  active 
and  talkative ; in  the  latter,  lazy  and  stupid. 

It  has  been  imagined  that  the  preparation  of 
opium  has  an  injurious  effect  upon  those  engaged 
therein ; but  Dr.  Eatwell,  of  the  Benares  Agency 
states  that,  “ amongst  the  thousands  of  individuals 
cultivators,  and  employes , with  whom  the  factory 
is  filled  during  the  receiving  and  manufacturing 
seasons,  no  complaints  are  ever  heard  of  any  in- 
jurious effects  resulting  from  the  influence  of  the 
drug,  whilst  they  all  remain  quite  as  free  from 
general  sickness  as  persons  unconnected  with  the 
general  establishment — in  fact,  if  anything,  more 
®°.  It  occasionally  happens  that  a casual  visitor 
to  the  factory  complains  of  giddiness  or  headache  • 
out  the  European  officers  employed  in  the  depart- 
ment, who  pass  the  greater  part  of  the  day  with 


144 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEI\ 


the  thermometer  between  95°  and  105°  Fah. 
amongst  tons  of  the  drug,  never  experience  any 
bad  effects  from  it.  The  native  purkhea  sits 
usually  from  six  a.h.  to  three  p.m.  daily,  with  his 
hand  and  arm  immersed  nearly  the  whole  time  in 
the  drug,  which  he  is  constantly  smelling,  and  yet 
he  feels  no  inconvenience  from  it.  He  has  informed 
me,  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  season,  he 
experiences  usually  a sensation  of  numbness  in  the 
fingers ; but  I believe  this  to  be  more  the  result  of 
fatigue,  consequent  upon  the  incessant  use  of  the 
arm  and  fingers,  than  of  any  effect  of  the  opium. 
In  the  large  caking-vats,  men  are  employed  to 
wade  knee-deep  through  the  drug  for  several  hours 
during  the  morning,  and  they  remain  standing  in 
it  during  the  greater  part  of  the  rest  of  the  day, 
serving  out  the  opium  by  armsful,  their  bodies 
being  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a cloth  about 
the  loins.  These  men  complain  of  a sensation  of 
drowsiness  towards  the  end  of  their  daily  labours, 
and  declare  that  they  are  overpowered  early  in  the 
evening  by  sleep,  but  they  do  not  complain  of  the 
effect  as  being  either  unpleasant  or  injurious. 

“ Infants,  of  a few  months  old,  may  be  frequently 
seen  lying  on  the  opium-besmeared  floor,  under  the 
vats,  in  which  dangerous  position  they  are  left  by 
their  thoughtless  mothers;  but,  strange  to  say, 
without  any  accident  ever  occurring.  Here  are 
abundant  facts  to  show  that  the  health  ot  those 
emplo3Ted  in  the  opium-factory,  and  in  the  manipu- 
lation of  the  drug,  is  not  exposed  to  any  risk  what- 
ever ; whilst  the  impunity  with  which  the  drug  is 
handled  by  hundreds  of  individuals,  for  hours 
together,  proves  that  it  has  no  endemic  action , 
for  I am  inclined  to  consider  the  soporific  eilect 
experienced  by  the  vat-treaders  as  produced  through 
the  lungs,  and  not  through  the  skin/  This  may 
he  considered,  therefore,  as  setting  the  question 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


145 


entirely  at  rest,  and  demonstrating  the  fact  that 
the  factory  labourers  are  not  sufferers. 

According  to  a Chinese  petition  presented  on 
one  occasion  to  the  Emperor,  it  is  believed  that  the 
English,  by  introducing  opium  into  that  country, 
did  so  as  a means  of  its  subjugation,  presuming, 
we  may  suppose,  that  the  Celestials  were  invincible, 
except  by  some  such  cabalistic  means.  “In  the 
History  of  Formosa,”  says  this  document,  “ we  find 
the  following  passage  : ‘ Opium  was  first  produced 
in  Kaoutsinne,  which  by  some  is  said  to  be  the 
same  as  Kalapa  or  Batavia.  The  natives  of  this 
place  were  at  the  first  sprightly  and  active,  and, 
being  good  soldiers,  were  always  successful  in 
battle.  But  the  people  called  Hung-maou  (red- 
haired)  came  thither,  and  having  manufactured 
opium,  seduced  some  of  the  natives  into  the  habit 
of  smoking  it.  From  these,  the  mania  for  it  spread 
rapidly  through  the  whole  nation;  so  that  in 
process  of  time  the  natives  became  feeble  and 
enervated,  submitted  to  foreign  rule,  and  ultimately 
were  completely  subjugated.  Now  the  English/ 
it  continues,  t are  of  the  race  of  foreigners  called 
Hung-maou.  In  introducing  opium  into  this 
country,  their  purpose  has  been  to  weaken  and 
enfeeble  the  Central  Empire.  If  not  early  aroused 
to  a sense  of  our  danger,  we  shall  find  ourselves, 
ere  long,  on  the  last  step  towards  ruin.’  ” 

. 1'he  degradation  or  subjugation  of  the  Chinese 
is  much  more  likely  to  be  affected  by  a habit  con- 
cerning which  we  hear  less,  but  which  is  infinitely 
more . disastrous  than  the  indulgence  in  opium, 
xhis  is  the  brandy-drinking  customs  of  the  north. 
Ihis  horrible  drink,  distilled  from  millet,  is  the 
Chinaman's  delight,  and  he  swallows  it  like  water. 
Many  ruin  themselves  with  brandy,  as  others  do 
2fr  Sammg-  In  company,  or  even  alone,  they 
wnl  pass  whole  days  and  nights  in  drinking  suc- 

L 


146 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


cessive  little  cups  of  it,  until  their  intoxication 
makes  them  incapable  of  carrying  the  cup  to  their 
lips.  “Gambling  ancl  drunkenness”  says  Abbe 
Hue,  “ are  the  two  permanent  causes  of  pauperism 
in  China.” 

It  is  unfortunately  the  custom  for  the  distillers 
to  supply  brandy  on  credit  for  a whole  year,  so 
that  a tippler  may  go  on  for  a long  time  drawing 
from  this  inexhaustible  spring.  His  troubles  will 
only  begin  in  the  last  moon — the  legal  period  of 
payment.  Then,  indeed,  he  must  pay,  and  with 
usury ; and  as  money  does  not  usually  become 
more  plentiful  with  a man  from  the  habit  of  getting 
drunk  every  day,  he  has  to  sell  his  house  and  his 
land,  if  he  has  any,  or  to  carry  his  furniture  and 
his  clothes  to  the  pawnbroker’s.  In  the  south, 
there  is  less  brandy-drinking,  and  more  gambling; 
but  between  the  two  there  is  little  to  choose,  as 
either  impoverishes  those  Vvlio  devote  themselves 
to  its  service,  and  to  which  even  opium-smoking 
is  preferable. 

Mr.  Meadows,  the  Chinese  Government  Inter- 
preter at  Hong-Kong,  says,  “ As  to  the  morality  of 
the  opium  question,  I am  fortunately  able  to  give 
the  home  reader,  by  analogy,  and  in  a few  words, 
as  exact  an  idea  of  it  as  I have  got  myself.  Smok- 
ing a little  opium  daily,  is  like  taking  a pint  or 
two  of  ale,  or  a few  glasses  of  wine  daily;  smoking 
more  opium  is  like  taking  brandy  as  well  as  beer 
and  wine,  or  a large  allowance  of  these  latter; 
smoking  very  much  opium  is  like  excessive  brandy 
and  gin-drinking,  leading  to  delirium  tremens  and 
premature  death.  After  frequent  consideration  of 
the  subject  during  thirteen  years,  the  last  two  spent 
at  home,  I can  only  say  that,  although  the  sub- 
stances are  different,  I can,  as  to  the  morality  of 
producing,  selling,  and  consuming  them,  see  no 
difference  at  all ; while  the  only  difference  I can 


THE  GATES  OF  PARADISE. 


147 


observe  in  the  consequences  of  consumption  is,  that 
the  opium-smoker  is  not  so  violent,  so  maudlin,  or 
so  disgusting  as  the  drunkard.  The  clothes  and 
breath  of  the  confirmed  and  constant  smoker  are 
more  or  less  marked  by  the  peculiar  penetrating 
odour  of  opium,  and  he  gets  careless  in  time  of 
washing  from  his  hands  the  stains  from  his  pipe. 
But  all  this  is  not  more  disagreeable  than  the  beery, 
vinous,  or  ginny  odour,  and  the  want  of  cleanliness 
that  characterize  the  confirmed  drunkard.  In  all 
other  respects,  the  contrast  is  to  the  disadvantage 
of  the  drunkard.” 

Without  pursuing  this  question  further,  there  is 
evidently  a fascination  in  the  pipe  to  the  opium- 
smoker,  to  a degree  of  which  the  most  ardent  lover 
of  a pipe  of  tobacco  has  but  a faint  idea.  In  pro- 
portion as  the  indulgence  in  the  drug  produces  a 
state  of  happiness  far  transcending  all  that  the 
votary  of  the  weed  experiences,  so  does  its  influ- 
ence over  him  increase ; and  if  it  is  difficult  for 
the  habitual  smoker  of  tobacco  to  forego  the  plea- 
sure of  his  accustomed  pipe,  it  is  therefore  ten 
times  more  difficult  for  the  smoker  or  eater  of 
opium  to  renounce  for  ever,  a custom  which  brings 
with  it,  even  in  imagination  though  it  may  be, 
tenfold  more  pleasures,  and  a more  ecstatic  enjoy- 
ment. This  is  the  universal  evidence  of  all  who 
have  been  inquired  of,  and  of  all  who  have  had 
intercourse  with  opiophagi  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 

What  fascinating  influence  this  Paradise  in  pro- 
spect has  upon  those  who  indulge  in  journeys 
thither,  may  be  imagined  from  the  notorious  fact, 
that  in  Bristol,  Coleridge  went  so  far  as  to  hire 
men  porters,  hackney-coachmen,  and  others — to 
oppose  by  force  his  entrance  into  any  druggist’s 
shop.  But  as  the  authority  for  stopping  him  was 
derived  only  from  himself,  so  these  poor  men  found 
themselves  in  a fix;  for  when  the  time  and  the 

l 2 


148 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


inclination  arrived,  he  proceeded  to  the  shop,  and 
on  their  offering  resistance,  he,  the  same  who  had  in- 
structed them  to  prevent  his  entrance,  now  insisted 
on  their  allowing  him  to  pass,  annulled  all  former 
instructions,  and  on  the  authority  of  one  who  paid 
for  their  services,  demanded  its  exercise  as  he 
thought  fit,  and  the  gates  of  Paradise  were  opened. 

According  to  Darwin,  even  poultry  have  mounted 
the  ladder  to  within  a few  steps  of  Elysium ; for 
that  worthy  informs  us,  that  they  were  fed  for  the 
London  market  by  mixing  gin  and  opium  with 
their  food,  and  keeping  them  in  the  dark,  but  that 
cc  they  must  he  killed  as  soon  as  they  are  fattened, 
or  they  become  weak  and  emaciated,  like  human 
drunkards."  We  have  no  recording  pullet  to  in- 
form us  of  the  visions  of  the  barn-door  family 
under  the  influence  of  the  beatific  drug,  nor  “ Con- 
fessions of  a Chanticleer,"  to  tell  of  the  pains  that 
succeeded  a too-free  indulgence  in  the  little  pills ; 
all  we  learn  from  the  account  is,  that  the  vision  of 
Paradise  very  closely  preceded  its  reality,  for  the  fea- 
thered bipeds  were  dosed  and  killed.  The  human 
biped  for  half  a century  continues  his  dream — and 
all  through  that  period  it  is  but  a dream — yet 
that  he  is  happy  while  under  its  influence  there 
can  be  no  doubt ; and  when  he  has  reclined  on  his 
couch,  obtained  his  pipe,  and  sunk  into  the  beatific 
oblivion  so  coveted  by  the  Asiatic,  we  may  imagine 
his  exclaiming  with  the  Peri,  after  obtaining  the 
trickling  tear, 

“ Joy,  joy  for  ever  ! my  task  is  done ; 

The  gates  are  passed,  and  heaven  is  won. 

Oh  ! am  I not  happy  1 I am — I am. 

To  thee,  sweet  Eden  ! how  dark  and  sad 

Are  the  diamond  turrets  of  Shadukram, 

And  the  fragrant  bowers  of  Amberabad. 

Joy,  joy  for  ever  ! my  task  is  done  ; 

The  gates  are  passed,  and  heaven  is  won  !” 


CHAPTER  XI. 


REVELS  AND  REVERIES. 


“ That  juice  of  earth,  the  bane 
And  blessing  of  man’s  heart,  and  brain — 

That  draught  of  sorcery,  which  brings 
Phantoms  of  fair  forbidden  things 
Whose  drops,  like  those  of  rainbows,  smile 
Upon  the  mists  that  circle  man 
Brightening  not  only  earth,  the  while 
But  grasping  heaven,  too,  in  their  span.” 

Lalla  liookh. 


The  Mahometan  legend  of  their  prophet’s  ascent 
into  heaven,  where  he  received  instructions  for  the 
iaith  and  conduct  of  his  followers,  is  thus  current 
amongst  them. 

. Mahomet  was  reclining  on  the  sacred  stone 
m the  temple  of  Mecca,  Gabriel  came  to  him,  and 
opened  his  breast  from  the  breastbone  to  the  groin 
and  took  out  his  heart,  and  washed  it  in  a golden 
basin,  full  of  the  water  of  Faith,  and  then  restored 
« to  its  place.  Afterwards  a white  beast  was 
Drought  to  him,  less  than  a mule,  and  larger  than 
an  ass,  called  Al-Borak.  It  had  a human  face, 
„r, ,i  ae  cheeks  a horse,  its  eyes  were  jacinths 
1^ian^  as  stars.  It  had  eagle’s  wings  all 

rys;f  light’  “d  its  -Me8  ft™ 

Unnr  i)-enCfenJ  mth  Sems  and  precious  stones 
Upon  this  Mahomet  was  borne.  Gabriel  pro- 


150 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


ceeded  with  him  to  the  first  heaven  of  silver,  and 
knocked  at  the  door,  after  some  conversation  he 
was  welcomed,  and  the  door  opened.  Here  Maho- 
met saluted  Adam.  They  then  proceeded  to  the 
second  heaven,  all  of  polished  steel  and  dazzling 
splendour,  and  saluted  Noah.  They  then  entered 
the  third  heaven,  studded  with  precious  stones,  and 
too  brilliant  for  mortal  eyes.  Here  was  seen 
Azrael,  the  Angel  of  Death,  writing  continually 
in  a hook  the  names  of  those  who  are  to  be  born, 
and  blotting  out  those  who  are  to  die.  They 
mounted  to  the  fourth  heaven,  of  the  finest  silver, 
where  they  saw  the  Angel  of  Tears,  who  was 
appointed  to  weep  over  the  sins  of  men,  and 
predict  the  evils  that  awaited  them.  The  fifth 
heaven  was  of  purest  gold.  Here  Mahomet  was 
received  and  saluted  by  Aaron.  This  heaven  was 
inhabited  by  the  Avenging  Angel.  He  sat  on  a 
tbrone  surrounded  by  flames,  and  before  him  was 
a heap  of  red  hot  chains.  The  sixth  heaven  was 
composed  of  a transparent  stone,  where  dwelt  the 
guardian  angel  of  heaven  and  earth.  Here  Moses 
wept  at  the  sight  of  the  prophet  who  was  to  have 
more  followers  than  himself.  Mahomet  then 
entered  the  seventh  heaven  of  divine  light,  where 
he  saw  many  marvellous  things,  which  he  related 
for  the  instruction  of  the  faithful.  He  entered  Al 
Mainour,  the  house  of  Adoration,  and  as  he  entered, 
three  vases  were  offered  him,  one  containing  wine, 
another  milk,  and  a third  honey.  He  drank  ot  the 
milk,  “ Well  hast  thou  done !”  exclaimed  Gabriel. 
“ Ha’dst  thou  drunk  of  the  wine,  thy  people  had 
all  gone  astray.”  The  Prophet  then  returned  to 
earth,  as  he  had  ascended  to  heaven. 

The  Al-Borak  of  modern  Moslems  is  opium,  by 
means  of  this  most  miraculous  of  vehicles  they 
mount  to  the  heaven  of  heavens. 

What  are  the  true  effects  of  opium  are  best 


REVELS  AND  REVERIES. 


151 


described  by  an  eminent  physician,  who  has  studied 
well  the  results  produced  by  all  such  influences 
upon  the  brain.  The  imagination  appears  to  be 
acted  upon,  independent  of  the  peculiar  torpor, 
accompanied  by  sensations  of  gratification,  and  the 
absence  of  all  communication  with  the  external 
world.  The  senses  convey  no  false  impressions  to 
the  brain ; all  that  is  seen,  heard,  or  felt,  is  faithfully 
delineated,  but  the  imagination  clothes  each  object 
in  its  own  fanciful  garb.  It  exaggerates,  it  multi- 
plies, it  colours,  it  gives  fantastic  shapes ; there  is  a 
new  condition  arising  out  of  ordinary  perception, 
and  the  reason,  abandoning  itself  to  the  imagina- 
tion, does  not  resist  the  delight  of  indulging  in 
visions.  If  the  eyes  are  closed,  and  nothing  pre- 
sented to  excite  the  external  senses,  a whole  train 
of  vivid  dreams  are  presented.  A theatre  is  lighted 
up  in  the  brain — graceful  dancers  perform  the 
most  captivating  evolutions— music  of  an  unearthly 
character  floats  along — poesy,  whose  harmonious 
numbers,  and  whose  exciting  themes,  are  far  beyond 
the  power  of  the  human  mind,  is  unceasingly 
poured  forth.  Memory  is,  however,  generally 
asleep— all  the  passions,  affections,  and  motions 
have  lost  their  sway.  It  is  all  an  exquisite  indo- 
lence, during  which  dreams  spontaneously  arise, 
brilliant,  beautiful,  and  exhilarating.  There  is 
order,  harmony,  tranquillity.  If  a single  object 
has  been  vividly  impressed  upon  the  eye,  it  is  mul- 
tiplied a thousand  times  by  the  imagination — vast 
processions  pass  him  in  his  reveries  in  mournful 
pomp. 

That  this  is  the  doctrine  of  the  true  church  on 
the  subject  of  opium,  we  may  learn  from  De 
tjuincey,  of  which  church  he  acknowledges  himself 
to  be  the  Pope,  and  self-appointed  legate  a latere  to 
all^ degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude. 

“I  often  fell  into  such  reveries  after  taking 


152  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

opium,  and  many  a time  it  has  happened  to  me  on 
a summer  night,  when  I have  been  seated  at  an 
open  window,  from  which  I could  overlook  the  sea 
at  a mile  below  me,  and  could,  at  the  same  time, 
command  a view  of  some  great  town  standing  on 
a different  radius  of  my  circular  prospect,  but  at 
nearly  the  same  distance — that  from  sunset  to 
sunrise,  all  through  the  hours  of  night,  I have  con- 
tinued motionless,  as  if  frozen,  without  conscious- 
ness of  myself  as  of  an  object  anywise  distinct 
from  the  multiform  scene  which  I contemplated 
from  above.  Such  a scene  in  all  its  elements  was 
not  unfrequently  realised  for  me  on  the  gentle 
eminence  of  Everton.  Obliquely  to  the  left,  lay 
the  many  languaged  town  of  Liverpool ; obliquely 
to  the  right,-  the  multitudinous  sea.  The  scene 
itself  was  somewhat  typical  of  what  took  place  in 
such  a reverie.  The  town  of  Liverpool  represented 
the  earth,  with  its  sorrows  and  its  graves  left 
behind,  yet  not  out  of  sight  nor  wholly  forgotten. 
The  ocean,  in  everlasting  but  gentle  agitation,  yet 
brooded  over  by  dove-like  calm,  might  not  unfitly 
typify  the  mind,  and  the  mood  which  then  swayed 
it.  For  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  then  first  I stood  at 
a distance  aloof  from  the  uproar  of  life,  as  if  the 
tumult,  the  fever,  and  the  strife  were  suspended ; 
a respite  were  granted  from  the  secret  burdens  of 
the  heart,  some  sabbath  of  repose,  some  resting 
from  human  labours.  Here  were  the  hopes  which 
blossom  in  the  paths  of  life,  reconciled  with  the 
peace  which  is  in  the  grave ; motions  of  the  intel- 
lect as  unwearied  as  the  heavens,  yet  for  all 
anxieties  a halcyon  calm  ; tranquillity  that  seemed 
no  product  of  inertia,  but  as  if  resulting  from 
mighty  and  equal  antagonisms,  infinite  activities, 
infinite  repose.” 

And  now  let  us  follow  him  to  the  Opera.  dhe 
late  Duke  of  Norfolk  used  to  say,  ‘ Next  Monday 


REVELS  AND  REVERIES. 


153 


wind  and  weather  permitting,  I propose  to  be 
drunk  ; ’ and,  in  like  manner,  I used  to  fix  before- 
hand how  often,  within  a given  time,  when,  and 
with  what  accessory  circumstances  of  festal  joy,  I 
would  commit  a debauch  of  opium.  This  was 
seldom  more  than  once  in  three  weeks,  for  at  that 
time  I could  not  have  ventured  to  call  every  day  (as 
afterwards  I did)  for  1 a glass  of  laudanum  negus, 
warm,  and  without  sugar/ 

“No : once  in  three  weeks  sufficed ; and  the  time 
selected  was  either  a Tuesday  or  a Saturday  night,  my 
reason  for  which  was  this — Tuesday  and  Saturday 
were  for  many  years  the  regular  nights  of  perfor- 
mance at  the  opera  house,  and  there  in  those  times 
Grassini  sang,  and  her  voice  was  delightful  to  me 
beyond  all  that  I had  ever  heard.  Thrilling  was  the 
pleasure  with  which  almost  always  I heard  her. 
Shivering  with  expectation  I sat,  when  the  time 
drew  near  for  her  golden  epiphany,  shivering  I rose 
from  my  seat,  incapable  of  rest,  when  that  heavenly 
and  harp-like  voice  sang  its  own  victorious  welcome 
in  its  prelusive  threttanelo — threttanelo.  The  choruses 
were  divine  to  hear  ; and,  when  Grassini  appeared 
in  some  interlude,  as  she  often  did,  and  poured  forth 
her  passionate  soul  as  Andromache  at  the  tomb  of 
Hector,  &c.,  I question  whether  any  Turk,  of  all  that 
ever  entered  the  paradise  of  opium-eaters,  can  have 
had  half  the  pleasure  I had.  But,  indeed,  I honour  the 
barbarians  too  much,  by  supposing  them  capable  of 
any  pleasures  approaching  to  the  intellectual  ones 
of'  an  Englishman.  A chorus  of  elaborate  harmony 
displayed  before  me,  as  in  a piece  of  arras  work,  the 
whole  of  my  past  life — not  as  if  recalled  by  an  act  of 
memory,  but  as  if  present,  and  incarnated  in  the 
music;  no.  longer  painful  to  dwell  upon,  but  the  detail 
of  its  incidents  removed,  or  blended  in  some  hazy 
abstraction,  and  its  passions  exalted,  spiritualized, 
and  sublimed.  And  over  and  above  the  music  of 


154 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


the  stage  and  the  orchestra  I had  all  around  me,  in 
the  intervals  of  the  performances,  the  music  of  the 
Italian  language  talked  by  Italian  women — for  the 
gallery  was  usually  crowded  with  Italians — and  I 
listened  with  a pleasure,  such  as  that  with  which 
Weld,  the  traveller,  lay  and  listened  in  Canada,  to 
the  sweet  laughter  of  Indian  women  ; for  the  less 
you  understand  a language,  the  more  sensible  you 
are  to  the  melody  or  harshness  of  its  sounds.” 

Let  the  reader  who  seeks  to  know  of  his  other 
Saturday  evenings’  experiences,  wandering  about  in 
the  market-places,  and  threading  the  intricate 
mazes  of  bye-lanes  and  alleys,  seek  it  in  his  “Con- 
fessions.” 

An  Englishman  awaking  one  morning  finds 
himself  at  Hong-Kong,  in  the  midst  of  opium 
and  opium-smokers.  He  is  astonished  that  the 
Chinaman  loves  opium  as  he  loves  nothing  else  ; 
he  cannot  think  why  his  vitiated  taste  had  not 
settled  upon  something  nobler,  why  he  does  not  take 
a fancy  to  British  Brandy  ? But  no  ! he  loves 
opium.  And  a Parsee  takes  him  to  see  the 
lions,  and  is  so  civil  as  to  convey  the  stranger 
into  his  warehouse  and  open  two  chests  of  opium, 
that  he  may  seo  the  drug  as  it  passes  into  com- 
merce. Of  these,  the  first  consisted  of  balls, 
which  he  describes  as  of  the  size  of  a large  apple 
dumpling,  and  when  cut  open  the  mass  is  found  to 
be  solid.  The  other  was  full  of  objects  which  a 
commander  in  the  navy  ordered  his  men  to  return 
to  the  owners  of  a captured  junk,  “ Ar’nt  you 
ashamed,  my  lads,  to  loot  a lot  of  miserable  Dutch 
cheeses  ? ” The  “ Dutch  cheeses  ” were  Patna 
opium,  worth  about  £5  each.  Globes  of  thick 
dark  jelly  enclosed  in  a crust  not  unlike  the  riud 
of  a cheese.  The  Parsee  tapped  one  with  a frag- 
ment of  an  iron  fastening  of  a chest,  and  drew 
forth  about  a spoonful  of  the  drug.  It  was  not 


EEYELS  AXD  REVERIES. 


155 


the  opium  which  engaged  the  traveller’s  attention, 
it  was  the  effect  it  produced  upon  the  surrounding 
coolies.  He  had  never  before  seen  excitement  in  a 
Chinaman’s  face.  He  had  seen  them  tried  for  their 
lives,  and  condemned  to  death.  He  had  seen  them 
test  the  long-suffering  patience  of  Mr.  Tudor  Davies 
in  the  Hong-Ivong  police  court,  where  that  gentle- 
man was  daily  engaged  in  laborious  endeavours 
to  extract  truth  out  of  conflicting  lies.  He  had 
seen  them  laugh  heartily  at  a gesture  at  a sing- 
song ; and  he  once  saw  a witness  grin  with  great 
delight,  as  he  unexpectedly  saw  his  most  intimate 
friend,  a tradesman  of  reputed  wealth,  among  a 
crowd  of  prisoners  in  the  dock.  But  these  coolies, 
when  they  saw  that  opium  opened  their  horizontal, 
slit-shaped  eyes,  till  they  grew  round  and  starting, 
their  limbs,  so  lax  and  limpid,  when  not  in  actual 
strain  of  labour,  were  stiff  from  excitement,  every 
head  was  pressed  forward,  every  hand  seemed  ready 
to  clutch.  There  was  a possibility  that  it  would  be 
put  down  upon  the  window-sill,  near  which  the 
stranger  and  his  Parsee  friend  were  standing — and 
there  could  be  seen  the  shadow  of  fingers  ready  to 
slide  in.  It  was  almost  certain  that  it  would  be 
thrown  aside — and  there  was  the  grand  hope  of  an 
opium  debauch  gratis,  and  this  was  the  state  of  mind 
that  hope  created.  And  oh  what  raptures,  what 
delights,  what  dreams  ! Already,  in  imagination, 
they  revelled  in  scenes  such  as  the  wakeful  eye  of 
mortal  man  ne’er  saw,  and  such  as  never  did  the 
mind  of  man  conceive. 

“ A paradise  of  vaulted  bowers 
Lit  by  downward  gazing  flowers, 

And  watery  paths  that  wind  between 
Wildernesses  calm  and  green, 

Peopled  by  shapes  too  bright  to  see 

And  rest,  having  beheld  ; somewhat  like  thee 

Which  walk  upon  the  sea,  and  chaunt  melodiously.” 


156  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

We  cannot  understand  this  fascination  in  which 
opium  holds  its  devotee  to  its  full  extent ; and  yet, 
in  some  sort,  the  lover  of  tobacco,  deprived  of  his 
pipe  or  quid,  can  in  some  sort  understand  it  better 
than  any  other  Englishman,  the  opiophagi  excepted. 
Let  the  admirer  of  his  weed  be  placed  in  circum- 
stances wherein  he  cannot  indulge  in  that  luxury, 
and  the  inward  longings  for  his  cherished  com- 
panion are  akin  to  those  of  the  smoker  of  opium 
without  his  drug.  Some  inveterate  smokers  of 
tobacco  have  been  known  to  declare  that  they  would 
rather  forego  their  accustomed  meal  than  their 
whiff ; this  they  will  sometimes  profess,  but  this 
the  opium  devotee  often  accomplishes.  Instances 
are  far  from  rare  of  opium-smokers  dying  of  starva- 
tion, having  denied  their  bodies  the  sustenance 
they  required,  to  procure  their  much  loved  chandu. 
Martyrs  to  their  love  of  opium. 

As  opium  is  generally  indulged  in  by  the  lower 
classes,  in  establishments  called  Opium  Shops, 
otherwise  Papan  • Mera,  a word  or  two  belongs  to 
them.  In  Singapore,  these  shops  are  limited  by 
the  regulations  to  forty-five  in  town  and  six  in  the 
country.  Each  has  a red  board,  which  the  vendor 
ought  to  hang  up  outside  his  shop,  with  the 
number  thereon,  as  received  from  the  opium 
farmer.  Hence  the  name  of  Papan  Mera,  or 
‘•'red  board,”  and  the  shops  are  known  by  that 
name  by  all  classes  of  natives.  They  are  scat- 
tered in  all  directions  over  the  island ; and 
wherever  a number  of  Chinese  are  congregated, 
there  you  have  one  or  more.  The  farmer  is 
most  interested  in  the  sale  of  opium,  and  the 
extension  of  shops,  and  of  the  trade.  A man 
goes  to  him  generally,  either  previously  known 
or  recommended,  and  says  he  wishes  to  open  a 
Papan  Mera  ; of  course,  the  opium  farmer  wishes 
that  he  may  do  so,  and  be  successful,  and  vend 


BEVELS  AND  REVEKIES. 


157 


plenty  of.  opium,  all  the  opium  being  purchased 
of  the  opium  , farmer,  no  one  else  being  allowed 
to  sell  opium  in  the  island,  and  for  which  privilege 
he  contracts  annually  with  the  Government  in  a 
handsome  sum.  The  man  gets  the  red  board,  for 
which  he  pays,  two  shillings.  If  the  limited  number 
of  forty-five  is  completed  he  does  not  require  a 
board,  but  he  is  not  refused  the  privilege  of  opening 
a shop.  In  this  case,  he  hangs  a mat  in  the  place 
of  the  door,  by  which  an  opium  shop  is  known  to 
all,,  while  the  fact  is  announced  by  a Chinese  in- 
scription. Nothing  is  paid  for  a licence,  no  secu- 
rities are  entered  into,  but  the  new  man  purchases 
of  the  farmer  a certain  quantity  of  chandu,  or  pre- 
pared opium, . and  according  to  his  facilities  for 
selling  it  so  is  the  price.  If  the  shop  is  to  be 
opened  in  town,  where  there  are  more  customers, 
and  if  near  to  where  Chinese  artificers  abound, 
then  he  pays  about  , eight  shillings  a tael  (1£  oz.), 
or  at  the  rate  of  six  shillings  an  ounce.  If  at  a 
little  distance,  about  five  shillings  and  sixpence  an 
ounce.  . Still  further  from  town,  five  shillings,  then 
four  shillings  and  sixpence.  Nay,  it  even  descends 
to  a fraction  beyond  three  shillings  an  ounce. 
JLhe  last,  is  the  sum  paid  by  the  Nacodah  of  a 
Chinese  junk,  who  takes  a large  quantity  at  a time, 
as  two-thirds  of  his  crew  are  generally  consumers, 
and  the  facility  for  illicit  consumption  is  great. 
1 he  proprietor s of  the  Papan  Mera  are  expected  to 
retail  it  to  their  customers  at  a little  above  the 
price  at  which  they  have  purchased  it.  If  in  town, 
where  they  pay  tenpence  a cheen  or  six  shillings 
an  ounce,  then  they  charge  elevenpence  a cheen  or 
scarcely  seven  shillings  an  ounce,  to  those  who 
come  to  buy  or  use  it  on  the  premises.  The 
opmm  farmer  receives  nothing  from  the  owner  of 
the  shop,  except  the  money  for  his  opium ; the 
ner  receives  nothing  from  the  farmer  but  the 


158 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


opium  for  his  money,  and  sometimes  a discount  of 
eight  per  cent.  Nor  do  the  opium-smokers  pay 
more  at  the  shops  for  their  opium  than  if  they 
purchased  it  direct  from  the  farmer.  How,  then, 
does  the  owner  of  the  “red  hoard”  manage  to 
live  ? How  does  he  pay  rent,  sometimes  to  the 
extent  of  £2  or  £3  per  month  ? How  can  he  keep 
his  wife,  and  the  little  “ red  boards,”  and  one  or 
two  coolies  ? Ecce  ! He  does  all  this  on  the 
refuse  of  the  chandu,  the  Tye  or  Tinco,  sold  to  the 
poor. 

On  the  Tinco  and  Samshing,  the  owners  of  many 
of  the  opium  shops  almost  entirely  depend  for  their 
living.  By  their  sale  the  rent  is  paid,  the  family 
supported,  and  the  servants  kept.  If  a man  sells 
three  taels,  or  three  ounces  and  three-quarters  of 
chandu  a day,  there  will  be  about  half  that  quan- 
tity of  Tinco,  or  one  ounce  and  three-quarters, 
this  is  the  unconsumed  refuse  left  in  the  pipe  after 
smoking,  and  which  is  the  property  of  the  owner  of 
the  Papan  Mera,  and  from  the  consumption  of  this 
he  gets  a further  refuse  of  little  more  than  three- 
quarters  of  an  ounce,  which  is  called  Samshing. 
If  he  sells  his  Chandu  for  twenty-five  shillings,  by 
his  Tinco  and  Samshing  he  will  realize  nearly 
twelve  shillings  and  sixpence  a day,  and  this  is  his 
income.  Few,  however,  sell  so  much,  and  fewer 
still  receive  as  much. 

The  “ Papan  Mera  ” is  of  all  kinds,  from  a hovel 
to  a brick  house  of  two  stories,  for  which  £3 
monthly  is  paid  for  rent.  Generally  speaking,  the 
luxury  of  the  pipe  is  all  that  the  smoker  cares  for, 
and  all  other  things,  such  as  commodious  _ apart- 
ments, elegant  furniture,  and  proper  ventilation  are 
disregarded.  In  some  houses  there  are  apartments 
beside  those  entered  from  the  street.  The  police 
regulations  ordain  that  at  nine  f.m.  all  shall  give  up 
their  pipes.  But  is  the  sound  of  the  curfew  always 


REVELS  AND  REVERIES. 


159 


heeded  ? “ Sooner  would  the  panting  traveller, 

under  a burning  sun,  when  hours  have  elapsed, 
since  his  parched  lips  were  moistened,  dash  from 
his  mouth  the  goblet  before  his  thirst  was  half 
quenched,  than  the  opium-smoker  be  the  slave  of 
time.”  If  nine  o’clock  comes,  and  he  has  not 
reached  his  climax,  he  then  retires  to  an  inner 
chamber,  where,  at  ease  and  undisturbed,  he  may 
realize  that  enjoyment,  and  consummate  that  bliss, 
of  which  the  owner  of  “ blue  coat  and  bright 
buttons  ” would  deprive  him.  Thus  he  slips  intp 
Paradise  whilst  the  Peri  and  the  lC  peeler  ” remain 
outside  disconsolate. 

Our  Papan  Mera  man  is  a good  man,  and  his 
wife  is  a good  woman,  so  we  get  a peep  indoors, 
upstairs,  behind  the  scenes,  the  apartment  where 
laches  are  at  home  de  jure , not  being  allowed  per- 
haps to  smoke  at  home  de  facto.  Of  course,  the 
general  visitor  has  no  admittance.  In  the  centre 
stands  a large  bed,  sitting  up  thereon  a female,  her 
back  supported  with  cushions.  She  is  young,  she 
is  fair — yea;  passing  fair,  and  dressed  in  the  habili- 
ments of  the  floWery  land.  Near  her  stands  a 
table,  on  which  are  tea  and  sweetmeats.  She,  too, 
is  a votary  to  the  drug ; with  dreamy  eyes  half 
closed,  she  draws  in  the  inspiring  vapour,  then 
sinks  back  upon  the  cushions,  unconscious  that  we 
are  gazing  upon  her,  her  dark  dishevelled  tresses 
hanging  over,  but  scarce  concealing  the  heaving 
bosom,  the  only  sign  of  life. 

Although  there  are  supposed  to  be  but  forty-five 
licensed  opium  shops  in  Singapore  town,  there  are 
upwards  of  eighty ; wherever  there  are  Chinese, 
there  may  also  be  found  the  Papan  Mera.  Certain 
trades  are  congregated  together — you  have  car- 
penters in  one  street,  blacksmiths  in  another,  gold 
and  silver  smiths  in  a third,  and  so  on.  Amongst 
some  trades,  the  habit  of  opium-smoking  is  more 


160 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


common  than  in  others,  the  principal  consumers 
will  be  found  amongst  carpenters,  blacksmiths, 
barbers,  huxsters,  coolies,  boatmen,  gambier 
planters,  and  gardeners.  Full  eighty-five  per  cent, 
of  the  persons  engaged  in  these  callings  are  devoted 
to  the  drug.  Shoemakers,  tailors,  and  bakers,  are 
generally  less  addicted  to  the  habit ; amongst  the 
two  first-named,  not  more  than  twenty  per  cent,  are 
smokers.  Wherever  you  have  carpenters,  black- 
smiths, &c.,  in  abundance,  there  will  you  have 
opium  shops  in  abundance  also.  In  many  streets 
there  are  six  of  these  shops.  In  one  street  there 
are  twelve.  In  Canton  Street  there  are  eight 
houses,  and  two  of  them  are  licensed  for  opium. 
At  Hong-Kong  and  at  Canton,  the  same  thing 
occurs.  Certain  streets  are  devoted  to  certain 
trades,  and  certain  trades  devoted  to  opium. 

M.  Abbe  Hue  communicates  a few  additional 
facts  concerning  opium  in  China.  At  present  this 
country  purchases  annually  of  the  English,  opium 
to  the  amount  of  seven  millions  sterling ; the 
traffic  is  contraband,  but  it  is  carried  on  along  the 
whole  coast  of  the  Empire,  and  especially  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  five  ports  which  have  been 
opened  to  Europeans.  Large  fine  vessels,  armed 
like  ships  of  war,  serve  as  depots  to  the  English 
merchants,  and  the  trade  is  protected,  not  only  by 
the  English  Government,  but  also  by  the  manda- 
rins of  the  Chinese  Empire.  The  law  which  for- 
bids the  smoking  of  opium  under  pain  of  death, 
lias,  indeed,  never  been  repealed;  but  everybody 
smokes  away  quite  at  his  ease  notwithstanding. 
Pipes,  lamps,  and  all  the  apparatus  are  sold  publicly 
in  every  town,  and  the  mandarins  themselves 
are  the  first  to  violate  the  law,  and  give  this  bad 
example  to  the  people,  even  in  the  courts  of  justice. 
During  the  whole  of  the  Abbe’s  long  journey 
through  Cliina,  he  met  with  but  one  tribunal 


REVELS  AND  REVERIES. 


161 


where  opium  was  not  smoked  openly  and  with 
impunity. 

The  Chinese  prepare  and  smoke  their  opium 
lying  down,  sometimes  on  one  side,  sometimes  on 
the  other,  saying  that  this  is  the  most  favourable 
position ; and  the  smokers  of  distinction  do  not 
give  themselves  all  the  trouble  of  the  operation,  but 
have  their  pipes  prepared  for  them. 

. For  several  years  past  some  of  the  southern  pro- 
vinces have  been  actively  engaged  in  the  cultivation 
of  the  poppy,  and  the  fabrication  of  opium.  The 
English  merchants  confess  that  the  Chinese  product 
is  of  excellent  quality,  though  inferior  to  that  of 
Bengal ; but  the  English  opium  suffers  so  much 
adulteration  before  it  reaches  the  pipe  of  the  smoker, 
that  it  is  not  in  reality  so  good  as  what  the  Chinese 
themselves  prepare.  The  latter,  however,  though 
deliveied  perfectly  pure,  is  sold  at  a low  price,  and 
2?^"  consumed  by  smokers  of  the  lowest  class. 

I hat  of  the  English,  notwithstanding  its  adultera- 
tion, thus  writes  Abbe  Hue,  is  very  dear  and 
reserved  to  smokers  of  distinction;  a caprice 
winch  can  only  be  accounted  for  from  the  vanity 
ot  the  rich  Chinese,  who  would  think  it  beneath 
them  to  smoke  opium  of  native  production,  and 
not  of  a ruinous  price ; that  which  comes  from 
a long  way  off  must  evidently  be  preferable.  It 
is  very  probable  that  the  Chinese  will  soon  culti- 
vate the  poppy  on  a large  scale,  and  make  at  home 
all  the  opium  necessary  for  their  consumption. 

ns  certain  that  the  English  cannot  offer  an 
qually  good  article  at  the  same  price  ; and,  should 
the  fashion  alter,  British  India  will  suffer  a great 
everse  in  her  Chinese  opium  trade.  The  Abbe 
makes  reference  to  the  increased  consumption  of  . 
opium  m England,  both,  in  the  liquid  and  solid 
form,  the  progress  of  which  he  characterised  „ 
alarming,  and  then  concludes  the  subject  with  the 


M 


162 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


following  extraordinary  paragraph: — “ Curious  and 
instructive  would  it  be,  indeed,  if  we  should  one 
day  see  the  English  going  to  buy  opium  in  the 
ports  of  China,  and  their  ships  bringing  back  from 
the  Celestial  Empire  this  deleterious  stuff,  to  poison 
England.  Well  might  we  exclaim  in  such  a case, 
c Leave  judgment  to  God.’  ” 


CHAPTER  XII. 


PANDEMONIUM. 


“ Sights  of  woe, 

Kegions  of  sorrow,  doleful  shades,  where  peace 
And  rest  can  never  dwell,  hope  never  conics, 

That  conies  to  all.” — Milton. 

The  night  side  of  opium-eating  and  smoking 
must  be  seen,  as  well  as  the  bright  and  sunny  day, 
before  we  lavish  upon  it  encomiums,  such  as  some 
of  its  votaries  have  indulged  in.  There  may  be  a 
paradise  to  which  the  Theriaki  can  rise,  but  there 
is  also  an  abyss  into  which  he  may  fall.  Lord 
Macartney  informs  us  that  the  Javanese,  under  an 
extraordinary  dose  of  opium,  become  frantic  as 
well  as  desperate.  They  acquire  an  artificial 
courage  ; and  when  suffering  from  misfortune  and 
disappointment,  not  only  stab  the  objects  of  their 
hate,  but  sally  forth  to  attack  in  like  manner  every 
person  they  meet,  till  self-preservation  renders  it 
necessary  to  destroy  them.  As  they  run  they 
shout  Amok,  amok , which  means  kill,  kill!  and 
hence  the  phrase  running  a muck.  The  practice 
ot  running  amok  is  hardly  known  at  Pinang  or 
any  of  the  three  Straits  settlements.  Captain  Low 
cud.  not  recollect  more  than  two  instances  at  that 
place,  including  Province  Wellesley,  within  a period 

m 2 


1G4  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

■9 

of  seventeen  years,  and 'the  last  he  had  heard  of, 
which  took  place  on  shore  at  Singapore,  was  many 
years  ago-  A man  ran  amok — or,  as  the  Malays 
term  it,  meng  amok.  He  had  gambled  deeply,  it 
was  said,  and  had  killed  one  or  more  individuals  of 
his  family.  He  next  dosed  himself  with  opium 
and  rushed  through  the  streets  with  a drawn 
kris  or  dagger  in  his  hand,  and  pursued  by  the 
police.  Major  F arquhar,  the  then  resident,  hearing 
the  uproar,  went  out  of  liis  house,  where  the  infu- 
riated man,  who  was  just  about  to  pass  it,  dashed 
at  him,  and  wounded  him  in  the  shoulder ; but  a 
sepoy,  who  was  standing  as  sentry  at  the  door, 
received  the  desperado  on  his  bayonet  at  the  same 
instant,  and  prevented  a second  blow. 

Captain  Beeckman  was  told  of  a Javanese  who 
ran  a muck  in  the  streets  of  Batavia,  and  had  killed 
several  people,  when  he  was  met  by  a soldier,  who 
ran  him  through  with  his  pike.  But  such  was  the 
desperation  of  the  infuriated  man,  that  he  pressed 
himself  forward  on  the  pike,  until  he  got  near 
enough  to  stab  his  adversary  with  a dagger,  when 
both  expired  together. 

But  the  worst  Pandemonium  which  those  who 
indulge  in  opium  suffer,  is  that  of  the  mind.  Opium 
retains  at  all  times  its  power  of  exciting  the 
imagination,  provided  sufficient  doses  are  taken ; 
but  when  it  has  been  continued  so  long  as  to  bring 
disease  upon  the  constitution,  the  pleasurable 
feelings  wear  away,  and  are  succeeded  by  others  of 
a very  different  kind.  Instead  of  disposing  the 
mind  to  be  happy,  it  acts  upon  it  like  the  spell  of 
a demon,  and  calls  up  phantoms  of  horror  and 
disgust.  The  fancy,  still  as  powerful,  changes  its 
direction.  Formerly  it  clothed  all  objects  with  the 
light  of  heaven — now.it  invests  them  with  the 
attributes  of  hell.  Goblins,  spectres,  and  every 
kind  of  distempered  vision  haunt  the  mind,  peopling 


PANDEMONIUM. 


165 


it  with  dreary  and  revolting  imagery.  The  sleep 
is  no  longer  cheered  with  its  former  sights  of  hap- 
piness. Frightful  dreams  usurp  their  place,  till 
at  last  the  person  becomes  the  victim  of  an  almost 
perpetual  misery. 

The  truth  of  all  this  is  acknowledged  by  De 
Qumcey,  when  writing  of  the  pains  of  opium. 
Almost  every  circumstance  becomes  transformed 
into  the  source  of  terror.  Visions  of  the  past  are 
still  present  m dreams,  but  not  surrounded  by  a 
halo  of  pleasure  any  longer.  The  outcast  Ann  and 
the  wandermg  Malay  come  back  to  torment  him 
with  their  continued  presence.  All  this  is  told  in 
auguage  so  graphic,  that  it  would  be  almost 
criminal  to  attempt  its  description  in  any  other. 
Ihe  Dream  of  Piranesi  is  cited  as  a type  of  those 
he  n°w  suffered : “ Many  years  a go,  as  I was 

lookmg  over  Piranesis  ‘ Antiquities  of  Pome,’ 
eridge,  then  standing  by,  described  to  me  a set 
of  plates  from  that  artist,  called  his  ‘ Dreams,’  and 
which  record  the  scenery  of  his  own  visions  during 

vha  tde^r  f u fcver*  1Some  of  these  represented 
niSlUv  thl°-  m 'S;  T the  floor  of  wllicl1  stood 

catar  nh,eTlneS  ^ 1.nacll^ery— wheels,  cables, 
catapuhs,  &c  — expressive  of  enormous  power  put 

S’  n°pr  Resistance  overcome.  Creeping  along  the 
unon  tbif6  ^ ? -U  perceived  a staircase ; and 

himself  5 #nUPingnhlS  Tay  Upwards>  wa«  Piranesi 
jumseff.  follow  the  stairs  a little  farther  and 

without^a'nt^T  rfaC}ing  an  abrapt  termination, 
any  balustrade,  and  allowing  no  sten 

“ ? hr  V\shaald  ^ch  the°extomtf 
bSVn^°  tlie  dePths  teW.  Whatever  is  to 
twT®  f P°or  l iranesi ! At  least,  you  suppose 
But  rn-8  aboiUS  mus^  now  *u  some  way  terminate, 
stairs  !n/urv eyeS’  and  behold  a second  flight  of 

fc  bl  °\wldch  again  P™i  Per- 

, by  this  time  standing  on  the  very  brink  of 


MG’  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

the  abyss.  Once  again  elevate  your  eye,  and  a 
still  more  aerial  flight  of  stairs  is  descried ; and 
there  again,  is  the  delirious  Piranesi,  busy  on  his 
aspiring  labours ; and  so  on,  until  the  unfinished 
stairs  and  the  hopeless  Piranesi  both  are  lost  in 
the  upper  gloom  of  the  hall.  With  the  same 
power  of  endless  growth  and  self-reproduction  did 
my  architecture  proceed  in  dreams.  In  the  early 
stage  of  the  malady,  the  splendours  of  my  dreams 
were,  indeed,  chiefly  architectural,  and  I beheld 
such  pomp  of  cities  and  palaces  as.  never  yet  was 
beheld  by  the  waking  eye,  unless  in  the  clouds. 
From  a great  modern  poet,  I cite  the  part  of  a 
passagevwhich  describes  as  an  appearance  actually 
beheld  in  the  clouds,  what,  in  many  of  its  circum- 
stances, I saw  frequently  in  sleep 

“ ‘ The  appearance,  instantaneously  disclosed, 

Was  of  a mighty  city— boldly  say 
A wilderness  of  building,  sinking  far 
And  self-withdrawn  into  a wondrous  depth, 

Far  sinking  into  splendour  without  end  ! 

Fabric  it  seem’d  of  diamond  and  of  gold, 

With  alabaster  domes  and  silver  spires, 

And  blazing  terrace  upon  terrace,  high 
Uplifted  ; here,  serene  pavilions  bright, 

In  avenues  disposed  ; there,  towers  begirt 
With  battlements,  that  on  their  restless  fronts 
Bore  stars— illumination  of  all  gems  ! 

By  earthly  nature  had  the  effect  been  wrought 
Upon  the  dark  materials  of  the  storm 
Now  pacified  ; on  them,  and  on  the  coves 
And  mountain-steeps  and  summits,  whereuuto 
The  vapours  had  receded— taking  there 
Their  station  under  a cerulean  sky.’  ” 


Further  confessions  describe  the  characteristics 
of  some  of  these  opiatic  visions  in  connection  with 
tropical  lands.  “Under  the  connecting  feeling 
of  tropical  heat  and  vertical  sunlights,  1 brought 
all  creatures— birds,  beasts,  reptiles ; an 


together 


PANDEMONIUM. 


167 


trees  and  plants,  usages  and  appearances,  that  are 
found  in  all  tropical  regions,  and  assembled  them 
together  in  China  or  Hindostan.  From  kindred 
feelings,  I brought  Egypt  and  her  gods  under  the 
same  law.  I was  stared  at,  hooted  at,  grinned  at, 
chattered  at  by  monkeys,  by  paroquets,  by  cocka- 
toos. I ran  into  pagodas,  and  was  fixed  for  centuries 
at  the  summit,  or  in  secret  rooms.  I was  the  idol — 
I was  the  priest — I was  worshipped — I was  sacri- 
ficed. I fled  from  the  wrath  of  Brama  through 
all  the  forests  of  Asia — Vishnu  hated  me — Seeva 
lay  in  wait  for  me.  I came  suddenly  upon  Isis 
and  Osiris.  I had  done  a deed,  they  said,  which 
the  ibis  and  the  crocodile  trembled  at.  Thousands 
of  years  I lived,  and  was  buried  in  stone  coffins, 
with  mummies  and  sphinxes,  in  narrow  chambers, 
at  the  heart  of  eternal  pyramids.  I was  kissed 
with  cancerous  kisses  by  crocodiles,  and  was  laid, 
confounded  with  all  unutterable  abortions,  amongst 
reeds  and  Nilotic  mud.” 

Again  he  says:  “The  cursed  crocodile  became 
to  me  the  object  of  more  horror  than  all  the  rest. 
I was  compelled  to  live  with  him,  and  (as  was 
always  the  case  in  my  dreams,)  for  centuries. 
Sometimes  I escaped,  and  found  myself  in  Chinese 
houses.  _ All  the  feet  of  the  tables,  sofas,  &c.,  soon 
became  instinct  with  life ; the  abominable  head  of 
the  crocodile,  and  his  leering  eyes,  looked  out  at 
me,  multiplied  into  ten  thousand  repetitions ; and 
I stood  loathing  and  fascinated.  So  often  did  this 
hideous  reptile  haUnt  my  dreams,  that  many  times 
the  very  same  dream  was  broken  up  in  the  very  same 
way.  I heard  gentle  voices  speaking  to  me  (I 
hear  everything  when  I am  sleeping),  and  instantly 
I awoke ; it  was  broad  noon,  and  my  children  were 
standing,  hand  in  hand,  at  my  bedside,  come  to 
show  me  their  coloured  shoes,  or  new  frocks,  or 
let  me  see  them  dressed  for  going  out.  ’ No 


168  , THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 

experience  was  so  awful  to  me,  and  at  the 
same  time  so  pathetic,  as  this  abrupt  translation 
from  the  darkness  of  the  infinite  to  the  gaudy- 
summer  air  of  highest  noon,  and  from  the  un- 
utterable abortions  of  miscreated  gigantic  vermin, 
to  the  sight  of  infancy  and  innocent  human 
creatures.”  • 

And  yet  again : “ Somewhere,  but  I knew  not 
where — somehow,  but  I knew  not  how — by  some 
beings,  but  I knew  not  by  whom — a battle,  a strife, 
an  agony  was  travelling  through  all  its  stages — 
was  evolving  itself  like  the  catastrophe  of  some 
mighty  drama,  with  which  my  sympathy  was  the 
more  insupportable,  from  deepening  confusion  as 
to  its  local  scene,  its  cause,  its  nature,  and  its  un- 
decipherable issue.  I had  the  power,  and  yet  had 
not  the  power  to  decide  it. ' I had  the  power,  if  I 
could  raise  myself  to  will  it ; and  yet  again  had 
not  the  power,  for  the  weight  of  twenty  Atlantics 
was  upon  me,  or  the  oppression  of  inexpiable  guilt. 
c Deeper  than  ever  plummet  sounded/  I lay  inactive. 
Then,  like  a chorus,  the  passion  deepened.  Some 
greater  interest  was  at  stake— some  mightier  cause 
than  ever  yet  the  sword  had  pleaded,  or  trumpet 
had  proclaimed.  Then  came  sudden  alarms, 
hurryings  to  and  fro,  trepidations  of  innumerable 
fugitives,  I knew  not  whether  from  the  good  cause 
or"  the  bad ; darkness  and  lights ; tempest  and 
human  faces ; and  at  last,  with  the  sense  that  all 
was  lost,  female  forms,  and  the  features  that  were 
worth  all  the  world  to  me;  and  but  a moment 
allowed,  and  clasped  hands,  with  heart-breakings,  * 
partings,  and  then— everlasting  farewells  ! And  • 
with  a sigh  such  as  the  caves  of  hell  sighed  when 
the  incestuous  mother  uttered  the  abhorred  name 
of  Death,  the  sound  was  reverberated— everlasting 
farewells  ! And  again  and  yet  again,  reverberated 
— everlasting  farewells ! 


PANDEMONIUM. 


169 


“ And  I awoke  in  struggles  and  cried  aloud,  ‘ I 
will  sleep  no  more  ! ’ ” 

These  visions,  and  those  of  a like  character,  in 
which  the  Malay  and  the  outcast  girl  appear  and 
re-appear,  are  almost  repeated  again  in  a work  of 
more  recent  years,  the  production  of  another  mind 
and  of  a widely  different  character.  Whoever  lias 
read  Kingsley’s  “ Alton  Locke,”  cannot  fail  to  have 
been  struck  with  the  vivid  opium-like  dreams 
which  pass  through  the  brain  of  the  hero  when 
struck  down  by  fever.  One  could  almost  imagine 
that  its  author  had  himself  suffered  some  of  the 
fearful  experiences  which  De  Quincey  narrates. 
In  these  the  place  once  occupied  by  the  two  persons 
above  named,  are  usurped  by  the  cousin  and 
Lillian ; change  the  names,  and  apart  from  the 
intimate  connection  of  the  two  with  each  other,  one 
could  almost  believe  himself  reading  a continuation 
of  those  dreams  which  an  unfortunate  accident 
prevented  the  English  opium-eater  giving  to  the 
world. 

“ I was  wandering  along  the  lower  ridge  of  the 
Himalaya.  On  my  right  the  line  of  snow  peaks 
showed  like  a rosy  saw  against  the  clear  blue 
morning  sky.  Raspberries  and  cyclamens  were 
peeping  through  the  snow  around  me.  As  I looked 
down  the  abysses  I could  see  far  below,  through  the 
thin  veils  of  blue  mist  that  wandered  in  the  glens 
the  silver  spires  of  giant  deodars,  and  huge  rhodo- 
dendrons, glowing  like  trees  of  flame.  The  longing 
of  my  life  to  behold  that  cradle  of  mankind  was 
satisfied.  My  eyes  revelled  in  vastness,  as  they 
swept  over  the  broad  flat  jungle  at  the  mountain 
toot,  a desolate  sheet  of  dark  gigantic  grasses 
furrowed  with  the  paths  of  the  buffalo  and  rhino- 
ceros, with  barren  sandy  water  courses,  desolate 
pools,  and  here  and  there  a single  tree,  stunted  with 
malaria,  shattered  by  mountain  floods;  and  far 


170 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


beyond  the  vast  plains  of  Hindostan,  enlaced  with 
myriad  silver  rivers  and  canals,  tanks  and  rice 
fields,  cities  with  their  mosques  and  minarets, 
gleaming  among  the  stately  palm-groves  along 
the  boundless  horizon.  Above  me  was  a Hindoo 
temple,  cut  out  of  the  yellow  sandstone.  I climbed 
up  to  the  higher  tier  of  pillars  among  monstrous 
shapes  of  gods  and  fiends,  that  mouthed  and 
writhed  and  mocked  at  me,  struggling  to  free 
themselves  from  their  bed  of  rock.  The  bull 
Nundi  rose  and  tried  to  gore  me  ; hundred-handed 
gods  brandished  quoits  and  sabres  around  my 
bead  ; and  Kali  dropped  the  skull  from  her  gore- 
dripping jaws  to  clutch  me  for  her  prey.  Then  my 
mother  came,  and  seizing  the  pillars  of  the  portico, 
bent  them  like  reeds ; an  earthquake  shook  the 
bills — great  sheets  of  woodland  slid  roaring  and 
crashing  into  the  valleys.  A tornado  swept  through 
the  temple  balls,  which  rocked  and  tossed  like  a 
vessel  in  a storm  : a crash — a cloud  of  yellow  dust 
which  filled  the  air — choked  me — blinded  me — 
burned  me — 

• * * * * * * *'  ^ * I 

“ And  Eleanor  came  by  and  took  my  soul  in  the 
palm  of  her  hand,  as  the  angel  did  Faust’s,  and 
carried  it  to  a cavern  by  the  sea-side  and  dropped 
it  in ; and  I fell  and  fell  for  ages.  And  all  the 
velvet  mosses,  rock  flowers,  and  sparkling  spare 
and  ores,  fell  with  me,  round  me,  in  showers  of 
diamonds,  whirlwinds  of  emerald  and  ruby,  and 
pattered  into  the  sea  that  moaned  below  and 
were  quenched  ; and  the  light  lessened  above  me 
to  one  small  spark,  and  vanished ; and  I was  in 
darkness,  and  turned  again  to  my  dust. 

• ••••** 

“ Sand — sand — nothing  but  sand  ! The  air  was 
full  of  sand,  drifting,  over  granite  temples,  and 
painted  kings  and  triumphs,  and  the  skulls  of  a 


PANDEMONIUM. 


171 


former  world,  and  I was  an  ostrich,  flying  madly 
before  the  simoon  wind,  and  the  giant  sand  pillars, 
which  stalked  across  the  plain  hunting  me  down. 
And  Lillian  was  an  Amazon  queen,  beautiful,  and 
cold,  and  cruel ; and  she  rode  upon  a charmed 
horse,  and  carried  behind  her  on  her  saddle,  a 
spotted  ounce,  which  was  my  cousin  ; and,  when  I 
came  near  her,  she  made  him  leap  down  and  course 
me.  And  we  ran  for  miles  and  for  days  through 
the  interminable  sand,  till  he  sprang  on  me,  and 
dragged  me  down.  And  as  I lay  quivering  and 
dying,  she  reined  in  her  horse  above  me,  and  looked 
down  at  me  with  beautiful  pitiless  eyes ; and  a 
wild  Arab  tore  the  plumes  from  my  wings,  and  she 
took  them  and  wreathed  them  in  her  golden  hair. 
The  broad  and  blood-red  sun  sank  down  beneath 
the  sand,  and  the  horse  and  the  Amazon  and  the 
ostrich  plumes  shone  blood-red  in  his  lurid  rays. 

• *•••••«• 

“ I was  a baby  ape  in  Borneon  forests,  perched 
among  fragrant  trailers  and  fantistic  orchis  flowers ; 
and  as  I looked  down,  beneath  the  green  roof,  into 
the  clear  waters,  paved  with  unknown  water-lilies 
on  which  the  sun  had  never  shone,  I saw  my  face 
reflected  in  the  pool — a melancholy,  thoughtful 
countenance,  with  large  projecting  brows — it  might 
have  been  a negro  child’s.  And  I felt  stirring  in 
me,  germs  of  a new  and  higher  consciousness — 
yearnings  of  love  towards  the  mother  ape,  who 
fed  me,  and  carried  me  from  tree  to  tree.  But  I 
grew  and  grew  ; and  then  the  weight  of  my  des- 
tiny fell  upon  me.  I saw  year  by  year  my  brow 
recede,  my  neck  enlarge,  my  jaw  protrude,  my 
teeth  became  tusks — skinny  wattles  grew  from 
my  cheeks — the  animal  faculties  in  me  were 
swallowing  up  the  intellectual.  I watched  in 
myself,  with  stupid  self-disgust,  the  fearful  degrada- 
tion which  goes  on  from  youth  to  age  in  all  the 


172  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 

monkey  race,  especially  in  those  which  approach 
nearest  to  the  human  form.  Long  melancholy 
mopings,  fruitless  stragglings  to  think,  were 
periodically  succeeded  by  wild  frenzies,  agonies  of 
lust,  and  aimless  ferocity.  I flew  upon  my 
brother  apes,  and  was  driven  off  with  wounds.  I 
rushed  howling  down  into  the  village  gardens, 
destroying  everything  I met.  I caught  the  birds 
and  insects,  and  tore  them  to  pieces  with  savage 
glee.  One  day,  as  I sat  among  the  houghs,  I saw 
Lillian  coming  along  a flowery  path — decked  as 
Eve  might  have  been  the  day  she  turned  from 
Paradise.  The  skins  of  gorgeous  birds  were  round 
her  waist ; her  hair  was  wreathed  with  fragrant 
tropic  flowers.  On  her  bosom  lay  a baby — it  was 
my  cousin’s.  I knew  her,  and  hated  her.  The 
madness  came  upon  me.  I longed  to  leap  from 
the  bough  and  tear  her  limb  from  limb  ; hut  brutal 
terror,  the  dxead  of  man  which  is  the  doom  of 
beasts,  kept  me  rooted  to  my  place.  Then  my 
cousin  came,  a hunter  missionary;  and  I heard  him 
talk  to  her  with  pride  of  the  new  world  of  civilisa- 
tion and  Christianity,  which  he  was  organising 
in  that  tropic  wilderness.  I listened  with  a dim 
jealous  understanding — not  of  the  words,  hut  of 
the  facts.  I saw  them  instinctively,  as  in  a dream. 
She  pointed  up  to  me  in  terror  and  disgust,  as  I 
sat  gnashing  and  gibbering  overhead.  He  threw  up 
the  muzzle  of  his  rifle  carelessly  and  fired — I fell 
dead,  but  conscious  still.  I knew  that  my  carcase 
was  carried  to  the  settlement;  and  I watched  while  a 
smirking,  chuckling,  surgeon  dissected  me,  bone  by 
bone,  and  nerve  by  nerve.  And  as  he  wa£  fingering 
at  my  heart,  and  discoursing  sneeringly  about  Van 
Helmont’s  dreams  of  the  Archmus,  and  the  animal 
spirit  which  dwells  within  the  solar  plexus,  Eleanor 
glided  by  again  like  an  angel,  and  drew  my  soul 
out  of  the  knot  of  nerves,  with  one  velvet  finger  tip.” 


PANDEMONIUM. 


173 


Here  are  dreams  which,  however  natural  in  their 
realisation  to  the  opiophagi,  are  enough  to  cause  a 
hearty  utterance  of  those  lines  by  Keats  : — 


“ 0 dreams  of  day  and  night ! 

0 monstrous  forms ! 0 effigies  of  pain  ! 

0 spectres  busy  in  a cold,  cold  gloom  ! 

0 lank-eared  Phantoms  of  black  weeded  pools !” 


The  “dream  fugue  ” of  the  author  of  the  “ con- 
fessions ” is  a day  dream — a splendid  one — but  the 
type  of  many  another  dream,  perhaps,  that  had 
coursed  through  the  mind  of  its  writer  while  under 
the  influence  of  the  subtle  drug.  One  might  al- 
most venture  the  assertion  that  none  but  the 
“ opium-eater  ” could  have  conceived  and  written 
that  “fugue.”  But  “shadows  avaunt,”  we  have 
stern  realities  yet  from  the  Pandemonium  of  opium. 
The  mind  suffers  and  it  re-acts  upon  the  body! 
Although  pictures  of  both  the  mental  and  bodily 
afflictions  of  indulgers  in  opium  are  likely  to  be 
gazed  upon  with  somewhat  of  scepticism,  and  justly 
too,  in  these  times  of  prejudice  and  outcry  against 
opium  trading,  yet  the  stubborn  fact  stares  the 
scepticism  out  of  countenance,  in  many  of  the  details 
of  the  excesses  of  the  victims  of  the  insinuating 
P°PPy  joico-  Some  of  these  facts  come  to  us  with 
so  high  an  authority  and  are  so  often  repeated 
that  the  eye  and  ear  refuse  to  close  and  be  blind  and 

deaf  to  the  pains  which  succeed  the  pleasures  of 
opium. 

A young  eagle  said  to  a thoughtful  and  verv 
studious  owl  “ It  is  said  there  is  a bird  called 
Merops  which,  when  it  rises  into  the  air,  flies  with 
he  tail  first  and  the  head  looking  down  to  the 
earth.  Is  it  a fact  ?” 


‘•'By  no  means ” (said  the  owl),  “it  is  onlv  a 
si  y fiction  of  mankind.  Man  himself  is  the 
Merops,  for  he  would  willingly  soar  to  heaven, 


174 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


without  losing  sight  of  the  world  for  a single 
instant.” 

Dr.  Medhurst  thus  describes  the  opium-smoker 
of  China: — “ The  outward  appearances  are  sallovv- 
ness  of  the  complexion,  bloodless  cheeks  and  lips, 
sunken  eye,  with  a dark  circle  round  the  eyelids, 
and  altogether  a haggard  countenance.  There  is  a 
peculiar  appearance  of  the  face  of  a smoker  not 
noticed  in  any  other  condition  ; the  skin  assumes  a 
pale  waxy  appearance,  as  if  all  the  fat  were  re- 
moved from  beneath  the  skin.  The  hollows  of  the 
countenance,  the  eyelids,  fissure  and  corners  of  the 
lips,  depression  at  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  temples, 
&c.,  take  on  a peculiar  dark  appearance,  not  like 
that  resulting  from  various  chronic  diseases,  but  as 
if  some  dark  matter  were  deposited  beneath  the 
skin.  There  is  also  a fulness  and  protrusion  of  the 
lips,  arising  perhaps  from  the  continued  use  of  the 
large  mouth-piece  peculiar  to  the  opium-pipe.  In 
fine,  a confirmed  opium-smoker  presents  a most 
melancholy  appearance,  haggard,  dejected,  with 
a lack-lustre  eye,  and  a slovenly,  weakly,  and  feeble 
gait.” 

Mustapha  Shatoor,  an  opium-eater  of  Smyrna, 
took  daily  three  drachms  of  crude  opium.  The 
visible  effects  at  the  time  were  the  sparkling  eyes 
and  great  exhilaration  of  spirits.  He  found  the 
desire  of  increasing  his  dose  growing  upon  him.  He 
seemed  twenty  years  older  than  he  really  was — his 
complexion  was  very  sallow — his  legs  small — his 
gums  eaten  away,  and  his  teeth  laid  bare  to  the 
sockets.  He  could  not  rise  without  first  swallow- 
ing half  a drachm  of  opium.  This  case  is 
detailed  in  the  “ Philosophical  Transactions,”  and 
for  its  veracity  the  Philosophers  are  responsible. 

Pouqueville  says,  “Always  beside  th.mselves, 
the  Theriakis  are  incapable  of  work,  they  seem  no 
more  to  belong  to  society.  Toward  the  end  of 


PANDEMONIUM. 


175 


their  career,  they,  however,  experience  violent 
pains,  and  are  devoured  by  constant  hunger,  nor 
can  their  paregoric  in  any  way  relieve  their  suffer- 
ings ; they  become  hideous  to  behold,  deprived  of 
their  teeth,  their  eyes  sunk  in  their  heads,  in  a con- 
stant tremour,  they  cease  to  live  long  before  they 
cease  to  exist. 

Heu  Naetse,  a native  Celestial,  in  his  address  to 
the  Sacred  Emperor,  the  brother  of  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  informs  his  imperial  majesty,  that  ££  when 
any  one  is  long  habituated  to  inhaling  opium,  it 
.becomes  necessary  to  resort  to  it  at  regular  intervals, 
and  the  habit  of  using  it,  being  inveterate,  is  destruc- 
tion of  time,  injurious  to  property,  and  yet  dear  to 
one  even  as  life.  Of  those  who  use  it  to  great 
excess,  the  breath  becomes  feeble,  the  body  wasted, 
the  face  sallow,  and  the  teeth  black.  The  indivi- 
duals themselves  clearly  see  the  evil  effects  of  it, 
yet  cannot  refrain  from  it.  It  will  be  found  on 
examination  that  the  smokers  of  opium  are  idle, 
lazy  vagrants,  having  no  useful  purpose  before 
them  ” 

Hr.  Ball  states,  “that  throughout  the  districts  of 
China  may  be  seen  walking  skeletons — families 
wretched  and  beggared  by  drugged  fathers  and 
husbands — multitudes  who  have  lost  house  and 
home  dying  in  the  streets,  in  the  fields,  on  the 
banks  of  the  river,  without  even  a stranger  to  care 
for  them  while  alive,  and  when  dead  left  exposed 
to  view  till  they  become  offensive  masses.’’ 

A Pinang  surgeon  says,  “that  the  hospitals  and 
poorhouses  are  chiefly  filled  with  opium-smokers. 
In  one  that  I had  charge  of,  the  inmates  averaged 
sixty  daily,  five-sixths  of  whom  were  smokers  of 
chanclu.  . The  effects  of  this  habit  on  the  human 
constitution  are  conspicuously  displayed  by  stupor, 
forgetfulness,,  general  deterioration  of  all  the 
mental  faculties,  emaciation,  debility,  sallow  com- 


176  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

plexion,  lividness  of  lips  and  eyelids,  langour  and 
lack  lustre  of  eye ; appetite  either  destroyed  or 
depraved.  In  the  morning  these  creatures  have  a 
most  wretched  appearance,  evincing  no  symptoms 
of  being  refreshed  or  invigorated  by  sleep,  how- 
ever profound.  There  is  a remarkable  dryness  or 
burning  in  the  throat,  which  urges  them  to  repeat 
the  opium-smoking.  If  the  dose  be  not  taken  at 
the  usual  time,  there  is  great  prostration,  vertigo, 
torpor,  and  discharge  of  water  from  the  eyes.  If 
the  privation  be  complete,  a still  more  formidable 
train  of  phenomena  takes  place — coldness  is  felt* 
all  over  the  body,  with  aching  pains  in  all  parts, 
the  most  horrid  feelings  of  wretchedness  comes  on, 
and  if  the  poison  be  withheld,  death  terminates 
the  victim’s  sufferings.  The  opium-smoker  may 
be  known  by  his  inflamed  eyes  and  haggard  coun- 
tenance, by  his  lank  and  shrivelled  limbs,  tottering 
gait,  sallow  visage,  feeble  voice,  and  the  death 
boding  glance  of  his  eye.  He  seems  the  most 
forlorn  creature  that  treads  the  earth.” 

The  Abbe  Hue  writes,  “nothing  can  stop  a 
smoker  who  has  made  much  progress  in  this  habit, 
incapable  of  attending  to  any  kind  of  business, 
insensible  to  every  want,  the  most  hideous  poverty; 
and  the  sight  of  a family  plunged  into  despair  and 
misery,  cannot  rouse  him  to  the  smallest  exertion, 
so  complete  is  the  disgusting  apathy  to  which  he 
is  sunk.” 

The  evidence  of  Ho  King  Shan  is,  that  “it 
impedes  the  regular  performance  of  business ; 
those  in  places  cf  trust  who  smoke  fail  to  attend 
personally  even  to  their  most  important  offices. 
Merchants  who  smoke  fail  to  keep  their  appoint- 
ments, and  all  their  concerns  tall  behind  hand. 
For  the  wasting  of  time  and  the  destruction  of 
business,  the  pipe  is  unrivalled.” 

Oppenheim  declares  “that  when  the  baneful  habit 


PANDEMONIUM. 


177 


lias  become  confirmed,  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
break  it  off.  His  torments,  when  deprived  of  the 
stimulant,  are  as  dreadful  as  bis  bliss  is  complete 
when  be  has  taken  it.  Night  brings  the  torments 
of  hell,  day  the  bliss  of  paradise ; and  after  long 
indulgence,  he  becomes  subject  to  nervous  pains, 
to  which  opium  itself  brings  no  relief.  He  seldom 
attains  the  age  of  forty,  if  he  has  begun  the 
practice  early/' 

Also  Dr.  Madden : — “ The  debility,  both  moral 
and  physical,  attendant  on  the  excitement  produced 
by  opium  is  terrible ; the  appetite  is  soon  destroyed, 
every  fibre  in  the  body  trembles,  the  nerves  of  the 
neck  become  affected,  and  the  muscles  get  rigid. 
Several  of  these  I have  seen  in  this  place  at 
various  times,  who  had  wry  necks  and  contracted 
fingers,  but  still  they  cannot  abandon  the  custom  ; 
they  are  miserable  until  the  hour  arrives  fox- 
taking  their  daily  dose ; and  when  its  delightful 
influence  begins,  they  are  all  fire  and  animation/’ 

A native  literati  of  Hong-Kong  affirms,  “ that 
from  the  robust  who  smoke,  flesh  is  gradually  con- 
sumed and  worn  away,  and  their  skin  hangs  down 
like  bags ; the  faces  of  the  weak  who  smoke  are 
cadaverous  and  black,  and  their  bones  naked  as 
billets  of  wood.” 

Also  Dr.  Oxley  of  Singapore “ The  inordinate 
use  of  the  drug  most  decidedly  does  bring  on 
Gaily  decrepitude,  destructive  of  certain  powers 
connected  with  the  increase  of  the  species,  and  a 
morbid  state  of  all  the  secretions.  But  I have 
seen  a man  who  had  used  the  drug  for  fifty  years  in 
moderation  without  evil  effects,  and  one  I recollect 
in  Malacca  who  had  so  used  it  was  upwards  of 
eighty.  Several  in  the  habit  of  smoking  assured 
me,  that  in  moderation,  it  neither  impaired  the 
functions  nor  shortened  life,  at  the  same  time  they 
fully  admitted  the  deleterious  effects  of  too  much.” 


178 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Dr.  Little  visited  on  one  occasion  an  opium  shop, 
and  found  there  two  women  smoking  the  drug 
— one  had  been  a smoker  for  ten  years.  <c  In  the 
morning  when  she  awakes  she  Says,  ‘ I feel  as 
one  dead.  I cannot  do  anything  until  the  pipe 
is  consumed.  My  eyelids  are  glazed  so  that  they 
cannot  be  opened,  my  nose  discharges  profusely.  I 
feel  a tightness  in  the  chest,  with  sense  of  suffoca- 
tion. My  bones  are  sore,  my  head  aches  and  is 
giddy,  and  I loathe  the  very  sight  of  food/  Within 
an  hour  I could  produce  a thousand  of  those  crea- 
tures ; and  if  I stood  at  the  door  of  an  opium  shop, 
and  watched  those  that  entered,  out  of  the  hundred 
would  be  found  at  least  seventy-five  or  eighty 
whose  appearance  would  not  require  the  confession 
that  their  health  was  destroyed,  and  their  mind 
weakened,  since  the  day  that  they  were  cursed 
with  the  first  taste  of  an  opium-pipe.  To  finish 
this  subject  let  me  record  my  opinion,  the  result 
of  extensive  investigation.  That  the  habitual  use 
of  opium  not  only  renders  the  life  of  the  man 
miserable,  but  is  a powerful  means  of  shortening 
that  life.” 

To  the  last  conclusion  there  are  many  objectors ; 
and  this  subject  has  been  canvassed  as  much  as  any 
in  connection  with  the  habit.  Some  years  ago  a 
trial  took  place  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the 
Earl  of  Mar,  who  was  an  opiophagi,  and  the  insu- 
rance society  on  this  ground  objected  to  pay  the 
money  to  his  representatives.  Dr.  Christison,  after 
detailing  the  facts,  adds,  “they  would  certainly 
tend  on  the  whole  rather  to  show  that  the  practice  of 
eating  opium  is  not  so  injurious,  and  an  opium- 
eater’s  life  not  so  uninsurable,  as  is  commonly 
thought.”  The  result  of  the  above-named  trial 
was  that  the  money  had  to  be  paid.. 

Before  passing  from  this  Plutonian  region,  the 
evidence  of  a good  authority  may  be  taken  to  show 


PANDEMONIUM. 


179 


how  apt  prejudice  is  to  impute  even  worse  effects 
to  the  “subtle  drug”  than  circumstances  will 
warrant.  An  opium  den  is  visited ; the  members 
of  this  convivial  society  are  good-humoured  and 
communicative.  “ One  was  a chair-cooly,  a second 
was  a petty  tradesman,  a third  was  a runner  in  a 
mandarin’s  yanum ; they  were  all  of  that  class  of 
urban  population  which  is  just  above  the  lowest. 
They  were,  however,  neither  emaciated  nor  infirm. 
The  chair-cooly  was  a sturdy  fellow,  well  capable 
of  taking  his  share  in  the  porterage  of  a sixteen- 
stone  mandarin ; the  runner  seemed  well  able  to 
run,  and  the  tradesman,  who  said  he  was  thirty- 
eight  years  old,  was  remembered  by  all  of  us  to 
be  a singularly  young-looking  man  of  his  age.  He 
had  smoked  opium  for  seven  years.  As  we  passed 
from  the  opium-dens,  we  went  into  a Chinese  tea- 
garden— a dirty  paved  court,  with  some  small  trees 
and  flowers  in  flower-pots — and  a very  emaciated 
and  yawning  proprietor  presented  himself.  ‘ The 
man  has  destroyed  himself  by  opium-smoking,’ 
&nd  an  English  clergyman  who  accompanied  us. 
The  man  being  questioned,  declared  that  he  had 
never  smoked  an  opium-pipe  in  his  life,— a bad 
shot,  at  which  no  one  was  more  amused  than  the 
reverend  gentleman  who  had  fired  it. 

,“I  on]y  take  the  experiment  for  what  it  is  worth. 
There  must  be  very  many  most  lamentable  speci- 
mens.of  the  effects  of  indulgence  in  this  vicious 
practice,  although  we  did  not  happen  to  see  any  of 
them  that  morning.  They  are  not,  however,  so 
universal,  nor  even  so  common,  as  travellers  who 
wide  in  support  of  some  thesis,  or  who  are  not 
above  truckling  to  popular  prejudices  in  England 
^e  pleased  to  say  they  are.  But  if  our  visit  was 
a failure  in  one  respect,  it  was  fully  instructive  in 
another.  In  the  first  house  we  visited,  no  man 
spent  on  an  average  less  than  80  cash  a-day  on  his 

N 2 


180 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


opium-pipe.  One  man  said  he  spent  120.  The 
chair-cooly  spends  80,  and  his  average  earnings 
are  100  cash  a-day.  English  physicians,  uncon- 
nected with  the  missionary  societies,  have  assured 
me  that  the  cooly  opium-smoker  dies,  not  from 
opium,  hut  from  starvation.  If  he  starves  himself 
for  his  pipe,  we  need  not  ask  what  happens  to  his 
family."  (Times.) 

■ 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


Fal.  No  abuse,  Hal. 

Poins.  No  abuse ! 

Fo.1.  No  abuse,  Ned,  in  the  world  ; honest  Ned,  none.  I dispraised 
him  before  the  wicked,  that  the  wicked  might  not  fall  in  love  with  him  ; 
in  which  doing,  I have  done  the  part  of  a careful  friend,  and  a true  sub- 
ject. No  abuse,  Hal ; none,  Ned,  none no,  boys,  none.— Amo  Henry 
PP.,  part  II. 


Scarce  a flower  that  graces  the  earth,  or  a tree 
waving  in  the  forests,  has  had  its  character  assailed 
so  mercilessly  as  the  poppy.  Hot  one  of  the  simples 
or  compounds  of  the  chemist’s  store,  even  including 
arsenic  and  strychnine,  has  been  so  strictly  interro- 
gated as  to  the  honourable  and  dishonourable  of 
hs  intentions.  It  is  matter  of  surprise  that  the 
East  India  Company  has  not  been  obliged,  by 
authority  of  Act  of  Parliament,  to  imprint  the 
decalogue,  at  least  in  the  Chinese  language,  upon 
every  cake  or  ball  of  opium  leaving  their  stores, 
lake  upon  credit  all  that  some  men  would  tell 
yon,  and  there  would  not  be  room  for  doubt,  were 
the  next  informant  to  state  that  on  the  arrival  of 
a cargo  of  opium,  at  such  a port,  on  such  a day, 


182  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

the  entire  population  cut  each  other’s  throats,  on 
account  of  the  pestilential  miasma  diffused  by  the 
said  cargo.  What  are  really  the  moral  effects  of 
opium-smoldng,  can  best  he  collected  from  a state- 
ment of  facts,  the  reader  drawing  his  own  infer- 
ences : they  are,  at  any  rate,  bad  enough  without 
the  aid  of  exaggeration. 

At  Singapore  stands  a house  of  correction,  in 
which,  during  the  month  of  July,  1847,  might  he 
found  forty-four  Chinese  criminals ; and  of  these, 
thirty-five  were  opium-smokers — not  moderate 
smokers,  hut  indulgers  to  excess — not  confining 
themselves  to  what  they  could  obtain  with  such 
money  as  they  could  spare  from  their  wages,  hut 
in  some  instances,  swallowing  or  smoking  them  all 
up,  and  in  certain  instances,  even  more  than  their 
wages.*  The  aggregate  amount  of  the  monthly 
wages  of  seventeen  of  these  men  was  £16  Os.  10d., 
or  individually  18s.  10|d.  The  monthly  consump- 
tion of  opium  of  these  men  amounted  in  value  to 
£20  16s.  3d,,  or  individually  to  £1  4s.  5|d.,  so 
that  each  of  these  men,  in  addition  to  spending  all 
his  wages,  begged,  borrowed,  or  stole  5s.  7cL 
monthly,  to  make  up  his  quantity  of  opium  alone, 
without  reference  to  any  other  necessaries.  One 
of  these  men,  who  spent  £1  5s.  monthly,  and 
whose  wages  only  reached  half  of  that  amount, 
was  asked  to  explain  how  it  was  to  be  accounted 
for.  WTas  there  not  some  error  in  the  calculation, 
or  was  he  deceiving  the  person  to  whom  the  cir- 
cumstances were  being  detailed  ? How  was  it 
possible  that,  with  an  income  of  only  12s.  6d..  he 
could  spend  £1  5s.?  The  answer  was  a graphic 
one  and  much  to  the  point : — “ What  am  I in  here 
for  ?”  Of  course,  the  tenants  of  a jail  can  account 
for  such  discrepancies  in  arithmetic.  The  offences 


* See  Table  XY.  in  the  Appendix. 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


183 


for  which  these  persons  were  confined  were  such 
as  would  stand  in  a calendar  under  the  rank  of 
vagrants,  suspicious  characters,  persons  attempting 
to  steal,  and  such  like — the  crimes  committed  being 
against  property  and  not  persons.  This  distinction 
deserves  notice,  as  it  will  serve  as  the  bases  of 
some  future  suggestions. 

In  looking  down  the  column  of  the  table  in 
which  the  above  instances  occur,  it  will  be  seen 
that  one  planter,  whose  income  was  twelve  shillings 
and  sixpence,  expended  in  opium  six  times  that 
amount ; and  another,  whose  income  is  not  stated, 
but  which  would  not  far  exceed  the  former,  ex- 
pended twelve  times  that  amount  in  the  drug. 
Occasional  instances  occur  in  which,  where  the 
income,  reached  twelve  shillings  and  sixpence,  the 
expenditure  amounted  only  to  a trifle  beyond  ; and 
where  the  income  was  sixteen  shillings  and  eight- 
pence,  the  expenditure  was  only  eight  shillings  and 
fourpence  or  ten  shillings. 

The  inspector  of  the  above  institution  states: 
“During  the  course  of  these  investigations,  I found 
some  opium-smokers,  who  declared  that  their 
wages  only  equalled  the  value  of  the  opium  con- 
sumed, and  in  the  majority  of  cases  but  little 
exceeded  their  consumption;  yea,  I found  instances 
and  these  not.  few,  where  the  value  of  the  opium 
consumed  monthly,  was  more  than  the  whole  wages 
received.  The  idea  then  suggested  itself  to  me 
that  there  must  be  an  affinity  betwixt  opium- 
smoking, and  crime;  for  when  once  the  habit  is 
formed,  it  cannot  be  broken  off,  while  the  desire 
increases  with  the  consumption.  It  must  happen 
that  the  wages  of  the  individual  will  at  last  be 
inadequate  to  supply  his  desire,  even  supposing 
that,  after  a lengthened  career  of  indulgence  he 
was  able  to  earn  the  same  amount  of  money  as 
when,  strong,  vigorous,  and  unimpaired,  he  com- 


184 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


menced  his  dissipation.  I,  therefore,  was  not  at 
all  surprised  when  I went  to  the  house  of  correction, 
to  find  that  three-fourths  of  the  prisoners  were 
opium-smokers.” 

An  examination  of  the  prisoners  in  jail  in  July 
of  the  same  year,  under  different  sentences,  showed 
that  out  of  fifty-one  Chinese  prisoners,  fifteen  only 
were  not  opium-smokers.  Seventy  per  cent,  were 
addicted  to  the  vice,  each  consuming  quantities 
ranging  from  twelve  to  one  hundred  and  eighty 
grains  per  day.  The  same  jail  was  again  visited, 
and  the  prisoners  examined  a month  after- 
wards, several  fresh  criminals  had  entered, 
others  had  been  enlarged.  At  this  time,  there 
were  sixty-nine  criminals,  and  of  these  only 
thirty-one  were  opium-smokers,  being  only  forty- 
five  per  cent,  against  the  seventy  per  cent,  of  the 
former  visit. 

A quantity  of  criminals  from  Pinang  under 
sentence  of  transportation  showed,  on  examination, 
the  following  results : — Out  of  twenty-one  crimi- 
nals, Chinese  and  Malays,  eight  did  not  smoke. 
The  crimes  of  these  men  were  murder,  stabbing 
with  intent  to  murder,  burglary,  and  larceny.  Ten 
of  these  men  were  Chinese,  all  of  whom  smoked 
but  one.  Of  these  nine,  eight  were  condemned  for 
offences  against  property,  one  only  against  the 
person.  Of  the  nine  persons  out  of  the  twenty-one 
who  were  convicted  for  offences  against  the  person, 
four  did  not  smoke,  three  smoked  but  little.  _ Hence 
the  conclusion  is  inevitable,  that  the  criminals  of 
the  worst  degree,  or  those  committing  offences 
against  the  person,  are  either  not  Smokers  at  all, 
or  are  so  only  to  a moderate  extent.  Other 
statistics  show  that,  for  crimes  of  this  character, 
highway  robbery,  and  burglary,  forty  to  fifty  per 
cent,  only  indulge  in  opium ; whilst  for  vagrancy, 
misdemeanour,  and  petty  larceny,  seventy  to  eighty 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


185 


per  cent,  indulged  in  the  use  of  the  drug,  and  often 
to  a very  extraordinary  extent. 

Why  do  we  find  that  those  charged  with  the 
gravest  offences  are  the  least  addicted  to  opium  ? 
May  it  not  be  that  this  class  of  criminal  requires 
a certain  ingenuity,  an  amount  of  method  and 
calculation,  and  mental  vigour  and  excitement  of 
the  passions,  greater  than  the  debased  opium- 
smoker  is  possessed  of,  the  want  of  which,  there- 
fore, unfits  him  for  carrying  out  any  such  enterprise 
requiring  such  adjuncts,  leaving  him  only  capable 
of  being  a criminal  on  a small  scale.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  Chinese  are  inveterate  gamblers ; 
but  it  is  not  in  connexion  with  the  pipe,  but  with 
the  arrack-cup,  that  this  vice  is  indulged  in.  The 
influences  of  opium  are  sedative  and  soothing, 
those  of  arrack  stimulating  and  exciting ; the  latter, 
therefore,  as  may  be  supposed,  is  the  companion  of 
the  gambler,  rather  than  the  former.  There  are 
other  phases  in  which  the  two  vices  of  opium- 
smoking and  intoxication  may  he  compared.  The 
abuse  of  ardent  spirits  leads  to  crimes  against 
the  person ; the  abuse  of  opium  leads  to  crimes 
against  property.  The  victim  of  ardent  spirits 
commits  his  crimes  while  under  their  influence  ; 
the  devotee  to  opium,  while  under  its  influence,  is 
at  peace  with  all  mankind,  and  dreams  only  of  his 
own  happiness.  The  drunkard,  when  not  under 
the  influence  of  liquor,  may  he  a moral  member  of 
society,  and  often  a contrite  one;  the  opium-smoker 
at  that  time  is  often  scheming  the  violation  of  moral 
and  social  laws,  which,  when  effected,  makes  him  a 
criminal,  hut  enables  him  to  gratify  his  appetite.'* 

* Dr.  Ilobson  states,  in  an  official  communication  to  the 
Government,  “ I do  not  know  of  any  mortal  disease  from  opium 
corresponding  to  delirium  tremens  from  alcohol.  I have  never 
been  called  to  attend  to  any  accidents  resulting  from  opium 
similar  to  those  occurring  so  frequently  from  habits  of  in  toxica- 


186  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

De  Quincey  compares  the  two  habits,  not  so 
much  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  tendency  of 
either  of  them  to  crime,  hut  for  the  proving  that 
opium  does  not  produce  intoxication  any  more  than 
would  a rump  steak.  “ The  pleasure  given  by  wine 
is  always  rapidly  mounting,  and  tending  to  a crisis, 
after  which  as  rapidly  it  declines ; that  from  opium, 
when  once  generated,  is  stationary  for  eight  or  ten 
hours.  The  first — to  borrow  a technical  distinc- 
tion from  medicine — is  a case  of  acute,  the  second 
of  chronic  pleasure ; the  one  is  a flickering  flame, 
the  other  a steady  and  equable  glow.  But  the 
main  distinction  lies  in  this,  that  whereas  wine 
disorders  the  mental  faculties,  opium,  on  the  con- 
trary (if  taken  in  a proper  manner)  introduces 
amongst  them  the  most  exquisite  order,  legislation, 
and  harmony.  Wine  robs  a man  of  self-possession ; 
opium  sustains  and  reinforces  it.  Wine  unsettles 
the  judgment,  and  gives  a preternatural  brightness 
and  a vivid  exaltation  to  the  contempts  and  the 
admirations,  to  the  loves  and  the  hatreds  of  the 
drinker ; opium,  on  the  contrary,  communicates 
serenity  and  equipoise  to  all  the  faculties,  active  or 
passive,  and  with  respect  to  the  temper  and  moral 
-feelings  in  general,  it  gives  simply  that  sort  of  vital 
warmth  which  is  approved  by  the  judgment,  and 
which  would  probably  always  accompany  a bodily 
constitution  of  primeval  or  antediluvian  health. 
Wine  constantly  leads  a man  to  the  brink  of 
absurdity  and  extravagance,  and  beyond  a certain 

tion  from  liquor.  The  opium-smoker,  when  under  the  full 
influence  of  his  delicious  drug,  brawls  and  swaggers  not  in  the 
public  streets,  like  a drunkard,  to  the  annoyance  of  bystanders, 
but  reposes  quietly  on  his  couch,  without  molesting  those 
around  him.” 

Also  Dr.  Traill,  of  Singapore,  from  his  own  experience,  has 
not  found  opium-smoking  in  any  way  so  powerful  a promoter  of 
disease  as  the  habitual  use  of  intoxicating  liquors. 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


187 


point,  it  is  sure  to  volatize  and  disperse  the  intel- 
lectual energies;  whereas  opium  always  seems  to 
compose  what  had  been  agitated,  and  to  concentrate 
what  had  been  distracted.  In  short,  to  sum  up  all 
in  one  word,  a man  who  is  inebriated,  or  tending 
to  inebriation  is,  and  feels  that  he  is  in  a con- 
dition which  calls  up  into  supremacy  the  merely 
human,  too  often  the  brutal  part  ot  his  nature ; 
hut  the  opium-eater,  simply  as  such,  assuming  that 
he  is  in  a normal  state  of  health,  feels  that  the 
divine  part  of  his  nature  is  paramount,  that  is, 
the  moral  affections  are  in  a state  of  cloudless 
serenity,  and  high  over  all,  the  great  light  of  the 
majestic  intellect/’ 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  abuse  of 
opium  should  be  a fertile  source  of  poverty,  when 
so  much  of  the  wages  of  many  of  its  votaries  are 
devoted  to  it.  This  diseased  habit  is  progressive, 
and  the  quantity  taken  must  be  daily  increased  to 
produce  the  necessary  effects ; but  the  capability 
of  furnishing  the  means  does  not  keep  pace  with 
the  desire  of  consumption.  The  cooly,  who,  when 
strong  and  vigorous,  could  earn  twenty-five  shil- 
lings per  month,  has  only  to  commence  opium- 
smoking, and  in  two  years  he  will  not  receive  more 
than  two-thirds  of  that  amount,  whilst  he  still 
smokes  his  quantity  of  opium;  and  as  years  roll 
on,  he  finds  that,  mainly  on  account  of  the  vice  he 
has  adopted,  he  can  no  longer  endure  the  toil 
that  formerly  was  to  him  only  as  child’s  play, 
the  amount  of  excitement  having  still  to  be 
kept  up  under  a decreased  income,  he  has  to 
lessen  his  expenditure  for  clothes,  and  then  for 
food,  and  lastly,  the  quantity  of  opium  itself; 
until  worn  out,  exhausted,  and  diseased,  he 
finds  himself  the  inmate  of  a jail  or  a poor- 
house.  A sad  reflection,  truly,  but  a history 
repeated  over  and  over  again,  with  but  little 


188 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


variation,  in  the  lives  of  thousands  of  Chinamen 
and  Malays. 

Were  poverty  to  be  succoured  in  places  where 
this  description  of  persons  most  do  congregate,  as 
it  is  at  home,  thousands  would  become  public 
burdens ; but  there  the  hand  of  charity  has  been 
closed,  and  the  springs  of  compassion  for  the  poor 
dried  up.  In  Singapore,  it  was  not  until  the  horrid 
spectacle  of  miserable  Chinese  daily  crawling  in  front 
of  their  doors,  exposing  their  loathsome  sores  and 
leprous  bodies,  and  polluting  the  air  they  breathed  ; 
it  was  not  until  these  wretched  beings,  without  food 
or  friends,  and  deprived  of  the  power  of  sup- 
porting themselves,  laid  them  down  to  die  in  the 
streets,  of  disease  and  starvation,  that  by  the  active 
philanthropy  of  two  or  three  individuals  a shed  was 
erected  to  keep  these  paupers  out  of  sight.  When 
the  novelty  passed  away,  the  philanthropy  declined, 
and  the  monthly  contribution  dwindled  down  to 
about  three  pounds,  which  was  the  sum  total  of 
the  public  charity  of  the  European  residents  in 
behalf  of  the  diseased  poor  of  Singapore.  In  this 
shed  were  to  be  found  two  classes  of  persons,  united 
in  the  same  individuals,  the  diseased  poor.  These 
are  the  only  kind  of  poor  that  excite  any  sympathy 
in  such  places,  and  an  examination  of  the  inmates 
of  the  shed  will  give  some  insight  into  the  pro- 
pensities of  this  class.  Out  of  125  under  relief  at 
the  time,  70  were  opium-smokers  and  55  were  not 
(or  would  not  acknowledge  it).  Of  these  70,  some 
before  their  admission,  were  reduced  to  the  alterna- 
tive of  Tye  or  Sams /tiny,  or  no  opium  at  all.  The 
total  consumption  of  these  paupers  before  their 
admission  amounted  to  upwards  of  four  pounds 
(2022  grains)  daily,  giving  an  average  daily  con- 
sumption to  each  smoker  of  upwards  of  28  grains, 
being  nearly  the  average  consumption  of  the 
opium  smoker  in  general,  under  more  favourable 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


189 


circumstances.  The  greatest  consumption  of  any 
one  of  these  individuals  had  amounted  to  120 
grains,  hut  at  that  rate  his  finances  soon  failed 
him,  and  he  had  to  be  content  with  one  fourth  of 
that  amount  shortly  before  he  became  an  invalid. 
Sixty-two  of  these  men  consumed  opium  to  the 
monthly  value  of  £38  7s.  6d.,  while  their  aggre- 
gate income  amounted  in  the  same  period  to  but 
£50  11s.  3d.  ; or,  individually,  the  value  of  each 
man’s  monthly  consumption  of  opium  was  12s.  d., 

and  his  income  was  but  16s.  6d.,  leaving  only  about 
4s.  monthly,  or  Is.  per  week  to  feed,  clothe,  and 
house  himself,  and  in  fact,  for  every  other  purpose 
for  which  money  is  required.  Some  of  these  did 
not  confine  themselves  to  this.  Fifteen  of  them 
(as  will  be  seen  from  Table  XVI.)  consuming  all, 
or  more  than  their  income  in  opium.  Surely  such 
men  were  worthy  not  only  of  a pauper  hospital, 
but  also  of  a jail. 

These  paupers  at  one  time  all  received  even  more 
than  the  average  amount  of  wages,  sufficient  to 
have  clothed  and  fed  them  and  their  families,  and 
kept  them  comfortable,  whilst  at  that  time  they 
were  dependent  on  a charity  which  allowed  them 
to  exist  on  the  rice  which  was  supplied  to  them, 
and  five  doits  a day  or  about  a shilling  per  month. 
Thousands  more,  not  incapacitated  so  much  by 
disease  as  to  be  unable  to  work  and  not  therefore 
inmates  of  the  hospital,  were  no  better  off,  for  what 
they  had  they  spent  in  chandu. 

The  Dutch  Commissioners  report  that,  “the 
use  of  opium  is  so  much  more  dangerous,  because 
a person  who  is  once  addicted  to  it  can  never 
leave  it  off.  To  satisfy  that  inclination  he  will 
sacrifice  everything,  his  own  welfare — the  sub- 
sistence of  his  wife  and  children,  and  neglect 
his  work.  . Poverty  is  the  natural  consequence, 
and  then  it  becomes  indifferent  to  him  by  what 


190 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


means  he  may  content  his  insatiable  desire  after 
opium  ; so  that  at  last  he  no  longer  respects  either 
the  property  or  life  of  his  fellow  creature.” 

A Chinaman,  who  himself  is  a smoker  and 
consumes  opium  to  the  monthly  value  of  £2,  says, 
that  in  one  hundred  Chinese  about  Hong-Ivong 
and  Singapore,  seventy  of  them  smoke,  and  that  all 
the  coolies  do  so  more  or  less.  If  a cooly  earns 
£1  monthly,  4s.  goes  for  food,  lOd.  for  house 
rent,  a small  outlay  for  a jacket  and  trowsers  once 
in  six  months,  and  all  the  rest  goes  in  opium. 
From  his  own  experience,  and  what  he  has  seen 
of  others,  he  would  say  if  a man  had  been 
accustomed  to  smoke  opium  for  seven  or  eight 
years,  and  gives  it  up  for  a day  he  is  attacked 
with  diarrhoea,  while  during  the  time  he  is  smoking 
the  opposite  is  the  case.  And  he  who  usds  six 
grains  a day  will  soon  require  twelve. 

To  give  up  opium-smoking,  after  it  has  once  been 
commenced,  all  declare  to  be  a very  difficult  achieve- 
ment. A Malay  who  was  apprehended  on  some 
criminal  charge  some  years  ago,  when  locked  up, 
previous  to  examination  was,  as  a matter  of  course, 
deprived  of  opium  for  some  days,  he  pined  away  so 
rapidly  that,  although  only  four  or  five  days  in 
the  lock-up  house,  he  could  not  leave  it  when  re- 
leased, but  was  carried  out,  having  entered  the  place 
as  strong  and  muscular  a man  as  can  be  met  with. 

Dr.  Oxley  states,  “ that  the  lower  class  of  Chinese 
when  deprived  of  their  allowance,  are  very  liable  to 
become  dropsical.  The  effect  of  deprivation  at 
first  appears  to  produce  desperation,  a heart-rend- 
ing despondency,  something  like  the  low  state  of 
delirium  tremens,  hut  differing  in  many  respects 
from  that  malady.  Death  certainly  does  occur 
from  deprivation,  and  generally  by  dropsy.” 

A great  many  women  smoke,  generally  the 
wives  of  opium-smokers.  A woman  was  dis- 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


191 


covered  by  a surgeon  in  Singapore  in  an  opium 
shop  up  stairs  smoking  away,  as  she  had  done  for 
three  years,  at  the  rate  of  thirty-six  grains  a day. 
She  stated  that  she  had  two  children,  but  that  they 
were  very  sickly  and  always  crying.  And  how 
did  she  stifle  their  cries  ? She  conveyed  from  her 
lips  to  those  of  the  child  the  fresh  drawn  opium 
vapour,  which  the  babe  inspired.  This  was  repeated 
twice,  when  it  fell  back  a senseless  mass  into  its 
mother’s  arms,  and  allowed  her  quietly  to  finish  her 
unholy  repast.  This  practice  she  had  often  recourse 
to,  as  her  child  was  very  troublesome,  adding  that  it 
was  no  uncommon  thing  for  mothers  to  do  so. 

Another  inveterate  opium-smoker  makes  his 
“confession,”  that  after  his  quantity  is  consumed, 
he  feels  no  desire  for  sleep  until  twelve  or  two  in 
the  morning,  when  he  falls  into  disturbed  slum- 
bers, which  last  till  eight  or  nine.  When  he 
awakes,  his  head  is  giddy,  confused,  and  painful — 
his  mouth  is  dry,  he  has  great  thirst,  he  has  no 
appetite,  can  neither  read  nor  write,  suffers  pains 
in  all  his  bones  and  muscles,  gasps  for  breath  ; he 
wishes  to  bathe,  but  cannot  stand  the  shock.  This 
state  continues  till  he  gets  his  morning  pipe,  when 
he  can  eat  and  drink  a little,  and  after  that  attend 
to  his  business.  The  force  of  example  taught  him 
this  habit,  and  he  knows  no  class  of  people  exempt 
from  it  except  Europeans.  “Look,”  says  he, 
appealing  to  himself,  u I was,  ere  I gave  way  to 
this  accursed  vice,  stout,  strong,  and  able  for  any- 
thing. 1 loved  my  wife  and  children,  attended  to 
my  business,  and  was  happy  ; but  now  I am  thin, 
meagre,  and  wretched.  I can  receive  enjoyment 
from  nothing  but  the  pipe,  my  passions  are  gone, 
and  if  I am  railed  at,  and  abused  like  a dog,  I 
return  not  an  angry  word.” 

Although  opium-smoking  is  carried  to  such  an 
excess  among  some  of  the  Chinese  coolies,  yet  there 


192  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEI*. 

is  no.  gambling  amongst  them  at  the  opium  shops 
at  Singapore.  It  is  true  that  this  vice  has  been 
suppressed,  but  it  is  not  secretly  indulged  in  ; and 
a gentleman  who  was  formerly  the  opium  farmer, 
says,  “ that  the  consumption  of  opium  is  but  little 
affected  by  gambling,  from  arrack  or  samshu  being 
the  intoxicating  medium  used,  a much  better 
instrument  for  raising  excitement  and  stimulating 
to  excessive  play  than  opium,  whose  effects  are 
much  more  sedative  than  exciting.” 

The  consideration  of  the  morals,  and  influence 
of  these  customs  leads  us  to  a remarkable  passage 
in  one  of  M.  Quetelet’s  works,  it  refers  to  the  cer- 
tainty of  natural  laws  in  states  as  well  as  indivi- 
duals : — “ All  those  things  which  appear  to  be  left 
to  the  free  will,  the  passions,  or  the  degree  of  in- 
telligence of  men,  are  regulated  by  laws  as  fixed, 
immutable,  and  eternal  as  those  which  govern  the 
phenomena  of  the  natural  world.  No  one  knows 
the  day  or  the  hour  of  his  own  death  ; and  nothing 
appears  more  entirely  accidental  than  the  birth  of 
a boy  or  of  a girl  in  any  given  case.  But  how  many 
out  of  a million  of  men  living  together  in  one 
country,  shall  have  died  in  ten,  twenty,  forty,  or 
sixty  years,  how  many  boys  and  girls  shall  be  bom 
in  a million  of  births  ; all  this  is  as  certain,  nay, 
much  more  certain,  than  any  human  truth.” 

The  statistics  of  courts  of  justice  have  disclosed 
to  us  the  regular  repetition  of  the  same  crimes, 
and  have  established  the  fact — incomprehensive  to 
our  understandings,  because  we  do  not  know  the 
connecting  links — that  in  every  large  country,  the 
number  of  offences,  and  of  each  land  of  offence, 
may  be  predicted  for  every  coming  year,  with 
the  same  certainty  as  the  number  of  the  births 
and  of  the  natural  deaths.  Of  every  100  persons 
accused  before  the  supreme  tribunal  in  France,  61 
are  condemned  ; in  England,  71.  The  variations, 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


19S 


on  an  average,  amount  hardly  to  yloth  part  of  the 
whole.  We  can  predict  with  confidence,  for  fifteen 
years  to  come,  the  number  of  suicides  generally — 
that  of  the  cases  of  suicide  by  fire-arms,  and  that 
of  the  cases  of  suicide  by  hanging. 

Every  large  number  of  phenomena  of  the  same 
‘kind,  which  rise  and  fall  periodically,  leads  to  a 
fixed  proportion.  This  is  the  law  of  large  num- 
bers to  which  all  things  and  all  events  without  ex- 
ception, are  subject.  These  laws  have  nothing  to 
do  with  the  essence  of  vice  and  virtue  in  the  moral 
world,  but  with  the  external  causes,  and  the  effects 
they  produce  in  human  society.  No  one  denies  the 
influence  of  education,  and  of  habits  of  labour  and 
order  on  the  conduct  of  men,  but  no  one  thinks 
of  regarding  this  moral  conduct  as  a mere  result 
of  those  habits.  Good  education  and  improved 
cultivation  diminish  the  number  of  offences,  as 
well  as  that  of  the  annual  deaths  in  our  tables  of 
mortality. 

The  results,  therefore,  of  a collection  of  statis- 
tical information  carefully  arranged  for  Singapore, 
one  of  the  most  inveterate  of  opium  localities, 
should,  on  comparison  with  the  results  obtained 
from  other  quarters,  show  that  the  per  centage  of 
deaths  is  greater,  the  per  centage  of  births  less ; 
the  per  centage  of  criminals  higher,  and  of  suicides 
larger,  in  this  population  of  opium-smokers,  than 
in. any  other  equally  conditioned  country  in  which 
opium  is  indulged,  or  it  is  not  proven  that  the 
habit  tends  to  shorten  life,  decrease  production, 
increase  crime,  and  induce  suicide,  all  of  wliic 
charges  have  been  made  against  it. 

With  this  evidence  we  are  not  at  present  satis- 
factorily supplied.  That  opinion  has  an  influence, 
though  probably  only  a minor  one,  on  moral  and 
social,  development,  is  not  to  be  denied.  Because 
man  is  so  entirely  a creature  of  relation,  that 

o 


194 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


nothing  is  unimportant  to  him.  “If  the  move- 
ments of  the  remotest  star  that  glitters  in  the 
heavens  affect  those  of  our  earth,  assist  in  deter- 
mining its  position  in  space,  its  climate,  its  pro- 
ductions, and  thus  influence  the  lot  of  man,  who 
is  the  creature  of  these  circumstances  ; what 
combinations  subsisting  upon  the  surface  of  the* 
earth,  or  developing  themselves  in  the  bosom  of 
society,  can  he  deemed  wholly  indifferent  to  his 
conduct,  and  without  power  over  his  well  being 
and  happiness  ? ” . • 

If,  as  Dr.  Lyon  Playfair  recently  noticed,  it  is 
worthy  of  observation,  that  the  character  of  the 
nations  through  which  Dr-.  Livingstone  passed  in  his 
recenttravels.dependeduponthe  habitsof  the  people, 
in  the  acquisition  of  their  food,  as  well  as  upon  the 
food  itself,  we  may  expect  to  find  opium  exerting 
also  its  influence.  If,  for  instance,  the  Kaffirs  who 
lived  by  hunting,  and  were  flesh-eaters,  were  wild 
and  warlike  ; and  the  Wampoos,  who  lived  princi- 
pally on  grain,  wrere  of  a more  quiet  and  peaceable 
disposition.  Then  again,  the  Bechuanos,  who 
lived  upon  grain,  were  more  civilized  than  the 
Kaffirs,  and  the  Macololas,  who  combined  as 
their  food  both  grain  and  flesh,  did  not  lose  the 
warlike  character,  and  made  incursions  upon  their 
more  feeble  neighbours.  It  was  an  axiom  amongst 
the  latter  people,  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  gullet 
(alluding  to  their  appetites)  there  wrould  be  no  war 
or  fighting  amongst  mankind.  In  those  parts, 
such  as  Loando,  where  the  people  lived  upon 
starchy  varieties  of  food,  they  had  become  diminu- 
tive in  their  stature ; and  this  applied  not  merely 
to  the  natives,  but  also  to  the  Portuguese  settlers 
there,  for  they  had  lost  the  physical  characters  of 
their ’ancestors,  and  had  become  feminine  in  t heir 
frames  and  habits,  and  this  extended  even  to • their 
handwriting.  Where  more  nitrogenous  food  vas 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


195 


taken,  the  physical  character  of  the  people  had  not 
undergone  that  very  marked  change.  If  food 
exerts  this  influence  upon  the  people  of  a country 
or  district,  we  cannot  doubt  that  any  habit,  such 
as  smoking  tobacco  or  opium,  chewing  betel  or 
coca,  must  exert  some  influence  upon  the  nations 
so  indulging,  whether  that  influence  be  good  or 
bad. 

Who  will  say  that  tobacco  has  no  portion  in  the 
formation  of  the  German  character  ? Yet  the 
subtle  and  profound  Germans  exhibit  no  extraor- 
dinary evidence  in  their  national  character  of  the 
baneful  influences  on  their  moral  and  social  de- 
velopment, by  their  indulgence  in  this  habit. 
Compare  with  them  the  Turks  and  Chinese,  and 
let  the  balance  be  shown  iu  favour  of  the  most 
elevated  in  the  ranks  of  civilization.  Yet  the 
most  deficient  must  claim  the  influence  of  other 
equally  potent  circumstances  in  extenuation,  for 
neither  opium  nor  tobacco  moulds  the  entire 
national  character,  it  is  only  one  of  many  in- 
fluences. Let  the  Papuan  stand  beside  the  China- 
man and  the  Turk,  and  in  spite  of  opium,  the 
Papuan  standard  will  exhibit  a woeful  short-com- 
ing. The  waters  of  the  great  Amazon  river  must 
exert  some  influence  on  the  currents  of  the  Atlantic, 
but  none  will  venture  to  assert  that  therefore  the 
influx  of  such  a body  of  water,  vast  in  itself,  but 
small  in  comparison  to  the  whole,  is  the  cause  of 
the  gulf  stream.  The  drinking  of  tea  will  bear 
just  such  a relation  to  the  currents  in  the  life  of 
nations  who  indulge  in  that  luxury,  but  who  will 
declare  that  the  Chinese  soldiers  fly  from  the 
points  of  the  British  bayonets,  or  are  expert  in  the 
carving  of  ivory  balls,  because  they  indulge  in  a 
beverage  admired  by  other  old  ladies  who  can 
neither  run  nor  carve.  Neither  because  certain 
Javanese  or  Malays,  under  the  influence  of  an  over 

o 2 


19G  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

dose  of  opium,  will  £‘  run  amok  ,”  or  other  Arabs, 
intoxicated  with  “haschish,”  have  made  the  name 
of  assassin  to  become  an  object  of  dread,  is  it  to  be 
concluded  hence  that  all  men  who  indulge  in  the 
use  of  either  of  these  narcotics  will  be  dangerous 
members  of  society,  or  that  they  will  rush  into  the 
jaws  of  death  without  a shudder  at  the  sight  of  his 
fangs. 

Is  it  because  the  Scot  loves  whisky  that  he  is 
generally  so  cautious  and  shrewd  in  his  business 
transactions  as  to  win  himself  a name  ? Is  it  because 
the  Cockney  imbibes  sundry  deep  potations  of 
London  porter  or  gin,  that  the  enterprise  and  com- 
merce of  those  great  citizens  of  the  world  have 
become  the  envy  of  surrounding  nations  ? Or  is  it 
because  the  Russian  persisted  in  his  love  of  raw 
turnip  and  sour  quass,  that  the  Malakoff  and 
Sebastopol  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  frog-eating 
Frenchman,  and  the  beef-eating  Englishman  ? 

May  we  not  impute  to  beef  and  tobacco,  gin  and 
opium,  porter  and  hemp,  results  infinitely  in  ad- 
vance of  their  power  ? 

Dr.  Eatwell  writes,  “ It  has  been  too  much  the 
practice  with  narrators  who  have  treated  on  the 
subject,  to  content  themselves  with  drawing  the 
sad  picture  of  the  confirmed  opium  debauchee, 
plunged  in  the  last  stage  of  moral  and  physical 
exhaustion,  and  having  formed  the  premises  of 
their  argument  of  this  exception,  to  proceed,  at 
once  to  involve  the  whole  practice  in  one  sweeping 
condemnation.  But  this  is  not  the  way  in.  which 
the  subject  can  be  treated ; as  rational  would  it 
be  to  paint  tbe  horrors  of  de'irium  tremens,  and 
upon  that  evidence,  to  condemn  at  once  the  entire 
use  of  alcoholic  liquors.  The  question  for  deter- 
mination is  not  what  are  the  effects  of  opium  used 
to  excess,  but  what  are  its  effects  on  the  moral 
and  physical  constitution  of  the  mass  of  the 


OPIUM  MORALS. 


197 


individuals  who  use  it  habitually,  and  in  modera- 
tion, either  as  a stimulant  to  sustain  the  frame 
under  fatigue,  or  as  restorative  and  sedative  after 
labour,  bodily  or  mental.  Having  passed  three 
years  in  China,  I may  he  allowed  to  state  the 
results  of  my  observation,  and  I can  affirm  thus 
far,  that  the  effects  of  the  abuse  of  the  drug  do 
not  come  very  frequently  under  observation  ; and 
that  when  cases  do  occur,  the  habit  is  frequently 
found  to  have  been  induced  by  the  presence  of 
some  painful  chronic  disease,  to  escape  from  the 
sufferings  of  which  the  patient  has  fled  to  this 
resource.  That  this  is  not  always  the  case, 
however,  I am  perfectly  ready  to  admit,  and 
there  are,  doubtless,  many  who  indulge  in  the 
habit  to  a pernicious  extent,  led  by  the  same 
morbid  impulses  which  induce  men  to  become 
drunkards  in  even  the  most  civilized  countries; 
but  these  cases  do  not,  at  all  events,  come  before 
the  public  eye.  It  requires  no  laborious  search 
in  civilized  England  to  discover  evidences  of  the 
pernicious  effects  of  the  abuse  of  alcoholic  liquors : 
our  open  and  thronged  gin-palaces,  and  our  streets, 
afford  abundant  testimony  on  the  subject ; but  in 
China  this  open  evidence  of  the  evil  effects  of 
opium  is  at  least  wanting.  As  regards  the  effects 
ot  the  habitual  use  of  the  drug  on  the  mass  of 
the  people,  I must  affirm  that  no  injurious  results 
are  visible.  The  people  generally  are  a muscular 
and  well-formed  race,  the  labouring  portion  being 
capable  of  great  and  prolonged  exertion  under  a 
fierce  sun,  in  an  unhealthy  climate.  Their  dispo- 
tion  is  cheerful  and  peaceable,  and  quarrels  and 
brawls  are  rarely  heard  amongst  even  the  lower 
orders,  whilst  in  general  intelligence,  they  rank 
deservedly  high  amongst  orientals. 

“ The  proofs  are  still  wanting  to  show  that  the 
moderate  use  of  opium  produces  more  pernicious 


198 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OE  SLEEP. 


effects  upon  the  constitution,  than  does  the 
moderate  use  of  spirituous  liquors,  whilst  at  the 
same  time,  it  is  certain,  that  the  consequences  of 
the  abuse  of  the  former  are  less  appalling  in  their 
effect  upon  the  victim,  and  less  disastrous  to 
society  at  large,  than  are  the  consequences  of  the 
abuse  of  the  latter.  Compare  the  furious  mad- 
man, the  subject  of  delirium  tremens , with  the 
prostrate  debauchee,  the  victim  of  opium;  the 
violent  drunkard,  with  the  dreaming  sensualist 
intoxicated  with  opium ; the  latter  is  at  least 
harmless  to  all  except  to  his  wretched  self,  whilst 
the  former  is  but  too  frequently  a dangerous 
nuisance,  and  an  open  bad  example  to  the  com- 
munity at  large.  ’ 


CHAPTER  XiV. 


FALSE  PROPHETS. 


“ If  your  wish  be  rest, 
Lettuce  and  cowslip  wine  probatum  est." 

Pope. 


Before  describing  any  of  the  imitations  of  opium, 
or  substitutes  for  it  in  any  form,  it  will  not  be  out 
of  place  to  notice  briefly  the  tinctures  in  popular 
use  in  which  that  drug  forms  a prominent  ingre- 
dient. Laudanum  is  the  spirituous  infusion,  and 
contains  the  active  ingredients  of  a twelfth  part 
of  its  weight  of  opium.  Scotch  paregoric  elixir 
is  a solution  in  ammoniated  spirit,  and  is  only 
one-fifth  of  the  strength  of  laudanum,  containing, 
therefore,  one  part  in  sixty  of  opium.  English 
paregonc  is  a tincture  of  opium  and  camphor,  and 
is  four  times  weaker  still.  The  black  drop,  and 
Battlers  sedative  liquor , are  believed  to  be 
solutions  of  opium  in  vegetable  acids,  and  to 
possess,  the  one  of  them,  four,  and  the  other,  three 
times  the  strength  of  laudanum.  Although  some 
good  authorities  consider  this  an  exaggerated 
computation  of  the  strength  of  the  latter  two,  and 
that  they  are  not  more  than  half  that  strength. 


200  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

There  are  several  other  pharmaceutical  prepara- 
tions into  which  opium  enters  as  a component, 
but  to  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  refer.  Those 
already  named,  as  has  before  been  intimated,  are 
used  not  a little,  to  still  the  sounds  of  those 
miniature  human  organs  so  distasteful  to  bachelor 
ears.  The  practice,  unfortunately  so  prevalent, 
of  soothing  infants  with  preparations  of  opium, 
cannot  be  too  strongly  deprecated.  We  are  ready 
to  express  our  surprise  that  oriental  mothers 
should  transfer  their  cigars  from  their  own  mouths 
to  those  of  their  infants,  that  the  helpless  little 
creatures  may  enjoy  the  luxury  of  a suck,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  we  are  inuring  them  to  the 
use  of  a far  more  insidious  and  deadly  poison. 
Eather  let  us  for  the  future,  when  inclined  to 
charge  this  as  a crime  upon  others,  remember 
that  scene  which  took  place  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago,  and  the  rebuke  with  which  it  closed, 
in  words  written  with  the  finger  upon  the  ground, 
“Let  him  that  is  without  sin  amongst  you  cast 
the  first  stone  at  her.” 

One  of  the  most  important  of  opium  substitutes 
is  derived  from  a plant  in  itself  not  only  harmless, 
but  extensively  used  as  an  article  of  food : it  is 
Lactucarium  or  Lettuce  Opium,  and  is  prepared 
generally  from  the  wild  lettuce,  although  similar 
properties  exist  to  a more  limited  extent  in  the 
cultivated  varieties  which  find  their  way  to  our 
tables. 

There  is  no  certainty  about  the  period  at  which 
lettuce  was  introduced  into  this  country,  although 
the  time  has  been  fixed  at  1520,  when  it  is  stated 
to  have  been  brought  from  Flanders.  In  the  early 
part  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  when  Queen 
Katherine  wished  for  a salad,  she  despatched  a 
messenger  to  Holland  or  Handers ; at  that  period, 
therefore,  very  few  English  tables  could  ever  boast 


FALSE  PROPHETS. 


201 


the  honour  of  a salad.  In  the  privy  purse  expenses 
of  Henry  VIII.,  in  1530,  an  item  occurs  from 
which  we  learn  that  the  gardener  of  York  Place 
received  a reward  for  bringing  “lettuze”  and 
cherries  to  Hampton  Court.  This  was  policy  on 
the  part  of  the  King,  his  royal  consort  having  a 
liking  for  salads,  for  it  was  rather  expensive  as 
well  as  tedious,  to  send  for  them  to  the  gardens  of 
Brabant.*  In  1600,  peas,  beans,  and  lettuce  were 
in  common  use  in  England ; and  in  1652,  a writer 
of  the  time  speaks  of  lettuce  as  a plant  with  which 
the  public  generally  had  been  long  familiar.  One 
variety  of  the  cultivated  lettuce  was  doubtless  de- 
rived from  the  island  of  Cos,  inasmuch  as  it  still 
bears  that  name. 

Lettuces  were  known  to  the  ancients.  Dioscorides 
and  Theophrastus  speak  of  them  as  cultivated  by 
the  Greeks,  and  also  used  in  medicine  ; the  prickly 
lettuce  is  still  found  wild  on  the  higher  hills  of 
Greece,  and  was  probably  one  of  the  species  to  which 
the  above-named  ancient  authors  refer.  Several 
varieties  of  the  garden  lettuce  were  used  in  salads  by 
both  Greeks  and  Eomans.  The  pride  of  the  garden 
of  Aristoxenus  was  his  lettuces,  and  he  irrigated 
them  with  wine. 

Two  species  of  wild  lettuce  are  found  in  Britain, 
the  acrid  and  the  prickly  lettuce,  both  of  which 
possess  similar  properties,  yielding  a juice  from 
which  lactucarium  may  be  prepared.  Two  other 
wild  species  are  only  occasional.  The  lactucarium 

* Dr.  Doran  says  that  a salad  was  so  scarce  an  article  during 
the  early  part  of  the  last  century,  that  George  I.  was  obliged 
also  to  send  to  Holland  to  procure  a lettuce  for  his  queen. 
These  vegetables  must,  therefore,  have  become  unpopular 
before  that  time,  or  the  cultivation  had  been  for  some  cause 
discontinued,  otherwise  we  cannot  reconcile  this  with  the  fact 
that  lettuces  were  common  enough  a century  before  a George 
sate  upon  the  English  throne. 


202 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


of  the  London  Pharmacopoeia  is  prepared  only 
from  the  garden  lettuce,  but  the  acrid  lettuce  is 
stated  to  yield  a much  larger  quantity  and  of  supe- 
rior quality.  A single  plant  of  the  garden  lettuce 
will  yield  only  17  grains  of  lactucarium,  on  an 
average,  while  a plant  of  the  acrid  lettuce  yields 
no  less  than  56  grains,  or  more  than  three  times 
that  quantity  ; and  although  the  milkiness  of  the 
juice  increases  till  the  very  close  of  the  time  of 
flowering,  or  till  the  month  of  October  in  this 
climate,  the  value  of  the  lactucarium  is  deteriorated 
after  the  middle  of  the  period  of  flowering,  for 
subsequently,  while  the  juice  becomes  thicker,  a 
material  decrease  takes  place  in  the  proportion  of 
bitter  extract  contained  in  it. 

Lactucarium  is  a reddish  brown  substance  with 
a narcotic  odour  and  bitter  taste,  having  a consider- 
able resemblance  to  opium.  On  analysis  it  yields 
a snow  white  crystalline  substance  called  lactucin, 
which  is  narcotic  in  its  effects.  Dr.  Duncan 
recommended  the  use  of  lactucarium  as  a substi- 
tute for  opium,  the  anodyne  properties  of  which 
it  possesses,  without  being  followed  with  the 
same  injurious  effects.  In  France,  a water  is 
distilled  from  lettuce,  and  used  as  a mild  sedative. 
Experiments  of  the  effects  of  lettuce-opium  upon 
animals  are  detailed  by  Orfila,  who  states  that 
three  drachms  introduced  into  the  stomach  of  a 
dog  killed  it  in  two  days,  without  causing  any  re- 
markable symptoms ; two  drachms  applied  to  a 
wound  in  the  back  induced  giddiness,  slight 
sopor,  and  death  in  three  days  ; and  thirty-six 
grains  injected,  in  a state  of  solution,  into  the 
jugular  vein  caused  dulness,  weakness,  slight  con- 
vulsions, and  death  in  18  minutes. 

In  North  America  the  prickly  lettuce  is  more 
common  than  with  us,  and  from  it  the  American 
lactucarium  is  extracted.  In  Guinea  a species  oi 


FALSE  PROPHETS. 


203 


lettuce  is  found  wild,  possessing  precisely  similar 
properties,  and  applicable  to  a like  use.  This 
plant  is  largely  used  by  the  negroes  as  a salad  and 
also  as  an  opiate. 

The  plants  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  the  juice 
are  grown  in  a rich  soil,  with  a southern  aspect. 
In  such  a situation  they  thrive  vigorously,  and 
send  up  thick,  juicy,  flower  stems.  As  soon  as 
these  have  attained  a considerable  height,  and 
before  the  flowers  expand,  a portion  of  the  top 
is  cut  off.  The  milky  juice  quickly  exudes  from 
the  wound,  while  the  heat  of  the  sun  renders  it 
so  viscid  that,  instead  of  flowing  down,  it  con- 
cretes on  the  stem  in  a brownish  flake.  After 
it  has  acquired  a proper  consistence  it  is  removed. 
As  the  juice  closes  up  the  vessels  of  the  plant, 
another  slice  is  taken  off  lower  down  the  stem, 
and  the  juice  again  flows  freely  and  another  flake 
is  formed.  The  same  process  is  repeated  as  long  as 
the  plant  affords  any  juice.  To  the  crude  juice,  thus 
obtained,  the  name  of  lactucarium  has  been  given. 

“This,”  says  Johnston,  “is  one  of  those  nar- 
cotics in  which  many  of  us  unconsciously  indulge. 
The  eater  of  green  lettuce  as  a salad,  takes  a por- 
tion of  it  in  the  juice  of  the  leaves  he  swallows ; 
and  many  of  my  readers,  after  this  is  pointed 
out  to  them,  will  discover  that  their  heads  are 
not  unaffected  after  indulging  copiously  in  a 
lettuce  salad.  Eaten  at  night,  the  lettuce  causes 
sleep ; eaten  during  the  day,  it  soothes  and  calms 
and  allays  the  tendency  to  nervous  irritability. 
And  yet  the  lover  of  lettuce  would  take  it  very 
much  amiss  if  he  were  told  that  he  ate  his  green 
leaves,  partly  at  least,  for  the  same  reason  as  the 
Turk  or  the  Chipaman  takes  his  whiff  from  the 
tiny  opium  pipe : that,  in  short,  he  was  little  better 
than  an  opium-eater,  and  his  purveyor  than  the 
opium  smuggler  on  the  coast  of  China” 


204 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


Lest  this  should  occasion  some  alarm  in  the 
breasts  of  those  who  prefer  their  lobsters  with  a 
salad,  let  us  strive  to  administer  a little  consola- 
tion. We  have  seen  that  the  cultivated  or  garden 
lettuce  does  not  contain  so  much  as  one  third  the 
quantity  of  lactucarium  yielded  by  the  wild  species, 
ten  good  lettuces  must  therefore  he  eaten  before 
sufficient  extract  will  have  been  consumed  to  have 
killed  a dog  in  two  days.  This  is  upon  the  pre- 
sumption that  the  lettuces  eaten  as  salad  are  in 
precisely  the  same  condition,  and  capable  of 
affording  the  same  amount  of  the  extract  as  when 
cultivated  specially  for  that  purpose;  but  this  is 
not  the  case,  it  is  not  until  just  before  flowering 
that  the  full  amount  of  juice  is  contained  in  the 
plant,  a per  centage  only  of  which  exists  in  the 
younger  plants  as  gathered  for  the  table.  Nor  is 
that  quantity  of  the  same  narcotic  quality  as  in 
the  more  matured  plant,  which  has  collected,  at 
that  period,  all  its  strength  properly  to  produce,  and 
bring  to  perfection,  its  flowers  and  fruit. 

“ Nothing  hath  got  so  far, 

But  man  hath  caught  and  kept  it  as  his  prey. 

His  eyes  dismount  the  highest  star. 

He  is  in  little  all  the  sphere. 

Herbs  gladly  cure  our  flesh,  because  that  they 
Bind  their  acquaintance  there. 

“More  servants  wait  on  man 
Than  he’ll  take  notice  of : in  every  path 

He  treads  down  that  which  doth  befriend  him, 

When  sickness  makes  him  pale  and  wan. 

Oh,  mighty  love  ! Man  is  one  world,  and  hath 
Another  to  attend  him.” 

The  lacticiferous  or  milk  bearing  plants  are 
nearly  all  of  them  connected  by  very  important 
ties  with  man  and  civilization.  The  phenomena 
themselves  are  welL  worthy  of  study,  and  their 


FALSE  PKOPnETS. 


205 


association  with  humanity  replete  with  interest. 
These  plants  are  by  no  means  restricted  to  one 
genus  or  family,  nor  are  their  properties  of  the 
same  character.  The  one  circumstance  of  their 
secreting  a white  juice  resembling  milk  in  appear- 
ance is  almost  all  they  have  in  common.  In  the 
poppy  it  becomes  opium , in  the  lettuce  lactucarium. 
It  constitutes  refreshing  beverages,  obtained  in 
large  quantities,  in  the  sunny  climes  of  Asia,  from 
the  cow-tree  of  South  America,  the  kiriaghuma 
and  hya-hya  of  British  Guiana,  the  Euphorbia 
balsamifera  of  the  Canary  Islands,  the  juice  of 
wliich  as  a sweet  milk,  or  evaporated  to  a jelly,  is 
taken  as  a great  delicacy,  and  the  Banyan  tree,  all 
of  which,  to  a certain  extent,  supply  the  place  of 
the  cow,  in  places  and  conditions  wherein  cows  are 
not  to  be  found.  Similar  juices  are  collected  in  the 
form  of  India  rubber  or  caoutchouc,  a substance  so 
invaluable  in  the  arts  of  life.  They  exude  from 
figs,  euphorbias,  and  cacti,  in  the  East  Indies, 
South  America,  and  Africa,  from  all  of  which 
places  a large  quantity  of  the  consolidated  juice  is 
exported  to  the  markets  of  Europe  and  North 
America.  The  greater  quantity  of  these  lactescent 
juices  are  elaborated  in  the  Tropics.  Gutta  percha 
and  allied  substances  are  similarly  produced,  and 
indeed,  numerous  plants  are  possessed  of  this  kind 
of  secretion,  which  have  not  yet  been  made  avail- 
able for  economical  purposes,  but  which  may 
become  equally  well  known,  and  useful,  to  succeed- 
lng  generations.  Narcotic  properties  do  not  appear 
to  be  so  common  in  these  juices  as  the  irritant  or 
acrid,  which  abound  in  some  euphorbiaceous  plants, 
and  the  inert,  and  when  coagulated  and  dry, 
elastic  properties  found  in  the  siphonias,  figs,  and 
sapotaceous  plants. 

In  St.  Domingo,  a species  of  Muracuja  is  be- 
lieved to  possess  qualities  very  similar  to  opium, 


206  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

from  which,  and  from  an  allied  plant,  Dr.  Hamilton 
believes,  that  the  concentrated  sap,  collected  at  a 
proper  time,  strained,  evaporated,  and  properly 
prepared,  would  prove  an  excellent  substitute  for 
the  expensive  opium,  at  a cheaper  rate.  The 
species  indigenous  to  Jamaica,  is  known  as  bull- 
hoof  or  Dutchman’s  laudanum.  At  a time  when 
opium  was  scarce,  from  some  accidental  cause,  in 
the  island  of  Jamaica,  a Dutch  surgeon  found  in 
this  plant  a successful  substitute.  The  plant  is 
common  in  Jamaica  and  some  other  of  the  West 
Indian  islands.  It  is  an  elegant  climber,  bearing 
bright  scarlet  blossoms,  somewhat  resembling  a 
passion  flower.  Browne  says,  that  the  flowe  is  are 
principally  employed,  and  when  infused,  or  mixed 
in  a state  of  powder  with  wine  or  spirits,  are  re- 
garded as  a safe  and  effectual  narcotic. 

Dr.  Landerer  states  that  the  Syrian  rue  is  a 
highly  esteemed  plant  in  Greece.  This  plant  ap- 
pears to  have  been  known  to  the  ancients,  and 
mentioned  by  Dioscorides.  Its  properties  are 
narcotic,  resembling  those  of  the  Indian  hemp. 
The  Turks  macerate  the  seeds  in  scherbet  or  boosa, 
administering  the  infusion  internally.  It  also 
serves  in  the  preparation  of  a yellow  dye.  The 
seeds  are  sometimes  used  by  the  Turks  as  a spice, 
and  the  same  people  also  resort  to  them  to  produce 
a species  of  intoxication.  The  Emperor  Solyman, 
it  is  stated  kept  himself  in  a state  of  intoxication 
by  their  use.  The  peculiar  phenomena  of  this 
intoxication  has  not,  that  we  are  aware,  been 
described,  but  we  are  informed  that  the  property  of 
producing  it  exists  in  the  husks  of  the  seeds,  from 
which  a chemical  principle  of  a narcotic  nature 
has  been  obtained. 

There  is  another  plant,  a native  of  Arabia,  and 
of  the  nightshade  family,  so  prolific  in  narcotics,  the 
seeds  of  which  are  used  by  some  of  the  Asiatics  to 


FALSE  PROPHETS. 


207 


produce  those  mental  reveries  and  excitement  so 
much  coveted.  These  seeds,  the  produce  of  a plant 
known  to  botanists  under  the  name  of  Scopolia 
muticci,  are  also  roasted  and  infused  to  form  a sort 
of  drink,  in  which  the  Arabs  and  some  others 
indulge. 

The  seeds  of  a species  of  Sterculia  are  said  to  be 
used  by  the  natives  of  Silhet  as  a substitute  for 
opium.  The  Cola  nuts,  so  highly  esteemed  by  the 
negroes  of  Guinea,  are  the  produce  of  a Sterculia. 
The  natives  attribute  very  extraordinary  properties 
to  these  seeds,  somewhat  analogous  to  those  claimed 
by  the  Peruvians  for  the  leaf  of  the  coca,  stating, 
that  if  chewed,  they  satisfy  hunger,  and  prevent 
the  natural  craving  for  food,  that  for  this  purpose 
they  carry  some  with  them  when  undertaking  a 
long  journey.  They  are  also  affirmed  to  improve 
the  flavour  of  anything  that  may  be  subsequently 
eaten,  if  a portion  of  one  of  them  is  taken  before 
meals.  Formerly  they  were  even  more  esteemed 
than  at  the  present  day.  In  those  times,  fifty  of 
them  were  sufficient  to  purchase  a wife.  These 
seeds  are  flat,  and  of  a brownish  colour  and  bitter 
taste.  Their  tonic  properties  have  been  supposed 
equal  to  those  of  the  famed  Cedron  seeds  of  Guiana, 
and  the  more  famous  Cinchona  bark  of  the  Andes. 
Probably  further  and  more  elaborate  investigation 
will  piove  that  these  wonderful  seeds  possess 
slightly  beneficial  properties  as  a tonic,  it  may  be 
even  inferior  to  those  of  the  roots  of  Gentian,  or 
other  parts  of  some  of  our  indigenous  plants. 

In  the  Straits, _ the  leaves  of  the  “ Beah”  tree  are 
used  by  the  opium-smokers  as  a substitute  for 
opium,  when  that  drug  is  not  procurable.  These 
serrated  leaves,  the  produce  of  we  know  not  pre- 
cisely what  tree,  except  under  the  above  native 
name,  are  occasionally  sold  in  the  bazaars  or 
markets  at  a quarter  of  a rupee  per  catty,  or  at 


208 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


the  rate,  Anglicised,  of  fourpence  halfpenny  per 
pound. 

In  addition  to  the  substances  which  do  duty  for 
opium  knowingly  and  wittingly,  there  are  others 
which  enter  into  its  composition  in  the  form  of 
adulteration,  to  which  writers  on  materia  medica 
have  drawn  attention,  and  ultimately  Dr.  Hassell. 
These  also  deserve,  with  far  greater  appropriate- 
ness, the  designation  of  false  prophets,  since, 
promising  the  glimpses  of  paradise  which  opium 
is  believed  to  give,  they  only 

Keep  the  promise  to  the  lip 

And  break  it  with  the  heart. 

The  first  sophistication,  says  Pereira,  which 
opium  receives,  is  that  practised  by  the  peasants 
who  collect  it,  and  who  lightly  scrape  the  epi- 
dermis from  the  shells  or  capsules  to  augment  the 
weight.  This  operation  adds  about  one-twelfth 
of  foreign  matters,  which  are  removed  by  the 
Chinese  in  their  method  of  preparing  the  opium 
and  forming  it  into  chandu. 

According  to  Dr.  Eatwell,  the  grosser  impurities 
usually  mixed  with  the  drug  to  increase  its  weight 
are  mud,  sand,  powdered  charcoal,  soot,  cow  dung, 
pounded  poppy  petals,  and  pounded  seeds  of 
various  descriptions.  All  these  substances  are 
readily  discoverable  in  breaking  up  the  drug  in 
cold  water,  decanting  the  lighter  portion,  and 
examining  the  sediment.  Flour  is  a very  favourite 
article  of  adulteration,  but  is  readily  detected. 
Opium  so  adulterated  becomes  sour,  breaks  with 
a short  ragged  fracture,  the  edges  of  which  are 
dull,  and  not  pink  and  translucent  as  they  should 
be.  The  farina  of  the  boiled  potato  is  not  un  fre- 
quently made  use  of ; ghee  and  ghour  (an  impure 
treacle)  are  also  occasionally  used,  as  being  articles 


FALSE  PROPHETS. 


209 


at  the  command  of  most  of  the  cultivators.  Their 
presence  is  revealed  by  the  peculiar  odour  and 
consistence  which  they  impart  to  the  drug.  In 
addition  to  the  above,  a variety  of  vegetable  juices, 
extracts,  pulps,  and  colouring  matters  are  occa- 
sionally fraudulently  mixed  with  the  opium,  such 
as  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  prickly  pear,  the 
extracts  prepared  from  the  tobacco  plant,  the  thorn 
apple,  and  the  Indian  hemp.  The  gummy  exuda- 
tions from  various  plants  are  frequently  used  ; and 
of  pulps, the  most  commonly  employed  are  those  of 
the  tamarind,  and  of  the  Bael  fruit.  To  impart 
colour  to  the  drug  various  substances  are  employed, 
as  catechu,  turmeric,  the  powdered  flowers  of  the 
mowha  tree,  &c.  Here  is  a list  long  enough  to 
satisfy  any  antiquarian,  containing  delicacies  of 
all  kinds,  the  essence  of  which  would  improve  any 
soothing  syrup  or  Godfrey’s  cordial,  with  which, 
under  the  name  of  opium,  they  may  be  incorpo- 
rated, whether  they  may  consist  of  tobacco  juice, 
cow  dung,  or  bad  treacle. 

Let  us  still  enlarge  the  collection  from  the 
experience  of  Dr.  Normandy,  eminent  in  chemical 
analysis— “ Opium  is  often  met  with  in  commerce 
from  which  the  morphine  has  been  extracted  ; on 
the  other  hand,  this  valuable  drug  is  often  found 
adulterated  with  starch,  water,  Spanish  liquorice 
lactucarium,  extract  of  poppy  leaves,  of  the  sea- 
side poppy,  and  other  vegetable  extracts,  mucilage 
of  gum  tragacanth,  or  other  gums,  clay,  sand 
gravel.  Often  the  opium  is  mixed  in  Asia  and 
Lgypt,  when  fresh  and  soft,  with  finely  bruised 
grapes,  from  which  the  stones  have  been  removed  ■ 
sometimes  also  a mixture,  fabricated  by  bruising 
the  exterior  skins  of  the  capsules  and  stalks  of  the 
poppy  together  with  the  white  of  eggs,  in  a stone 
mortar,  is  added  in  certain  proportions  to  the 
opium.  In  fact,  this  most  valuable  drug,  certainly 


210  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

one  of  the  most  important,  and  most  frequently 
used  in  medicine,  is  also  one  of  the  most  extensively 
adulterated.” 

Dr.  Landerer  has  described  an  adulteration  of  a 
sample  of  opium  obtained  direct  from  Smyrna ; it 
consisted  of  salep  powder  in  large  proportions, 
and  he  was  afterwards  informed  that  this  is  a 
very  common  adulteration,  practised  in  order 
to  make  the  opium  harder,  and  to  hasten  the 
process  of  drying.  Dr.  Pereira  speaks  of  an 
opium  which  contained  a gelatiniform  substance, 
and  Mr.  Morson  met  with  opium  in  which  a 
similar  substance  was  present.  Dr.  Landerer 
also  states  that  the  extract  obtained  by  boiling 
the  poppy  plants  is  commonly  added  to  Smyrna 
opium. 

Dr.  Hassell  found  “that  out  of  twenty-three 
samples  of  opium  analysed,  nineteen  were  adul- 
terated, and  four  only  genuine,  many  of  these  as 
shown  by  the  microscope,  being  adulterated  to  a 
large  extent ; the  prevailing  adulterations  being 
with  poppy  capsules  and  wheat  flour,”  in  addition 
to  which  adulteration  two  samples  of  Smyrna 
opium,  and  two  of  Egyptian  opium  were  adul- 
terated with  sand,  sugar,  and  gum. 

From  the  analysis  of  forty  samples  of  powdered 
opium,  he  found  also,  “that  thirty-three  of  the 
samples  were  adulterated,  and  one  only  genuine ; 
the  principal  adulterations,  as  in  the  previous  case, 
being  with  poppy  capsule  and  wheat  flour.  That 
four  of  the  samples  were  further  adulterated  by  the 
addition  of  powdered  wood,  introduced,  no  doubt, 
in  the  process  of  grinding.” 

Dr.  Thomson  stated  in  his  evidence  before  the 
Parliamentary  Committee,  that  he  had  known 
extract  of  opium  mixed  with  extract  of  senna, 
and  from  thirty  to  sixty  per  cent,  of  water. 

Dr.  0‘Shaughnessy  found  from  25  to  21  per 


FALSE  PJROPHETS. 


211 


cent,  of  water  in  Indian  opium  (Behar  agency), 
and  13  per  cent,  in  Patna  opium. 

. Dr.  Eatwell,  the  opium  examiner  in  the  Benares 
district,  finds  that  the  proportion  of  water  varies 
from.  30  to  24-5  per  cent,  in  the  opium  of  that 
district. 

In  1838,  a specimen  of  opium  resembling  that 
of  Smyrna  was  presented  to  the  Societe  de  Phar- 
macie  of  Paris,  being  part  of  a considerable  quan- 
tity .which  had  been  introduced  into  commerce  at 
Paris  and  Havre.  It  did  not  exhibit  the  least 
trace  of  morphia.  It  was  in  rolls,  well  covered 
with,  leaves,  had  a blackish  section,  and  a slightly 
elastic  consistence.  It  became  milky  upon  contact 
with  water.  Its  odour  and  taste  were  analogous  to 
opium,  hut  feebler.  It  was  adulterated  with  so 
much  skill,  that  agglutinated  tears  appeared  even 
under  a magnifier — a character  which  had  hitherto 
been  regarded  as  decisive  in  detecting  pure  opium, 
hut  which  with  this  occurrence  lost  its  value.  The 
same  article  appears  to  have  been  met  with  also  in 
the  United  States. 

A writer  from  Singapore  states,  “ I lately  saw  a 
Chinaman  brought  to  the  police  for  fabricating 
opium  balls.  The  imitation  balls  were  composed 
of  a skin. or  . husk  formed  from  the  leaves  of  Madras 
tobacco,  inside  was  sand,  which  was  evidently  in- 
tended  to  form  the  shape  of  the  halls  till  the  outer 
covering,  had  sufficiently  set,  the  whole  was  neatly 
sewed  with  bandages  of  calico,  which  would  be  re- 
moved when  the  tobacco  was  able  to  retain  its 
propei  shape,  the  sand  would  then  be  abstracted 
and  a mixture  of  gambier  and  opium  substituted,5 
while  the  outside  would  be  rubbed  over  with  a 
watery  solution  of  chandu.  By  these  means  the 
native  traders  are  much  and  often  imposed  upon.” 


CHAPTER  XV. 


NEPENTHES. 


“ Bright  Helen  mixed  a mirth-inspiring  bowl, 

Tempered  with  drugs  of  sovereign  use,  to  assuage 
The  boiling  bosom  of  tumultuous  rage ; 

To  clear  the  cloudy  front  of  wrinkled  care. 

And  dry  the  tearful  sluice3  of  despair.” 

Pope’s  Eomcr.. 


The  influence  of  climate  in  modifying  the  cha- 
racters of  plants  is  a circumstance  known  to  all 
botanical  students.  The  same  plant,  in  temperate 
regions  and  under  the  tropics,  exhibits  different  pro- 
perties, or,  we  should  rather  say,  in  one  instance 
developes  more  highly  certain  properties  which 
in  the  other  lie  nearly  dormant.  The  newly- 
introduced  sorghum,  from  which  we  have  been 
promised  an  unfailing  supply  of  excellent  sugar, 
fails  in  the  North  of  France  to  reach  that  degree 
of  maturity,  or  to  develope  in  such  manner  its 
saccharine  secretions  as  to  be  available  for  the 
manufacture  of  a crystallizable  sugar.  The  sweet 
floating  grass  ( Glyceria  fluitans)  in  Poland  and 
Russia  supplies  farinaceous  seeds,  which,  under  the 
name  of  manna  croup,  are  consumed  as  food ; but  no 
seeds  at  all  available  for  that  purpose  are  produced 
at  home  from  the  same  plant,  although  it  grows 


NEPENTHES. 


213 


freely.  The  flavour  of  the  onion,  as  grown  in 
Egypt,  is,  we  are  assured,  far  milder,  and  vastly 
different  from  the  bulbs  cultivated  in  Britain.  The 
odour  of  violets  and  other  flowers  grown  for  per- 
fumery and  other  purposes  at  Nice,  have  a scent 
more  rich  and  delicious  than  when  grown  in  Eng- 
lish soil,  subject  to  our  variable  climate.  But  the 
most  extraordinary  effect  of  all,  produced  by  these 
influences  upon  plants,  occurs  in  the  case  of  hemp, 
which  in  Europe  developes  its  fibrous  qualities  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  produce  a material  for  cordage 
hitherto  unsurpassed ; but  in  India,  while  deficient 
in  this  respect,  developes  narcotic  secretions  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  occupy  a prominent  position 
among  the  chief  narcotics  of  the  world. 

It  was  for  some  time  supposed  that  the  Indian 
or  narcotic  hemp  was  a different  species  to  that 
which  is  cultivated  for  textile  purposes  ; and  even 
now  it  is  often  characterised  by  a different  specific 
name,  which  would  seem  to  assume  that  the  species 
are  distinct.  This,  however,  the  most  celebrated 
of  our  botanists  deny.  The  difference  is  declared 
to.  be,  not  one  of  species,  but  of  climate,  and  of 
climate  only.  The  native  home  of  the  hemp  plant 
is  assigned  by  Dr.  Lindley  to  Persia  and  the  hills 
in  the  North  of  India,  whence  it  has  been  intro- 
duced into  other  countries.  Burnett  says,  “ Hemp 
seed  is  nutritious  and  not  narcotic ; it  has  the  very 
singular  property  of  changing  the  plumage  of 
bullfinches  and  goldfinches  from  red  and  yellow  to 
black,  if  they  are  fed  on  it  for  too  long  a time  or 
in  too  large  a quantity.”  Never  having  tried  the 
experiment,  we  have  no  ground  for  disputing  or 
authority  for  verifying  these  remarks.  If  such, 
however,  is  the  case,  hemp  seed  possesses  some 
property,  if  not  narcotic,  which  canary  and  poppy 
seeds,  we  should  presume,  do  not. 

Johnny  Englishman,  with  his  usual  genius  for 


214  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

discovery  and  invention,  has  been  discovered  filling 
his  pipe  on  board  ship  with  oakum,  when  the 
stores  of  tobacco  have  been  exhausted,  but  not 
being  satisfied  from  his  own  experiments  of  the 
superiority  of  hemp,  in  that  form,  to  his  brother 
Jonathan’s  tobacco,  he  therefore  adheres  to  the 
latter.  He  considers  hemp  an  excellent  thing 
when  twisted  into  a good  hawser,  but  does  not  like 
it  as  “ twist”  in  the  masticatory  acceptation  of  the 
term ; nor  does  he  at  all  admire  the  twist  of  Ben 
Battle,  when 

“ Round  his  melancholy  neck 
A rope  he  did  entwine, 

And  for  his  second  time  in  life, 

Enlisted  in  the  line. 

“ One  end  he  tied  around  a beam, 

And  then  removed  his  pegs ; 

And  as  his  legs  were  off,  of  course 
He  soon  was  off  his  legs. 

“ And  there  he  hung  till  he  was  dead 
As  any  nail  in  town  ; 

For  though  distress  had  cut  him  up, 

It  could  not  cut  him  down.” 

Hemp  is  one  of  those  plants  which  adapts  itself 
well  to  any  climate : there  is  scarce  a country  in 
Europe  where  it  cannot,  or  might  not,  be  cultivated. 
From  Poland  and  Bussia  in  the  North,  to  Italy  in 
the  South,  the  fibre  is  supplied  to  our  markets. 
In  North  America  it  is  grown  for  its  fibre,  and 
in  South  America  for  its  narcotic  properties. 
Throughout  Africa,  it  may  be  found  chiefly  as  an 
article  for  the  pipe.  In  most  of  Asia  it  is  known, 
and  it  has  been  cultivated  in  Australia.  Thus,  in 
its  distribution,  it  may  now  be  considered  as  almost 
universal. 

Twenty-five  centuries  ago,  Herodotus  wrote  of 
its  cultivation  by  the  Scythians : — “ They  have  a 


NErENTHES. 


215 


sort  of  hemp  growing  in  this  country  very  like 
flax,  except  in  thickness  and  height;  in  this  respect 
the  hemp  is  far  superior — it  grows  both  spon- 
taneously and  from  cultivation,  and  from  it  the 
Thracians  make  garments  very  like  linen,  nor 
Avould  any  one  who  is  not  well  skilled  in  such 
matters  distinguish  whether  they  are  made  of  flax 
or  hemp;  but  a person  who  has  never  seen  this 
hemp,  would  think  the  garment  was  made  of  flax.” 
Then  follows  a description  of  the  use  of  the  hemp 
as  a narcotic : “ The  Scythians,  transported  with 
the  vapour,  shout  aloud.”  Antiquity  is  in  favour 
of  this  narcotic,  and  its  use  for  that  purpose  before 
any  other,  except  perhaps  the  poppy,  was  known, 
or  at  least  of  those  now  in  use.  The  nepenthes  of 
Homer  has  been  supposed  to  have  been  this  plant, 
or  one  of  its  products.  The  use  of  hemp  had 
become  so  general  amongst  the  Homans  at  the 
time  of  Pliny,  that  they  commonly  made  ropes  and 
cordage  of  it.  The  practice  of  chewing  the  leaves 
to  produce  intoxication  existed  in  India  in  very 
early  ages,  whence  it  was  carried  to  Persia,  and 
before  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  this 
custom  was  adopted  in  Egypt,  but  chiefly  by  per- 
sons of  the  lower  orders. 

The  narcotic  properties  of  hemp  become  con- 
centrated m a resinous  juice,  which  in  certain  sea- 
sons and  in  tropical  countries  exudes,  and  concretes 
on  the  leaves,  slender  stems,  and  flowers.  This 
constitutes  the  base  of  all  the  hemp  preparations 
to  which  all  the  powers  of  the  drug  are  attributable! 
in  Central  India,  the  hemp  resin  called  churrus  , is 
collected  during  the  hot  season  in  the  following 
manner.  Men  clad  in  leathern  dresses  run  through 
the  hemp  fields,  brushing  through  the  plants  with 
all  possible  violence ; the  soft  resin  adheres  to  the 
leather  and  is  subsequently  scraped  off  and 
kneaded  into  balls,  which  sell  at  from  five  to 


216 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


six  rupees  the  seer,  or  about  five  or  six  shillings 
per  pound.  A still  finer  kind,  the  momeca  or 
waxen  churrus,  is  collected  by  the  hand  in  Nepaul, 
and  sells  for  nearly  double  the  price  of  the  ordi- 
nary kind.  Dr.  McKinnon  says — “ In  Nepaul,  the 
leathern  attire  is  dispensed  with,  and  the  resin  is 
collected  on  the  skin  of  naked  coolies.”  In  Persia 
the  churrus  is  obtained  by  pressing  the  resinous 
plant  on  coarse  cloths,  and  then  scraping  it  from 
these  and  melting  it  in  a pot  with  a little  warm 
water.  Mirza  considers  the  churrus  of  Herat  the 
most  powerful  of  all  the  varieties  of  the  drag.  The 
hemp  resin,  when  pure,  is  of  a blackish  grey  colour, 
with  a fragrant  narcotic  odour,  and  a slightly 
warm,  bitterish,  acrid  taste. 

The  dried  hemp  plant  which  has  flowered,  and 
from  which  the  resin  has  been  removed,  is  called  in 
India  gunjeh.  It  sells  at  from  twelve  annas  to  a 
rupee  the  seer,  or  from  ninepence  to  a shilling  per 
pound,  in  the  Calcutta  bazaars.  It  is  sold  chiefly 
for  smoking,  in  bundles  two  feet  long  and  three 
inches  in  diameter,  containing  twenty-four  plants. 
The  colour  is  dusky  green,  the  odour  agreeably 
narcotic,  the  whole  plant  resinous  and  adhesive  to 
the  touch. 

The  larger  leaves  and  capsules  without  the 
stalks,  are  called  Bang,  Subjee,  or  Sidhee  in  India, 
and  have  been  brought  into  the  London  market 
under  the  name  of  Guaza.  They  are  used  for 
making  an  intoxicating  drink,  for  smoking,  and  in 
the  conserve  called  Majoon.  Bang  is  cheaper  than 
Gunjeh,  and  though  less  powerful,  is  sold  at  so  low' 
a price  that  for  one  halfpenny  enough  cau  be  pur- 
chased to  intoxicate  an  habituated  person. 

mes  chiefly 
extensively 
loot.  The 

natives  cut  the  plant  when  in  flower,  allow  it  to 


The  Gunjeh  consumed  in  Bengal  cc 
from  Mirzapore  and  Ghazeepur,  being 
cultivated  near  Gwalior  and  in  Tir 


NEPENTHES. 


217 


dry  for  three  days,  and  then  lay  it  in  bundles 
averaging  two  pounds  each  which  are  distributed 
to  the  licensed  dealers.  The  best  kinds  are  brought 
from  Gwalior  and  Bhurtpore,  and  it  is  cultivated 
of  good  quality  in  gardens  around  Calcutta. 

The  Majoon  or  hemp  confection,  is  a compound 
of  sugar,  butter,  flour,  milk,  and  bang.  The  mass 
is  divided  into  small  lozenge-shaped  pieces ; one 
dram  will  intoxicate  a beginner,  three  drams  one 
experienced  in  its  use.  The  taste  is  sweet  and 
odour  agreeable.  Most  carnivorous  animals  will  eat 
it  greedily,  and  very  soon  become  ludicrously  drunk, 
but  seldom  suffering  any  worse  consequences. 

The  confection  called  el  mogen  in  use  amongst 
the  Moors  appears  to  be  similar  to,  if  not  identical 
with,  the  majoon  of  India. 

The  ancient  Saracens  and  modern  Arabs  in  some 
parts  of  Turkey  and  generally  throughout  Syria, 
use  preparations  of  hemp  still  known  by  the  name 
of  haschisch  or  Hashash.  M.  Adolph  Stuze,  the 
court . apothecary  at  Bucharest,  thus  describes  the 
haschisch,  by  which  general  name  all  intoxicating 
drugs  whose  chief  constituent  is  hemp,  are  well 
known  all  over  the  East.  The  tops  and  all  the 
tender  part  of  the  hemp  plant  are  collected  after 
flowering,  dried  and  kept  for  use.  There  are 
several  methods  of  using  it. 

I.  Boiled  in  fat,  butter,  or  oil,  with  a little  water  ■ 
the  filtered  product  is  employed  in  all  kinds  of 
pastry. 

II.  Powdered  for  smoking.  Five  or  ten  grains 
of  the  powder  are  smoked  from  a common  pipe 
with  ordinary  tobacco,  probably  the  leaf  of  a 
species  of  Lobelia  (Tombuki)  possessing  strong 
narcotic  properties. 

III.  Formed  with  tragacanth  mucilage  into 
pastiles,  which  are  placed  upon  a pipe  and  smoked 
in  similar  doses. 


218 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


IV.  Made  into  an  electuary  with  dates  or  figs 
and  honey.  This  preparation  is  of  a dark  brown 
or  almost  black  colour. 

V.  Another  electuary  is  prepared  of  the  same 
ingredients,  with  the  addition  of  spices,  cloves,  cin- 
namon, pepper,  amber,  and  musk.  This  preparation 
is  used  as  an  aphrodisiac. 

The  confection  most  in  use  among  the  Arabs  is 
called  Daivamese.  This  is  mingled  with  other 
stimulating  substances,  so  as  to  administer  to  the 
sensual  gratifications,  which  appear  to  be  the 
summum  bonum  of  oriental  existence. 

The  haschisch  extract  is  about  the  consistence  of 
syrup,  and  is  of  a dark  greenish  colour,  with  a 
narcotic  odour,  and  a bitter,  unpleasant  taste. 

A famous  heretical  sect  among  the  Mahometans 
bore  the  name  of  Assassins,  and  settled  in  Persia 
in  1090.  In  Syria  they  possessed  a large  tract  of 
land  among  the  mountains  of  Lebanon.  They 
assassinated  Lewis  of  Bavaria  in  1213,  were  con- 
quered by  the  Tartars  in  1257,  and  extirpated  in 
1272.  Their  chief  assumed  the  title  of  “ Ancient 
of  the  Mountain.”  These  men,  some  authorities 
inform  us,  were  called  Hascliiscliins  because  the 
use  of  the  haschish  was  common  among  them  in 
the  performance  of  certain  rites,  and  that  the 
ancient  form  has  been  corrupted  into  that  now  in 
use.  M.  de  Sacy  states  that  the  word  “ assassin  ” 
has  been  derived  from  the  Arabic  name  of 
hemp.  It  has  also  been  declared,  that  during  the 
wars  of  the  Crusades,  certain  of  the  Saracen  army 
while  in  a state  of  intoxication  from  the  use  of  the 
drug,  rushed  madly  into  the  Christian  camp,  com- 
mitting great  havoc,  without  themselves  having 
any  fear  of  death,  and  that  these  men  were  called 
Hashasheens , whence  has  arose  our  word  “ assassin.” 
The  term  “ hashash  ” says  Mr.  Lane,  signifies  “ a 
smoker  or  an  eater  of  hemp,”  and  is  an  appellation  of 


NEPENTHES. 


219 


obloquy ; noisy  and  riotous  people  are  often  aallecl 
“hashasheen,”  which  is  the  plural  of  that  appella- 
tion, and  the  origin  of  our  word  “assassin.” 

Benjamin  of  Tudela  says,  “In  the  vicinity  of 
Lebanon  reside  the  people  called  Assassins,  who  do 
not  believe  in  the  tenets  of  Mahommedanism,  but 
in  those  of  one  whom  they  consider  like  unto  the 
Prophet  Kharmath.  They  fulfil  whatever  he  com- 
mands them,  whether  it  he  a matter  of  life  or  death. 
He  goes  by  the  name  of  Sheikh-al-Hashishin,  or, 
their  old  man,  by  whose  command  all  the  acts  of 
these  mountaineers  are  regulated.  The  Assassins 
are.  faithful  to  one  another,  by  the  command  of 
their  old  man,  and  make  themselves  the  dread 
of  every  one,  because  their  devotion  leads  them 
gladly  to  risk  their  lives,  and  to  kill  even  kings, 
when  commanded. 

In  the  centre  of  the  Persian,  as  well  as  the 
Assyrian  territory  of  the  Assassins,  that  is  to  say, 
both  at  Alarnut  and  Massiat,  were  situated,  in  a 
space  surrounded  by  walls,  splendid  gardens — true 
eastern  paradises — there  were  flower-beds,  and 
thickets  of  fruit  trees,  intersected  by  canals  ; shady 
walks  and  verdant  glades,  where  the  sparkling 
stream  bubbles  at  every  step ; bowers  of  roses  and 
vineyards luxurious  halls,  and  porcelain  kiosks, 
adorned  with  Persian  carpets  and  Grecian  stuffs 
where  drinking  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  and  crystal 
glittered  on  trays  of  the  same  costly  materials  • 
charming  maidens  and  handsome  boys,  black-eyed 
and  seductive  as  the  houris  and  boys  of  Mahom- 
med  s paradise,  soft  as  the  cushions  on  which  they 
reposed,  and  intoxicating  as  the  wine  which  thev 
presented;  the  music  of  the  harp  was  mingled 
with  the  songs  of  birds,  and  the  melodious  tones  of 
tlie  songstress  harmonised  with  the  murmur  of  the 

nnTi L~eK?ffhinS  breathed  PWe>  raptae, 


220 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


A youth  who  was  deemed  worthy,  by  his  strength 
and  resolution,  to  be  initiated  into  the  Assyrian 
service,  was  invited  to  the  table  and  conversation 
of  the  grand  master  or  grand  prioi*;  he  was  then 
intoxicated  with  henbane  (haschish)  and  carried 
into  the  garden,  which,  on  awakening,  he  believed 
to  be  paradise.  Everything  around  him,  the 
houris  in  particular,  contributed  to  confirm  his 
delusion.  After  he  had  experienced  as  much  of 
the  pleasures  of  paradise — which  the  prophet  has 
promised  to  the  blessed — as  his  strength  would 
admit,  after  quaffing  enervating  delight  from  the 
eyes  of  the  houris  and  intoxicating  wine  from  the 
glittering  goblets,  he  sank  into  the  lethargy  pro- 
duced by  debility  and  the  opiate,  on  awakening 
from  which,  after  a few  horns,  he  again  found 
himself  by  the  side  of  his  superior.  The  latter 
endeavoured  to  convince  him  that  corporeally  he 
had  not  left  his  side,  but  that  spiritually  he  had 
been  wrapped  into  paradise,  and  had  then  enjoyed 
a foretaste  of  the  bliss  which  awaits  the  faithful, 
who  devote  their  lives  to  the  service  of  the  faith 
and  the  obedience  of  their  chief.  Thus  did  these 
infatuated  youths  blindly  dedicate  themselves  as  the 
tools  of  murder,  and  eagerly  sought  an  opportunity 
to  sacrifice  their  terrestrial,  in  order  to  become  the 
partakers  of  eternal  life. 

To  this  day,  Constantinople  and  Cairo  show 
what  an  incredible  charm  opium  with  henbane 
exerts  on  the  drowsy  indolence  of  the  Turk  and  the 
fiery  imagination  of  the  Arab,  and  explains  the 
fury  with  which  those  youths  the -enjoyment  of 
these  rich  pastiles  (haschish),  and  the  confidence 
produced  in  them,  that  they  are  able  to  undertake 
anything  or  everything.  From  the  use  of  these 
pastiles  they  were  called  Hashishin  (herb-eaters,) 
which,  in  the  mouths  of  Greeks  aud  Crusaders,  has 
been  transformed  into  the  word  Assassin,  and  £S 


NEPENTHES. 


221 


synonymous  with  murder,  has  immortalized  the 
history  of  the  order  in  all  the  languages  of  Europe.* 
This  is  the  account  given  by  Marco  Polo,  as 
repeated  by  Yon  Hammer  in  his  “ History  of  the 
Assassins.”  To  this  let  us  further  add  M.  Sylvestre 
de  Sacy’s,  from  a memoir  read  before  the  Institute 
of  France: — “I  have  no  doubt  whatever,  that 
denomination  was  given  to  the  Ismaelites,  on 
account  of  their  using  an  intoxicating  liquid  or 
preparation,  still  known  in  the  East  by  the  name 
of  hashish.  Hemp  leaves,  and  some  other  parts 
of  the  same  vegetable,  form  the  basis  of  this  pre- 
paration, which  is  employed  in  different  ways, 
either  in  liquid  or  in  the  form  of  pastiles,  mixed  with 
saccharine  substances,  or  even  in  fumigation.  The 
intoxication  produced  by  the  haschish,  causes  an 
ecstasy  similar  to  that  which  the  orientals  produce 
by  the  use  of  opium ; and  from  the  testimony  of  a 
great  number  of  travellers,  we  may  affirm  that 
those  who  fall  into  this  state  of  delirium,  imagine 
they  enjoy  the  ordinary  objects  of  their  desires,  and 
taste  felicity  at  a cheap  rate.  It  has  not  been 
forgotten  that  when  the  French  army  was  in  Egypt 
the  General-in-chief  Napoleon,  was  obliged  to  pro- 
hibit, under  the  severest  penalties,  the  sale  and 
use  of  these  pernicious  substances,  the  habit  of 
which  has  made  an  imperious  want  in  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Egypt,  particularly  the  lower  orders. 
Those  who  indulge  in  this  custom  are  to  this  day 
called  Hashishin,  and  these  two  different  expres- 
sions explain  why  the  Ismaelites  were  called  by 
the  historians  of  the  Crusades  sometimes  Assissini 
and  sometimes  Assassini. 

As  an  instance  of  the  blind  submission  of  these 
devoted  followers  to  the  will  of  their  chief,  it  is 
narrated  that  J elaleddin  Melekshah,  Sultan  of  the 


♦Yon  Hammer’s  History  of  the  Assassins. 


222 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Seljuks,  having  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  Sheikh 
of  the  Assassins,  to  require  his  obedience  and 
fealty,  the  son  of  Sahab  called  into  his  presence 
several  of  the  initiated.  Beckoning  to  one  of  them, 
he  said,  “ Kill  thyself,”  and  he  instantly  stabbed 
himself:  to  another,  “Throw  thyself  down  from 
the  rampart;”  the  next  instant  he  lay  a mutilated 
corpse  in  the  moat.  On  this  the  grand  master, 
turning  to  the  envoy,  who  was  unnerved  by  terror, 
said — “In  this  way  am  I obeyed  by  seventy  thou- 
sand faithful  subjects.  Be  that  my  answer  to  thy 
master.” 

From  comparison  of  these  notes,  it  will  therefore 
appear  that  the  order  of  Hashishans  used  the 
haschish,  as  a means  whereby  to  induce  young  men 
to  devote  themselves  to  their  cause.  That  it  was 
used  by  the  chief  for  its  intoxicating  and  illusionary 
properties,  probably  without  the  knowledge  of  the 
members  of  the  order,  but  as  a secret,  the  divul- 
ging of  which  would  have  defeated  his  design,  and 
that  it  was  not  indulged  in  habitually  by  the 
order ; but  that  from  its  use  in  these  initiatory  rites 
they  came  to  be  called  Haschishans,  afterwards 
corrupted  into  Assassins.  And  ultimately,  that 
their  murderous  acts  procured  for  all  those  wrho  in 
future  times  imitated  them,  the  honour  of  their 
name. 

But  to  return  from  this  long  digression,  we  still 
meet  with  the  name  of  Haschisch  and  Hashaskeen 
in  Egypt,  and  also  with  preparations  of  hemp, 
which  are  believed  as  of  old  to  transport  those  who 
indulge  therein  to  scenes  such  as  paradise  alone  is 
supposed  to  furnish. 

“ Where’er  his  eye  could  reach, 

Fair  structures,  rainbow-hued,  arose  ; 

And  rich  pavilions  through  the  opening  woods 
Gleamed  from  their  waving  curtains  sunny  gold  ; 

And  winding  through  the  verdant  vale, 


NEPENTHES. 


223 


Flowed  streams  of  liquid  light, 

And  fluted  cypresses  reared  up 
Their  living  obelisks, 

And  broad-leaved  plane  trees  in  long  colonnades, 

O’er  arched  delightful  walks, 

Where  round  their  trunks  the  thousand-tendril’d  vine 
Wound  up,  and  hung  the  boughs  with  greener  wreaths, 
And  clusters  not  their  own.” 


M.  Rouyer,  of  the  Egyptian  Commission,  says, 
with  the  leaves  and  tops,  collected  before  ripening, 
the  Egyptians  prepare  a conserve,  which  serves  as 
the  base  of  the  berch , the  diasmouJc , and  the 
hemaouy.  Hemp  leaves  reduced  to  powder  and 
incorporated  with  honey  or  stirred  with  water, 
constitute  the  berch  of  the  poorer  classes. 

Dr.  Livingstone  found  hemp  in  use  among  the 
natives  of 'Southern  Africa  under  the  name  of 
mutokuane. 

With  the  Hottentots  it  is  known  as  Dacha , and 
another  plant  used  for  similar  purposes  among 
them  is  called  the  wild  Dagga  or  Dacha.  The  use 
of  hemp  as  a narcotic  appears  to  he  very  general 
in  all  parts  of  Africa. 

The  D’amba  possesses  numerous  native  titles, 
but  it  is  only  understood  by  those  distinctive  terms 
which  the  negroes  give  it  in  their  respective  coun- 
tries. By  the  people  of  Ambriz  and  Musula  it  is 
pronounced  as  D yambah,  while  to  the  various 
races  in  Kaffraria,  it  is  more  generally  known 
under  the  Hottentot  name  of  Dakka  or  Dacha. 
This  plant  is  extensively  cultivated  by  the  Dongos 
Damarfis,  and  other  tribes  to  the  southward  of 
Benguela.  Among  the  Ambundas  or  aborigines 
of  Angola,  the  dried  plant  is  duly  appreciated 
not  only  for  its  narcotic  effects,  but  likewise  on 
account  ot  some  medicinal  virtues  which  it  has 
been  reputed  to  enjoy.  The  markets  of  St. 
Baul  de  Loanda  are  mostly  supplied  from  the 


224  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

Dongos,  and  other  adjacent  tribes,  and  from  St. 
Salvador,  and  the  towns  in  the  vicinity  of  Upper 
Kongo. 

The  mode  in  which  it  is  prepared  for  sale,  con- 
sists in  carefully  separating  from  the  leaves  and 
seeds,  the  larger  stalks,  retaining  only  the  smaller 
stems,  which  are  compressed  into  a conical  mass, 
varying  from  two  to  four  inches  in  diameter,  and 
from  one  to  two  feet  in  length,  the  whole  being 
covered  by  some  dried  vegetable,  firmly  secured  by 
thin  withes.  The  substance  thus  manufactured  is 
ordinarily  employed  for  the  purpose  of  smoking, 
and  is  endowed  with  powerful  stimulant  and  in- 
toxicating principles,  consequently  it  is  propor- 
tionately prized  by  those  nations  who  are  familiar 
with  those  peculiar  qualities,  and  is  probably 
viewed  more  in  the  light  of  a luxury  owing  to  the 
absence  of  all  other  sources  of  excitement,  for 
which,  perhaps,  it  was  the  only  available  substi- 
tute. 

The  Zulu  Kaffirs  and  Delagoans  of  the  South 
Eastern  Coast  use  it  under  the  same  or  like  names. 
Amongst  the  former  the  herb  is  powdered  and  used 
as  snuff.  The  true  tobacco  is  known  amongst  them, 
and  is  grown  to  a certain  extent,  but  the  use  of  hemp 
both  for  smoking  and  snuffing,  is  far  more 
commom.  Perhaps,  requiring'  less  cultivation,  it 
suits  best  their  indolent  habits. 

The  most  eminent  of  the  Persian  and  Arabian 
authors  refer  the  origin  of  hemp  intoxication  to 
the  natives  of  Hindostan.  But  few  traces,  how- 
ever, of  its  early  use  can  be  found  in  any  part  of 
India. 

In  the  “ Rajniguntu,”  a treatise  on  materia 
niedica,  the  date  of  which  is  vaguely  estimated  at 
about  six  hundred  years  ago,  there  is  a clear  account 
of  this  drug.  The  names  under  which  it  is  there 
known  are,  “ Bijoya,”  “ Ujoya,”  and  “ Joya,”  mean- 


NEPENTHES. 


225 


mg'  promoters  of  success;  “ Brijputta?  or  the 
strengthener ; “ Chapola,”  the  causer  of  a reeling 
gait ; “ Ununda,”  or  the  laughter-moving ; “ Hur- 
' the  exciter  of  sexual  desire. 


sun 


In  another  treatise  in  Sanscrit,  of  later  date,  the 
above  is  repeated ; and  in  a religious  treatise, 
called  the  Hindu  Tantra,  it  is  stated  that  Sidhee 
is  more  intoxicating  than  wine. 

In  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Institutes  of  Menu, 
Brahmins  are  prohibited  to  use  Pabandoo  or 
onions,  Gunjara  or  Gunjah,  and  such  condiments 
as  have  strong  and  pungent  scents. 

Persian  and  Arabic  writers  give,  however,  a 
fuller  and  more  particular  account  of  the  early  use 
of  this  substance.  Makrisi  treats  of  the  hemp  in 
Ins  description  of  the  ancient  pleasure-grounds  in 
t . . vicinity  of  Cairo.  This  quarter,  after  many 
vicissitudes,  is  now  a mass  of  ruins.  In  it  was 
situated  a cultivated  valley,  named  Djoneina,  which 
was  the  theatre  of  all  conceivable  abominations. 
It  was  famous,  above  all,  for  the  sale  of  the 
Hasheesha  or  Haschisch,  which  is  still  consumed 
by  certain  of  the  populace,  and  from  the  con- 
sumption of  which  sprung-  those  excesses  which 
gave  rise  to  the  name  of  “assassin,”  in  the  time  of 
the  Crusades.  This  author  states  that  the  oldest 
work  in  which  hemp  is  noticed  is  a treatise  by 
Hassan,  who  states  that  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira 
608,  the  Sheikh  Djafar  Shirazi,  a monk  of  the 
order  of  Haider,  learned  from  his  master,  the  history 
of  the  discovery  of  hemp.  Haider,  the  chief  of 
ascetics  and  self-chasteners,  lived  in  rigid  privation 
on  a mountain  between  Nishabor  and  Rama,  where 
be  established  a monastery  of  Fakirs.  Ten  years 
e had  spent  in  this  retreat,  without  leaving  it  for 
a moment  tifi  one  burning  summer’s  day,  when  he 
parted  a one  to  the  fields.  On  his  return,  an  air 

joy  and  gaiety  was  imprinted  on  his  counte- 


226  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

nance ; he  received  the  visits  of  his  brethren,  and 
encouraged  their  conversation.  On  being  ques- 
tioned, lie  stated  that,  struck  by  the  aspect  of  a 
plant  which  danced  in  the  heat  as  if  with  joy, 
while  all  the  rest  of  the  vegetable  creation  was 
torpid,  he  had  gathered  and  eaten  of  its  leaves. 
He  led  his  companions  to  the  spot — all  ate,  and 
all  were  similarly  excited.  A tincture  of  the 
hemp-leaf  in  wine  or  spirits,  seems  to -have  been  the 
favourite  formula  in  which  the  Sheikh  Haider 
indulged  himself.  An  Arab  poet  sings  of  Haider’s 
emerald  cup — an  evident  allusion  to  the  rich  green 
colour  of  the  tincture  of  the  drug.  The  Sheikh 
survived  the  discovery  ten  years,  and  subsisted 
chiefly  on  this  herb,  and  on  his  death  his  disciples, 
by  his  desire,  planted  an  arbour  in  which  it  grew 
about  his  tomb.  From  this  saintly  sepulchre,  the 
knowledge  of  the  effects  of  hemp  is  stated  to  have 
spread  into  Khorasan.  In  Chaldea  it  was  unknown 
until  the  Mahommedan  year  728,  during  the  reign 
of  the  Caliph  Mostansir  Billah.  The  kings  of 
Ormus  and  Bahrein  then  introduced  it  into  Chaldea, 
Syria,  Egypt,  and  Turkey. 

In  Khorasan,  it  seems  that  the  date  of  the  use 
of  hemp  is  considered,  notwithstanding  the  fore- 
going, to  be  far  prior  to  Haider’s  era.  Biraslan, 
an  Indian  pilgrim,  contemporary  with  Cosroes 
(whoever  this  same.  Cosroes  may  be,  for  it  is  a 
name  often  occurring,  and  applied  as  Cresar  or 
Czar  to  more  than  one  generation),  is  stated  to 
have  introduced  and  diffused  the  custom  through 
Khorasan  and  Yemen. 

In  780  m.e.  very  severe  ordinances  were  passed 
in  Egypt  against  this  practice  of  indulging  in 
hemp.  The  Hjoneina  garden  was  rooted  up,  and 
all  those  convicted  of  the  use  of  the  drug  were 
.subjected  to  the  extraction  of  their  teeth.  But  in 
792  m.e.  the  custom  re-established  itself  with  more 


NEPENTHES. 


227 


than  original  vigour.  A vivicl  picture  is  given  by 
Makrisi  of  the  vice  and  its  victims : — “As  a general 
consequence,  great  corruption  of  sentiments  and 
manners  ensued,  modesty  disappeared,  every  base 
and  evil  passion  was  openly  indulged  in,  and 
nobility  of  external  form  alone  remained  to  those 
infatuated  beings.”  In  the  “ Sisters  of  Old,”  some 
further  memoranda  will  be  found  of  the  early  his- 
tory of  this  extraordinary  narcotic. 

Not  only  was  its  intoxicating  power,  but  many 
other  properties — some  true,  some  fabulous — were 
known  at  the  above  periods.  The  contrary  quali- 
ties of  the  plant — its  stimulating  and  sedative 
effects — are  dwelt  on : — “ They  at  first  exhilarate 
the  spirits,  cause  cheerfulness,  give  colour  to  the 
complexion,  bring  on  intoxication,  excite  the  ima- 
gination into  the  most  rapturous  ideas,  produce 
thirst,  increase  appetite,  excite  concupiscence ; 
afterwards,  the  sedative  effects  begin  to  preside, 
the  spirits  sink,  the  vision  darkens  and  weakens, 
and  madness,  melancholy,  fearfulness,  dropsy,  and 
such  like  distempers  are  the  sequel.”  Mirza  Abdul 
Kussac  says  of  it : “ It  produces  a ravenous  appe- 
tite and  constipation,  arrests  the  secretions,  except 
that  of  the  liver,  excites  wild  imagining,  a sensation 
of  ascending,  forgetfulness  of  all  that  happens 
uring  its  use,  and  such  mental  exaltation  that  the 
beholders  attribute  it  to  supernatural  inspiration.” 
To  which  he  also  adds:  “The  inexperienced,  on 
first  taking  it,  are  often  senseless  for  a day,  some 
go  mad,  others  are  known  to  die.” 

Whether  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  its  power, 
or  for  what  other  reason  we  know  not,  in  India  the 
seeds  of  Datura  are  mixed  with  hemp,  in  com- 
pounding some  of  the  confections,  as  well  as  the 
powder  of  nux  vomica.  This  is,  however,  excep- 
tional, neither  of  these  substances  entering  into  the 
composition  of  the  Majoon  of  Bengal  any  more 


228 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


than  does  corrosive  sublimate  form  a proportion 
of  the  pills  in  general  use  by  the  opium-eater  of 
Constantinople. 

It  is  a custom  with  some  people  to  blame, 
without  limit,  those  who  indulge  in  nervous  stimu- 
lants of  a nature  differing  from  their  own,  while 
serving  the  same  purpose.  Thus,  one  who  thinks 
that  Providence  never  designed  his  corporeal  frame 
to  become  a perambulating  beer-barrel,  eschews  all 
alcoholic  drinks,  but  at  the  same  time  eschews  not 
the  abuse  of  those  who  think  fit  to  indulge  in  a 
little  wine  for  their  stomach’s  sake,  or  a draught  of 
porter  for  their  bodily  infirmities.  These  same 
abstainers  still  adhere  to  their  tea  and  coffee,  and 
though  harmless  enough  as  these  dietetics  may  be, 
yet  they  in  part  serve  the  purposes  for  which  others 
employ  alcoholic  stimulants.  An  eminent  chemist 
states  that  persons  accustomed  to  the  use  of  wine, 
when  they  take  cod  liver  oil,  soon  lose  the  taste 
and  inclination  for  wine.  The  Temperance  So- 
cieties should  therefore  canonise  cod  liver  oil. 

It  is  true  that  thousands  have  lived  without  a 
knowledge  of  tea  or  coffee ; and  daily  experience 
teaches,  that  under  certain  circumstances  they  may 
he  dispensed  with  without  disadvantage  to  the 
merely  animal  vital  functions.  “But  it  is  an 
error,”  writes  Liebig,  u certainly,  to  conclude  from 
this  that  they  may  be  altogether  dispensed  with  in 
reference  to  their  effects ; and  it  is  a question 
whether,  if  we  had  no  tea  and  no  coffee,  the  popular 
instinct  would  not  seek  for  and  discover  the  means 
of  replacing  them.  Science,  which  accuses  us  of 
so  much  in  these  respects,  will  have,  in  the  first 
place,  to  ascertain  whether  it  depends  on  the  sensual 
and  sinful  inclinations  merely,  that  every  people 
of  the  globe  has  appropriated  some  such  means  of 
acting  on  the  nervous  life — from  the  shore  of  the 
Pacific, where  the  Indian  retires  from  life  for  days, 


NEPENTHES. 


229 


in  order  to  enjoy  the  bliss  of  intoxication  with 
coca,  to  the  Arctic  regions,  where  the  Kamtschat- 
dale  and  Koriakes  prepare  an  intoxicating  beverage 
from  a poisonous  mushroom.  We  think  it,  on  the 
contrary,  highly  probable,  not  to  say  certain,  that 
the  instinct  of  man,  feeling  certain  blanks,  certain 
wants  of  the  intensified  life  of  our  times,  which 
cannot  be  satisfied  or  filled  up  by  mere  quantity, 
has  discovered,  in  these  products  of  vegetable  life, 
the  true  means  of  giving  to  his  food  the  desired 
and  necessary  quality.  Every  substance,  in  so  far 
as  it  has  a share  in  the  vital  processes,  acts  in  a 
certain  way  on  our  nervous  system,  on  the  sensual 
appetites,  and  the  will  of  man.”  So,  although 
some  have  no  tobacco,  they  find  in  the  use  of  hemp 
or  opium  a substitute  for  that  vegetable  which 
nature  has  denied  them.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  had  we  never  become  acquainted  with  tobacco 
or  gin,  we  should  have  discovered  and  used  some 
other  narcotic  in  the  place  of  the  one,  and  a no  less 
fiery  and  injurious  form  of  alcohol  instead  of  the 
other.  To  talk  of  the  degraded  Chinese  as  bar- 
barians, indulging  to  an  awful  extent  in  opium, 
and  the  ignorant  Hindoo  and  Arab,  as  in  madness 
revelling  in  debauches  of  hemp  confections,  is  an 
evidence  of  the  workings  of  the  same  narrow- 
minded prejudices  under  which  some  who  abstain 
from  alcoholic  stimulants  rail  and  rave  at  those 
whose  feelings  and  habits  lay  in  an  opposite  direc- 
tion, charging  upon  the  enjoyments  of  the  many 
the  excesses  of  the  few.  Friend  Brooklove,  drink 
thy  tea,  and  re-consider  thy  verdict ! 


CHAPTEK  XYI. 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


« Oh,  kind  and  blissful  mockery,  when  the  manacled  felon,  on  his 
hed  of  straw,  is  transported  to  the  home  of  his  innocent  boyhood,  and 
the  pining  and  forsaken  fair,  is  happy  with  her  fond  and  faithful  lover 
— and  the  poor  man  hath  abundance — and  the  dying  man  is  in  joyous 
health — and  despair  hath  hope — and  those  that  want  are  as  though  they 
wanted  not— and  they  who  weep  are  as  though  they  wept  not. — But 
the  fashion  of  these  things  passeth  away,” 

“ At  home  ” may  mean,  that  quarter-day  has  passed 
with  all  its  terrors,  accounts  settled,  hills  filed,  tax-  : 
collectors  satisfied,  and  the  horizon  of  finance  clear 
and  cloudless.  There  is  no  fear  of  duns  or  doctors,  ■■ 
and  John  Thomas  announces  “at  home.”  Or  it 
may  mean,  that  having  enrobed  oneself  in  morning 
gown  and  slippers,  filled  and  lighted  our  pipe, 
seated  ourselves  in  an  easy  chair,  placed  our  feet 
firmly  and  contentedly  on  the  hearthrug,  and  com- 
menced enveloping  ourselves  in  a cloud  like  that 
in  which  Juno  conveyed  the  vanquished  Paris 
from  the  field  to  the  presence  of  the  fairest  of  the 
daughters  of  Greece,  we  feel,  with  reference  to  our- 
selves, and  in  despite  of  the  rest  of  the  world— “ at 
home.”  Or  it  may  mean,  that  having  made  the 
“ grand  tour,”  crossed  the  desert  on  a camel,  or 
seen  the  lions  of  Singapore,  Hong-Kong,  and  . 


GUXJA  AT  HOME. 


231 


Shanghai,  we  are  once  more  on  our  native  soil, 
and  no  longer  fear  Italian  banditti  or  Turkish 
plague,  sandstorms  or  crocodiles,  Chinese  poisoners 
or  bow-wow  pie,  that  we  breathe  again,  and  are 
u at  home.”  Or  it  may  mean  half-a-dozen  things 
beside.  But  to  see  a man  at  home,  is  to  see  him 
in  all  the  gradations  of  light  and  shade,  of  sunlight 
and  shadow,  brighter  and  deeper,  than  when  he 
covers  his  head  and  walks  abroad  to  look  at  the 
sun. 

Gunja  is  not  at  home  in  Europe.  Notwith- 
standing the  efforts  made  in  England  and  France 
to  introduce  the  Indian  hemp  into  medical  prac- 
tice, and  the  asseverations  of  medical  practitioners 
in  British  India,  who  have  extolled  its  power  as  a 
narcotic  and  anodyne,  it  has  never  settled  upon 
European  soil.  The  drugs  already  in  use  to  pro- 
duce sleep  and  alleviate  pain,  still  occupy  their  old 
popularity,  undisturbed  by  the  visit  of  a stranger, 
who,  finding  the  reception  too  cold,  has  retreated. 
In  France,  certain  experiments  were  made,  and  by 
leave  of  Dr.  Moreau,  we  shall  take  advantage  of 
them,  and  of  the  J ournal  of  Psychological  Medicine, 
to  ascertain  the  effects  of  this  drug  on  those  who 
have  used  it. 

Since  the  days  of  Prosper  Albinus,  both  learned 
and  unlearned  have  listened  with  wonder  to  the 
marvellous  effects  of  those  “drowsy  syrups  of  the 
East,”  when — 

“ Quitting  earth’s  dull  sphere,  the  soul  exulting  soars 
To  each  bright  realm  by  fancy  conjured  up, 

And  clothed  in  hues  of  beauty,  there  to  mix 
With  laughing  spirits  on  the  moonlit  green  ; 

Or  rove  with  angels  through  the  courts  of  heaven, 

And  catch  the  music  flowing  from  their  tongues.” 

In  Asia  Minor  an  extract  from  the  Indian  hemp 
has  been  from  time  immemorial  swallowed  with 


232 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

the  greatest  avidity,  as  the  means  of  producing  the 
most  ecstatic  delight,  and  affording  a gratification 
even  of  a higher  character  than  that  which  is 
known  there  to  follow  on  the  use  of  opium.  A 
small  dose  seems  only  to  influence  the  moral  facul- 
ties,  giving  to  the  intellectual  powers  greater 
vivacity,  and  momentary  vigour.  A larger  dose 
seems  to  awaken  a new  sensibility,  and  call  into 
action  dormant  capabilities  of  enjoyment.  Not 
only  is  the  imagination  excited,  but  an  intensity  of 
energy  pervades  all  the  passions  and  affections  of 
the  mind.  Memory  not  only  recurs  with  facility 
t°.  the  past,  but  incorporates  delusions  with  it,  for 
with  whatever  accuracy  the  facts  may  be  remem- 
beied,  they  are  painted  with  glowing  colours,  and 
made  sources  of  pleasure.  The  senses  become  in- 
stillments also  of  deception,  the  eye  and  the  ear, 
not  only  are  alive  to  every  impression,  but  they 
delude  the  reason,  and  disturb  the  brain,  by  the 
delusions  to  which  they  become  subject.  Gaiety, 
or  a soothing  melancholy,  may  be  produced,  as 
pleasant  or  disagreeable  sights  or  sounds  are 
presented. 

So  much  alive  are  the  swallowers  of  hascliisch 
to  the  effect  of  external  objects  upon  the  perceptive 
powers,  that  they  generally  retire  to  the  depths  of 
the  harem,  where  the  almas,  or  females  educated 
for  this  purpose,  add,  by  the  charms  of  music  and 
the  dance,  to  the  false  perceptions  which  the 
disordered  condition  of  the  brain  gives  rise  to. 
Insensibly  the  reason  and  the  volition  are  entirely 
overcome,  and  yield  themselves  up  to  the  fantastic 
imagery  which  affords  such  delight.  Can  we 
wonder  at  such  people  producing  and  admiring  all 
the  extravagancies  of  the  “ Arabian  Nights’  Enter- 
tainments ? ” Can  we  be  surprised  at  their  belief 
in  a paradise  for  the  future,  which  is  at  best  but  a 
voluptuary’s  dream  ? 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


233 


At  the  commencement  of  the  intoxication  pro- 
duced by  the  hemp,  there  is  the  most  perfect 
consciousness  of  the  state  of  the  disordered  facul- 
ties. There  exists  the  power  of  analyzing  the 
sensations,  but  the  mind  seems  unwilling  to  resume 
its  guiding  and  controlling  power.  It  is  conscious 
that  all  is  but  a dream,  and  yet  feels  a delight  in 
perfect  abandonment  to  the  false  enjoyment.  It 
will  not  attempt  to  awaken  from  the  reverie,  but 
rather  to  indulge  in  it,  to  the  utmost  extent  of 
which  it  is  capable.  There  seems  an  ideal  existence, 
but  it  is  too  pleasurable  to  shake  off — it  penetrates 
into  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  body — it  envelopes 
it.  The  dreams  and  phantoms  of  the  imagination 
appear  part  of  the  living  being ; and  yet,  during 
all  this,  there  remains  the  internal  conviction  that 
the  real  world _ is  abandoned,  for  a fictitious  and 
imaginative  existence,  which  has  charms  too  de- 
lightful to  resist.  To  the  extreme  rapidity  with 
which  ideas,  sensations,  desires,  rush  across  the 
brain,  may  be  attributed  the  singular  retardation 
of  time,  which  appears  to  be  lengthened  out  to 
eternity.  Similar  effects,  proceeding,  doubtless, 
from  the  same  or  similar  causes,  are  noticed  in  the 
Confessions  of  an  Opium-Eater,”  wherein  he 
speaks  of  minutes  becoming  as  ages. 

Dr.  Moreau  gives  singular  illustrations  of  this 
peculiar  state.  On  one  occasion  he  took  a dose  of 
the  haschisch  previously  to  his  going  to  the  opera, 
and  he  fancied  that  he  was  upwards  of  three  hours 
finding  his  way  through  the  passage  leading  to  it. 
M.  de  baulcy  partook  of  a dose  of  haschisch,  and 
when  he  recovered,  it  appeared  to  him  that  he  had 
been  under  its  influence  for  a hundred  years  at 


Whilst  an  indescribable  sensation  of  happiness 
takes  possession  of  the  individual,  and  the  joy  and 
exultation  are  felt  to  be  almost  too  much  to  be 


234  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

borne,  the  mind  seems  totally  at  a loss  to  account 
for  it,  or  to  explain  from  what  particular  source  it 
springs.  There  is  a positive  sensation  of  universal 
contentment,  but  it  is  vain  to  attempt  to  explain 
the  nature  of  the  enjoyment.  The  peculiar  motion 
appears  to  be  wholly  inexplicable.  A sense  of 
something  unusual  pervades  every  fibre,  but  all 
attempts  to  analyze  or  describe  it  are  declared  to 
be  in  vain.  After  a certain  period  of  time  the 
system  appears  to  be  no  longer  capable  of  further 
happiness,  the  sensibility  seems  thoroughly  ex- 
hausted, a gentle  sense  of  lassitude,  physical  and 
moral,  gradually  succeeds — an  apathy,  a careless- 
ness, an  absolute  calm,  from  which  no  exterior 
object  can  arouse  the  torpid  frame.  These  are  the 
great  characteristics  of  this  stage.  The  most 
alarming  or  afflicting  intelligence  is  listened  to 
without  exciting  any  emotion.  The  mind  is 
thoroughly  absorbed,  the  perception  seems  blunted, 
the  senses  scarcely  convey  any  impression  to  the 
brain.  A re-action  has  taken  place,  yet  the  col- 
lapse is  unattended  with  any  disagreeable  feeling. 
The  energies  are  all  prostrate,  yet  there  are  none 
of  those  depressing  symptoms  which  attend  the 
last  stages  of  ordinary  intoxication.  All  that  is 
described  is  an  ineffable  tranquillity  of  soul,  during 
which  it  is  perfectly  inaccessible  to  sorrow  or  pain. 
“The  haschisch  eater  is  happy,”  continues  Dr. 
Moreau,  J‘  not  like  the  gourmand,  or  the  famished 
man  when  satisfying  his  appetite,  or  the  voluptuary 
in  the  gratification  of  his  amative  desires ; but  like 
him  who  hears  tidings  which  fill  him  with  joy,  or 
like  the  miser  counting  his  treasures,  the  gambler 
who  is  successful  at  play,  or  the  ambitious  man 
who  is  intoxicated  with  success.” 

All  those  who  have  tried  the  experiment  do  not 
speak  in  such  glowing  terms  of  the  results.  M. 
de  Saulcey,  who  tried  it  at  Jerusalem,  says : — “ The 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


235 


experiment,  to  which  we  had  recourse  for  passing 
our  time,  turned  out  so  utterly  disagreeable  that  I 
may  safely  say,  not  one  of  us  will  ever  he  tempted 
to  try  it  again.  The  haschisch  is  an  abominable 
poison  which  the  dregs  of  the  population  alone 
drink  and  smoke  in  the  East,  and  which  we  were 
silly  enough  to  take,  in  too  large  a dose,  on  the 
eve  of  New  Year’s-day.  We  fancied  we  were  going 
to  have  an  evening  of  enjoyment,  hut  we  nearly 
died  through  our  imprudence.  As  I had  taken  a 
larger  dose  of  this  pernicious  drug  than  my  com- 
panions, I remained  almost  insensible  for  more 
than  twenty-four  hours,  after  which  I found  myself 
completely  broken  down  with  nervous  spasms,  and 
incoherent  dreams.” 

It  is  not  uncommon  for  illusions  and  hallucina- 
tions to  occur  during  the  early  stage,  when  the 
senses  have  lost  their  power  of  communicating 
faithfully  to  the  brain  the  impressions  they  re- 
ceive. 

Dr.  Auber,  in  his  work  on  the  plague,  narrates 
various  instances  of  delusions  occurring  in  the 
course  of  his  administering  hemp  preparations  as 
a relief  in  that  disease.  An  officer  in  the  navy 
saw  puppets  dancing  on  the  roof  of  his  cabin — 
another  believed  that  he  was  transformed  into  the 
piston  of  a steam-engine — a young  artist  imagined 
that  his  body  was  endowed  with  such  elasticity  as 
to  enable  him  to  enter  into  a bottle,  and  remain 
there  at  his  ease.  Other  writers  speak  of  indi- 
viduals similarly  affected : one  of  a man  who 
believed  himself  changed  entirely  into  brittle  glass, 
and  in  constant  fear  of  being  cracked  or  broken, 
or  having  a finger  or  toe  knocked  off ; another,  of 
a youth  who  believed  himself  growing  and  expand- 
ing to  such  an  extent,  that  he  deemed  it  inevitable 
that  the  room  in  which  he  was  would  be  too  small 
to  contain  him,  and  that  he  must,  during  the 


236 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


expansion,  force  up  the  ceiling  into  the  room  above. 
Dr.  Moreau,  on  one  occasion,  believed  that  he  was 
melting  away  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  at  another, 
that  his  whole  body  was  inflated  like  a balloon, 
that  he  was  enabled  to  elevate  himself,  and  vanish 
in  the  air.  The  ideas  that  generally  presented 
themselves  to  him  of  these  illusions  were,  that 
objects  wore  the  semblance  of  phantasmagoric 
figures,  small  at  first,  then  gradually  enlarging, 
then  suddenly  becoming  enormous  and  vanishing. 
Sometimes  these  figures  were  subjects  of  alarm  to 
him.  A little  hideous  dwarf,  clothed  in  the  dress 
of  the  thirteenth  century,  haunted  him  for  some 
time.  Aware  of  the  delusion,  he  entreated  that 
the  object  which  kept  up  the  illusion  should  be 
removed — these  were  a hat  and  a coat  upon  a 
neighbouring  table.  An  old  servant  of  seventy- 
one,  was,  upon  another  occasion,  represented  by  his 
eye  to  the  brain  as  a young  lady,  adorned  with  all 
the  grace  of  beauty,  and  his  white  hair  and 
wrinkles  transformed  into  irresistible  attractions. 
A friend  who  presented  him  with  a glass  of  lemo- 
nade was  pictured  to  his  disordered  imagination  as 
a furnace  of  hot  charcoal.  Sometimes  the  happi- 
ness was  interrupted  by  delusions  that  affrighted 
him.  Thus,  having  indulged  himself  with  his 
accustomed  dose,  every  object  awoke  his  terror  and 
alarm,  which  neither  the  conviction  of . his . own 
mind  nor  the  soothing  explanations  of  his  friends 
could  diminish,  and  he  was  for  a considerable 
length  of  time  under  the  most  fearful  impressions. 

“ Through  the  darkness  spread 
Around,  the  gaping  earth  then  vomited 
Legions  of  foul  and  ghastly  shapes,  which 
Hung  upon  his  flight.” 

These  are  the  immediate  effects  produced  by  this 
most  extraordinary  substance.  There  are  others, 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


237 


however,  still  more  singular,  which  have  attracted 
the  attention  of  travellers,  and  become  the  objects 
of  intense  curiosity.  These  are  of  a nature  un- 
known in  connection  with  any  other  substance,  and 
have  formed  the  basis  of  numerous  marvellous 
narrations,  that  have  astonished  even  the  incredu- 
lous. Those  who  have  seen  the  fearful  symptoms 
betrayed  during  delirium  tremens,  and  have  heard 
the  sufferers  declare  that  they  saw  before  them 
genii,  fairies,  devils,  know  how  the  senses  may 
become  the  source  of  delusion,  and  hence  may 
judge  to  what  a disordered  state  of  the  intellect  may 
lead.  When  the  brain  has  once  become  disordered 
by  the  use  of  the  narcotic  hemp,  it  becomes  ever 
afterwards  liable  to  hallucinations  and  delusions, 
unlike  thqse  produced  by  anything  else,  save  in- 
toxicating liquours  after  an  attack  of  delirium 
tremens.  The  mind  then  believes  that  it  sees 
visions,  and  beholds  beings  with  whom  it  can  con- 
verse. ' The  phenomena  gradually  develop  them- 
selves, until  illusions  take  the  place  of  realities,  and 
hold  firm  possession  of  the  mind,  which  would 
seem  on  all  other  points  to  be  healthy  and  vigorous 
but  on  this  point,  insane.  So  firm  and  so  fixed’ 
becomes  the  belief,  that  neither  argument  con- 
vinces, nor  ridicule  shakes,  the  individual  from  his 
faith,  in  which  a prejudiced  or  too  credulous  nature 
confirms  him  but  the  more. 

. The  Arabs,  especially  those  of  Egypt,  are  exceed- 
ingly superstitious,  and  there  is  scarce  a person 
even  among  the  better  informed,  who  does  not 
believe  in  the  existence  of  genii.  According  to 
their  belief  there  are  three  species  of  intelligent 
beings,  namely,  angels,  who  were  created  of  light 
genii,  who  were  created  of  fire,  and  men,  created  of 
earth  The  prevailing  opinion  is  that  Sheytans 
(devils)  are  rebellious  genii.  It  is  said  that  God 
created  the  genii  two  thousand  years  before  Adam, 


238 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


and  that  there  are  believers  and  infidels  among 
them  as  among  men.  It  is  held  that  they  are 
aerial  animals  with  transparent  bodies,  which  can 
assume  any  form.  That  they  are  subject  to  death, 
but  live  many  ages.  The  following  are  traditions 
of  the  Prophet  concerning  them.  The  genii  are  of 
various  shapes,  having  the  forms  of  serpents,  scor- 
pions, lions,  wolves,  jackals,  &c.  They  are  of  three 
kinds,  one  on  the  land,  one  in  the  sea,  one  in  the 
air.  They  consist  of  forty  troops,  each  tioop  con- 
sisting of  six  hundred  thousand.  They  are  of 
three °sorts,  one  has  wings  and  fly ; another,  are 
snakes  and  dogs  ; and  the  third  move  about  from 
place  to  place  like  men.  Domestic  snakes  on  the 
same  authority,  are  asserted  to  be  genii.  If  ser- 
pents or  scorpions  intrude  themselxes  upon  the 
faithful  at  prayers,  the  Prophet  orders  that  they  be 
killed,  but  on  other  occasions,  first  to  admonish 
them  to  depart,  and  then  if  they  remained  to  kill 
them.  It  is  related  that  Aisheeh,  the  prophets 
wife  having  killed  a serpent  in  her  chamber,  was 
alarmed  by  a dream,  and  fearing  that  it  might 
have  been  a Muslim  Jinnee,  as  it  did  not  enter  her 
chamber  when  she  was  undressed,  gave  in  alms,  as 
an  expiation,  about  three  hundred  pounds,  the 
mice  of  the  blood  of  a Muslim.  The  genii  appear 
to  mankind  most  commonly  in  the  shapes  of  ser- 
pents, dogs,  cats,  or  human  beings.  In  the  last 
case,  they  are  sometimes  of  the  stature  of  nien,  and 
sometimes  of  a size  enormously  gigantic.  If  good, 
they  are  generally  resplendeutly  handsome,  it  evil, 
horribly  hideous.  They  became  invisible  at  plea- 
sure (by  a rapid  extension  or  rarefaction  of  the 
particles  which  compose  them)  or  suddenly  dis- 
appear in  the  earth  or  air,  or  through  a solid  wall. 

The  Sheykh  Ivhaleel  El  Medabighee  related  the 
following  anecdote  of  a Jinnee.  He  had,  lie  said 
a favourite  black  cat,  which  always  slept  at  the 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


239 


foot  of  his  musquito  curtain.  Once,  at  midnight, 
he  heard  a knocking  at  the  door  of  his  house,  and 
his  cat  went  and  opened  the  hanging  shutter  of 
the  window,  and  called,  “ Who  is  there  ?”  A 
voice  replied,  “I  am  such  a one,”  (mentioning 
a strange  name)  £t  the  jinnee,  open  the  door.” 
“ The  lock,”  said  the  Sheykh’s  cat,  “ has  had  the 
the  name  pronounced  upon  it.”  It  is  the  custom 
to  say,  -£(In  the  name  of  God,  the  compassionate, 
the  merciful,”  on  locking  the  door,  covering  bread, 
laying  down  their  clothes  at  night,  and  on  other 
occasions,  and  this  they  believe  protects  their 
property  from  genii.  “ Then  throw  me  down,” 
said  the  voice,  “ two  cakes  of  bread.”  “ The 
bread-basket,”  answered  the  cat  at  the  window, 
“ has  had  the  name  pronounced  upon  it.’’  ‘‘  Well,” 

said  the  stranger,  “ at  least  give  me  a draught  of 
water.”  But  he  was  answered  that  the  water-jar 
had  been  secured  in  the  same  manner,  and  asked 
what  he  was  to  do,  seeing  that  he  was  likely  to  die 
of  hunger  and  thirst.  The  Sheykh’s  cat  told  him 
to  go  to  the.  door  of  the  next  house,  and  went  there 
also  himself,  and  opened  the  door,  and  soon  after 
returned.  .Next  morning  the  Sheykh  deviated 
from  a habit  which  he  had  constantly  observed  ; 
he  ga\  e to  the  cat  half  of  the  fateereh  upon  which 
he  breakfasted  instead  of  a little  morsel  which  he 
was  wont  to  give,  and  afterwards  said,  “ 0 my  cat, 
thou  knowest  that  I am  a poor  man ; bring  me 
then  a.  little  gold,”  upon  which  words  the  cat 
immediately  disappeared,  and  he  saw  it  no  more. 
Such  are  the.  stories  which  they  believe  and  narrate 
of  these  genii ; and  there  is  scarce  an  indulger  in 
haschisch  whose  imagination  does  not  lead  him  to 
believe  that  he  has  seen  or  had  communication 
with  some  of  these  beings. 

Mr.  Lane,  translator  of  the  “ Arabian  Nights  ” 
had  once  a humourous  cook  addicted  to  the  intoxi- 


240  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

eating  haschisch,  of  whom  he  relates  the  following 
circumstance: — “Soon  after  he  had  entered  my 
service,  I heard  him,  one  evening,  muttering,  and 
exclaiming  on  the  stairs  as  if  surprised  at  some 
event,  and  then  politely  saying,  £ But  why  are  you 
sitting  here  in  the  draught  ? Do  me  the  favour  to 
come  up  into  the  kitchen,  and  amuse  me  with  your 
conversation  a little  ! ’ The  civil  address  not  being 
answered,  was  repeated,  and  varied  several  times, 
till  I called  out  to  the  man,  and  asked  him  to 
whom  he  was  speaking.  £ The  efreet  of  a Turkish 
soldier/  he  replied,  ‘ is  sitting  on  the  stairs, 
smoking  his  pipe,  and  refuses  to  move  ; he  came 
up  from  the  well  below ; pray  step  and  see  him.’ 
On  my  going  to  the  stairs,  and  telling  the  servant 
that  I could  see  nothing,  he  only  remarked  that  it 
was  because  I had  a clear  conscience.  My  cook 
professed  to  see  this  efreet  frequently  after.” 

Dr.  Moreau  enumerates  many  instances,  from 
his  own  immediate  followers,  of  genii  seers  among 
the  haschisch  eaters.  His  dragoman,  who  had 
been  attached  in  that  capacity  to  Champollion,  the 
captain  of  the  vessel,  and  several  sailors,  had  not 
only  a firm  belief  in,  but  had  actually  received 
visits  from  genii  or  efreets,  and  neither  argument 
nor  ridicule  could  shake  their  conviction.  The 
captain  had,  on  two  occasions,  seen  a jinnee,  he 
appeared  to  him  under  the  form  of  a sheep.  On 
returning  one  evening  somewhat  late  to  his  house, 
the  captain  found  a stray  sheep  bleating  with 
unusual  noise.  He  took  him  home,  sheared  him 
for  his  long  fleece,  and  was  about  to  kill  him,  when 
suddenly  the  sheep  rose  up  to  the  height  of  twenty- 
feet,  in  the  form  of  a black  man,  and  in  a voice  of 
thunder,  announced  himself  as  a jinnee. 

One  of  the  sailors,  Mansour,  a man  who  had 
made  nearly  twenty  voyages  with  Europeans, 
recounted  his  interview  with  a genius  under  the 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


241 


guise  of  a young  girl  of  eight  or  ten  years  of  age. 
He  met  her  in  the  evening  on  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  weeping  deplorably  because  she  had  lost  her 
way.  Mans  our,  touched  with  compassion,  took  her 
home  with  him.  In  the  morning  he  mounted  her 
on  an  ass,  to  take  her  to  her  parents.  On  entering 
a grove  of  palms,  he  heard  behind  him  some  fear- 
ful sighs ; on  looking  round  to  ascertain  the  cause, 
he  saw,  to  his  horror,  that  the  little  girl  has  dis- 
mounted, that  her  lower  extremities  had  become  of 
an  enormous  length,  resembliug  two  frightful  ser- 
pents, which  she  trailed  after  her  in  the  sand.  Her 
arms  became  lengthened  out,  her  face  mounted  up 
into  the  skies,  black  as  charcoal,  her  immense 
mouth,  armed  with  crocodile’s  teeth,  vomited  forth 
‘ flame.  P oor  Mansour  fell  suddenly  upon  the  earth, 
where,  overcome  with  terror,  he  passed  the  night. 
In  the  morning  he  crawled  home,  and  two  months 
of  illness  attested  the  fact  of  disorder  of  the  brain. 

Many  such  tales  are  recounted,  and  all  told  by 
the  sufferers  with  the  firmest  belief,  and  the  most 
earnest  conviction  of  their  truth ; each,  by  his  own 
delusion,  strengthening  and  confirming  others. 
All  those  who  had  seen  visions  had  their  minds 
diseased  through  the  use  of  haschisch,  wdiile  those 
who  did  not  indulge  in  the  habit  were  free  from 
these  extraordinary  illusions.  These  hallucina- 
tions seem  to  be  manifested  independently  of  any 
then  existing  affection  of  the  brain,  and  the  indi- 
vidual appears,  under  other  circumstances,  fitted 
tor  the  usual  avocations  of  life.  They  may  be 
only  symptoms  of  a previously  disordered  intellect 
but  they  may  also  be  the  starting  point,  from 
which  insanity  is  developed.  In  all  instances  in 
which  these  hallucinations  occur,  watchfulness  is 
necessary,  since,  in  the  majority  of  cases  they  ter- 
minate finally  m derangement  of  the  brain  to  the 
extent  generally  denominated  madness. 


R 


242 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


Other  curious  results  from  the  use  of  this 
narcotic  are  detailed  by  Dr.  0‘Shaughnessy,  as 
exhibited  by  patients  in  India,  to  whom  he  had 
prescribed  it,  in  his  capacity  of  medical  practitioner, 
and  other  experiments  he  made. 

A dog,  to  whom  some  churrm  was  given,  in  half 
an  hour  became  stupid  and  sleepy,  dozing  at  inter-' 
vals,  starting  up,  wagging  his  tail  as  if  extremely 
contented ; he  ate  food  greedily,  on  being  called  he 
staggered  to  and  fro,  and  his  countenance  assumed 
the  appearance  of  utter  and  helpless  drunkenness. 
In  six  hours  these  symptoms  had  passed  away,  and 
he  was  perfectly  well  and  lively. 

A patient  to  whom  hemp  had  been  administered, 
on  a sudden  uttered  a loud  peal  of  laughter,  and 
exclaimed,  that  four  spirits  were  springing  with 
his  bed  into  the  air.  Attempts  to  pacify  him  were 
in  vain,  his  laughter  became  momentarily  more  and 
more  uncontrollable.  In  a short  time  he  exhibited 
symptoms  of  that  peculiar  nervous  condition, 
which  mesmerists  have  of  late  years  made  us  more 
acquainted  with,  under  the  name  of  catalepsy.  In 
whatever  imaginable  attitude  his  arms  and  legs 
were  placed,  they  became  rigid  and  remained. 
A waxen  figure  could  not  be  more  pliant  or 
stationary  in  each  position,  no  matter  how  con- 
trary to  the  natural  influence  of  gravity  on  the 
part.  A strong  stimulant  drink  was  given  to  him, 
and  his  intoxication  led  to  such  noisy  exclamations, 
that  he  had  to  be  removed  to  a separate  room, 
where  he  soon  became  tranquil,  in  less  than  an 
hour  his  limbs  had  gained  their  natural  condition, 
and  in  two  hours  he  said  he  was  perfectly  well,  and 
very  hungry. 

A rheumatic  cooly  was  subjected  to  the  influence 
of  half  a grain  of  hemp  resin.  In  two  hours  the 
old  gentleman  became  talkative  and  musical,  told 
several  stories,  and  sang  songs  to  a circle  of  highly 


CUJNJA  AT  HOME. 


243 


delighted  auditors,  ate  the  dinners  of  two  persons, 
subscribed  for  him  in  the  ward,  and  finally  fell 
soundly  asleep,  and  so  continued  until  the  following 
morning.  At  noon  he  was  perfectly  free  from 
headache,  or  any  unpleasant  sequel ; at  his  request, 
the  medicine  was  repeated,  and  he  was  indulged 
with  it  for  a few  days,  and  then  discharged. 

A medical  pupil  took  about  a quarter  of  a grain 
of  the  resin  in  the  form  of  tincture.  A shout  of 
loud  and  prolonged  laughter  ushered  in  the  symp- 
toms, and  a state  of  catalepsy  occurred  for  two  or 
three  minutes.  He  then  enacted  the  part  of  a 
Rajah  giving  orders  to  his  courtiers ; he  could  re- 
cognize none  of  his  fellow  students  or  acquaintances 
— all  to  his  mind  seemed  as  altered  as  his  own 
condition ; he  spoke  of  many  years  having  passed 
since  his  student's  days,  described  his  teachers  and 
friends  with  a piquancy  Avhich  a dramatist  would 
envy,  detailed  the  adventures  of  an  imaginary 
series  of  years,  his  travels,  his  attainment  of  wealth 
and  power.  He  entered  on  discussions  on  religious, 
scientific,  and  political  subjects,  with  astonishing 
eloquence,  and  disclosed  an  extent  of  knowledge, 
reading,  and  a ready  apposite  wit,  which  those  who 
knew  him  best  were  altogether  unprepared  for. 
For  three  hours  and  upwards  he  maintained  the 
character  he  at  first  assumed,  and  with  a degree  of 
ease  and  dignity  perfectly  becoming  his  high  situ- 
ation. This  scene  terminated  nearly  as  abruptly 
as  it  commenced,  and  no  headache,  sickness,  or 
other  unpleasant  symptoms  followed  the  excess. 

AY  ithout  detailing  instances  in  which  its  virtues 
as  a medicinal  agent  are  set  forth,  or,  naming  cases 
of  hydrophobia  in  which  it  was  given  and  failed, 
or  of  tetanus  in  which  it  was  resorted  to  with 
success,  we  can  scarce  forbear  noticing  the  fact 
that  .to  an  infant  only  60  days  old,  130  drops  of 
the  tincture  had  to  be  given  to  produce  narcotism, 


244  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

whilst  10  drops  produced  those  effects  in  the 
student  above  named,  who  believed  himself  an 
important  Rajah. 

The  most  recent  information  we  have  of  the 
effects  of  haschisch  is  supplied  by  Professor  K.  D. 
Schroff.  It  relates  to  a kind  called  “Birmingi,” 
the  laughter  producer  (“macht  keif”)  obtained 
from  Bucharest. 

This  preparation  was  in  the  form  of  tablets, 
hard  and  difficult  to  break,  externally  almost  black 
and  smooth,  with  hut  a slight  smell.  The  taste 
was  neither  bitter  nor  aromatic,  but  rather  insipid. 
On  prolonged  mastication,  the  very  tough  mass 
became  gradually  pappy,  and  eventually  dissolved 
in  the  saliva,  leaving  a crumbling  solid  substance. 
It  produced  irritation  in  the  throat,  when  chewed 
for  a long  time. 

Dr.  Heinrich  took  ten  grains  of  this  preparation 
in  May,  1859,  at  about  half-past  five  in  the  after- 
noon. He  chewed  this  quantity  for  about  an  hour, 
during  which  it  gradually  dissolved  and  was 
swallowed;  only  the  insoluble  residue,  about  two 
grains,  was  spit  out.  Irritation  of  the  throat,  and 
slight  nausea,  succeeded.  The  attempt  to  smoke 
a cigar  in  the  open  air  had  to  be  given  up  on 
account  of  dryness  and  roughness  in  the  throat. 
Dr.  H.  walked  into  town,  and  looked  at  the  print- 
shops  without  perceiving  any  change  in  himself. 
At  the  end  of  an  hour  and  a half,  about  seven 
o’clock,  he  met  an  acquaintance,  to  whom  he  talked 
all  kinds  of  nonsensical  trash,  and  made  the  most 
foolish  comparisons ; henceforth,  everything  he 
looked  at  seemed  to  him  ridiculous.  This  condition 
of  excitement  lasted  about  twenty  minutes,  during 
which  his  face  and  eyes  grew  redder  and  redder. 
Suddenly  a great  degree  of  sadness  came  over  him ; 
everything  was  too  narrow  for  him — he  acquired 
a disturbed  appearance,  and  became  pale.  His 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


245 


sadness  Increased  to  a feeling  of  anxiety,  accom- 
panied by  the  sensation  as  if  his  blood  was  flowing 
in  a boiling  state  up  to  his  head  ; the  feeling  as  if 
his  body  was  raised  aloft,  and  as  if  he  was  about 
to  fly  up,  was  particularly  characteristic.  His 
anxiety  and  weakness  overcame  him  to  such  a 
degree,  that  he  was  obliged  to  collect  all  the  power 
of  his  will,  and  his  companion  had  to  seize  him 
firmly  under  the  arm,  in  order  to  bring  him  on, 
which  was  done  in  all  haste,  as  he  feared  a new 
attack,  and  wished,  if  possible,  to  reach  a place 
where  he  could  be  taken  care  of;  but  in  the  course 
of  three  minutes,  while  he  was  still  walking,  the 
attack  set  in  with  increased  violence. 


It  was  only  with  great  difficulty  he  reached  the 
Institute — here  he  immediately  drank  two  pints  of 
cold  water,  and  washed  his  head,  neck,  and  arms 
with  fresh  water,  on  which  he  became  somewhat 
better.  The  improvement,  however,  lasted  only 
about  five  minutes.  He  sat  down  on  a chair  and 
felt  his  pulse,  which  he  found  to  be  very  small  and 
slow,  with  very  long  intervals.  He  was  no  longer 
in  a state  to  take  out  his  watch  to  ascertain  more 
exactly  the  frequency  of  his  pulse,  for  the  feeling 
of  anxiety  came  over  him  again,  and  with  it  he 
traced  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  a new  and 
violent  attack.  He  was  taken  into  tlie  adjoining 
chamber,  stripped  himself  partly  of  his  clothes,  and 
gave  over  his  things,  directing  what  was  to  be  done 
with  them  after  his  deaths  for  he  was  firmly  con- 
vrnced  that  his  last  hour  had  struck,  and  continually 
ci  led  out,  “ I am  dying ; I shall  soon  be  undergoing 
dissection  m the  dead-room.”  The  new  attack  was 
more  violent  than  the  former  were,  so  that  the 
patient  retained  only  an  imperfect  degree  of  con- 
Bciousness,  and  at  the  height  of  the  paroxysm,  even 
this  disappeared.  After  the  fit,  too,  consciousness 
returned  but  imperfectly : only  so  much  remained 


246 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


in  his  recollection,  that  the  images  which  arose 
within  him  constantly  increased  in  ghastliness, 
until  they  gave  way  to  the  unconscious  state,  and 
that  gradually,  with  returning  consciousness,  less 
formidable  figures  appeared  in  their  stead.  Subse- 
quently he  stated  that  it  appeared  to  him  as  if  he 
were  transported  from  the  level  surface  to  a hill, 
thence  to  a steep  precipice,  thence  to  a hare  rock, 
and  lastly  to  the  ridge  of  a hill,  with  an  immense 
abyss  before  him.  From  this  time,  he  could  no 
longer  control  the  current  of  ideas  following  one 
another  with  impetuous  haste,  and  he  could  not 
avoid  speaking  uninterruptedly  until  a fresh  attack 
came  on,  which  quite  deprived  him  of  consciousness 
for  some  minutes.  The  flow  of  his  ideas  had  now 
free  course  ; and  notwithstanding  his  loquacity,  he 
could  only  utter  a few  words  of  what  he  imagined. 
All  his  thoughts  and  deeds  from  his  childhood 
came  into  his  mind.  The  senses  of  sight  and 
hearing  were  unimpaired,  for  when  he  opened  his 
eyes,  he  knew  all  who  were  standing  about  him, 
and  recognized  them  by  their  voices  when  his  eyes 
were  closed.  Towards  ten  o’clock — that  is,  four 
hours  and  a half  after  the  seizure — the  storm  was 
somewhat  allayed ; he  obtained  control  over  his 
imagination,  ceased  to  speak  incessantly,  and  traced 
where  he  felt  pain.  During  the  night  he  drank  a 
great  deal  of  lemonade ; nevertheless,  sleep  tied 
from  him,  and  his  imagination  was  constantly  at 
work.  Next  morning  he  dressed,  and  was  con- 
veyed home,  but  could  not  set  to  his  daily  work, 
because,  notwithstanding  the  greatest  efforts,  he 
could  not  collect  his  scattered  thoughts,  and  he 
also  felt  bodily  weak.  He  was  obliged  to  take  to 
bed,  where  he  remained  till  the  morning  of  the 
third  day.  During  this  time,  he  drank  four  pints 
of  lemonade,  and  took  soup  only  twice,  as  he  had 
no  appetite.  On  the  third  day  he  was  led  about, 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


247 


supported  by  a second  person,  but  was  still  rather 
confused  and  giddy.  This  day  lie  ate  but  little, 
and  drank  lemonade.  During  the  second  and  third 
nights,  his  sleep  was  tranquil'.  On  the  fourth  day 
he  felt  well  again,  regained  his  appetite,  his  strength- 
increased,  and  his  appearance  became  less  unsettled. 
Nevertheless,  walking  about  for  half  an  hour  tired 
him  much.  The  depression  which  came  on  after 
the  excitement  gave  way  only  gradually.* 

The  incautious  use  of  hemp  is  also  noticed  as 
leading  to,  or  ending  in,  insanity,  especially  among 
young  persons,  who  try  it  for  the  first  time.  This 
state  may  be  recognised  by  the  strange  balancing 
gait  of  the  victim,  a constant  rubbing  of  the  hands, 
perpetual  giggling,  and  a propensity  to  caress  and 
chafe  the  feet  of  all  bystanders,  of  whatever  rank. 
The  .eye  wears  an  expression  of  cunning  and 
merriment  which  can  scarcely  be  mistaken.  In  a 
few  cases,  the  patients  are  violent — in  all,  vora- 
ciously hungry. 

Under  the  influence  of  this  drug,  its  devotees 
exhibited,  doubtless,  to  the  astonished  gaze  of  the 
early  travellers  from  this,  and  other  northern 
countries,  strange  freaks  and  antics,  which  filled 
them  with  wonder,  and  sent  them  home  brim-full 
of  wonderful  legends  and  marvellous  stories 
gathered  from  the  lips  of  the  votaries  of  Hemp, 
-i- H 1 end)  and  active  brain  of  the  oriental — always 
- associating  places  and  people,  actions  and  accidents, 
men  and  manners,  with  the  unseen  agency  of 
ghosts  and  genii — under  the  influence  of  haschisch, 
/ gave  full  scope  to  their  imaginations,  letting  loose 
upon  the  traveller  a torrent  of  romance,  and 
peopling  every  corner  of  his  route  with  legions  of 
spirits,  set  him  wondering  to  himself  whether  he 
hud  really  escaped  from  the  common-place  world 

* Dublin  Quarterly  Journal  of  Medical  Science.” 


248 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


of  liis  nativity  into  another  sphere  specially  devoted 
to  the  occupation  of  etherial  beings.  Now  listen- 
ing to  the  narrative  of  a reputed  communicant 
with  spirits,  he  hears  of  the  concentrated  genii, 
confined  in  the  narrow  form  of  a little  dog,  or 
smaller  still,  in  a little  fish,  gradually  expanding, 
and  towering  higher  and  higher,  till  his  head 
reached  to  the  clouds,  and  then  with  a voice  of 
thunder  communicating  Iris  message  to  the  terrified 
and  superstitious  Arab  crouching  at  his  feet. 
Anon,  he  hears  of  the  plague,  and  his  credulous 
dragoman  informs  him  that  once  upon  a time  a 
pious  Moslem  was  worshipping  at  sunrise,  when  he 
saw  a hideous  phantom  approaching  him,  and  the 
following  conversation  passed  between  them. 

“ Who  art  thou  ? ” 

“The  Plague/' 

“ Whither  goest  thou  ? ” 

“ To  Cairo/’ 

“ Wherefore  ? ” 

“To  kill  ten  thousand.” 

“ Go  not.” 

“ It  is  destined  that  I shorlld.” 

“ Go  then,  hut  slay  not  more  than  thou  hast 
gai(]  ^ 

“To  hear  is  to  obey.” 

After  the  plague  was  over,  at  the  same  hour, 
and  in  the  same  place,  the  phantom  once  more 
appears  to  him,  and  the  holy  man  again  addressed 
him  thus — 

“ Whence  comest  thou  ? ” 

“From  Cairo.” 

“ How  many  persons  hast  thou  destroyed  ? ” 
“Ten  thousand,  according  to  my  orders." 

“ Thou  best,  Uventy  thousand  are  dead." 

“ !Tis  true,  I killed  ten  thousand,  fear  carried 
off  the  remainder." 

Shortly,  and  the  traveller  passes  a tree,  a mound, 


GUNJA  AT  HOME. 


249 


or  a mass  of  ruins.  The  dragoman  narrates  the 
story  of  confined  treasures  and  protecting  genii, 
and  marvels  of  the  days  long  gone,  and  of  deeds 
of  sin,  and  ends  with  the  universal  ejaculation, 
“ God  is  great,  and  Mahomet  is  his  prophet.” 
From  these  people  of  mysteries  and  land  of 
marvels  the  traveller  returns,  and  though  he  only 
narrates,  for  fear  of  shame,  the  more  credible  of 
the  stories  he  has  heard,  from  that  day  forth,  poor 
man,  his  friends  shake  their  heads,  and  mutter 
their  fears  that  a tropical  sun  has  addled  his  brains. 

Naturally  and  nationally  superstitious  and 
credulous,  the  use  of  the  narcotic  assists  in  adding 
to  his  store  of  legendary  lore,  and  the  Arab  or 
Turk  becomes  in  himself  not  only  a new  edition  of 
the  “ Arabian  Night’s  Entertainments,”  but  it  also 
becomes  in  him  a living  belief,  and  the  narration 
comes  from  his  lips  with  all  the  earnestness  of 
positive  truth,  impressing  itself  upon  the  auditor 
as  a circumstance  in  which  the  narrator  was  a 
principal  actor.  And  father  to  son,  and  generation 
to  generation,  tell  the  tales,  recount  the  marvels, 
and  swallow  the  haschischof  their  fore-fathers,  and 
Allah  is  praised,  and  Mahomet  is  still  “ the 
Prophet.” 


CHAPTEE  XYII. 


HUBBLE-BUBBLE. 

“ This  is  a strange  repose,  to  he  asleep 
With  eyes  wide  open,  standing,  speaking,  moving, 
And  yet  so  fast  asleep.” — The  Tempest. 


The  Hubble-bubble  proper  is  a smoking  apparatus 
so  contrived  that  the  smoke,  in  its  passage  from 
the  point  of  consumption  to  that  of  inhalation, 
shall  pass  through  water,  which  performs  the 
office  of  a cooler.  The  Hubble-bubble  common 
consists  of  a cocoa-nut  shell,  with  two  holes  per- 
forated in  one  end,  at  about  an  inch  apart,  through  * 
the  germinating  eyes  of  the  nut.  Through  these 
orifices  the  kernel  is  extracted,  and  a wooden  or 
bamboo  tube,  about  nine  inches  long,  surmounted 
by  a bowl,  is  passed  in  at  one  opening  to  the  bottom 
of  the  shell,  which  is  partly  filled  with  water,  and 
the  smoke  is  either  sucked  from  the  other  hole,  or 
a tube  is  inserted  into  that  opening  also,  as  an  im- 
provement on  the  ruder  practice,  through  which  to 
imbibe  the  smoke.  The  hubble-bubble  is  used 
generally  for  smoking  hemp,  but  in  Siam  occa- 
sionally for  opium. 

Smoking  the  hemp  is  indulged  in,  with  some 
variations,  from  the  course  usually  pursued  with 
tobacco.  In  Africa  this  mode  of  indulgence  seems 


HUEBLE-BUBBLE. 


251 


to  be  more  universal  than  that  of  the  Indian  weed. 
The  inhabitants  of  Ambriz  seek  with  avidity 
the  solace  of  this  preparation ; they,  nevertheless, 
appear  to  employ  it  in  moderation,  and  are  not  so 
passionately  addicted  to  its  influence  as  other 
native  tribes — they  therefore  suffer  less  from  those 
pernicious  effects  which  result  from  intemperate 
indulgence  in  it.  The  Aboriginal  method  of 
smoking  this  narcotic  consists  in  fixing  the  clay 
howl  of  a native  pipe  into  the  centre  of  a large 
gourd,  and  passing  it  to  each  individual  composing 


ABORIGINAL  DAKKA  PIPE  OE  A1EBEIZ. 

the  community,  who  in  succession  take  several  in- 
halations of  the  smoke,  which  is  succeeded  by 
. violent  paroxysms  of  coughing,  flushed  face,  suf- 
fused eyes,  and  spasmodic  gestures,  with  other 
symptoms  indicative  of  its  dominant  action  on  the 
system.  Upon  the  subsidence  of  this  excitement, 
the  party  experience  all  those  soothing  sensations 
of  ease  and  comfort,  with  that  pleasing  languor 
.stated  to  constitute  the  potent  charm,  that  renders 
it  in  such  universal  request.  If  the  inhaling  pro- 
cess is  carried  beyond  this  stage,  inebriation  shortly 
supervenes.* 

The  Hottentots  and  Bushmen  smoke  the  leaves 
of  this  plant,  either  alone  or  mixed  with  tobacco  ; 
and  as  they  generally  indulge  to  excess,  invariably 
become  intoxicated.  When  the  Bushmen  were  in 

* Daniell  in  “Pharmaceutical  Journal.” 


252  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

London  exhibiting  themselves,  they  smoked  the 
hemp,  from  pipes  made  from  the  tusks  of  animals. 

The  Bechuanas  have  a curious  method  of  smok- 
ing the  Dacha.  Two  holes  the  size  of  the  howl  of 
a tobacco-pipe  are  made  in  the  ground  about  a foot 
apart ; between  these  a small  stick  is  placed,  and 
clay  moulded  over  it,  the  stick  is  then  withdrawn, 
leaving  a passage  connecting  the  two  holes,  into 
one  of  which  the  requisite  material  and  a light  is 
introduced,  and  the  smoking  commenced  by  the 
members  of  the  party,  each  in  turn  lying  on  his 
face  on  the  ground,  inhaling  a deep  whiff,  and 
then  drinking  some  water,  apparently  to  drive  the 
fumes  downward.  It  is  a singular  circumstance, 
that  a similar  method  of  smoking  is  employed  by 
certain  of  the  tribes  of  Incjia,  as  already  described, 
on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Forbes  Boyle. 

Among  the  Zoolus  the  dacha  is  placed  at  the 
end  of  a reed  introduced  into  the  side  of  an  ox- 
horn,  which  is  filled  with  water,  and  the  mouth 


EGOODU;  OR  SMOKING  HORN,  OF  TIIE  ZOOLUS. 

applied  to  the  upper  part  of  the  horn.  The  quan- 
tity of  smoke  which  is  inhaled  through  so  large  an 
opening,  unconfined  by  a mouth-piece,  often  affects 


HUBBLE-BUBBLE. 


253 


the  breath,  and  produces  much  coughing,  notwith- 
standing which  the  natives  are  very  fond  of  it; 
this  kind  of  pipe  is  called  Egoodu.  Tobacco  com- 
posed of  the  dried  leaf  of  the  wild  hemp  is  in 
general  use,  and  has  a very  stupifying  effect,  fre- 
quently intoxicating,  on  which  occasions  they  in- 
variably commence  long  and  loudly  to  praise  the 
king. 

Though  some  of  the  Zoolus  indulge  in  smoking, 
all,  without  exception,  are  passionately  fond  of 
snuff,  which  is  composed  of  dried  “ dacca  ” leaves 
mixed  with  burnt  aloes,  and  powdered.  No  greater 
compliment  can  be  offered  than  to  share  the  con- 
tents of  a.  snuff  calabash  with  your  neighbour. 
The  snuff  is  shovelled  into  the  palm  of  the  hand, 
with  a small  ivory  spoon,  whence  it  is  carefully 
sniffed  up.  Worse  than  a Gloth  would  that  bar- 
barian be  who  would  wantonly  interrupt  a social 
party  thus  engaged. 

The  Delagoans  of  the  eastern  coast,  consider  the 
smoking  of  the  “ hubble-bubble  ” one  of  the  greatest 
luxuries  of  life.  A long  hollow  reed  or  cane,  with 
the  lower  end  immersed  in  a horn  of  water,  and 
the  upper  end  capped  with  a piece  of  earthenware, 
shaped  like  a thimble,  is  held  in  the  hand.  They 
cover  the  top,  with  the  exception  of  a small  aper- 
ture, through  which,  by  a peculiar  action  of  the 
mouth,  they  draw  the  smoke  from  the  pipe  above 
by  the  water  below ; they  fill  the  mouth,  and  after 
having  kept  it  some  time  there,  eject  it  with 
violence  from  the  ears  and  nostrils.  “ 1 have  often,” 
says  Mr.  Owen,  “ known  them  giddy,  and  appa- 
rently half  stifled  from  indulging  in  this  fascinating 
luxury  it  produces  a violent  whooping  and  cough- 
ing, accompanied  by  a profuse  perspiration,  and 
great  temporary  debility,  and  yet  it  is  considered 
by  the  natives  highly  strengthening,  and  is  always 
resorted  to  by  them  previously  to  undertaking  a 


254 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


long  journey,  or  commencing  work  in  the  field. 
To  the  hut  of  an  old  man  who  was  thus  indulging 
himself,  I was  attracted  by  the  loudness  of  the 
cough  it  had  occasioned,  and  as  I entered  I ob- 
served that  his  feeble  frame  had  almost  fallen  a 
victim  to  the  violent  effects  of  the  bang  or  dakka 
he  was  smoking.  He  had  thrown  himself  back  on 
some  faggots,  and  it  was  not  until  I had  been  some 
time  there  that  he  appeared  at  all  conscious  of  my 
presence  ; yet,  as  soon  as  the  half  inebriated  wretch 
had  obtained  sufficient  strength,  he  commenced  his 
devotions  to  the  pipe  again,  and  by  the  time  I 
quitted  the  hut  was  reduced  to  the  same  state  as 
that  in  which  I had  found  him.” 

“I  have  seen  the  opium-eaters  of  Constantinople,” 
writes  the  Times  correspondent,  “ and  the  hashish- 
smokers  of  Constantine.  I recollected  having  a 
taboosh  in  the  bazaars  of  Smyrna  from  a young 
Moslem  whose  palsied  hand  and  dotard  head  could 
not  count  the  coins  I offered  him.  I recollect  the 
hashish-smokers  of  Constantine,  who  were  to  be 
seen  and  heard  every  afternoon  at  the  bottom  of 
the  abyss  which  yawns  under  the  Adultress  Eock 
— lean,  fleshless  Arabs — smoking  their  little  pipes 
of  hemp-seed,  chauntingand  swaying  their  skeleton 
forms  to  and  fro,  shrieking  to  the  wild  echoes  of 
the  chasm,  then  sinking  exhausted  under  the  huge 
cactus — sights  and  sounds  of  saturnalia  in  pur- 
gatory.” 

Hemp,  of  all  narcotics,  appears  to  be  the  most 
uncertain  in  its  effects.  It  is  so  in  the  form  of 
haschisch  or  alcoholic  infusion,  and  doubtless  is  so 
also  when  smoked.  Professor  Schroff  says  of  it — 
“ I have  seen  patients  take  from  one  to  ten,  or,  in 
one  case,  even  so  much  as  thirty  grains  of  the 
alcoholic  extract  in  the  course  of  an  evening  and 
night,  sometimes  within  a few  hours,  without 
producing  any  particular  symptoms,  except  some 


HUBBLE-BUBBLE. 


255 


determination  to  tlie  head  j even  the  so  much, 
wished  foi  sleep,  on  account  of  which  the  remedy 
was  taken,  was  not  obtained,  while  in  other  cases, 
one  grain  of  the  same  preparation,  from  the  same 
source,  produced  violent  symptoms,  bordering  on 
poisoning  delirium,  very  rapid  pplse,  extreme 
restlessness,  and  subsequently,  considerable  de- 
pression. I must,  therefore,  repeat,  that  Indian 
hemp,  and  all  its  preparations,  exhibits  the 
greatest  variety  in  the  degree  and  mode  of  action 
according  to  the  difference  of  individuality,  both 
m the  healthy  and  diseased  condition,  that  they 
are,  therefore,  to  be  classed  among  uncertain 
remedies,  to  be  used  with  great  caution.” 

In  India,  Gunjah  is  used  for  smoking  alone 
About  180  grains  and  a little  dried  tobacco  are 
rubbed  together  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  with  a 
tew  drops  of  water.  This  suffices  for  three 
pei  sons.  A little  tobacco  is  placed  in  the  pipe 
first,  then  a layer  of  the  prepared  Gunjah,  then 
more  tobacco,  and  the  fire  above  all.  Four  or  five 
persons  usually  join  in  this  debauch.  The  hookah 
is  passed  round,  and  each  person  takes  a single 
draught.  Intoxication  ensues  almost  instantly- 
nom  one  draught  to  the  unaccustomed,  within 
alf  an  hour ; and  after  four  or  five  inspirations 
to  those  more  practised  in  the  vice.  The  effects 
difler  from  those  occasioned  by  drinking  the 
bWhee.  Heaviness,  laziness,  and  agreeable  reveries 
ensues,  but  the  person  can  be  readily  roused,  and 
is  able  to  discharge  routine  occupations,  such  as 
pulling  the  punkah,  waiting  at  table,  and  divers 

“ America  is  beginning  to  use  the 

ffipulai;  amonS  the  Hindoos,  though 
m rather  a different  manner,  for  young  Jonathan 

™drfnl™  IT"  be  an  origiliaL  H is  not  a 
drink,  but  a mixture  of  bruised  hemp  tops  and 


256 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


the  powder  of  the  betel,  rolled  up  like  a quid  of 
tobacco.  It  turns  the  lips  and  gums  of  a deep 
red,  and  if  indulged  in  largely,  produces  violent 
intoxication.  Lager  beer  and  schnaps  will  give 
way  for  “ bang,”  and  red  lips,  instead  of  red  noses, 
become  the,tC  style.” 


CHAPTEE  XVIII. 


SIRI  AND  PINANG. 

“ He  took  and  tasted,  a new  life 
Flowed  through  his  renovated  frame  ; 

His  limbs,  that  late  were  sore  and  stiff, 
Felt  all  the  freshness  of  repose ; 

His  dizzy  brain  was  calmed, 

The  heavy  aching  of  his  lids 
At  once  was  taken  off ; 

For  Laila,  from  the  bowers  of  Paradise, 
Had  borne  the  healing  fruit.” — Thalaba. 


The  widely  distributed  race  of  Malays,  occupy 
not  only  the  Malayan  Peninsula,  and,  though,  not 
exclusively,  the  islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago 
hub  has  penetrated  into  Madagascar,  and  spreads’ 
itself  through  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  from  New 
Zealand,  the  Society,,  the  Friendly  Isles,  and  the 
Marquesas,  to  the  distant  Sandwich  and  Easter 
. S;  .Whatever  may  have  been  the  starting 
point,  it  is  essentially  a shore-dwelling  race 
peopling  only  islands,  or  such  portions  of  the 
continent  as  border  the  ocean,  and  never  penetrating 
nto  the  interior,  or  passing  the  mountains  running 
parallel  to  the  coast.  Their  energies  are  most 
conspicuous  m maritime  occupations,  and  to  this 
predilection  their  extensive  diffusion  may  be 
attributed  These  people,  supposed  by  some  to 

andChincf6 nity  t0;  r alHanCe  with  the  Hiudo° 

HwS  pp-  raC6S’  Whence  the^  have  been  called 

en  d0:;G  reSC’  rirfent  as  maQy  P°ints  of  differ- 
ence as  of  resemblance;  and  while  some  of  the 


258 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  southern  or  eastern 
Asia  may  be  found  amongst  them,  they  have  also 
others  peculiarly  their  own.  The  indulgence  in 
opium  is  not  unknown  to  the  Malays,  hut  the 
national  indulgence  of  the  race  is  the  areca.  or 
betel  nut,  a habit  characteristic  of  a sea-loving 
people.  The  use  of  a pipe,  and  especially  an 
opium-pipe,  would  he  a hindrance  to  the  freedom 
of  their  motions  on  hoard  then’  vessels,  and  require 
a state  of  inactivity  or  repose  incompatible  with  a 
maritime  life,  in  order  to  he  enjoyed.  This  may  in 
part  account  for  the  prevalence  of  chewing  tobacco 
in  our  navy,  and  of  the  a huyo  ” by  the  Malays.  , 1 
The  areca  palm  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of 
the  palms  of  India.  It  has  a remarkably  straight 
trunk,  rising  forty  or  fifty  feet,  with  a diameter  of 
from  six  to  eight  inches,  of  nearly  an  equal 
thickness  throughout.  Six  or  seven  leaves  spring 
from  the  top,  of  about  six  feet  in  length,  hanging 
downwards  from  a long  stalk  in  a graceful  curve. 
This  palm  is  cultivated  all  over  India,  in  Cochin-  , 
China,  Java,  and  Sumatra,  and  other  islands  of  the 
Archipelago,  for  the  sake  of  the  nuts.  The  fruit 
is  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a hen’s  egg,  and  con- 
sists of  an  outer,  firm,  fibrous  rind  or  husk,  about 
half  an  inch  thick,  and  an  inner  kernel,  somewhat 
resembling  a nutmeg  in  size,  but  more  conical  in 
shape.  Internally  the  resemblance  to  a nutmeg, 
with  its  alternate  white  and  brown  markings,  is 
even  greater.  When  ripe,  the  fruit  is  of  a reddish 
yelloAv  colour,  hanging  in  clusters  among  the 
bright  green  leaves.  If  allowed  to  hang  until 
fully  ripe,  it  falls  off  and  sows  itself  in  the  ground, 
but  this  is  not  allowed.  ’ The  trees  are  in  blossom 
in  March  and  April,  and  the  fruits  may  be  gathered 
in  July  and  August,  when  the  sliced  nut  can  be 
prepared  from  them,  but  they  do  not  fully  npen 
till  September  and  October. 


SIRI  AND  PINANG. 


259 


The  nuts  vary  in  size,  their  quality,  however, 
does  not  at  all  depend  upon  this  property,  hut  upon 
their  internal  appearance  when  cut,  intimating  the 
quantity  of  astringent  matter  contained  in  them. 
If  the  white  or  medullary  portion  which  inter- 
sects the  red,  or  the  astringent  part  be  small,  has 
assumed  a bluish  tinge,  and  the  astringent  part  is 
very  red,  the  nut  is  considered  of  good  quality,  but 
when  the  medullary  portion  is  in  large  quantity, 
the  nut  is  considered  more  mature,  and  not  possess- 
ing so  much  astringency,  is  not  deemed  so  valuable. 

This  palm  is  cultivated  in  gardens  and  planta- 
tions. The  latter  are  usually  close  to  the  villages, 
and  are  extremely  ornamental.  Like  the  Malays 
themselves,  the  areca  palm  prefers  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  sea,  which  is  most  conducive  to  the 
perfection  of  the  fruit,  as  the  coca  shrub  of  the 
Peruvian  mountaineers  delights  in  the  slopes  of  the 
Andes.  It  is  stated  that  a fertile  palm  will  produce, 
on  an  average,  eight  hundred  and  fifty  nuts  annually’ 
the  average  production  in  the  plantation  is  about 
fourteen  pounds  weight  for  each  palm,  or  ten  thou- 
sand pounds  per  acre.  The  price  they  realize  to  the 
grower  is  about  two  shillings  the  hundredweight. 

The  addaca , or  betel  nut,  is  a staple  product  of 
Travancore.  In  183/  the  number  of  trees  grow- 
ing there  was  stated  in  the  survey  to  be  10,232,873, 
which,  at  the  average  rate  named,  would  produce 
63,000  tons  of  nuts.  Nearly  half  a million 
trees  are  in  cultivation  in  Prince  of  Wales’ 
Island,  which  would  produce  about  3,000  tons 
more.  The  Pedir  coast  of  Sumatra  produces 
annually  about  4,700  tons,  of  which  half  is  ex- 
ported. The  Chinese  import  near  3,000  tons 
annually,  exclusive  of  their  supplies  from  Cochin- 
China,  the  amount  of  which  is  not  known,  but 
without  doubt,  more  than  another  3,000  tons’ 
Many  ships  freighted  solely  with  these  nuts  saii 

s 2 


260 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


yearly  from  the  ports  of  Sumatra,  Malacca,  and 
Siam. 

When  there  is  no  immediate  demand  for  the 
areca  nuts  they  are  not  shelled,  but  preserved  in 
the  husk,  to  save  them  from  the  ravages  of  insects, 
which  attack  them  nevertheless,  almost  as  success- 
fully. Of  the  nuts  produced  in  Travancore, 
upwards  of  2,000  candies,*  prepared  nuts,  are 
annually  exported  to  Tinnevelly  and  other  parts 
of  the  country,  and  about  3,000,000  of  ripe 
nuts  are  shipped  to  Bombay  and  other  places, 
exclusive  of  the  quantity  consumed  in  the  country, 
and  for  the  inland  trade. 

From  the  report  of  P.  Shungoomry  Menowen, 
we  derive  the  following  account  of  the  preparation 
of  the  nuts.  There  are  various  kinds  in  use. 
That  used  by  families  of  rank  is  collected  while 
the  fruit  is  tender ; the  husk,  or  outer  pod,  is 
removed,  the  kernel,  a round  fleshy  mass,  is  boiled 
in  water.  In  the  first  boiling  of  the  nut,  when 
properly  done,  the  water  becomes  red,  thick,  and 
starch  like,  and  this  is  afterwards  evaporated  into 
a substance  like  catechu.  The  boiled  nuts  being 
now  removed,  sliced,  and  dried,  the  catechu-like 
substance  is  rubbed  thereto,  and  dried  again  in  the 
sun,  when  they  become  of  a shining  black  colour, 
and  are  ready  for  use.  Whole  nuts,  without  being 
sliced,  are  also  prepared  in  the  same  form  for  use. 
Pipe  nuts,  as  Avell  as  young  nuts  in  the  raw  state, 
are  used  by  all  classes  of  people,  and  ripe  nuts  pre- 
served in  water  are  also  used  by  the  higher  classes. 

Nuts  prepared  in  Travancore  for  exportation  to 
Trichonopoly,  Madura,  and  Coimbatore,  are  pre- 
pared in  thin  slices,  coloured  with  red  catechu  or 
uncoloured.  For  Tinnevelly  and  other  parts  of 


* 1850 — 1,734  candies. 

1851— 1,983  candies. 

1852 —  2,953  candies. 


1853— 2,073  candies. 

1854 —  l 954  candies. 
The  candy  is  433£  lbs. 


SIRI  AND  PINANG. 


261 


the  country,  the  nuts  are  prepared  by  merely 
cutting  them  into  two  or  three  slices  and  drying 
them.  For  Bombay,  and  other  parts  of  the 
Northern  Country,  the  nuts  are  exported  in  the 
form  of  whole  nuts  dried  with  the  pods. 

The  nut  is  chewed  by  both  sexes  indiscriminately 
in  Malabar  as  well  as  on  the  Coromandel  coast.  In 
Malabar  they  mix  it  with  betel  leaf,  chunam,  and 
tobacco ; but  in  Tinnevelly  and  other  parts,  tobacco 
is  never  added.  The  three  ingredients  for  the 
betel,  as  commonly  used,  are,  the  slieed  nut,  the 
leaf  of  the  betel  pepper,  in  which  the  nut  is  rolled, 
and  chunam,  or  powdered  lime,  which  is  smeared 
over  the  leaf. 

The  areca  nut  is  commonly  known  by  the  Malay 
name  of  Pinang,  but  in  the  Acheenese  language  it 
is  called  Penu,  and  the  palm  producing  it  Ba 
Perm.  The  ripe  nut  is  called  also  Penu  massa , and 
the  green  Penu  mudr , The  leaf  of  the  betel  pepper 
is  called  either  Ranu  or  Sin,  and  the  lime  Chunam 
or  Gapia  Tobacco,  when  used,  is  called  Bakun. 

In  China,  the  principal  consumption  of  the  nut 
as  a masticatory  is  in  the  provinces  of  Quangton, 
Quang-se,  and  Che-keang;  and  it  may  be  seen 
exposed  for  sale  on  little  stalls  about  the  suburbs 
of  Canton  with  the  other  additional  articles  used 
in  its  consumption.  It  is  also  used  in  dyeing.  In 
the  central  provinces  of  Hoo-kwang  and  Kang-si 
the  nut  is,  after  being  bruised  and  pounded,  mixed 
with  the  green  food  of  horses  as  a preventive 
against  diarrhoea,  to  which  some  kinds  of  food 
subjects  them.  The  Chinese  state  that  it  is  used 
as  a domestic  medicine  in  the  North  of  China,  some 
pieces  being  boiled,  and  the  decoction  adminis- 
tered. From  them  is  also  prepared  a kind  of  cutch 
or  catechu,  which  is  exported  in  great  quantities’ 
ail 1S,  .no^  .us,cd  largely  in  this  country,  together 
with  other  kinds,  as  a tanning  and  dyeing  material. 


262 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


In  Ceylon  these  instruments  are  used:  the 
Grirri  (No.  1.)  for  cutting  the  areca  nut,  and  the 
Wanggedi  (No.  2)  and  Moolgah  (No.  3),  a kind  of 
mortar  and  pestle  for  mincing  and  intimately 
mixing  the  ingredients  together. 


No.  1. 


GIRRI,  TOR  CUTTING  ARECA* 


No.  2. 


No.  3. 


WANGGEDI  OR 

MORTAR 


AND 


JtfOOLOAH  OR 
PEST  LB, 


TOR  MIXING  THE  INGREDIENTS, 


SIEI  AND  PINANG. 


263 


In  Virginia,  tobacco  was  at  one  period  used  as  a 
currency  at  a fixed  value  per  pound.  In  Peru,  the 
labourer  is  paid  in  coca,  and  in  the  Philippines, 
betel  rolls  have  been  used  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
currency.  To  the  Malay  it  is  as  important  as 
meat  and  chink,  and  many  would  rather  forego  the 
latter  than  their  favourite  Pinang.  The  same  thing 
might  also  be  said  of  the  inveterate  quidder  of 
tobacco ; we  remember  one  of  this  description,  who 
for  years  used  one  ounce  per  day,  and  declared 
often  that  he  had  rather  be  deprived  of  his  dinner 
than  his  quid,  although  he  liked  both.  Without 
his  leaf,  the  confirmed  “'coquero”  is  the  most 
miserable  of  beings,  and  when  deprived  of  his 
customary  pipe,  the  opium- smoker  becomes  sullen, 
ill,  and  utterly  incapacitated  for  his  employment. 
Habits  of  indulgence  of  this  kind,  when  once  com- 
menced, are  not  so  easily  thrown  off.  It  has  been 
said  that  a “ coquero  ” was  never  reclaimed  from 
the  use  of  his  coca. 

No  estimate  can  be  given  of  the  absolute  quan- 
tity of  areca  nuts  which  are  used  as  a masticatory. 
Johnston  calculates  that  they  are  chewed  by  not 
less  than  fifty  millions  of  people,  which,  at  the 
rate  of  ten  pounds  per  year,  or  less  than  half  an 
ounce  per  day,  would  amount  to  two  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  tons,  or  five  hundred  millions  of 
pounds,  a quantity  greater  than  that  of  any  other 
narcotic  except  tobacco. 

Areca  nuts  have  been  strung  and  made  into 
walking  sticks,*  and,  in  this  country,  turned  and 
formed  into  ornamental  bracelets,  as  well  as  burnt 
into  charcoal  for  tooth  powder.  We  have  engirdled 
the  earth  with  pig-tail,  let  us  apply  the  same  kind 
of  calculation  to  the  estimated  annual  consumption 

* There  is  a stick  of  this  kind  in  the  Museum  of  Economic 
Botany  at  Kew  Gardens. 


264  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

of  areca  nuts,  and  strung  together  in  the  form  of 
a bracelet,  we  have  a string  505,050  miles  in  length, 
enough  to  go  round  the  world  21  times ; or,  sup- 
posing these  nuts  to  be  arranged  side  by  side,  they 
would  cover  a road  fourteen  feet  wide  for  the  dis- 
tance of  not  less  than  3,000  miles.  If  arranged  in 
like  manner  in  the  form  of  a square,  they  would 
occupy  at  least  5,000  acres  of  land. 

The  areca  palm  has  given  its  name  to  the  island 
of  Penang,  not  from  its  growing  there  in  larger 
numbers,  or  more  luxuriant  than  elsewhere,  but 
because  it  was  the  tree  chiefly  cultivated  by  the 
Malays  who  first  occupied  the  island.  It  now 
better  deserves  the  title,  being  the  emporium  for 
the  betel  nut  raised  on  the  east  coast  of  Sumatra. 

In  Sumatra  many  of  the  common  chinking  and 
baking  utensils  in  the  boats,  and  vessels  for  holding 
water,  not  dissimilar  to  those  made  by  the  Austra- 
lian natives  from  the  bark  of  the  gura  trees,  are 
made  from  the  spathe  of  this  palm,  it  is  also  nailed 
upon  the  bottoms  of  the  boats,  and  often  small 
bunches  of  the  abortive  fruit  may  be  seen  placed 
as  an  ornament  at  the  stem  and  bows  of  the  native 
vessels.  The  male  flowers  are  deliciously  fragrant, 
and  are  in  request  in  the  island  of  Borneo  on  all 
festive  occasions ; they  are  considered  a necessary 
ingredient  in  the  medicines  and  charms  employed 
for  healing  the  sick.  In  Malabar  an  inebriating 
lozenge  is  prepared  from  the  sap  of  this  palm. 

Manuel  Blanco  thinks  that  the  areca  might  be 
used  for  making  red  ink,  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  it  is  thus  employed  in  India.  With  other 
combinations  it  makes  black  ink  of  moderate 
quality.  The  lower  part  of  the  petiole  is  used  for 
wrapping  instead  of  paper,  for  which  purpose  it  is 
sold  in  the  Philippines.  The  heart  of  the  leaves  is 
eaten  as  a salad,  and  has  not  a bad  flavour.  The 
convicts  confined  in  the  Andaman  Islands  masti- 


SIRI  AND  PINANG. 


265 


cate  the  nuts  of  another  species  of  areca.  The 
Nagas  and  Abors  of  Eastern  Bengal,  use  those  of 
a third  species,  and  the  natives  of  the  mountainous 
districts  of  Malabar  those  of  a fourth.  There  are 
about  twenty  species  of  the  areca  genus,  of  which 
several  are  thus  used. 

When  betel  nuts  are  scarce  in  the  Philippines, 
the  natives  substitute  the  bark  of  the  Guayabo 
and  the  Antipolo. 

It  is  confidently  affirmed  to  us,  that  in  Ceylon 
the  natives  sometimes  masticate  the  roots  of  the 
cocoa-nut  palm,  instead  of,  and  as  a substitute  for, 
the  areca  nut,  and  that  it  answers  the  purpose  very 
well. 

_ The  root  of  a plant  known  botanically  as  Derris 
pinnata , is  also  occasionally  used  amongst  certain 
Asiatics,  in  the  same  manner,  in  cases  of  deficiences 
in  the  supply  of  genuine  betel. 

The  consumption  of  the  areca-nut  being  con- 
fined to  an  area  of  no  very  wide  extent,  and  that 
principally  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  producing 
countries,  or  in  those  countries  themselves,  the 
necessity  for  providing  a substitute  does  not  often 
arise ; hence,  those  of  which  we  have  any  know- 
ledge, as  having  been  at  all  generally  used  for  that 
purpose,  are  confined  to  two  or  three  substances. 
Some  years,  _ however,  are  not  so  productive  as 
others,  and  instances  have  occurred  in  which  the 
average  price  of  areca  nuts  for  mastication  has 
been  doubled.  If  the  Yankees  persist  in  their  betel 
and  hemp  chewing  propensities,  which  have  lately 
been  developed  amongst  them,  probably  the  Chinese 
and  Malay  will  have  to  pay  a higher  price  for  their 
nuts,  or  provide  something  which  shall  thenceforth 
fulfil  its  duties,  and  we  may  hear  of  other 
substitutes. 

Ardent  as  the  admirers  of  the  areca  may  be 
in  their  admiration  of  the  “ buyo,”  we  have  never 


266 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


seen  more  than  one  translation  of  a Malayan  poem 
in  which  the  masticatory  was  extolled,  and  this, 
unfortunately,  we  are  unable  to  present  to  our 
readers.  The  gods  have  either  not  made  the 
votaries  of  betel  so  poetical  as  the  servants  of  the 
pipe,  or  the  peans  in  praise  thereof  are  locked  up 
from  us  in  the  cabalistic  characters  of  their  national 
language.  The  unmistakable  marks  left  by  the 
habit  on  the  lips,  teeth,  and  gums,  are  certainly 
extolled  by  them  as  marks  of  beauty.  In  the 
poem  already  referred  to,  the  lover  addresses  his 
mistress  in  praise  of  the  redness  of  her  teeth  and 
lips,  and  the  fragrant  odour  of  her  breath,  produced 
by  the  sweet  “buyo”  secreted  in  the  hollow  of  her 
cheek.  White  teeth  are  therefore  held  in  abomi- 
nation, and  as  this  is  also  the  opinion  of  certain 
African  tribes,  who  stain  theirs  with  the  juice  of 
flowers,  ours  must  be  a barbarous  nation  to  respect 
such  albino  masticators. 


N.B. — The  average  annual  export  of  areca  nuts  from  Ccylou 
is  CO, 000  cwts.,  and  the  price  a fraction  below  20s.  per  cwt. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


UNDER  THE  PALMS. 

“ A wind  blew  warm  from  the  east,  and  it  lifted  its  arms  hopelessly  ; 
and  when  the  wind,  love-laden  with  most  subtle  sweetness,  lingered, 
loth  to  fly,  the  palm  stood  motionless  upon  its  little  green  mound,  and 
the  flowers  were  so  fresh  and  fair,  and  the  leaves  of  the  trees  so  deeply 
hued,  and  the  native  fruit  so  golden  and  glad  upon  the  boughs,  that  the 
still  warm  garden  air  seemed  only  the  silent,  voluptuous  sadness  of  the 
tree ; and  had  I been  a poet  my  heart  would  have  melted  in  song  for 
the  proud,  pining  palm.” — G.  W.  Curtis. 

Two  species  of  a kind  of  pepper  vine  are  exten- 
sively cultivated,  with,  the  areca  palm,  in  all  the 
countries  of  the  East  where  chewing  the  betel  is 
indulged  in,  These  belong  to  the  same  family 
of  plants  as  those  producing  the  common 
black  pepper  and  the  long  pepper  of  commerce. 
They  are  known  to  botanists  as  Chavica  betle  and 
Chavica  siraboa.  They  are  similar  in  their  habits, 
being  trailing  plants,  with  some  resemblance  to  the 
ivy,  but  more  tender  and  fragile.  The  betel  palms 
may.be  often  seen  with  the  pepper,  climbing  and 
twining  around  their  tall,  straight,  slender  trunks, 
or  they  are  trained  about  poles  of  bamboo  in  the 
manner  of  hops  in  the  hop  gardens  of  Kent. 
Almost  every  one  with  a piece  of  land  cultivates 
the  pepper  for  his  own  consumption.  In  the 
markets . incredible  quantities  of  the  leaves  are 
offered  for  sale,  in  piles  carried  about  in  baskets. 


268  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

In  Northern  India,  sheds  are  constructed  for  the 
growth  of  the  pepper.  These  are  from  twenty  to 
fifty  yards  in  length,  and  eight  or  twelve  broad,  of 
bamboo,  to  shelter  the  plants  from  the  sun.  Great 
attention  is  paid  to  the  cultivation,  and  the  plants 
are  carefully  attended  to,  and  cleaned  every 
morning. 

Betel  leaf  cannot  be  preserved  in  a sound  state 
beyond  eight  days  without  preparation,  but  by 
being  prepared  over  a fire,  and  rolled  into  balls,  in 
which  state  it  is  called  chenai,  it  will  keep  a year, 
only  the  quality  is  much  deteriorated.  In  Penang 
the  old  men  carry  about  with  them  a sort  of  metal 
tube,  having  a ramrod-looking  pestle,  with  which 
they  busy  themselves  in  pounding  the  mixture  for 
chewing.  The  young  daily  make  nut-crackers  of 
their  jaws,  and  although  the  mixture,  perhaps, 
rather  tends  to  preserve  the  teeth,  still  the  exercise 
on  the  nut  must  be  a little  too  violent  for  them, 
and  the  Malays  say  it  injures  the  sight.  The 
Chinese  are  not  much  addicted  to  the  use  of  the 
betel. 

The  consumption  of  betel  by  the  inhabitants  of 
Penang  and  Province  Wellesley  may  be  stated  at 
6,211,440  bundles  of  100  leaves  each,  equal  in 
value  to  31,057  Spanish  dollars,  which  would  he 
the  produce  of  98  orlongs  of  land,  or  about  130 
acres,  planted  regularly.  But  allowing  for  the 
various  distances  given  by  different  cultivators 
between  the  plants  110  orlongs  may  be  assumed, 
or  about  147  acres. 

The  Chinese  colonists  of  Singapore  used  the 
leaves  of  the  common  pepper,  instead  of  those  of 
the  betel  pepper  in  compounding  this  masticatory. 

The  Ava  pepper,  or  Macropiper  metliysticum , is 
even  more  celebrated  for  its  narcotic  properties 
than  the  two  just  referred  to.  This  plant  has  a 
thick  aromatic  wood  stalk,  and  a large  root,  and 


UNDER  THE  PALMS. 


269 


cordate  or  heart-shaped  leaves.  It  is  a native  of 
the  Society,  Friendly,  and  Sandwich  Islands,  where 
it  is  largely  consumed.  Macerated  in  water,  the 
stems  and  root  form  an  intoxicating  beverage,  and 
the  leaves  are  used  with  the  areca  nut  and  lime, 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  leaves  of  the  other 
peppers.* 

Mariner  gives  an  account,  in  his  “ History  of  the 
Tonga  Islands,”  of  the  use  of  this  plant.  The  root 
is  split  up  with  an  axe  into  small  pieces,  and  after 
heiug  scraped  clean  with  mussel  shells,  is  handed 
out  to  those  in  attendance  to  he  chewed.  There  is 
then  a buzz  in  the  assembly,  contrasting  curiously 
with  the  silence  which  reigned  before,  several 
crying  out,  “ Give  me  some  cava  ! give  me  cava,” 
each  of  those  who  intend  to  chew  it  crying  out  for 
some  to  be  handed  to  him.  Ho  one  offers  to  chew 
the  cava  but  young  persons  who  have  good  teeth, 
clean  mouths,  and  no  colds.  Women  frequently 
assist.  It  is  astonishing  how  remarkably  dry  they 
preserve  the  root  during  the  process  of  mastication. 
In  about  two  minutes,  each  person  having  chewed 
his  quantity,  takes  it  out  of  his  mouth  with  his 
hand,  and  puts  it  on  a piece  of  plantain  or  banana 
leaf,  or  he  raises  the  leaf  to  his  mouth,  and  puts  it 
off  from  his  tongue,  in  the  form  of  a ball  of  toler- 
able consistence.  The  different  portions  of  cava 
being  now  chewed,  which  is  known  by  the  silence 
that  ensues,  a large  wooden  bowl  is  placed  on  the 
ground  before  the  man  who  is  to  make  the  infusion. 
Each  person  passes  up  his  portion  of  the  chewed 
root,  which  is  placed  in  the  bowl,  wherein  they 
are  laid  in  such  a manner  that  each  portion  is  dis- 
tinct and  separate  from  the  rest,  till  the  whole 

* The  stem  and  roots  of  long  pepper,  cut  in  pieces  and  dried 
under  the  name  of  Pipula  moola , are  exposed  for  sale  iu  all  the 
bazaars  of  India,  but  these  are  not  used  with  the  areca  nut  nor 
are  the  leaves  applied  to  that  purpose. 


270 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


inside  of  the  bowl  becomes  studded,  from  the 
bottom  up  to  the  rim,  on  every  side.  The  man, 
before  whom  the  bowl  is  placed,  now  tilts  it  up  a 
little  towards  the  chief,  that  he  may  see  the  quan- 
tity of  its  contents,  saying,  “This  is  the  cava 
chewed.”  If  the  chief  thinks  there  is  enough,  he 
says,  “ Cover  it  over,  and  let  there  come  a man 
here.”  The  bowl  is  covered  over  with  a plantain 
or  banana  leaf,  if  there  is  not  enough,  and  a man 
fetches  more  root  to  be  chewed.  If  there  is  enough, 
the  chief  says  “ mix.”  The  two  men,  who  sit  on 
each  side  of  him,  who  is  to  prepare  the  cava,  now 
come  forward  a little,  and  making  a half  turn,  sit 
opposite  to  each  other,  the  bowl  being  between 
them,  one  of  these  fans  off  the  flies  with  a large 
leaf,  while  the  other  sits  ready  to  pour  in  the  water 
from  cocoa-nut  shells,  one  at  a time. 

Before  this  is  done,  however,  the  man  who  is 
about  to  mix,  having  first  rinsed  his  hands  with  a 
little  of  the  water,  kneads  together  the  chewed 
root,  gathering  it  up  from  all  sides  of  the  bowl, 
and  compressing  it  together.  Upon  this  an 
attendant  says,  “ Pour  in  the  water,”  and  the  man 
on  one  side  of  the  bowl  continues  pouring,  fresh 
shells  being  handed  to  him,  until  the  attendant 
thinks  there  is  sufficient,  and  says,  “Stop  the 
water.”  The  mixture  is  stirred  together  at  the 
command  of  the  attendant,  who  then  says,  “Put 
in  the  fow,”  which  is  the  bark  of  a tree  stripped 
into  small  fibres,  and  has  the  appearance  of  willow 
shavings.  A large  quantity  ot  this  substance, 
enough  to  cover  the  whole  surface  of  the  infusion, 
is  now  put  in  by  one  of  those  seated  beside  the 
bowl,  and  it  floats  upon  the  surface.  _ The  man 
who  manages  the  bowl  now  begins  his  difficult 
operation.  In  the  first  place,  he  extends  his  left- 
hand  to  the  further  side  of  the  bowl,  with  the 
lingers  pointing  downwards  and  the  palm  towards 


UNDER  THE  PALMS. 


271 


himself ; he  sinks  that  hand  carefully  down  the 
side  of  the  bowl,  carrying  with  it  the  edge  of  the 
fow ; at  the  same  time  his  right  hand  is  performing 
a similar  operation  at  the  side  next  to  him,  the 
fingers  pointing  downwards  and  the  palm  pre- 
senting outwards.  He  does  this  slowly  from  side 
to  side,  gradually  descending  deeper  and  deeper, 
till  his  fingers  meet  each  other  at  the  bottom,  so 
that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  fibres  of  the  root  are 
by  these  means  enclosed  in  the  fow,  forming,  as  it 
were,  a roll  of  about  two  feet  in  length,  lying 
along  the  bottom  from  side  to  side,  the  edges  of 
the  fow  meeting  each  other  underneath.  He  now 
carefully  rolls  it  oyer,  so  that  the  edges  overlapping 
each  other,  or  rather  intermingling,  come  upper- 
most. He  next  doubles  in  the  two  ends  and  rolls 
it  carefully  over  again,  endeavouring  to  reduce  it 
to  a narrower  and  firmer  compass.  He  now  brings 
it  cautiously  out  of  the  fluid,  taking  firm  hold  by 
the  two  ends,  and  raising  it  breast  high,  with  his 
arms  extended ; by  a series  of  movements  the 
mass  is  more  and  more  twisted  and  compacted 
together,  while  the  infusion  drains  from  it  in  a 
regular  decreasing  quantity,  till,  at  length,  it 
denies  a single  drop.  He  now  gives  it  to  the 
person  on  his  left  side  and  receives  fresh  fow  from 
the  one  on  the  right.  The  operation  is  again 
renewed,  with  a view  to  collect  what  might  before 
have  escaped  him,  and  even  a third  time  till  no 
dregs  are  left  which  this  process  can  remove. 

During  the  above  operation,  various  people  are 
employed  in  making  cava  cups  from  the  unex- 
panded leaves  of  the  banana,  folded  and  tied  in  a 
peculiar  manner.  The  infusion  being  strained, 
the  performance  generally  occupying  a quarter  of 
an  hour  or  twenty  minutes,  the  man  at  the  bowl 
calls  out,  “ The  cava  is  clear.”  The  infusion  is 
now  filled  into  the  cups  by  means  of  a bundle  of 


272 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


fow  which  is  dipped  into  the  bowl,  and  when 
replete  with  the  liquid,  held  over  the  cup,  and 
being  compressed,  the  liquid  runs  out  till  the  cup 
is  filled.  With  certain  other  ceremonies  the  cups 
are  passed  round  amongst  the  company. 

From  this  account  it  will  he  seen  that  the 
beverage  is  drank  immediately  after  it  is  prepared, 
without  being  in  any  manner  fermented,  its  intoxi- 
cating and  narcotic  properties  must,  therefore,  be 
due  to  the  root.  This  liquor  is  indulged  in  to  a 
large  extent  in  the  islands  of  Oceanica,  where  the 
natives  are  generally  passionately  fond  of  it. 

Another  substance  entering  into  the  composition 
of  the  “ buyo”  is  the  extract  of  the  leaves  of  the 
gambir  ( Uncaria  gambir).  There  are  different 
qualities  of  extract : the  first  and  best  is  white, 
brittle,  and  has  an  earthy  appearance  when  rubbed 
between  the  fingers,  which  earthy  appearance  gave 
it  the  name  of  Terra  Japonica,  being  supposed,  at 
first,  also,  to  come  from  Japan,  and  is  formed  into 
very  small  round  cakes.  This  is  the  most 
expensive  kind,  and  most  refined,  but  it  is  not 
unfrequently  adulterated  with  sago  ; this  land  is 
brought  in  the  greatest  quantity  from  the  island 
of  Sumatra.  The  second  quality  is  of  a brownish 
yellow  colour,  is  formed  into  oblong  cakes,  and 
when  broken  has  a light  brown  earthy  appearance; 
it  is  also  made  into  a solid  cubic  form  ; it  is  sold  in 
the  bazaars  in  small  packets,  each  containing  five 
or  six.  The  third  quality  contains  more  impurities 
than  the  preceding,  is  formed  in  small  circular 
cakes,  and  sold,  in  packages  of  five  or  six,  in  the 
bazaars. 

The  method  employed  in  making  the  extract  is 
thus  described  in  the  Singapore  Chronicle: — The 
leaves  are  collected  three  or  lour  times  a year ; they 
are  thrown  into  a large  cauldron,  the  bottom  of 
which  is  formed  of  iron,  the  upper  part  of  bark 


UNDER  THE  PALMS. 


273 


and  boiled  for  five  or  six  hours,  until  a strong 
decoction  is  inspissated,  it  is  then  allowed  to  cool, 
when  the  extract  subsides.  The  water  is  drawn 
off,  a soft,  soapy  substance . remains,  which  is  cut 
into  large  masses  ; these  are  further  divided  by  a 
knife  into  small  cubes,  about  an  inch  square,  or 
into  still  smaller  pieces,  which  are  laid  in  frames 
to  dry.  This  catechu  has  more  of  a granular 
uniform  appearance  than  that  of  Bengal,  it  is, 
perhaps,  also  less  pure.  The  younger  leaves  of 
the  shrub  are  said  to  produce  the  whitest  and  best 
gambir,  the  older  a brown  and  inferior  sort.  The 
men  employed  in  the  gambir  plantations  generally 
indulge  freely  in  the  use  of  opium. 

Another  extract  made  in  India  from  the  wood 
of  Acacia  Catechu*  and  which  bears  the  name  of 
Cutch  or  “ Kutt,”  is  used  in  combination  with  the 
betel  nut.  The  trees  are  cut  down,  and  the  heart- 
wood  chopped  and  boiled  in  water,  strained  off, 
and  evaporated.  This  is  poured  into  clay  moulds 
and  dried  in  the  sun.  Dr.  Hooker  gives  a sketch 
from  the  life  of  one  of  the  native  “ Kutt”  makers 
of  India : — 

“At  half-past  eight  a.m.  it  suddenly  fell  calm, 
and  we  proceeded  to.  Chakuchee,  the  native  carts 
breaking  down  in  their  passage  over  the  projecting 
beds  of  flinty  rocks,  or  as  they  hurried  down  the 
inclined  planes  which  cut  through  the  precipitous 
banks  of  the  streams.  Hear  Chakuchee  we 
passed  an  alligator,  just  killed  by  two  men — a 
foul  beast  about  nine  feet  long,  and  of  the  Mager 
kind.  More  interesting  than  its  natural  history 
was  the  painful  circumstance  of  its  having  just 
swallowed  a child  that  was  playing  in  the  water, 
while  its.  mother  was  washing  her  domestic 
utensils  in  the  river.  The  brute  was  hardly 

* From  cate  a tree,  and  chu  juice. 

T 


274 


TEE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OP  SLEEP. 


dead,  much  distended  by  its  prey,  and  the  mother 
standing  beside  it.  A very  touching  group  was 
this ! the  parent  with  hands  clasped  in  agony, 
unable  to  withdraw  her  eyes  from  the  cursed 
reptile,  which  still  clung  to  life  with  that  tenacity 
for  which  its  tribe  is  so  noted,  and  beside  her  the 
two  men  leaning  on  their  bloody  bamboo  staves 
with  which  they  had  all  but  despatched  the  animal. 

“ The  poor  woman  who  had  lost  her  child  earns 
a scanty  maintenance  by  making  catechu.  She 
inhabits  a little  cottage,  and  has  no  property  but 
her  two  oxen  to  bring  wood  from  the  hills,  and  a 
very  few  household  chattels,  and  how  few  these 
are  is  known  only  to  persons  who  have  seen  the 
meagre  furniture  of  the  Dangha  hovels.  Her 
husband  cuts  the  trees  in  the  forest  and  drags 
them  to  the  hut,  but  he  is  now  sick,  and  her 
only  son,  her  future  stay,  was  he  whose  end  is  just 
related.  Her  daily  food  is  rice,  with  beans  from 
the  beautiful  flowered  dolichos,  trailing  round  the 
cottage,  and  she  is  in  debt  to  the  contractor,  who 
has  advanced  her  two  rupees,  to  be  worked  off  in 
three  months,  by  the  preparation  of  240  lbs.  of 
catechu.  The  present  was  her  second  husband, 
an  old  man ; by  him  she  never  had  any  children, 
and  in  this  respect  alone  did  the  poor  creature 
think  herself  very  unfortunate,  for  her  poverty 
she  did  not  feel.  Kent  to  the  Rajah,  tax  to  the 
police,  and  rates  to  the  Brahminee  priest,  are  all 
paid  from  an  acre  of  land,  yielding  so  wretched  a 
crop  of  barley,  that  it  more  resembled  a fallow 
field  than  a harvest  field.  All  day  long  she  is 
boiling  down  the  catechu-wood  cut  into  chips,  and 
pouring  the  decoction  into  large  wooden  troughs, 
where  it  is  inspissated.” 

From  the  areca  nut  another  kind  of  catechu  is 
prepared,  which  is  generally  preferred  as  a masti- 
catory. Heyne  thus  describes  the  process  of  its 
manufacture,  “ Areca  nuts  are  taken  as  they  come 


UNDER  THE  PALMS. 


275 


from  the  tree,  and  boiled  for  some  hours  in  an  iron 
vessel.  They  are  then  taken  out  and  the  remain- 
ing water  is  inspissated  by  continued  boiling. 
This  process  furnishes  kassu,  or  most  stringent 
terra  japonica , which  is  black,  and  mixed  with 
paddy  husks  and  other  impurities.  After  the  nuts 
are  dried,  they  are  put  in  a fresh  quantity  of  water, 
boiled  again,  and  the  water,  being  inspissated  like 
the  former,  yields  the  best  or  dearest  kind  of 
catechu,  called  coury.  It  is  yellowish  brown,  has 
an  earthy  fracture,  and  is  free  from  the  admixture 
of  foreign  bodies.”  It  is  probable  that  the  flat 
round  cakes,  covered  with  paddy  husks,  met  with 
in  commerce  is  the  kassu  of  Heyne. 

The  husk  which  surrounds  the  nut,  and  which 
is  of  a fibrous  nature,  resembling  the  coir  of  the 
cocoa  nut  is  thrown  away  by  tons,  and  allowed  to 
rot.  This  substance  has  lately  been  experimented 
upon  for  the  manufacture  of  paper,  for  which  pur- 
pose it  appears  to  be  available,  and,  as  there  is  no 
want  of  the  raw  material,  perhaps  at  some  future 
time  it  will  become  utilized  as  extensively  as  the 
“ coir  ” of  Ceylon. 

The'  Bombay  catechu  i§  obtained  from  Acacia 
catechu , and  the  Bengal  catechu  from  Uncuria 
Garnbir.  The  Bombay  produce  is  of  a dark 
brownish  red. colour,  and  is  stated  to  be  the  richer 
of  the  two  in  tannin.  The  Bombay  variety  is 
commonly  called  u cutch,”  while  the  Bengal  produce 
is  of  a lighter  brown  colour,  and  is  termed  “ terra.” 
Catechu  of  good  quality  is  also  obtained  from  Pegu. 

The  catechu  exported  from  Madras  to  England 
Bombay,  France,  and  Ceylon  was — 


part  of  1856-7 — 658 


1853- 4 — 484  cvvt. 

1854- 5—1,364  „ 

1855- 6—2,908  „ 


valued  at  £199  4s. 


698  8 
2,297  2 
270  8 


T 2 


Or  in  3£  years— 5,414  „ 


£4,265  2 


276 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


But  this  is  only  a small  proportion  of  the 
catechu  consumed  in  England  alone,  since  in  1849 
we  imported  169,140  cwts.  of  that  substance  for 
tanning  purposes,  and  the  quantity  has  since 
increased. 

The  totals  of  cutch  and  gambier  imported  in 

1856  was  8,536  tons. 

1857  „ 11,047  „ 

1858  „ 11,205  „ 1 

1859  „ 13,762  „ 

Of  this  quantity  we  exported  in — 

1856— 1,031  tons. 

1857— 1,427  „ 

1858—  974  „ 

1859— 1,809  „ 

These  articles,  therefore,  make  no  insignificant 
item  in  our  East  Indian  trade,  which,  valued  at 
the  intermediate  rate  of  15s.  and  30s.  per  cwt., 
would  amount  to  the  sum  of  £153,375  in  1858. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


CHEWING  THE  COON. 


“ It  ascends  me  into  the  brain,  dries  me  there  all  the  foolish,  and 
dull,  and  crudy  vapours  which  environ  it ; makes  it  apprehensive, 
quick,  forgetive,  full  of  nimble,  fiery,  and  delectable  shapes,  which, 
delivered  over  to  the  voice  (the  tongue),  which  is  the  birth,  becomes 
excellent  wit.” — Sir  John  Falstaff. 


“ In  Burmah,”  says  Howard  Malcolm,  “almost 
every  one,  male  and  female,  chews  the  singular 
mixture  called  coon , and  the  lacquered  or  gilded 
box  containing  the  ingredients  is  borne  about  on 
all  occasions.  The  quid  consists  of  a slice  of 
areca  nut,  a small  piece  of  cutch,  and  some  tobacco 
rolled  up  in  a leaf  of  betel  pepper,  on  which  has 
been  smeared  a little  tempered  quicklime.  It 
creates  profuse  saliva,  and  so  fills  up  the  mouth 
that  they  seem  to  be  chewing  food.  It  colours  the 
mouth  deep  red,  and  the  teeth,  if  not  previously 
blackened,  assume  the  same  colour.  From  the 
combination  of  the  three  ingredients  this  colour 
seems  to  proceed,  since  the  leaf  and  nut,  without 
the  lime,  fail  to  produce  it.  This  hue,  communi- 
cated to  the  mouth  and  lips,  is  esteemed  orna- 
mental, and  an  agreeable  odour  is  imparted  to 
the  breath.  The  juice  is  usually,  though  not 
always,  swallowed.  A curious  circumstance  con- 
nected with  the  expectoration  of  the  red  juice  is 


278 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


related  at  Manilla,  where  it  is  narrated  with  strong 
protestations  and  firm  belief  in  its  veracity. 

Some  years  ago  a ship  from  Spain  arrived  in  the 
port  of  Manilla.  Among  the  passengers  was  a 
young  doctor  from  Madrid,  who  had  gone  to  the 
Philippines  with  the  design  of  settling  in  the 
colony  and  pushing  his  fortune  hy  means  of  his 
profession.  On  the  morning  after  he  had  landed, 
our  doctor  sallied  forth  for  a walk  on  the 
pasco.  He  had  not  proceeded  far  when  his  atten- 
tion was  attracted  to  a young  girl,  a native,  who 
was  walking  a few  paces  ahead  of  him.  He 
observed  that  every  now  and  then  the  girl 
stooped  her  head  towards  the  pavement  which  was 
straightway  spotted  with  blood.  Alarmed  on  the 
girl’s  account,  our  doctor  walked  rapidly  after  her, 
observing  that  she  still  continued  to  expectorate 
blood  at  intervals  as  she  went.  Before  he  could 
come  up  with  her  the  girl  had  reached  her  home, 
a humble  cottage  in  the  suburbs,  into  which  she 
entered.  The  doctor  followed  close  upon  her 
heels,  and  summoning  her  father  and  mother, 
directed  them  to  send  immediately  for  the  priest 
as  their  daughter  had  not  many  hours  to  live. 
The  distracted  parents,  having  learned  the  pro- 
fession of  their  visitor,  immediately  acceded  to 
his  request.  The  child  was  put  to  bed  in 
extreme  affright,  having  been  told  what  was 
about  to  befal  her.  The  nearest  padre  was 
brought,  and  everything  was  arranged  to  smooth 
the  journey  of  her  soul  through  the  passes  of  pur- 
gatory. The  doctor  plied  his  skill  to  the  utmost, 
but  in  vain.  In  less  than  twenty-four  hours  the 
girl  was  dead. 

As  up  to  that  time  the  young  Indian  had  always 
enjoyed  excellent  health,  the  doctor’s  prognosl  ica- 
tion  was  regarded  as  an  evidence  ot  great  and  J 
mysterious  skill.  The  fame  of  it  soon  spread 


CHEWING  THE  COON. 


279 


through  Manilla,  and  in  a few  hours  the  newly- 
arrived  physician  was  beleagured  with  patients, 
and  in  a fair  way  of  accumulating  a fortune.  In 
the  midst  of  all  this,  some  one  had  the  curiosity  to 
ask  the  doctor  how  he  could  possibly  have  pre- 
dicted the  death  of  the  girl,  seeing  that  she  had 
been  in  perfect  health  a few  hours  before.  “ Predict 
it,”  replied  the  doctor,  “why,  sir,  I saw  her  spit 
blood  enough  to  have  killed  her  half  a dozen 
times.” 

“ Blood ! how  did  you  know  it  was  blood  ?” 

“ How  ! from  the  colour,  how  else  ?” 

“ But  every  one  spits  red  in  Manilla.” 

The  doctor,  who  had  already  observed  this 
fact,  and  was  labouring  under  some  uneasiness  in 
regard  to  it,  refused  to  make  any  further  confession 
at  the  time,  but  he  had  said  enough  to  elucidate 
the  mystery.  The  thing  soon  spread  throughout 
the  city,  and  it  became  clear  to  every  one  that 
what  the  new  medico  had  taken  for  blood,  was 
nothing  else  than  the  red  juice  of  the  buyo,  and 
that  the  poor  girl  had  died  from  the  fear  of  death 
caused  by  his  prediction.  His  patients  now  fled 
from  him  as  speedily  as  they  had  congregated ; 
and  to  avoid  the  ridicule  that  awaited  him,  as  well 
as  the  indignation  of  the  friends  of  the  deceased 
girl,  our  doctor  was  fain  to  escape  from  Manilla, 
and  return  to  Spain  in  the  same  ship  that  had 
brought  him  out. 

The  ladies  who  work  in  the  government  cigar 
factory  at  Manilla,  all,  more  or  less,  chew  the 
betel  nut,  and  any  one  daring  enough  to  disregard 
the  warning  not  to  touch  anything,  when  passing 
as  a visitor  through  the  rooms,  must  stand  the 
assault  from  the  mouths  of  a hundred  or  two  of 
these  dames,  in  the  shape  of  a deluge  of  the 
decoction  of  this  nut.  The  captain  of  an  American 
vessel  at  Manilla,  although  warned  of  tire  conse- 


280  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

quences,  with.  American  impudence,  infringed  the 
rule,  and  paid  the  penalty.  He  was  compelled  to 
beat  a retreat,  and  being  dressed  in  the  white  garb 
of  the  East,  resembled  a spotted  leopard,  in  the 
room  of  a free  and  enlightened  citizen  of  the  great 
Republic. 

The  mastication  of  the  betel  is  considered  very 
wholesome  by  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  using 
it,  and  it  may  be  so,  but  the  black  appearance  it 
gives  to  the  teeth,  although  it  is  said  to  be  an 
excellent  preserver  of  them,  together  with  the 
brick  red  lips  and  mouth,  cause  anything  but  an 
agreeable  appearance.  Its  use  certainly  does  not 
impart  additional  beauty  to  the  native  females, 
who  habituate  themselves  to  an  extent  equal  to 
that  of  the  opposite  sex. 

The  custom,  Marsden  states,  is  universal  among 
the  Sumatrans,  who  carry  the  ingredients  con- 
stantly about  them,  and  serve  them  to  their 
guests  on  all  occasions ; the  prince  in  a gold  stand, 
and  the  poor  man  in  a brass  box  or  mat  bag. 
The  betel-stands  of  the  better  ranks  of  people  are 
usually  of  silver,  embossed  with  rude  figures.  The 
Sultan  of  Moco-Moco  was  presented  with  one  by 
the  India  Company  with  their  arms  upon  it,  and 
he  possesses  another  besides,  of  gold  filagree.  The 
form  of  the  stand  is  the  frustum  of  an  hexagonal 
pyramid,  reversed,  about  six  or  eight  inches  in 
diameter.  It  contains  many  smaller  vessels,  fitted 
to  the  angles,  for  holding  the  nut,  leaf,  and 
chunam,  with  places  for  the  instruments  employed 
in  cutting  the  first,  and  spatulas  for  spreading  the 
last. 

Captain  Wilkes  also  describes  that  of  the  Sultan 
of  Sooloo.  “ On  the  left  hand  of  the  Sultan  sat  his 
two  sons,  on  the  right  his  councillors,  while  imme- 
diately behind  him  sate  the  carrier  of  his  betel- 
nut  casket.  The  casket  was  made  of  filagree  silver, 


CHEWING  THE  COON. 


281 


about  tbe  size  of  a small  tea-caddy,  of  oblong 
shape,  and  rounded  at  the  top.  It  had  three 
divisions,  one  for  the  nut,  another  for  the  leaf, 
and  a third  for  the  lime.  Next  to  this  official  was 
the  pipe-hearer,  who  did  not  appear  to  be  held  in 
equal  estimation.” 

A circumstance  is  also  narrated  in  connection 
with  the  son  of  this  same  Sultan,  which  exhibits 
the  use  of  betel  in  another  phase.  This  son, 
shortly  after  taking  a few  whiffs  from  the  opium- 
pipe  was  overcome,  and  became  stupid  and  listless. 
When  partially  recovered,  he  called  for  his  betel 
nut  to  revive  him  by  its  exciting  effects,  and 
counteract  the  influence  of  the  opium.  The 
pinang  or  buyo  was  carefully  chewed  by  his 
attendant  to  a proper  consistency,  moulded  into  a 
ball,  and  then  slipped  into  his  mouth.  Hence  we 
may  learn  two  things.  First,  that  chewing  the 
betel  counteracts  the  ill  effects  of  an  over-dose  of 
opium.  Secondly,  that  it  is  extremely  convenient 
to  have  an  attendant  with  a good  set  of  teeth, 
since  he  could  not  only  masticate  betel  nut  for 
you,  and  relieve  you  from  a large  amount  of 
labour ; but  in  the  event  of  your  joint  not  being 
so  tender  as  it  should  be,  the  amount  of  milling  to 
be  expended  at  dinner  could  be  divided  between 
you,  the  attendant  masticating  the  tough  dishes, 
and  yourself  the  tender,  and  thus,  by  division  of 
labour,  a good  dinner  could  be  procured  with  little 
expenditure  of  your  own  muscular  strength. 

In  Sumatra,  when  the  first  salutation  is  over, 
which  consists  in  bending  the  body,  and  the 
inferior  putting  Ins  joined  hands  between  those 
of  the  superior,  and  then  lifting  them  to  Ins 
forehead,  the  betel  is  presented  as  a token  of 
hospitality  and  an  act  of  politeness.  To  omit  it 
on  the  one  hand,  or  to  reject  it  on  the  other  would 
be  an  affront,  as  it  would  be,  likewise,  in  a man  of 


282 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


subordinate  rank  to  address  a great  man  without 
the  precaution  of  chewing  it  before  he  spoke. 

The  Tagali  maidens,  says  Meyen,  regard  it  as  a 
proof  of  the  uprightness  of  the  intentions  of  a 
lover,  and  of  the  strength  of  his  affection,  if  he 
takes  the  buyo  from  his  mouth.  In  Lu§on,  a little 
box  or  dish  is  kept  in  every  house,  in  which  are 
kept  the  betel  rolls  prepared  for  the  day’s  con- 
sumption, and  there  a buyo,  or  betel  roll,  is  offered 
to  every  one  who  enters,  just  as  a pinch  of  snuff  or 
a pipe  might  be  with  us.  Making  the  buyo  is  a 
part  of  the  occupation  of  the  females,  who  may  be 
seen  in  the  forenoon  stretched  on  the  ground  roll- 
ing them.  Enough  for  the  day’s  consumption  is 
generally  carried,  in  a siri  box§  of  metal  or 
japanned  ware,  by  those  whose  occupation  call 
them  from  home ; every  one  who  can  afford  the 
expense,  puts  a fresh  roll  in  his  mouth  every  hour, 
which  he  continues  to  chew  and  suck  for  about 
half  an  hour  or  more. 

Betel  holds  an  important  place  in  the  marriage 
ceremonies  of  the  Tagals.  When  once  a young 
man  has  informed  his  father  and  mother  that  he 
has  a predilection  for  a young  Indian  girl,  his 
parents  pay  a visit  to  the  young  girl’s  parents  upon 
some  fine  evening,  and  after  some  very  ordinary 
chat,  the  mamma  of  the  young  man  offers  a piastre 
to  the  mamma  of  the  young  lady.  Should  the 
future  mother-in-law  accept,  the  young  lover  is 
admitted,  and  then  his  future  mother-in-law  is  sure 
to  go  and  spend  the  very  same  piastre  in  betel  and 
cocoa  wine.  During  the  greater  portion  of  the 
night,  the  whole  company  assembled  upon  the 
occasion,  chews  betel,  drinks  cocoa  wine,  and 
discusses  upon  all  other  subjects  but  marriage. 
Tire  young  men  never  make  their  appearance  till 
the  piastre  has  been  accepted,  because  in  that  case 
they  look  upon  it  as  being  the  avant-couricr , that 


CHEWING  THE  COON. 


283 


is,  the  first  and  most  essential  step  towards  their 
marriage. 

During  the  fast  of  Eamadan,  the  Mahometans 
abstain  from  the  use  of  the  betel  while  the  sun 
continues  above  the  horizon,  but,  except  at  this 
time,  it  is  the  constant  luxury  of  both  sexes  from  an 
early  period  of  childhood  till  old  age,  when,  becom- 
ing toothless,  they  are  unable  to  masticate  the  nut, 
and  are  reduced  to  the  alternative  of  having  all 
the  ingredients  previously  reduced  to  the  form  of 
a paste  for  them,  so  that,  without  effort,  they  may 
dissolve  in  the  mouth. 

When  Lady . Raffles  had  reached  Merambung 
in  Sumatra,  being  much  fatigued  with  walking, 
and  the  rest  .of  the  party  having  dispersed  in 
various  directions,  she  lay  down  under  the  shade 
of  a tree,  when  a Malay  girl  approached,  with 
great  grace  of  manner,  and  on  being  asked  if  she 
wanted  anything,  replied,  “ No ! but  as  you  were 
quite  alone,  I thought  you  might  like  to  have  a 
little  talk,  so  I came  to  offer  you  some  siri  (betel) 
and  sit  beside  you.”  n 

The  darker  the  . teeth  the  more  beautiful  is  a 
Siamese  belle  considered  \ and  in  order  that  their 
gums  should  be  oi  a brilliant  red,  to  form  a 
pleasant  contrast  to  the  black  lips  and  teeth,  they 
resort,  to  the  pastime  of  chewing  betel  from 
morning  till  night.  The  constituents  of  the  betel 
being  rolled  up.  into  something  very  much  like  a 
sailor’s  quid,  it  is  then  thrust  into  the  lady’s  cheek 
and  is  munched,  and  crunched,  and  chewed  so 
long  as  the  slightest  flavour  is  to  be  extracted 
and,  as  they,  never  swallow  the  juice,  the  results 
are  very  detrimental  to  the  cleanliness  of  the  floors 
ot  the  houses,  and  of  themselves  generally.  They 
commonly  make  use  of  two  such  quids  during  the 
day,  and  this  mixture  has  the  effect  of  dyeing  their 
gums  and  the  whole  of  the  palate  and  tongue  of  a 


284  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

blood-red  colour.  Old  crones,  and  very  ancient 
chronoses  (for  both  men  and  women  use  the  betel), 
who  have  no  longer  any  teeth  to  masticate  the 
mixture  with,  are  attended  by  servants,  who  have 
a species  of  small  pestle  and  mortar  always  about 
them,  wherein  they  reduce  the  betel  into  a proper 
form  for  the  delicate  gums  of  their  aged  patrons.  * 

The  betel  pepper  is  cultivated  at  Zanzibar, 
where  the  use  of  betel  prevails,  as  it  does  at  the 
Comoro  Islands  and  at  Bombay.  But  the  custom 
is  not  in  vogue  in  Arabia.  The  betel  palm  is  also 
grown  for  the  sake  of  its  fruits  in  the  island  of 
Zanzibar. 

The  habit  of  masticating  betel  nut  in  combina- 
tion with  hemp  has  of  late  come  into  vogue  in  the 
United  States  of  America,  and  doubtless  Brother 
Jonathan  will  soon  eclipse  Malaya  in  his  predilec- 
tion for  the  “ buyo.” 


* Neale’s  Residence  in  Siam. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


And  all  my  days  are  trances ; 

And  all  my  nightly  dreams 
Are  where  thy  dark  eye  glances, 

And  where  thy  footstep  gleams  : 

In  what  etherial  dances, 

By  what  eternal  streams. 

E.  A.  Poe. 

To  the  Peruvian  the  province  of  Yungas  de  la 
Paz  in  the  North-East  of  Bolivia  is  an  El  Dorado, 
because  there . grows  m the  greatest  profusion  and 
luxuriance  his  favorite  Coca.  We  may  look  with 
delight  towards  the  island  of  Ceylon,  and,  in 
imagination,  snuff  the  fragrant  breezes  that  have 
passed  over  the  cinnamon  groves  and  coffee  planta- 
tions ; or  direct  the  gaze  of  our  children  across 
the  map  of  the  world  to  South-Eastern  China,  and 
inform  them  that  from  thence  our  good  dames 
receive  their  tea  ; and  thence  to  the  United  States, 
and  add  that  from  this  place  their  worthy  sires 
receive  the  greater  part  of  their  tobacco.  But  the 
affections  of  the  Peruvian  are  not  so  divided  • 
they  are  located  upon  one  spot,  and  that  the  pro- 
duce of  the  “ warm  valleys,”  or  the  Yungas  de  la 
Paz;  there  dwells  his  patron  saint,  and  from 
thence  he  receives  the  “ keys  of  Paradise.” 


286  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

At  the  time  of  the  conquest  the  Coca  was  only- 
usecl  by  the  Incas,  and  those  of  the  royal,  or  rather 
solar,  blood.  It  was  cultivated  for  the  monarch 
and  for  the  solemnities  of  their  religion ; none 
might  raise  it  to  his  mouth,  unless  he  had 
rendered  himself  worthy  by  his  services  to  partake 
of  this  honour  with  his  sovereign.  The  plant  was 
looked  upon  as  an  image  of  divinity,  and  no  one 
entered  the  enclosures  where  it  was  cultivated 
without  bending  the  knee  in  adoration.  The 
divine  sacrifices  made  at  that  period  were  thought 
not  to  be  acceptable  to  Heaven,  unless  the  victims 
were  crowned  with  branches  of  this  tree.  The 
oracles  made  no  reply,  and  auguries  were  terrible 
if  the  priest  did  not  chew  coca  at  the  time  of  con- 
sulting them.  It  was  an  unheard  of  sacrilege  to 
invoke  the  shades  of  the  departed  great  without 
wearing  the  plant  in  token  of  respect,  and  the 
Coyas  and  Mamas  who  were  supposed  to  preside 
over  gold  and  silver,  rendered  the  mines  impene- 
trable unless  propitiated  by  it.  In  the  course  of 
time  its  use  extended,  and  gradually  became  the 
companion  of  the  whole  Indian  population.  To 
this  plant  the  native  recurred  for  relief  in  his 
greatest  distress ; no  matter  whether  want  or 
disease  oppressed  him,  or  whether  he  sought  the 
favours  of  Fortune  or  Love,  he  found  consolation 
in  the  “ divine  plant.” 

The  word  by  which  this  plant  is  known  has 
been  referred,  for  its  etymology,  to  the  Aymara 
language,  in  which  Khoka  signifies  tree  or  plant. 
It  is  known  that  the  shrub  producing  the  Slate 
or  Paraguay  tea,  the  favourite  beverage  of  many 
South  American  nations,  is  called  la  Yerba , i.e.  the 
plant  As  also  in  Mexico  tobacco  was  called  yeti , 
and  by  the  Peruvians  Sagri,  meaning  in  those 
languages  the  herb , so  we,  occasionally,  are  apt  to 
designate  the  latter  article  the  weed.  Showing, 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


287 


that  to  those  persons  or  nations  who  have  appro- 
priated such  names,  trivial  in  themselves,  to  the 
different  articles  of  consumption,  these  plants  were 
in  themselves  pre-eminent  in  the  vegetable 
creation,  as,  in  another  instance,  we  have  shown 
our  appreciation  of  one  book  above  all  others, 
century  after  century,  by  the  simple  designation  of 
The  Book. 

In  Europe,  the  historians  of  the  conquest  gave 
the  first  information  of  the  sacred  plant  of  the 
Peruvians ; this  was,  however,  merely  superficial. 
In  1569,  Monardes,  and  in  1605  Clusius,  wrote 
concerning  it,  but  the  leaves  of  the  plant  itself  were 
not  seen  until  brought  over  by  one  of  the  com- 
panions of  La  Condamine,  Joseph  de  Jussieu, 
who  nearly  lost  his  life  in  1749,  while  crossing  the 
Cordilleras  in  search  of  this  plant.  He  was  com- 
pelled to  cross  the  mountains,  covered  as  they  were 
with  snow,  on  foot,  descending  by  means  of  paths 
cut  out  like  ladders,  and  overhanging  frightful 
precipices.  The  intensity  of  the  sun’s  rays, 
reflected  by  the  snow,  caused  him  the  most  dis- 
tressing pains  in  the  eyes,  and  almost  blinded 
him,  but  the  success  of  his  expedition  consoled  him 
for  the  misfortunes  that  he  had  endured. 

> This  shrub  rises  to  the  height  of  from  four  to 
eight  feet,  the  stem  covered  with  whitish  tubercles, 
which  appear  to  be  formed  of  two  curved  lines  set 
face  to  face.  The  leaves  are  oblong,  and  acute  at 
each  end,  from  an  inch  and  a half  to  two  inches 
in  length.  The  leaves  are  the  only  parts  used,  for 
which  purpose  they  are  collected  and  dried.  The 
shrub  is  found  wild  in  Peru,  according  to  Poppig 
m the  environs  of  Cuchero,  and  on  the  stony 
summit  of  the  Cerro  de  San  Christobal.  It  is 
cultivated  extensively  in  the  mild,  but  very  moist 
climate  of  the  Andes  of  Peru,  at  from  2,000  to 
o,000  feet  above  the  sea  level ; in  colder  situations 


288 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


it  is  apt  to  be  killed,  and  in  warmer  to  lose  the 
flavour  of  the  leaf. 

The  coca  plant  is  propagated  from  seed  sown  in 
nursery  beds  and  carefully  watered.  When  about 
sixteen  or  eighteen  inches  high  they  are  trans- 
planted into  plantations  called  cocals,  in  terraces 
upon  the  sides  of  the  mountains.  At  the  end  of  a 
year  and  a half  the  plant  affords  its  first  crop,  and 
from  this  period  to  the  age  of  forty  years  or  more 
it  continues  to  yield  a supply.  Instances  have  been 
noticed  of  coca  plantations  that  have  existed  for 
near  a century ; but  the  greatest  abundance  of 
leaves  is  obtained  from  plants  between  the  third 
and  sixth  years.  There  are  four  gatherings  in  the 
season ; the  first  takes  place  at  the  period  of 
flowering,  and  consists  of  the  lower  leaves  only. 
These  are  larger  and  less  finely  flavoured  than 
those  afterwards  collected,  and  are  mostly  con- 
sumed at  once.  The  next  and  most  abundant 
harvest  takes  place  in  March  ; the  third  and 
most  scanty,  in  June  or  July,  and  the  last  in 
November.  The  leaves  are  collected  similarly  to 
those  of  tea.  Women  and  children  are  employed 
for  this  purpose.  The  gatherer  squats  down,  and 
holding  the  branch  with  one  hand,  plucks  from  it 
the  leaves,  one  by  one,  with  the  other.  These  are 
deposited  in  a cloth,  from  which  they  are  after- 
wards collected  into  sacks  to  be  conveyed  from  the 
plantation.  The  sacks  of  leaves  are  carried  to  the 
haciendas,  where  they  are  spread  upon  a floor  of 
black  slate  to  dry  in  the  sun.  They  are  then 
packed  up  in  bales  made  of  banana  leaf,  closely 
pressed  together,  each  bale  containing  on.  an 
average  twenty-four  pounds.  The  price  realised 
to  the  cultivator  is  one  shilling  per  pound. 

Dr.  Weddell  endeavoured  to  obtain  reliable 
information  as  to  the  quantity  of  coca  cultivated 
and  collected  in  the  province  of  Yongas,  and  states, 


OUR  LADY  OP  YOSTGAS. 


289 


as  a result,  that  the  annual  produce  is  about 
400,000  bales,  or  9,600,000  Spanish  pounds. 
There  is  also  a large  cultivation,  not  only  in  other 
parts  of  Bolivia,  and  in  Peru,  but  also  in  parts  of 
Brazil,  so  that  this  cannot  represent  more  than 
half  the  amount  of  the  annual  consumption  of 
coca.  It  is  true  that  Poppig  estimated  fifteen 
millions  of  pounds  as  the  quantity  consumed,  but 
this  would  be  too  small.  On  the  other  hand, 
Johnston  estimates  the  consumption  at  thirty 
millions  of  pounds ; this  is,  probably,  erring 
rather  on  the  contrary  side.  Of  this  quantity  he 
estimates  the  value  at  one  million  and  a half 
sterling,  and  concludes  that  the  chewing  of  coca 
is  indulged  in  by  about  ten  millions  of  the  human 
race.  This  again  is  rather  a “ long  bow  the  use 
of  coca  seems  to  be  confined  to  Peru,  Bolivia,  and 
Brazil— at  any  rate,  it  is  confined  to  South 
America,  and  there  is  no  mention  of  its  indul- 
gence in  Chili  to  the  South,  or  in  the  Columbian 
Republics  to  the  North.  It  would,  moreover 
confer  upon  us  somewhat  of  a personal  favour* 
were  some  one  to  convince  us  that  the  male 
population  of  South  America  amounts  to  the  num- 
ber which  the  professor  has  estimated  as  that 
of  the  mdulgers  in  coca.  Our  own  impression  is 
that  the  entire  population  has  only  been  estimated 
at  seventeen  and  a quarter  millions:  this  is,  at 
least,  the  mean  of  four  very  respectable  authorities. 
Suppose  half  of  these  to  be  children,  and  half  of 
the  residue  females,  and  we  have  only  an  adult 
male  population  of  less  than  four  and  a half 
millions  in  the  southern  half  of  the  New  World. 

o shades  ol  Cocker  and  Be  Morgan  ! tell  us  how 
yom  these  we  can  subtract  ten  millions  who  indulge 
m coca,  and  yet  show  a remainder,  be  it  ever  so 
nffi1.  ’ cd  abstainers.  But  it  has  never  been 
mrrned  that  coca  was  indulged  in,  except  in 


290  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

Peru,  Bolivia,  and  Brazil.  The  population  of 
these  three  countries  amount,  according  to  the 
higher  authorities,  only  to  ten  millions,  so  that 
every  man,  woman,  and  child,  must  be  a coquero 
to  reach  the  estimated  number.  Viewing  this 
subject  in  another  of  its  phases — Johnston  states 
that  the  average  consumption  of  the  coquero  is 
from  one  ounce  to  one  ounce  and  a half  per  day, 
or,  according  to  ordinary  computation,  twenty-two 
to  thirty-three  pounds  per  year,  whereas  the  esti- 
mated production,  which  we  have  presumed  to  be 
too  large,  is,  in  fact,  too  small  for  the  number 
estimated  as  indulging  therein,  as  it  only  allows 
each  coca  masticator  three  pounds  per  annum. 
In  all  deference  to  so  high  an  authority,  we  will 
venture  to  suggest  that  were  the  number  indulging 
in  coca  limited  to  two  millions,  and  the  supply  to 
twenty  millions  of  pounds,  or  ten  pounds  annually 
to  each  person,  some  of  these  difficulties  would  be 
removed;  but,  out  of  regard  for  the  patience  of 
our  readers,  we  will  forbear  detailing  any  further 
calculations,  or  the  bases  on  which  they  rest. 

At  first  the  Spaniards  strenuously  opposed  the 
use  of  the  coca — it  was  anathematized  by  them 
everywhere,  as  tobacco  was  by  its  zealous  opponents 
in  the  old  world,  but  this  opposition  only  seemed  to 
produce  an  extension  of  the  habit.  Then  the  • 
Spaniards,  appreciating  the  advantages  which 
might  accrue  to  them  in  a monopoly  of  the  plant, , 
took  the  culture  into  their  own  hands,  and  by 
force,  enrolled  the  Indians  of  the  Cordilleras  in 
their  service,  much  to  the  discomfort  of  the 
latter,  who  suffered  extremely  from  the  change 
of  climate.  Complaints  to  the  government  being 
so  numerous,  the  Viceroy,  Bon  Francisco  de 
Toledo,  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Indians,  pub- 
lished seventy-one  decrees  in  their  favour,  and  the 
speculation  was  abandoned.  It  is  said,  that  in 


OUR  LADY  OP  YONGAS. 


291 


1583  the  government  of  Potosi  derived  a sum  not 
less  than  £100,000  from  the  consumption  of 
90,000  to  100,000  baskets  of  this  leaf.  The  culti- 
vation of  coca  is  therefore  an  important  feature  in 
Peruvian  husbandry,  and  so  lucrative,  that  a coca 
plantation,  whose  original  cost  and  current  ex- 
penses amoimted  to  £500  during  the  first  twenty- 
months,  will,  at  the  end  of  ten  months  more,  bring 
a clear  income  of  £340. 

The  coca  possesses  a slightly  aromatic  and 
agreeable  odour,  and  when  chewed,  dispenses  a 
grateful  fragrance,  its  taste  is  moderately  bitter 
and  astringent,  and  somewhat  resembles  green  tea ; 
it  tinges  the  saliva  of  a greenish  hue.  Its  effects 
on  the  system  are  stomachic  and  tonic,  and  it  is 
said  to  be  beneficial  in  preventing  intermittents, 
which  have  always  prevailed  in  this  country. 

The  mode  of  employing  coca  is  to  mix  with  it 
in  the  mouth  a small  quantity  of  lime  prepared 
from  shells,  much  after  the  manner  that  the  betel 
is  used  in  the  East.  With  this,  a handful  of 
parched  corn,  and  a ball  of  arrow-root,  an  Indian 
will  travel  on  foot  a hundred  leagues,  trotting  on 
ahead  of  a horse.  On  the  frequented  roads,  we  are 
informed,  that  the  Indian  guides  have  certain  spots 
where  they  throw  out  their  quids,  which  have 
accumulated  into  little  heaps,  that  now  serve  as 
marks  of  distance  5 so  that,  instead  of  saying,  one 
place  is  so  many  leagues  from  another,  it  is  common 
to  call  it  so  many  quids.  Dr.  Weddell  states  that 
the  Bolivians  are  in  the  habit  of  using  instead  of 
Line  with . their  leaf,  a substance  called  llipta 
which  consists  of  the  ashes  of  the  Quinoa  plant ; in 
other  parts  the  ashes  of  other  plants  are  used,  as 
on  the  Amazon,  those  of  the  leaves  of  the  trumpet- 
tree.  These  alkaline  ashes  are  made  into  little 
cakes,  and  sold  in  the  markets. 

“The  Peruvian  ordinarily  keeps  his  coca  in  a 

u 2 


292  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

little  bag  called  chuspa,  winch  he  carries  suspended 
at  his  side,  and  which  he  places  in  front  whenever 
he  intends  to  renew  his  chique,  which  he  does  at 
regular  intervals,  even  when  travelling.  The 
Indian  who  prepares  himself  to  chew,  in  the  first 
place  sets  himself  as  perfectly  at  ease  as  circum- 
stances permit.  If  he  has  a burden,  he  lays  it 
down ; he  seats  himself,  then  putting  his  chuspa 
on  his  knees,  he  draws  from  it,  one  by  one,  the 
leaves  which  are  to  constitute  his  fresh  1 quid.’ 
The  attention  which  he  gives  to  this  operation  is 
worthy  of  remark.  The  complaisance  with  which 
the  Indian  buries  his  hand  in  the  leaves  of  a well- 
filled  chuspa , the  regret  he  seems  to  experience 
when  the  bag  is  nearly  empty,  deserve  observation, 
for  these  little  points  prove  that  to  the  Indian  the 
use  of  coca  is  a real  source  of  enjoyment,  and  not 
the  simple  consequence  of  want.”  We  remember 
an  elderly  lady*  who  was  in  the  habit  of  taking 
snuff  with  the  same  amount  of  ceremony.  First, 
she  comfortably  seated  herself,  arranged  her  dress, 
and  smoothed  her  apron.  The  most  important 
occupations  always  being  for  the  time  put  aside, 
and  apparently  forgotten.  The  next  operation 
consisted  in  drawing  from  some  capacious  recep- 
tacle, the  entrance  to  which  was  enveloped  in  the 
folds  of  her  outer  garment,  a large  brown  hand- 
kerchief, studded  with  small  yellow  spots,  just 
visible,  we  remember  it  for  years,  and  never  any 
other ; this  was  laid  upon  the  lap  prepared,  to 
receive  it.  Another  step  consisted  in  drawing 
out  from  the  same  mysterious  receptacle,  a black 
japanned  box,  circular  in  shape,  and  of  the  diameter 
of  a shaving-box,  but  scarce  an  inch  in  thickness ; 
this  was  carefully  wiped  with  the  handkerchief 


* Wliy  are  ladies  who  indulge  in  this  habit  universally  de- 
scribed as  elderly  ladies  1 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


293 


already  named,  and  then  grasped  in  the  left  hand, 
resting  on  the  palm,  and  pressed  by  the  thumb  on 
one  side,  and  the  extremities  of  the  fingers  on  the 
other.  A slight,  but  smartly  repeated  rap  or  two- 
on  the  top  of  the  box  with  the  knuckles  of  the 
right  hand  constituted  the  commencement  of  the 
fourth  operation,  which  ended  by  taking  hold  of 
the  upper  portion  of  the  box  with  the  fingers  of 
the  right  hand,  in  the  same  manner  that  the  lower 
was.  held  by  the  left,  and  gently  raising  it  obliquely, 
as  it  were,  upon  a hinge,  although  it  possessed 
none,  and  leaving  it,  when  nearly  perpendicular,  in 
charge  of  the  now  disengaged  fore-finger  and 
thumb  of  the  left  hand,  whilst  the  right  hand  was 
entirely  free.  How  radiant  was  the  smile  when 
the  yellow  dust  filled  at  least  a moiety  of  the  cavity 
of  the  opened  box.  How  disconsolate  the  expres- 
sion when  this  devout  consummation  was  not 
attained. . Witness  next  the  extended  fingers,  and 
the  adroit  dexterity  with  which  the  finger  and 
thumb  collected  its  accustomed  dole,  and  conveyed 
it  to  the  olfactory  organs.  How  carefully  it  was 
carried,  first  to  the  right  nostril,  and  then  to  the 
left,  and  with  two  hearty  inspirations  imbibed. 
The.  returning  fingers  now  closed  the  box,  which 
received  another  wipe,  and  was  then  returned  into 
the  receptacle.  The  fingers  first,  and  then  the 
nose,  underwent  the  same  purifying  process  by 
means  of  the  brown  handkerchief.  Then,  although 
no  particle  ot  dust  could  anywhere  be  seen,  the 
whole  frontispiece,  from  the  chin  to  the  knees 
underwent  a regular  dusting;  the  handkerchief 
was  replaced  among  the  folds  of  the  dress  the 
apron  smoothed  down  with  both  hands,  a ’half- 
uttered  exclamation  of  satisfaction,  and  the  work 
which  had  been  temporarily  laid  aside  was  now 
resumed,  until  another  occasion  of  a like  character 
should  arise  to  demand  its  suspension. 


294 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


But  to  return  to  coca,  the  effects  of  which  are 
described  as  of  the  most  extraordinary  nature, 
totally  distinct  from  those  produced  by  any  other 
known  plant  in  any  part  of  the  world.  The 
exciting  principle  is  said  to  be  so  volatile,  that 
leaves,  after  being  kept  for  twelve  months,  entirely 
lose  their  power,  and  are  good  for  nothing. 

Large  heaps  of  the  freshly-dried  leaves,  par- 
ticularly while  the  warm  rays  of  the  sun  are  upon 
them,  diffuse  a very  strong  smell,  resembling  that 
of  hay  in  which  there  is  a quantity  of  melilot. 
The  natives  never  permit  strangers  to  sleep  near 
them,  as  they  would  suffer  violent  headaches  in 
consequence.  When  kept  in  small  portions,  and 
after  a few  months,  the  coca  loses  its  scent,  and 
becomes  weak  in  proportion.  The  novice  thinks 
that  the  grassy  smell  and  fresh  hue  are  as  percep- 
tible in  the  old  state  as  when  new.  Without  the 
use  of  lime,  which  always  excoriates  the  mouth  of 
a stranger,  the  natives  declare  that  coca  has  not 
its  true  taste,  a flavour  which  can  only  be  detected 
after  long  use.  It  then  tinges  green  the  carefully 
swallowed  saliva,  and  yields  an  infusion  of  the 
same  colour.  Of  this  infusion  Poppig  made  trial, 
and  found  that  it  had  a flat-,  grass-like  taste,  but 
he  experienced  the  full  power  of  its  stimulating 
principles.  When  taken  in  the  evening,  it  was 
followed  by  great  restlessness,  loss  of  sleep,  and 
generally  uncomfortable  sensations,  while  from  its 
exhibition  in  the  morning,  a similar  effect,  though 
to  a slight*  degree  arose,  accompanied  with  loss  of 
appetite.  Dr.  Archibald  Smith  of  Huanaco, 
when  on  one  occasion  unprovided  with  Chinese 
tea,  made  a trial  of  the  coca  as  a substitute . for  it, 
but  experienced  such  distressing  sensations  of 
nervous  excitement,  that  he  never  ventured  to  use 
it  again.  It  is  not  at  all  uncommonly  used  in  this 
way ; and  the  Indians  have  tea  -parties  or  tertulias, 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


295 


for  taking  the  infusion  of  the  leaves,  as  well  as  for 
chewing  them.  Some  affirm  that  in  the  coca-tea 
drinkings  the  effects  are  agreeably  exhilarating. 
It  is  usual  to  say  on  such  occasions,  “ Vamos  a 
coquear  y acullicar’ — “ Let  us  indulge  in  coca.” 
Chewing  the  coca  becomes  quite  a passion  in 
those  who  indulge  in  it;  and  when  the  habit 
is  once  commenced,  it  is  affirmed  that  it  is 
never  discontinued,  and  that  an  instance  of  a 
reclaimed  coquero  has  never  been  known.  To 
indulge  in  the  enjoyment*  of  this  narcotic,  the 
Peruvian  will  expose  himself  to  the  greatest 
dangers.  As  its  stimulus  is  most  fully  developed 
when  the  body  is  exhausted  with  toil,  or  the  mind 
with  conversation,  “the  victim  then  hastens  to 
some  retreat  in  a gloomy  native  wood,  and  flinging 
himself  under  a tree,  remains  stretched  out  there, 
heedless  of  night  or  of  storms,  unprotected  by 
covering  or  by  fire,  unconscious  of  the  floods  of 
rain,  and  of  the  tremendous  winds  which  sweep 
the  forest,  and  after  yielding  himself  for  two  or 
three  entire  days  to  the  occupation  of  chewing 
coca,  returns  home  to  his  abode,  with  trembling 
limbs,  and  a pallid  countenance,  the  miserable 
spectacle  of  unnatural  enjoyment.  Whoever  acci- 
dentally meets  the  coquero  under  such  circum- 
stances, and  by  speaking  interrupts  the  effects  of 
this  intoxication,  is  sure  to  draw  upon  himself  the 
hatred  of  the  half-maddened  creature.  The  man 
who  is  once  seized  with  the  passion  for  this 
practice,  if  placed  in  circumstances  which  favours 
its  indulgence,  is  a ruined  being.  Many  instances 
were  related  to  Poppig  while  in  Peru,  where  young 
people  of  the  best  families,  by  occasionally  visiting 
the  forests,  had  begun  using  the  coca  for  the  sake 
of  passing  the  time  away,  and  acquiring  a relish 
for  it,  from  that  period  been  lost  to  civilization  * 
as  if  seized  by  some  malevolent  instinct,  they 


296  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

refused  to  return  to  their  homes,  and  resisting  the 
entreaties  of  their  friends,  who  occasionally  dis- 
covered the  haunts  of  these  unhappy  fugitives, 
either  retired  to  some  distant  solitude,  or  took  the 
first  opportunity  of  escaping,  when  they  had  been 
brought  back  to  the  towns.”  So  sed'uctive  becomes 
this  habit,  for  we  cannot  doubt  the  veracity  of 
these  statements,  that  neither  home,  nor  friends, 
nor  family,  nor  society,  nor  fear,  nor  love,  nor 
respect,  nor  any  other  creature,  nor  passion,  would 
seem  to  have  the  power  of  winning  them  back 
from  their  monomania  to  a rational  state  of 
existence. 

The  virtues  of  the  coca  must  be  of  the  most 
astonishing  character.  The  Indians,  who  are  ad- 
dicted to  its  use,  are  declared  to  be  thereby  enabled 
to  withstand  the  toil  of  the  mines  amidst  noxious 
metallic  exhalations  without  rest,  food,  or  protec- 
tion from  the  climate.  They  run  hundreds  of 
leagues  over  deserts,  and  plains,  and  craggy  moun- 
tains, sustained  only  by  the  coca  and  a little 
parched  corn  ; and  often  too,  acting  as  mules  in 
bearing  loads  through  passes  where  animals  cannot 
go.  Some  have  attributed  this  frugality  and  power 
of  endurance  to  the  effects  of  habit,  and  not  to  the 
use  of  coca ; but  the  Indian  is  naturally  voracious, 
and  it  is  known  that  many  Spaniards  were  unable 
to  perform  the  Herculean  tasks  of  the  Peruvians 
until  they  habitually  used  the  coca ; moreover,  it 
is  affirmed,  that  without  it,  the  Indians  lose  both 
their  vigour  and  powers  of  endurance.  During 
the  siege  of  La  Paz  in  1781,  when  the  Spaniards 
were  constantly  on  the  watch,  and  destitute  of 
provisions,  in  the  inclemencies  of  winter,  they  were 
saved,  as  chroniclers  narrate,  from  disease  and 
death  by  resorting  to  this  plant.  Some  of  those 
who  deny  many  of  the  effects,  said  to  be  produced 
by  its  use,  admit  that  the  coca  is  useful  medicinally 


OUR  LADY  OF  TONGAS. 


297 


as  a preservative  against  the  fevers  which  are  con- 
sequent to  a climate  like  that  of  Peru. 

Hallucinations  result  from  the  use  of  the  coca  as 
from  that  of  the  narcotic  hemp,  but  not,  as  it  would 
appear,  to  the.  same  extent.  The  inordinate  use  of 
this  plant,  as  indeed  of  all  the  narcotics,  seem  to  be 
attended,  with  fearful  results.  One  description 
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  gives  details  of  no 
very  desirable. character.  It  affirms  that  the  abuse 
speedily  occasions  bodily  disease,  and  detriment  to 
the  moral  powers,  but  that  still  the  custom  may  be 
persevered  in  for  many  years,  especially  if  fre- 
quently intermitted,  and  the  coquero  sometimes 
attains,  the  age  of  fifty  with  comparatively  few 
complaints.  But.  the  oftener  the  orgies  are  cele- 
brated, especially  in  a warm  and  moist  climate,  the 
sooner  are  their  destructive  effects  made  evident. 
Foi  this  reason,  the  natives  of  the  cold  and  dry 
districts  of  the  Andes  are  more  addicted  to  the  con- 
sumption of  coca  than  those  of  the  close  forests 
where  undoubtedly  other  stimulants  do  but  take 
its . place.  Weakness  in  the  digestive  organs 
which,  like  . most  incurable  complaints,  increases 
continually  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  first  attacks 
the  unfortunate  coquero.  This  complaint,  which 
is.  called  “ opilacion,”  may  be  trifling  at  the  begin- 
ning, but  soon  attains  an  alarming  height.  Then 
come  bilious,  obstructions,  attended  with  all  those 
thousand  painful  symptoms  which  are  so  much 
aggravated  by  a tropical  climate,  jaundice  and 
derangement  of  the  nervous  system  follow,  alono- 
with  pains  in  the  head,  and  such  a prostration  of 
strength,  that  the  patient  speedily  loses  all  appetite, 
ihe  whites  of  the  eyes  assume  a leaden  colour 
and  a total  inability  to  sleep  ensues,  which 
aggravates  the  mental  depression  of  the  unhappy 
individual,  who  spite  of  all  his  ills,  cannot  relin- 
quish the  use  of  the  herb,  to  which  he  owes  his 


298  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

suffering,  but  craves  brandy  in  addition.  The 
appetite  becomes  quite  irregular,  sometimes  failing 
altogether,  and  sometimes  assuming  a wolfish  vo- 
racity, especially  for  animal  food.  Thus  do  years 
of  misery  drag  on,  succeeded  at  length  by  a painful 
death. 

This  property  of  dispelling  sleep,  as  a result  of 
the  inordinate  use  of  coca,  was  noticed  by  Weddell, 
as  the  result  also  of  the  moderate  indulgence,  by 
way  of  experiment,  in  an  infusion  of  the  leaves,  and 
which  led  him  to  suppose  that  the  chemical  prin- 
ciple of  tea,  called  theine,  would  be  found  present 
in  them.  Professor  Frerny  analyzed  them  accord- 
ingly, but  found  no  such  principle  present,  although 
an  active  bitter  principle  was  found,  peculiar  to  this 
plant,  the  full  properties  of  which  are  still  unascer- 
tained. 

Coca  has  the  reputed  power  of  sustaining  strength 
in  the  absence  of  any  other  nutriment.  The  Indians 
declare,  that  when  using  it  they  feel  neither  the 
pains  of  hunger  nor  of  thirst,  that  they  are  enabled 
to  perform  the  most  laborious  operations  with  little 
or  no  food,  insensible  either  to  cold  or  weariness  ; 
that  by  its  use  they  can  ascend  the  steep  passes  of 
the  Andes,  carrying  with  them  heavy  loads,  and 
without  lassitude  or  loss  of  breath.  When  Tschuddi 
was  in  the  Pima,  he  drank  always  before  going  out 
to  hunt,  a strong  infusion  of  coca-leaves.  Then, 
he  states,  he  could  during  the  whole  day  climb  the 
heights,  and  follow  the  wild  animals  without  ex- 
periencing any  greater  difficulty  of  breathing  than 
he  would  have  felt  in  similar  movements  along  the 
coast.  One  account  states,  that  a native,  who  was 
employed  in  laborious  digging  for  five  days  and 
nights,  tasted  no  food  during  that  period,  and  only 
slept  two  hours  each  night.  He  regularly  chewed 
the  coca-leaves,  to  the  extent  of  about  half  an 
ounce  every  two  or  three  hours,  and  kept  a quid  of 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


299 


them  constantly  in  his  mouth.  The  work  being 
finished,  he  went  a two  days’  journey  of  twenty- 
three  leagues  across  the  level  heights,  keeping  pace 
with  a mule,  and  only  halting  to  replenish  his  quid. 
At  the  end  of  all  this  labour,  he  was  willing  to 
engage  for  the  performance  of  as  much  more  with- 
out food,  but  with  a plentiful  allowance  of  coca. 
This  man  was  sixty-two  years  of  age,  and  was  never 
known  to  have  been  ill  in  his  life.  For  this  reason, 
that  it  appears  to  act  as  a substitute  for  food, 
several  learned  and  ingenious  authors  have  lamented 
that  it  has  not  been  introduced  into  countries  like 
our  own,  where  it  would  be  a boon  so  valuable  to 
the  poor  in  times  of  scarcity  and  distress. 

What  says  science  concerning  this  extraordinary 
power  ? One  of  two  things  is  certain  : either  that 
the  coca  contains  some  nutritive  principle  which 
directly  sustains  the  strength,  or  it  does  not 
contain  it,  and,  therefore,  simply  deceives  hunger 
while  acting  on  the  system  as  an  excitement.  As 
to  the  existence  of  a nutritive  principle  in  coca, 
although  it  cannot  positively  be  denied,  on  account 
of  the  quantity  of  nitrogen,  together  with  assimi- 
lable carbonized  products,  which  have  been  found 
to  exist  in  the  leaf ; yet  their  proportion  is  so 
small  compared  with  the  mass,  and  especially  with 
the  quantity  that  a coquero  consumes  at  once,  that 
they  can  scarcely  be  taken  into  consideration. 
Moreover,  it  has  also  been  affirmed  that  coca,  as  it 
is  habitually  taken,  does  not  satiate  hunger.  The 
Indians  who  accompany  travellers,  will  chew  the 
leaves  during  the  day,  but,  on  the  arrival  of 
evening,  they  will  fill  their  stomachs  like  fasting 
men,  devouring,  at  a single  meal,  enough  to  satisfy 
an  ordinary  man  for  two  days.  The  Indian  of  the 
Cordillera . is  like  the  vulture  of  his  mountains, 
when  provisions  abound,  he  gorges  himself  greedily* 
when  they  are  scarce,  his  robust  nature  enables 


300  THE  SEVEN  SISTEES  OF  SLEEP. 

him  to  content  himself  ■with  very  little.  This  is 
the  evidence — what  is  the  verdict  ? That  the  use  ' 
of  the  coca  assists,  perhaps,  to  support  the  absti- 
nence ; but  that  its  action  is  confined  to  an 
excitement  of  a peculiar  kind,  very  different  fi^om 
that  of  the  ordinary  excitants,  and  especially 
alcohol.  Brandy  gives  strength,  but  that  strength 
is  only  a loan,  at  the  expense  of  strength  reserved 
for  the  future.  The  stimulus  produced  by  coca  is 
slow  and  sustained,  in  part  owing  to  the  manner 
of  its  employment,  as  the  infusion  acts  differently 
from  the  leaf  as  taken  in  the  ordinary  way.  Tea 
and  coffee  act  specially  on  the  brain,  on  which  they 
produce  an  anti-soporific  effect ; but  while  coca 
produces  a little  of  this  effect  when  taken  in  large 
doses,  it  does  not  act  perceptibly  upon  the  brain  in 
small  doses.  To  account  for  the  ordinary  effects 
of  the  leaf,  one  must  suppose  that  its  action, 
instead  of  being  localized,  as  in  the  case  of  tea  and 
coffee,  is  diffused,  and  bears  upon  the  nervous 
system  generally,  producing  a sustained  stimulus, 
calculated  to  impart  to  those  under  its  influence, 
that  support  which  has  been  attributed  erroneously 
to  peculiar  nutritive  properties. 

Superstition  and  prejudice  combined  have,  how- 
ever, ennobled  this  plant  in  the  mind  of  the 
Peruvian,  and  he  looks  upon  it  as  a true  “gift  of 
God.”  Its  influences  and  effects  are  magnified  in 
his  own  mind  into  something  miraculous,  and, 
indeed,  miraculous  powers  have  been  attributed  to 
it,  for  in  what  other  light  can  we  regard  the  belief 
current  amongst  them,  that  if  the  miner  throws 
the  masticated  leaves  upon  the  hard  and  impene- 
trable veins  of  metal,  the  ore  will  thereby  become 
softened  and  be  more  easily  worked  ? or  that  the 
leaves  when  placed  in  the  mouth  of  a dead  person, 
ensures  it  a more  favourable  reception  into  the 
world  of  spirits  ? or  that  when  a mummy  is  met 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


301 


with  disentombed  from  its  narrow  home,  the 
presentation  of  a few  leaves  propitiates  its  dis- 
engaged spirit,  and  is  accepted  as  a pious  offering  ? 

Much  of  the  fidelity  of  the  Indian  to  his  coca, 
as  with  the  smoker  to  his  pipe  of  tobacco,  is  due 
to  habit,  and  in  this  case  the  influence  of  the  habit 
is  more  powerful,  inasmuch  as  it  has  been  handed 
down  through  a long  line  of  ancestors,  and  is 
almost  the  only  one  which  has  been  preserved. 
Finally,  he  finds  in  its  use  a distraction,  and  the 
only  one,  which  breaks  the  monotony  of  his 
existence.  The  Peruvian  Indians  are  of  a gloomy 
temperament,  and  subject  to  fits  of  melancholy. 
When  not  engaged  in  out-door  work,  they  will  sit 
in  their  huts  chewing  coca  and  brooding  gloomily 
over  their  own  thoughts ; indeed,  the  combined 
testimony  of  travellers  establish  the  fact,  that  there 
is  in  their  features  an  expression  of  concentrated 
melancholy,  which  seems  to  speak  of  an  undefined 
but  constant  suffering ; we  cannot  be  astonished  at 
finding  such  people  seeking  for  comfort  in  the 
best  substitute  for  opium  that  their  country  will 
furnish. 

Coca  appears  to  enjoy  an  undisputed  reign  in  the 
Cordilleras ; no  other  narcotic  starts  up  "to  share 
the  throne,  and  this  is  almost  the  only  one  which 
has  not  been  imitated,  or  for  which  some  substitute 
has_  not  either  been  proposed  or  used.  The 
antipodes,  or  nearly  so,  of  this  country  possesses  a 
plant,  which,  had  it  grown  freely  in  other  parts  of 
the  world  might  have  been  heard  of  more  exten- 
sively as  an  indulgence.  In  Siberia,  however, 
there  seems  to  be  little  use  made  of  the  small 
mmgenous  rhododendron,  which  claims  to  be  one 
of  the  most  powerful  narcotics  in  the  world, 
bteller,  the  Pmssian  botanist,  had  a tame  deer 
which  became . so  intoxicated  by  browsing  on 
about  ten  of  its  leaves,  that,  after  staggering 


302  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

about  for  some  time,  it  dropped  into  a deep  but 
troubled  sleep  for  four  hours,  after  which  it 
awoke,  apparently  free  from  pain,  but  would 
never  touch  the  leaves  again.  Steller’s  servants, 
after  this,  took  to  intoxicating  themselves  with 
the  leaves  without  any  evil  effects.  We  have 
also  been  informed  that  certain  of  the  Russians 
have  been  charged  with  the  habit  of  following 
the  example  of  these  experimentalists,  by  getting 
drunk  upon  the  leaves,  which  have  been  used  in 
infusion,  as  Pallas  states,  with  good  effect  in  the 
cure  of  chronic  rheumatism.  The  flowers  of 
another  species  of  rhododendron  are  eaten  as  a 
narcotic  by  the  Hill  people  of  India,  but  in  these 
instances  the  extent  of  their  use  is  so  small,  and 
the  persons  indulging  in  them  so  few,  that  no 
claim  can  be  set  up  for  them,  except  as  minor 
narcotics  occasionally  employed,  when  the  other 
and  more  important  substances  cannot  readily  be 
obtained. 

For  t'he  basis  of  much  which  this,  chapter  con- 
tains, we  are  indebted  to  the  Travels  in  Bolivia  and 
Peru  of  that  worthy  trio  of  doctors,  Poppig, 
Weddell,  and  Tscliuddi,  besides  three  times  as 
many  more,  less  noted  and  less  known,  but  whose 
information  was  not  less  to  be  relied  upon  on  the 
points  concerning  which  they  have  spoken. 
Whether  the  votaries  of  our  Lady  of  Yongas  are 
as  numerous  as  has  been  asserted,  or  only  of  the 
number  we  have  suggested — whether  the  influence 
of  this  plant  over  the  stomachic  regions  is  suffi- 
cient to  subdue  the  pangs  of  hunger,  or  allay  the 
cruelties  of  thirst,  or  these  are  only  effects  due  to 
the  imagination — whether  it  has  the  manellous  j 
power  of  softening  the  adamantine  rock,  or  j 
strengthening  and  supporting  the  lungs  in  the 
ascent  of  Andean  summits,  or  whether  these,  ana 
all  of  these,  are  fictions  proceeding  from  the  heat- 


OUR  LADY  OF  YONGAS. 


303 


oppressed  brain,  it  is,  nevertheless,  certain,  that  a 
great  amount  of  interest  gathers  around  this  plant, 
which  associates  itself  so  intimately  with  the 
country  in  which  it  flourishes,  that,  as  for  centuries 
past,  so  for  centuries  to  come,  coca  will  remain  the 
characteristic  plant  of  the  Peruvian  nation,  as  tea 
was,  and  is,  of  the  Chinese. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY. 


“ Alexander  died.  Alexander  was  buried.  Alexander  returneth 
into  dust ; the  dust  is  earth  ; ol  earth  we  make  loam.  And  why  of 
that  loam,  whereto  he  was  courerted,  might  they  not  stop  a beer 
barrel  ?” — Hamlet. 

The  fact,  at  one  time  doubted,  but  now  established 
beyond  dispute,  that  some  tribes  indulge  in  the 
habit  of  dirt-eating,  is  one  which,  from  its  sin- 
gularity, claims  notice.  The  Malayan  uses  lime  as 
an  ingredient  in  compounding  his  favourite  masti- 
catory, and  the  coquero  of  the  Andes  mixes  it  with 
his  leaves  of  coca.  The  Nubians  mingle  the  saline 
natron  with  their  quid  of  tobacco,  and  the  blacks 
of  Gesira  the  same  material  to  compound  their 
“ bucca  ” The  Ottamacs  and  Omaguas  avail 
themselves  of  the  assistance  of  shell  lime  to  give 
pungency  to  their  intoxicating  snuffs.  The  tribes 
on  the  coast  of  Pari  i.  according  to  Gomara,  stimu- 
lated the  organs  of  taste  by  caustic  lime,  as  other 
races  employ  tobacco,  coca,  or  betel.  In  our  own 
days  this  practice  exists  among  the  Guajiros  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Rio  do  la  Hacha.  Plere  the  stil 
uncivilized  Indians  t arry  small  shells,  calcined  and 
powdered,  in  a box  made  from  the  husk  of  a fruit. 
This  box  is  suspended  from  their  girdle,  and  serves 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY. 


305 


a variety  of  purposes.  The  powder  used  by  the 
Guajiros  is  an  article  of  commerce,  as  formerly  was 
that  of  the  Indians  of  Paria.  What  could  first 
have  induced  these  people  to  use  by  itself,  or  other 
races  to  mingle  with  vegetable  substances,  a 
mineral  only  known  to  us  as  a whitewash,  or  for 
somewhat  similar  vulgar  uses,  and  to  metamor- 
phose it  into  a luxury,  is  difficult  to  understand. 
We  comprehend  the  value  of  lime  when  stirred 
about  in  a pail,  with  sufficiency  of  water  to 
reduce  it  to  the  consistence  of  cream,  and  then 
by  the  aid  of  a broad  flat  brush  transferred  to 
the  ceilings  of  our  dwellings.  We  cannot  so 
well  comprehend  or  appreciate  the  luxury  of  roll- 
ing it  into  a pellet,  and  transferring  it  to  our 
mouths,  as  a whitewash  for  regions  where  the 
curious  eye  of  man  does  not  penetrate. 

The  residents  at  the  fur-posts  on  the  Mackenzie 
River,  have  a mineral  in  use  among  them,  known 
by  the . appellation  of  id  ate  mud , which  is  used 
for  whitewashing,  and,  when  soap  is  scarce,  it 
supplies  the  place  of  that  article  for  washing 
clothes.  It  resembles  pipe-clay,  and  exists  in 
beds  from  six  to  twelve  inches  in  thickness.  It 
is  of  a yellowish  white  colour,  sometimes  with  a 
reddish  tinge.  On  the  Arkansas  also  a similar 
substance  haf  been  met  with,  called  pink  clay. 
The  play  of  the  Mackenzie  is  smooth,  and,  when 
masticated,  has  a flavour,  we  are  told,  resembling 
the  kernel  of  a hazel  nut..  Sir  John  Richardson 
obtained  some  of  this  clay  in  his  journey  to  Prince 
Ruperts  Land.,  and  had  it  examined,  but  could 
not  discover  in  it  any  nutritious  properties,  or 
detect  the  remains  of  infusorial  animal enW  smnL  nc 


use  they  prolong  their  lives. 

x 


306 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


physiological  reasons  known  to  us  whereby  we 
account  for  fowls,  and  other  winged  bipeds  in- 
dulging in  the  singular  propensity  of  swallowing 
small  pebbles,  fragments  of  lime  or  mortar,  sand 
and  clay;  but  as  we  cannot  apply  these  same 
arguments  to  the  cases  of  other  “ bipeds  without 
feathers  ” who  indulge  in  the  same  propensity,  we 
naturally  seek  for  some  signs  of  nutritious  value 
in  the  substance  itself.  In  this  instance  the 
remote  probability  of  its  containing  decayed  animal 
matter  does  not  apparently  exist,  for  the  micro- 
scope detects  no  infusoria.  And  unless  we  argue, 
as  did  Hamlet  with  his  friend  Horatio,  that  in  this 
clay  are  the  remains  of  a previous  generation,  we 
can  scarce  account  for  its  being  a good  article  of 
food. 

“ Imperial  Csesar,  dead  and  turned  to  clay, 

Might  stop  a hole  to  keep  the  wind  away 

or  dead  Indians  turned  to  clay  to  appease  the 
hunger  of  their  living  descendants.  Thus,  if  the 
imagination  may  trace  the  noble  dust  of  Alexander, 
till  we  find  it  stopping  a bunghole,  may  it  not 
also  follow  this  same  clay  from  the  bunghole  into 
the  veins  of  a new  Alexander  ? 

Richardson  states  that  the  above  is  a kind  of  pipe- 
clay. If  made  into  pipes  for  smoking,  Hamlet 
might  argue  still  further,  “ may  we  not  trace  the 
dust  of  the  dead  Indian,  till  we  find  a man  smoking 
his  weed  from  the  leg  or  arm  of  his  great  grand- 
father.” 

Clay  eating  exists  in  South  America,  among  the 
Guamos,  and  by  the  tribes  between  the  Meta  and 
the  Apure.  The  natives  here  speak  of  the  custom 
as  one  of  great  antiquity.  The  Ottomacs  are, 
however,  great  clay-eaters.  Humboldt  found 
amongst  them  heaps  of  earth-balls,  piled  up  in 
pyramids  three  or  four  feet  high,  and  these  balls 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY. 


307 


five  or  six  inches  in  diameter.  This  clay  was  of  a 
yellowish  grey  colour,  and  did  not  contain  mag- 
nesia, but  silex  and  alumina,  and  three  or  four  per 
cent,  of  lime,  no  trace  of  organic  substance,  either 
oily  or  farinaceous,  could  be  found  mixed  with  it. 
If  the  Ottomac  is  asked  what  he  lives  upon  during 
the  two  months  of  the  inundation  of  the  rivers,  he 
shows  you  his  balls  of  clayey  earth.  It  is  asserted 
that  far  from  becoming  lean  at  that  season,  they 
are,  on  the  contrary,  extremely  robust. 

At  the  village  *of  Banco,  on  the  Rio  Magdalena, 
the  same  traveller  found  Indian  women  making 
pottery,  who  continually  swallowed  great  pieces  of 
clay. 

On  the  coast  of  Guinea,  the  negroes  eat  a 
yellowish  earth,  which  they  call  caouac,  the  taste 
of  which  is  said  to  be  agreeable,  and  to  cause  no 
inconvenience.  When  these  Africans  are  carried 
to  the  West  Indies,  they  still  indulge  in  the  custom, 
for  which  purpose  Chanvalon  states  that  it  is  sold 
in  the  markets,  but  that  the  West-Indian  clay 
does  not  agree  with  them  so  well  as  that  of  their 
native  country. 

Labillardiere  saw  between  Surabaya  and  Sama- 
rang  little  square  reddish  cakes,  called  tanaampo, 
exposed  for  sale,  which  were  slightly  baked,  and 
eaten  with  relish.  5 


Leschenault  states  that  the  reddish  clay  (cimpo) 
which  the  Javanese  are  fond  of  eating  occasionally^ 
is  spiead  on  a plate  of  iron  and  baked,  after  being 
rolled  into  little  cylinders  in  the  form  of  cinnamon 
bark.  In  this  state  it  is  sold  in  the  markets.  It 
has  a peculiar  taste,  which  is  owing  to  the  baking 
is  very  absorbent,  and  adheres  to  the  tongue.  The 
Javanese  women  eat  the  cimpo  in  order  to  grow 
thin,  the  absence  of  plumpness  being  there 
regarded  as  a kind  of  beauty. 

In  times  of  hunger  or  scarcity,  the  savages  of 

x 2 


308 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


New  Caledonia  eat  great  pieces  of  a friable  stone, 
which  contains  magnesia  and  silex,  with  a little 
oxide  of  copper. 

The  African  negroes  of  Bunch  and  Los  Idoles 
eat  a kind  of  white  and  friable  steatite,  or  soap- 
stone, from  which  custom  they  are  said  to  suffer 
no  inconvenience. 

At  Popayan  and  several  of  the  mountainous 
parts  of  Peru,  finely-powdered  lime  is  sold  in  the 
public  markets  with  other  articles  of  food.  This 
powder  is,  however,  generally  mixed  with  the  leaves 
of  the  coca,  and  used  as  a masticatory.  In  other 
parts  of  South  America,  lime  is  swallowed  alone, 
the  Indians  carrying  with  them  a little  box  of 
lime,  as  other  people  carry  their  tobacco-box,  snuff- 
box, or  siri-box. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Quito,  the  Tigua  natives  eat 
from  choice,  and  without  any  ill  consequences,  a 
very  fine  clay  mixed  with  sand.  This  clay,  mixed 
with  water,  renders  it  milky.  Large  vessels  filled 
with  this  mixture,  called  agua  de  llanka,  water  of 
clay,  or  leche  de  llanka,  milk  of  clay,  may  be  seen 
in  most  of  their  huts,  where  it  serves  as  a beverage. 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Kamen-da-Maslo, 
there  is  produced  a fossil,  or  an  earthy  substance, 
called  in  Russian  kamennoye  maslo,  stone  butter, 
which  is  eaten  in  various  ways,  as  well  by  the 
Russians  as  the  Tongousi,  it  is  of  a yellowish  cream 
colour,  and  not  unpleasant  in  taste,  but  it  is  for- 
bidden as  pernicious  in  its  effects.  This  earthy 
matter  is  stated  to  be  a fossil,  or  salt  oozing  out  of 
rocks,  in  many  parts  of  Siberia,  but  chiefly  from 
those  near  the  river  Irtish  and  Yenissei.  When 
it  is  exposed  to  the  air  in  dry  weather  it  hardens, 
but  in  wet  weather  it  again  becomes  soft  or  liquid. 
The  Russian  hunters  use  it  also  as  a bait.  The 
animals  scent  it  from  afar,  and  are  fond  of  the 
smell. 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY. 


309 


In  . Germany,  the  workmen  employed  in  the 
quarries  of  sandstone  at  Kiffhauser,  spread  a fine 
clay  upon  their  bread  instead  of  butter,  which  they 
call  Steinbutter  (stone  butter).  There  is  another 
substance,  called  bergbutter,  or  mountain  butter, 
which  is . a saline  substance  produced  by  the 
decomposition  of  aluminous  schists. 

On  the  shores  of  a lake  near  Urania,  in  Sweden 
is  found  a deposit,  called  by  the  peasants  “ mountain 
meal”  ( bergmehl ) which  they  use,  mixed  up  with 
flour,  as  an  article  of  food.  This  deposit  consists 
chiefly  of  fossil  infusoria. 

In  Finland  also,  a similar  kind  of  earth  is  mixed 
with  bread  stuff,  as  also  in  parts  of  Northern 
Gei  many  in  cases  of  scarcity  or  necessity.  In 
Lapland  also,,  this  fossil  farina  has  been  found  and 
applied  to  a like  use.  The  Tripoli  or  rotten  stone 
ot  commerce  is  an  infusorial  earth  of  this  descrip- 
tion, composed  of  fossils  of  extraordinary  minute 
dimensions. 


A poor  man,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dejufors 
Sweden,.  some  years  since,  found  an  earth  of  this 
description,  which  had  much  the  appearance  of 
meal  The  people  being  at  that  time  in  a state  of 
privation,  and  living  upon  bark  bread,  this  man 
took  some  home,  mixed  it  with  rye  meal,  baked  it 
into  bread,  and  found  it  palatable,  hereupon 
there  was  a general  run  upon  this  earth,  and  some 
ot  it  found  its  way  to  Stockholm.  On  analysis  it 
was  found  to  contain  flint  and  felspar,  finely  pul- 
verized with  lime,  clay,  oxide  of  iron,  and  some 
organic  substance  resembling  animal  matter,  and 
yielding  ammonia,  and  an  oil. 

Ehrenberg  found  that  a hill  in  Bohemia  was 
one  mass  of  the  siliceous  fossil  shells  of  these 
minute  creatures,  and  that  in  a stratum  fourteen 
feet  in  thickness,  one  cubic  inch  contained  tho 
remains  of  41,000,000,000  of  individuals. 


310 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


These  kind  of  deposits  are  continually  accumu- 
lating, and  producing  important  changes,  in  the 
bed  of  the  Nile,  at  Dongola,  and  in  the  Elbe,  at 
Cuxhaven,  and  even  choking  up  some  of  the 
harbours  in  the  Baltic  Sea. 

Dr.  Trail  analyzed  a bergmehl  from  the  North 
of  Sweden,  and  found  it  to  be  composed  of  the 
minute  shields  of  infusoria,  about  one  thousandth 
of  an  inch  in  size,  consisting  chiefly  of  siliceous 
earth  and  alumina.  A small  quantity  of  this  curious 
substance  was  found  in  County  Down,  Ireland,  by 
Dr.  Drummond,  twenty  years  ago,  while  sinking  a 
pit  near  Newcastle. 

MM.  Cloquet  and  Breschet  ate  experimentally 
as  much  as  five  ounces  of  a silvery  green  laminar 
talc.  Their  hunger  was  completely  satisfied,  and 
they  felt  no  inconvenience  from  the  use  of  a kind  of 
food  to  which  they  had  not  been  accustomed.  In 
parts  of  the  East,  use  is  still  made  of  the  Bole  earths 
of  Lemnos,  which  are  clay  mixed  with  oxide  of  iron. 

In  Portugal  and  Spain,  bucaro  clays  are  made 
into  vessels,  from  which  many  are  fond  of  drinking 
on  account  of  the  smell  of  the  clay ; and  the 
women  of  the  province  of  Alentejo  acquire  a habit 
of  masticating  the  bucaro  earth,  and  feel  it  a great 
privation  when  unable  to  indulge  in  this  vitiated 
taste. 

In  the  Bolivian  markets,  Dr.  Weddell  saw  a 
grey-coloured  clay  which  was  offered  for  sale.  It 
is  called  pahsa , and  the  Indians  of  La  Paz  eat  it 
with  the  bitter  potato  of  the  country.  It  is  steeped 
in  water,  made  into  a kind  of  gruel,  and  seasoned 
with  salt. 

At  Chiquisaca  a kind  of  earth  called  cliaco  is 
made  into  little  pots,  and  eaten  like  chocolate. 
Although  their  moderate  use  is  not  calculated  to 
injure  the  system,  their  contribution  to  the  nourish- 
ment of  the  body  must  be  but  small. 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY. 


311 


In  the  valleys  of  the  Sikkim  Himalayas,  a kind 
of  red  earth  is  chewed  as  a cure  for  the  goitre,  but 
it  is  not  stated  to  be  regularly  indulged  in  as  an 
article  of  food  either  there  or  in  any  other  part  of 
India. 

Mr.  Wallace  relates  that  a little  Indian  boy  died 
from  the  habit  of  dirt-eating — a very  common  and 
destructive  habit  among  Indians  and  half  breeds  in 
the  houses  of  the  whites  in  the  Amazon  valley. 
All  means  had  been  tried  to  cure  the  lad  of  the 
habit.  He  had  been  physicked  and  whipped,  and 
confined  in  doors  ; but  when  no  other  opportunity 
offered,  he  would  find  a plentiful  supply  in  the  mud 
walls  of  the  house.  The  whole  body,  face,  and 
limbs  swelled,  so  that  he  could  with  difficulty  walk, 
and  not  having  so  much  care  taken  of  him,  he  ate 
his  fill  and  died. 

Those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  children, 
will  have  noticed  amongst  some  of  them  the  germs 
of  tiffs  propensity,  which  will  occasionally  develop 
itself  in  chewing  pieces  of  pipe,  slate  pencil,  chalk, 
and  other  substances  of  a like  nature.  Although 
not  carried  to  so  great  an  extent  as  to  become  inju- 
rious, cases  of  this  kind  are  far  from  being,  among 
school  children,  either  exceptional  or  uncommon. 

In  the  mission  of  San  Borja,  Humboldt  found 
the  child  of  an  Indian  woman,  which,  according  to 
the  statement  of  its  mother,  would  hardly  eat  any- 
thing but  earth.  It  was  very  thin  and  emaciated. 

These  instances  are  not,  after  all,  so  singular  as 
those  of  habitual,  national  dirt-eating  which  we  find 
amongst  the  tribes  of  South  America  and  the 
negroes  of  Africa.  Children  are  not  always  the 
most  particular  in  the  choice  of  their  articles  of 
food,  or  we  should  not  read  of  such  instances 
as  occur  in  tropical  America  of  these  young- 
sters drawing  immense  centipedes  out  of  their 
holes  and  eating  them ; or,  as  related  by  Captain 


312  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

Cochrane,  of  a child  devouring  several  pieces 
of  tallow  candle,  which  was  succeeded  by  a 
large  lump  of  yellow  soap,  all  of  which  he  seemed 
to  enjoy. 

Chroniclers  often  make  mention  of  the  employ- 
ment, during  times  of  war,  of  kinds  of  infusorial 
earth  as  food,  under  the  general  term  of  moun- 
tain meal.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Thirty  Years 
War,  at  Camin  in  Pomerania,  Muskau  in  the 
Lausitz,  and  Ivleiken  in  the  Dessau  territory  ; and 
subsequently  in  1719  and  1733  at  the  fortress  of 
Wittenberg.  But  in  times  of  war  and  scarcity, 
one  is  prepared  to  hear  of  men  satisfying  their 
hunger  by  every  legitimate  means. 

M.  S.  Julien  sent  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
Paris  some  few  years  since,  specimens  of  a peculiar 
mineral  substance  from  the  province  of  Kiang-si 
in  China,  on  which,  in  times  of  famine,  the  inha- 
bitants have  been  said  to  be  able  to  support  them- 
selves as  a nutriment.  It  has  a disagreeable  taste, 
and  produces  dryness  in  the  mouth.  It  is  never- 
theless used  by  the  natives  mixed  with  flour,  and  is 
even  esteemed  by  them. 

It  may  appear  somewhat  singular  to  refer  to 
these  dirt-eating  customs,  in  connection  with  those 
relating  to  narcotics.  The  connection  is,  however, 
more  intimate  than  at  the  first  glance  might 
appear.  Two  kinds  of  substances  are  mostly  re- 
sorted to,  either  to  gratify  these  depraved  tastes,  or 
satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger — lime  and  clay, 
or,  as  we  have  designated  them — clay  and  white- 
wash. It  is,  or  has  been  matter  of  dispute,  whether 
the  stimulating  properties  of  the  betel  and  coca,  and 
the  intoxicating  snuffs  of  the  Orinoco,  are  to  be 
attributed  to  the  vegetable  substances  themselves, 
or  to  the  lime  used  with  them,  or  both  in  conjunc- 
tion ; hence  the  introduction  of  lime  is  not  con- 
sidered inappropriate.  As  for  the  clay,  it  is  not 


WHITEWASH  AND  CLAY.  313 

only  intimately  associated  with  the  other,  from  the 
similarity  of  the  use  to  which  it  is  thus  strangely 
applied,  _ but  the  connection  of  it  in  some  of  its 
forms  with  the  consumption  of  one  or  two  of  the 
narcotics,  as  the  means  whereby  they  are  indulged 
in,  must  serve  as  an  apology,  if  such  be  needed? 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


PRECIOUS  METALS. 


“ The  virtues  of  the  noble  metals  are,  moreover,  of  such  a nature  that 
they  inspire  respect  even  in  those  who  do  not  seek  these  qualities  in 
higher  spheres,  but  ask  after  the  common  and  every-day  usefulness  of  a 
thing.” — Von  Kobell. 


Some  consider  those  metals  most  precious  which, 
like  gold  and  silver,  have  earned  that  reputation 
by  acting  in  the  capacity  of  representatives,  of 
wealth,  as  the  current  coins  of  civilized  nations. 
To  some  men  these  have  been  esteemed  more 
precious  than  health,  or  even  than  life  itself  j 
others,  calculating  on  the  grounds  of  utility,  have 
considered  iron  and  copper,  so  universally  appli- 
cable to  the  wants  of  civilized  life,  such  mighty 
agents  in  the  cause  of  civilization,  as  the  most 
precious  of  metals ; and  these  may  be  right  in 
their  calculations,  for  although  we  might  manage 
to  get  on  without  the  former,  we  can  hardly 
imagine  for  ourselves  the  condition  occasioned  by 
the  loss  of  the  latter.  There  are  yet  a few  to 
whom  it  would  seem,  however  strange  the  fact 
may  appear,  that  two  metals  are  the  most  precious 
which  the  rest  of  the  world  have  no  idea  of  con- 
sidering as  of  but  a very  low  rate  of  value,  and 
without  which  they  can  readily  conceive  ot  the 


PRECIOUS  METALS. 


315 


world  moving  on  without  any  very  great  sense  of 
their  loss.  These  two  are  Arsenic  and  Mercury. 
The  very  names  are  almost  sufficient  to  send  a 
shudder  of  horror  through  us  as  we  write  or  repeat 
them ; and  to  elect  them  into  the  highest  place  in 
our  affections  is  the  last  act  we  should,  in  a state 
of  sanity,  deem  ourselves  likely  to  perform.  The 
one  suggests  images  of  Aqua  Tophana  and  the 
Middle  Ages,  and  our  teeth  loosen  in  our  gums 
with  unpleasant  reminiscences  of  black  draught 
and  blue  pill  as  associated  with  the  other.  For 
one  we  can  think  of  no  better  employment  than 
the  extirpation  of  rats,  or  the  preservation  of 
mummies;  and  for  the  other  no  more  exalted  an 
occupation  than  to  coat  the  backs  of  our  mirrorsj 
or  inform  us  of  the  conditions  of  the  atmosphere. 
That  any  one  could  indulge  in  them  as  luxuries, 
or,  by  their  habitual  use,  elevate  them  to  a com- 
panionship with  tobacco  and  opium,  with  haschish 
and  coca,  would  appear  to  be  a gross  libel  upon  the 
“Seven  Sisters  of  Sleep,”  and  a satire  upon  the 
cherished  companions  of  millions  of  the  human 
race. 

Medical  men,  foremost  amongst  whom  is  Dr. 
Christison,  consider  that  these  minerals  cannot  be 
indulged  in  without  exercising  a deleterious  effect 
upon  the  system.  The  cumulative  action  of 
mineral  poisons  is  a great  point  of  difference 
between  them  and  those  of  vegetable  origin,  for 
although  the  same  eminent  physician  is  of  opinion 
that  tobacco  may  be  indulged  in  without  injury, 
he  does  not  believe  such  a possibility  to  exist  with 
regard  to  mercury  and  arsenic.* 

The  use  of  corrosive  sublimate,  the  bichloride  of 
mercury,  is  certainly  restricted  within  very  con- 


* This  name,  derived  from  the  Greek,  indicates  strong, 
powerful. 


316  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

fined  limits,  and  even  within  those  limits,  the 
information  we  have  is  very  meagre.  At  Constan- 
tinople, the  opium-eater,  who  finds  his  daily  dose 
insufficient  in  time  to  produce  those  results  which 
at  first  accrued  from  its  use,  resorts  to  the 
expedient  of  mixing  therewith  a small  quantity  of 
corrosive  sublimate,  to  increase  the  potency  of  the 
drug.  By  itself,  it  is  never  indulged  in  as  a passion 
in  the  same  manner  as  vegetable  narcotics,  nor  can 
the  same  pleas  be  urged  in  favour  of  its  use,  or  in 
extenuation  of  its  abuse.  An  opium-eater  at 
Broussa  is  stated  to  have  been  accustomed  to 
swallow  daily  with  his  opium,  forty  grains  of  cor- 
rosive sublimate  without  any  apparently  injurious 
effects.  In  South  America  its  use  is  affirmed  to 
be  very  extensive. 

Arsenious  acid,  or  white  arsenic,  is  a more 
popular  irritant  than  mercury.  The  arsenic- 
eaters  of  Styria  are  now  historical  individuals,  and 
the  custom  there  and  in  the  neighbouring  districts 
appears  to  be  a common  one  among  the  labouring 
population.  Itinerant  pedlars  vend  it  for  this  pur- 
pose, and  it  becomes  a necessary  of  life  to  those  who 
commence  the  practice.  It  is  taken  every  morning 
as  regularly  as  the  Turk  consumes  his  opium. 

One  of  the  benefits  said  to  accrue  from  its  use 
is,  that  it  gives  a plumpness  to  the  figure,  softness 
to  the  skin,  freshness  to  the  complexion,  and 
brilliancy  to  the  eye.  For  this  purpose,  young 
men  and  maidens  resort  to  it,  to  increase  their 
charms,  and  render  themselves  acceptable  and 
fascinating  to  each  other.  A friend,  recently 
returned  from  Canada  and  the  United  States, 
informs  us,  positively,  that  it  is  largely  consumed 
by  the  young  ladies,  in  those  regions  of  the  civilized 
world,  for  the  same  purposes  above  described,  to 
which  it  is  resorted  by  the  Austrian  damsels. 
He  declares  that  the  custom  is  so  common  that  no 


PRECIOUS  METALS. 


317 


surprise  is  excited  on  discovering  any  one  addicted 
to  its  use,  and  that  amongst  the  fairer  sex  it  is  the 
rule  rather  than  the  exception. 

The  principal  authority  for  its  use  in  the 
European  districts,  is  the  celebrated  traveller  Yon 
Tschuddi,  who  has  published  an  account  of  several 
cases  which  have  come  to  his  knowledge.  In  one 
instance,  a pale,  thin  damsel,  anxious  to  attach 
herself  to  her  lover,  by  presenting  a more  pre- 
possessing exterior,  took  the  “precious  metal/'’  in 
the  form  of  its  oxide,  several  times  a week,  and 
soon  became  stout,  rosy,  and  captivating  ; but  in 
her  over-anxiety  to  heighten  her  charms,  and  rival 
the  fabled  beauties  of  old,  and  having  experienced 
the  benefit  of  small  doses  of  the  poison,  ventured 
upon  a larger  quantity,  and  died  from  its  effects, 
the  victim  of  her  vanity.  The  habit  is  generally 
commenced  with  small  doses,  starting  with  about 
half  a.  grain  or  less,  each  day,  and  gradually 
increasing  it  to  two  or  three  grains.  The  case  of 
a hale  old  peasant  is  mentioned,  whose  morning 
whet  of  arsenic  reached  the  incredible  quantity  of 
four  grains. 

Another  singular  benefit  is  supposed  to  arise 
from  the  use  of  this  substance,  similar  to  that 
claimed  by  the  Peruvians  for  their  coca,  namely, 
that  of  rendering  the  breathing  easier  in  toiling 
uphill,  so  that  steep  heights  may  be  climbed 
without  difficulty  or  exhaustion.  It  is  curious  that 
the  mountaineers  of  the  Andes  and  the  Alps,  at 
distances  so  remote,  should  deem  themselves 
possessed  of  the  means  of  assisting  nature  in 
surmounting  difficulties,  by  preventing  exhaustion 
m climbing  the  mountain  side  : in  one  instance,  by 
chewing  a quid,  of  leaves  which  grow  plentifully 
on  the . mountain  slopes,  and  in  the  other,  by 
swallowing  a small  fragment  of  a mineral  obtained 
from  the  mines  at  the  mountain  side. 


318  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

Whilst  the  practice  of  arsenic  eating  is  continued, 
no  evil  effects  would  seem  to  be  experienced,  every- 
thing connected  with  the  body  of  the  eater  seems 
to  be  in  a flourishing  condition,  the  appearance  is 
healthy,  plump,  and  fresh,  no  symptoms  of  poison- 
ing are  manifested  until  the  regular  dose  is  dis- 
continued, when  a great  feeling  of  discomfort 
arises,  the  digestion  becomes  deranged,  burning 
sensations  and  spasms  are  present  in  the  throat, 
pains  in  the  bowels  commence,  and  the  breathing 
becomes  oppressed.  From  these  unpleasant  sensa- 
tions there  is  no  relief  but  by  an  immediate  return 
to  the  habit  of  arsenic  eating,  and  hence,  when 
once  commenced,  the  use  of  this  article  becomes  a 
necessity  of  life,  and  the  poisonous  mineral  a 
“precious  metal.” 

Dr.  Macgowan  of  Ningpo,  says,  “We  are  told 
that  Mongolian  hunters,  beyond  the  wall,  eat 
arsenic  to  enable  them  to  endure  cold  when 
patiently  lying  on  the  snow  to  entrap  martins.  In 
this  part  of  China  arsenic  is  taken  by  divers,  who 
in  cold  weather  plunge  into  still  water  in  pursuit 
of  fish,  which  are  then  found  hybernating  among 
stones  at  the  piers  of  bridges.  We  perceive  with 
regret,  that  the  modern  Chinese  have  added  arsenic 
to  their  habitual  stimulants.  The  red  sulphuret 
in  powder  is  mixed  with  tobacco,  and  their  joint 
fumes  are  smoked  in  the  ordinary  manner.  We 
have  met  with  no  habitual  smokers  of  this  com- 
pound of  mineral  and  vegetable  poisons;  but 
persons  who  have  made  trial  state  that  dizziness 
and  sickness  attend  first  attempts.  After  a few 
trials,  arseniated  tobacco  may  be  taken  without 
any  apparent  inconvenience.  From  reports  given 
of  it,  we  infer  that  its  effects  on  the  Chinese  are 
analogous  to  what  is  observed  among  the  arsenic- 
eating peasants  of  Austria. 

“ At  Pekimr.  where  arseniated  tobacco  is  most  in 


PRECIOUS  METALS. 


319 


use,  it  costs  no  more  than  the  unmixed  article  ; it 
may  be  known  by  the  red  colour  imparted  to  the 
vegetable  by  the  powdered  proto-sulphuret.  Its 
introduction  is  attributed  to  Cantonese  from  Chau- 
chau.  If  this  he  correct,  it  is  probable  that  these 
southerners,  unable  at  the  north  to  procure  the 
masticatory  to  which  they  are  addicted,  sought  to 
appease  a craving  for  the  pungent  hut  harmless 
lime  and  betel  nut,  by  substituting  the  deleterious 
mineral  gas.  Many  of  the  miserable  victims  of 
opium,  to  whom  that  narcotic  is  a necessity,  and 
not  a pleasure,  have  eagerly  employed  the  new 
stimulant  to  prop  and  exhilarate  their  exhausted 
bodies,  and,  perhaps,  have  thereby  meliorated 
and  prolonged  their  existence.  We  would  fain 
hope  that  the  use  of  arsenical  stimulants  will 
not  become  general ; yet  that  pernicious  custom 
is  extending,  and  we  know  our  race  too  well 
not  to  entertain  fears  on  that  subject.  It  is 
even  stated  that,  for  a time  at  least,  the  reigning 
Emperor  in  his  boyhood  preferred  tobacco  thus 
mineralized.  In  domestic  economy,  the  red  sul- 
phuret  is  employed  for  making  away  with  rats 
and  husbands."  * 

. One  of  the  best  things  that  Hahnemann  ever 
did  was  to  write  a treatise  on  arsenic.  This  he 
did  well,  and  therefore  deserves  to  be  remembered  • 
but  for  this  he  is  often  forgotten,  and  is  only  ex- 
tolled for  a less  important  labour — the  introduction 
of  homoeopathy.  Chemists  deserve  well  of  man- 
kind for  the  assiduity  with  which  they  have  studied 
this  subtle  poison,  so  that  now  it  may  be  detected 
in  the  minutest  quantities.  One  point,  however, 
seems  to  be  hardly  clear,  and  on  this,  perhaps,  the 
Styrian  peasant  could  enlighten  us,  namely,  the 
taste  of  arsenic,  some  declaring  that  it  has  no 


* “Edinburgh  Medical  Journal,”  1857. 


320  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

distinguishable  taste,  others,  that  it  is  sweetish, 
and  others  saline.  The  only  means  of  arriving  at 
the  truth  is  rather  too  hazardous  a one  to  be 
ventured  upon. 

The  effects  of  arsenic  upon  the  human  frame, 
were  illustrated  in  a curious  case  which  occurred  a 
few  years  since  in  the  northern  part  of  France. 
A domestic  at  a country  seat  wished  to  cause  the 
death  of  his  mistress,  and  mixed  arsenic  in  small 
quantities  with  her  food,  hoping  that  the  slow 
operation  of  the  poison  would  prevent  any  suspicion 
of  murder.  To  his  great  astonishment,  she  gained 
rapidly  in  health,  flesh,  and  spirits.  ' At  length 
he  gave  her  a larger  quantity,  which  occasioned 
serious  illness,  and  led  to  the  discovery  and  punish- 
ment  of  the  crime. 

We  have  as  yet  applied  arsenic  only  to  some  of 
the  purposes  for  which  it  is  applicable.  The  roses 
of  England  possess  enough  of  bloom  without 
resorting  to  the  bloom  of  the  smelting  furnace. 
Although  we  use  it  to  preserve  with  all  the  ap- 
pearances of  life  the  deceased  zoological  curiosities 
of  our  museums,  we  do  not  seek  its  aid  to  enhance 
the  charms  of  those  living  specimens  of  beauty 
which  are  the  glory  and  the  pride  of  our  hearths 
and  homes.  Fortunately,  we  have  no  Andes  to 
climb,  and  no  Alps  to  scale,  and  the  summits  we 
have  to  gain  are  arrived  at  by  dint  of  perseverance, 
and  no  small  amount  of  puffing,  in  which  latter 
circumstance  it  seems  to  be  our  nature  to  glory  as 
much  as  the  Peruvian  or  the  Austrian  in  its 
absence.  Now  and  then  we  become  suspicious  of 
its  presence  in  our  green  paper  hangings,  and  in 
that  menial  office  are  almost  content  to  dispense 
with  its  services.  Or  anon,  we  are  treated  to  a 
scramble  of  Bradford  drops,  which,  finding  the 
temperature  of  the  climate  uncongenial,  melt  away 
to  a stray  ghost  or  two  that  haunt  the  stoppered 


PRECIOUS  METALS. 


321 


bottles  of  our  chemical  museums.  Grumble  as  we 
may  at  our  precious  metals,  we — 

“ Rather  bear  those  ills  we  have, 

Than  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of.” 

Animals  have  not  escaped  arsenic-eating,  for  the 
Austrians,  having  discovered  its  property  of  plump- 
iQg  up,  and  putting  into  good  condition  the  human 
animal,  have  resorted  to  it,  as  an  improver  of  their 
ill-conditioned  horses.  Gentlemen’s  grooms  bestow 
it  upon  the  animals  in  their  charge,  and  pronounce 
its  effects  as  certain  and  as  marvellous,  as  upon 
thin  and  sickly-looking  damsels.  A pinch  of  the 
white  powder  is  sprinkled  like  pepper  over  the 
feed  of  corn,”  or  tied  up  in  a piece  of  rag  and 
fastened  to  the  “bit,”  before  that  instrument  is 
introduced  into  the  animal’s  mouth.  The  same 
two  properties  are  said  to  be  exhibited  in  the  case 
of  the  horses,  as  are  affirmed  to  take  place  in  man. 
The  body  is  plumped  out,  and  rounded  into  fair 
proportions,  the  skin  rendered  sleek  and  glossy, 
and  the  breath  is  improved,  so  that  long  journeys' 
steep  and  rugged  ascents,  and  heavy  loads,  are 
readily  overcome  by  its  potency.  If  this  secret 
were  communicated  to  some  of  our  London  omni- 
bus and  cabmen,  it  would  probably  be  of  advantage 
to  the  appearance  of  some  of  the  poor  animals 
doomed  for  a certain  time  to  walk  this  earth,  and 
increase  their  facility  for  moving  through  a space 
of  three  or  four  miles  in  less  time  than  a pedestrian 
could  accomplish  the  feat. 

The  teamsters  in  mountainous  countries  fre- 
quently add  a dose  of  arsenic  to  the  fodder,  which 
wiey  give  their  horses,  before  a laborious  ascent. 

I he  practice  of  giving  arsenic  to  horses  may  con- 
tinue for  yearn  without  accident,  but  as  soon  as  the 
animal  passes  into  the  hands  of  a master  who  does 
not  use  arsenic,  he  becomes  thin,  loses  his  spirits 


322  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

and,  in  spite  of  tine  most  abundant  nourishment, 
never  recovers  his  former  appearance. 

The  use  of  arsenic  for  horned  cattle  is  less  fre- 
quent ; it  is  only  given  to  oxen  and  calves  intended 
for  fattening.  In  Austria,  hogs  and  other  animals 
are  also  fattened  by  a careful  use  of  arsenic. 

Precious  metals,  like  precious  stones,  are  subject 
to  misfortunes.  As  of  the  latter,  a learned  pro- 
fessor saith,  “ Patents  of  nobility  are  distributed 
here  in  the  most  arbitrary  manner,  and  outward 
aspect  and  character,  weigh  heaviest  in  the  scales 
by  which  they  are  determined.  To  such  an 
extent  is  this  the  case,  that  the  stones  which  have 
literally  and  truly  fallen  from  the  skies,  are  not 
reckoned  among  the  precious  stones,  although  they 
have  been  in  all  times  objects  of  curiosity  to  the 
most  cultivated  minds,  and  certainly  are  of  very 
high  descent , since  they  came,  at  least,  from  the 
moon,  and  are  even  imagined  to  be  young  worlds, 
little  princes,  which  would  in  time  have  come  to  reign 
as  planets.  And  whence  this  injustice  ? Because 
these  little  strangers,  which,  perhaps,  are  pleased  to 
travel  incognito,  have  an  inconspicuous  exterior,  are 
enveloped  in  a dark  weather-proof  cloak,  because 
from  under  this  cloak,  only  a greyish  suit,  without 
gold  lace,  with  merely  a little  iron  scattered  about 
it,  comes  to  light ; because  this  aspect  does  not 
show  from  afar  off  that  they  have  fallen  from  the 
skies,  and  because  they  do  not  say  to  everybody, 
‘ My  mother  lives  in  the  mountains  of  the  moon/ 

And  although  Mercury,  not  only  in  name,  but 
also  in  its  volatile  and  skyward  tendencies,  claims 
kindred  with  the  planetary  system,  which  ten- 
dencies are  likewise'  shown  in  the  behaviour  of  the 
other  metallic  substance,  of  which  this  chapter  dis- 
courses. Yet  their  high  claims  are  disregarded,  and, 
like  the  aerolites,  they  are  condemned  by  the  majo- 
rity of  men  to  a plebeian  rank  and  menial  offices. 


CHAPTER  XXI Y. 


DATURA  AND  CO. 

» 

“ That  skulk  in  the  depths  of  the  measureless  wood 

^lid  the  Dark’s  creeping  whispers  that  curdle  the  blood. 
Where  the  wolf  howls  aloof,  and  the  wavering  glare 
Flashes  out  from  the  blackness  the  eyes  of  the  bear.” 

The  tliorn-apple  and  nightshade  are  types  of  a 
class  of  narcotics,  which,  though  not  largely 
employed  either  for  their  intoxicating  effects  or 
their  medicinal  virtues,  are,  notwithstanding, 
extremely  powerful  in  their  effects,  and,  when 
used,  exercise  a wonderful  influence  upon  the 
brain.  The  majority  of  them  belong  to  that 
family  of  plants,  of  which,  not  only  tobacco,  but 
the.  potato,  aie  members  5 so  that,  if  only  from 
then-  family  connections,  independently  of  any 
other  right,  they  have  a claim  upon  our  attention 
and  respect.  Beyond  this,  even,  we  shall  find  them 
insinuating  themselves  into  the  good  graces  of  that 
portion  of  the  creation  who  have  taken  the  two 
members  of  the  family  already  named  under  its 
protection,  and  adopted  them  as  companions,  the 
one  to  soothe  and  console  after  the  hours  of  labour 
are  past,  the  other  to  aid  in  giving  strength  to 
perform  that  labour,  or  satisfy  the  cravings  of 
hunger.  0 

The  solanaceous  plants  have,  in  general,  narcotic 
qualities.  In  some  species  these  are  developed  in 


324 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


a great  degree,  so  as  to  render  them  extremely 
poisonous ; in  others,  they  are  obscured  by  the 
prevalence  of  starchy  matter.  In  some  instances 
parts  of  the  plant  have  narcotic  properties,  whilst 
other  parts  are  used  as  articles  of  food.  The 
Bitter  Sweet  ( Solanum  dulcamara ) has  slightly 
narcotic  properties,  and  the  scarlet  berries  are 
considered  poisonous.  The-  Common  Nightshade 
( Solanum  nigrum)  has  more  active  narcotic  pro- 
perties. The  Potato  ( Solanum  tuberosum)  has 
slight  narcotic  qualities  in  its  leaves  and  fruit,  but 
its  tubers  are  edible  and  nutritious.  The  Deadly 
Nightshade  (Atropa  belladonna)  is  a highly 
poisonous  plant,  narcotic  in  all  its  parts.  Hen- 
bane ( Hyoscyamus  niger)  contains  also  similar 
properties.  Many  species  of  Thorn  Apple  are 
powerfully  narcotic,  especially  the  seeds  or  fruit ; 
this  is  especially  the  case  with  our  common  thorn- 
apple  ( Datura  stramonium),  with  the  thorn-apple 
of  the  Andes  ( Datura  sanguinea),  and  of  North 
America  ( Datura  tatula),  the  thorn-apples  ofj 
India  (Datura  metel,  D.  ferox,  and  D.  fatuosa). 
Several  species  of  Nicotiana  furnish  tobacco.  The 
fruit  of  different  species  and  varieties  of  Capsicum , 
which  are  used  as  pepper,  possess  irritant  properties 
which  obscure  the  narcotic  action.  Other  species 
are  used  as  narcotics,  or  as  poisons,  and  some,  as 
the  Tomato  and  other  Lycopersicums,  as  articles 
of  food;  but  the  majority  give  evidence,  in  some 
of  their  parts,  of  the  existence  of  a narcotic 
principle.* 

* The  potato,  the  tomato,  and  egg  plant  possess,  when 
uncooked,  in  a mild  degree,  the  properties  of  the  nightshade, 
the  stramonium,  and  the  henbane,  confirming  the  remark  of  De 
Candolle  “ that  all  our  aliments  contain  a small  proportion  of 
an  exciting  principle,  which,  should  it  occur  in  a much  greater 
quantity,  might  become  injurious,  but  which  is  necessary  as 
a natural  condiment.”  In  fact,  when  food  does  not  contain 
some  stimulating  principle,  we  add  it  in  the  form  of  spices. 


DATURA  AND  CO. 


325 


The  Kala  clhatoora  {Datura  fatuosa ) and  Sada 
dhatoora  ( Datur  alba ) are  very  common  species 
of  thorn-apple  over  the  peninsula  of  India,  where 
they  are  also  called  mazil  or  methel.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  facilitating  theft  and  other  criminal  designs, 
the  seeds  are  very  commonly  given  in  Bengal, 
vuth  sweetmeats,  to  stupify  merely,  hut  not  with 
the  intention  of  killing.  Intoxication  or  delirium 
is  seldom  produced.  The  individual  sinks  into  a 
profound  lethargy,  with  dilated  pupils,  hut  natural 
respiration.  These  symptoms  have  been  known  to 
continue  for  two  days.  The  vision  often  becomes 
obscured  long  after  the  general  recovery  takes 
place.  Graham  says  that  the  seeds  are  often 
fatally  used  for  these  purposes  in  Bombay.  The 
narcotic  action  is  more  speedy  and  powerful  on  an 
empty  stomach  than  after  a meal;  hence  death 
often  ensues  from  the  effects  when  the  intention 
was  only  to  produce  narcotism. 

In  some  parts  of  South  America,  especially  in 
Peru,  where  a species  of  thorn-apple  (. Datura  san- 
guined) grows  wild,  the  natives,  in  certain  cases, 
drink  a decoction  of  the  leaves  or  seeds,  which 
produces  such  violent  effects  as  to  cause  them  to 
fall  _ into  a state  nearly  resembling  death,  and 
lasting  frequently  two  or  three  days.  Every 
malady  is  there  ascribed  to  enchantment,  and  this 
very  singular  plan  is  resorted  to  to  discover  by 
whom  the  mischief  may  have  been  wrought.  In 
cases  of  extreme  illness  the  decoction  is  given  not 
to  the  sick  person,  but  to  the  nearest  relative,  who 
devotes  himself  for  this  purpose,  to  discover  during 
his  sleep  the  sorcerer  or  Mohari  who  has  inflicted 
the  disease.  The  medicine  soon  causes  the  relative 
to  fall  under  its  influence,  and  he  is  placed  in  a fit 
position  to  prevent  suffocation.  On  returning  to 
his  senses  he  describes  the  sorcerer  he  has  seen 
m his  dreams,  and  the  whole  family  set  out  to 


326 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


discover  the  Mohari  who  bears  the  nearest  resem- 
blance to  the  description,  who,  when  found,  they 
compel  to  undertake  the  cure  of  the  sick  person. 
When  no  sorcerer  has  been  seen  in  the  vision,  or 
no  one  is  found  resembling  the  one  which  has  been 
seen,  the  first  Mohari  they  meet  with  is  obliged  to 
undertake  the  office  of  physician.  Should  the 
patient  die  during  the  vision  of  the  relative,  the 
sorcerer  whose  image  is  then  supposed  to  be 
presented  is  subjected  to  the  same  fate. 

This  plant,  which  is  called  “ Florispondio”  in 
tropical  America,  appears  always  to  have  played, 
and  still  continues  to  play,  a prominent  part  in  the 
superstitions  of  the  natives.  The  Indians  of 
Darien,  as  well  as  those  of  Choco,  according  to 
Seemann,  prepare  from  its  seeds  a decoction,  which 
is  given  to  their  children  to  produce  a state  of 
excitement,  in  which  they  are  supposed  to  possess, 
the  power  of  discovering  gold.  In  any  place  where 
the  unhappy  patients  happen  to  fall  down,  digging 
is  commenced ; and  as  the  soil  nearly  everywhere 
abounds  with  gold  dust,  an  amount  of  more  or 
less  value  is  obtained.  In  order  to  counteract  the 
bad  effects  of  the  poison,  some  sour  chica,  a beer 
made  of  Indian  corn,  is  administered. 

It  is  this  same  thorn-apple  which  is  used  amongst 
the  Andes  of  New  Granada,  and  even  as  far  south, 
as  Peru,  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  therefrom  a 
drink,  with  very  strong  narcotic  properties,  which 
they  call  “ Tonga.”  Dr.  Von  Tschuddi  has  giveq 
a description  of  the  effects  of  this  narcotic  upon  an 
old  Indian.  “ Shortly  after  swallowing  the  beve- 
rage he  fell  into  a heavy  stupor.  He  sat  with  his 
eyes  vacantly  fixed  on  the  ground,  his  mouth  con-' 
vulsively  closed,  and  his  nostrils  dilated.  Iu  th( 
course  of  about  a quarter  of  an  hour  his  eyes  began 
to  roll,  foam  issued  from  his  half-opened  lips,  auc 
his  whole  body  was  agitated  by  frightful  coni 


DATURA  AND  CO. 


327 


vulsions.  These  violent  symptoms  having  subsided, 
a profound  sleep  of  several  hours  succeeded.  In 
the  evening,  when  I saw  him  again,  he  was  relating 
to  a circle  of  attentive  listeners  the  particulars  of 
his  vision,  during  which  he  alleged  he  had  held 
communication  with  the  spirits  of  his  forefathers. 
He  appeared  very  weak  and  exhausted.” 

By  means  of  this  plant  they  believe  that  they 
can  hold  communication  with,  their  ancestors,  and 
obtain  a clue  to  the  treasures  concealed  in  their 
huacas  or  graves — hence  it  is  called  huaca-cacha 
or  grave  plant.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the 
frenzied  ravings,  called  prophecies,  of  the  Delphic 
oracles  were  produced  by  this  plant,  which  has 
been  used,  as  Dr.  Lindley  asserts,  in  the  temple 
of  the  sun  at  Sogamossa,  near  Bogota,  in  New 
Granada,  for  the  same  purpose.  Already  we  have 
alluded  to  the  Delphic  oracles  more  fully,  when 
writing  of  the  “ Sisters  of  Old.” 

The  cunning  few  acquainted  with  some  of  the 
extraordinary  properties  of  certain  plants,  which 
were  unknown  to  the  superstitious  and  barbarous 
multitude  in  days  gone  by,  had  ample  means  at 
their  disposal  for  imposing  on  their  credulity, 
by  the  performance  of  wonderful  cures,  working- 
apparent  miracles,  and  gulling  the  less  informed 
into  the.  belief  that  they  were  either  in  direct 
communication  with  the  spiritual  world,  or  had 
received  a divine  commission  by  which  to  govern. 
Most  of  the  marvels  of  ancient  times  were  no 
greater  than  the  little  experiments  which  the 
school-boy  now  performs  for  his  amusement  and 
that  of  his  companions,  with  a few  crystals  and 
powders,  contained  in  as  many  pill-boxes. 

The  pots  or  gourds,  in  which  cocoa-nut  sap  to 
make  arrack  is  drawn  off  in  Ceylon,  are  sometimes 
visited  and  the  contents  carried  off  during  the 
night.  To  detect  the  thief,  the  leaves  of  a species 


328  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

of  datura  or  thorn-apple  are  occasionally  put  into 
some  of  the  pots.  By  means  of  the  highly  intoxi- 
cating effect  of  this  compound  the  marauder  is 
often  discovered.  On  the  Coromandel  coast  the 
retailers  of  toddy  sometimes  rub  the  inside  of 
the  pots  with  the  seed-vessel  or  leaves  of  this 
highly  poisonous  plant,  to  increase  the  intoxicating 
influence  of  the  toddy. 

The  phrase  “ pariah-arrack  ” is  often  used  to 
designate  a spirit  distilled  in  the  peninsula  of 
India,  which  is  said  to  he  rendered  unwhole- 
some by  an  admixture  of  Giinja,  and  a species  of 
Datura,  with  the  intention  of  increasing  its  intoxi- 
cating quality.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  term 
pariah-arrack  be  colloquially  employed  to  designate 
an  inferior  spirit  or  an  adulterated  compound.  It 
is  curious  that  a system  of  “ doctoring  ” beverages, 
to  make  them  heady,  should  obtain  abroad,  as  it 
does  at  home,  and  in  both  cases  perhaps  inde- 
pendently: for  it  does  not  seem  probable  either 
that  we  borrowed  the  system  from  the  Hindoos,  or 
that  they  copied  it  from  us. 

While  under  the  influence  of  these  narcotics  the 
mind  seems  to  he  subjected  to  a troubled  dream, 
and  the  person  suffering  from  it  indulges  in  fits  of 
uncontrollable  laughter.  Beverley,  the  historian  of 
Jamaica,  quaintly  describes  the  effects  of  the  thorn- 
apple.  Some  soldiers,  who  were  sent  to  quell  the 
rebellion  in  the  island,  ate  of  it : 11  the  effect  was  a 
very  pleasant  comedy,  for  they  turned  natural  fools 
upon  it  for  several  days.  One  would  blow  up  a 
feather  in  the  air,  another  would  dart  straws  at  it 
with  much  fury.  Another,  stark  naked,  was  sit- 
ting up  in  a corner  grinning  like  a monkey,  and 
making  mouths  at  them.  A fourth  would  fondly 
kiss  and  paw  his  companions,  and  sneer  in  their 
faces  ■with  a countenance  more  antic  than  a Dutch 
doll.  In  this  frantic  condition  they  were  confined, 


DATURA  AND  CO. 


329 


lest  in  their  folly  they  should  destroy  themselves. 
A thousand  simple  tricks  they  played ; and,  after 
eleven  days,  returning  to  themselves  again,  not 
remembering  anything  that  had  occurred.” 

The  extract  of  Stramonium  or  common  thorn- 
apple  has  occasionally,  when  injudiciously  admini- 
stered, produced  similar  effects  upon  the  individual 
to  whom  it  has  been  given,  affecting  the  senses, 
particularly  that  of  sight.  “ Imaginary  objects  are 
seen  to  play  before  the  eyes,  at  which  the  victim 
strikes,  as  they  seem  to  terrify  him.  And  similar 
results  have  occurred  from  the  use  of  the  seeds.” 
Fowler  relates  a case  of  a child  who  supposed  that 
cats,  dogs,  and  rabbits  were  running  along  the  tops 
and  sides  of  the  room.  Dr.  Winslow  says  “ that 
when  inhaled,  the  smoke  conveys  a sense  of  gentle 
tranquillity,  the  muscles  of  the  thorax,  and  those 
which  have  been  called  into  action  to  assist  them, 
in  the  paroxysms  of  asthma  which  the  smoking  is 
resorted  to  to  relieve,  are  rendered  less  irritable 
and  the  fibre  is  relaxed,  sleep  is  induced,  but  there 
is  rarely  any  disturbance  of  the  imagination.” 

In  France  and  Germany,  this  plant  has  been 
resorted  to.  for  the  basest  of  purposes,  and  many 
unhappy  victims  have  been  consigned  to  hopeless 
insanity  by  its  means,  details  of  which  would  be 
far  more  horrible  than  interesting.  Faber  also 
speaks  of  its  use  by  the  ladies  of  the  Turkish 
harems ; but  there  is  doubt  whether  this  is  not  one 
of  those  marvels,  of  which  many  may  be  met  with 
in  connection  with  medicinal  agents,  containing 
more  of  romance  than  reality.  Dr.  Ainslie  states 
that  the  seeds  form  one  of  the  ingredients  of  the 
confection  of  hemp  and  opium  known  under  the 
name  of  madjoun  in  India ; as  henbane  is  asserted 
to  enter  into  the  composition  of  that  in  use  under 
the  same,  or  a similar  name,  in  Egypt.  The  pro- 


330  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

portion  of  either  of  these  when  used  is  doubtless 
small,  and  is  in  most  cases  dispensed  with. 

Etymologists  declare  that  the  name  of  bella- 
donna, which  has  been  given  to  the  deadly  night- 
shade (Atropa  belladonna ) was  so  given  because 
those  to  whom  it  was  administered  fancied  they 
saw  beautiful  females  before  them*  There  is  no 
doubt  that  it  produces  illusions  of  a singular 
character,  and  cases  of  impulsive  insanity  have 
resulted  from  its  use  in  repeated  doses.  The  effect 
of  belladonna  upon  the  brain  is  more  extraor- 
dinary than  those  usually  attendant  upon  the  use 
of  other  narcotics.  Persons  who  have  been 
poisoned  by  the  berries  of  the  plant  have  become 
restless  and  delirious,  complained  of  dimness  of 
vision,  and  subsequently  loss  of  sight.  There  were 
observed  frequent  spasmodic  contractions  of  the 
muscles  of  the  eyeballs  and  the  throat,  with  strong 
symptoms  of  mania.  Six  soldiers  who  were 
poisoned  by  the  plant  exhibited  delirium  the  most 
extravagant,  and  commonly  of  the  most  pleasing 
kind,  accompanied  with  immoderate  and  uncon- 
trollable paroxysms  of  laughter,  sometimes  -with 
constant  talking,  but  occasionally  with  complete 
loss  of  speech.  Buchanan  relates  that  the  Scots 
mixed  a quantity  of  the  juice  of  belladonna  with 
the  bread  and  drink  which,  by  their  truce,  they 
were  to  supply  the  Danes  with,  which  so  intoxicated 
them,  that  the  Scots  killed  the  greater  part  of 
Sweno’s  army  while  asleep. 

The  effects  of  belladonna  on  the  brain  are  well 
described  by  Dr.  Wiuslow,  than  whom  no  better 
authority  can  be  desired.  “ One  of  the  marvellous 
effects  of  continued  doses  is  the  production  of  a 

* Another  fanciful  origin  for  the  name,  which  signifies 
“ beautiful  woman,”  is,  that  it  was  bestowed  in  consequence  of 
the  use  once  made  of  its  berries  by  the  Italian  ladies  as  a 
cosmetic. 


DATURA  AND  CO. 


331 


singular  psychological  phenomenon.  A delirium 
supervenes,  unaccompanied  by  any  fantasia,  or 
imaginary  illusion,  whose  marked  characteristic  is 
somnambulism.  An  individual  who  has  taken  it 
in  several  doses  seems  to  be  perfectly  alive  to  sur- 
rounding objects,  his  senses  conveying  faithfully  to 
the  brain  the  impressions  that  they  receive ; he 
goes  through  his  usual  avocations  without  exhibit- 
ing any  unwonted  feeling,  yet  is  he  quite  uncon- 
scious of  his  existence,  and  performs  mechanically 
all  that  he  is  accustomed  to  do,  answers  questions 
correctly,  without  knowing  from  whom  or  from 
whence  they  proceed,  looks  at  objects  vacantly, 
moves  his  lips  as  if  conversing  yet  utters  not  a 
sound,  there  is  no  unusual  state  of  the  respiratory 
organs,  no  alteration  of  the  pulse,  nothing  that  can 
bespeak  excitement.  When  this  state  of  somnam- 
bulism passes  away,  the  individual  has  not  the 
slightest  recollection  of  what  has  occured  to  him  ; 
he  reverts  to  that  which  immediately  preceded  the 
attack,  nor  can  any  allusion  to  his  apparent  reverie 
induce  him  to  believe  that  he  has  excited  any 
attention.  The  case  of  the  tailor  who  remained  on 
his  shopboard  for  fifteen  hours,  performing  all  his 
usual  avocations,  sewing  with  great  apparent  ear- 
nestness, using  all  the  gestures  which  his  business 
requires,  moving  his  lips  as  if  speaking,  yet  the 
whole  of  the  time  perfectly  insensible,  has  been 
frequently  quoted.  It  was  produced  by  bella- 
donna.” 

The  use  of  this  plant  has  been  recommended 
as  a preventive  of  scarlatina.  An  instance  is 
recorded  of  a family  consisting  of  eleven  persons 
who  took  it  for  this  purpose,  in  small  quantities, 
twice  a day.  Five  of  these  persons  were  domestics! 
On  the  fourth  day,  almost  all  of  them  became 
under  the  influence  of  the  drug,  two  or  three  of 
them  very  slightly,  simply  complaining  of  having 


332  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

the  vision  disturbed  by  objects  which  they  in  vain 
attempted  to  remove,  for  they  were  fully  persuaded 
that  they  existed.  Two  had  singular  fits  of  laugh- 
ter which  nothing  could  control.  All  complained 
of  being  in  an  unusual  state.  The  servants  were 
all  of  them  able  to  go  through  their  work,  but  all 
seemed  to  act  mechanically,  each  independent  qf 
the  other.  Of  this  the  most  ludicrous  example  was 
in  the  course  of  the  fourth  evening.  A carriage 
arrived  at  the  street  door,  and  the  street  bell  was 
rung  with  considerable  violence.  They  all  imme- 
diately left  their  business,  quietly  walked  up  stairs 
as  if  they  had  not  the  slightest  idea  that  they 
were  all  upon  the  same  errand.  They  went  to  the 
door  ; two  of  them,  however,  only  opened  it ; one 
of  these  walked  away  without  waiting  to  know 
what  was  the  reason  of  the  ringing,  and  the  other 
seemed  not  disposed  to  trouble  himself  with  any- 
thing beyond  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the 
door.  On  the  discontinuance  of  the  medicine,  they 
all  soon  returned  to  their  usual  state,  and  two  of 
them  had  scarlatina,  though  only  in  a mild  form. 

From  this  descriptive  account  of  the  action  of 
belladonna,  and  its  singular  effects  upon  the  mind, 
approaching  to  a form  of  insanity,  it  will  appear 
strange  that  this  drug  should  be  recommended 
by  Hahnemann  and  his  followers  for  the  cure  of 
insanity.  But  this  is  the  very  principle  upon  which 
that  school  operates.*  That  drug  which  produces, 
in  its  effects  the  worst  forms  of  mania,  is  the  best 
adapted  for  its  cure.  We  are  not,  however,  either 
apologists,  exponents,  or  opponents  of  homoeopathy, 
and  will  leave  its  supporters  to  champion  their  own 
cause. 

Henbane  ( Hyoscyamus  niger ) is  another  of  these 
powerful  narcotic  agents,  educing  symptoms  ana- 


* “ Similia  similibus  curantur.” 


DATURA  AND  CO. 


333 


logous  to  insanity.  In  small  closes,  its  effect  is  to 
produce  a pleasant  sleep  and  soothe  pain.  In  larger 
doses,  the  effects  are  extremely  deleterious.  Two 
soldiers  who  ate  the  young  shoots  dressed  with 
olive  oil,  became  giddy  and  stupid,  lost  their 
speech,  had  a dull  and  haggard  look.  The  limbs 
were  cold  and  palsied,  and  a singular  combination 
of  delirium  and  coma  manifested  itself.  As  the 
palsy  and  somnolency  decreased,  the  delirium 
became  extravagant.  Others  who  partook  of  the 
same  species  of  plant  by  mistake  were  affected  in  a 
similar  manner.  Several  were  delirious  and  danced 
about  the  room  like  maniacs,  and  one  appeared  as 
if  he  had  got  drunk.  A French  physician  gives 
an  account  of  nine  persons  who  were  nearly- 
poisoned  by  eating  the  roots  of  henbane.  The 
effects  of  this  poison  were  horrible  in  the  extreme ; 
in  five,  out  of  the  nine,  it  produced  raving  madness. 
The  madness  of  all  these  was  so  complete,  and 
their  agitation  so  violent,  that  in  order  to  give  one 
of  them  an  antidote,  six  strong  men  had  to  be 
employed  to  hold  him  down,  while  his  teeth  were 
being  separated  to  pour  down  the  remedy.  For 
two  or  three  days  after  their  recovery,  every  object 
appeared  to  them  as  red  as  scarlet. 

Henbane,  which  is  often  administered  as  a sub- 
stitute for  opium,  and  in  the  East  occasionally 
mixed  with  it,  has  the  extraordinary  faculty  of 
producing  jealousy.  Many  authenticated  cases  are 
recorded  of  the  power  of  the  leaves,  and  the  fumes 
of  the  seeds,  over  the  more  intense  passions.  A 
disposition  to  quarrel  and  fight  is  decidedly  pro- 
duced. One  case  is  that  of  a young  couple,  who 
had  married  from  affection,  had  lived  upon  terms 
of  the  most  perfect  mutual  regard — indeed,  had 
been  noticed  for  the  warmth  and  strength  of  their 
attachment ; but  suddenly,  to  the  surprise  of  the 
surrounding  neighbours,  their  harmony  was  not 


334  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

only  interrupted,  but  they  became  bitter  antagonists, 
fighting  and  beating  each  other  most  unmercifully. 
What  seemed  most  surprising  was,  that  in  one 
particular  room  appeared  to  spring  then-  most 
determined  quarrels,  and  that  they  soon  subsided 
elsewhere.  This  mystery  was  at  length  explained, 
and  their  days  of  happiness  restored,  by  the  dis- 
covery that  to  the  effects  of  a considerable  quantity 
of  henbane,  stored  up  for  drying,  them  miseries 
were  owing,  and  on  the  removal  of  this,  the  source 
of  their  feuds  appeared  to  vanish.  Hahnemann, 
as  might  be  expected,  considers  this  as  one  of  the 
most  potent  medicines  for  the  cure  of  jealousy, 
since  it  is  so  effective  in  causing  it. 

The  leaves  of  the  three  plants  lately  noticed — 
namely,  thorn-apple  or  stramonium,  belladonna, 
and  henbane  — are  made  up  in  the  form  of 
cigarettes ; and  the  first  of  these  also  as  cigars,  to 
be  smoked  by  asthmatic  persons,  for  their  soothing 
and  sedative  effects.  These  are  all  made  and  con- 
sumed extensively  on  the  continent,  and  may  be 
procured  in  many  parts  of  London.  They  have 
also  been  recommended  to  those  not  asthmatical, 
as  pleasant,  harmless,  and  containing  all  the 
narcotising  influences  of  a good  cigar.  They 
may  be  considered  as  truly  narcotic  substitutes  for 
tobacco ; but  at  the  present  rate  at  which  they  are 
sold,  although  not  subject  to  either  customs  or 
excise,  there  is  but  little  fear  of  their  interfering 
prejudicially  with  the  sale  of  the  genuine  article. 
In  face  of  the  facts  already  detailed,  a good  amount 
of  courage  seems  necessary  to  make  the  attempt, 
lest  they  should  prove  cumulative  in  their  action. 
Dr.  Cbristison  says,  when  writing  of  these  narcotics, 
“ The  action  of  such  poisons  is  not  always,  how- 
ever, entirely  thrown  away ; they  still  produce 
some  immediate  effect ; and  further,  by  being  fre- 
quently taken,  they  may  slowly  bring  on  certain 


DATURA  AND  CO.  335 

diseases,  or  engender  a predisposition  to  disease. 
A very  singular  exception  to  this  rule  prevails  in 
the  instance  of  tobacco,  which,  under  the  influence 
of  habit,  may  he  smoked  daily  to  a considerable 
amount,  and,  so  far  as  appears,  without  any  cumu- 
lative effect  on  the  constitution,  like  that  of 
opium-eating  or  drinking  spirits.” 

It  does  not  appear  that  hitherto  the  leaves  of 
the  purple  foxglove  ( Digitalis  purpurea)  has  been 
used  in  the  same  form,  or  for  any  other  than  purely 
medicinal  purposes ; hut  it  possesses  narcotic 
powers  equal  to  the  others,  and,  in  excess,  produces 
equally  fatal  results,  such  as  delirium,  convulsions, 
and  insensibility.  A fatal  case  which  occurred  in 
1826  became  the  ground  of  a criminal  trial,  in 
which  death  took  place  in  twenty-two  hours,  having 
been  preceded  by  convulsions  and  insensibility. 

An  enumeration  of  the  various  other  narcotics 
which  enter  into  combination  with  other  sub- 
stances in  the  production  of  beverages,  such  as  the 
hop  and  its  substitutes,  forming  no  part  of  the 
plan  of  this  work,  would  be  uninteresting  without 
further  details.  Nor  would  a list  of  such  narcotics 
as  are  used  merely  in  materia  medica  answer  any 
useful  end.  Fuller  particulars  would  only  convert 
this  into  a toxicological  treatise,  interesting  to  none 
but  medical  students,  for  whom  ample  information 
is  provided  in  the  libraries  to  which  they  have 
access. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA. 


“ Vilibus  ancipites  fungi  ponentur  amicis ; 

Boletus  domino.” — Juvenal. 

The  rage  for  scampering  half  over  the  world  in 
search  of  the  picturesque  has  scarcely  got  far 
enough  to  tempt  any,  except  a stray  traveller  or 
two,  into  the  chilly  regions  of  Siberia  and  Kamt- 
schatka,  and  in  these  exceptional  cases,  perhaps, 
more  from  force  than  choice.  These  are  regions, 
therefore,  concerning  which  our  information  is 
remarkably  limited.  It  is  true  that  Captain 
Cochrane  informs  us  that  he  married  a wife  from 
Ivamtschatka  —a  virtuous  maiden,  who  knew  more 
of  that  region,  perhaps,  than  he  or  she  cared  to 
tell ; for  the  one  tells  us  very  little,  and  the  other 
nothing,  of  yon  strange  land,  with  an  almost 
unpronounceable  name.  We  are  told,  moreover, 
that  the  capital  is  called  by  the  names  of  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul.  Fearing  lest  one  patron  saint 
should  not  be  sufficient  to  immortalize  the  metro- 
polis of  all  the  Kamtschatkas,  the  founders  and 
inhabitants  have  wisely  adopted  two..  This  city 
also  is  stated  to  contain  forty-two  dwellings,  besides 
fifteen  edifices  belonging  to  the  government,  an 
old  church,  and  the  foundation  of  a new  one.  The 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA. 


337' 


winters  are  declared  to  be  mild,  compared  with 
those  of  Siberia;  but  even  these  are  not  very- 
inviting,  as  the  snow  lies  on  the  ground  seven  or 
eight  months,  and  the  soil,  at  the  depth  of  twenty- 
four  to  thirty  inches,  being  frozen  at  all  seasons. 
Potatoes  never  ripen,  cabbages  never  come  to  a 
head,  and  peas  only  flower.  But  the  gallant 
captain  adds : “ I am  certainly  the  first  English- 
man that  ever  married  a Kamtschatdale,  and  my 
wife  is  undoubtedly  the  first  native  of  that  penin- 
sula that  ever  visited  happy  Britain.” 

In  such  a land,  there  is  little  hope  of  cultivating 
P0PPy,  tobacco,  betel,  coca,  hemp,  or  thorn-apple ; 
and  the  poor  native  would  have  been  compelled  to 
have  glided  into  his  grave  without  a glimpse  of 
Paradise  beforehand,  if,  on  the  one  hqnd,  the  kindly 
Russian  pedlar  had  not  found  a way  to  smuggle  a 
little  bad  spirits  into  the  country,  to  the  great 
annoyance  of  ah  quietly-disposed  persons,  or,  on 
the.  other,  nature  had  not  promptly  supplied  an 
indigenous  narcotic,  in  the  form  of  an  unpretendin  °'- 
looking  fungus  or  toadstool,  to  stimulate  the  dor- 
mant energies  of  the  dwellers  in  this  region  of  ice 
and  snow. 

That  some  kinds  of  mushrooms  are  poisonous  is 
a truth  of  which  every  farm  labourer  seems  aware. 
But  that  some  of  those  which  have  been  reputed 
poisonous  are  inert,  is  beyond  their  philosophy  and 
only  receives  at  present  the  sanction  of  some  of 
the  more  scientific,  who  have  directed  their  studies 
thitherward.  The  fly  agaric  is  one  of  those  justly- 
reputed  poisonous  species,  occasionally  found  in 
this  country,  but  .which  grows  plentifully  in 
Ivarntschatka  and  Siberia.  A recent  author  of  an 
account  of  Russia  states,  “that  mushrooms  viru- 
lently  poisonous  in  one  country  are  eaten  with 
safety  m another,  is  well  known  in  other  cases  as 
or  instance,  in  that  of  the  fly  mushroom  {Amanita 


338 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


muscaria),  which  is  common  in  England,  and  always 
poisonous  there,  while  in  Kamtschatka  it  is  used 
as  a frequent  article  of  food.”  Then  he  inquires 
into  the  reasons  wherefore  this  should  be  the  case : 
— “It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  difference  of  soil 
and  climate  explain  the  mystery ; for  though  we 
know  that  culture  changes  the  properties  of  plants, 
converting  what  is  poisonous  in  the  wild  state  into 
a wholesome  esculent  when  raised  in  the  garden — 
as  in  the  case  of  the  common  celery,  for  example — 
yet  throughout  the  whole  of  the  vegetable  kingdom 
we  find  almost  no  other  instance  of  a plant  which 
is  poisonous  in  one  country  becoming  wholesome, 
without  culture,  when  transplanted  to  another,  and 
left  entirely  to  itself,  and  in  both  placed  in  appa- 
rently the  same  circumstances  as  to  soil,  &c.  . After 
all,  a great  part  of  the  secret  may  lie,  not  in  the 
plant,  but  in  the  mode  of  preparing  it  for  the  table. 
So  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  Russian  cook,  on  first 
cutting  up  these  spoils  of  the  forest,  makes  a much 
more  copious  use  of  salt  than  is  done  with  us ; and 
the  efficacy  of  this  agent  in  deadening  the  poisonous 
quality,  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  melancholy 
case  recorded  in  medical  treatises,  of  a French 
officer  and  his  wife,  both  of  whom  died  in  thirty- 
two  hours  after  eating  certain  mushrooms,  while 
the  person  who  supplied  them,  and  his  whole  family, 
made  a hearty  and  wholesome  meal  from  the  same 
gathering.”  In  this  case,  it  appears  that  while  the 
former  took  them  without  addition,  the  lattei  first 
salted  them  strongly,  and  then  squeezed  them  well 
before  using  them.  M.  Roques  says  distinctly  that 
this  plant  has  not  its  poisonous  properties  modified 
by  any  climate.  The  Czar  Alexis  lost  his  life  by 
eating  this  mushroom.  The  details  ot  its  effects 
upon  the  Kamtschatkans  by  Kraschemimkow,  m 
his  natural  history  of  that  country  are  explicit, 
respecting  the  delirious  intoxication  induced  by  it. 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA. 


339 


Gmelin  and  Pallas  also  equally  certifying  its  intoxi- 
cating powers.  Roques  reports  seven  different  sets 
of  observations  respecting  its  deleterious  effects  on 
man. 

Unless  we  accept  some  such  explanation  of  the 
phenomena  as  this,  how  can  we  reconcile  the  fact 
of  their  being  eaten  by  the  Russians  without 
injury,  whilst,  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Christison, 
we  have  such  a fatal  case  as  the  following,  from 
eating  the  same  kind  of  fungus,  the  growth  of 
the  same  country  and  climate.  Several  French 
soldiers  in  Russia  ate  a large  quantity  of  Amanita 
muscaria , some  were  not  taken  ill  for  six  hours  and 
upwards.  Four  of  them  who  were  very  powerful 
men  thought  themselves  safe,  because,  while  their 
companions  were  already  suffering,  they  themselves 
felt  perfectly  well  and  refused  to  take  emetics. 
In  the  evening  they  began  to  complain  of  anxiety, 
a sense  of  suffocation,  frequent  fainting,  burning 
thirst,  and  violent  gripes.  The  pulse  became  small 
and  irregular,  and  the  body  bedewed  with  cold 
sweat,  the  lineaments  of  the  countenance  were 
singularly  changed,  the  nose  and  lips  acquiring  a 
violet  tint,  they  trembled  much,  the  belly  swelled, 
and  a profuse  diarrhoea  followed.  The  extremities 
soon  became  livid  and  cold,  and  the  pain  of  the 
abdomen  intense,  delirium  ensued,  and  all  the  four 
died.  Two  of  the  others  suffered  coma  for  twenty- 
four  hours. 

This  proves  that  the  mushroom  in  question  is 
possessed  of  undoubtedly  poisonous  properties, 
which  are  fatal  in  their  effects,  unless  counter- 
acted or  dispelled  by  the  method  of  preparing 
them  for  the  table.  That  this  method  is  known 
to  the  Russians  and  to  some  other  nations,  and  is 
believed  to  consist  in  well  saturating  the  fungi 
with  salt  before  cooking  them.  The  Muscovite 
seems  to  have  no  greater  dread  of  ill  effects  from 

z 2 


340  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

the  fly  agaric  than  has  the  Brazilian  from  his 
cassava  or  mandioca  flour,  which  is  prepared  from 
the  equally  poisonous  root  of  the  mandioca  plant, 
the  deleterious  qualities  of  which  are  destroyed  by 
the  heat  used  in  its  preparation.  Dr.  Pouchet  of 
Kouen  seems  to  have  clearly  proved  that  the 
poisonous  property  of  the  fly  agaric  and  a venenata 
may  be  entirely  removed  by  boiling  them  in  water. 
A quart  of  water  in  which  five  plants  had  been 
boiled  for  fifteen  minutes,  killed  a dog  in  eight 
hours ; and,  again,  another  in  a day ; but  the 
boiled  fungi  themselves  had  no  effect  at  all  on  two 
other  dogs  ; and  a third  which  had  been  fed  for 
two  months  on  little  else  than  boiled  amanitas,  not 
only  sustained  no  harm,  but  actually  got  fat  on  the 
fare.*  Pouchet  is  inclined  to  think  that  the  whole 
poisonous  plants  of  the  family  are  similarly  circum- 
stanced. 

The  most  singular  circumstance  connected 
with  the  history  of  this  fungus,  is  the  place  it 
occupies  as  a substitute  for  those  narcotics  known 
in  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  an  un- 
genial  northern  climate  fails  to  produce.  What 
the  coca  is  to  the  Bolivian,  and  opium  to  the 
Chinese — the  areca  to  the  Malay,  and  liaschisch 
to  the  African — the  tobacco  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Europe  and  America,  and  the  thorn-apple  to  those 
of  the  Andes — is  the  fly  agaric  to  the  natives 
of  Siberia  and  Kamtschatka.  Why  it  has  been 
called  by  this  name  has  arisen  from  its  use  as  a 
fly  poison.  Never  having  seen  those  dipterous 
insects  while  under  its  influence,  we  cannot  detail 
the  symptoms  it  produces. 

This  poisonous  fungus  has  some  resemblance  to 
the  one  generally  eaten  in  this  country,  yet  there 
are  also  striking  points  of  difference.  As,  tor  instance, 


* “ Journ.  de  Chem  Med.,”  1839,  p.  322, 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA- 


341 


the  gills  are  white  instead  of  pinkish  red,  inclining 
to  brown,  and  the  cap  or  pileus,  which  is  rather 
flat,  is  generally  of  a livid  red  colour,  sprinkled  with 
angular  lighter  coloured  worts.  These  are  distinc- 
tions broad  enough  to  prevent  any  one  having  the 
use  of  his  eyes,  and  who  has  ever  seen  the  edible 
mushroom  being  deceived  into  the  belief  that  the 
fungus  thus  briefly  described  is  identical  with  the 
delicacy  of  our  English  tables. 

. These  fungi  are  collected  by  those  who  indulge 
m them  narcotically,  during  the  hot,  or  rather 
summer  months,  and  afterwards  hung  up  to  dry 
in  the  open  air.  Or  they  may  be  left  to  ripen 
and  dry  in  the  ground,  and  are  afterwards  col- 
lected. When  left  standing  until  they  are  dried, 
they  are  said  to  possess  more  powerful  narcotic 
properties  than  when  dried  artificially.  The  juice 
of  the  whortleberry  in  which  this  substance  has 
been  steeped,  acquire  thereby  the  intoxicating 
properties  of  strong  wine. 

. Tlie  method  of  using  this  singular  substance 
is  to  roll  it  up  m the  form  of  a bolus  and 
swallow  it  without  any  mastication,  as  one  would 
swallow  a large  pill.  It  is  swallowed  thus  on 
principle,  not  that  its  flavour  would  be  unplea- 
sant, as  compound  colocynth  might  be  when  mas- 
ticated, but  because  it  is  stated  to  agree  ill  with 
the  stomach  when  that  operation  is  performed. 
.Mature  is  jealous  of  her  rights,  and  it  would 
appear  from  experience,  that  the  gastronomic 
regions  expect  to  receive  all  other  supplies  well 
triturated,  except  these — amanita  and  pill  colo- 
cj nth— winch  are  both  expected  equally  alike  to 
arrive  at  the  regions  below  without  mutilation. 

A days  intoxication  may  thus  be  procured  at 
the  expense  of  one  good  sized  bolus,  compounded 
of  one  large  or  two  small  toadstools;  and  this 
intoxication  is  affirmed  to  be,  not  only  cheap, 


342 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


which  is  a consideration,  hut  also  remarkably 
pleasant.  It  commences  an  horn’  or  so  after  the 
bolus  has  been  swallowed. 

The  effects  which  this  singular  narcotic  pro- 
duces are,  some  of  them,  similar  to  that  produced 
by  intoxicating  liquors ; others  resemble  the  effects 
of  haschisch.  At  first,  it  generally  produces  cheer- 
fulness, afterwards  giddiness  and  drunkenness, 
ending  occasionally  in  the  entire  loss  of  conscious- 
ness. The  natural  inclinations  of  the  individual 
become  stimulated.  The  dancer  executes  a pas 
d' extravagance,  the  musical  indulge  in  a song,  the 
chatterer  divulges  all  his  secrets,  the  oratorical 
delivers  himself  of  a philippic,  and  the  mimic 
indulges  in  caricature.  Erroneous  impressions  of 
size  and  distance  are  common  occurrences,  equally 
with  the  swallower  of  amanita  and  hemp.  The 
experiences  of  M.  Moreau  with  haschisch  are 
repeated  with  the  fungus-eaters  of  Siberia ; a 
straw  lying  in  the  road  becomes  a formidable 
object,  to  overcome  which,  a leap  is  taken  sufficient 
to  clear  a barrel  of  ale,  or  the  prostrate  trunk  of  a 
British  oak. 

But  this  is  not  the  only  extraordinary  cir- 
cumstance connected  therewith.  There  is  the 
property  imparted  to  the  fluid  excretions,  of 
rendering  it  intoxicating,  which  property  it  retains 
for  a considerable  time.  A man  having  been 
intoxicated  on  one  day,  and  slept  himself  sober 
by  the  next,  will,  by  drinking'  this  liquor,  to  the 
extent  of  about  a cupfull,  become  as  intoxicated 
thereby  as  he  was  before.  Confirmed  drunkards 
in  Siberia  preserve  their  excretionary  fluid  as  a 
precious  liquor,  to  be  used  in  case  a scarcity  of  the 
fungus  should  occur.  This  intoxicating  property 
may  be  again  communicated  to  every  person  who 
partakes  of  the  disgusting  draught,  and  thus,  also, 
with  the  third,  and  fourth,  and  even  the  fifth 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA. 


343 


distillation.  By  this  means,  with  a few  boluses 
to  commence  with,  a party  may  shut  themselves 
in  their  room,  and  indulge  in  a week’s  debauch  at 
a very  economical  rate.  This  species  of  “ sucking 
the  monkey”  is  one  that  Mungo  never  contem- 
plated. Persons  who  are  fond  of  getting  liquor 
at  the  expense  of  others  take  every  opportunity  of 
“ sucking  the  monkey,”  which  process  has  been 
thus  explained.  It  consists  in  boring  a hole  with 
a gimlet  in  a keg  or  barrel,  and  putting  a straw 
therein,  to  suck  out  any  quantity,  at  any  given 
time.  Persons  who  are  accustomed  to  receive  real 
Devonshire  cider,  or  genuine  Wiltshire  ale,  or  the 
pure  Geneva,  in  London,  experience  the  liberties 
those  take  who  “suck  the  monkey,”  by  either 
liberally  diminishing  the  quantity,  or  diluting  it 
with  water  on  the  road,  so  as  to  make  the  quantity 
what  the  quality  should  be.  It  is  said  that  the 
origin  of  the  term  “sucking  the  monkey”  is 
derived  from  the  prolific  invention  of  a black,  who, 
in  order  to  find  an  excuse  to  the  captain  for  his  being 
caught  lying  with  a favourite  monkey  so  often  near 
the  rum  puncheons  on  board,  from  which  he  daily 
drank,  said — “Massa,  you  ask  what  Mungo  do 
here  ? — do  here,  massa  ? You  say  monkey  hab  de 
milk  ob  human  kindness,  massa.  Mungo  like  dat 
milk,  massa,  and  Mungo  suck  de  monkey,  massa 
Dat’s  all.” 

# Chemical  investigations  have  not  yet  been 
directed  into  the  channel  leading  towards  the 
elucidation  of  the  mysteries  of  these  poisonous 
fungi,  and  hitherto  we  know  of  no ' experiments 
having  been  made  with  a view  to  ascertain  whether 
any  of  our  indigenous  fungi,  other  than  the  one 
already  referred  to,  can  be  used  in  the  same  way 
and  with  the  same  results,  as  we  have  described! 
Doubtless  such  experiments  would  be  successful  so 
far  as  realizing  the  results,  since  one  of  the  effects 


344  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

produced  by  eating  poisonous  fungi  is  narcotic 
in  its  character.  M.  Letellier  found  in  certain 
of  these  fungi  a chemical  principle  which  is  fixed, 
and  resists  drying,  and  which  he  calls  Amanitine. 
Its  effects  on  animals  appear  to  resemble  consider- 
ably those  of  opium.*  Dr.  Christison  states  that 
“the  symptoms  produced  by  them  in  man  are 
endless  in  variety,  and  fully  substantiate  the  pro- 
priety of  arranging  them  in  the  class  of  narcotico- 
acrid  poisons.  Sometimes  they  produce  narcotic 
symptoms  alone,  sometimes  only  symptoms  of  irri- 
tation, but  much  more  commonly,  both  together.” 
A person  gathered  in  Hyde  Park  a considerable 
number  of  mushrooms,  which  he  mistook  for  the 
species  commonly  eaten,  stewed  them,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  eat  them  ; but  before  ending  his  repast, 
and  not  more  than  ten  minutes  after  he  began  it, 
he  was  suddenly  attacked  with  dimness  of  vision, 
giddiness,  debility,  trembling,  and  loss  of  recol- 
lection. In  a short  time  he  recovered  so  far  as  to 
be  able  to  go  in  search  of  assistance.  But  he  had 
hardly  walked  250  yards  when  his  memory  again 
failed  him,  and  he  lost  his  way.  His  countenance 
expressed  anxiety,  he  reeled  about,  and  could 
hardly  articulate.  He  soon  became  so  drowsy, 
that  he  could  be  kept  awake  only  by  constant 
dragging.  Vomiting  was  produced ; the  drowsi- 
ness gradually  went  off,  and  next  day  he  com- 
plained merely  of  languor  and  weakness. 

The  smoke  of  the  common  puff-ball  when  burnt, 
has  been  used  to  stupify  bees  when  their  hive  was 
about  to  be  robbed;  and  similar  narcotic  effects 
have  been  observed  in  other  animals  when  sub- 
jected to  its  fumes.  The  action  bears  a resem- 
blance to  that  of  chloroform  by  producing 
insensibility  to  pain.  If  future  generations  do 


* “ Archives  Gen.  de  Med.,”  t.  xl,  p.  94. 


THE  EXILE  OF  SIBERIA.  345 

not  deem  it  desirable  to  indulge  in  a narcotic  of 
this  kind  for  the  purpose  of  producing  pleasurable 
sensations,  or  to  smother  the  carking  cares  of 
life,  yet  they  may  learn  more  than  we  at  present 
know  of  the  peculiar  characteristics  which  dis- 
tinguish this  from  all  the  others  of  the  “ Seven 
Sisters  of  Sleep.” 

Night  draws  on  apace;  let  us  gather  together 
all  the  straggling  members  of  the  family,  sweep 
up  the  crumbs,  call  in  the  cat,  bar  the  door, 
wind  up  the  clock,  and  go  to  bed — 


“ To  sleep,  perchance  to  dream.” 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 

“And  our  poor  dream  of  happiness 
Yanislieth,  so 

Farewell.” — Motherwell. 


After  a feast,  tlie  prudent  and  thrifty  housewife 
will  gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain,  if  for  no 
other  purpose  than  to  distribute  them  amongst  the 
poor. 

It  was  the  constant  habit  of  a certain  elderly 
man  of  business,  so  long  as  he  could  stoop  for  the 
purpose,  to  pick  up  and  stow  away  every  pin  and 
scrap  of  paper,  or  end  of  string,  which  he  saw 
lying  about  on  his  premises.  And  when  lie  could 
bend  no  longer  to  perform  the  operation  himself, 
he  would  stand  by  the  truant  fragment,  and  voci- 
ferate loudly  for  one  of  his  apprentices  to  come 
and  “gather  up  the  cord  and  string,”  adding  “ ’tis 
a pity  they  should  spile.” 

Approaching  to  the  conclusion  of  our  task,  we 
have  followed  the  old  gentleman’s  advice,  and  col- 
lected the  odd  pieces  that  have  fallen  to  the  ground 
in  the  course  of  our  work,  convinced  that  thrift  is 
praiseworthy,  and  although  only  “ Odds  and  Ends,” 
there  may  be  enough  of  interest  in  them  to  warrant 
you  in  adding  “ ’tis  a pity  they  should  spile.” 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 


347 


Tobacco  ends  in  smoke.  We  began  with  the 
former,  it  is  but  a natural  consequence  that  we 
should  end  with  the  latter.  Somewhere  we  have 
read  a “ smoke  vision  of  life.”  Some  people  have 
but  a smoky  or  foggy  vision  of  life — they  have  sad 
eyes,  poor  travellers,  and  can  see  nothing  for  the 
fog  that  surrounds  them — they  live  in  a mist, 
and  die  without  being  missed.'  Forgive  the  trans- 
gression, good  friend,  the  obscurity  of  the  subject  is 
to  blame,  and  the  pun  was  written  before  we  had 
made  ourselves  aware  of  its  presence.  Let  it  pass 
on,  it  will  soon  be  lost  in  the  smoke.  An  old  piper 
believes  that  there  is  generally  something  racy, 
decided,  and  original  in  the  man  who  both  smokes 
and  snuffs.  Outwardly,  he  may  have  a kippered 
appearance,  and  his  voice  may  grate  on  the  ear 
like  a scrannel  pipe'  of  straw,  but  think  of  the 
strong  or  beautiful  soul  that  body  enshrines  ! Do 
you  imagine,  oh,  lean-hearted  member  of  the  Anti- 
Snuff  and  Tobacco  Club,  that  the  dark  apostle 
standing  before  us  will  preach  with  less  power,  less 
unction,  less  persuasive  eloquence,  because  he  snuffs 
over  the  psalm  book,  and  smokes  in  the  vestry 
between  the  forenoon  and  afternoon  service  ? 
Does  his  piety  ooze  through  his  pipe,  or  his  ear- 
nestness end  in  smoke  ? Was  Robert  Hall  less 
eloquent  than  Massillon  or  Chalmers,  because  he 
could  scarcely  refrain  from  lighting  his  hookah  in 
the  pulpit  ? Answer  us  at  your  leisure — could 
Tennyson  have  brought  down  so  magnificently  the 
Arabian  heaven  upon  his  nights ; dreamed  so 
divinely  of  Cleopatra,  Iphigenia,  and  Rosamond; 
pictured  so  richly  the  charmed  sleep  of  the  Eastern 
princess  in  her  enchanted  palace,  with  her  “full 
black  ringlets  downward  rolled ; ” or  painted  so 
soothingly  the  languid  picture  of  the  Lotos- 
eaters,  jf  he  had  never  experienced  the  mystic 
inspiration  ot  tobacco  f Could  J ohn  W llson — peace 


348  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

to  his  princely  shade — have  filled  his  inimitable 
papers  with  so  much  fine  sentiment,  radiant 
imagery,  pathos,  piquancy,  and  point,  without  the 
aid  of  his  silver  snuff-box  ? Deprive  the  Grants 
and  Macgregors  of  their  mulls  and  nose  spoons  of 
bone,  and  you  cut  the  sinews  of  their  strength — 
you  destroy  the  flower  of  the  British  army.  Pluck 
the  calumet  of  peace  from  the  lips  of  the  red 
Indian,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  your  beau- 
tiful scalp  will  be  dangling  at  his  girdle.  Tear 
his  “ gem  adorned  chibouque  ” from  the  mouth  of 
the  Turk,  and  the  Great  Bear  by  to-morrow’s  dawn 
will  be  grinning  on  his  haunches  in  Constantinople. 
Clear  Germany  of  tobacco  smoke,  and  Goethe 
would  groan  in  his  grave,  Bichter  would  revisit 
the  glimpses  of  the  moon,  philology  would  fall 
down  in  a fatal  fit  of  apoplexy  over  the  folios  of 
her  fame,  and  poetry  would  shriek  her  death-shriek 
to  see  the  transcendental  philosophy  expire.  Shake 
the  quids  from  the  mouths  of  the  merry  mariners 
of  England — cast  their  pig- tail  upon  the . waters, 
and  commerce  would  become  stagnant  in  all  our 
ports — our  gallant  war-fleet  would  rot  at  its 
stations,  and  Britain  would  never  boast  the  glories 
of  another  Trafalgar.  Tell  Yankeedom  that 
smoking  is  no  more  to  be  permitted  all  over  the 
world,  under  penalty  of  death,  and  soon  the  melan- 
choly pine  forests  would  wave  over  the  dust  of  an 
extinguished  race.  In  fine,  were  the  club  to  which 
you  belong  to  succeed  in  its  attempt,  which  it 
cannot,  the  earth  would  stand  still,  like  the  sun  of 
old  upon  Gibeon,  and  the  moon  in  the  valley  of 
Ajalon,  and  the  planets  would  clothe  themselves 
with  sackcloth  for  the  sudden  death  of  their  sister 
sphere  1 

There  is  extant,  in  an  old  work  written  three 
centuries  since,  a curious  paragraph,  which  we  had 
well  nigh  forgotten.  It  refers  to  Canada,  “ There 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 


349 


groweth  a certain  kind  of  herbe,  whereof  in  summer 
they  make  great  provision  for  all  the  yeere,  and 
only  the  men  use  of  it ; and  first  they  cause  it  to 
he  dried  in  the'  sunne,  then  wear  it  about  their 
neckes,  wrapped  in  a little  beaste’s  skinne,  made 
like  a little  bagge,  with  a hollow  peece  of  stone  or 
wood  like  a pipe;  then,  when  they  please,  they 
make  poudre  of  it,  and  then  put  it  in  one  of  the 
ends  of  the  said  cornet  or  pipe,  and  laying  a coal 
of  fire  upon  it,  at  the  other  end  suck  so  long,  that 
they  fill  their  bodies  full  of  smoke,  till  that  it 
cometh  out  of  their  mouth  and  nostrils,  even  as 
out  of  the  tonnell  of  a chimney.” 

Methinks  it  had  been  well  had  every  Canadian 
been  also  favoured  with  a Saint  Betsy,  as  a com- 
panion in  life,  otherwise  there  had  been  fire  as  well 
as  smoke.  It  is  now  some  time  since  the  inimit- 
able Punch  introduced  Saint  Betsy  to  the  world, 
and  that  she  may  not  altogether  be  excluded  from 
our  future  11  fireside  saints,”  we  will  give  her  legend 
a place  in  our  “ Odds  and  Ends.” 

“St.  Betsy  was  wedded  to  a knight  who  sailed 
with  Baleigh,  and  had  brought  home  tobacco,  and 
the  knight  smoked.  But  he  thought  that  St. 
Betsy,  like  other  fine  ladies  of  the  Court,  would 
fain  that  he  should  smoke  out  of  doors,  nor  taint 
with  tobacco  smoke  the  tapestry,  whereupon  the 
knight  would  seek  his  garden,  his  orchard,  and,  in 
any  weather,  smoke  sub  Jove.  How  it  chanced,  as 
the  knight  smoked,  St.  Betsy  came  to  him  and 
said,  ‘ My  lord,  pray  ye  come  into  the  house and 
the  knight  went  with  St.  Betsy,  who  took  him  into 
a newly  cedared  room,  and  said,  ‘ I pray  my  lord 
henceforth  smoke  here,  for  is  it  not  a shame  that 
you,  who  are  the  foundation  and  prop  of  your 
house,  should  have  no  place  to  put  your  head  into 
and  smoke  ?’  And  St.  Betsy  led  him  to  a chair 
and  with  her  own  fingers  filled  him  a pipe ; and" 


350  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

from  that  time  the  knight  sat  in  the  cedar  chamber 
and  smoked  his  weed.” 

No  pipe,  no  smoke,  no  dreams ! Never  again, 
on  a beautiful  summer’s  day  would  two  young 
Ottoman  swains  sit  smoking  under  a tree,  by  the 
side  of  a purling  stream,  hearing  the  birds  sing, 
and  seeing  the  flowers  in  bloom,  to  become  the 
actors  in  a scene  like  that  described  in  one  of  their 
own  songs.  By  and  bye  came  a young  damsel, 
her  eyes  like  two  stars  in  the  nights  of  the  Ramazan. 
One  of  the  swains  takes  his  pipe  from  his  mouth, 
and  “sighing  smoke,”  gazes  at  her  with  delight. 
The  other  demands  why  his  wrapt  soul  is  sitting 
in  his  eyes,  and  he  avows  himself  the  adorer  of  the 
veiled  fair.  “ Her  eyes,”  says  he,  “ are  black,  hut 
they  shine  like  the  polished  steel,  nor  is  the  wound 
they  inflict  less  fatal  to  the  heart.”  The  other 
swain  ridicules  his  passion,  and  bids  him  re-fill  his 
pipe.  “ Ah,  no  ! ” cries  the  lover,  “ I enjoy  it  no 
more ; my  heart  is  as  a fig  thrown  into  a thick 
leafy  tree,  and  a bird  with  bright  eyes  has  caught 
it  and  holds  it  fast.” 

Hearken  to  the  story  of  Abou  Gallioun,  the 
father  of  the  pipe-howl,  and  then  laugh  if  you 
will  at  the  votaries  of  the  marvellous  weed.  A 
mountaineer  of  Lebanon,  a man  young  and  tall, 
and  apparently  well  to  do,  for  his  oriental  cos- 
tume was  rich  and  elegant,  established  himself  at 
Tripoli,  in  Syria.  He  resided  at  an  hotel,  and 
astonished  every  one  with  a howl  at  the  end  of  his 
pipe  stem  of  enormous  dimensions.  Some  days 
after  his  arrival  he  was  seen  to  seat  himself  at  the 
corner  of  a street,  to  rest  the  bowl  of  his  pipe  on 
the  ground,  and  to  take  from  his  pocket  a little 
tripod  and  a coffee-pot.  Having  filled  his  coffee- 
pot, he  put  the  tripod  upon  the  howl  of  his 
pipe,  and  stood  his  coffee-pot  thereon.  He  then 
proceeded  to  smoke,  and  at  the  same  time 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 


351 


to  boil  the  water  for  his  coffee.  This  sight  caused 
the  passers-by  to  stop,  and  a crowd  collected  in  the 
street  so  as  to  obstruct  the  throughfare.  The  police 
came  to  clear  the  passage,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
the  Pacha  was  informed  of  the  circumstance,  and 
consulted  as  to  what  should  he  done.  The  Pacha 
gave  instructions  that  as  the  stranger  did  harm  to 
no  one,  he  was  to  he  allowed  to  make  his  coffee  in 
the  street,  for  the  street  was  open  to  all,  hoping 
that  when  it  rained  he  would  certainly  go  away. 
The  police  were,  therefore,  ordered  to  prevent  any 
crowding  around  the  mountaineer,  and  to  take 
especial  care  that  he  received  no  insult,  lest  he 
should  then  complain  to  the  Emir  of  the  mountain 
of  his  ill-treatment.  The  mountaineer  having 
heard  of  the  instructions  of  the  Pacha,  continued 
to  drink  his  coffee  and  smoke  his  pipe  as  before,  in 
the.  presence  of  numbers  of  curious  spectators. 
This  exhibition  continued  daily,  till  the  news  jDene- 
trated  into  the  harems,  and  the  women  came  to 
see  a man  make  his  coffee  upon  the  bowl  of  his 
pipe— a thing  they  had  never  before  heard  of,  and 
which,  till  now,  had  never  occurred. 

The  mountaineer  loved  to  converse  with  the  - 
passers-by,  when  he  told  them  that  his  pipe  served 
him  also  at  home  for  his  baking  oven,  and  that  he 
had  no  other,  chafing  dish  in  winter ; that  he  filled 
the  bowl  twice  a day,  in  the  morning  on  rising, 
and  in  the  evening  on  going  to  rest,  to  last  him 
through  the  night ; that  he  stopped  very  little,  and 
during  the  night  drank  five  or  six  cups  of  coffee. 
This  stranger  was  surnamed  Abou  Gfallioun,  “father 
of  the  pipe-bowl,”  and  is  still  known  by  that  name 

m Inpoli  when  they  speak  of  him  and  his  extrava- 
gance. 

In  general,  the  pipe  bowls  are  of  a certain  size, 
so  that  they  may  last  at  least  a quarter  of  an  hour 
and  with  slow  smoking  they  will  last  half  an  hour’ 


352  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

The  tobacco  does  not  burn  rapidly  if  the  smoker 
does  not  pull  hard — this  quiet  kind  of  smoking 
generally  characterizes  the  grave  orientals.  Their 
pipes  are  seldom  extinguished  of  themselves  unless 
laid  down,  because  the  tobaccos  of  the  East  have 
more  body  than  other  tobaccos.  Abou  Gallioun 
might  then  always  rest  assured  that  his  pipe  would 
never  go  out,  although  he  held  long  conversations 
by  day,  and  rose  occasionally  at  night  to  take  his 
coffee. 

Tobacco  is  stated  to  have  been  imported  into 
the  Celestial  empire  by  the  Mantclioos ; and  the 
Chinese  were  much  astonished  when  they  first  saw 
their  conquerors  inhaling  fire  through  long  tubes 
and  u eating  smoke.”  By  a curious  coincidence 
this  plant  is  called  by  the  Matnchoos  taxnbakou ; 
but  the  Chinese  designate  it  simply  by  the  word 
meaning  “ smoke.”  Thus  they  say  they  cultivate 
in  their  fields  the  “ smoke-leaf,”  they  “ chew  smoke,” 
and  they  name  their  pipe  the  “ smoke-funnel.” 

The  old  proverb  that  “smoke  doth  follow  the 
fairest,”  is  thus  commented  upon : — “ Whereof  Sir 
Thomas  Brown  says,  although  there  seems  no 
natural  ground,  yet  it  is  the  continuation  of  a very 
ancient  opinion,  as  Petrus  Victorius  and  Casaubon 
have  observed  from  a passage  in  Athenmus,  where- 
in a Parasite  thus  describes  himself — 

‘ To  every  table  first  I come, 

Whence  Porridge  I am  called  by  some  ; 

Like  whips  and  tbongs  to  all  I ply, 

Like  smoak  unto  the  fair  I fly.”’ 

There  is  extant  in  the  East,  an  Arabian  tale  con- 
cerning the  Broken  Pipe  of  Saladin,  which  is  taken 
from  an  author  named  Ali-el-Fakir,  who  lived  in 
the  times  of  Saladin,  a tale  which  is  often  repeated 
among  smokers  in  Syria.  The  Sultan,  Salah-el- 
Diu  (called  by  us  Saladin),  was  a great  warrior,  a 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 


353 


lover  of  the  harem,  and  at  the  same  time  pleasant. 
His  court  abounded  with  officers,  servants,  and 
slaves.  Among  his  servants,  who  could  best  amuse 
him  in  his  leisure  moments,  was  a simple  man  to 
whom  he  had  confided  the  care  of  his  pipes,  and 
whom  he  had  made  his  pipe-hearer.  All  the 
Sultan’s  pipes  were  of  great  value,  owing  to  the 
oriental  luxury  which  prevails  in  everything,  and 
especially  in  everything  belonging  to  the  Sultan, 
who  is  considered  the  master  of  the  world. 

Saladin,  in  consequence  of  the  climate  of  the 
south  of  Syria,  generally  passed  his  time  in  the 
gardens  of  Damascus,  luxuriously  seated  upon  rich 
Persian  carpets  and  soft  cushions,  under  a tree  sur- 
rounded by  his  guards,  and  a numerous  band  of 
servants,  who  promptly  obeyed  his  commands. 

Under  another  tree,  not  far  off,  was  the  coffee- 
maker,  ready  to  serve  his  master  on  the  instant, 
for,  like  all  other  orientals,  he  was  fond  of  this 
beverage ; and  Ramadan,  the  pipe-bearer,  was 
commanded  to  be  at  hand,  that  he  might  execute 
his  sovereign’s  orders. 

Between  the  tree  under  which,  the  Sultan  was 
reposing,  and  that  under  which  was  the  stove  of 
the  cofiee-maker,  stood  another  tree,  to  which  was 
tied  a watch-dog,  who  was  only  let  loose  at  night. 

Saladin  said  to  Ramadan — “ Take  my  pipe,  fill 
it,  and  bring  it  to  me  directly.”  At  that  time 
tobacco  was  not  smoked  in  the  East,  instead  thereof 
they  used  Te  begh.  Ramadan  hastened  to  obey 
his  master,  but  the  dog,  not  well  knowing  him,  set 
to  barking  at  him  as  he  passed  on  his  way  'to;  the 
coffee-maker’s  stove  for  the  purpose  of  preparing 
them  the  Sultan’s  pipe,  and  in  return  Ramadan 
shook  his  fist  at  him.  When  the  pipe-bearer  came 
back  the  dog,  recognizing  in  him  the  man  who 
had  lately  menaced  him,  not  being  securely  tied 
loosened  himself  and  sprang  at  him.  Ramadan 

2 A 


354 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


used  the  pipe  to  defend  himself,  the  dog  was  beaten 
back,  but  the  bowl,  the  stem,  and  the  rich  mouth- 
piece of  the  pipe  were  all  broken  in  the  encounter. 

The  facts  were  related  to  Saladin,  who  imme- 
diately ordered  the  dog  to  be  summoned  before 
him.  The  animal  said  nothing  while  Ramadan 
was  continually  charging  him  with  the  blame. 
“ Thou  seest,”  said  the  Sultan,  u that  the  dog 
appears  docile.  If  thou  hadst  not  threatened  or 
frightened  him  he  would  have  said  nothing  to  thee. 
Thou  shalt  be  tied  up  as  the  dog  was,  and  the  dog 
shall  dwell  with  me.” 

The  guards  chained  up  poor  Ramadan  to  the 
tree  where  the  dog  had  been  fastened,  and  his 
appearance  was  very  disconsolate.  The  dog  became 
the  favourite  of  the  Prince,  whom  he  recognized  by 
Iris  natural  instinct,  and  for  ever  afterwards  the 
Srdtan  swore  by  his  dog. 

The  Mussulman  delights  in  comparing  the 
wisdom  of  this  decision  with  the  judgment  of 
Solomon. 

The  recent  remarks  of  one  high  in  clerical 
authority,  which  came  to  light  but  too  lately  to 
have  a more  honourable  position  assigned  them, 
must  accordingly  be  scattered  among  the  frag- 
ments. “ Heaven  forbid,”  writes  the  reverend  gen- 
tleman, “ that  I should  ever  see  in  England  what 
I have  more  than  once  seen  in  France — a fine  and 
gorgeously  arrayed  lady,  with  lavander  coloured 
kid  gloves,  and  a delicate  little  cigarette  between 
her  lips,  expectorating  in  the  most  refined  manner 
into  a polished  spittoon,  and  accompanying  her 
male  friends  in  inhaling  the  fumes  of  this  noxious 
weed  ! No,  our  ladies  have  not  countenanced  the 
custom  by  example,  but  they  have  fostered  it, 
cherished  it,  promoted  it  by  their  too  much  good 
nature,  and  allowed  their  husbands,  brothers,  and 
sons,  and  perhaps,  their  intended  husbands,  to 


ODDS  AND  ENDS. 


355 


enjoy  their  cigars  in  their  presence,  and  even  in 
their  houses.” 

“ Oh  horrible,  most  horrible  !” 

Hearken  still  further.  “ I don’t  scruple  to  con- 
fess that  I sat  down  to  the  consideration  of  this 
subject  strongly  prejudiced,  personally  and  socially, 
against  this  evil  practice;  but  I rise  from  the 
examination  of  the  facts  of  the  case  surprised  at 
the  magnitude  of  the  abomination  to  which  it  gives 
rise.  I cordially  throw  any  influence  I possess 
into  the  scale  of  those  who  are  labouring  to  promote 
the  total  abolition  of  the  custom  among  us,  and  I 
earnestly  entreat  all  who  think  with  me  to  exert 
their  utmost  efforts  to  stay  the  plague.” 

King  James  is  dead,  poor  man,  otherwise  this 
worthy  Dean,  most  assuredly,  would  soon  have 
become  a Bishop.  How  unfortunate  a circum- 
stance it  is  that  wise  men  will  be  born  at  a time 
when  the  generation  who  would  have  appreciated 
them  most,  is  either  extinct  or  in  embryo. 

We  remember  to  have  once  heard  an  equally 
estimable  clerical  gentleman  declare  that  he  thought 
those  words  of  Longfellow’s  very  descriptive  of  the 
effects  of  his  customary  “ whiff — 

“ And  the  night  shall  be  filled  with  music, 

And  the  cares  that  infest  the  day, 

Shall  fold  their  tents  like  the  Arabs, 

And  as  silently  steal  away.” 

With  a fable  of  Krummacher’s,  let  this  basket 
of  fragments  be  filled,  and  finished — 

“The  angel  of  sleep  and  the  angel  of  death, 
fraternally  embracing  each  other,  wandered  over 
the  earth.  It  was  eventide.  They  laid  them- 
selves down  beside  a hill  not  far  from  the  habita- 
tions of  men.  A melancholy  silence  1'eigned 
around,  and  the  evening  bell  of  the  distant 
hamlet  had  ceased. 


356 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


“ Silently  and  quietly,  as  is  their  wont,  the  two 
kindly  genii  of  the  human  race  lay  in  confidential 
embrace,  and  night  began  to  steal  on. 

“ Then  the  angel  of  sleep  rose  from  his  mossy 
couch,  and  threw  around,  with  careful  hand,  the 
unseen  grains  of  slumber.  The  evening  wind 
hare  them  to  the  quiet  dwellings  of  the  wearied 
husbandmen.  Now  the  feet  of  sleep  embraced  the 
inhabitants  of  the  rural  cots,  from  the  hoary 
headed  old  man  who  supported  himself  on  his  staff, 
to  the  infants  in  the  cradle.  The  sick  forgot  their 
pains,  the  mourners  their  griefs,  and  poverty  its 
cares.  All  eyes  were  closed. 

“ And  now,  after  his  task  was  done,  the  beautiful 
angel  of  sleep  lay  down  again  by  the  side  of  his 
sterner  brother.  When  the  morning  dawn  arose, 
he  exclaimed  in  joyous  innocency — ‘ Men  praise 
me  as  their  friend  and  benefactor.  Oh  what  a bliss 
it  is,  unseen  and  secretly  to  befriend  them ! How 
happy  are  we,  the  invisible  messengers  of  the  good 
God  ! How  lovely  is  our  quiet  vocation  !’ 

“ Thus  spake  the  friendly  angel  of  sleep.  And 
the  angel  of  death  sighed  in  silent  grief ; and  - a 
tear,  such  as  the  immortals  shed,  trembled  in  his 
great  dark  eye.  ‘Alas  !’  said  he,  ‘that  I cannot 
as  thou,  delight  myself  with  cheerful  thanks.  Men 
call  me  their  enemy  and  pleasure  spoiler.’ 

“ ‘ Oh,  my  brother/  rejoined  the  angel  of  sleep, 

‘ will  not  the  good  also,  when  awaking,  recognize 
in  thee  a friend  and  benefactor,  and  thankfully 
bless  thee  ? Are  not  we  brothers  and  messengers 
of  one  Father.’ 

“ Thus  spake  he,  and  the  eyes  of  the  angel  of 
death  sparkled,  and  more  tenderly  did  the  brotherly . 
genii  embrace  each  other.’’ 


APPENDIX. 


TABLE  I. 


A.D. 

1496 

1519 

1535 

<> 

1559 

1565 


1570 

1574 

1575 
1585 

)* 

1590 

1601 

1604 

1610 

1615 

1616 
1619 


1620 

1622 

1624 


1631 

1634 

1639 

1653 

1661 


CHRONOLOGY  OF  TOBACCO. 

Romanus  Paine  published  the  first  account  of  tobacco, 
under  the  name  cohoba. 

Tobacco  discovered  by  the  Spaniards  near  Tabasco. 

Negroes  cultivated  it  on  the  plantations  of  their  masters. 

It  was  used  at  this  time  in  Canada. 

Tobacco  introduced  into  Europe  by  Hernandez  de  Toledo. 

Conrad  Gesner  became  acquainted  with  tobacco. 

Sir  J ohn  Hawkins  brought  tobacco  from  Florida. 

Tobacco  smoked  in  Holland  out  of  tubes  of  palm-leaves. 

Tobacco  cultivated  in  Tuscany. 

First  figure  of  plant  in  Andre  Thevot’s  Cosmographie. 

Clay  pipes  noticed  by  the  English  in  Virginia. 

First  clay  pipes  made  in  Europe. 

Schah  Abbas,  of  Persia,  prohibited  the  use  of  tobacoo  in 
his  empire. 

Tobacco  introduced  into  Java.  Smoking  commenced  in 
Egypt  about  this  time . 

James  I.  laid  heavy  imposts  on  tobacco. 

Tobacco-smoking  known  at  Constantinople. 

Tobacco  first  grown  about  Amersfort,  in  Holland. 

The  colonists  cultivated  tobacco  in  Virginia. 

James  I.  wrote  his  “ Counterblast.” 

Sale  of  tobacco  prohibited  in  England  till  the  custom 
should  be  paid,  and  the  royal  seal  affixed. 

Ninety  young  women  sent  from  England  to  America,  and 
sold  to  the  planters  for  tobacco  at  120  lbs.  each. 

Annual  import  of  tobacco  into  England  from  America 
142,085  lbs.  ’ 

The  Pope  excommunicated  all  who  should  take  snuflf  in 
church..  King  James  restricted  the  culture  of  tobacco 
to  V lrgmia  and  the  Somer  Isles. 

Tobacco-smoking  introduced  into  Misnia. 

A tribunal  formed  at  Moscow  to  punish  smoking. 

The  Assembly  of  Virginia  ordered  that  all  tobacco  planted 
m that  and  the  succeeding  two  years  should  be  destroved 

Smoking  commenced  at  Apenzell  (canton)  in  Switzerland! 

Ihe  police  regulations  of  Berne  made,  and  divided 

WM°prohibit°ed ' ° tC“  commandments> in  which  tobacco 
2 B 


358 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


(Tulle  I.  continued). 

A.D. 

1669  Adultery  and  fornication  punished  in  Virginia  by  a fine 

of  500  to  1000  lbs.  of  tobacco. 

1670  Smoking  tobacco  punished  in  the  canton  of  Glarus  by 

fines. 

1676  Customs  on  tobacco  from  Virginia  collected  in  England, 

£120,000. 

„ Two  Jews  attempt  the  cultivation  of  tobacco  in  Bran- 
denburg. 

1689  Dr.  J.  E.  Vicarius  invented  tubes  containing  pieces  of 
sponge  for  smoking  tobacco. 

1691  Pope  Innocent  XII.  excommunicated  all  who  used 
tobacco  in  St.  Peter’s  Church  at  Rome. 

1697  Large  quantities  of  tobacco  produced  in  the  palatinate  of 
Hesse. 

1709  Exports  of  tobacco  from  America,  28,858,666  lbs. 

1719  Senate  of  Strasburg  prohibited  the  culture  of  tobacco. 

1724  Pope  Benedict  XIV.  revoked  Pope  Innocent’s  Bull  of 
excommunication . 

1732  Tobacco  made  a legal  tender  in  Maryland,  at  one  penny 
per  lb. 

1747  Annual  exports  of  tobacco  to  England  from  the  American 
colonies,  40,000,000  lbs. 

1753  The  King  of  Portugal  farmed  cut  the  tobacco  trade  for 
about  £500,000. 

„ The  revenue  of  the  King  of  Spain  from  tobacco, 
£1,250,000. 

1759  Duties  on  tobacco  in  Denmark  amounted  to  £8,000. 

1770  Empress  of  Austria  derived  an  income  of  £160,000  from 
tobacco. 

1773  Duties  on  tobacco  in  the  two  Sicilies,  £80,000. 

1775  Annual  export  of  tobacco  from  the  United  States 
1,000,000  lbs. 

1780  King  of  Prance  derived  an  income  of  £1,500,000  from 
. tobacco. 

1782  Annual  export  of  tobacco  during  the  seven  years  revo- 
lutionary war,  12,378,504  lbs. 

1787  Tobacco  imported  into  Ireland,  1,877,579  lbs. 

1789  Exports  of  tobacco  from  the  United  States,  90,000,000  lbs. 

„ Tobacco  first  put  under  the  excise  in  England. 

1820  Quantity  of  tobacco  grown  in  France,  32,887,500  lbs. 

1828  Tobacco  revenue  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  £5,400. 

1830  Revenue  from  tobacco  and  snuff  in  Great  Britain  was 
2^  millions  of  pounds. 

1834  Value  of  tobacco  used  in  the  United  States  estimated  at 

£3,000,000. 

1838  Annual  consumption  of  tobacco  in  the  United  States 
estimated  at  100,000,000  lbs. 

1840  It  was  ascertained  that  1.500,000  persons  were  engaged 
in  the  cultivation  and  manufacture  of  tobaeco  in  the 
United  States. 


APPENDIX, 


359 


TABLE  II. 

CONSUMPTION  OF  TOBACCO. 


COUNTRIES. 

Average  consump 
of  male  population 
per  head,  over  IE 
years  of  age. 

Nett  Revenue 
from  Tobacco. 

Austria  

Zollverein  ...  

Steurverein,  including  Han-  ) 
over  and  Oldenburg  ...  | 

France  

Russia  

Portugal  

Spain  

Sardinia 

Tuscany 

Papal  States 

Two  Sicilies 

Britain  

Holland 

Belgium 

Denmark  

Sweden 

Norway 

United  States 

6-75  lbs. 
9-75  „ 

12-50  „ 

5*50  „ 

2- 50  „ 

3- 50  „ 

4- 75  „ 
2-75  „ 
2-50  „ 
2-00  „ 

4-10  „ 

8- 25  „ 

9- 00  „ 

8-00  „ 
4-37  „ 

6- 40  „ 

7- 60  „ 

£1,212,530 

296,560 

12,420 

3,058,356 

284,280 

304,140 

1,268,082 

246,192 

84,860 

297,252 

168,422 

5,272,471 

6,210 

28,014 

10,488 

14,766 

23,322 

TABLE  III. 

DUTIES  ON  IMPORTATION  OF  TOBACCO. 


United  States 

30- 

per  cent,  ad 

Belgium 

13-9 

do. 

Great  Britain 

933-3 

do. 

Hanover 

9-6 

do. 

Holstein 

10- 

do. 

Holland 

3-5 

do. 

Russia  

161’ 

do. 

Switzerland  ... 

3. 

do. 

Zollverein 

45. 

do. 

360 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


TABLE  IV. 

Nett  Profits  of  the  French  Regie  on  Tobacco,  after  paying  all 
expenses  of  purchase,  transportation,  manufacture,  and  sale. 
Showing  the  increased  consumption,  in  decennial  periods,  from 
1811  to  1851. 


Tears. 

Francs. 

1811  

26,000,000 

1821  

42,219,604 

1831  

45,920,930 

1841  

71,989,095 

1851  

92,233,729 

Total  gross  revenue^ 
in  1857  1 

185,000,000 

TABLE  V. 

Consumption  of  Tobacco  in  Britain,  with  rate  of  Duty  and 
Revenue  therefrom. 


Years. 

Consumption. 

Duty. 

Revenue. 

Population. 

1821 

15,598,152  lbs. 

4s.  per  lb. 

£3,122,583 

21,282,903 

1831 

19,533,841  „ 

3s. 

1J 

2,964,592 

24,410,459 

1841 

22,309,360  „ 

3s. 

)» 

3,580,163 

27,019,672 

1851 

28,062,978  „ 

3s. 

?> 

4,485,768 

27,452,262 

1856 

32,579,166  „ 

3s. 

9) 

5,216,770 

* 

1857 

32,677,059  „ 

3s. 

» 

5,231,455 

* 

1858 

34,110,850  „ 

3s. 

5,272,471 

* 

* Owing  to  extensive  emigration,  especially  from  Ireland,  the  popula- 
tion must  be  considered  as  but  little  above  that  of  1851. 


TABLE  YI. 


Consumption  of  Tobacco  in  the  Austrian  Empire. 


Tears. 

Quantity  consumed. 

1850 

34,457,513  lbs. 

1851 

54,217,578  „ 

1852 

61,805,697  „ 

1853 

57,926,925  „ 

1854 

62,020,333  „ 

1856 

85.161,030  ,. 

APPENDIX, 


361 


TABLE  VII. 

Statement  exhibiting  the  quantities  of  Tobacco  exported  from 
the  United  States  into  the  countries  named,  during  1855. 


Countries. 

Quantities. 

Bremen  

38,058,000  lbs. 

Great  Britain  

24,203,000  „ 

France  

40,866,000  ,, 

Holland  

17,124,000  „ 

Spain 

7,524,000  „ 

Belgium  

4,010,000  „ 

Sardinia  ...  

3,314,000  „ 

Austria  

2,945,000  „ 

Sweden  and  Norway 

1,713,000  „ 

Portugal  

336,000  „ 

TABLE  VIII. 

Disposition  of  Tobacco  the  growth  of  the  United  States  in  1840 
and  in  1850,  with  the  Home  Consumption  at  each  period. 


Years. 

Growth. 

Exports. 

Consumption. 

Rate  pr. 
Head. 

1840 

1850 

219,163,319  lbs. 
199,532,494  „ 

184,965,797  lbs 
122,408,780  „ 

34,543,557  lbs. 
81,933,571  „ 

32i  oz. 
56  „ 

TABLE  IX. 

Statement  showing  the  Exports  of  Tobacco  from  America 
(United  States)  in  decennial  periods,  from  1820  to  1850,  and 
in  1855. 


Years. 

Quantity  exported. 

1820 

66,000  hogsheads. 

1830 

83,810  „ 

1840 

119,484  „ 

1850 

145,729  „ 

1855 

150,213 

362  THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 

TABLE  X. 

ANALYSIS  OF  TOBACCO  BY  POSSELT  & REENMANN. 


Nicotina  

0-06 

Concrete  vegetable  oil  

0-01 

Bitter  extractive  

2-87 

Gum,  with  malate  of  lime  

1-74 

Chlorophylle  

0-267 

Albumen  and  gluten  

1-308 

Malic  acid 

0-51 

Lignin  and  a trace  of  starch  

4-969 

Salts  (sulphate,  nitrate,  and  malate  of") 

potash,  chloride  of  potassium,  phos-f. 

phate  and  malate  of  lime,  and  malate  V 

of  ammonia) 

Silica  mi  •••  •••  ...  ...  ...  ... 

0-088 

Water  

88-280 

Fresh  leaves  of  tobacco  

100-836 

TABLE  XI. 

Return  showing  the  quantity  of  Chests  of  Opium  exported  by 
the  East  India  Company  between  1846  and  1858. 


Tears. 

No.  of  Chests. 

1846 — 47  

22,468 

1847—48  

22,879 

1848—49  

33,073 

1849—50  

35,919 

1850—51  

32,033 

1851—52  

31,259 

1852—53  

35,521 

1853—54  

42,403 

1854—55  

49,979 

1855—56  

49,399 

1856—57  

66,305 

1857—58  

68,004 

* Each  Chost  of  Opium  contains  about  140  lbs. 


APPENDIX, 


363 


TABLE  XII. 


Amount  of  Income  derived  by  the  East  India  Company  from 
the  Opium  Monopoly. 


Years. 

Amount. 

1840—41  

£874,277 

1341—42  

1,018,765 

1842—43  

1,577,581 

1843—44  

2,024,826 

1844—45  ...  ... 

2,181,288 

1845—46  

2,803,350 

1846—47  

2,886,201 

1847—48  

1,698,252 

1848—49  

2,845,762 

1849—50  

3,309,637 

1850—51  

3,043,135 

1851—52  

3,139,247 

1852—53  

3,717,932 

1853—54  

3,359,019 

1854—55  

...  ...  3,333,601 

1855—56  

3,961,975 

1856—57  

3,860.390 

1857—58  

5,918,375 

TABLE  XIII. 

OPIUM  STATISTICS  OE  GREAT  BRITAIN. 


Years. 

Imports. 

Consumption. 

1826 

79,829  lbs. 

28,329  lbs. 

1827 

113,140  „ 

17,322  „ 

1830 

209,076  „ 

22.668  „ 

1833 

106,846  „ 

35,407  „ 

1836 

130,794  „ 

38,943  „ 

1839 

196,247  „ 

41,632  „ 

1842 

72,373  „ 

47,432  „ 

1845 

259,644  „ 

38,229  „ 

1848 

200,019  „ 

61,055  „ 

1849 

105,724  „ 

44,177  „ 

1850 

126,318  „ 

42,324  „ 

1851 

118,024  „ 

50,682  „ 

1852 

205,780  „ 

62,521  „ 

1853 

159,312  „ 

67,038  „ 

1854 

97,427  „ 

61,432  „ 

1855 

50,143  „ 

34,473  „ 

1856 

51,479  „ 

38,609  „ 

1857 

136,423  „ 

56,174  „ 

1858 

82,085  „ 

77,639  „ 

364 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP. 


TABLE  XIV. 

ANALYSIS  OF  OPIUM,  BY  MULDER. 


Morphia  

... 

...  10-842 

4-106 

Narcotina  

... 

6-803 

8-150 

Codeia  

... 

...  0-678 

0-834 

Narceine 

... 

6-662 

7-506 

Meconine 

... 

...  0-804 

0-846 

Meconic  acid  

... 

...  5-124 

3-968 

Fat  

...  2-166 

1-350 

Caoutchouc  

... 

6-012 

5-026 

Resin  ...  

...  3-582 

2-028 

Gummy  extractive  ... 

...  25-200  - 

31-470 

Gum 

1-042 

2-896 

Mucus  

... 

...  19-086 

17-098 

Water  

... 

...  9-846‘ 

12-226 

Loss  ...  ...  ...  ... 

... 

...  2-148 

2-496 

Total 


...  100-000  100-000 


PRISONERS  SENTENCED  BY  THE  POLICE  TO  THE  HOUSE  OF  CORRECTION  AT  SINGAPORE. 


APPENDIX. 


365 


p« 

< 


>> 

P« 


a 

■§ 

© • 

3S 
g 0 j 

*12  S’* 

.3  ft£  § § 
ft°3  °.§ 

-s 


>> 

M 


■g 


.aj.g.F 


•g,g  S 5 ssu  3 


3-S  o 
ft  <3  « 

CQ  O o 
© rt  ^ 


3 © Vn  © © Q/cO  S 

c3  o.  op  t>3  _ . . c3 

£\9 


I t>>°  2 


-ft  rfF|K3 


^ bfl 


m id 

5 o o o 
© o ° o 

Hftftft 


ro  >>  t>>  «>  >-»  „ £ „ rv  _ 

o 2 3 ^ 3 .3  5 .9  3.9 

o.2.2.2.2^.©  J3  o9r 
t-^OQCQOQOQHhHOE-iE 


y 

**  J.P, 


• o.U 

‘ c3 

joct 

j a a g 

3S  Q,®  ® ° 
© £7©  <d  y 
rtrS  9 o o 
.9  ^ o T3  *3  'S 

P<bOTJ  3 3 


' ttlttfl'i 

O uQ  P Q O P Hi  P k 


3 

o 

-*3 

3 

Xi 

& 

© 


3 

o 

£ 


o 

^4 

o 

P 

-t-> 

.3 


si? 

II 

21 

O^J 

2 2 

•as 

a 


>» . 
d m 
~ o 

5 c* 

6 


e 

H 


o si? 

£•8  * 

s §3 


<yog 


0$ 

J 


^3  o 
td'K 
=S'H 


OOOOOO^f^OOO 


-1  o o o o 


Orjito  0^0^  : O £3  <M  00  T*  o • 

• i^rH  «rH  M+lHH  . r— I ^ r-i  2 


© 00 

: : ^ : ©© 


COHHCOHHO^OHH  O-POOHH 

DO 


r&  © 
rrJP 


© © © © © 
lONOOO 


©©©  ©©CO©©© 

: : o 

> © © © ; O O -*J  © O CI 


>> 

'o 


©O' 

o o 


u 

>>-§ 

;§A 

Oft 


a a a 


.>>>»-«  >>  >.  >i 

: O O go  ;75  'o 
O Or2  o * © o 

00^ 

M 

o 


a a 


o2 

a 


* o 

^ © © © 
o o o 


:M 

p< 


3 3 3 

«M»  W 


oiot-oo^ooo'O-tfooioiooiio-^-^-^m 
d r— t r—i  O CO  rH  O O O Zj 


000 


o 

p 


000 

ppp 


O o © © o o c 
CO  o to  CO  c>  © ' 


> o © © © 
< -*->  co  © © 


Z*  QtOOOCO 

c-i  ^3  co  co  © t* 


rHC^C0TH©©t-C0©©rH(MC0'^ 


HrtrlrlHrtrlHHHWNNMWWWNwS 


a 

* 


366 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP, 


TABLE  XVI. 


OPIUM  CONSUMED  BY  FIFTEEN  PERSONS  FROM 
THE  PAUPER  HOSPITAL,  SINGAPORE. 


Quantity 
of  Opium 
consumed 
daily. 

Years 

habitu- 

ated. 

Monthly 

Wages. 

Excess 

Df  expenditure  over 
income. 

Grains. 

s. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

1 

36 

7 

11 

6 

5 

8 excess 

2 

36 

3 

8 

0 

6 

6 „ 

3 

24 

5 

8 

0 

1 

8 » 

4 

36 

8 

12 

0 

2 

6 „ 

5 

42 

20 

16 

0 

0 

10  „ 

6 

30 

10 

10 

0 

2 

1 „ 

7 

24 

7 

8 

0 

1 

8 „ 

8 

30 

10 

12 

0 

Income  and  expenditure  equal 

9 

24 

5 

8 

0 

1 

8 excess 

10 

30 

10 

8 

0 

4 

0 „ 

11 

30 

8 

12 

0 

Income  and  expenditure  equal 

12 

36 

10 

12 

0 

2 

6 excess 

13 

30 

15 

12 

0 

Income  and  expenditure  equal 

14 

30 

25 

12 

0 

1) 

15 

42 

22 

12 

0 

4 

10  exces 

TABLE  XVII. 

REPORTS  OF  OPIUM-SMOKING  IN  CHINA. 

In  the  Chung-wan  (centre  bazaar)  there  are  about  5,800 
inhabitants. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  merely  because  they  like  it 
are  upwards  of  2,600. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  300. 

In  the  Hah-wan  (Canton  bazaar)  there  are  upwards  of  1,200 
inhabitants. 

The  number  that  smoko  opium  merely  because  they  like  it 
are  upwards  of  600. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  100. 

The  number  that  died  for  cause  of  smoking  opium  Tory  few. 

(Signed)  Chung-wan  & Hah-wan  Teatoa’s  Repost. 

Dated  Tuei-man  year , 11/A  month,  20 th  day 
( December  20th,  1806). 


APPENDIX.  367 

The  number  of  male  residents  at  Sheong-wan  are  estimated  as 
following  : — 

This  year  have  ascertained  the  number  of  male  residents  are 
13,000. 

There  are  3,000  opium-smokers  ; 300  smoke  8 mace  a-day; 
700  smoke  5 mace  each  day;  1,000  smoke  3 mace  each  day;  the 
rest  smoke  1 mace,  more  or  less. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  merely  because  they  like  it  are 
upwards  of  4,000. 

The  number  that  got  sick  for  cause  of  opium-smoking  went 
home,  and  did  not  die  here. 


(Signed)  Teapoa  of  Sheong-wan  Tong  Chew’s  Report. 

Dated  December  29th,  1855. 


By  order,  have  ascertained  the  number  of  inhabitants  of  Tai- 
ping-Shan. 

There  are  upwards  of  5,300  men. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  because  they  like  it  are 
upwmrds  of  1,200. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  600. 

The  number  that  died  for  cause  of  opium-smoking  very  few. 

(Signed)  Tai-ping-Shan  Teapoa’s  Report. 

Dated  Tuet-man  year,  1 1th  month,  20  th  day 
(. December  29 th,  1855). 


By  order,  have  ascertained  that  in  Wan-tsai  there  are  up- 
wards of  1,600  inhabitants. 

Those  that  smoke  opium  merely  because  they  like  it  are 
upwards  of  500  men. 

Those  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  200  men. 

I hose  that  died  for  cause  of  smoking  opium,  none. 

(Signed)  Wan-tsai  Teapoa’s  Report. 

Dated  Tuet-man  year,  11  th  month,  20 th  day 
C December  29 Ik,  1855). 


By  order,  have  ascertained  that  in  Wanc-nai-clioon  there  are 
upwards  of  200  men. 


368 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP, 


The  number  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  10  men. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  merely  because  they  like  it  are 
few  only. 

The  number  that  died  for  cause  of  smoking  opium,  very  few. 

(Signed)  Wang-nai-choon  Teapoa’s  Repokt. 

Dated.  Tuet-man  year , 11  th  month,  20 tli  day 
( December  29th,  1S65). 


By  order,  have  ascertained  the  number  of  inhabitants  of  Ting- 
loong-chow  (east  point). 

There  are  upwards  of  2,500  inhabitants. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  merely  because  they  like  it 
are  upwards  of  300. 

The  number  that  smoke  opium  are  upwards  of  100. 

[ (Signed)  Ting-loon-chow  Teapoa’s  Repout. 

Dated  Tuet-man  year,  11  th  month,  20 th  day 
(December  29 th,  1S55). 


TABLE  XVIII. 

N 

Professor  Johnston’s  estimate  of  the  number  of  persons  indulging 
in  the  Seven  principal  Narcotics  of  the  world. 


Tobacco  

Opium  

Hemp  

Betel 

Coca  

Thorn-Apple  (no  estimate) 
Amanita  ,, 


800,000,000 

400.000. 000 

200.000. 000  to  300,000,000 

100.000. 000 
10,000,000 

Less  than  Coca. 

»» 


APPENDIX, 


369 


TABLE  XIX. 

SYNOPSIS  OF  NARCOTICS,  WITH  THEIR 
SUBSTITUTES. 

I. — Tobacco. 


Vulgar  Name. 


Virginian  tobacco. 
Orinoko  ,, 

European  „ 

Javanese  „ 

Billah  ,, 

Guzerat  „ 

Chinese  „ 

Thibetian  „ 

Persian  ,, 

I.atakia  „ 

Djiddar  ,, 

Indian  „ 


Cuban  „ 

Columbian  „ 

Brazilian  ., 

Peruvian  „ 

Coltsfoot  leaves 
Yarrow  „ 
Bbubarb  „ 
Bogbean  „ 

Sage 

Mountain  tobacco . 
Black  holly  .. 
Stag’s  hom  sumach 
Copal  sumach 
Water  lily  leaves... 

Pucha-pat 

Tombeki  

Indian  tobacco 
Maize  husks..., 
Birch  bark  .... 
Willow  leaves  . 
Bearberry  leaves... 
Pimento  berries 
Cascarilla  bark 
Polygonum  leaves 

Camphor  leaves  -j 
Wild  dagga  ., 


Nicotiana  tabacum  .., 

macrophylla  ... 
rustica  


Culcn 

Purphiok 

Camomile  flowers 


Beet  leaves  

Akel  

Trouna  

Kauw  good  | 

Angelica  root  . 


Botanical  name. 


Where  used 
or  cultivated 


,>  var 

„ varAsiatica. 

„ var 

„ varChinensis 

.,  var 

Persica  


var  . 


Europe  . 
Java  .... 
Malwa  . 
Guzerat . 
China  .... 
Thibet  . 
Persia.... 
Syria  .... 


cnspa 

quadrivalvis  ... 
multivalvis 


U.  States 


Smoked  & chewed 


Smoked. 


nana  

repanda  

loxensis 

glauca 

andicola . 

Tusiilago  farfar  

Achilloea  millefolium 
Rheum  emodi,  &c.  .. 

Menyanthes  trifoliata  ... 

Salvia  offic  inalis 

Arnica  montana 

Ilex  vomitoria 

Rhus  typhina 

Rhus  copallina  

Nelumbium  speciosum 
Marrubium  odoratissi-  \ 

mum  j 

Lobelia  sp 

Lobelia  inflata 

Zea  Mays 

Betula  excelsa 

Salix  sp 

Arctostaphylus  uva-ursi 

Eugenia  pimento  

Croton  eleuteria 

Polygonum  hispida  

Tarchonanthus  cam- 1 

phoratus  ) 

Leonotis  leonurus 

I.eonotis  ovata 

Psoralea  glandulosa  

Tupistra  sp 

Anthomis  nobilis  

Beta  vulgaris 


N.  America. 

if 

Rocky  Mts. 

Cuba  

America 

Brazil 

Andes 

Europe  


Smok’d  for  tobacco 


Himalayas... 

Britain  

Europe  

Switzerland, 
N.  America. 
Mississippi . 


Moscmbryanthemum 

tortuosum.. 

Archangclica  officinalis... 


China.., 
India  .. 

E.  Asia 
N.  America. 
U.  States 
N.Brunswck 
N.  America. 
Chenooklnd 
W.  Indies  ... 

S.  America 
Cape  


Mauritius . 
Sikkim  .... 
Britain  .... 

France  .... 
Algeria  .... 


Cape  .... 
Lapland. 


How  used. 


Mix’d  with  tobacco 
Mix’d  with  tobacco 
Smoked  as  tobacco 

ff 

Patented  for  cigars 
Mix’d  with  tobacco 
Smoked  as  tobacco 
Mix’d  with  tobacco 
Smoked 

Mix’d  with  tobacco 
Smoked 


Mix’d  with  tobacco 


substitute 
Mix’d  with  tobacco 


Chewed 


370 


THE  SEVEN  SISTERS  OF  SLEEP, 

( Table  XIX.  qpntinucd.J 


Vulgar  name. 


Monkey  bread ) 

leaves f 

Rhododendron  I 

leaves j 

Brown  dust  of) 

petioles  of. } 

Asarabacca  

'Grimstone's  eye  7 

snuff  j 

Various  indigenous 

Woodruff  

Amadou  ashes 


Where  used 
or  cultivated 


Smyrna  opium  .. 
Constantinople  do. 

Egyptian  do 

Trebizond  do 

Bengal  do 

Garden  Patna  do... 

Malwa  do 

Cuteh  do 

Kandeish  do 

English  do — 

French  do :.. 

German  do 

Lactucarium  .... 


Adansonia  digitata  .... 

Rhododendron  campa- 

nulatum  

Kalmia  sp 

Rhododendron  sp 

Asarum  Europoeum  .... 

Various  plants 

plants  

A specula  odorata  

Polyporus  igniarius  .... 

II. — Opium. 

Papaver  somniferum. 


W.  Africa  ... 
India 

N.  America. 
Europe  


Britain  

Erzegebirge. 
Britaih 


How  used. 


Kmtschatka|Snuffed. 


Snuffed 

Snuffed. 


Mixed  with  snuff. 


Dutchman’s  lau- 1 

danum  J 

Ditto  


Syrian  rue  seods... 

Seeds  of 

Seeds  of 

Juice  of 


Lactuca  sativa 

„ virosa 

„ scariola 

,,  altissima  

sylvestris 

„ elongata  

„ taraxacifolia 


Levant 
Turkey 
Egypt.... 
Persia... 
India  .... 


Gimjah  and  Bang. 
Churrus  (resin)  ... 
Powdered  dacca  ' 
and  aloes  / 


Betel  nuts 


Murucuja  ocellata  ... 

,,  orbiculata 
Poganum  harmala... 

Sterculia  alata 

Seopolia  mutica  ... 
Chondrilla  juncea  ... 

III. — Hemp. 
Cannabis  indica  


England... 
France  ... 
Gennany 
Britain  ... 


Subs,  for  opium. 


Guiana  .... 
Jamaica.... 
Barbadoes . 
Turkey  .... 

Silhet 

Arabia  .... 
Lemnos  .... 


Smoked,  Ac. 


To  produce  in- 
toxication. 
Subs,  for  opium. 

S To  produce  in- 
toxication. 
Subs,  for  opium. 


India,  Africa  Smoked,  See. 
Nepaul,  Sec. 


S.  W.  Africa. 


IV. — Betel. 


Snuffed 


Kassu  (extract)  ... 
Cowry  (extract)  ... 
Kutt  or  catechu ... 


Aroca  catechu ... 

Areca  laxa  

Areca  Ndgonsis 
Arena  Dicksoni 
Areca  catccliu ... 
Areca  catechu ... 
Acacia  catechu 


Malay  Ponin 
Andaman  Is 
E.  Bengal ... 
Malabar... 

India 

Mysore  ... 
India 


Chewed. 


APPENDIX. 


371 


(Table  XIX.  continued.) 


Vulgar  name. 

Botanical  name. 

Where  used 
or  cultivated 

How  used. 

Gambir 

Betelpepperleaves 

it  

Blk.  pepper  leaves 

Ava  pepper 

Boots  of  

Boots  of  

Guayabo  bark 

Antipolo  bark 

Uncaria  gambir  

Uncaria  sp 

Chavica  betle  

Chavica  siraboa  1 

Piper  nigrum  

Macropiper  methysticum 

Derris  pinnata 

Cocos  nucifera 

Psidium  guayaba  

if  ..»•••••• 

Singapore  &c 

if 

Malay  Penin 

if 

Singapore  ... 
S.  Seas  

Ceylon  

Phillipines  . 

if 

Chewed. 

a 

Chewed  with  betel 

a 

tt 

if 

Subs,  for  betel 

ft 

a 

a 

Coca  leaves 


V. — Coca. 

.JErytliroxylon  coca.., 

VI. — Thorn-Apple. 


Florispondio  seeds 
Thorn  Apple  leaves 
seeds 


Belladonna  leaves. 
Henbane  leaves  ... 

Leaves  of  

Flowers  of. 

Foxglove  leaves ... 

Fly  agaric 


Datura  sanguinea  

N.  Granada. 

„ stramonium...;.. 

Europe  

Atropa  belladonna 

Europe  ..  .’.. 

Hyoscyamus  niger 

India  

f Bhododendron  chry- 

( santhum  

Bhododendron  arboreum 

India  ......... 

Digitalis  purpurea 

ft 

Peru  (Masticatory 


Drank  in  infusion. 
Smoked. 


f By  the  Delphic 
X oracle. 

As  an  opiate. 
Smoked. 

C Mixed  with  has- 
l chish. 

Chewed. 


/Mixed  with  has- 
\ chisch. 


VII. — Amanita. 

Amanita  muscaria jSiberia  |Swallowed. 


M ‘COBQUOD ALB  b Co.,  PBINTEBS,  LONDON— WOBKS,  NlEWTON. 


