MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT. 

By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 


MESCAL  (Anhalonium  Lewinii)  belongs  to  the  group  of  plants 
which  in  various  parts  of  the  world  have  been  intimately  con- 
nected with  religion  and  have  received  the  honors  due  to  divine  beings. 
This  group  may  indeed  be  said  to  be  large,  but  mescal — on  account  of 
the  special  appeal  to  the  supernatural  which  its  peculiar  properties 
make — belongs  to  the  innermost  circle  of  such  plants.  It  is  or  has  been 
venerated  by  the  Indians  of  many  tribes  over  a  very  large  region  in 
Northern,  Central  and  Eastern  Mexico,  in  New  Mexico,  in  Texas  and  in 
Indian  Territory,  each  tribe  having  its  own  name  for  the  plant — 
mescal,  hikori,  peyote,  kamaba,  etc.*  Botanically  it  is  a  cactus, 
belonging  to  the  special  and  little  known  group  of  the  Melocacteae; 
there  are  in  the  group  some  six  or  seven  Anhalonia;  they  all  grow  in 
inaccessible  spots  on  high  and  rocky  peaks,  and  have  only  in  recent  years 
become  known  to  science.  The  plant  most  nearly  allied  to  the  Anhalo- 
nium Lewinii  is  the  A.  Williamsii,  from  which  is  obtained  the  alkaloid 
pellotin,  lately  found  of  therapeutic  value  as  a  hypnotic.  Mescal 
buttons  (as  from  their  shape  the  dried  tops  of  A.  Lewinii  are  locally 
known)  are  somewhat  brittle  discs  some  two  or  three  centimeters  in 
diameter  and  partially  covered  by  a  hairy  cushion.  Lewin  and  Hen- 
ning  in  1885  first  described  this  cactus  and  made  experiments  on  ani- 
mals with  it,  from  which  Lewin  concluded  that  it  is  'intensely 
poisonous,'  resembling  strychnine  in  its  action,  and  by  its  lethal  action 
standing  apart  from  all  other  Cactece.  This  opinion  probably  rendered 
investigators  of  mescal  cautious,  and  little  further  progress  was  made 
in  our  knowledge  until  1894,  when  Mr.  John  Mooney,  agent  among  the 
Indians,  who  had  read  a  paper  on  this  subject  before  the  Washington 
Anthropological  Society  three  years  earlier,  brought  to  the  United 
States  Bureau  of  Ethnology  a  large  supply  of  mescal  buttons  which  were 
entrusted  to  Professor  Prentiss  and  Dr.  Morgan,  of  Columbian  Uni- 
versity for  physiological  investigation. 

*  I  retain  the  name  mescal  by  which  the  plant  first  became  known.  It  has, 
however,  the  disadvantage  of  being  identical  with  the  name  of  an  intoxicating 
drink,  prepared  from  one  or  more  species  of  Agave,  with  which  it  has  no  con- 
nection whatever. 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF   A    DIVINE    PLANT.  53 

II. 

At  this  point  it  may  be  interesting  to  consider  briefly  the  sacred  rites 
with  which  the  Indians  have  surrounded  the  mescal  plant.  These  rites 
have  been  vaguely  known  for  a  very  long  time  and  were  referred  to  by 
early  travelers,  like  Hernandez  and  Sahagun.  Father  Ortega,  on 
account  of  its  hallucinatory  properties,  named  it  Raiz  diabolica,  devil's 
root. 

The  first  reliable  account  of  its  use  in  modern  times  was  given  by 
Mr.  Mooney  from  his  experience  of  the  Kiowa  Indians  on  the  Kiowa 
Keservation  in  Indian  Territory.  The  religious  ceremonies  of  these 
Indians  usually  take  place  on  Saturday  night;  the  men,  having 
obtained  a  supply  of  the  drug  which  is  brought  by  traders  from  Mexico, 
seat  themselves  in  a  circle  round  a  large  camp  fire  within  the  tent. 
After  prayer,  the  leader  hands  each  man  four  buttons.  One  of  these, 
freed  from  the  tuft  of  hairs,  is  put  into  the  mouth,  thoroughly  softened, 
ejected  into  the  palm  of  the  hand,  rolled  into  a  bolus  and  swallowed. 
Ten  or  twelve  buttons  are  thus  taken  at  intervals  between  sundown  and 
3  a.m.,  with  the  accompaniment  of  occasional  prayers  and  rites. 
Throughout  the  ceremony  the  camp-fire  is  kept  burning  brightly  and 
attendants  maintain  a  continual  beating  of  drums.  The  Indians  sit 
quietly  throughout,  from  sundown  to  noon  of  the  next  day,  and  as  the 
effect  wears  off  they  get  up  and  go  about  their  work,  without  experien- 
cing depression  or  unpleasant  after-effects.  On  the  day  following  they 
abstain,  from  ritual  reasons,  from  using  salt  with  their  food.  These 
and  similar  rites  have  become  the  chief  religion  of  the  tribes  of  the 
southern  plain,  to  such  an  extent  that  the  Christian  missionaries, 
unable  to  grapple  with  the  mescal  cult  by  spiritual  weapons,  fell  back 
on  the  secular  arm  and  induced  the  government  authorities  at  Wash- 
ington to  prohibit  mescal  under  severe  penalties.  Nevertheless  its  use 
still  persists. 

Although  the  propaganda  of  the  mescal  cult  among  the  Indians  of 
the  United  States  has  thus  been  highly  successful,  it  is  fairly  clear  that 
much  of  its  primitive  religious  significance  has  here  been  lost.  We  may 
understand  how  this  is  when  we  know  that  the  Kiowa  Indians  are 
immigrants  from  the  south;  they  come  from  the  Eio  Grande,  and  it 
is  from  the  Eio  Grande  that  they  still  obtain  their  mescal.  Mexico 
is  the  chief  home  alike  of  the  mescal  plant  and  of  the  mescal  rites  in 
their  primitive  purity.  It  is  to  Mexico  that  we  have  to  turn  to  realize 
their  primitive  significance. 

As  used  by  the  Indians  of  the  Nayarit  Sierra  in  the  province  of 
Xalisco,  mescal  (or  peyote,  as  it  is  here  commonly  called)  has  been 
described  by  Diguet.*    Mescal  is  regarded  by  these  Indians  as  a  food  of 

*  L6on  Diguet,  Nouvelles  archives  des  missions  scientifiques,  Vol.  IX.,  1899, 
pp.  621-625. 


54  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

even  higher  order  than  maize,  for  while  maize  is  merely  the  food  of  the 
body,  mescal  is  the  food  of  the  soul.  It  is  indeed  the  supreme  food,  and 
on  that  account  is  offered  to  the  gods.  Like  maize,  mescal  has  tutelary 
deities  and  a  special  goddess.  Its  psychic  manifestations  are  considered 
a  supernatural  grace  bringing  man  into  relation  with  the  gods;  while 
in  moderation  it  enables  men  to  face  the  greatest  fatigues  and  to  bear 
hunger  and  thirst  for  five  days,  that  is  during  the  fast  prescribed  by 
the  laws  of  Majakuagy.  It  is  said  that  when  Majakuagy  was  engaged 
in  preaching  his  doctrines  he  and  his  disciples  had  to  flee  from  persecu- 
tion. In  the  course  of  his  flight  he  broke  his  food  vessels  near  San  Luis 
Potosi,  and  the  gods  in  mercy  changed  the  fragments  into  mescal.  The 
Indians  only  gather  it  in  October,  just  before  the  dry  season;  it  is  said 
that  it  is  only  at  this  time  that  it  contains  its  active  properties.  The 
third  maize  feast,  which  takes  place  at  the  beginning  of  October,  is 
regarded  as  a  prelude  to  the  mescal  festival  and  dances.  An  expedi- 
tion is  organized  to  the  spot  near  San  Luis  Potosi,  where  the  prophet's 
utensils  were  transformed  into  mescal,  to  gather  the  sacred  plant.  This 
expedition  takes  a  month ;  those  who  lead  it  march  in  front,  reciting  or 
chanting  prayers;  the  others  follow  with  the  pack-animals  to  carry  the 
harvest.  A  few  days  before  reaching  the  holy  spot  the  members  of  the 
expedition  practise  a  rigorous  fast.  They  also  perform  a  sort  of  public 
penance  with  expiation.  As  they  return,  there  is  great  rejoicing  in  all 
the  villages  through  which  they  pass,  and  mescal  is  offered  on  the 
altars  and  fragments  given  to  every  person  met.  Sufficient  is  reserved 
for  the  great  festivals,  and  the  rest  is  sold  to  those  who  took  no  part  in 
the  expedition. 

The  Huichol  Indians,  who  occupy  part  of  the  territory  covered  by 
Diguet's  investigations,  have  been  carefully  investigated  as  regards  their 
religious  symbolism  by  Dr.  Lumholtz,  who  touches  on  the  mescal  (or, 
as  it  is  here  called,  hikuli)  cult.*  He  states  that  the  expedition  to 
obtain  the  plant  goes  to  a  place  near  the  mining  town  of  Keal  Catorce 
in  October,  but  that  the  great  festival  only  takes  place  in  January. 
Abstinence  from  sexual  intercourse  is  part  of  the  cult,  and  it  is  noted 
that  the  use  of  the  plant  temporarily  removes  all  sexual  desire.  The 
balance  of  the  body  is  said  to  be  maintained  better  than  usual,  and 
under  its  influence  men  walk  fearlessly  on  the  edge  of  precipices,  and 
endure  hunger,  thirst  and  fatigue  to  an  incredible  extent.  Lumholtz 
states  that  the  festival  is  connected  with  the  god  of  fire.  We  may 
account  for  this  by  the  luminous  nature  of  the  visions  caused  by  mescal 
and  by  the  influence  of  a  blazing  fire  in  stimulating  those  visions. 

The  same  author,  in  the  course  of  an  account  of  'Tarahumari 
Dances  and  Plant- Worship'  f  has  described  the  cult  of  mescal  among 

*  Carl  Lumholtz,  Memoirs  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History, 
Vol.  III.,  Anthropology,  II.,  1900. 

f  Scribner's  Magazine,  Oct.,   1894. 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.  55 

an  allied  Indian  tribe  who  call  it  hikori  and  worship  it  as  a  god.  This 
account  furnishes  a  few  supplementary  details  to  Diguet's  narrative 
of  the  expedition.  We  are  told  that  as  the  Indians  approach  the 
plants  they  display  every  sign  of  veneration,  uncovering  their  heads. 
Before  gathering  them  they  cense  themselves  with  copal  incense.  They 
dig  out  the  cactus  with  great  care,  so  as  not  to  hurt  it,  and  women  and 
boys  are  not  allowed  to  approach  the  god.  The  plants  are  kept  in  jars 
in  caves,  and  offerings  of  food  and  drink  made  to  them.  Even  Chiutian 
Indians  regard  hikori  as  coequal  with  their  own  divinity  and  make 
the  sign  of  the  cross  in  its  presence.  At  all  important  festivals  hikori 
is  made  into  a  drink  and  consumed  by  the  medicine  men,  and  certain 
selected  Indians  partake  of  it,  singing  invocations  to  hikori  to  grant  a 
'beautiful  intoxication.'  A  rasping  noise  is  made  with  sticks,  while 
men  and  women  dance,  the  sexes  separately,  a  picturesque  and  fantastic 
dance,  the  women  in  white  petticoats  and  tunics,  before  those  who  are 
under  the  influence  of  the  god. 

III. 

We  have  now  to  consider  what  are  those  special  virtues  which  have 
caused  this  insignificant  little  cactus,  hidden  away  among  almost 
inaccessible  rocks,  to  be  surrounded  by  so  splendid  a  halo  of  veneration. 

The  first  really  scientific  attempt  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the 
peculiar  effects  of  this  drug  on  the  human  organism  was  made  by 
Professor  Prentiss  and  Dr.  Morgan  in  their  investigation,  already  men- 
tioned,* of  the  mescal  buttons  obtained  by  Mr.  Mooney  among  the 
Kiowa  Indians.  These  observers  administered  the  drug,  in  what  I 
should  consider  extremely  large  doses  (in  one  case  as  many  as  seven 
buttons),  to  several  subjects  whose  symptoms  were  noted  and  their  color 
visions  briefly  described.  These  investigators  made  no  observations 
on  themselves.  In  the  following  year,  however,  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell, 
attracted  by  their  account  of  the  effect  of  the  drug,  obtained  some 
of  the  extract  from  them  and  made  an  experiment  on  himself,  taking 
a  large  dose.  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell  describes  himself  as  a  good  subject  for 
visions,  and  his  vivid  and  elaborate  account  of  his  experiences,  as  read 
before  the  American  Neurological  Society,!  furnished  the  first  really 
full  and  instructive  description  of  the  artificial  paradise  of  mescal.  In 
the  early  part  of  the  next  year,  having  been  greatly  interested  by  Dr. 
Weir  Mitchell's  experience,  and  thinking  that  this  drug  might  help  to 
throw  light  on  various  matters  which  I  was  trying  to  account  for,  I  suc- 
ceeded in  obtaining  a  supply  of  mescal  buttons  in  England  and  experi- 
mented on  myself.  As  these  observations,  the  first  made  outside 
America  on  the  psychic  effects  of  mescal,  covered  the  same  ground  as 
Dr.  Weir  Mitchell's,  while  at  the  same  time  revealing  new  classes  of 

*  Therapeutic  Gazette,  September  16,  1895. 

f  Reprinted  in  the  British  Medical  Journal,  December  5,  1896. 


56  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

phenomena  which  had  not  been  noted  by  previous  observers,  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  record  them  in  full,  as  fairly  typical  of  those  vision- 
producing  properties  which  procured  for  this  plant  its  divine  honors.* 

The  experiment  took  place  on  Good  Friday,  1897,  when  I  was 
entirely  alone  in  quiet  chambers  in  the  Temple,  the  most  peaceful  spot 
in  central  London.  I  made  a  double  infusion  or  decoction  of  three 
mescal  buttons  (a  single  infusion  is  inert)  and  drank  this,  in  three 
doses,  at  intervals  of  an  hour,  beginning  at  2 :30  p.m.,  two  hours  after 
a  light  lunch.  I  had  not  touched  alcohol  or  smoked  during  the  day. 
The  following  notes  are  reproduced,  with  trifling  omissions,  exactly  as 
written,  during  the  course  of  the  experiment. 

"The  most  noteworthy,  almost  immediate,  result  of  the  first  dose 
was  that  a  headache  which  for  some  hours  had  shown  a  tendency  to 
aggravation  was  somewhat  relieved.  At  3  began  to  feel  drowsy.  At 
3 :30  took  another  third  of  the  infusion.  My  headache  was  speedily  still 
further  lightened,  and  I  now  felt  a  certain  consciousness  of  energy  and 
intellectual  power.  No  color  or  other  visual  phenomena  appeared,  how- 
ever, even  when  eyes  were  closed  for  several  minutes.  No  obvious 
increase  of  knee-jerk,  though  I  seemed  to  be  conscious  of  a  certain 
heightening  of  muscular  irritability  as  when  one  has  been  without  sleep 
for  an  unusual  time.  Some  gastric  discomfort  now  made  itself  felt,  but 
was  relieved  (at  4  o'clock)  by  eating  a  few  biscuits.  At  this  time,  for 
the  first  time,  there  was  a  distinct  lowering  of  pulse  by  some  6  or  8 
beats.  At  4:30  took  the  remaining  portion  of  the  infusion.  At  this 
period,  except  for  a  very  slight  frontal  headache  and  a  faint  sensation 
of  nausea,  no  abnormal  phenomena  had  yet  appeared,  and  I  was  feeling 
on  the  whole  better  than  before  I  began  the  experiment.  At  5  I  felt 
slightly  faint,  so  that  it  was  difficult  to  concentrate  my  attention 
while  reading  and  I  lay  down  on  a  couch;  the  pulse  was  still  lower  (48) 
but  no  visual  phenomena  could  be  detected.  At  5 :45  while  lying  down 
reading  I  noticed  (what  Weir  Mitchell  noticed)  that  a  pale  violet 
shadow  floated  over  the  page  around  the  point  on  which  my  eyes  were 
fixed.  Some  little  time  earlier  I  had  noticed  that  objects  not  in  the 
direct  line  of  vision,  such  as  my  hand  holding  the  book,  frequently 
tended  to  become  obtrusive,  and  as  it  were  heightened  in  color,  mon- 
strous and  enlarged.  At  6  the  prevailing  feeling  was  one  of  slight 
faintness  with  some  muscular  unsteadiness;  there  was  no  marked 
discomfort  (except  slight  nausea)  ;  the  headache  had  almost  gone.    No 

*  I  published  a  somewhat  briefer  account  of  this  experiment  in  '  Mescal :  a 
New  Artificial  Paradise,'  Contemporary  Review,  January,  1898.  This  paper  also 
contains  the  interesting  results  of  an  experiment  on  an  artist  friend;  further 
remarks  were  published  in  'A  Note  on  Mescal  Intoxication,'  Lancet,  June  5, 
1897.  These  papers  attracted  the  attention  of  Dr.  Walter  Dixon,  who  made 
many  experiments  on  himself  and  has  published  the  results  in  an  interesting 
article  in  the  Journal  of  Physiology,  September,  1899. 


MESCAL:   A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.  57 

further  visual  phenomena  except  that  it  seemed  that  on  closing  the 
eyes  after-images  were  marked  and  persistent.  It  may  also  be  said  that 
for  some  time  previously,  although  no  color  visions  came,  the  play  of 
light  and  shade  always  seen  with  closed  eyes  seemed  more  marked  than 
usual,  and  suggested  pictures  which  were  not  really  seen. 

"6:15.  I  should  take  more  buttons  in  solid  form,  but  refrain  from 
doing  so  in  consequence  of  the  faintness  which  makes  me  disinclined 
to  do  more  than  make  these  notes.  Also  the  thought  of  taking  more  of 
the  drug  and  the  sight  of  the  glass  produces  a  feeling  of  nausea.  The 
blue-black  color  of  the  ink  as  I  write  seems  unusually  brilliant  and  the 
shadows  on  my  left  on  the  verge  of  the  visual  field  seem  unusually 
violet. 

"6:40.  Pulse  now,  lying  down,  is  about  60.  When  lying  with  eyes 
closed  I  am  more  conscious  than  before  of  visions  on  the  curtain  of 
the  eyelid;  but  they  are  vague  and  confused,  the  whole  of  the  field 
seeming  crowded  with  them,  and  even  when  definite  images  are  seen 
they  are  not  recognizable,  but  are  of  the  same  character  as  the  images 
produced  by  the  kaleidoscope — symmetrical  groupings  of  spiked  objects. 
Violet  shadows  are  still  conspicuous,  and  now  also  I  see  what  some  little 
time  earlier  I  seemed  faintly  to  see — occasional  distinct  green  shadows 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  visual  field,  while  a  green-toned  newspaper  lying 
on  the  floor,  whenever  I  glanced  at  it,  always  seems  unusually  green. 

"7 :00.  It  is  now  dark,  and  chancing  to  glance  out  at  the  window  for 
a  moment  and  then  close  my  eyes  I  was  surprised  at  the  astonishingly 
bright  vision  of  light  left  in  my  eyes,  a  positive  after-image.  All 
objects  seen  not  in  the  direct  line  of  vision  have  a  tendency  to  look 
startlingly  large  and  prominent. 

"Before  7:30,  when  lying  with  closed  eyes,  the  visions  had  become 
much  distincter,  but  still  quite  indescribable,  mostly  a  vast  field  of 
golden  jewels  studded  with  red  and  green  stones  and  ever  changing 
and  full  of  delight.  And  moreover  all  the  air  round  me  seemed  at  one 
moment  to  be  flushed  with  vague  perfume — producing  with  the  visions 
a  delicious  effect.  All  feelings  of  discomfort  have  now  quite  vanished, 
except  only  a  slight  feeling  of  faintness  showing  itself  by  tremors  in 
hands,  etc. 

"8.00.  The  chief  character  of  the  visions  is  their  indescribableness ; 
sometimes,  however,  they  are  like  clusters  of  jewels — some  bright  and 
sparkling,  others  with  a  dull  rich  brilliance.  Again  they  resemble  a 
vast  collection  of  the  glistering,  iridescent,  fibrous  wings  of  gorgeous 
insects.  But  the  main  impression  is  that  they  are  constantly  approach- 
ing and  constantly  eluding  the  semblance  of  known  things.  The  human 
face  is  the  only  known  form  that  is  sometimes  momentarily  caught,  or 
perhaps  merely  suggested. 

"8:30.     [Written  with  pencil.']     Pulse  now  much  higher   (72  in 


58  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

sitting  position).  Muscular  incoordination  is  so  considerable  that  it 
is  very  difficult  to  use  a  pen,  but  still  easy  to  write  with  a  pencil. 

"I  find  that  it  is  easily  possible  to  see  the  visions  when  lying  down 
in  a  dark  room  with  open  eyes.  (Weir  Mitchell  could  not  do  this.) 
Sometimes  the  vision  seems  to  be  of  a  vast  hollow  vessel  into  the 
polished  interior  of  which  one  gazes  while  the  hue  rapidly  changes  on 
its  mother-of-pearl  surface.  The  objects  seen  are  very  often  extremely 
definite;  the  remarkable  point  is  that  they  are  always  novel.  There  has 
been  all  along  apparent  hypersesthesia  to  all  sensory  impressions. 

"9:10.  I  had  to  break  off  as  I  cannot  write  for  long  at  a  time.  The 
visions  continue  as  brilliantly  as  ever:  I  think  I  see  them  better  in  a 
room  lighted  by  fire  than  in  a  dark  room.  I  have  seen  thick  glorious 
fields  of  jewels  which  spring  into  forms  like  flowers  beneath  my  view 
and  then  seem  to  turn  into  gorgeous  butterfly-like  forms.  When  I 
speak  my  voice  seems  strange  to  me  and  certainly  sounds  hoarse. 

"As  I  write  (by  electric  light)  vague  thin  color  washes  seem  to  lie 
on  the  paper,  especially  a  golden  yellow,  and  even  the  pencil  seems  to 
make  somewhat  golden-tinged  marks.  My  hands  seen  in  indirect  vision 
seem  strange,  bronzed,  scaled,  flushed  with  red.  Except  for  slight 
nausea  I  am  feeling  well,  my  head  perfectly  well,  though  when  watch- 
ing the  visions  I  once  noticed  slight  right  frontal  pain.  The  chief 
inconvenience  is  decidedly  the  motor  incoordination.  It  involves 
inability  to  fix  attention  long;  but  otherwise  intellect  is  perfectly  clear. 

"9 :40.  [Written  with  pen.]  I  am  now  going  to  bed.  Visions  con- 
tinue; I  feel  well,  except  for  slight  nausea  when  I  move  and  the  motor 
weakness.  [What  follows  was  written  on  the  next  morning.']  Before 
going  to  bed  I  drank  some  hot  water  with  a  little  wine  in  it,  but  took 
nothing  to  eat.  On  undressing  I  was  struck  by  the  red,  scaly,  bronzed 
or  pigmented  appearance  of  my  feet,  hands  and  limbs  when  I  was  not 
directly  looking  at  them.  After  going  to  bed  the  nausea  entirely  dis- 
appeared, not  to  reappear,  and  except  for  thoracic  oppression  and 
occasional  sighing  there  was  no  discomfort.  But  there  was  not  the 
slightest  drowsiness.  I  think,  however,  that  the  visions  might  easily 
have  blended  into  dream  visions  but  that  I  was  kept  awake  by  a  certain 
consciousness  of  faintness  and  by  auditory  hypersesthesia.  I  was 
keenly  receptive — as  I  had  been  all  along — to  sounds,  and  whenever  I 
seemed  about  to  fall  asleep  I  was  startled  either  by  the  exaggerated 
reverberation  in  my  head  of  some  distant  street  sound  or  else  by  the 
mental. image  (not  hallucination)  of  a  loud  sound.  At  a  later  stage 
there  was  some  ringing  in  the  ear.  There  were  also  some  slight  twitch- 
ings  of  the  larger  muscles  of  the  limbs.  Before  going  to  bed  I  had 
ascertained  that  there  was  marked  exaggeration  of  the  knee-jerk,  and 
the  pupils  were  dilated.    I  felt  hot ;  the  skin  was  dry,  the  kidneys  active. 

"Meanwhile  the  visions  continued  with  but  little  diminution  of 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.  59 

brilliancy,  and  the  same  perpetual  novelty.  Some  new  kind  of  effect 
was  perpetually  appearing  in  the  field  of  vision;  sometimes  there  was 
swift  movement,  sometimes  dull  somber  richness  of  color,  sometimes 
glitter  and  sparkle,  once  a  startling  rush  of  flashes  that  seemed  to 
approach  me.  Usually  there  was  a  combination  of  rich  dark  color  with 
jewel-like  spots  of  brilliant  color.  Every  conceivable  color  and  tint 
seemed  to  appear  at  one  time  or  another  (Weir  Mitchell  never  saw 
blue).  Sometimes  the  different  varieties  of  one  color,  as  of  red,  would 
spring  up  in  turn — scarlet,  crimson,  pink,  etc.  But,  in  spite  of  the 
immense  profusion  of  objects,  there  was  always  a  certain  parsimony  and 
esthetic  value  in  the  colors  presented.  They  were  always  associated 
with  form,  and  seldom  appeared  in  large  masses  of  color;  if  they  did 
the  color  was  of  very  delicate  tone.  I  was  struck  not  only  by  the  bril- 
liancy, delicacy  and  variety  of  the  colors,  but  by  the  great  variety  and 
loveliness  of  texture  which  they  presented — fibrous,  waxen,  polished, 
dull,  glowing,  veined,  semi-transparent,  etc.  The  glowing  (jewel-like) 
and  the  fibrous  (insect- wing)  textures  were  perhaps  the  most  prevalent. 
Although  the  effects  were  novel,  they  often  vaguely  recalled  known 
objects — exquisite  porcelain,  elaborate  sweetmeats,  Maori  architecture, 
Moorish  windows.  But  in  all  these  cases  the  objects  grew  and  changed 
beneath  my  gaze  without  any  reference  to  the  characteristics  of  those 
real  things  of  which  they  vaguely  reminded  me.  I  tried  to  influence 
their  course  but  with  very  little  success.  It  seemed  that  colors  could 
to  some  extent  be  called  forth  but  I  could  not  evoke  the  simplest  image 
by  an  act  of  will. 

"  On  the  whole,  if  I  had  to  describe  the  visions  in  one  word,  I  should 
say  that  they  were  living  arabesques.  There  was  generally  a  certain 
incomplete  tendency  to  symmetry,  the  effect  being  somewhat  as  if  the 
underlying  mechanism  consisted  of  a  large  number  of  polished  facets 
acting  as  mirrors.  It  constantly  happened  that  the  same  image  was 
repeated  over  a  large  part  of  the  field,  though  this  holds  good  mainly  of 
the  forms,  for  in  the  colors  there  would  still  remain  all  sorts  of  delicious 
varieties.  Thus  at  a  moment  when  uniformly  jewelled  flowers  seemed 
to  be  springing  up  and  extending  all  over  the  field  of  vision,  the 
flowers  still  showed  every  variety  of  delicate  tone  and  tint. 

"Unlike  Weir  Mitchell,  who  could  not  see  the  visions  with  open 
eyes  even  in  the  darkest  room,  I  could  see  them  in  the  dark  with 
almost  equal  facility  when  my  eyes  were  open,  though  they  were  not 
of  equal  brilliancy.  After  observing  them  in  the  dark  for  some  hours, 
I  became  a  little  tired  of  them  and  turned  on  the  gas.  I  then  found 
that  I  was  able  to  study  a  new  aspect  of  these  visual  phenomena.  The 
gas  jet  (a  common  flickering  burner)  seemed  to  burn  with  great  bril- 
liance, sending  out  waves  of  light  which  expanded  and  contracted 
enormously.    I  was  even  more  impressed  by  the  shadows  which  were  in 


60  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

all  directions  heightened  by  flushes  of  red,  green  and  especially  violet. 
The  whole  place  became  vivid  and  beautiful  and  the  tone  and  texture 
of  the  whitewashed  but  not  very  white  ceiling  was  immensely  improved. 
The  difference  between  the  room  as  I  saw  it  then  and  the  appearance 
it  usually  presents  was  the  difference  one  may  often  observe  between 
the  picture  of  a  room  and  the  actual  room.  The  shadows  I  saw  were  the 
shadows  that  the  artist  put  in,  and  that  are  not  visible  in  the  actual 
object  under  ordinary  conditions  of  casual  inspection.  At  the  same  time 
shadows  chased  each  other  across  the  walls,  never  becoming  actual 
visions. 

"I  wished  to  ascertain  how  the  subdued  and  steady  electric  light 
could  influence  the  phenomena,  and  passed  into  the  next  room.  Here 
the  rich  shadows  which  were  evidently  largely  due  to  the  stimulus  of 
the  flickering  light  were  not  obtrusive.  But  I  observed  that  whatever  I 
gazed  at  seem  to  show  a  tendency  to  wave  or  pulsate.  If  I  looked  at  the 
matting  on  the  floor  it  showed  a  singular  richness  of  texture,  thick  and 
felted,  with  a  tendency  to  rise  in  little  waves.  These  effects  were 
apparently  due  to  the  play  of  heightened  shadows  on  the  outskirts  of 
the  visual  field.  In  the  same  way  a  closed  door  seemed  to  be  ajar,  from 
the  heightening  of  the  shadows  in  the  interspaces. 

"I  returned  to  bed  still  experiencing  the  same  phenomena  though 
in  a  less  degree,  and  now  for  the  first  time  there  was  a  tendency  for 
human  figures  to  appear,  fantastic  and  Chinese  in  character.  There 
were  vague  hallucinations  of  smell,  sometimes  distinct  recurrence  of  the 
freshly  prepared  mescal  infusion;  these  olfactory  impressions  were 
pleasurable,  I  think  because  they  involved  deep  inspirations,  and  thus 
relieved  the  respiratory  oppression. 

"At  3 :30  a.m.  I  felt  that  the  phenomena  were  diminishing  and  was 
able  to  settle  down  to  sleep.  When  I  awoke  two  hours  later,  after  a 
peaceful  and  dreamless  sleep,  there  was  a  slight  headache  and  the  visions 
were  still  present  with  closed  eyes,  though  they  were  now  in  somber 
colors,  brown  and  black.  I  slept  again  for  an  hour  or  so  and  rose  at 
the  usual  time  feeling  by  no  means  tired,  and  with  an  excellent  appetite ; 
except  for  a  slight  headache  which  passed  off  in  the  course  of  the 
morning,  I  felt  none  the  worse  but  rather  the  better  for  my  experiment. 
The  only  after-effect  was  a  slightly  hypersesthetic  vision  for  colored 
objects  (as  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment),  lasting  for  a  day  or  so, 
and  more  especially  noticeable  as  regards  blue,  so  that  a  familiar  notice- 
board  in  the  Strand  with  dark-blue  background  was  much  more  con- 
spicuous and  intensely  blue  than  usual." 

IV. 

The  experiment  just  described  may  be  regarded  as  fairly  typical  of 
the  effects  of  mescal  in  an  ordinarily  healthy  subject,  so  far  as  my 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.  61 

observations  extend.  There  are,  however,  very  wide  individual  varia- 
tions in  the  effects  of  the  drug,  as  have  been  made  clear  by  subsequent 
experiments  which  I  have  made  on  other  persons.  It  may,  therefore, 
be  of  interest  to  present  another  experiment  for  the  sake  of  comparison. 
In  this  case  the  subject  was  not  under  my  own  immediate  observation; 
I  should  not  myself,  indeed,  have  given  him  mescal  at  all,  knowing  that 
in  such  a  case  the  experience  would  certainly  not  be  altogether  pleasant. 
The  subject  was  an  art-student,  26  years  of  age  and  6  feet  in  height,  a 
Highlander  on  the  father's  side,  and  a  Lowlander  on  the  mother's,  pre- 
senting the  type  of  the  red-haired,  beak-nosed  Highlander.  Though 
never  ill,  he  is  never  in  good  condition,  muscles  flabby,  skin  clammy, 
pulse  liable  to  be  weak  and  intermittent,  without  reserve  of  mental  or 
physical  energy.  He  had  severe  rheumatism  ten  years  previously.  He 
is  lazy  and  drinks  and  smokes  to  excess.  He  gives  the  impression  of  a 
man  of  splendid  physical  race,  who  has  somehow  not  reached  the  per- 
fection of  his  type.  Altogether,  so  far  as  mescal  is  concerned,  I  should 
regard  him  as  an  unlikely  subject  for  what  the  Indian  would  call  a 
'beautiful  intoxication.'  But  the  experiment  which  I  give  in  the  words 
of  the  very  good  observer  who  conducted  it  is  not  on  that  account  the 
less  interesting. 

"The  first  dose  was  administered,  after  a  fair  meal,  at  4:30  p.m. 
No  nausea  was  at  any  time  experienced.    Pulse  96. 

"5:00  p.m.     The  pulse  was  86. 

"5 :30  p.m.  The  pulse  was  62,  flaccid  and  compressible,  with  a  per- 
ceptible second  beat,  and  rather  intermittent.     The  subject  had  been 

lying  in  the  veranda  of  the  bungalow  since  4:30  p.m.    The  second  dose 
was  now  given. 

"5:45  p.m.  The  pulse  was  60,  and  remained  at  60,  except  during 
exertion,  for  the  next  twenty  hours.  The  pulsations  were  now  occurring 
in  a  strongly  staccato  fashion.  There  was  no  perceptible  second  beat, 
and  the  pulse  was  not  so  compressible. 

"6:00  p.m.  The  pulse  was  no  longer  staccato,  but  distinctly  inter- 
mittent. It  was,  however,  stronger,  and  but  little  affected  by  holding 
the  wrist  above  the  head. 

"6:30  p.m.  The  third  dose  was  given  at  6:30,  and  the  subject 
came  indoors,  and  was  wrapped  up  in  a  chair  facing  the  open  door,  and 
looking  out  to  sea.  A  deep  sudden  breath  now  caused  a  marked 
acceleration  in  the  heart's  action,  and  rising  from  a  lying  to  a  sitting 
posture  sent  up  the  pulse  from  60  to  80,  for  a  space  of  ten  seconds  or  so. 

"6:45  p.m.  A  feeling,  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant,  of  general 
lassitude  and  indifference,  and  a  slight  sensation  of  rigidity  in  the  backs 
of  the  fingers  when  extended.  The  same  feeling  was  present  in  a  less 
degree  all  over  the  body,  giving  the  subject  the  impression  that  the  motor 
nerves  were  becoming  partially  paralyzed.  Otherwise  the  subject  was 
perfectly  comfortable,  though  somewhat  weak  and  lethargic. 


62  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

"7:00  p.m.  The  pulse  was  alarmingly  intermittent.  There  was 
often  a  pause  of  two  seconds  between  beats.  However,  the  subject  was 
quite  unaware  of  the  fact,  and  perfectly  comfortable. 

"8:00  p.m.  The  subject  complained  of  difficulty  in  breathing,  as 
though  a  tight  bandage  were  tied  over  the  left  side.  The  pulse  was  now 
almost,  and  sometimes  quite,  imperceptible.  The  arms  became  weak; 
in  a  few  minutes  they  became  absolutely  paralyzed.  The  subject  began 
to  be  a  little  scared.  However,  in  about  ten  minutes  the  loss  of  power 
passed  away,  and  he  became  perfectly  comfortable,  though  disinclined 
to  move  a  finger. 

"8:45  p.m.  The  sea  suddenly  turned  purple  and  tilted  up  to  the 
eaves  of  the  veranda,  and  instantly  regained  its  normal  aspect.  The 
victim  was  not  particularly  excited  at  this  sight;  indeed,  throughout 
the  experiment  I  was  struck  by  the  very  matter-of-fact  way  in  which  he 
received  the  various  visions,  I  myself  being  far  more  keenly  interested 
in  them.  The  legs  now  became  partially  paralyzed  for  a  few  minutes. 
There  was  no  other  symptom  whatever  till  8 :45  p.m.,  when  very 
indefinite  stationary  spots  of  purple  and  blue-green  were  seen  on  the 
beach  at  a  distance  of  fifteen  or  twenty  feet.  They  gradually  assumed 
the  shape  of  rather  conventionalized  thistle-heads,  some  purple  and 
some  emerald.  For  a  moment  the  shingle  beach  appeared  to  be  turn- 
ing into  a  bed  of  flowers,  but  they  quickly  faded  away.  When  I  went 
out  and  struck  a  match  before  the  bungalow  the  flowers  suddenly 
reappeared.  Whenever  a  match  was  struck  they  became  more  vivid. 
It  was  now  twilight  and  when  the  flowers  appeared  the  beach  became 
brighter. 

"I  now  lit  the  lamp  and  placed  it  by  the  subject.  The  thistles  had 
faded  away.  Suddenly  the  sea — which  was  gray — turned  green,  and 
became  covered  with  symmetrically  arranged  spots  of  violet,  which 
rotated  on  their  axes  and  passed  off  to  the  right.  There  were  three 
bathing-machines  half  way  down  the  shingle,  and  the  spots  passed 
behind  them. 

"I  now  turned  down  the  lamp.  The  shingle  instantly  became  a  bed 
of  blue  flowers ;  some  unknown  little  plant  which  produced  a  short  spire 
of  blue  blossoms,  and  a  few  green  blades.  I  asked  the  subject  to  direct 
me  to  one  spire  which  was  higher  than  the  others,  and  trod  on  it,  when 
il  disappeared.    I  turned  up  the  lamp ;  the  flowers  disappeared. 

"The  subject  now  saw  a  large  cutter  about  half  a  mile  from  shore, 
which  sailed  rapidly  along  and  passed  behind  the  bathing  machines. 
He  made  a  sketch  of  it  as  it  approached,  to  give  me  the  relative  pro- 
portions of  the  cutter  and  the  machines,  and  then  described  it  as  close 
in.  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  was  a  small  cutter  about  a  mile  off  shore, 
and  about  one  tenth  the  size  of  his  sketch. 

"9:25  p.m.     On  the  beach,  where  the  flowers  had  been  seen  before, 


MESCAL:   A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.         63 

a  head  like  the  Cheshire  Cat  appeared.  It  was  vague,  except  for  the 
smile.  Presently  it  developed  a  body  and  legs,  and  became  a  lynx,  with 
nc  feet,  and  eyes  like  glowing  opals.  It  danced  gravely  round  in  a 
circle.  Having  inquired  as  to  its  exact  position,  I  went  out  and  kicked 
it.    It  vanished. 

"The  subject  now  saw,  in  the  wake  of  the  moon,  which  was  now 
shining  brightly,  a  boat  containing  two  men  fishing,  with  a  light.  I 
could  see  the  men  only  with  the  telescope.  Handing  the  subject  the 
telescope,  he  said  that  he  saw  the  boat  three  times  as  large  without  the 
glass.  He  now  came  out  and  leaned  on  the  rail  of  the  veranda.  A 
cloud  over  the  moon  appeared  to  him  an  oared  galley,  five  times  the 
diameter  of  the  moon.  The  oars  were  moving  at  the  rate  of  30 
strokes  to  the  minute. 

"10:15  p.m.  The  galley  having  disappeared,  the  subject  sat  down 
inside  the  door  again.  A  creature  with  a  pointed  nose  and  sharp  ears 
popped  its  head  constantly  round  the  corner  of  the  door.  As  the  pulse 
was  again  imperceptible  I  administered  a  pint  of  strong  coffee. 

"10:45  p.m.  A  beautiful  miniature  Eastern  city  appeared,  on  the 
beach  about  twelve  feet  away.  It  was  lit,  apparently,  by  the  sun ;  there 
were  walls,  citadels,  mosques,  minarets,  houses,  etc.,  all  white,  inter- 
spersed with  green  foliage.  It  was  very  compact,  standing  high  above 
the  walls,  and  about  six  feet  in  diameter.  After  some  five  or  ten  minutes 
an  enormous  tortoise,  with  a  Greek  key  pattern  in  metal  round  the 
periphery  of  the  carapace,  walked  against  the  city  and  right  through  it 
when  it  disappeared,  and  the  tortoise  with  it. 

"Shortly  afterwards  a  vast  horde  of  little  black  woolly  animals, 
rather  like  black  guinea-pigs  with  astrachan  coats  and  glow-worms  for 
eyes,  poured  up  over  the  pebble  ridge  from  the  sea,  and  disported  them- 
selves over  the  beach,  which  was  quite  covered  with  them.  After 
pouring  up  for  a  minute  or  two  they  vanished  into  thin  air.  Their 
motion  was  like  that  of  a  swarm  of  maggots  discovered  in  turning  over 
a  dead  animal.  This  was  the  last  vision.  The  subject  expressed  a  desire 
for  a  very  large  meal,  ate  a  small  one,  went  to  bed,  immediately  slept  a 
dreamless  sleep,  and  was  for  two  days  very  languid  and  weak,  with  a 
feeble  and  depressed  pulse,  and  occasional  palpitation.  He  will  on  no 
account  try  the  experiment  again. 

"The  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  visions  was  that  they  all  had 
'a  local  habitation  and  a  name.'  They  all  appeared  out  of  doors,  most 
of  them  on  the  ground  at  a  distance  of  twelve  feet  or  so;  they  did  not 
move  when  the  head  or  eyes  were  turned,  but  kept  exactly  in  their  place. 
The  visions  were  seen  with  either  eye  indifferently ;  with  the  eyes  closed 
nothing  was  seen.  Mechanical  pressure  on  the  eye-balls  had  no  effect. 
At  one  period  of  the  experiment  the  muscles  of  the  eyes  became  relaxed, 
so  that  the  subject  saw  near  objects  slightly  doubled." 


64  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

V. 

It  may  be  seen  from  the  two  experiments  which  I  have  described  in 
some  fullness  that,  in  general  character,  the  physical  and  psychic  mani- 
festations of  mescal  somewhat  recall  those  produced  by  haschisch,  the 
most  famous  and  typical  of  the  'artificial  Paradises'  which  man  has 
found  for  himself.  No  other  drug,  indeed,  can  be  said  to  approach  so 
nearly  to  haschisch  in  its  effects.  They  are  alike  in  the  variability  of 
their  effects  on  different  individuals  and  in  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
a  reliable  preparation.*  They  both  slow  the  heart,  tending  in  some 
cases  to  produce  intermittence,  and  both  affect  the  respiration.  They 
both  produce  muscular  weakness  and  incoordination,  exaggerate  the 
knee-jerk  and  dilate  the  pupils.  They  both,  moreover,  possess  the  same 
vision-producing  properties.  I  cannot  speak  from  personal  experience 
on  this  point,  but  one  of  my  subjects,  a  poet  who  has  paid  much  atten- 
tion to  the  methods  of  generating  visions,  assures  me  that  in  his 
experience  the  virtues  of  the  two  drugs  are  about  equal  and  that  he  has 
no  preference  for  haschisch  over  mescal. 

While  there  are  thus  marked  and  fundamental  resemblances  between 
mescal  and  haschisch,  there  also  appear  to  be  numerous  points  of  differ- 
ence. On  the  whole  it  may  be  said  that  mescal  has  a  more  restricted,  a 
less  generalized  action  than  haschisch.  In  some  of  the  early  accounts 
of  haschisch,  which  may  now  almost  be  said  to  be  classic,  great  stress 
was  laid  on  its  exuberant  motor  manifestations,  the  uncontrollable 
antics,  and  the  loss  of  all  sense  of  time.  These  manifestations  are  much 
less  conspicuous,  and  often  do  not  appear  at  all,  in  the  later  accounts 
cf  haschisch,  so  that  they  are  evidently  not  essential. 

Under  mescal,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe,  they  seldom 
appear.  Mescal  may  at  one  stage  produce  a  sense  of  well-being,  vigor 
and  intellectual  lucidity,  but  there  is  no  actual  motor  exhilaration,  or 
loss  of  self-control,  usually  no  mental  failure  at  any  point,  except  that 
when  the  influence  is  strongest  attention  may  be  impaired,  so  that  one 
realizes  when  under  mescal  how  much  attention  is  a  matter  of  muscular 
coordination.  The  action  of  mescal  on  the  motor  system  is  to  depress, 
so  that  there  is  a  tendency  to  tremulousness  of  the  muscles  which  feel 
weak,  and  it  seems  to  the  subject  that  he  must  exert  more  than  usual  care 


*  Haschisch  is  said  to  vary  in  accordance  with  season,  as  well  as  with  the 
district  in  which  the  hemp  is  obtained.  The  Indians  believe  that  mescal  is 
only  active  at  one  season  of  the  year.  I  found  one  supply  that  reached  me  to 
be  almost  or  quite  inert,  and  it  is  possible  that  it  was  gathered  out  of  season. 

f  The  resemblances  between  haschisch  and  mescal  come  out  most  clearly  in 
the  latest  and  most  reliable  investigations,  see,  e.  g.,  W.  E.  Dixon,  '  The 
Pharmacology  of  Cannabis  Indica,'  British  Medical  Journal,  November  11,  1899, 
and  E.  B.  Delabarre,  '  Report  on  the  Effects  of  Cannabis  Indica,'  Psychological 
Revieiv,  March,  1899.  The  latter  is  only  a  brief  summary,  but  Professor  Dela- 
barre informs  me  that  he  hopes  to  publish  a  full  account  of  his  investigations. 


MESCAL:   A    STUDY    OF   A    DIVINE    PLANT.  65 

to  prevent  himself  from  staggering  and  more  than  usual  energy  to  per- 
form even  the  simplest  action.  This  may  affect  space-relations  and  one 
of  my  subjects  found  that  in  lifting  a  cup  to  his  lips  the  distance 
traversed  seemed  very  much  more  than  usual;  the  same  subject  found 
that  his  ideas  of  time  seemed  to  be  disturbed,  but  on  testing  him  with 
the  watch  his  estimates  were  found  to  be  fairly  accurate. 

The  positive  and  active  manifestations  of  mescal  are  always  mainly 
if  not  entirely  on  the  sensory  side,  and  the  motor  weakness  and  sense  of 
lassitude  which  is  often  present  only  throw  the  subject  of  mescal 
intoxication  more  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  the  waves  of  unfamiliar 
sensory  impetus  which  strike  him  from  every  side.  Every  sense  is 
affected:  apart  from  the  various  visionary  influences,  sounds  become 
unfamiliar  and  abnormally  acute,  the  sense  of  smell  is  stimulated  or 
olfactory  hallucinations  may  occur,  the  simplest  food  seems  to  possess 
an  added  relish,  while  there  are  vague  skin  sensations,  and  to  the  sense 
of  touch  the  body  seems  as  unfamiliar  as  everything  else  has  become. 
I  have  elsewhere  remarked,  in  illustration  of  the  peculiar  effects  of  this 
drug,  that  mescal  seems  to  introduce  us  into  the  world  in  which 
Wordsworth  lived  or  sought  to  live.  The  'trailing  clouds  of  glory/  the 
tendency  to  invest  the  very  simplest  things  with  an  atmosphere  of 
beauty,  a  'light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land/  the  new  vision  of  even 
'the  simplest  flower  that  blows/  all  the  special  traits  of  Wordsworth's 
peculiar  poetic  vision  correspond  as  exactly  as  possible  to  the  actual  and 
effortless  experiences  of  the  subject  of  mescal. 

It  should  be  added  that  a  sense  of  well-being  is  not  an  essential  part 
of  these  sensory  manifestations.  In  this  respect  mescal  is  entirely 
unlike  those  drugs  of  which  alcohol  is  the  supreme  type.  Under  the 
influence  of  a  moderate  dose  of  alcohol  the  specific  senses  are  not 
obviously  affected  at  all,  but  there  is  a  vague  and  massive  consciousness 
of  emotional  well-being,  a  sense  of  satisfaction  tending  to  a  conviction 
that  'all's  well  with  the  world.'  Alcohol  has  a  dulling  influence  on 
sensory  activity  and  on  the  intellectual  centers;  and  it  may  indeed  be 
said  that  for  the  brain-worker  whatever  value  the  moderate  use  of 
alcohol  may  possess  chiefly  lies  in  the  fact  that  after  brain-work  is  over 
it  helps  to  soothe  undue  brain-activity.  Mescal,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
not  mainly  emotional  in  its  effects  but  mainly  sensory  and  it  leaves  the 
intellect  almost  unimpaired  even  in  large  doses.  It  is  true  that  at  one 
stage  of  mescal  intoxication,  and  more  especially  in  quite  healthy 
persons,  there  is  a  feeling  of  well-being,  and  even  of  beatitude,  accom- 
panied by  an  illusory  sense  of  quite  unusual  intellectual  activity;  but 
there  is  no  stage  of  maudlin  emotionality;  on  the  whole  there  is  a 
condition  of  fairly  unimpaired  and  alert  intellect,  untiringly  absorbed 
in  the  contemplation  of  the  strange  world  of  new  sensory  phenomena 

into  which  the  subject  has  been  introduced. 
vol.  lxi. — 5. 


66  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

These  phenomena  are  above  all  visual,  and  the  intellectual  character 
of  mescal  intoxication  as  compared  with  perhaps  any  other  intoxication, 
seems  connected  with  the  fact  that  it  is  the  most  intellectual  of  the 
senses  that  is  chiefly  involved.  The  visual  effects  of  mescal  may  be  of 
very  various  character,  largely  depending  on  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the 
subject  as  well  as  on  the  degree  of  the  intoxication.  They  vary  from 
an  exaggeration  of  the  normal  phenomena,  producing  a  heightened  play 
of  light  and  shade  and  color,  to  visions  seen  on  the  curtain  of  the  eye- 
lid with  closed  eyes  and  with  open  eyes  in  the  dark,  up  to  actual  localized 
hallucinations  seen  in  broad  daylight.  It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  cerebral  centers  of  vision  are  affected  under  mescal,  and  the 
occipital  headache  which  occasionally  follows  supports  such  an  assump- 
tion; a  merely  peripheral  stimulation  could  scarcely  suffice  to  account 
for  such  an  crgy  of  vision.  But  at  the  same  time  I  am  convinced  that 
the  conditions  produced  in  the  eye  itself  are  important  factors  in  the 
production  of  the  phenomena.  Not  only  must  we  suppose  that  the 
retina,  like  all  the  sensory  apparatus,  has  become  hyperaesthetic,  but  the 
pupils  are  dilated,  so  widely  dilated  in  one  of  my  subjects  that  there 
was  extreme  photophobia.  It  is  probably  not  without  significance  that 
in  the  other  chief  vision-producing  drugs,  such  as  haschisch  and  bella- 
donna, the  pupils  are  also  dilated.  It  is  evident  that  light  can  penetrate 
into  the  chamber  of  the  eye  with  much  more  ease  than  usual.  The 
Kiowa  Indians  sit  round  a  fire  during  the  nights  on  which  the  mescal 
rites  are  performed  and  I  have  found  that  the  flicker  of  fire-light  acting 
through  the  closed  eyelids  furnishes  a  very  favorable  condition  for 
seeing  the  visions  to  advantage. 

There  is  another  characteristic  of  a  large  number  of  these  visions 
(as  indeed  of  many  visions  otherwise  produced)  which,  it  would  seem, 
we  must  explain  through  peculiarities  of  the  eye.  I  refer  to  what  I  have 
termed  their  kaleidoscopic  character,  the  tendency  to  symmetrical  group- 
ing in  the  visual  field  of  objects  similar  in  shape,  and  harmonious, 
though  not  necessarily  similar,  in  color,  so  that  a  kind  of  vision  is  pro- 
duced such  as  we  might  attribute  to  an  animal  with  faceted  eyes.  We 
might  account  for  such  a  phenomenon  by  means  of  that  irregular 
astigmatism,  found  more  or  less  in  normal  eyes,  which  has  been 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  crystalline  lens  is  composed  of  many 
sections  connected  by  radial  sutures,  or,  more  plausibly,  with  Shelford 
Bi dwell,  who  has  made  some  interesting  experiments  on  this  point,  to 
the  light  passing  through  the  coarse-meshed  tissues  of  the  eyes.*  With 
perhaps  still  greater  probability  we  might  adopt  the  suggestion  of  Zehen- 
derf  who  in  dealing  with  subjective  visual  perceptions  would  explain 
the  strikingly  regular  polygonal  figures  which  arise  under  various  con- 

*  Shelford  Bidwell,  '  Multiple  Vision,'  Nature,  April  13,  1899. 
t  Klinische  Monatsilatt  fur  Augenheilkunde,  November,  1895. 


MESCAL:   A    STUDY    OF   A    DIVINE    PLANT.         67 

ditions  to  the  movements  and  displacements  of  retinal  pigment  grains  in 
course  of  chemical  decomposition. 

There  is  another  visual  phenomenon  caused  by  mescal,  to  which  my 
attention  was  particularly  attracted,  since  it  appears  to  have  been  little 
noticed  by  previous  observers,  and  which  is  of  considerable  interest 
because  it  may  be  brought  into  line  with  various  phenomena  which 
occur  without  the  intervention  of  drugs.  I  refer  to  the  play  of 
shadowy  color,  and  more  especially  the  violet  halos  which  are  seen  to 
play  around  and  over  objects  and  constitute,  in  my  own  case  at  all 
events,  the  earliest  group  of  color  phenomena  seen  under  mescal.  I 
have  already  described  my  impressions  of  this  effect,  and  one  of  my 
subjects  who  saw  the  same  phenomenon,  describes  it  as  'a  violet  fringe, 
surrounding  objects  and  tending  to  become  flower-like.'  It  has  been 
observed  by  many  when  passing  over  snow-covered  regions,  and  espe- 
cially by  Alpine  climbers,  that  moving  objects,  and  more  espe- 
cially their  own  hands  or  garments,  show  a  violet  border.*  Then  we 
have  the  tendency  to  color  vision  (erythropsia  or  perhaps  more  strictly, 
or  more  usually,  violet  vision)  to  which  the  eye  becomes  liable  after 
surgical  removal  of  the  crystalline  lens.  Once  more  there  are  the  colors 
produced  by  the  much  discussed  colorless  'spectrum  top.'  It  seems  to 
me  that  all  these  phenomena,  and  others  that  could  be  named,  must  be 
regarded  as  more  or  less  allied.  The  first  explanation  offered  for  the 
earliest  of  them  to  be  noted  was  that  they  are  due  to  over-stimulation 
and  exhaustion  of  the  eye.  Later  inquirers  have  sought  after  a  more 
precise  mechanism  for  the  phenomenon.  Thus  Dobrowolski  in  1887, 
dealing  with  the  erythropsia  often  occurring  after  removal  of  the  lens, 
argues  that  a  necessary  condition  is  the  dilatation  of  pupil  produced  by 
atropine,  and  that  the  color  vision  is  really  of  the  nature  of  a  negative 
after-image  of  the  rays  that  strike  the  eye.  Fuchs,  in  1896,  who  has 
dealt  in  an  interesting  manner  with  the  erythropsia  experienced  on 
climbing  snow-covered  mountains  (regarded  by  him  as  strictly  a  purple 
vision)  finds  that  Dobrowolski's  explanation  is  inadequate,  and,  while 
contenting  himself  with  the  theory  of  stimulation  and  fatigue  for  some 
of  the  phenomena,  believes  that  the  real  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  a 
temporary  visibility  of  the  visual  purple  of  the  retina.  Whatever  the 
value  of  this  explanation  may  be  as  applied  to  the  whole  group  of 
phenomena,  Fuchs  more  than  any  one  helped  to  bring  color-visions  of 
this  kind  from  the  sphere  of  the  pathological  into  the  sphere  of  the 
normal.  More  recently  still,  Shelford  Bidwell  in  1897,  when  making 
some  simple  but  ingenious  experiments  with  the  object  of  discovering 
the  mechanism  of  the  spectrum  top,  found  that  when  a  dark  patch  is 

*  This  phenomenon  was  discussed  in  Nature,  during  May,  1897,  some  of 
those  who  described  it  assuming  without  question  that  it  was  an  objective 
phenomenon. 


68  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

suddenly  formed  upon  a  bright  ground  the  patch  appears  to  be  momen- 
tarily surrounded  by  a  blue  border,  and  he  accounts  for  this  by  the 
theory  of  a  sympathetic  affection  of  the  red  nerve  fiber;  when  the  light 
is  suddenly  cut  off  from  a  patch  in  a  bright  field,  there  occurs  an 
insensitive  reaction  in  the  red  fibers  just  outside  the  darkened  patch,  in 
virtue  of  which  they  cease  for  a  short  time  to  respond  to  the  luminous 
stimulus,  in  sympathy  with  those  inside  the  patch.  The  green  and 
violet  fibers,  by  continuing  to  respond  uninterruptedly,  give  rise  to  the 
sensation  of  a  blue  border.  Where  highly  competent  experts  fail  to 
agree  it  would  be  rash  to  state  any  definite  conclusions.  It  is  difficult, 
however,  not  to  believe  that,  whatever  the  precise  retinal  process  may 
be,  over- stimulation  and  fatigue  certainly  have  very  much  to  do  in 
calling  it  into  action.  Associated  with  the  violet  halo,  as  we  have 
found,  there  is  a  tendency  under  mescal,  especially  by  the  aid  of  a  bright 
flickering  light,  for  shadows  generally  to  be  variously  colored,  more 
especially  (as  in  erythropsia  and  allied  conditions)  towards  the  out- 
skirts of  the  visual  field.  Any  one  who  will  sit  for  a  few  minutes  with 
his  eyes  directed  on  a  sheet  of  white  paper  illuminated  by  bright 
sunlight  will  soon  begin  to  see  on  a  small  scale  a  faint  reproduction  of 
the  colored  shadows  seen  under  the  influence  of  mescal.  Here  clearly 
we  have  a  fatigue  phenomenon  due  to  over-stimulation  by  bright  light, 
and  precisely  analogous  to  the  after-images  produced  by  looking  at 
any  excessively  bright  object.  Under  mescal  we  have  a  similar  effect 
produced,  not  through  the  stimulation  of  unusually  bright  light,  but 
by  the  unusually  hypersesthetic  condition  of  the  visual  apparatus,  due  in 
part  to  the  dilatation  of  the  pupil  and  in  part  to  the  effect  of  mescal  on 
the  retina. 

There  is  one  other  effect  of  this  fascinating  drug  to  which  attention 
may  finally  be  called.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  under  mescal  all  the 
peripheral  sense  organs  become  highly  irritable  or  hypersesthetic.  Not 
only  is  this  so,  but  they  are  brought  in  a  quite  unusual  degree  into 
sympathy  with  each  other.  I  found  that  casual  stimulation  of  the  skin 
at  once  heightened  the  brilliancy  of  the  visions,  or  produced  an  impres- 
sion of  sound.  One  of  my  subjects,  an  artist,  had  a  curious  sensation 
of  tasting  colors,  and  another  found  that  music  had  a  delightful 
influence  over  the  visual  effects.  This,  and  the  fact  that  the  Indians 
keep  up  a  continual  beating  of  drums  during  the  time  they  are  under 
mescal,  led  me  to  plan  a  further  experiment  on  myself  with  mescal. 
I  arranged  that  when  the  stream  of  visions  was  in  full  force  a  friend 
should  play  to  me  on  the  piano  various  pieces  of  a  more  or  less 
progressive  character  which  were  unknown  to  me,  at  all  events  by  name. 
I  found  that  these  pieces,  more  especially  those  which  were  somewhat 
uniform  and  monotonous,  not  only  distinctly  stimulated  the  visions, 
but  influenced  their  character;  and  in  about  half  the  tests  there  was  a- 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF   A    DIVINE    PLANT.         69 

real  resemblance,  sometimes  in  a  striking  manner,  between  the  prevail- 
ing nature  of  the  visions  and  the  name  of  the  piece.  This  was  espe- 
cially the  case  as  regards  Schumann's  music.  It  would  be  worth  while 
to  carry  out  further  experiments  along  this  line,  and  on  a  variety  of 
people,  preferably  non-musical  people.  It  may  be  added  that  under 
some  circumstances  music  itself  evokes  a  train  of  visual  imagery. 
Heine  has  somewhere  described  in  detail  the  imagery  called  up  when 
listening  to  Berlioz's  music,  and  in  'Florentine  Nights'  he  describes,  in 
the  person  of  his  hero,  the  elaborate  imagery  evoked  on  hearing 
Paganini  play,  and  remarks:  "You  know  my  second  sight,  my  gift 
of  seeing  at  each  tone  a  figure  equivalent  to  the  sound,  and  so  Paganini 
with  each  stroke  of  his  bow  brought  visible  forms  and  situations  before 
my  eyes;  he  told  me  in  melodious  hieroglyphics  all  kinds  of  brilliant 
tales ;  he,  as  it  were,  made  a  magic  lantern  play  its  colored  antics  before 
me,  he  himself  being  the  chief  actor."  It  would  seem  that  in  Heine's 
case  music  produced  actual  visual  imagery,  as  under  the  influence  of 
mescal.  In  this  connection  I  may  recall  an  account  of  visual  imagery, 
as  seen  at  a  concert,  recorded  by  Dr.  Robert  MacDougall.* 

One  is  tempted  to  ask  by  what  process  we  should  conceive  to  our- 
selves that  the  action  of  mescal  works  on  the  organism.  I  think  it  is 
not  impossible  to  hazard  such  an  explanation,  provided  that  we  avoid 
the  risks  attending  undue  precision  in  our  explanations.  We  are 
justified,  it  seems  to  me,  in  supposing  that  mescal  effects  its  peculiar 
actions  by  producing  a  kind  of  violent  but  temporary  neurasthenia  and 
cerebrasthenia.  In  other  words,  it  rapidly  overstimulates  and  exhausts 
the  nervous  and  cerebral  apparatus,  more  especially  on  the  sensory  side. 
It  is  true  that  such  an  explanation  might  be  said  to  apply  to  the  action 
of  many  drugs,  including  all  those  that  are  commonly  called  stimulants. 
The  day  has  gone  by  when  it  could  be  supposed  that  a  stimulant  put 
anything  into  the  system.  It  acts  not  by  putting  energy  into  the  system 
but  by  taking  it  out,  and  so  rapidly  producing  a  state  of  fatigue.  The 
careful  experiments  of  Fere  with  the  ergograph  have  lately  shown  that 
all  sorts  of  sensory  stimulants,  acting  on  various  senses  and  not  neces- 
sarily involving  the  use  of  drugs,  produce  an  immediate  increase  in  the 
output  of  muscular  work,  but  that  no  sensory  stimulant  of  any  kind 
will  enable  us  to  do  a  total  amount  of  work  equal  to  that  we  can  achieve 
without  stimulants,  because  the  sudden  rise  of  output  is  more  than 
compensated  by  the  subsequent  fall.  So  that  by  the  use  of  stimulants, 
so  far  as  output  of  work  is  concerned,  we  not  only  draw  on  our  capital, 

*'Music  Imagery,'  Psychological  Review,  September,  1898.  The  cases  in 
which  some  definite  appearance  is  regularly  associated  with  the  sound  of  each 
instrument  belong  to  an  allied  though  different  class;  a  case  of  this  kind  is 
recorded  in  "Nature,  March  6,  1890.  Here,  we  approach  the  best  known  group 
of  '  secondary  sensations.' 


7o  POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY. 

we  actually  dissipate  and  waste  it.  But  the  results  of  this  kind  of 
fatigue  do  not  usually  produce  any  condition  comparable  with 
neurasthenia;  they  do  not,  for  instance,  produce  visions.  In  neuras- 
thenic states  there  is,  however,  a  tendency  to  visionary  effects — colored 
vision,  intolerance  of  light,  photopsiae,  persistence  of  retinal  impres- 
sions, etc. — and,  moreover,  in  all  temporary  conditions  of  nervous 
fatigue  in  otherwise  fairly  healthy  people  the  same  tendency  to  abnormal 
color  effects  with  open  eyes,  and  vague  visions  with  closed  eyes,  is  apt  to 
show  itself.  I  find  that  some  persons,  when  very  tired,  see  shadows  as 
unusually  violet,  while  kaleidoscopic  visions  and  processions  of  figures 
and  faces  are  also  seen  with  closed  eyes  after  fatiguing  days.  I  have 
myself  noted  effects  faintly  recalling  those  produced  by  mescal  after 
periods  of  unusual  brain  activity.  On  the  border-land  between  sleep- 
ing and  waking  color- visions  are  also  sometimes  seen,  and  Mrs.  Christine 
Ladd  Franklin  has  stated  that  in  falling  asleep  over  a  book  she  sees 
colored  shadows,  especially  violet,  floating  over  the  page.  It  is  note- 
worthy, further,  that  in  various  conditions  of  abnormal  color-vision 
fatigue  increases  the  brilliancy  of  the  colors.  The  same  tendency  rules 
the  association  between  music  and  visions.  Heine  was  a  somewhat 
neurotic  subject  who  constantly  complained  of  very  severe  headaches, 
and  Mr.  MacDougall,  in  describing  the  physical  conditions  under  which 
he  finds  that  visual  imagery  is  liable  to  occur,  describes  a  state  approach- 
ing that  produced  by  mescal:  "In  the  earlier  stages  of  fatigue,  before 
the  final  condition  has  been  approached,  a  period  of  cerebral  excitement 
occurs,  often  accompanied  by  slight  frontal  headache,  in  which  my 
mental  imagery  becomes  more  varied  and  concrete  than  normal.  I  feel 
an  unusual  brilliancy  and  fertility  of  suggestion;  my  mental  scenery 
becomes  less  schematic  and  algebraic;  comparisons  and  illustrations 
suggest  themselves  on  every  hand ;  thought  proceeds  by  object  images." 
It  may  be  pointed  out  that  neurasthenia  is  widely  regarded  as  a  condi- 
tion of  depression  with  irritability  of  the  higher  cerebral  centers. 
Binswanger,  indeed,  in  his  book  on  the  pathology  of  neurasthenia,  con- 
siders the  parallel  between  fatigue  and  neurasthenia  as  so  close  that  he 
is  inclined  to  regard  the  latter  as  nothing  else  than  a  prolonged  con- 
dition of  over-fatigue.  In  mescal  intoxication  we  may  be  said  to  have 
a  neurasthenia  which  is  very  limited,  but  is  very  sudden  and  swift.  The 
sensorial  apparatus  is  allowed  to  run  violently  down,  and  in  healthy 
persons  the  accompanying  acute  metabolic  activity  produces  the  pleasur- 
able feelings  which  usually  accompany  nervous  activity.  It  is  perhaps 
due  to  the  swiftness  of  this  process,  and  also  to  the  good  physical  condi- 
tion of  the  subject,  that  no  unpleasant  after-effects  are  usually  ex- 
perienced. I  have  noticed  that  the  pleasant  or  unpleasant  effects  and 
after-effects  of  mescal  may  be  quite  accurately  foretold  from  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  subject's  general  health,  and  that  the  better  his  general 


MESCAL:    A    STUDY    OF    A    DIVINE    PLANT.  7* 

condition  the  less  likely  is  he  to  experience  any  unpleasant  results  from 
taking  mescal. 

It  was  inevitable  that  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  drag  mescal  into 
the  already  overcrowded  field  of  therapeutical  agents.  Curiously 
enough,  the  first  affection  which  it  was  used  to  treat  was  neurasthenia, 
and  the  results  were  said  to  be  good,  but  nothing  further  has  been  heard 
of  it.  In  various  quarters  it  has  been  suggested  for  use  in  insanity,  and 
at  Carmarthen  Asylum  Dr.  Goodall,  as  he  informs  me,  has  made  many 
trials  with  it,  on  melancholic  and  stuporose  patients,  pushing  the  drug 
eventually  in  large  doses,  but  beyond  dilatation  of  pupils  and  rapidity 
of  heart  action,  the  results  were  nil.  I  have  myself  never  felt  hopeful 
about  mescal  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  and  though  it  is  possible  that  of 
the  various  alkaloids  obtained  from  it  some  may  be  found  useful,  it  is 
not  easy  to  see  in  what  diseased  conditions  the  crude  drug  itself  is 
indicated.  The  fact  that  its  best  results  are  obtained  in  perfectly 
healthy  individuals  would  alone  counter-indicate  its  use  as  a  remedial 
agent,  and  at  present  there  seems  no  excuse  whatever  for  thrusting  it 
into  the  pharmacopoeia. 

The  chief  interest  of  mescal  is  for  the  physiologist  and  the  psychol- 
ogist.* It  may  be  added  that  for  every  healthy  person  a  single 
experience,  at  all  events,  of  what  mescal  has  to  teach  would  be  an 
educational  advantage  of  no  little  value.  As  one  of  my  subjects,  who 
strongly  feels  this  educational  value  of  mescal  though  he  has  no  wish 
to  repeat  the  experience,  remarks :  "The  connection  between  the  normal 
condition  of  my  body  and  my  intelligence  had  broken — my  body  had 
become  in  a  measure  a  stranger  to  my  reason — so  that  on  reasserting 
itself  it  seemed,  with  reference  to  my  reason  which  had  remained  per- 
fectly sane  and  alert,  for  a  moment  sufficiently  unfamiliar  for  me  to 
become  conscious  of  its  individual  and  peculiar  character.  It  was  as 
if  I  had  unexpectedly  attained  an  objective  knowledge  of  my  own  per- 
sonality." Thus  it  is  that  the  Indians  who  raised  this  remarkable  plant 
to  divine  rank,  and  dedicated  to  it  a  cult,  have  in  some  measure  beer 
justified,  and  even  in  civilization  there  remains  some  place  for  the  rites 
of  mescal. 

