[23 



\ ' \ 



'I > 



'< ) 






Huntington Free Library 

Native American 
Collection 




CORNELL UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 



III ' ' 



r': f 



V'^'^ 






, ■''-■■■■I' 9i-C.: ! 












\ I 



-' h 



t: 



:,'/■ 



f-'. 






'X'^:^",%iHf$ 









'i ' 'h 



',:■/ 



urn :'■:'-. 









CpRNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



V~>> 



A 



r ■,' 



- -i.- 



■■(A- I ' ■' 




3 1924 097 625 895 






V^: 



i'* 



; 






:'a;^ 



ilit^'i 



i4 1"' 



,-i/:- 



,i' 



/'■) « 



( " Vi 






''■'' '%• 



/\\,:*^ 



1; 



I 



7 ^,\ rti. ,i:'4 .., 



"^ 



,\/'. 






'' .7-:,/ 






4 









■J" , 






/- >J 






?/ -/'• ;■'- ■: - ' '/ " 1. 



<^, i 






t>/ - 



T, '; / 



ay 




: '■^'' '' 


:'^->r ; '■ A 


^ '-' 


■'''7;? ' ,f ^''"'m'' 


1 




,1 '' 





'ii\ h' 



\ \-t. I 






. I '('. , 












; 









/■>, ■>; 









' w^' 



J, i 



\M 



i/W ' ^ "/ / ^ 



M, '> V !' ; 



A I \ 



J ^\y/ 



1 ' i 
( / < 






* 1 \ 



. ^ /\' 



^ -^ ] 






^ 'V>,^n^^^ 



■ 1, 



h' 



^ > 






4 \ 



r 



a> 



\' 



o , . . 



1, f 
\ 






k 






^- ) / 



) ^T 



. N ' ., 



~1 I' 



< ; ' 



{ -, ' I ( ^ _ 



ll / 



\ 



/ ' I ' 






1\ v^^ 



( ' ' 



^ ' \ 



I .'v^: 



I 



, \ 



\ 1 



\ 






r 1 



I 1 



y. rc 






1 



- / 






( 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/cletails/cu31924097625895 



P E^ ^T O T E 



HEARINGS 

BEFORE .V 

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS 

OF THE 

HOUSE OF EEPEESENTATIVES 



H. R. 2614 



TO AMEND SECTIONS 2139 AND 2140 OF THE REVISED 

STATUTES AND THE ACTS AMENDATORY THEREOF, 

AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES 




WASHINGTON 

GOVKKNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
1918 



P E Y T E 



Subcommittee of the Committee on Indian Aefaiks. 

House of Representatives, 
Thursday, February 21, 1918. 
The subcommittee, composed of Representatives Tillman, Has- 
tings, and Snyder, this day met, Hon. John N. Tillman presiding. 

Mr. Tillman. This is a hearing on H. R. 2614, of which the follow- 
ing is a copy : 

A BILL To amend sections twenty-one hundred and thirty-nine and twenty-one hundred 
and torty of the Revised Statutes and the acts amendatory thereof, and for other 
purposes. " ' 

Be it enacted by the (Senate ftud House of Representatives of the United 
States in Congress assembled. That sections twenty -one liuuclred and thirty-nine 
and twenty-one hundred and forty of the Revised Statutes and the acts amenda- 
tory thereof be amended to read as follows : 

" Section 1. That any person who shall sell, give away, dispose of, exchange, 
barter, or otherwise furnish any malt, fermented, spirituous, or vinous liquor, 
including beer, ale, and wine, tulapai or tiswln, or any ardent or other intoxi- 
cating liquor of any kind whatsoever, or any essence, extract, bitters, prepara- 
tion, compound, composition, or any article whatsoever, under any name, label, 
or brand, which produces intoxication, or cannabis Indica or Indian hemp, or 
anhalonium or peyote, to any Indian to whom allotment of land has been made 
while title to same shall be held in trust by the Government, to any Indian 
a ward of the Government under the charge of any Indian superintendent or 
agent, or to any Indian, including Pueblos and mixed bloods, over whom or over 
whose property the Goverment, through its departments, exercises guardian- 
ship or supervision, whether a citizen or not, and any person who shall intro- 
duce or attempt to Introduce into or convey or transport through the Indian 
country, which term shall include all the lands embraced in what was formerly 
the Indian Territory and now a part of the State of Oklahoma, all of Osage 
County, in said State of Oklahoma, any Indian allotment while the title to same 
shall be held in trust by the Government, or while the same shall remain 
inalienable by the allottee without the consent of the United States, any Indian 
reservation or any town site or tract of land, including any railroad right of 
way or part thereof, located wholly within the exterior limits of any Indian 
reservation or pueblo land grant, or any lands owned by Indians individually 
or as communities, whether allotted or not, Indian settlements, Indian school 
lands, and Indian pueblos, and any lands to which by treaty or otherwise the 
Indian intercourse laws or other laws prohibiting the liquor traffic therein 
liave been made applicable, and any other lands not herein described, which 
may be Indian country on or prior to the date of the passage of this act, or who 
shall have in possession, sell, give away, dispose of, exchange, barter, or manu- 
facture any malt, fermented, spirituous, or vinous liquor, including beer, ale, 
and wine, tulapai or tiswin, or any ardent or intoxicating liquor of any kind 
whatsoever, or any essence, extract, bitters, preparation, compound, composi- 
tion, or any article whatsoever, under any name, label, or brand, which pro- 
duces intoxication, or cannabis indica or Indian hemp, or anhalonium or 
peyote, within the Indian country as hereinbefore described, shall be punished 
by imprisonment for more than sixty days, but less than one year and by a 
fine of not less than $100 or more than $500 for the first offense: Provided, 
however, That the person convicted shall be committed until the fine and costs 
are paid. But it shall be a sufficient defense to any charge of introducing or 
attempting to introduce or having in possession any of the articles herein 

3 



4 PEIOTE. 

named tliat tlie acts charged were done by order of or under authoritj' in writ- 
ing from tlie Secretary of the Interior or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
under such regulations as may be prescribed. Prosecutions under this section 
may be by information. Hereafter, it shall not be unlawful to Introduce and 
use wines solely for sacramental purposes under church authority at any place 
within the Indian country as hereinbefore described. 

" Sec. 2. Any person having been convicted of a second or subsequent ofCense 
under section one of this act shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200 
or more than $2,000, and by imprisonment for not less than six months or more 
than three years. 

" Sec. 3. That if the chief special officer or any of his duly authorized depu- 
ties whose appointments have been affirmed by the Commissioner of Indian 
AfEairs, or any Indian superintendent, or other person in the service of the 
United States whose appointment is made by the Secretary of the Interior or 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, or any United States marshal or his 
deputy, has reason to suspect or Is informed that any of the Intoxicants, drugs, 
or preparations enumerated in, or coming within the purview of this act, have 
been or are about to be introduced into or conveyed across any of the places 
mentioned herein in violation of law, or that any such intoxicants, drugs, prepa- 
rations, or articles are within any of such places in violation of law, it shall be 
the duty of such person to search the premises, conveyances, or places of 
deposit and to take and destroy any of the aforesaid intoxicants, drugs, prepa- 
rations, or articles found in any such place or places, except such as may be 
introduced therein by or under authority In writing of the Secretary of the 
Interior or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and to seize the places of deposit 
and all articles and goods found therewith or therein, the teams, wagons, sleds, 
boats, automobiles, or any other vehicles or conveyances used in the transporta- 
tion of such intoxicants, drugs, or preparations, whether used by the owner 
thereof or other persons, and deliver them to the proper officer, and same shall 
■ be proceeded against by libel in the proper court ; and if such person be a trader 
his license shall be revoked and his bond put in suit. In all cases arising under 
this, or any other law, Indians shall be competent witnesses. 

" Sec. 4. That hereafter when any reservation or portion thereof is thrown 
open for settlement the lands allotted, those retained or reserved, and the sur- 
plus lands sold or otherwise disposed of shall be subject to all the laws of 
the United States relative to the introduction, possession, sale, or other disposal 
and seizure of intoxicants, drugs, and preparations until Congress shall other- 
wise provide. 

" Sec. 5. The records of any common carrier, telegraph or telephone company, 
or wholesale or retail dealer in litiuors, or of any other individual, firm, or 
corporation, shall he comjietent exidence in any case arising under this act. 
If any officer, agent, employee, or representative of any common carrier, cor- 
poi-ation. or company, or an^- other person liaving knowledge of any violation 
of any of the provisions of this act, shall withhold or conceal such information, 
Ixioks. or records, or who does not as soon as may be disclose or make known 
the same to one of the officers named in section three of this act, such person 
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, or imprisoned not less 
than thirty days nor more than one year, or both. 

" Spx. 6. That any person hereafter committing against the person of the chief 
special officer for the suppre.ssion of the liquor traffic among Indians, and duly 
authorized officers M-orking under his supervision, or other employees whose 
appointments are made or affii-nied by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or 
the Secretary of the Interioi-, against any United States marshal, deputy United 
States marshal, jiosse, posse coniitatus. or guard while lawfully engaged in the 
execution of au.\- United States process or lawfully engaged in any other duty 
impo.sed upon such special officer or his duly authorized agent or other employee 
appointed as aforesaid, or marshal, deputy marshal, posse, posse comitatus, or 
gunrd, by the laws of the United States, any of the following crimes, namely: 
JIuriler, manslaughter, assault with intent to murder, assault, or assault and 
battery ; or who shall in any manner obstruct by threats or violence any per- 
son who i^i engaged in the sei-vice of the United States in the discharge of anv 
of his duties as such chief special officer, or his duly authorized agent, or other 
officer aforesaid, ov who shall hereafter commit any of the crimes aforesaid 
against any person who at the time of the commission of said crime, or at any 
time within three years previous thereto, belonged to any of the' classes of 
officers liereinbefore named, shall be sub.iect to the laws of the United States 



PEYOTE. 5 

relating to such crimes, and sliall be tried by the district court of the United 
States exercising criminal jurisdiction where sucli offense was committed, and 
shall be subject to the same penalties as are all other persons charged with 
the commission of said crimes, respectively, and such courts are hereby given 
jurisdiction of all such cases. 

■■ Sec. 7. Whoever shall resist, oppose, prevent, impede, or interfere with anv 
officer employed to suppress the traffic in intoxicants among the Indians, or 
his deputy, or any person assisting him in the execution of his duties, or any 
person authorized to make searches and seizures in the execution of his duty, 
or shall rescue, attempt to rescue, or cause to. be rescued, any prisoner or any 
property which has been seized by any person so authorized ; or whoever before, 
at, or after such arrest or seizure, in order to prevent the arrest and confine- 
ment of such prisoner, or the seizure or securing of any liquor, drugs, or prepara- 
tions, wagons, sleds, boats, automobiles, or other articles used in transport- 
ing, or places used in storing or keeping su*h liquors, drugs, or preparations 
by any person so autliorized shall destroy or remove the same, or shall release, 
or attempt to secure the release,, or prevent the confinement of any prisoner, 
shall be fined not more than !|;2,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or 
both: and whoever shall use any deadly or dangerous weapon in resisting any 
person authorized to make searches or seizures in the execution of his duty 
with intent to commit a bodily injury upon him or to deter or prevent him from 
discharging his duty shall be imprisoned not more than ten years. 

" Sec. 8. In the defen.se of suits, eithei- civil or criminal, other than by the 
United States, against those employed to enforce the provisions of this act, 
arising out of their official acts, the United States attorney shall appear on 
behalf of such employee, and the expense in connection with such suits shall 
be paid from the same appropriation from which the employee is paid. 

" Sec. 9. Indian superintendents and officers designated by the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs to enforce the provisions of this act are hereby authorized to 
administer oaths and take acknowledgments for general purposes. 

" Sec. 10. That all acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of 
this act are hereby repealed." 

I will also have inserted in the record the letter from the Indian 
Bureau in support of the measure : 

\\'ashi.\(,T(i\, Ani/uxt 10, 1!)]7. 

JIy Deab ilK. Carter: I ha\e the honor to acknowledge the receipt of yovir 
letter of April 17 transmitting for report a copy of H. R. 2614, being a bill " to 
amend sections two thousand one hundred and thirty-nine and two thousand 
one hundred and foi'ty of the Revised Statutes and the acts amendatory thereof, 
and for other purposes." 

In view of the many changes in conditions since the enactment of existing 
laws, I shall take up and discuss these changes as they appear. 

Section 1 of the bill anjends section 1 of the act of January 30, 1897, and 
jidds to the class of articles which shall not be furnished to Indians " tulapai 
or tiewin." This is a beverage manufactured from sprouted corn by the Apache 
Ind.ians of the Southwest, and who use same as a beverage with results detri- 
mental to their health and industrial progress. It is intoxicating, and it is 
believed that under the present conditions the corn should be used for more 
beneficial purposes than the manufacture of such an article. The State of 
Arizona has just enacted a law to prohibit the manufacture of this article and 
its disposition, etc., among the Indians. However, this law is applicable only to 
those Indians who reside off of the several reservations. It is necessary, there- 
fore, to have some provision applicable to those Indians residing on the several 
reservations in both Arizona and New Mexico. 

The word " fermented " is added, no doubt, to cover a class of beverages not 
embodied within the term " malt, spirituous, or vinous liquor." 

" Cannabis Indica, or Indian hemp, or anhalonium, or peyote," have also been 
added to the class of articles which shall not be furnished to the Indians. 
Among the Mission, Sioux, Cheyenne. Arapaho, Havasupai, Apache, Kiowa, 
Comanche, Osage, Klckapee, Omaha, Winnebago, Potawatomi, Sac and Fox, 
Santee, Shawnee, Otoe, and Missouri Indians the practice of using peyote has 
grown to such an extent that it retards tlieir progress and development. It is 
used as a substitute for intoxicating liquors, and that of itself should be suffi- 
cient to justify the enactment of this provision. At the )iresent time there is 
no Fetleral law whereby we can prosecute those who furnish these articles to 



b PEYOTE. 

Ihe Iiidijiiis or introduce them into tlieir reservations. In connection witli tliis 
portion of tliis section, attention is invited to H. R. 10669, Sxty-fourth Congress, 
being a bill to prohibit the traffic in peyote, including- its sale to Indans, intro- 
duction into the Indian country, importation and transportation, and providing 
a ))eniilty therefor, upon which a favorable report has been submitted. 

I might also add for the benefit of your committee that the States of Colo- 
rado and Utah have just enacted legislation to prohibit the use of and traffic 
in this article, indicating that those States recognize the evils resulting from 
the use of this article and the necessity of dealing therewith. 

The evils resulting from the use of Cannabis Indica, or Indian hemp, are well 
known and no argument should be necessary to establish the advisability of 
enacting this pi-ovision. 

Under the class of Indians to whom the articles enumerated shall not be fur- 
nished is included Pueblos. The act of June 20, 1910 (36 Stat., 657), providing 
for the adnn"sion of New Mexico into the Union, reads that — 

■• The terms ' Indian ' and ' Indian country ' shall include the Pueblo Indians 
of Xew Jlexico and the lands owned or occupied by them on the 20th day of 
.Tune. 1910, or which ai-e occupied by them at the admission of New Mexico as a 
State." 

This tirovision in this bill is in substance a reenactment of a portion of the 
Xew Mexico enabling act. 

This class has been further extended so as to include those Indians "over 
whom or wliose propei'ty the Government, through its departments, exercises 
guardianship or supervision, whether citizen or not." 

The act of February 8, 1S87 (24 Stat., 388), confers citizenship upon the 
Indians receiving allotments thereunder, according to the view of the Supreme 
Court of the United States in the case of Albert HefC (197 U. S., 488). Congress, 
realizing that po.ssibly it had been hasty in conferring this right upon the 
Indian.s, amended said law by the act of May 8, 1906 (34 Stat, 182), whereby 
citizenship was withheld until the issuance of a free patent. However, many 
Indians had received allotments under the original act, and under that decision 
of the Supreme Court they were not sub.iect to the Federal law dealing vcith the 
sale of liquor to Indians. 

There was recently presented to the Supreme Court of the United States for 
decision the question of whether, under existing laws, the sale of liquor to any 
Indian \-iho, prior to the act of May 8, 1906, supra, had received an allotment 
oi- trust I latent, was an offense. As will he noted, that tribunal, in the HefC case, 
held that it was not an offense, but in the case above referred to (U. S. v. 
Nice, 241 U. S., 591) the Supreme Court said that " as, therefore, these allottees 
remain tribal Indians under national guardianship, the power of Congress to 
i-egulate or prohibit the sale of Intoxicating liquor to them, as is done by the 
act of 1897, is not debatable." 

"We recognize that a different consti-uction was placed upon section 6 of the 
act of 1887 in matter of HefC (197 U. S., 488), but after reexamining the ques- 
tion lu the light of other provisions in the act and of many later enactments 
cleiirly reflecting vfhnt was intended by Congress, we are constrained to hold 
ll'at the decision in that case is not well grounded, and it is accordingly over- 
ruled." 

Tlie Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of United States v Noble 
'.-■1' V.^" '^^^- *'^^ <'"-<-"it <'Ourt of Appeals, in the eases of Katzenmeyer r 
1 iiite.1 States (2.,.-, Fed.. 532). and Mosier r. United States (188 Fed., 54) and 
other lederal tribunals, have held that there is no incompatibility between elti- 
zpiiship and guardianship over an Indian, and that Federal guardianship is in 
nil force both as to property rights and personal rights, at least as long as the 
tribal relation continues, except in so far as Congress has relinquished it 

iiiere are many reservations throughout the countrv where the title to a 
liarcel thereof has passed from the United States so as' no longer to be Indian 
country withm the definition of that term and where there are no .special pro- 
visions extending the liquor laws thereto. Under such circumstances there is 
some question as to whether It is an offense to take liquor thereon ; and conse 
,piently we have m the midst of an Indian settlement community, or reserva- 
tion a tra.t where liquor may be taken and disposed of apparently without a 
vioation of the Federal laws. Such a situation, of course should Tot exis^ 
.;.nd is detruiie^ual to the welfare of the Indians. Likewise, ihe Federal courts 
m the cases of United States v. Carr (2 Mont., 234), United States I Twenty 
nine Gallons of AVhi.sky (45 Fed., 847), and United States I Four Bottlls 



PEYOTB. 7 

of Sour Mash Whisky (80 Fed., 720) have held that liquor Is not Introduced 
into the Indian country by being transported across a reservation to a 
place where it can be lawfully sold and is not subject to seizure while in transit 
or after It reaches Its destination. 

Among the many difficult situations that confront us is that on the Yumn 
Reservation, in California. Prior to the setting aside of the land of the res- 
ervation for these Indians a patent was issued to an individual, and the 
Executive order providing tor said reservation specifically excepted therefrom 
the lands to which valid title has been obtained theretofore. Imperial County, 
Cal., has an ordinance prohibiting the traffic, etc., in intoxicants, and the State 
of Arizona is " bone dry." Whether the Federal Govenmient, therefore, is in 
a position to punish for the introduction of liquor onto said tract within the 
Yuma Reservation, or to deal with the transportation of liquor through said 
reservation to the State of Arizona, is a question. The danger lies in the fact 
that such liquor while in the course of transit through the reservation may and 
does reach the Indians, and its effect upon them and their well-being is a matter 
of history. Liquor should not be permitted in the Indian country for beverage 
purposes under any circumstances. 

The provision in the bill making it an offense to " convey or transport 
through the Indian country " would remedy the foregoing situation and enable 
the Government to prohibit such traffic and protect the Indians. 

It will be noted that the term " Indian country " has been enlarged so as to 
include many classes of lands owned or occupied by the Indians or located 
within the exterior boundaries of the reservations. The added portion reads 
as follows : 

"All the lands embraced in what was formerly the Indian Territory 
and now a part of the State of Oklahoma, all of Osage County in said 
State of Oklahoma, * * * any Indian reservation, or any town site 
or tract of land, including any railroad right of way or part thereof, 
located wholly within the exterior limits of any Indian reservation or pueblo 
land grant, or any lands owned by Indians individually or as communities, 
whether allotted or not, Indian settlements, Indian school lands, and Indian 
pueblos, and any land to which by treaty or otherwise the Indian-intercourse 
laws or other laws prohibiting the liquor traffic therein have been made ap- 
plicable, and any other lands not herein described, which may be Indian 
country on or prior to the date of the passage of this act." 

Within "all the lands embraced in what was formerly the Indian Territory 
and now a part of the State of Oklahoma " reside approximately one-third of the 
Indian population of the United States, and by reason of their peculiar condi- 
tions it is necessary that they continue to receive the protection of the United 
States. 

In the agreements with the Seminoles made in 1897 (30 Stats., 567), with the 
Creeks in 1901 and 1902 (31 Stats., 861 ; 32- Stats., 500), with the Choctaws and 
Chickasaws in 1897 (30 Stats., 507), and in 1902 (32 Stats., 641), and with the 
Cherokees in the latter year (32 Stats., 716). the importance of continuing 
restrictions upon the introduction of intoxicants from without and traffic in 
them within the Territory was recognized. 

Section 8 of the act of March 1, 1895 (28 Stats.. 693), applicable to the 
former Indian Territorv. prohibits the disposition or introduction of intoxi- 
cating drinks or liquors' into the Territory. Congress further recognized this 
fact in the act of June 16, 1906 (34 Stats., 267), in providing for the admission 
of Oklahoma into the Union. ,,- ^r c aao^ -^ i^„ 

The Supreme Court, in the case of Ex Parte Webb (22.o U. S., 663), holds 
that the enabling act did not repeal the act of 1895 so far as it pertains to 
carrying liquor from without the new State into that part of it which was 

^"in'^uJc^sfof United States r. Wright (229 U. S.. 226). the Supreme Court 
held that the act of January 80, 1897, vvas not repealed l.y the enabling act. 

In the case of Joplin Mercantile Co. r. United States (236 U S., 561) 
the indictment charges an introduction or attempt to introduce intoxicating 
ifquors into what was formerly the Indian Territory and no^^' th| eastern 
IMrict of Oklahoma. It was held that pending the c.mtinuance of State pro- 
hibition, as prescribed in the enabling act. the provisions of the act of March 1, 
1895 respecting intrastate transactions, are not enforeable. 

T-mler the court's decision liquor, therefore, raaj- be shipped from the western 
to the eas^lrndlstric? without violating the act of March 1, 1895, and to that 
extent said act is rendered ineffective. 



» PEYOTE. 

The enabling- act expressly reserves the authority of the Goverinnent of the 
United States to make laws or regulations resiiectlng such Indians, just "s it 
the enabling act had never been passed. (Tiger v. Western Investment Co., 
'2-21 U. S., 286-309.) And, also, it expressly continued the laws in force at the 
lime of the admission of the State into the Union, except as modified or 
changed, and all the laws of the United States not locally inapplicable. 

The Supreme Court, in the Joplin case, also said : 

"It does not follow from wliat was there decided (Coyle d. Oklahoma, 221 
U. S., 559) that the plan of intrastate prohibition proposed to the State by 
("(jngress in the enabling act and accepted )iy the State would be subject to 
repeal by the State within the prescribed period. Nor does it follow from any- 
thing that we have said that Congress may not, during that period, by re- 
enacting In substance the act of 3S'.>r, or liy ap])ropi-iate afflrmative legisla- 
tion in some other form, resun)e the Federal control over the liquor traflic In 
and witli what was Indian Territory by virtue of Its general authority over 
Indian relations." 

In view of this decision our legal iis ^vell as moral duty toward these 
IK'ople, and the large number of Indians and their welfare, it is essential and 
necessary that this provision be enacted in order to enable this department to 
alford these people the necessary protection. 

Concerning the provision including " all of Osage County in said State of 
Oklahoma," attention is invited to the provision in the Indian appropriation 
act of March 2, 1917, Public, No. 369, as follows : 

"That all of Osage County, Okla., shall hereafter be deemed to be In- 
<lian countr>- ^^■ithin the meaning of the acts of Congress making it unlawful 
to introduce intoxicating liquors into the Indian country." 

This provision of the bill is merely a reenactment of that portion of the In- 
dian appropriation act. 

The term has also been made to include "any Indian resej-vation or^my 
town site or tract of land, including any railroad right of way or part thereof, 
located wholl.^' within the exterior limits of any Indian reservation or pueblo 
land grant, or any lands owned by Indians individually or as conmiunities, 
whether allotted or not, Indian settlements, Indian school lands, and Indian 
jineblos." The term " Indian country " as referred to in the case of Bates 1;. 
Clark (95 U. S., 208), is defined to be land to which the Indian title has not 
been extinguished. There are many places within the exterior limits, of the 
reservations coming within the list of i)laces above referred to, but to which 
the term " Indian country " is not applicable, and therefore the introduction of 
liquor there would be no offense. . To' permit intoxicants to reach these places 
is deti-imental to the -welfare of the Indians and therefore it is proposed to in- 
clude such places within the term, in order that the Indians may receive the 
protection from this great curse. 

It was said by the Supreme Court in the case of United States v. Forty-three 
Gallons of Whiskey (93 U. S., 188) : 

" If liquor is injurious to them inside of a reservation, it is equally so outside 
of it, and why can not Congress forbid its introduction into a place near by, 
which they would be likely to frequent? It is easy to see that the love of 
liquor would tempt tliem to stray beyond their borders to obtain it. and that 
bad white men, knowing this, would carry on their traffic in adjoining localities, 
rather than venture upon forbidden ground. If Congress has the power, as the 
ca.se last ciied decides, to punish the sale of liquor anywhere to an individual 
member of an Indian tribe, why can not it also subject to forfeiture liquor 
introduced for an unlawful purpose into territory in proximity to that where 
Indians live? There is no reason for the distinction; and, as there can be no 
divided authority on the subject, our duty to them, our regard for their mate- 
rial and moral well-being, would require us to Impose further legislative restric- 
tions should country adjacent to their reservations be used to carry on the 
lifjuor traflic with them," 

This case is quoted with approval in a number of decisions and expresses 
clearly the reasfjns and necessity for this much-needed legislation, 

Tliere is also included in the term " Indian country " " any land to which by 
treaty or otherwise the Indian intercourse laws or other laws prohibiting the 
liq\ior traffic therein have been made applicable. By treaties and agreements 
entered into with the Indian tribes it was provided in certain instances that 
the Fe<leral laws i-elative to trade and intercourse or the traflic in intoxicants 
shall be applicable within the territory ceded, until otherwise ordered by Con- 
gross or the President, and in instances the.se provisions are narrow in their 



PFA'OTE. 



othPv; hpVn,i •ir^'.'' ^''''' "* ^'"^ '"'"'■^' intoxiciuUs uou- 0.1 tlu. market, an.l in 
s h ^liK ^f.r.- ?".\ '\ ^'i^^'-^'^y *«'■ "'®"" ^lol^'tion, etc. In these instan... 
hlnil- ^.T^"*'?^.^''^* ^^'^ *^'"<'aty and other provisions l,e enforced for 



s h ^liK ^f.r.- ?".\ '\ ^'i^^'-^'^y *«'■ "'®"" ^lol^'tion, etc. In tliese instan.'es if 
benefit nf fhe<=. T h"'^* ^\ ^'^""^^ ^"^^ °"^«' Pi'o^-isions be enforced for Ibe 
in ^^tii ,L ^^®- ^"?'.^"^ """^ *'^'it the shortcomings of the lesishition as then 



bv the n eif,^'\*'''l^° that these Indians may have every benetit nff.irded 
bj the piesent laws to the other Indians throughout the country. 
..i,,,-i"^'T''*'- , !-"^ ^1]^^ already recognized to a certain extent the necessitv of 
Ar V i« loil ,orc5l™":lo'*^ enactment in the Indian appropriation act of 
•V! ' ^^^^ ^^^ ^t'^*-"^-' I'^S). of tlie following provision- 

Ihe possession by a person of iiiloxicating liquors In the country where the 
introduction is prohibited by treaty or Federal statute shall be prima facie 
evidence ol unlawful introduction." 

That provision incUKiin;;- " any other lands not herein described which niav 
lie Indian country on or prior to the date of the passage of the act" is for tli'c 
purpose of embracing any tract of land which may have been overlooked in the 
foregoing sections. 

The various acts constituting offenses under the provisions of the bill have 
been further extended so as to include the acts of having in possession, selling, 
giving away, disposing of, exchanging, bartering, or manufacturing within the 
Indian country any of the articles coming within the classes enumerated. Con- 
gress has also recognized the need for legislation covering the item of liaving 
lifiuor in possession as indicated by the provision in the act above quoted It 
is advisable and necessary to include as an offense the act of disposing, etc.. 
of any of the articles within the Indian country so as to give added protection 
to the Indians. 

The " manufacture" of liquor within the Indian country applies under section 
2141 of the Revised Statutes only to the act of setting up or conducting a dis- 
tillery for the manufacture of ardent spirits. The shortcomings of this section 
liave been remedied by Congress liy the s.-uue act of May IS, 1916, wherein Con- 
m-ess provided that "the provisions of sections 2140 and 2141 of the Revised 
Statutes of the United States shall also apply to beer and other intoxicatim;- 
liquors named in the act of .lanuary 30, 1897 (29 Stat. L., p. 506)." 

Particular attention is invited to the change in the punishment for the viola- 
tion of the provisions of this bill. The act of January 30, 1897, provides for 
'■ imprisonment for not less than 60 days " and the act of .Inly 23, 1892, provides 
f<n- a maximum of two years. It is held by the Attorney General and the courts 
that action thereunder must be instituted by indictment. This procedure is ex- 
pensive and sometimes causes long delays; In order to avoid this, the punish- 
ment has been changed for the first offense so that the maximum is less than one 
year and action can therefore be taken by information, as proposed by the bill. 

The act of January 30, 1897, provides that it shall be a sufficient defense to 
the charge of introducing liquor into the Indian country that it was done under 
authority, in writing, from the War Department. The Indians were formerly 
under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of War, and therefore it was proper 
tliat the function of authorizing the introduction of liquor should come within 
the jurisdiction of that department. Now, that the Department of the Interior 
is charged with the administration of the affairs of these people, there would 
seem to be no reason for continuing the old phraseology. This department is 
the proper one to be charged with this duty. 

There is inserted therein for reenactment that provision declaring it not 
to be unlawful to introduce and use wines solely for sacramental purposes 
under church authority at any place within the Indian country. 

Section 2 of the bill fixes a specific minimum punishment for the commission 
of a second or subsequent offense and increases the maximum with the idea 
of providing a greater jiunishment and to act as a greater deterrent toward 
a further commission of the offense of furnishing liquor to the Indians, or in- 
troducing it into the Indian country. Under this section, prosecution must be 
by indictment. 

Section 3 of the bill enlarges the scope of section 2140 of the Revised Statutes 
authorizing searches and seizures within the Indian country. New modes of 
transportation, etc., have come with the general advancement of civilization 
and additional legislation is necessary to cope therewith. The larger the 
scope of the law. the better we can protect the Indians and the greater will be 
the deterrent effect on those who might be Inclined to continue such nefarious 
practices and business. 

It will be noted that section 3 of the bill mentions " the chief special officer 
or any of his duly authorized deputies whose appointments have been affirmed 



10 PEYOTE. 

In- the Commissioner of Indian Affairs * * * or otlier pei-son in the sei^'- 
ice of the United States whose appointment is made by the Secretary ot tne 
Interior or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, or any United States marshal 
or his deputy." , , « i. 

The act of March 1, 1907 (34 Stats., 1017), authorizes that the powers con- 
ferred by section 2140 of the Revised Statutes upon Indian agents and sub- 
agents and commanding officers of military posts are hereby conferred upon 
the special agent of the Indian Bureau for the suppression of the liquor trathc 
among Indians and in the Indian country and duly authorized deputies work- 
ing under his supervision." 

This section of the bill also extends the right to carry out certain ot its 
provisions to " any United States marshal or his deputy." These officials assist 
this department Yer\- materially in the enforcement of the laws for the pro- 
tection of the Indians, and it is but just and proper that they should have 
every right or authoritv that any of our employees have. 

It will be noted that section 2140, Revised Statutes, only refers to spirituous 
liquor or wines. This is not broad enough and Congress has recognized this 
in the act of May 18, 1916, already quoted, wherein it is provided that the 
provision of section 2140 shall also apply to beer and other intoxicating liquors 
named in the act of January 30, 1887. 

This section also authorizes the search for and seizure of Intoxicants where 
they are conveyed across any of the places mentioned herein. This is in line 
with what has been referred to covering the provision in section 1 of the 
bill making it an offense to convey or transport liquor through an Indian 
reservation, etc. 

Section 2140 of the Revised Statutes makes it the duty of any employee of 
the United States or any Indian to take and destroy any ardent spirits or wine 
found in the Indian country. This section of the bill increases the class of 
articles to be taken and destroyed and restricts the class of employees upon 
whom this duty is devolved. 

Existing law, namely section 2140, refers to " boats, teams, wagons, and 
sleds used in conveying same." A Federal court recently construed this act as 
not including an automobile. Congress thereupon, in the act of March 2, 1917, 
provided " that automobiles or any other vehicles or conveyances used In intro- 
ducing or attempting to introduce intoxicants into the Indian country or where 
the introduction is prohibited by treaty or Federal staute, whether used by 
the owner thereof or other person, shall be subject to the seizure, libel, and for- 
feiture provided in section 2140 of the Revised Statutes of the United States. 

The language of section 3 where it reads " automobiles or any other vehicles 
or conveyance * * * whether used by the owner thereof or other person " 
is a reenactment of the provision above referred to. 

I realize that there is likely to be some question as to the constitutionality 
of the provision of this section of the bill authorizing the search of premises, 
conveyances, or places of deposit, etc., and the seizure of the places of deposit, 
all articles and goods found therewith or therein, the teams, wagons, sleds, 
boats, automobiles, or any other vehicles or conveyances used in the trans- 
portation of such intoxicants. Therefore, I do not consider it inappropriate to 
submit the following review of Indian legislation along this line and the deci- 
sions bearing thereon : 

By section 21 of the act of Marcli 30. 1S(I2 (2 IStats., 1.39-14(i), it was pro- 
vided — 

" That the President of the United States be authorized to take such meas- 
ures from time to time as to him may appear expedient to prevent or restrain 
the vending or distribution of spirituous liquors among all or any of the said 
Indian tribes, anything herein contained to the contrary thereof notwith- 
standing." 

This was amended l)y the act of May 6, 1822 (3 Stats., 682), so 

" That it shall be and may be lawful for the President of the United States 
ill execution of the power vested in him by the twenty-first section of the act of 
JIarch 30. 1802, to which this is an amendment, to direct Indian agents govern- 
ors of Territories acting as supej-intendents of Indian Affairs, and the'inilitarv 
officers to cause tlie stores and packages of goods of all traders to be searched 
uiion suspicion or information that ardent spirits are carried into the Indian 
countries liy said traders in violation of the said twentv-tirst secton of the act 
to which this is an amendment," etc. 

Section 20 of the act of .Inne'.SO, 1S34 (4 Stats., 729^732), provides in part 



PEYOTE. 11 

" It shall be lawful for such superintendents, Indian agents, or subagents or 
military otHcer agreeably to such regulations as may be established by the 
President of the United States to cause tJie boats, stores, packages, and places 
of deposit of such person to be searched, and if any such spiritous liquor or 
wine Is found the goods, boats, packages, and peltries of such person shall hf 
seized and delivered to the proper officer and shall be proceeded against b.\ 
libel in the proper court," etc. 

The act of March 15, 1864 (13 Stats., 29), amends section 20 of the act of 
June 30, 1834, in a few particulars, but does not change the sense thereof. It 
reads : 

" It shall be lawful for such superintendents, agents, subagents, or command- 
ing officer to cause tlie boats, stores, packages, wagons, sleds, and places of 
deposit of such person to be searched ; and if any such liquor Is found therein 
the same, together with boats, teams, wagons and sleds used in conveying the 
same, and also the goods, packages, and peltries of such person shall be seized 
and delivered to tire proper officer and shall be proceeded against by libel in 
the proper court," etc. 

Section 2140 of the Revised Statutes, the present law, reads in part as 
follows : 

" Sucli superintendents, agents, subagent, or commanding officer may cause 
the boats, stores, packages, wagons, sleds, and places of deposit of such person 
to be searched ; and if any such liquor is found therein the same, together 
with the boats, teams, wagons, and sleds used in conveying the same, also the 
goods, packages, and peltries of sucli person, shall be seized and delivered to 
the proper officer and shall be proceeded against by libel in the proper 
courts," etc. 

The right to search and seize so far as it applies to the Indian country 
appears to have been the subject of .iudiclal determination in several cases, to 
some of which I invite your attention. 

In the case of the American Fur Oo. v. Tnited States (2 Peters, 3.58) the 
court said : 

" We have found no little difficulty in understanding the real meaning of 
the court from the language in which this latter proposition is expressed ; 
whether it was intended to state that after the goods with the ardent spirits 
had been carried into the Indian country with the unlawful purpose they 
might be seized in a country purchased of the Indians by the United States 
under the circumstances referred to, or that being carried into this latter 
district or country and there seized, such seizure would be legal. We rather 
incline to tlie opinion that the latter interpretation was the one intended by 
the court and tliat that part of the sentence was merely added as explanatory 
of the term Indian country, which liad previously been used. For if it was 
merely means to affirm that, after the forfeiture had attached in the Indian 
country, the goods might be seized anywhere out of that country, no reason 
is perceived why the place of seizure should be contined to a territory pur- 
i-hased by the United States of the Indians and inhabited exclusively by them 
rather than to a territory not so purchased and inhabited. Besides, the 
proposition assented in the preceding part of the instruction being that ardent 
.spirits cai-ried into the Indian country, with the unlawful piu-pose. and found 
with a part of the trader's goods and seized in the Indian country, subjected 
all his goods fmnid with spirits to forfeiture; it would seem something like 
a contradiction to lay it down as a distinct proposition that the seizure spoken 
of might be made out of the Indian territory. As explanatory of the expres.sions 
before noticed, it was entirely appropriate." 

This case was remanded for a new trial. 

The case of 43 Gallons of Cognac Brandy v. United States (11 Fed. Rep., 47) 
involves the question of the seizure of liquor under 2140 Revised Statutes 
within the Indian countiy. The court said : 

" In this case it is not claimed that liquor was seized within the limits of an 
Indian re.servati(>u, and it follows, according to the view I have taken of the 
statutes, that the seizure was unauthorized." 

The court held in this case that the place of seizure was not Indian country. 

The case of Bates v. Clark (9.5 U. S., 208) — one of the leading cases on the 
subject of what is Indian country — was instituted as a result of a seizure of 
whisky introduced into ^^■hat was considered the Indian country. The defend- 
ant in error, Clark, recovered judgment against Bates in an action of trespass 
on which an appeal was taken, the plaintiff in error relying, as a military 



12 PEYOTE. 

oflk-er, mion the provisiuiis of section 2140 of the Revised Statutes, whicli 
iiiithoi-izes searches and seizures. The court, in its oi)iuiou, sa.vs : 

■' If this wliisky was seized in Indian countr.v ^^■ithin the lueaninn' of the 
tict of 1834 and the amendment of 1864, tlie plea which set up that tlie defend- 
ant acted in good faith under the statute ought to be sustained." 

Tlie court refers to the case of American Fur Co. v. United States, supra. 
In concluding its opinion the court says: 

" So the plea that they had good reason to believe that this was Indian 
country and that they acted in good faith, while it might excuse these officers 
of punitory damages, is no defense to the action. If it had been Indian country 
and it had turned out that the plaintiff had a license or did not intend selling 
the introduced goods, the fact that the defense acted on reasonable .grounds 
would have exerripted them from libel." 

In the case of Evans r. A'ictor and Larson (199 Fed., 004) the defendants en- 
tered the plantiff's iilace of business, a drug store within the city of Muskogee, 
Okla., and without the authority of a search warrant oi- othei' process proceeded 
to search same for intoxicating liquoi's, etc. The plaintiff asked for a temporary 
restraining order, damages, and otlier measures of i-elief, and the United States 
I>istrict Court in passing thereon held tliat under section 2140 of the Revised 
Statutes the special officers and their deputies may make searches iu that pai't 
of Oklahoma formerly Indian Territory liy virtue of their official positions 
and without the formality of search warrants or other pi'ocess. An ajipeal was 
fallen in this case, and the Circuit ('ourt of Ajipeals for the eighth circaiit in 
its decision (304 Fed.. 361) held that the lands within the original corporate 
limits of the cit.v of Muskogee are not Indian country. It will be noted that 
the case turned on the question as to the status of the land. Tlie Circuit 
Court of Appeals said in that case — 

" It is conceded by the counsel for the defendants, and is settled l)y repeated 
decisions of the Supreme Court that the -power of the officers of the Intei'ior 
Department and of the officei's of the Army to cause such searches and seizures 
Is limited by the terms and true construction of section 20 of the act of 1834. 
and of sections 21,39 and 2140 of the Revised States to searches and seizures in 
the Indian country, and that they are without authority to cause such searches 
and seizures outside the Indian country." (Bates v. Clark, 95 U. S., 204-209; 
Clairmont v. United States, 225 U. S., 551-556-560.) 

In a most recent case (unreported) arising out of our operations in Minne- 
sota under the provisions of the treaty of Februai-y 28, 1855 (10 Stats., 1165), 
there were seized certain papers and held as evidence in that case. Applica- 
tion was made to the court for the return of said papers, which was refused. 
No doubt some stress will be laid upon the decision of the Supreme ( 'ourt of 
the United States in the case of Weeks v. United States (232 U. S., 383). Tlie 
principles laid down by the court in that case regarding search and seizvire 
,Tre broad and just, but it is necessary in applying same to consider the fact 
that the locus in that case was Kansas City, a place over which Congress had 
no jurisdiction, whereas that dealt with in this hill is Indian country, which 
the Supreme Court in large number of cases has held is subject to legislation 
by Congress and the jurisdiction of the Federal Government. 

That Congress has taken the same view and is favorable to action for the 
further protection of the Indians is indicated by the pi'ovisions of the acts of 
May 18, 1916, and March 2. 1917. already quoted, extending the provisions of 
section 2140 regarding search and seizure to beer and other intoxicating liquors 
and also making automobiles or any other vehicles subject to seizure, libel, 
and forfeiture as tjrovided for in section 2140 of the Revised Statutes. 

Section 4 has for its oi)ject the continuance of the liquor liiws to all lands 
within Indian reservations whether sold, allotted, retained, or reserved, set 
aside for town-site purposes, etc., until ( 'ongress shall otherwise provide. It 
has been the policy of Congress in later years to enact restrictive provisions 
in the various laws providing for the opening of Indian reservations. 

The Supreme Court of the United States in the cases of Perrin v. United 
States (232 U. S., 478) and Johnson v. Gearlds (234 U. S., 432) upheld the 
validity of treaty provisions continuing the Ihiuor laws in effect in certain 
tei'ritories until otherwise ordered by Congress. 

In recent litigation involving a conspiracy to ship intoxicants into the 
eastern district of Oklahoma, it was poHsible for the defendant to have ex- 
cluded from admission as evidence the original way bills, railroad records, 
bank records, telephone records, and even Government records, thereby requir- 
ing the Government to prove the introduction of the liquor by the testimony of 



PEYOTE. X3 

persons who actually accompamed same while in transit, whose ouh- knowledge 
of the movement would naturally be that obtained from the bill of lading 
r^^^dnf'^T^ '"'T- T""' far-reaching effect of this ruling can be amireciated 
leadilj and m order to permit of the enforcement of the law and the punish- 
nient of the offenders it is proposed by section 5 to make these records admis- 
sible in evidence. It is also proposed to make it an offense to withhold in- 
formation or conceal information, books, or records, or fail to disi-lose informa- 
tion as to the crimes or offenses under this act. This legislation is npcensarv 
m order to prevent the concealment of important records and books to anil 
require persons to give information relative to the violations of this law 
Important cases have been lost in the absence of such a provision. This por- 
tion of this section, with such modifications as ,'ire made necessary by i-eason 
of the character of the work to be performed under tills bill, is 'based upon 
section 146 of the criminal code. 

Sections 6 and 7 are embodied for the protection of the officers engaged in 
this work, including the Indian Service men, the Department of .lusticc 
officials, and others who may be called upon to assist. These sections arc 
based in part upon Senate bill 71.")4 of the Sixty -third Congress, third session, 
introduced by Senator Owen, and section 65 of the Criminal Code, with such 
modifications and changes as to make them applicable to meet the conditions 
existing in this work. The men engaged in the suppression of the liquor 
traffic among the Indians are called upon to handle and face dangerous and 
perilous situations. Some of those engaged in the traffic in intoxicants among 
Indians have little hesitanc\- in taking a life, as evidenced by the fact that 
several of our men have been killed in the line of duty. It is therefore proper 
that these men should be afforded every protection in their work. 

Section 8 grants to the employees engaged in this work the services of the 
United States attorney in suits brought against them arising out of their 
official acts, and also provides that the expenses in connection therewith shall 
be paid from the same appropriation from which said employee is paid. 

It has occurred a number of times that officers are made defendants in 
either civil or criminal suits arising out of their official acts. The compensa- 
tion of these employees is small, and to be charged with expense in connection 
with defending such suits, whether .lust or unjust, is a charge which they 
can not well afford to meet. These expenses have heretofore been borne out 
of the personal funds of the officers. 

Section 9 authorizes Indian superintendents and officers specially designated 
by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to enforce the provisions of this act, to 
administer oaths and take acknowledgements for general purposes. In the course 
of operations by the liquor service it is often found necessary to take the 
statements of witnesses for use at the trial to be held some months later. If 
the witnesses testify contrary to the statement prepared no action can be brought 
against them ; but if the officer is authorized to administer an oath and thereby 
swear these witnesses, the likelihood of being taken iiy surprise is removed 
and lietter results will be olitained. 

Having taken up the bill as introduced and discus.sed its several provisions, 
etc I wish now to offer a few changes and amendments which would, to my 
mind, add to the scope of the bill and aid us in the. protection of the Indians. 
To make more clear the various tracts of lands, etc., which are to be classed 
as Indian ctmntrv under section 1 of the bill, it is suggested that they be sel 
I)ff liy semicolons' rather than commas, as appears in the bill, and I have tlie 
honor to .so recommend. • , , , ■ +,„ 

Section 1 of the bill defines the vaiaous tracts ot land to be included in the 
term " Indian country," and on line 20. page 2. read : " any railroad right of 
w'lv or part thereof " As there are other rights of ways granteil over Indian 
reservations it is recommended that after the word "railroad," in line 20, 
thei-e be inserted the words " or other," so that the item will read " any 
railroad or other right of way or parts thereof." This will enable us to handle 
the situation more effectively. „ . ,. ^ _ ,, , . 

It is suggested that after the word " the," in line 6. on i>age •>. there be iii- 
sprteri the words "introduction, attempted introduction, or." and after tlu' 
word "transportation." in the same line, there be a(kle<l the woi-ds "within 
or across anv of the places mentioned herein," so that the clause will read: 
" oi 'inv' other vehicles or conveyances used in the. introduction, attempted in- 
troduction, or transportation within or across any of the places mentioned 
herein, of such intoxicants." 



14 PEYOTE. 

This change is suggested in order that the language of the bill may conform 
as nearly as possible to the language of the act of March 2, 1917; and, 
furthermore, to permit of the confiscation of automobiles transporting liquor 
within the Indian country. It has been considered by the Federal courts 
that to take intoxicants through the Indian country from a place outside to 
another beyond the reservation does not constitute an offense. This, therefore, 
permits the introduction of liquor into the Indian country and its passage 
through the same, and affords an opportunity for the individuals to supply the 
Indians with intoxicants and when apprehended to offer the plea that they 
were bound for a point beyond the reservation. In order to close this apparent 
gap, it is advisable that the language of the bill be changed as suggested. 

I suggest also that the word " ai-ticles," in line 24, page 7, be replaced by 
the word " vehicles." 

In view of the importance of this legislation to the Indian Service, and tlie 
benefits which will accrue to the Indians, I have the honor to suggest and 
recommend favorable action. 
Cordially, yours, 

Alexakdek Vogels.\ng, Acfiiifi Sccrctfir/i. 

Hon. C. D. Cabtek, 

Chairman Committee on Indian Affairs, 

House of Representatives. 

Now, Mr. Haj'den, Ave will hear from you and the other wit- 
nesses. 

STATEMENT OF HON. GAEL HAYDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CON- 
GRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA. 

Mr. Hayden. I introduced this bill at the request of the Indian 
Office. The main purpose of the bill, as you will note by reading it, 
is the revision and codification of the laws relating to the liquor 
traffic among Indians so that the law may be clearer and easier of 
administration. The only controverted points in the bill, so far as 
I know, are to be found in lines 2 and 3, on page 2, and line 12 on ■ 
page 3, wherein the drug known as peyote is included. An issue 
has been raised as to whether this drug should be included in the 
bill and treated as though it were an intoxicant and injurious to the 
Indians. On that question there are a number of witnesses here who 
are more competent to testify than myself, and I w-ould like to have 
you listen to them. If it is agreeable to you I shall first call on Mr. 
Brosius, who is secretary of the Indian Rights Association, for ; 
brief statement. 

However, before we hear Mr. Brosius I desire to direct your atten- 
tion to two brief articles from the new International Encyclopedia 
on the subject of peyote and hashish, or Indian hemp, the two drugs 
mentioned in the bill, which I would like to have inserted in the 
record. 

]Mr. Tillman. They may be inserted at this ]X)int. 

(The articles referred to are as follows:) 

I'eyote (Sp., from Aztec peyotl. caterpillar, in allusion to the downward 
growth upon the root of the southern variety). The Mexican name "-iven to 
several species of plants used by the Indians of the plains and central plateau 
to produce a peculiar kind of mental exhilaration. The practice existed anion" 
the native tribes from tlie Arkansas Itiver as far south at least as 'the city of 
Mexico, and in a few places that crossed the main divide to tlie Pacific Coast 
The southern plant, to which the name was originallv applied by the As-tecs' 
is a species of composit;e, the active principal being in the root. ' The varietv 
best known, and the use ot which is everywhere found from about tlie valleV 
of Mexico northward to the Arkansas, is a small cactus, botanically identified 
as Loiihouhora inUiam.sii. The plan! grows abundantlv in a wild state alon" 



PEYOTE. 15 

the Rio Gniiiae and soutlnvavd and is pitlieved by the Indians, wlio use tlie 
dried top, called a " button." It is taken at intervals during a ceremony which 
lasts throushout the night. A small goiird rattle and a tinv water drum are 
the chief regalia. The effect is to exlularate and intensity the imaginative 
faculties, ijroduclng a pleasant dreaminess without, however, overmastering 
the will power or producing a disagreeable reaction later. Many observers 
assert that the moral tone of the users is heightened and that it effectively 
checks tendencies toward alcoholism. In recent years the ceremony, or peyote 
religion, has spread through Oklahoma and northward among" the plains 
tribes. The ritual has been described by A, L. Kroeber in Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History, Volume XVIII. Consult also Safford 
in Journal of Heredity, Volume A'l, No. 7. 

Hashish (Ar. hashishat, from Ar. hashish, herbage, hay, from hasha, to cut 
grass). The oriental name of the flowering tops and tender parts of Indian 
hemp (cannabis indica). A'arious preparations of the plant are employed for 
the producing of a peculiar intoxication. A favorite mode of extracting its 
active principle is by lioiling the tops and flowers with water to which butter 
or oil ha.s been added, evaporating, and thus forming an oleaginous solution or 
fatty extract. This fatty extract is frequently mixed with other substances 
which are reputed to posses aphrodisiac properties, and is taken in the form 
of electuary confection or pastile. The ma.ioon used at Calcutta, the mapouchari 
employed at Cairo, and tlie dawames or dawamesk of the Arabs are iirepara- 
tions of this kind. In India it is emiiloyed as a narcotic stimulant under the 
name hashish, chnrrus bhang, siddhi. and gun.iah. American hemp (cannabis 
Americana) possesses a similar but weal^er action. The effect of hashish de- 
pends largely uijon the individual. Among the orientals the dreams are of 
an erotic character, but this is not so among the western nations. One of the 
first apiireciable effects of the drug is the gradual weakening of tlie powers 
of controlling and directing of the thoughts. Then comes the stage already 
described, and accompanying and. in part, following it there are observed 
errors of sense, false conviction, and the predominance of one or more ex- 
travagant ideas. These ideas and convictions are generally not altogether of 
an imaginary character, but are suggested by external impressions which are 
erroneously interpreted l)y the perceptive faculties. A Minute may seem a 
year, and an hour only an instant. Sounds may be greatly exaggerated. The 
sense of duration of time and extent of space and the appreciation of ])erson- 
ality are lost ; there Is a sensation of weight in the extremities and anasthesla 
of the skin, wiiich may often become complete. Finally, if the dose is suf- 
ficiently powerful, there is marked drowsiness and sleep. The drug is used 
as a sedative, as a substitute for opium. For the relief of pain in neuralgia 
and migraine It has been successfully used. It is a valuable hypnoti(.- in 
delirium tremens, and a useful remedy for functional impotence and certain 
uterine disorders. 

STATEMENT OF MR. S. M. BROSIUS. 

Mr. Tillman. State your present occupation and give a brief his- 
tory of yourself. 

Mr. Bkosius. Mr. Chairman, I am agent of the Indian Rights 
Association, of Philadelphia, an organization having for its prime 
purpose the protection of the Indians and their development into 
the citizenship of the country. I have been connected with that or- 
ganization since 1898, now almost 20 years. During my association 
with the work of the Indian Eights Association I have had occasion 
every year to go out among the Indians to ascertain conditions and 
see in what way we could be of service to them. I might say that 
this organization is a philanthropic organization. It makes no 
charge to the India.ns for its services. I think I can safely say that 
during the years I have been connected with the association it has 
been of vital benefit to the Indians, but I will not go into that: 

The question of peyote, among other questions, has been called to 
our attention. So far as I am personally concerned, I have never had 



16 PEYOTE. 

any experience in the eating of peyote or the drinking of mescal 
wines or under whatever terms they may be called, but my attention 
was called to the evil effects of the use of peyote among the Indians 
during a trip to the Uintah and Ouray agency at Fort Duchesne, 
Utah, in 1916. Dr. Henry Lloyd was the physician in charge at that 
agency, and I had several interviews with him regarding it, and I 
do not think I could do better than to read a letter I have from him. 
I have not read it recently, but I think it is confined exclusively to 
the peyote matter. 

Mr. Snyder. Tell us who he is ? 

Mr. Brosius. He is employed by the Government at that place and 
he has been there a number of years ; I think 10 or 12 years. 

Mr. Sntdee. Is he now in the employ of the Government? 

Mr. Beosicts. Yes. 

(The letter submitted by Mr. Brosius follows:) 

UlXTAH AM) Ol'liAY AOEXC'Y, 

Fort Diiflirxiic. I'tdli. Dcccinlier 2. lOKi. 
Mr. S. M. Bkcsjis, 

Afient IiKjiaii HU/Mk A.i.if)ciiitiiiii, WiiKliiiifitaii. 1). ('. 

JlY Deak Me. Brosius: I rogret very iinich tlie delay in replying to your 
letter of November 3. I can only offer that I have been alone in the work 
here since October 1, the other position ot physician at Ouray beins teni])o- 
rarily vacant. 

I had also hoped to Liet some additional data regarding cei'tain features of 
the peyote traffic. 

,\s to whether jieyote and mescal are identical I have the following to offer: 
I'rof. E. B. Putt, of the (iovernment experiment station, North Dalvota Agri- 
cultural College, sayg : " Jiescal is a term a|)plied to a di'ug obtained from the 
tops of certain species of cacti grown in the valley of the Uio Grande in 
Mexico. The most impoi-tant of these sjiccies are AiilKiloiiiiini ■' * * or 
Lopliophora. * * * The word mescal shrmld not be c(mfuseil with the simi- 
lar term which is applied to a distilled liquor •■• * * from the * * •■ 
.juice * * * (pulque) of several species of a.g.-ive." 

E. P. Ladd. food commissioner nf the above exiieriment station, in his letter 
transmitting Prof. Putt's repoi't, refers in one jilace to "mescal or peyote" and 
in another to ''peyote" alone. So that there can lie no doubt as to the 
identity of the substance under corjsideration by Prof. Putt. It is also quite 
clear to me that the species of cacti referred to \nider the terms " mescal " (U- 
"peyote" is identical with the di'ug now in use by the I'te Indians of this 
reservation. 

It seems to me that Prof. Putt's reference to the distilled li(|uor of agave, 
also called "mescal," clears \\\i the confusi(]n. However, if it is not desired to 
include the liquor "mescal " in the prohibitory act it might be well to make a 
designation something like the following: "Peyote or mescal from the cacti 
species Anhatouiinii ov fji/ijlmpliora and their derivatives." 

Unless it will increase the opposition tn the law, I would suggest that merely 
the term "peyote er mescal" be used, thus including the li(|Uor above men- 
tioned, as I )iclie\e it is harmfvd to the In<lians of the South and its lu-ohibition 
would be a go(nl thing, at the same time simplir.\ing identity. 

As to the effect of the drug peyote on the I'te Indans, I can now say. after 
two years of observation, that it has done moi-e harm to them in more d'irferent 
ways than wln'skc>-, gambliug, or any other intluence. Its physical effect is 
appalling. Its liarmfnl effects are most noticeable on those wiio are already 
weak and depressed fnau disease or age, and upon both mother and babe in 
jiarturition. liecause of the profound nuiscular paralyses it Induces, the ])atient 
already stru.ggling against low vitality quickly succumbs to a few doses of 
peyote. The uterine nniscle of the pai'turient woman is so conqiletely paralysced 
that normal contractions cease and delivery, is often impossible; or' if delivery 
does finally occur, the uterus fails to contract tdiereaftei- and fatal hemorrbagv 
is the result. 

Amither serious result of tlie use of this drug is the i-efusal of those who 
take it to siibndt to I'atiimal treatment by the jihysician. Indians who bad 



PEYOTE. 17 

learned to come to the agency physician and to employ scientittc remedies under 
his instructions are taught by the "peyote chief" to take no further treatment 
from physicians — to use no other remedial measures, hut to depend entirely 
upon the miraculous effects of the peyote. 

Thus the work of years in teaching the Indian to use the white man's 
methods of combatting disease is undone. 

The effect of peyote on the morals of these Indians is beginning to be 
decidedly noticeable. Especially is this true with regard to sexual matters. 
Several recent separations of husband and wife who had lived contentedly 
together for years may he traced to the use of this drug. 

A number of young girls, some of whom had been attending school, have 
gone to the bad under the influence of peyote. 

The pretense of religious rite connected with its use is a travesty. The 
Sioux Indian who introduced it here is proven by the testimony of a reliable 
Sioux. Standing Bear, to be a thief and a suspected murderer. 
Very sincerely, 

Henky Lloyd, M. D., 

Agency Physirian. 

I want to say on my own account that I took a trip with the agency 
superintendent, Mr. Kneales, who was then in charge, and has been 
in charge since that time, at Fort Duchesne Agency, and he showed 
me some of the fields of the formerly prosperous Indians, and they 
were being neglected. The testimony of other employees there, at 
least those with whom I spoke, was that the object of the devotees 
of peyote, and especially the peyote lodge organizers who came from 
the Sioux country, was to reach the prosperous Indians, those who 
had cattle. Some of the Ute Indians are quite prosperous, several of 
them having as many as 300 or 400 head of cattle, and the object 
of the agents of mescal seemed to be to reach them especially and 
then they could control their funds, and that was the effect of their 
getting them under the influence of peyote. Outside of the Uintah 
and Ouray Agency I might say generally that my observation has 
been, and from what I learned from all sources, that the tise of 
peyote is very bad for the Indians in general. They make a pre- 
tense — I call it a pretense — that it is a religious ceremony in which 
they use this peyote, but I think that is a very flimsy pretense, because 
a similar pretense might be made for the use of any other intoxicant 
or any drug that is now prohibited by law. 

Mr. Hastings. How long have they been addicted to the use of 
peyote? 

Mr. Brosius. The Indians? 

Mr. Hastings. Yes. 

Mr. BEOsrus. That I can not say, but we have been hearing of it 
for the last five or six years, and its use seems to be on the increase. 
My knowledge of t¥at is only general and I suppose not any more 
specific than your own would be. 

I think I have nothing more to say. 

Mr. Snyder. What have you to say about the effect of this peyote 
upon the mind of an Indian at the time he is taking it or going 
through this religious rite? I have been told by some of these In- 
dians that they maintain it brightens their minds and puts them in 
a position to receive a message— for instance, a message from Christ, 

if you like and at that period their minds are so much clearer and 

brighter that they are more easily influenced and get a better idea of 
Christ and his teachings, and so on, and that from that they become 
better men and women. 
47003—18 2 



18 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Beosius. All I would have to say about that is what I have 
read about the experiments, which seem to show that they do see 
visions and that things appear much brighter than they did before. 
T think that is the case, but there are several documents here from 
scientific sources which show that the after effect is often worse. Of 
course, these visions amount to nothing. 

Mr. Sntdee. a day or two ago I had come to my office an Indian, 
and I think he said liis name was Lone Wolf. He had with h-im his 
wife as a living example of the advantage of the use of this peyote as 
a medicine, and he claimed that through its use his Avife was cured of 
chronic rheumatism, and also exhibited himself as a living example,, 
of the beneficent effects of this peyote. He certainly did seem to be 
a fine specimen of a man. 

Mr. Brositjs. Yes; I agree with you as to Lone Wolf. 

Mr. Snvdee. And appeared to be an intelligent man, and his wife 
seemed to be a hardy, healthy, and intelligent woman. They told me 
they had used this peyote for many years, and it cei-tainly seemed to 
me it did not have any serious effect upon them. 

Mr. Beosius. PossilDly it did not affect Lone Wolf, because he was 
so strong physically that he could combat any evil that there might 
be in peyote. 

Mr. Snydee. You understand, I am asking these questions for in- 
formation, and you ought to know. 

Mr. Beositjs. No ; I do not claim to Imow 

Mr. Snydee (interposing). You have made a study of it? 

Mr. Beosius. I have not made a special study of it, and I thought 
I made that clear. I have gone among the Indians to some extent, 
1 ut I have never made a special study of peyote and the effect of it. 
HoAvever, I have some documents here that showthe effects of the use 
of peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you ever seen an Indian under the influence 
of peyote ? 

Mr. Beosius. No ; I never have. 

]Mr. Tillman. You have no personal or pecuniary interest in this 
matter? 

Mr. Beosius. None whatever. i 

Mr. Tillman. You are influenced solely by your desire to be of 
benefit to the Indians? 

Mr. Beosius. That is it. 

Mr. Tillman. You think this habit is spreading among them ? 

Mr. Beosius. Well, that seems to be the evidence; yes; and I 
think it is spreading. 

Mr. Tillman. Do they claim they get a direct message from God 
after they use this stuff ? 

Mr. Beosius. Well, I can hardly say about that one way or the 
other. 

Mr. Tillman. I will ask you if it is not true that it gives them a 
rather rose-colored view of things and that they see attractive pic- 
tures ? 

Mr. Beosius. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Does not a drug in the nature of peyote have a 
deleterious effect? Is not that the result of using it? 

Mr. Beosius. I think so. 



PEYOTE. 19 

Mr. Tillman. I will ask you whether the more dangerous drugs 
like chlorine, hasheesh, and things of that kind, do not have the 
same effect? 

Mr. Beosius. That is my information. I am not a scientific man 
and do not pretend to be. 

Mr. Tillman. I understood you to say that this peyote has a bad 
effect upon the morals of the Indians so far as sexual matters are 
concerned ? 

Mr. Beositts. That is my information ; and it was that point par- 
ticularly, and the point of it attacking the better class of Indians on 
the Uintah and Ouray Eeservations, that brought its bad effects 
particularly to my attention, that its use had a bad effect morally 
upon the Indians. 

Mr. Tillman. They claim it has an exhilerating effect upon them, 
do they not? 

Mr. Beosius. Yes. 

Mr. Tillman. Is it not your experience that drugs or drinks that 
have such an effect upon men are usually bad ? 

Mr. Beosius. Certainly ; that is the final result of them. 

Mr. Tillman. You thiiik that their claim that it is used as a part 
of a religious ceremony is a mere subterfuge ? 

Mr. Beosius. I can not see but that it is; it appears that way to 
me. They could make the same claim for any other drug ? 

Mr. Tillman. Do the Christian Indians claim it is used by them as 
a sort of ceremonial, or is it used by some other class of religious 
Indians ? 

Mr. Beosius. I do not know that they claim to be Christians, but 
they possibly are where they appeal to Christ. They make that 
claim in their religious life, at least. 

Mr. Tillman. There is quite a profit in the sale of this stuff? 

Mr. Beosius. I thinlc so; and that profit has been secured by the 
Sioux representative of the peyote cult. The postmaster at one of 
the stations near the Fort Duchesne Agency, reported $800, in one 
instance, as being returned to the people of this agent, and that was 
the sum he had secured from those prosperous Indians. 

Mr. Tillman. Where does this drug come from ? 

Mr. Beosius. From Mexico, I understand. 

Mr. Hastings. Do they drink it at all in the United States ? 

Mr. Beosius. They may along the Mexicon border. 

Mr. Hastings. How extensively is it used? I mean by that, how 
many of the Indian tribes use it? 

Mr. Beosius. Well, it seems that up until about four or five years 
ago we hardly knew of it except among a half dozen of the tribes ; 
but it seems to be spreading very rapidly. I would say that possibly 
15 or 20 tribes now use it. 

Mr. Hastings. Its use is confined to the western tribes ? 

Mr. Beosius. Largely; yes. 

Mr. Sntdee. About this $800 check. Do you know of your own 
knowledge that that check was a check paid by somebody to some- 
body for this peyote that was distributed to the Indians on a sale 
basis ? 

Mr. Beosius. No; I do not know of my own knowledge, but that 
was the information I secured there; and the postmaster reported 



20 PEYOTE. 

that this agent of the peyote cult had sent large amounts through the 
post office. It was not at the agency, but it was at an outside office; 
and, I presume, it was sent through an outside office so that it would; 
not be so noticeable. 

Mr. Sntdek. Is it not a fact that most of the Indians cure this, 
peyote themselves? Do they not get the button, dry it, and get it 
into a condition to use it themselves, and that they do not purchase it 
as a regular commodity ? 

Mr. BEOsrus. I have understood that they purchased it from the 
agents that go in there. 

Mr. Snyder. My understanding is entirely different from that. 

Mr. Brosius. I am not thoroughly posted on that. 

[From the thirty-fourth annual report of the Indian Rights Association, Dec. 14, 1916.1 

THE liAVAGE.S OF PEYOTE. 

An effort in the past few years to prevent the use of anhaloniiim, or peyote^ 
by Indians has not been altogether successful. No Federal provision of law has 
been secured, although urged by the Indian Bureau and many students of the 
Indian problem. Judging from the results of efforts heretofore made to sup- 
press its use, the devotees of peyote evidently maintain lobbyists to oppose 
legislation intended to place i ban on the drug. The peyote button is obtained 
by cutting the top from a small cactus which grows in Mexico. These buttons, 
are collected and shipped into the Indian country. 

It is urged by the Indians who are addicted to the peyote habit that the drug- 
is used in their religious ceremonies, and therefore no interdiction should be 
promulgated regarding its use, since such an effort would be to deny to the 
cult freedom of religion, in violation of the guaranty of the Constitution. If 
that view is accepted, any vicious practice or use of drugs which undermines 
the morals and health may be upheld with equal force if it is associated in 
any manner with so-called religious ceremonies. 

Various Indian tribes are being seriously affected by the use of peyote. Its; 
advocates, we are informed, seek to influence the most thrifty In-dians ; and 
once under their control, liberal contributions for the parent organization 
follow. Among the latest victims succumbing to this enchantment are the 
Uintah and Ouray Indians in Utah. It is alleged that secret agents visit this 
reservation for the purpose of introducing the use of the dru?, and derive- 
financial contributions from their victims., So successful have they been in 
their efforts that the postmaster located in a town near the reservation is- 
reported to have stated that in his opinion not less than $800 wore forwarded 
to the headquarters of promoters and agents for disseminating propaganda 
favorable to peyote by the traveling representative of the Indians, who op- 
erated among the Uintah and Ouray Tribes. It is stated that nearly one-half of 
the Uintah and Ouray Indians, numbering 1,160 persons, have become devotees 
of the peyote habit. 

The baneful effects upon the followers are soon apparent. The successful 
farmer neglects his fields and home ; his health is often affected, and interest 
is lost in the things which tend to better living. The testimony of Dr. Henry B 
Lloyd, resident physician at Fort Duchesne Indian Agency, is convincing He- 
cited the case of a victim of peyote who had always been industrious, but who 
after being won over to the habit, relied wholly upon the medicinal benefits of 
the drug for every ailment, using it at all times to secure superhuman intelli- 
gence—to read thoughts and to learn of the contents of books without more 
than half a glance at their pages. This devotee removed his child from the 
Government school in order that he might teach him to use the drug and 
thereby become wise. Dr. Lloyd cites instances in which the use of pevote- 
has undermined the health. Several deaths are reported as directly traceable 
to the habit. 

From a moral and religious standpoint the effect of peyote is even more 
apparent. Its followers seem to abandon Christian teaching and ih their fre- 
quent nightly gatherings indulge in excesses through the midnight hour in- 
which men and women participate. It is claimed that in these noctural de- 
baucheries there is often a total abandonment of virtue, especiallv among the 



PEYOTE. 21 

Women. To refer to a single instance: A member of the tribe came to the 
agency at Fort Duchesne and reported that his wife had attended a peyote 
meeting the night before, and having eaten some of the peyote, became crazed, 
tore off her clothing, and danced about almost naked in the presence of those 
assembled. This was related by the Indians as not an unusual occurrence. 
The late Dr. S. Wier Mitchell, the celebrated specialist in nervous diseases, 
after a thorough investigation of the effects of peyote upon the system, said : 

" I predict a perilous reign of the habit when the agent once becomes obtain- 
able. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be too much for 
some men to resist after they have set foot in this land of fiiir colors, so much 
to charm and stf little to disgust." 

Many Indians are appealing for legislation restricting the importation and 
Use of peyote. Mr. and Mrs. R. T. Bonnin, intelligent and educated Indians, 
located at the Uintah and Ouray Agency, have poined in a statement reciting the 
evil effects following the use of the drug. Rev. M. J. Hersey, missionary of the 
Episcopal Church, located within the reservation, vouches for and concurs in 
their statement, which follows : 

FoKT Duchesne, Utah, October 12, JOJti. 
My Dear Me. Beosius : We, the undersigned Indians, make the following 
statements regarding the use of peyote among Indians, particularly the Utes of 
Uintah and Ouray Reservation : 

1. It excites the baser passions and is demoralizing — similar in its abnormal 
effects to that of opium, morphine, and cocaine. 

2. It creates false notions in the minds of the users, preventing sound logic 
and rational thought with which to meet the problems of their daily lives. Be- 
lieving that peyote is the comforter sent by God, they reject the teachings of 
the church. Believing that peyote reveals the secret thoughts of man and gives 
superhuman knowledge of the contents of books, they deprecate the necessity of 
schools. Believing peyote a cure-all for every human ailment, they ignore the 
advice and aid of physicians. Attending the weekly peyote meetings, they waste 
time, strength, and money, consequently neglecting their homes and farms. 

3. It has spread with alarming rapidity witliin the last two years and now 
has close to 50 per cent of the tribe. 

4. It appears to have been the direct cause of the deaths of 25 persons among 
these Utes within the last two years. 

5. After a careful study of the spread of peyote among the Utes, where we 
have labored some 14 years, it appears to us that an unscrupulous organization, 
through its agents, is promoting the peyote cult, under a religious guise, solely 
for the easy money gotten from their superstitious victims. From reliable 
sources we derive the information that large collections of money are taken up 
at the weekly meetings and no accounting made whatever. The Utes, who had 
cattle, sheep, and horses, were the very ones first singled out by the shrewd 
peyote agent. It is the money from sale of stock, together with $15 subsistence 
•checks, that is taken without any concern for the inevitable wreckage of body, 
mind, and soul of the pitiable victims. 

6. Since the use of peyote is spreading rapidly and is undermining the uplift 
work of the churches and our benevolent Government ; since it is an American 
principle to protect helpless, downtrodden people from the ruthless hand of the 
oppressor, to restrain the unscrupulous greed of those who traffic upon the ignor- 
ance and superstition of a people, we do implore all earnest citizens of America 
for a Federal law to protect us against the traffic in and the indiscriminate 
use of peyote. 

Gerteude Bonnin. 
Raymond T. Bonnin. 

I have read the above relative to the use of peyote. I hereby vouch for the 
veracity of these statements, and do concur with Mr. and Mrs. Bonnin in implor- 
ing some Federal action against this great evil, peyote. 

M. .1. Hersey, 
Episcopal ilissioimry. 

The State Board of Pharmacy of Utah proposes to urge measures before the 
■coming legislature to prohibit the introduction of peyote within the State. Tfie 
board will act in harmony with an effort seeking Federal control of the drug. 

Voluminous evidence has been collected from various sources, including state- 
ments regarding the effect of the use of the drug upon various Indian tribes. 
These reports are available in the archives of the Indian Bureau. Hon. H. M. 



22 PEYOTE. 

Gandv, of South Dakota, has introCuced a bill (H. R. 10669) which seelis to 
prohibit traffic hi anhalonium, or peyote, among the Indians. The bill stipulates 
suitable fine and imprisonment for violation of the provisions of the proposed 
legislation. If the friends of the Indians would combine m appealing to tpeir 
Representatives in the House and Senate to favor legislation such as is outlined 
in the Gandy bill it is believed that desirable laws may be secured betore the 
termination of the present Congress on March 4, 1917. 

STATEMENT OF MR. F. H. DAIKER. 

Mr. Daiker. I am connected with the Indian Office, and have been 
for a period of about 10 years. When I first went into the Indian 
Office I began to handle the correspondence in connection with this 
peyote. We have had many reports from our superintendents and 
from others speaking of the deleterious effects of this drug. Of 
course we get correspondence, on the other hand, from tlie Indians 
who have used it setting, forth its virtues, its effects, etc. At about 
that time the matter was taken up with the Department of Agricul- 
ture with a view of having them make an investigation to determine 
whether or not the drug was really harmful. The Department of 
Agriculture made a report and classed it as a harmful drug. Dr. 
Hrdlicka, of the Bureau of Ethnology, also made an investigation, 
and he classed it as dry whisky and just as harmful as cocaine and 
some of the other drugs which are classed as harmful. Some years 
later the use of it increased so much that the department took up 
the question with the Department of Agriculture, and also with the 
Treasury Department, under the pure food and drug act, to get the 
article excluded from importation into the United States, and on 
the strength of the reports that we submitted, and also on the inves- 
tigation that the Department of Agriculture had made, an order was 
issued excluding its importation into the United States. Following 
that we also took up the question with the Post Office Department, 
with a view to prohibiting the use of the mails for the shipment of 
this article, and on the strength of the data submitted the Post Office 
Department also issued such an order. 

The reports that we are receiving indicate that the use of peyote is 
on the increase. As Mr. Brosius has stated, some claim it is used 
in connection with a religious service. The reports we have received 
are to the contrary and indicate that the religious service is held 
whenever they want to use peyote. As Mr. Brosius states, it also has. 
an effect upon the moral phase of the situation. From the corre- 
spondence we have, from reports made by superintendents of Indian 
agencies, and from investigations made by Dr. Wiley, Dr. Morgan^ 
Dr. Prentiss, Dr. Ewell, Dr. Hrdlicka, and gentlemen of that class, 
as well as scientists and professional men, we consider it a dangerous 
article. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you specimens of the buttons? 

Mr. Daiker. I brought with me what few I have. 

Mr. Tillman. Describe the button, as best you can, for the record. 

Mr. Daiker. As I understand from the correspondence on file, it 
is the top of the cactus. It is cut and then dried, and when it is used 
it is steeped in water and a tea made out of it, or this fuzz in the 
center here [indicating] is cut out and the bean chewed. It is very 
bitter. I have never tasted it, but from those who have I understand 
it is bitter. It is very hard and they chew it, and some of them use 



PEYOTE. 23 

four or five of them at a time, and some use as many as 25 or 30 at a 
time. 

Mr. Tillman. This is all there is to it — this bean ? 
Mr. Daikee. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. And it is used in two waj's? It is chewed and a 
liquid is made from it called mescal ? 

Mr. Daiker. The names are used interchangeably. That is the 
information we have, that it is called mescal and it is also called 
peyote. The Indians claim they are two separate articles altogether ; 
that one is not injurious and that the other is; that peyote is in- 
jurious and that mescal is not ; and that the Indians use mescal and 
not peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. Do not some of them chew the bean? 

Mr. Daikee. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Is that called mescal? 

Mr. Daiker. As I say, the names are used interchangeably. 

Mr. Tillman. Will you leave this with the committee, so that it 
may be used? 

Mr. Daikee. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. Is the mescal distilled from this button? 

Mr. Daikee. Well, there is a mescal made by the Apaches of 
Mescaloro. That is where they get their name from — Mescaloro. 
However, that is entirely different from this, and they also have some- 
thing that they use that is sometimes called mescal, but that is a food. 

Mr. Sntdee. I have had a little experience with mescal myself, 
and I was wondering whether you get the same effect out of this as 
you do out of that. , 

Mr. Hatden. In connection with your work have you any reports 
from superintendents in the Indian Service, or other reliable persons 
in official life, who have written as to what the effect upon them has 
been after using this drug? 

Mr. Daiker. We have statements from superintendents who have 
taken it under the observation of a physician. I did not bring any of 
the reports with me, but they are available if the committee wants 
them produced. 

Mr. Hatden. It seems to me it would be highly desirable to ha,ve 
such reports in the record. I happen to know of an Indian superin- 
tendent Mr. Charles E. Snell, now of Valentine, Ariz.— who took 

this drug under the observation of a physician. He has written his 
own experiences, and the physician has also made a report. Their 
statements are on file in the Indian Office. If the Indian Office has 
testimony of that kind, it would be well to have it inserted in the 
record, if agreeable to the subcommittee. 

Mr Tillman. I suggest that Mr. Daiker select two or three speci- 
mens of these reports from the superintendents as mentioned by Mr. 
Hayden and let them be made a part of the record. 

Mr Daikee. I think Mr. Brosius has a copy of the results of an 
investigation made by Mr. Anglers, of the Yale University. A Mr. 
Hall (5 the Y. M. C. A., took this peyote under the observation ot 
Mr. Angier, arid they recorded the results of that both personally 
and through instruments. 

Mr Brosius. I will be glad to insert that. 

Mr Tillman If you have anything to put in the record, do so. 



24 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Daikee. I did not bring any of the records with me. 

Mr. Tillman. Is this a Mexican product? 

Mr. Daiker. It is grown along the Eio Grande, on both sides of 
the river. 

Mr. Tillman. The Bureau of Indian Affairs is of the opinion that 
this is a deleterious drug and that it ought to be prohibited abso- 
lutely? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. The bureau has made a favorable report 
on Mr. Hayden's bill. Mr. Gandy has also introduced a specific bill 
on the subject, and on which the bureau has made a favorable report. 
A question was asked a little while ago as to what tribes used peyote. 
That is covered in the Secretary's report, and if you care to have 
me do so I will just read a list of the tribes. 

Mr. Snyder. As I understand, you have made an investigation of 
this matter over a period of 10 years ? 

Mr. Daikee. Only from correspondence and from reading. 

Mr. Snyder. Is it your opinion that the good effects claimed bj^ 
the Indians are offset by the bad effects ? 

Mr. Daiker. I should say that the bad effects are far more than 
the good effects. 

Mr. Snyder. I understand they claim this to be the only thing 
they have left that gives them a reasonable amount of cheerfulness 
and joy in life? 

Mr. Daiker. The good effects are only temporary — that is, 'dur- 
ing the period the drug is working — whereas the bad effects extend 
over a period of time. The superintendent of the Canton Insane 
Asylum has reported, as well as other superintendents, that deaths 
have resulted from the use of this drug, although they can not posi- 
tively prove that fact, and also that insanity has followed from the 
use of it. I will now read the list of tribes using this peyote : 

Gnniuibls incTica or Indian hemp, or anhalonium or peyote, have also been 
added to the class of articles which shall not be furnished to the Indians amonR 
the Mission, Sioux Cheyenne, Arapaho, Havasupai, Apache, Kiowa, Comanche, 
Osage, Kickapoo, Omaha, Winnebago, Potawatoml, Sac and Fox, Santee, 
Shawnee, Otoe, and Missouria Indians, and the practice of using peyote has 
grown to such an extent that it retards their progress and development. 

There is another thing I might say. The Indians, have claimed 
that by using peyote they do not use whiskey ; that is, that peyote de- 
stroys the taste for whisky. However, our reports show that is not 
true. Where Indians use peyote they also use whisky, and sometimes 
they quit peyote and used whisky altogether. 

Mr. Snyder. How do they get the whiskj' ? 

Mr. Daiker. Well, there are plenty of bootleggers that are willing 
to sell it for $12 a quart, which is the price at which it is selling now 
in some places, and there is a big profit in it. 

Mr. Hastings. Does the Indian Office have any report from any 
superintendent favorable to the use of peyote? 

Mr. Daikee. Some superintendents have reported that they have 
not seen any deleterious or bad results from the use of it. 

Mr. Hastings. About how many? 

Mr. Daiker. I could not say offhand. We have files about that 
thick [indicating] and it wouldTtake some time to go through them 
and classify them. 



PEYOTE. 25 

Mr. Hastings. Then there is some difference of opinion among 
the superintendents? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. But the large majority of them condemn it? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Is that true? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes. 

Mr. Hastings. Strongly? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes. 

Mr. Hastings. And some say they do not see any bad effects from 
Its use? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. When you say a large majority condemn it that is 
just a matter of observation and not a matter of your own knowl- 
edge from any calculations you have made, except as you have ob- 
served the correspondence as it has come in ? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. Of course, this is not used over the entire 
country, so that reports from superintendents where it is not used 
would not be worth very much. I was only speaking of the super- 
intendents where it is used, and the majority of them condemn it. 

Mr. Tillman. Of the reports you have received the majority are 
condemnatory of the drug? 

Mr. Daiker. As I say, we do not get reports from every superin- 
tendent, as it is not used everywhere. 

Mr. Tillman. I say, from the reports you have received it would 
appear that a majority of the superintendents condemn the use of 
the drug? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. As I understand his reply to my question, he stated 
that was merely a matter of observation with him and not any cal- 
culation he had made to show just how many were for it and how 
many were against it. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you received a single report favoring it? 

Mr. Daiker. I would not want to make it that strong, but I do 
recall that some of the superintendents reported that they did not 
see any bad results or effects from the use of it. 

Mr. Hayden. Did any of the superintendents say that they saw any 
good effects from the use of it ? 

Mr. Daiker. Well, some of them did go that far in connection with 
saying it had stopped the use of whisky, but our other reports show 
that the use of whisky and peyote go together, and that it did not 
stop the taste for liquor. 

Mr. Tillman. You have no personal interest in this ? 

Mr. Daiker. No. 

Mr. Tillman. And your opinion and observation is that it ought 
to be prohibited ? 

Mr. Daiker. Yes. 

The following exhibits are submitted in connection with my re- 
marks on this subject: 

A. The statement of Supt. Charles E. Shell, of the Indian Service, 
who took peyote in order to ascertain first hand its effect, etc. ; also 
the statement of the attending physician. 



26 PEYOTE. 

B. The affidavit of E. D. Hall, of the Y. M. C. A., who is in charge 
of the work among the Indians, who took peyote, together with the 
observations of Prof. E. P. Angiers, of Yale University^ 

C. The report of Prof. E. P. Putt, of the Agricultural College of 
North Dakota, who investigated the effect of peyote. 

D. The statement of Prof. L. E. Sayre, dean of the School of Phar- 
macy of the University of Kansas, regarding peyote. 

E. The report of the State chemist of Utah to the governor of that 
State, showing the result of his investigation, and on the strength of 
which said State passed a law prohibiting, etc., the traffic in this 
article. 

F. A memorandum showing the conclusions of scientists who in- 
vestigated the effect and action of peyote. 

G. A copy of a resolution adopted by the Board of Indian Com- 
missioners favoring legislation prohibiting the traffic in this article. 

H. A letter from Eev. William H. Ketcham, director of the Bureau 
of Catholic Indian Missions, regarding the use of peyote. 

I. An article prepared by the late Eev. W. C. Eoe, who for a long 
number of years was a missionary among the Indians who used pey- 
ote. relative to this article. 

J. An article furnished the Indian Office by Mrs. W. C. Eoe. which 
contains a statement by the daughter of the late Quannah Parker 
wherein she attributes the death of her father to the use of peyote. 

K. A report by Mr. Frank E. Thackery, formerly superintendent 
at Shawnee, Okla. 

L. Copy of an affidavit by William Sinco, relative to the use of 
peyote among the Kiowas. 

Exhibit^ A. 

Darlinoton, Oki.a.. Jvhf ,7, 1!)()9. 

O'l the 21 sf of lust month Mr. Chaj-les K. Shell expressed to me n desire to 
investiRnte the physiological action of the " mescal button " bv placing himself 
under its influence, and requested me to assist him by being i)resent to take 
observations and to record such signs and symptoms as might develop The 
afternoon of .Tune 22 was selected for carrying out the expei-iment and 10 
mescal buttons, steeped in a pint of water for 25 hours, was the strength of the 
dose to be taken. This aqueous solution was divided into four portions and 
taken at intervals of 1.5 minutes. 

A\'ben I arrived at the home of Mr. Shell he had already taken two doses or 
one-half the pint. I immediately began my. examination, ijut nothing of impor- 
tance had developed except a slightly flushed face and increased action of the 
heart, due, no doubt, to the stimulating properties of the mescal The beating 
of the pulse had increased about 10 times and was full and hounding After the 
third dose had been taken symptoms of a more positive nature began to de\-elop 
There was partial dilatation of the pupils of the eyes, accompanied with visual 
disturbance, the strong action of the heart had changed, and instead of its beats 
bemg full and bounding they were weak, rapid, and thready so rapid that it 
was with difficulty that they could be counted. Patient spoke of some nausea 
but not enough to be anno.ying. The slightly flushed face had given way to one 

The taking of the fourth and last portion of the solution soon developed what 
I considered to be the full effects of the drug. The action of the heart so far 
r,!- \ ^''"^L."'^"' IV'^"?' '■emained about the same as it was after taking the 
third portion of the solution. The pupils were dilated to their utmost extent 
and remained so up to the time of my departure, about two hours after the last 
portion of the solution was taken. The writer has had two analyses of The 
inescal button made by expert chemists, and with the results of these analvsel 
o'^hT't '''h' ^^'^P^f "« symptoms to appear that did not devolop ; Zd? upon the 
other hand, symptoms were observed that no medical man would haveToked 



PEYOTE. 27 

for with either of the analyses before him. For insttuice, both analyses re- 
vealed enough opium to have fully counteraeted the influence of the atropia that 
was present only in very small quantity, but the action appeared to be the 
reverse of this. There seemed to be an entire absence of dryness of the throat ; 
in fact, the secretions were not interfered with in the least. 

This briefly describes the objective symptoms as they were observed during 
the progress of the experiment. The sub.iective ones are graphically described 
by Mr. Shell himself, giving his experience with the drug during the entire 
period he was under its influence, which, in substance, differs very little from 
the crude descriptions given by the Indians of their experience with mescal 
while under its influence. 

J. S. LiNDLEY, M. D. 

EXPERIEKCE OF CHAKI^S E. SHELL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF PELLOTE 
(PBYOTF.) ON JUNE 21, 1900. 

The spread of the use of pellote pronounced peyote) among the Indians of 
tlie United States is alarming. They claim that it is hariiiless and destroys 
the desiye for the use of intoxicants. I had long desired to know for myself 
something of the effect of peyote upon an individual. I therefore made the 
following experiment upon myself. I took 10 large peyote units or buttons and 
steeped them in 1 pint of tepid water for 2.5 hours, at the end of which time 
I pressed the water which the buttons had absorbed into the remaining liquid, 
which was by this time about the color of sweet cider. After the units had 
the water pressed out of them the resulting liquid constituted about one and 
one-half ordinary drinking glasses full. 

I began this experiment at 2 o'clock p. m. June 21, 1909, at which time I 
drank one-fourth of this liquid. It was quite bitter, and I found some difBculty 
in forcing myself to swallow it. At 15 minutes past 2 I drank another one- 
fourth. At half past 2 another, and a quarter of 3 the remainder. At 3 
o'clock I could notice no unusual indications of Jiaving talcen the drug, except 
a fullness in the head and a sort of tingling of the eardrums. An hour later 
I observed that the senses of sight and hearing were intensified. The ticking 
of my watch, -which was carried in my shirt pocket, began to annoy me, 
although under normal conditions I do not notice it. At this time I was also 
languid and had a feeling of utter abandon. I laid down upon a comfort and 
yawned nad stretched almost incessantly. While my reason wa.s apparently 
unimpaired, I had no desire to talk, but only to be let alone. My thoughts now 
began to rise to a very high plane. I seemed incapable of having a base 
thought, but all were of a high order. I seemed to have forgotten that there 
was any evil in the world, all was good and pure. 

I d.0 not believe that any persons under the influence of this drug could 
possibly be induced to commit a crime, because crime is so foreign to the state 
of mind which exists. 

There was no business thoughts and none of the everyday routine of life. They 
were along the line of honor, integrity, and brotherly love. Another peculiar 
characteristic of this condition is that one seems to be under the influence of 
some hypnotist who directs ones thouglits and actions. I would become seized 
of a desire to walk, and, although I felt languid, I felt that I must walk. I 
arose and walked about a hundred yards westward to a fence ; here I found 
myself impelled to return, but by another route. When I had nearly returned 
to' the house I found myself stopped. I leaned up against the fence, placed my 
head on my arm, and remained for some minutes. Finally the physician who 
was watching the experiment called me to come to the house. I could not do 
so until several minutes afterwards, when the imaginary hypnotist allowed me 
to return. This inclination to walk and stop returned several times afterwards. 
On one of these tours the flowers along the way which are ordinarily purple 
were an intense and dazzling purple. A redbird sitting on the fence became 
an intense and dazzling splotch of red. The form of the bird being nearly lost. 
Every sound also was intensified. Modest colors, such as gray, ecru, and terra 
cotta, and the color of the road, remained the same. Only the more pronounced 
color.s were intensified. While all objects remained the same form as usual, 
there was a peculiar appearance to everything. This may best be explained 
by saying that they appeared at times translucent, at others perfectly natural. 

The clouds assumed rather fanciful shapes, such as I have, when a boy, 
imao-ined when lying upon my back looking at the fleecy clouds when they 



28 PEYOTE. 

seemed to assume shapes of human faces, dragons, ships, etc. I was to'^^ '^^' 
my attendant that he never saw the clouds look more unattractive, ^^f " -^ 
closed mv eves a procession of Chinese pagodas with beautiful colored tiim- 
mings, pleasing geometrical designs, and peacocks of brilliant plumage seemed 
to float in endless procession before me. A peculiar feature of this is that all 
of these scenes were statuesque; that is, there was no life. The peacocks 
seemed to be merel.y statues. 

At no time did I experience any dizziness. While my head seemed tull, 
almost ready to burst, there was no faintness. Locomotion was not interfered 
with, and the surrounding objects did not seem to float around me, as is the 
case with one who is under the influence of alcohol. 

An incident occurred during the test which shows something of the state 
of mind I was in. The physician observed a young bird which had fallen from 
a nest in the tree. He secured a garden rake, placed the bird upon it and 
lifted it up into the tree, hoping to return it to the parent bird. This is really 
what he meant to do, but it seemed to me that he was undertaking to bring 
about a universal brotherhood in the bird kingdom. 

The experience is such that if one could always remain in that state of 
mind the millenium would be at hand. I had no inclination to do or say any 
absurd things that an intoxicated man does. I retained at all times my reason 
and occasionally talked with the doctor, but always with effort. 

At 7 o'clock I was seized with a desire to sleep and went to my room and 
retired. As I was preparing to retire, there was a dry, rough sensation all 
over my skin, with a feeling of creepiness. This lasted for about one minute, 
and departed as .suddenly as it came. I immediately fell asleep and slept just 
about one hour. During" this time I had no dreams, but awoke with my mind 
as clear as a bell, although feeling the effects of the drug. At this time I 
secured paper and pencil and made the notes from which this article was 
written. The night which followed was sleepless and the following day the 
languor continued, although there was no feeling of depression. 

During the four hours, from 3 to 7, I was slightly nauseous all the time. 
I do not know whether the drug produced this or not. I did not see any .spirits 
or hold any conference with spirits — celestial, terrestrial, or subterrestrial. 
This may have been because I did not erect any altar, beat a tom-tom, or shake 
a rattle (although I had a regularly dedicated rattle in the adjoining room), 
nor perform the ceremonies usually performed by the followers of the mescal 
lodge. I do not say this in mockery of the religion of these people, for religion 
is too sacred a thing to be made a mockery of, no matter how absurd or 
heathenish. I have insisted, however, that, in my opinion, the religious cere- 
mony is only a cloak with which to cover this species of intoxication, for it 
is intoxication. 

Another peculiar feature of this matter is that, except the experience of 
drinking the liquid, there is nothing unpleasant about the whole thing. The 
experience while under its influence is a delight, and for the time being the 
millenium has come. The recovery does not leave one with a headache nor any 
unpleasant feeling, but it as though one had ascended above the earth and 
when he returns does not do so with a thud as of a dropping of ii sandbag, but as 
the floating down In a parachute. 

The continued use must necessarily, however, be injurious, as any drug which 
will produce the unusual conditions of the nerves which this produces must 
necessarily, by its continuous use, rob the nerves of their vitality. 

If this experience could be made universal and continuous, there would be 
no need of armies, navies, nor courts. 

The report of the physician, Dr. Lindley, who observed this experiment, is 
given below. 

Chakles E. Shell, 
Hiiperintendent and Special Disbursing Agent, 

Cheyenne and Arapahoe Agency. 



Exhibit B. 
State of New York, 

Comity of Neio Yorli, ss: 
I, Robert D. Hall, of the State of New York, county of New York and city of 
New York, do hereliy depose and say that on the 6th day of November, in the 
laboratories of the psychological department of Yale University, for the pur- 



PEYOTE. 29 

poses of experimentation, took some peyote and during the dav passed tlirougli 
various experiments conducted by R. P. Angiers, head of the psychological 
department. 

I noticed about 20 or 25 minutes after tailing the peyote a decided pressure 
or dull feeling at the top of my head. This remained with me throughout the 
(lay. I had occasional feelings of dizziness and a slight tendency at various 
times toward nausea. I, however, found that my brain seemed to be active and 
at periods very clear, but as the day went on I found slight lapses of memory 
occurring, or a lapse of mental control. I also found that I was somewhat 
shakey, finding it difficult to control my movements, especially in regard to my 
hands. I found that the eyes were affected, not being able to focus them quickly 
upon objects, especially those at a distance. I also felt quite feverish through- 
out the day and felt what resembled in a very slight form, barely noticeable, 
chills running down my arms and limbs. At various times I had a conscious- 
ness of losing my mental control, so that I feared that in conversation I might 
say things I did not intend to say. 

While coming how on the train that evening I found that the noises of the 
train and the confusion caused by passengers coming in and going out did not 
disturb me as much as usual and that I could concentrate my mind upon the 
book I was reading very easily ; in fact, I do not remember the passage from 
Bridgeport to New York distinctly, but was completely absoorbed in my read- 
ing. I found, as we neared New York and I stopped reading, that my eyes 
smarted a great deal. This was possibly due to constant reading without inter- 
mission. It is usually my custom to rest my eyes at periods during my reading. 
I can not attribute this concentration to my reading being of intense interest, 
for I had been reading the same book for some time and had not found it such. 
1 had a distinct feeling of hunger and entered a restaurant, ordering a heavy, 
meal. I knew the place and had always enjoyed the cofCee they sen'ed and their 
fresh eggs. I was greatly disappointed to' find that nothing tasted good to me 
and that, while hungry, I did not especially enjoy the meal. I also felt a slight 
exhilaration which put me in a very optimistic mood, and I hastened to my 
room lest it might lead me to lose control of myself. When in my room I 
planned to write a letter or two before retiring. I wrote several letters and 
found that I did not in the least care to go to sleep. It was long past midnight 
when I looked at my watch, having read all that time, so I took a bath and 
went to bed. However, I was exceedingly restless and as wide awake as anyone 
could be. I was not in the least worried about anything and felt in a very 
happy frame of mind. Along toward morning I succeeded in going to sleep and 
found that I was exceedingly drowsy and rather debilitated during the follow- 
ing day. As usual, I had the windows open and the room was very cool, a fresh 
draft blowing through the room the entire night, but I was exceedingly warm 
all night, as much so as if I had a fever, and I found that just the slightest 
covering seemed to be all I needed. 

It was especially noticeable during my writing all the evening that I could 
not control my hand so as to write smoothly and evenly. In one instance I had 
to address an envelope four times before it looked right to me. Another peculiar 
thing was that I seemed to have lapses of memory and had to stop in the middle 
of a 'sentence, having forgotten what I had intended to say, but these lapses 
did not last more than a few seconds, and then my mind was as clear as usual. 

Robert D. Hall. 

On this 10th day of November, in the year 1911. there appeared before me 
Robert D. Hall, of 124 East Twenty-eighths Street, New York, who being known 
to me, being by me duly sworn, says that he resides in the city of New York, 
and that on the 5th day of November he went to Yale University, at New Haven, 
Conn., where, on the 6th day of November, he took some peyote for purposes 
of experimentation, under the direction of R. P. Angiers, head of the psycho- 
logical department of Yale University, and that the above statement subscribed 
to by me is an accurate and truthful statement of his personal feelings during 
the time he was under the influence of this peyote. 

(Signed) Chas. E. Lyman. 

Notary Public, Richmand County. 

Certificate filed in New York County clerk's office. New York County. Regis-, 
ter's certificate 3146. ) 



30 PEYOTE. 

Yale University, 

PSYCHOLOGICAI, LaBOEATOEY, 

New Haven, Conn., January 10, 1912. 

My deab Mk. Hall : In accordance with my note to you of two days ago I 
herewith submit a report on the results of our experiments togetlier to deter- 
mine the influence of the peyote on your mental processes. As I wrote you 
then, these experiments were designed to be exploratory rather than tinal. 
Some of them gave no definite results whatever. I am includmg only those 
which warrant definite conclusions, and even these are not based upon as many 
experiments of each given type as I could wish. I am, therefore, using them 
as indications and hints for the devising of future experiments rather than as 
final conclusions. Even in their tentative form, however, they show, talien as a 
whole, that peyote is deleterious in its influence, even in the small doses which 
you took. I have little doubt that in large doses the influence would be worse. 
I am appending on the last sheet of this report the records of your tailing of 
the peyote, together with your comments on your feelings under its influence. 

These preliminary tests, as you may remember, were taken from Whipple's 
"Manual of Mental and Physical Tests," published in 1910 by Warwick & 
York, Baltimore. In each case I am giving the number of the test in Whipple, 
so that if you wish to refresh your memory on the exact nature of each test 
you may consult him. 

The first series of tests was designed to get some insight into your ability to 
control the movement of certain coordinated systems of muscles of your body 
under the influence of peyote. 

Test No. 11. Accuracy of movement. — The test consisted of an attempt on 
your part to strike with the point of a pencil, by thrusting out your arm from 
the shoulder at full length, the centers of a series of ten crosses, drawn in ink 
on the wall, in succession, three attempts being made with each cross, both with 
and without peyote, making a total, of 30 such thrusts. Without the peyote 
your average error for these 30 thrusts was 4.8 millimeters, and with the peyote, 
9.4 millimeters. Your errors under the influence of peyote were therefore 
about double in extent those without it. 

Test No. 12. Steadiness and precision of movement. — The test consisted In 
trying to pass a brass rod vertically downward between two other brass rods 
which stood upright on the table. The distances between the two upright rods 
were varied from 4 to 8 millimeters. Each time the brass rod which you were 
passing downward between the uprights came in contact with either of these 
an electric circuit was closed, which, by means of an appropriate marker, made 
a line on the smoked paper of a revolving drum. The number of contacts 
serves thus as an index for the steadiness of your movements, the steadiness 
varying in inverse proportion to the number of contacts. Without peyote the 
total number of contacts made in four such attempts was 132 ; with the peyote, 
238. Your steadiness of movement under the influence of peyote was, therefore, 
about 80 per cent poorer than without it. 

Test No. 13. Steadiness of movement. — The aim of this was similar to the 
preceding. The requirement was to hold a brass rod, less than a millimeter in 
diameter, in the centers of a series of circular holes punched in a brass plate, 
standing vertically on the table. You were told to hold the rod in each<one 
of those openings, which varied in diameter from 6 to 31 millimeters, without 
touching the edges. Bach time the rod which you held came In contact with 
the edge of the hole an electrical connection made a corresponding mark on 
smoked paper, as in the preceding experiment. Without peyote there were 134 
such contacts in five such experiments ; with the peyote, 162 contacts. Your 
steadiness was therefore, under the influence of peyote, about 21 per cent less 
than with it. 

These three types of experiments for testing motor control yield, therefore 
a rather unequivocal result, showing that the steadiness and accuracy of co- 
ordinated movements suffers considerably under the influence of peyote. The 
significance of this lack of motor control for people who take larger doses of 
peyote, and are at the same time under the influence of strong emotional excite- 
ment, seems rather obvious. 

The next series of experiments concerns your ability to control vonr attention 
and perception. 

Test No. 25. Ymial Appreheiision.—In this test 20 difeerent objects, such as a 
knife, letter scales, piece of sealing wax, etc., were spread out upon a table in 
irregular position. You were allowed to view these objects for 10 seconds at 



PEYOTE. 31 

the eiul of which period you turned your back on tliem and repeated to me aloud 
the names of as many of the objects as you remembered. The results were 
that, without peyote, you remembered 12 such objects, and with peyote, 6. The 
objects shown you in the two different tests, with and without peyote, respec- 
tively, were all different. Although it would be premature to base a final con- 
clusion on these two experiments, it seems fair to say that .your field of visual 
perception and your ability to retain in memory the images of objects seen is 
narrowed under the Influence of peyote. 

Test No. 27. Acciinicii and Concentration of Attention. — The test here was to 
count aloud, in any way that you wished series of black dots, each series 
arranged in a horizontal row on white paper, the distance between the dots 
and the total number of dots in each row varying. In all. 27 .such dilferent 
rows were counted. Without peyote your average time for counting each row 
was 12.7 seconds ; with peyote, 16.5. The number of errors made was, without 
peyote, 116, and with peyote, 125, It is perhaps fair to conclm'.i- from this 
tliat active and efficient concentration of the attention suii'ei-s umler the in- 
fluence of peyote. 

The next series of tests which proiluced certain results were those on the 
association of mental activities and on memory. The chief test was one in 
adding serie.s of printed digits, ai-i'anged in vertical rows of 10 (jach. You 
were asked to add as many of these as you could in the time given you as 
accurately as possible, recording the sum at the end of every 10 figures added. 
Without peyote you kept this up uninterruptedly for 52 minutes. In all, you 
added 2.232 figures in this time, giving an average number of figures added per 
minute of 42.9. Under the influence of peyote, you kept up this adding process 
on different rows of figures for 30 minutes, adding in that time 1,055 figures, 
giving an a\'erage of 35.2 figures added per minute. As a test in the pro- 
longed concentration of attention and accuracy of mental operations, this is 
one of the best that we have. I tliink it shows clearly that under the influence 
of peyote the speed of activity suffers considerably, showing undoubtedly that 
your attention fatigues easily. The higher average attending without peyote 
is indeed more significant than the figvires indicate, since the test was given 
lor 52 minutes, as against 30 nunutes when under the influence of peyote. 
One would expect, thei-efore, greater fatigue to show in the longer test, but the 
average number of figures added per minute is greater. 

Tc-it Xo. ,?.'■). Memoi-y of Ideas. — In this experiment a passage of prose, con- 
taining in all 166 worils and 67 different ideas, was read aloud to you. You 
were then asked to repi-oduce as conniletely as possible this passage, attempt- 
ing to give, not all the words, but all the ideas. Under the influence of ])eyote 
a similar j)assage, containing 181 words and 91 ideas, was read and reproduced. 
\^'ithout pe>-ote you omitted 37 per cent of the total number of ideas ; with 
peyote, you omitted in your reproduction 46 per cent. 

AH these experiments taken together seem to me to indicate, at least, that 
under the influence of peyote your control over your movements, that is, over 
the motor coordination of your nmscles, suffers; that your power of attention 
is not so great and fatigues more readily than when you are not under the 
influence of the drug. Furthermore, it appears that your range of apprehension 
and memory also suffer. In short, even with the small d<ises of the drug 
which you took, your general " efficiency " was certainly lessened. There was 
an indication also, running all through the experiment, that you tended to 
work with a sort of -superflcial haste, under the influence of peyote. If such 
lireliminary experiments, when made more thorough, should show similar re- 
sults. It would be fair to conclude, I think, that anyone under the influence of 
large quantities of this drug and suft'ering at the same time from strong 
emotional excitement would tend to lose the ordinary inhibitions on his im- 
pulsive activity that proceed from due reflection and yield in a haphazard way 
to his emotion.s. Before, however, any conclusion such as this could be definitely 
final, it would be necessary to amplify the experiments. 

Tours, very truly. 

ROSWELL P. AnGIKK. 

Jlr. ROBT. D. Hall, 

12Jf East Tiventy-eighth Street, 

Neio York City. 



32 PEYOTE. 

Exhibit C. 

MESCAL. 
[By E. B. Putt.] 

'' Mescal " is a term applied to a drug obtained from the tops of certaim 
species of cacti grown in the valley of the Rio Grande in Mexico. The most 
important of these species are anhalonium Lewinii and anhalonlum Williamsii.. 
According to Coulter, these should be referred, not to Anhalonium lint to the 
Lophophora species. Hence, the above appear in Coulter's classification as; 
Lophophora Lewinii and Lophophora Williamsii, respectively. 

The word " mescal " should not be confused with a similar term which is 
applied to a distilled liquor prepared by distillation of the fermented juice- 
of several species of agave (Agave American, L.) grown in Mexico. Tlie above 
juice before distillation is called "pulque" (V. U. S. Disp. 19th ed. ) 

Mescal was first investigated from a chemical standpoint by Lewin in 1888;. 
who separated what he considered to be the alkaloid anhalonine. HefEter, In; 
1896, made a further investigation of this drug and obtained, in addition to- 
anhalonine, three alkoloids, viz. mescaline, anhalonidine, and lophophorine. 

In 1899 E. Kauder made a thorough investigation of mescal in the labora- 
tories of E. Merck at Darmstadt. That work was very complete, and a full 
account of the investigation appeared in the Archiv der Pharmacie for 1899, 
volume 237. He reports the following percentage of alkaloids obtained from 
mescal : Mescalin sulphate cryst., 0.9 per cent ; anhalonine hydrochloride cryst., 
0.25 per cent ; pellotin hydrochloride cryst., 0.2 per cent ; anhalonidine hydro- 
chloride cryst., 0.2 per cent; anhalamine pure cryst., (?) per cent. 

The method employed by Kauder in separating the above constituents was- 
used by the writer for the purpose of ascertaining, if possible, which alkaloids- 
iire responsible for the peculiar effects attributed to the drug. Kauder's method 
consists essentially of the following: The drug is first extracted with alcohol, 
the extract freed from fat, made alkaline with ammonia water, and the alka- 
loids shaken out with chloroform. The alkaloids dissolve in the chloroform 
layer and a resin-like residue is left undissolved. This chloroform extract is 
then shaken out with acidulated water and the alkaloids removed as sulphates. 
These are again thrown out with ammonia and extracted first with ether and 
then with chloroform. The ether solution yields, according to Kauder, the- 
alkaloids anhalonine, pellotine and lophophorine. The chloroform solution 
yields mescaline, anhalonidine, and a new alkaloid — anhalamine. Owing to 
the limited time at the disposal of the writer, no attempt was made to effect 
a complete separation of the above constituents except that necessary to estab- 
lish the identity of the extracts obtained. 

The drug was reduced to a coarse powder by means of a drug mill and ex- 
tracted in soxhlet with ether and with chloroform. Another portion was ex- 
tracted by continuous percolation with 70 per cent alcohol and a fluid extract- 
thus obtained of U. S. P. strength, 1. e., 1 cc. of finished extract was equivalent 
to 1 gram of the original drug. These extracts were shaken out, as in 
Kauder's method, with water acidulated with sulphuric acid and again shaken- 
out -svith ammonlacal chloroform and ether. Two alkaloidal desidues were thus 
obtained — one, the ether extract, or "alkaloid A" of Kauder, representing the- 
alkaloids anhalonine, pellotine, and lophophorine ; the .second, or chloroform 
extract, the " alkaloid B " of Kauder, which represented the alkaloids mescal- 
ine, anhalonidine, and anhalamine. 

The chloroform residue from 100 grams of mescal was taken up with 5' 
cubic centimeters of alcohol and reserved for later physiologicaL tests. This 
extract (chloroform) should represent largely mescaline, to which the peculiar 
cerebral effects of the drug have been ascribed. The alcoholic fluid extract 
represents all the alkaloids found by Kauder and should, therefore, be identical 
with the crude in its physiological effects. 

At this point it may be well to note that with every extraction there was- 
a greenish-brown residue of a somewhat resinous nature which yielded no- 
alkaloids on extraction with acidulated water. In the light of subsequent 
tests of the physiological action of the drug, it would seem that this resin 
may be concerned in the peculiar effects which this drug produces. 

PHYSIOLOGICAI, TESTS. 

The following were- used: 

(1) An alcoholic extract representing the above chloroform residue "B" 
of such strength that 1 cubic centimeter represented 20 grams oif' d'pug. One- 
drop thus represented approximately 1 gram of mescal. 



PEYOTE. 33 

(2) A fluid extract of mescal, 1 cc. representing 1 gram of drug. 

(3) The mescal buttons entire. The buttons used averuged somewhat more 
than 3.5 grams each in weight. 

On November 24, 1911, I went to my room, tMking the above supplies of 
chloroform extract, fluid extract, and mescal buttons. The following data I 
recorded ou a sheet of paper lying on a table : 

At 4.30 p. ni. November 24, 1011, took 3 drops of chloroform extract diluted 
with water. 

At 5 p. ra. took 4 drops of chloroform extract diluted with water. 

At 5.30 p. m. took S drops of chloroform extract diluted with water. 

At 6 p. m. took 15 drops of chloroform extract diluted with water. 

Up to 6 p. m. no abnormalities of vision or other function observed. No 
effect from above at 7 p. m. 

At 7 p. m. took 20 drops of fluid extract (1 cc. equals 1 gram). 

At 7.40 p. m. no efi'ect from above other than dilation of pupils and slight 
stimulation. Ate 1 mescal button. (Vision first distorted at 8 p. m.) 

At 8.20 p. m. ate 1 mescal button. 

At 8.40 p. m. ate 1 mescal button. 

At 9 p. m. ate 1 mescal button. (Nausea.) 

Senses normal at 1 a. m. 

Such investigators as Havelock Ellis, Drs. Weir Mitchell, Prentiss, and 
Morgan have also experimented upon themselves by eating mescal, and my 
own experiences were in the main quite similar to those recorded by the above 
observers. 

The above data for the chloroform extract seem to indicate either that not 
all the mescal is removed by Kauder's method or that the pronounced effect 
of the drug is not due entirely to that alkaloid. It is well to note that the 
amoimt of this extract taken during 2* hours was equivalent to .30 grams of 
drug, or iibout 8 buttons. 

The alcoholic extract was much more active, as evidenced by the fact that 
the pupils began to dilate. The effect of this dose was simply a slight stimula- 
tion. The experiment with the fluid extract wns not continued further on 
account of the lateness of the hour. 

After taking the first mescal button 1 exjjerlenced after about 5 minutes a 
feeling of well being and a gradually increasing acuteness of visual perception. 
This was so pronounced as to attract my attention at the end of about 15 
minutes. I was sitting in ii rocker turning the pages of a book, when I happened 
to glance up at the wall. I was startled nt first to see for the first time a 
vivid crack in the v»-all beside the door. The surprise was so great that I rose 
and walked toward the door to ascertain the reality of the phenomenon. The 
crnck was really there: but as I ascertained next day was so inconspicuous 
that it would not ordinarily attract the attention of any but the closest 
observer. I quickly realized, having had a similar experience with strychnine, 
that the phenomenon w;is due to increased acuteness of vision and was not an 
hallucination. I quickly proved this point to my own satisfaction by sitting 
quietly and staring at the wall opposite. The effect was equally startling; 
for I could perceive inequalities in the shnding in the oil coloring of the wall. 
which had always previously appeared to me to be a uniform tan brown color. 
At this stage these phenomena were clearly not of the hallucination type; but 
were due solely to increased acuteness of vision and perception of color. This 
would ex])lain the shadow or "picturelike"' effect which other observers have 
noted while viewing familiar objects while under the influence of mescal. 
.Just before taking the second button I noticed by looking into the mirror that 
the pupils of my eyes were strongly dilated. The third button produced the 
first alarming systems. I ate half of that button and attempted to walk across 
the room. Though I accomplished this successfully there was a truly remark- 
able muscular weakness in my legs so tliat at times I had to assist myself with 
a chair. 

A most peculiar anil interesting thing in this connection was the fact that the 
tendency of the body was to fall backv.-ard ; never to the side or forward. In 
fact I have a distinct recollection of walking down the hall with my body bent 
forward, almost double, In the effort to keep from falling backward. I resumed 
my chair as soon as possible and was extremely exhausted. It then required 
the greatest effort of the will on my part to force myself to eat the other half 
of the third button. My nervous agitation became extreme, and I solved the 
problem by lighting a cigar. After smoking but si few moments I beciiiiie co'm- 

47003—18 3 



84 PE\()TK. 

posed and flnislied the third button. The tremulous movement of my hands 
ceased, and I felt at peace with the world. Feeling a great desire to lie down, 
I managed in spite of extreme weakness to undress myself and go to bed 
(9 p. m.). Just before I retired, however, I ate the fourth and last button, 
notwithstanding a protest of nausea during the process. Though the electric 
light in my room did not distress me earlier in the evening, it began to cause 
me great discomfort before I took the last button, and I therefore switched 
off the light when I retired to bed. After I had assumed the recumbent pos- 
ture I recall turning over on my side but once, and I recovered complete con- 
sciousness in that position. Within a few minutes muscular weakness had 
so increased that I was able only to move my fingers and toes. Though I ex- 
erted all my will power, I could not force my right hand to grasp my left upper 
arm, which it was touching. The fingers would move separately but not to- 
gether as a wliole hand. My eyes were wide open, and T was perfectly con- 
scious of my condition. I could hear the clock ticking and also the noise of the 
trains in the yards downtown. I experienced no fear or other discomfort, for I 
had no desire to sleep, as is the c;ise in an opium intoxication, and felt that so 
long as I kept awake I was in no danger. With my eyes open, staring into the 
darkness. I witnessed a l^aleidoscope of colors somewhat similar , to lliose de- 
scribed by other observers. It would be folly, however, to attempt a detailed 
description of them by reason of their almost infinite number; but I shall men- 
tion a few examples. One curious fact was noted that the duration of each 
burst of color was coincident with the noise of the ticking of my clock standing 
on a dresser in the room. This has since led me to belie^'e that the very tick- 
ing itself was responsible for the regularity of the visions ; since fitlier observers 
have noted that any sound called forth a burst of color. In this connection it 
may be noted that when the Kiowa Indians are celebrating the mescal rite the 
intoxicated persons are said to be seated before a flickering fire, while attend- 
ants beat upon drums throughout the entire night. Here, again, sound woul4 
seem to be a factor in producing impressions on the auditory centers which 
result in the production of visual hallucinations. At first I saw only a succes- 
sion of luminous, flying balls not unlike tiny electric-light bulbs and all of a 
green color of every conceivable shade. After a time these became interspersed 
with red ones, and the foundtainlike shower of color continued. I^ater. these 
colors came in pairs, usually of red and green, orange and yellow, and. most 
curious of all, purple and gold. The latter were always in bands which hurst 
forth in ribbonlike streamers and suddenly disappeared to give way to other 
colors. 

Presently the colors began to appear in a long broad band similar to the 
visible spectrum. In fact, it had the appearance of that band of color except 
that the violet end was absent. I recall that even in my condition of semi- 
stupor I noticed this difference from the experience of other observers. Others 
had quite unanimously reported violet as a predominant color, and up to that 
time I had seen neither blue nor violet, though I had witnessed a few purple 
flashes. I amused myself for a time by mentally calling foi- the appeai-ance of 
several colors of the spectrum. Indeed. I found that when I wanted green the 
whole band of color was green of innumerable shades. The same was true of 
red, orange, yellow, and purple. When I began systematically calling the spec- 
trum colors — violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red — I found that 
it was only by repeated and insistent calling that I obtained a vision of the 
violet end, and then it was unsatisfactory and transitory. One of the last 
visions that I recall was one of a vast field of tall golden lilies each pouring 
forth a stream of purple flame. This was an exceptional case, for most of the 
visions were not associated with familiar ob,1ects but were simply of a mass of 
twisting, undulating, luminous ob.iects of a more or less reg-ular or coiVlike 
shape. 

At one time I seemed to see a writhing coil of twisted .golden rope whirling 
its way from the pit of my stomach up to the mouth and then completing a 
circle back into the stomach again. Every movement was executed with in- 
credible celerity and the scenes changed as regularly as the clock ticked. Hav- 
ing once seen any given vision, it disappeared, to be seen no more. 

These visions continued for what seemed many hours, and suddenly I felt 
that my senses were normal again. I rose from my bed, feeling perfectly 
natural, and turned on the electric light. Instantly I was blinded by a flash of 
purple light which enveloped everything in the room. I closed my eyes and 
then opened them cautiously. This time I noticed no effect other than a sen- 
sitiveness to light. I thought that it must surelv be about 6 o'clock a m and 



PKVOTE. 35 

carelessly glanced at the clock. I was niomentiirily astounded to see that it 
was but 1 a. m. I had been In a state of trance for just four hours and it 
seemed like a \yhol6 night. I returned to bed, where I lay quietly till about 
2.30 a. m., when I fell asleep. 

At S a. m. I awoke, feeling no ill effects from my night's experience. But 
throughout the entire day I felt sluggish, both physically and mentally. My 
eyes were somewhat sensitive to light, though the other perceptive senses 
seemed .somewhat blunted. There was a pronounced tendency to shallow 
breathing and deep Inspirations were always made with more or less effort as 
if the respiratory muscles \\-ei'e fatigued. By 6 p. ni. of the day following the 
intoxication I felt perfectly normal and slept soundly the following night. 

The following observations were made wliile sitting in a chair after the 
second button was taken : 

Pulse, 84 per minute; soft and small. 
Respiration, shallow ; not markedly afCecteil. 
Skin, hot and flushed. 
Eyes, dilated. 

Cardiac region, no discomfort experienced. 
Muscles, relaxed ; slight tremors in hands and legs. 
Ears, faint, persistent roaring. 

The statement that the drug produces no after effect surely needs some quali- 
flcation. The general rule that the " the result of continued stinuilation of a 
given function ends in depression " seems to have no exception in the case of 
this drug. Certainly there is no after sensation of pain or other physical dis- 
comfort, but the decided languor and lack of energy resulting from the use of 
the drug mu.st surely be considered iis due to overstinudation, as is the case 
with many other intoxicants. 

The intoxication is by no means comp.-irable with that produced by alcohol. 
The intellect remains clear ; speech, though difficult, is not impeded or abnormal, 
though the voice sounds strangs and far away to the speaker. The instability, 
when standing, appears long before there is distortion of vision and the 
tendency to fall is always backward. The nausea which often follows opium or 
alcoholic intoxication is entirely absent, and in addition there is no excessive 
thirst. 

In conclusion, I may state that I should nof care to repeat the experiment 
with a dose exceeding four mescal buttons. The muscular paralysis is so 
complete that one might cease breathing, thus ending the experiment. 



Exhibit D, 

The University ov Kansas, 

Lawrence, May 8, 1915. 
A. R. Snyder, 

Superintendetit mid Special Disbursing Agent, 

Potawatomi Agency, Mayetta, Kans. 

Dkar Sir; Your lettei- of the 6th and the mescal buttons at hand. 

Permit me to state that we have examined these buttons and tested them 
physiologically in our pharmacological laboratory. 

We have found them to contain about 1 per cent of poisonous alkaloids, and 
these alkaloids, when experimented with upon animals, give the following 
physiological actions: They first increase reflex excitability, and later the 
animal passes into quiet sleep. The respiration is depressed and becomes full 
and deep The circulation is weakened and the heart beat Is diminished in 
rapidity Poisonous doses produce intense muscular spasms, especially of the 
stomacii and diaphragm, followed by tetanus convulsions resembling those 
caused by overdoses of strychnine. , ^ ^, ■ ^ 

I would ■^ay that although in the Harrison Act the mescal button is not men- 
tioned especially, it should be regarded as a habit-producing drug aud should 
be restricted or prohibited by the provisions of that act. ^ ^^ , ^, 

Please understand that I am no authority on the question of the buttons being 
a habit-nroducing drug, but from all I have learned from various communications 
I am inclined to think that it is decidedly one of this class. It is said to have 
a remarkable effect upon the imagination, and it is also said to be regarded by 
the Indians as the vegetable incarnation of a deity. 



36 PEYOTE. 

I do not consider the drug to be one that can be classified with the opium 
group, but it is, nevertheless, a harmful drug, and should be controlled in it3 
use among those who have no conception of the harm which may come through 
its employment. 

If there is any further assistance I can render you, I should be very glad to 
do so. 

Very truly, yours, 

L. E. Satbe. 



Exhibit E. 

Salt Lake City, Utah, March 10, 1916. 
John K. Hardy, Esq., 

Secretary of Gov. William Spry, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Dear Sir : Complying with your request of recent date, I take pleasure in 
submitting herewith the results of my investigation in regard to the plant 
known as " peyote." 

PEYOTE. 

Description. — The commercial article known as " peyote " constitutes the 
dried root and dried blossoms of a small cactus plant which grows abundantly 
in the valley of the Rio Grande, in the southwest portion of the United States 
and also in the adjacent parts of Mexico. The dried blossoms may be briefly 
described as occurring in irregular, flattened, more or less round, dull-brownish 
pieces, about an inch and a half in diameter and a quarter of an inch in thick- 
ness, heavily wrinkled, the bottom of the blossom showing the circular place 
where it had been detached from the cactus. The other side presents a circular , 
tuft of silkylike mass of fibers, soft and closely matted together. The dried. 
blossoms possess a characteristic, somewhat narcotic, odor and a peculiar bitter 
taste, which becomes more prominent upon chewing the blossom. 

J^nci. — Very little is known regariling the medicinal properties as well as 
the characteristic chemical constituents of the peyote plant. As stated above, 
both tlie roots and the blossoms are used, the latter, however, being preferred. 
According to statements of reliable parties, actually acquainted with the 
conditions, in recent years a dangerous practice has come into use among 
the Indians, notably the Ouray Utes, in acquiring a habit tor this drug. Its 
effect upon these people appears to be similar to that of opium. The blos- 
soms, including the tuft of silky fibers, are chewed and eaten similar to the 
way the Peruvians derive the effects of cocaine from chewing the coco leaves. 
At first the peyote blossom causes a great state of excitement and mental 
exhilaration. Then it deadens the senses, produces abnormal dreams, is 
demoralizing, and, finally, this peyote causes the Indians to remain drunk or 
in a stupor for two or three days. Peyote was first introduced under the 
form of a religious ceremony and during the reading from the Bible, prayer, 
singing of songs, and dances the peyote would be passed around until the 
Indians were drunk with it. At the present time the Ute Indians hold their 
■' peyote services " every Saturday night until Sunday morning at Randlette, 
Utah, and from all accounts this habit of evil is growing at a very rapid 
pace, with decidedly demoralizing effects upon these people. 

Inreatigation. — Besides the usual plant constituents, such as starch, resin, 
wax, gum, mucilage, tannin, etc., I have found that the dried blossoms of this 
plant contain an " alkaloid," an active principle similar to that which is 
contained in opium, coco, and other powerful narcotic drugs. ProUius modi- 
fied fluid appears to extract the active virtues of the plant, and, furthermore, 
from tlie alkaline-ether residue there is obtained an alkaloidal principle which 
possesses the following properties and reactions : 

Grayish white, distinctly crystalline, of a bitter taste, and practically in- 
iidorous; combines with acids to form salts. This principle, furthermore, 
responds to all of the connnon alkaloidal reactions and, with the special alka- 
loidal I'euKents, it gives characteristic color displays. The salt of this alkaloid 
yielded identical reactions. 

The following are recoi'ded herewith : 

A. Sulphuric acid: Bright canary yellow. 

B. Snljihuric' acid plus nitric acid : Deep browidsh red, clianging to orange 
jed and finally dull brownish. 



PEYOTE. 37 

C. Sulphuric acid plus bichromate: No change. 

D. Nitric acid : Colorless at first, soon changing to bright reddish brown. 
H. Froehdes reagent: Deep Nile green. 

F. Vanadine sulphuric acid : Greenish bluish, becoming darker upon standing. 

G. Erdman's reagent : Light orange. 
H. Iron chloride : No change. 

I. Iodic acid : Slight reduction. 

J. Ferricyanide potash plus iron : Bluish-greenish color. 

K. Mayers's reagent : Heavy precipitation. 

L. Picric acid : Heavy precipitation. 

M. Gold chloride : Heavy precipitation. 

Further investigation is being made to obtain a quantity of this alkaloidal 
principle. 

More than a month ago a request was made by the undersigned of tho 
Thomas Nelson Research and Information Bureau of New York in regard to 
peyote, its medical properties as well as the characteristics of this plant. 
Up to the present no reply has been received. 

Summary and conclusions. — The plant or drug known as " peyote " contains, 
among other constituents, an alkaloidal principle to which, no doubt, are due 
^the powerful narcotic actions upon the human system. It is earnestly recom- 
mended that the next legislature take the proper steps to include this plant 
or drug among the list of prohibited narcotics, as, no doubt, its indiscriminate 
use by the Indians and the laiety produces a demoralizing, harmful, and 
depraved condition. 

Respectfully, (Signed) Harman Hakms, 

^tatr Cficmint. 



Exhibit F. 
mescai. buttons. 

January 28, 1910. 

" The Physiological Action of the Alkaloids Dei'ived from Anhnluninm 1e-w%nii 
(Mescal Buttons)," by Walter E. Dixon. M. D. (The .Tournal of Physiology, 
London, 1899 to 1900, vol. 25, pp. 69 to 86.) 

Dr. Dixon has made a thorough investigation of the active principles of the 
mescal buttons or peyote, using at first dogs, cats, and other smaller animals, 
but later administering the drug to the human subject, and noting the results. 
His experiments extended over a considerable length of time, and the conclu- 
sions are reported at length, the principal part of which are as follows : 

" The action may be divided into a preliminary stage and a stage of intoxica- 
tion. In the former there is excitement, a feeling of exhilaration, and dimin- 
ished kineesthetic sensations, performances involving effort being hardly no- 
ticed, the face is flushed, and the pupils dilated ; there is a tendency to talka- 
tiveness, which may become wandering later, when the patient begins to feel 
' light-headed.' 

"This stage quickly passes away, and is followed by one of intoxication, 
In which there is a great inclination to He down, although there is never any 
tendency to sleep. The pupils are now widely dilated, and act but sluggishly 
to light. On attempting to walk, the gait closely resembles that in alcoholic 
intoxication, and in all movements requiring precision the incoordination is 
evident The body is generally in a tremulous condition, the tremors showing 
well when the attention is fixed on anything held in the hand. Reflexes over 
the whole body are much increased, including the skin reflexes, although there 
is considerable blunting of painful and tactile sensation. Twitching of muscles 
cocurs in various parts of the body, especially noticeable in the face, and there 
is 1 curious feeling as if the lace, lips, tongue, etc., were much swollen. 

"As in cannabis indica, time is overestimated, possibly as a result of the 
nnid flow of ideas and the inability to fix the attention. Perception of space 
is also modified, on one occasion giving the impression that the ground sloped 

^erLSion'mav^he considerably delayed; for example, one n.,y look at a 
Derson one knows well, and it is only after scanning his features for ^yhat 
™ea^s to the experimenter a considerable time, that recognition occurs ; it is 
appeals to rue '^-^1"='. . j^ explained by the increased time-relatiou. 

^^hfa'tten'tr^crn nof be^fixeTas'thX. st stim'ulus is suflicient to alter the 



38 PEYOTE. 

train of thought ; thus it was found impossible to fix the attention on a book, 
and a subsequent examination of notes attempted during Intoxication sliowed 
incoordination both as regards language and writing. 

" On two occasions when deeplj' under the influence of the drug, there was an 
indescribable feeling of dual existence; thus, after sitting with closed eyes 
subjectively examining the color visions, on suddenly opening them for a brief 
space one seems to be a dilferent self, as on waking from a dream we pass 
into a different world from that in which we have been. This may be to some 
extent comparable to the rhythmical rise and fall of the ' physical waves ' in 
Indian hemp intoxication. 

" But by far the most remarkable of these subjective phenomena are the 
sensory hallucinations, especially visual. These arise gradually, and are at 
first only seen with closed eyes; in the early stage (in my case) they closely 
resemble an attack of megrim, in that they show the same undulatory motion 
of sigzagged lines. The visions rapidly become more marked, until on closing 
the eyes a regular kaleidoscopic play of colors can be seen with either eye, 
precisely the same; hence the condition must be central. 

" These colors may assume all kinds of fantastic shapes ; they are never 
.still, but constantly in motion, sometimes in a circular or to-and-fro manner, 
but more generally there is a kind of pulsation somewhat similar to that in the 
cinematograph. It Is interesting to note that pressure to the eyeball was suffi- 
cient to alter the colors and change the type of vision. In no case were visions 
of external objects seen, but always the same dashes of color, of a brilliance 
and blending which in the intoxicated condition one considered of Indescribable 
beauty, and even as a memory still seem to possess a charm. The coloring 
of all external objects is intensified. The light blue shadows seen with the 
eyes open in this stage are, as suggested by Ellis, probably due to dilation of 
the pupils. Pobi'owolsky has sliown that the dilation of the pupils is necessary 
to such vision. 

" The effect of the sound of the piario was most curious and delightful, the 
whole air being filled with music, each note of which seemed to arrange around 
itself a medley of other notes which appeared to me to be surrounded by a halo 
of color pulsating to the music." 

" Anhalonium Lewinii (Mescal Buttons)." — A study of the drug with special 
reference to its physiological action upon man, with report of experiments. By 
D. W. Prentiss, M. D., and Francis P. Morgan, reported in the Therapeutic 
Gazette, 1895, volume 11, from page 577 to page 585. Drs. Prentiss and Mor- 
gan, after an extensive study of the charucteristics of the mescal button, 
giving its uses by the various Indian tribes of the United States with reference 
to their religious ceremonies, made a number of experiments upon the human 
subject, and recorded in detail the physiological action of the drug. A record 
of the action in each case was kept, and the entire number compared, and the 
following results reported : 

" The production of visions is the most interesting of the physiological effects 
of the Anhalonium Lewinii, as shown by these experiments. The visions ranged 
from ill-defined flashes of color to most beautiful figures, forms, landscapes, 
dances — in fact, there seemed to be absolutely no limit to the variety of visions 
which the drug could produce. They could in but few cases be seen with the 
eyes open, but upon closing them an ever-changing panorama appeared. The 
predominating feature of the vision was the color effects, although the figures, 
forms, etc., were in themselves sources of pleasure and admiration. Drumming, 
or otherwise marking regular time, enhanced the beauty and variety of the 
objects seen. In two cases the visions were under the control of the will, and 
in one case they were subject to the suggestion of others. The amount of 
pleasure derived from the drug seemed to vary inversely with the amount of 
muscular depression present. The effect of the drug in the production of 
visions is in all probability due to the stimulation of the centers of vision in 
the brain. The persistent ache and feeling of exhaustion in the occipital region, 
which was present for several days after Experiment 4, is of interest in this 
connection. 

" In some cases no eifect whatevei- was produced upon the reason or will of 
the Individual. In others there was some slowness of thought and loss of 
power of expression, and in Experiment 2 a marked delusion. Compared with 
other intoxicants, however, the effect upon the mind is extremely slight. 

" Dilatation of the pupil was well marked in every case, and persisted for 
from 12 to 24 hours after the drug was taken. The dilatation was accompanied 



PEYOTE. 39 

by a slight loss of the power of accommodation and consequent disturbance of 
vision. 

'^More or less depression of the muscular system existed in every case, and 
this was the first effect noticed after the drug was taken. It ranged from a 
feeling of lazy contentment to marked muscular depression. Susceptiliilitv to 
this effect varied widely. Whether the sedative action is caused by depres- 
sion of the nerve centers, peripheral nerves, or their nerve endings, or of the 
muscular fibers themselves, we are at present unable to state; Imt from con- 
comitant nervous effects we are inclined to the belief that it is due to depres- 
sion of the nervous system and not of the muscular fibers themselves. 

" Partial anaesthesia of the skin was present in three of the cases, appear- 
ing when the effects of the drug began to wear off. 

" The heart action is at first rendered more slow and somewhat weaker in 
Quality. This is followed by a rise to the normal in quality and rapidity, which 
continues during the period of greatest activity of the drug. In the cases in 
which the muscular depression was greatest, slight, if any, depression of the 
heart was present. 

" The respiration was unaffected in all cases except one. In this it seemed 
to partake slightly of the general muscular depression. 

" Upon the stomach the drug produced an effect which varied from a feeling 
of \ineasiness and fullness at intervals to nausea and vomiting. 

"Inability to sleep for at least 12 hours after the effects of tlie drug com- 
menced to pass off was a marked effect. 

" Loss of the sense of time existed in all cases. 

" No constant effect upon the bowels, skin, temperature, and the amount of 
secretion of the various glands of the body was found. 

" The only record of the taking of Anhalonium Lewinii for experimental pur- 
poses which we have been able to find is that of Briggs. He took " a third 
of a specimen," and the symptoms produced were the following: in 1.5 minutes 
the pulse rose from 60 to 70. In 30 minutes there was fullness of the head, 
pulse 90, respiration 26. The sense of fullness increased, and was followed by 
a headache and swimming in the head. Suddenly the iialse showed up to 160 
and the respiration increased so that he could with difficulty get sufficient 
breath to keep himself alive. He thought he was about to die, and became 
unconscious. In 6 or 8 hours his pulse and respiration went down again to the 
normal. Great depression existed for 12 hours. 

"The symptoms produced in this experiment are so widely different from 
those which we have obtained from administration of the drug that we can not 
believe that the drug taken by Briggs was the same one which we have now 
under consideration. 

" Lewin, in experiments upon animals, found that in them the drug produced 
an acute muscular .spasm of varying intensity, with increased reflexes, its 
action in this particular much resembling strychnine or brucine. No such 
effect was present, however, in our experiments upon man. Whether or not it 
would be produced by much larger doses is, of course, a matter of conjecture. 
In some animals, also, a quickened respiration was noted, which effect was 
present in our experiments only in one case, and in the presence of great general 
muscular depression. In animals, also, the heart remained unaffected, whereas 
in man we found a primary slowing of the heart action. In both animals and 
man more or less tendency to nausea and vomiting existed in most cases. 

" The physiological action of AnhaJimium. leirinii upon man can not be said to 
be identical with that of any other known drug. Its effects resemble those of 
certain drugs in some of the .symptoms produced, but differ widely from them 
in others. Cannabis indica produces visions, with dilated pupils, and with slight 
effect upon the circulation. In these particulars its action is similar to Anlialon- 
iimi levnnii. But cannabis indica is an hypnotic, and the delirium and halluci- 
nations are in most cases followed by sleep. AnhaMniuni leiriiiU, on the other 
hand, tends to produce wakefulness in every case. The Indians do not sleep 
for 24 hours after the commencement of their ceremony, and in our experiments 
.sleep was found to be impossible for about the same length of time. 

" In this tendency to produce wakefulness it resembles cocaine. The visions 
produced by cannabis indica ' are generally of a gay character, jiroducing unich 
merriment, accompanied by a great inclination to muscular movement.' The 
visions of Anhalonium Iririnii provoked wonder and admiration but no merri- 
ment, and there was present disinclination to make any musculai- effort. Other 
marked differences exist which will become evident to anyone comparing the 
action of the two drugs. 



40 PEYOTE. 

" Of the other drugs to whose action Anhalonium lewinii may seem to bear a 
faint resemblance — cocaine, belladonna, strychnine — the difference in action 
present is so great as to render it very improbable that any of them are active 
principles of the drug. Whether one or more of these substances or their 
alkaloids do not exist in the Anhalonium levAnii can not be stated until the 
chemical analysis is complete and experiments have been conducted to determine 
the identity of the principles isolated." 

"The Phenonena of Mescal Intoxication (Mescal Buttons)," Dr. Havelock 
Ellis (London Lancet, 1897, vol. 1, pp. 1540-1542.) 

Dr. Ellis's experiments were on the human subject. He used an infusion of 
three buttons given in three doses at intervals of one hour, and the following 
results are noted : 

A dissipated, severe headache ; produced a marked muscular irritability ; the 
pulse continued to fall until the full effect of the drug was obtained, going as low 
as 48 per minute ; produced shadows of various colors ; there was nausea, with 
shallow resporation, dilated pupils, and motor incoordination. 

Dr. Ellis states that motor incoordination and the thoracic symptoms of 
cardiac and respiratory depression were the only really unpleasant symptoms 
of the experiment. He thinks that the pleasure of mescal intoxication does not 
lie in any resultant passive emotional state, such as is produced by tea or alco- 
hol, but strictly in the enjoyment of the color visions produced. Attention, he 
says, is impaired, but intellectual judgment remains unimpaired. The visions 
seemed to him as beautiful in memory as when he experienced them. The 
sensory phenomena seemed to be due to great and general disintegration and 
exhaustion of the sensory apparatus. Dr. Ellis is convinced that all the senses 
were more or less affected. There were vague dermal sensations, and the body 
felt unfamiliar to the touch, just as everything seemed delightfully unfamiliar 
to the sense of vision. He noticed also that any marked casual stimulation of 
the skin produced other sensory phenomena — a heightening of the visions or an 
impression of sound. This is a phenomenon, he says, which may thi-ow an In- 
teresting light on the synaesthesiffi, or " secondary sensations." 

"The Alkaloids of Anhalonium lewinii (mescal buttons), with notes upon 
Therapeutic Uses," by D. W. Prentiss and F. I'. Morgan, reported in Transac- 
tions of thf Medical Society of the District of Coluinbia, 1897 (vol 1 pp l'>3- 
127). ' 

Drs. Prentiss and Morgan, after isolating from the mescal button a number 
of alkaloids, performed experiments upon the human subject to determine the 
action of these various preparations with a view to determining their thera- 
peutic uses. After a careful consideration of the results of each experiment, 
they gave the following as possibly the therapeutic uses of the drug : 

" The conditions in which it seems probable that the use of mescal buttons 
will produce beneficial effects are the following : In general nei'vousness, nervous 
headache, nervous irritable cough, abdominal pain due to colic or griping of the 
intestines, hysterical manifestations, and in other similar affections in which an 
antispasmodic is indicated ; as a cerebral stimulant in neurasthenia and in de- 
pressed conditions of the mind— hypochondriasis, melancholia, and allied con- 
ditions ; as a substitute for opium and chloral in conditions of great nervous 
irritability or restlessness, in active delirium and mania, and in insomnia caused 
by pain.' In the last condition it acts to produce sleep, not as a hypnotic, but 
by relieving the cause of the insomnia. In full physiological doses' it produces 
insomnia, but in therapeutic doses it does not have this effect." 

The following extract is taken from Materia Medica and Therapeutics of Dr 
Cushney : 

" It is similar to opium and cannabis indica, but more frequent color visions 
are produced. It does not produce the same amount of merriment that cannabis 
indica does, nor sleep as morphine. It produces imperfect coordination of move- 
ment, retards perception, and produces errors in estimation of time, due to its 
action on the cerebrum. Large doses cause depression of the respiratorv and 
circulatory centers." 

From Merck's Index foi- 1907, the follo\\ing extract is taken : 

"Me.scal buttons cause an intoxication accompanied bv most wonderful 
visions, beautiful and varied kaleidoscopic changes, sensations of increased 
physical ability, the physical and phychical functions remaining unimpaired " 

"Anhalonium lewinii (mescal button)." Dr. D. A. Richards, reported in the 
Denver Medical Times, 1896-97 (vol. 16, pp. 21.3-217) : 

" First. Relieved a persistent case of trifacial neuralgia. 



PEVOXE. 41 

" Second. Relieved a case of inflammatory rlieumatism, all excretlous mark- 
edly increased. 

'.'. '^^^^' '^^^^ "* persistent trifacial neuralgia relieved and reported cured. 
Fourth. A case of gout with deposits around tbe joints relieved of sufferinK 
and the deposits absorbed. 

"Fifth. Relief in all forms of gastro-intestinal colic. It lessens pain and 
causes diaresis. Increased elimination. I( must be given \yith care, for an 
overdose is very dangerous." 

The most vivid description of the action produced by this drug is given by 
Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, of Philadelphia, and reported in the British Medical Jour- 
nal, 1896, volume 2, pages 1625-1629. He took in all about 6 fluid drachms of 
the extract at intervals from 12 night to 4.10 p. m., representing six mescal 
buttons. His condensed report is as follows : 

"It will have been seen that mescal supplied me with one-sided (left) frontal 
headache, later with occipital pain on botli sides, with colored zigzags or forti- 
fication lines, T^he rain of silver, and disorder of the stomach. I ask myself 
now if the megrims with visions are apt to be found in association with 
occipital pain in the regions of the convolutions, which we believe store up our 
ocularly acquired memories. It is worth an Inquiry. 

" The mode of action of mescal Is somewhat curious and may vary with the 
dose and the man. At first, even at the height of drug action, the visions re- 
quire one to wait with closed eyes for a minute or more. .To open the eyes Is 
to dismiss tlie vision, no matter how dark be the room. Suggestion availed me 
but little, and no act of will was competent to hold my dream unaltered. 

" I found in these seeming laws some resemblance of those which — in my case. 
at least — appear to govern a quite ordinary and normal phenomenon. From 
childhood I, like some others, can at night, before sleep arrives, summon visions. 
These are not always just what I desire. Once present, I can not alter them ; 
they shift, change, and disappear under influences not within my capacity to 
control or to analyze. To open my eyes, even in the most intense darkness, dis- 
misses these visions. Is it true of opium visions? The same law certainly 
applies to some hysterical phantasms ; but the explanation does not as yet seem 
attainable. My normal power to summon visions was entirely lost under mescal 
action. I tried to see faces, gardens, etc.. but none came at command so long 
as I was under the influence of the drug. 

" For the psychologist this agent should have value. To be able with a wliole 
mind to experiment mentally upon such phenomena as I have described is an 
unusual iirivilege. Here is unlocked a storehouse of glorified memorial treas- 
ures of one kind. There may be a drug which shall so release a mob of verbal 
memories, or of musical records, or. in fact, of tastes and odors. I naturally 
speak of things seen under mescal Influence as glorifled memories — certainly 
nothing seen in these visions was altogether outside of my known experiences^ — 
but everything was excessive — forms were gigantic — colors marvelously in- 
termingled. In fact, nothing was simply the vision of a thing to be remem- 
bered and recognized except the familiar Newport Beach. 

" I see no obvious therapeutic uses for mescal in massive doses. It is yet to 
be tested by continuous employment in moderate amounts, and may be of 
value. 

"-I sought so to limit the influence of mescal ns to remnin In full possession 
of all my faculties. The larger doses secure, as Dr. Prentiss has shown, more 
remarkable results, but may lessen the power to observe and to comment. I 
should dread a little lest excessive amounts might leave too permanent effects. 
In fact. I constantly carried for days a quite vivid image of one of these jewel 
clusters, seeing it mentally whenever my mind was turned upon the subject of 
my visions. 

" I could match this also by a painful experience of some years ago, but I 
have said enough to show the great interest of this drug for physicians and 
psychologists. I predict a perilous reign of the mescal habit when this agent 
becomes attainable. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic of my 
experience will, I am sure, be too much for some men to resist after they have 
once set foot in this land of fairy colors, where there seems to be so much to 
charm and so little to excite horror or disgust. 

" Were I to take mescal again I should dictate to a stenographer all that I 
saw and in due order. No one can hope to remember for later record so wild a 
sequence of color and of forms. But since to talk does not disturb these visions, 
a perfect account might easily be given. No one has told us what visions come 
to the Bed man. I should like to know if those of the navvy would be like those 



42 PEYOTE. 

lit the artist, and above all, what those born blind could x-elate; and, too, such 
;is are born color blind. In fact, a valuable range of experiment is here to be 
laid open. 

" I append to my own statement that of Dr. Eshner, one of the clinical staff 
of the Infirmary for Nervous Diseases. It will be seen that, although the symp- 
toms were not unlike my own, there were some interesting differences. There 
was nausea, whereas I had none ; there was no distinct headache, whilst mine 
was notable. In general, the experience was in Dr. Eshner's case more unpleas- 
ant than in mine or in those Dr. Prentiss has reported, neither were the visions 
so remarkable nor the colors so vivid as were those I saw. It is as well to add, 
as concerns my own statement, that when twice in my life, I have had to take 
hypodermic injections of morphine for several successive nights, the drug 
ceased to cause sleep after the third night. Later it gave rise to visions of very 
remarkable character, which I have elsewhere described. These were seen 
whether or not the eyes were closed, if only the room in which- 1 lay was en- 
tirely dark." 



Exhibit G. 

vo'jk .^dol'tkd uy the board of indian commissioners at its annual meeting, 

march 6 and 7, 1912. 

Department of the Interior, 

Board op Indian Commissioners, 

Washington, D. G. 
Voted: That the Board of Indian Commissioners favor legislation or execu- 
tiv action extending all re.strictions applicable to the use of and traific in intoxi- 
cating liquors so that such restrictions shall apply also to the use of and traffic 
In mescal or peyote. 
A true copy : 

H. O. Phillips, Herretary. 



Exhibit H. 

The Bureau of Catholic Indian Missions, 

Washington, D. C, March 9, 1911. 
The Secretary of Interior, 

Washington, D. C. 

Sir : One of the most serious evils by which the Indians are menaced to-day Is 
the easting of the mascal button or peyote, which has been introduced in recent 
years among certain tribes, greatly to their detriment. This eating of the 
mescal, in the .iudgment of many, is a greater menace to the Indians than even 
whisky, and bears some analogy to the " opium habit." The fact that the eating 
of the mescal has been made a kind of a religious rite renders it a greater 
menace than it otherwise would be. I have not been able to secure the latest 
scientific pronouncements concerning the effect of the drug, but call attention to 
inclosures as follows : 

'/. Lettej- from Dr. Alerrill E. Gates, secretary. Board of Indian Commis- 
sioners. 

b. Letter from Kev. Di-. T. C. Moffett, with items submitted by him. 

I am under the impression that if more accurate information be needed, it can 
lie obtained from Dr. Wiley, who recently, in a conversation with me, stated that 
he would be glad to furnish any information on the matter that he might have. 

Some months ago an Arapaho Indian, of Wyoming, wrote me a letter telling 
me of tlie disastrous effects of the mescal on his mind (it seems he had become 
a fit subject for an insane asylum), and begging me to do something to save his 
people fi-om the subtle drug. In reference to this Dr. Wiley made the statement 
that he \vould not be surprised if it should be discovei-ed that mescal eating were 
conductive to insanity. 

Those who defend the practice of mesQiil eating contend that those who in- 
dulge, abstain from the use of whisky and that a marked improvement is noted 
in their cijnduct. I presume that this is only an instance of one evil supplanting 
.•mother. One tiling ci'i-tnin is that where the practice has taken hold, the In- 



I'EVOTE. 43 

diaiis imlulKe to excess, spending whole nights eating the mescal and engaging in 
tlie pecviliar religions observances with which they have surrounded its use. It 
will scarcely be possible to regulate its use and to keep it within bounds. Sys- 
tenmtie loss of sleep and overstimulation by the drug can not serve any useful 
purpose. Those who Indulge Will not be in a condition to work as they should 
and moreover will suffer physical and mental injur.\- and, of course, will be 
losers morally. 

On account of all this, those interested in the Indians have brought the matter 
to the attention of the Commissioner of Indian Affaii's. I am not quite sure, but 
I think tliat at one time there was some kind of regulation made limiting the 
munher of beans that could be brought onto a reservation. I am under the im- 
pression that the commissioner hesitjited to issue an order prohibiting the intro- 
duction and use of the bean on reservations, because of the semireligious char- 
acter of the ceremonies observed while using it. 

At a meeting of the secretaries of the missionary societies wliich do work 
uniong the Indians, on February 2(i, 1!>0,S, the following resolution adopted by 
the missionary secretaries was triuismitted to tlie Hoard of Indian Commis- 
sioners : 

" Resolred, That the Board of Indian Cuinmissioners be urged to investigate 
the mescal cult and to take such steps as necessary to suppress the use of the 
mescal button, or peyote, where it seems to be doing harm." 

The Board of Indian Commissioners gave their attention to the matter and 
evidently have been under the nnpression that the evil has been greatly abated, 
iis appears from their Forty-first Annual Report (1909). page I."), as follows; 

" The mexfol drug. — Some two years ago. as the result of interviews and 
correspondence with workers among Indians in the Southwest, this board rec- 
ommended that the Indian Bureau give careful attention to the growijig use 
of the powerful nar<'otic varlon.sly know as " nie.sci'.l mean," "mescal button," 
"Japanese button." or "wak-we." It iiroduces effects lil^e those of hasheesh. 
It is the dried blossom tip of a cactus in form somewhat like the parsni]i — 
not to be confounded with the mescal beet which the Apache gather and eat. 
In our last annual report we mentioned the fact that Dr. Wiley, of the De- 
partment of Agriculture (Bureau of Chemistry), and Dr. Morgan, both of 
whom had been interested in earlier experiments with the mescal bean, appeared 
before our board at a conference with missionary workers an)ong the Indians. 
They gave us the history of the expei'imeuts and investigations begun in 1897 
by the Smithsonian Institution (see Havelock Ellis's paper, ' JTescal, a New 
Artificial I'aradise'). They stated that this substance had been proved to be 
toxic, and that there was a ver>- strong presumption against its use by the 
Indians. A member of our board, at the request of the Bureau of Chemistry, 
obtained an additional supply of the mescal button, which was sent to the 
Agricultural Department for further experiments and investigation, should such 
be deemed necessary. We notice with pleasure the fact mentioned in the last 
report of the Commissionei- of Indian Affairs that in May, 1909, Chief Special 
Officer .lohnson bought up the entire market supply of the mescal button at 
Laredo, Tex., the central point for the trade, destroyed it, and obtained from 
the wholesale dealei's jigrcHiiients that they would no longer engage in tlie 
traffic. 'V^'e trust that the growing tendency among Indians to use this subtle 
and dangerous drug has Iieen permanently checked." 

The supply of mescal buttons is obtained from Mexico, and I believe that it is 
an impossibility for the entire market supply to be bought up. I am convinced 
that the mescal habit, instead of declining, is on the increase, and I am reliably 
informed that Indians go down to Mexico and bring up to the various reserva- 
tions all the buttons that are necessary for their purposes. In addition to my 
own personal observation, I wish to call attention to extracts of letters from 
Catholic missionaries which I submit herewith. 

I most earnestly beg that an effort be made at once to remove this evil from 
the reservations. I believe that the treatment of this question should be as 
drastic in nature as that administered in regard to the whisky evil among In- 
dians or as would be in regard to the " opium evil " if it were prevalent 
among them. I believe that no one should be permitted to introduce the 
bean upon a reservation- and that its use should he. if possilile. prohibited. 
Very respectfully, 

Wm. H. Ketchajt. Director. 



44 PEYOTE. 

Exhibit I. 

MESCAL, PETOTE, OR ANHALONIUM LBWINII. 

The name mescal is incorrect, meaning an entirely difEerent plant, and should 
not be used in this connection in legal or legislative documents unless closely 
defined. Peyote, signifying caterpillar, is of Mexican origin, and is generally 
understood by the Indians. Anhalonium Lewinii was the botanical name a few 
years ago, but I understand that another, which I do not know, is being sub- 
stituted for it. 

The use of the plant as a basis for a religious cult is apparently prehistoric 
among the Indian tribes of northern Mexico (e. g., the Tarumaris), and from 
them spread to the Kiowas, Comanches, etc.. of southwestern United States. 
From them, in turn, it moved northward until it has nearly, if not quite, 
reached the Canadian border. In its journey northward it has steadily dropped 
ofC pagan elements and grafted on Christian ones, until, as among the Winne- 
bagos, of Nebraska, it poses as a Christian denomination, administering the 
sacraments, and even claiming the right to marry. It affects chiefly the so- 
called "Plains Indians" and a few tribes closely affiliated with them (e. g., 
the Caddos). 

Without stopping to discuss the religious philosophies, or the various modes 
of worship, which the cult assumes, as being apart from out present purpose, 
I would suggest three of the chief reasons for its popularity : 

1. It is a drug habit, producing pleasurable excitation of the imagination, 
ordinarily without immediate Injurious effects. 

2. It is a religion which claims to be the Indian form of Christianity, and 
therefore makes a strong appeal to the racial instinct. 

3. It is generally organized and promulgated by young, educated Indians, 
who thus find that pathway to ambitious prominence which is denied them 
under the old-time regime. 

These three, combined with other arguments, either general or local in their 
application, make out a strong case to the Indian mind and win many converts. 

The effects of its use may be classified under four heads — physical, industrial, 
moral, and religious. 

(1) Physical: A number of cases have come to my Imowledge in which 
sudden death, apparently from heart failure or hemorrhage, has overtaken 
individuals while either eating or drinking peyote. Generally, however, the 
effect is slow, resulting in increasing lassitude and inactivity, with weakening 
will, disinclination to exertion, and loss of power of resistance when attacked 
by disease. We are also convinced that the offspring of confirmed users of 
peyote show marked nervous and brain disturbances, resulting often in early 
death, while the custom of administering the drug to young children must be 
deleterious. It is thought that the excessive mortality among the young men 
of certain tribes, e. g., the Oklahoma Arapahoes, is due to the prevalence of this 
habit among them. I am inclined to think that a moderate and occasional use 
of the drug may produce no evil effects, and may even be beneficial in some 
cases, if only because of its purgative action. Like liquor, it may often be used 
with impunity, but tends strongly to excess and physical harm. ' 

(2) Industrially the practice is without question injurious. The physical 
deterioration described above will, of course, in the end show Itself in decreased 
Indu.strial efficiency. The all-night character of their worship unfits the peyote 
eaters for active service the following day, while the influence of the drug results 
in unsteady nerves and relaxed brain. The undoubted fact that some are in- 
dustrious may often be offset by the .statement that these, like some hard 
drinkers, do not succumb because of exceptionally vigorous physiques, or perhaps 
use the plant only in moderation. It should further he remembered that as the 
cult confessedly attracts the young, educated. ;md progressive, it should show 
an exceptionally high degree of industrial efficiency. 

(3) Morally: It is certain that any practice which excites the imagination 
and relaxes the will, as the use of peyote does, must result in sexual immorality 
and the facts bear out this reasoning. I have been told repeatedly by those wlio 
have given up the practice that the so-called " mescal feasts " 'were often the 
scenes of unbridled libertinism. In some tribes, e. g., the Winnebagoes the 
cult teaches that peyote and liquor are Incompatible, and thus some restraint 
IS exercised oyer drunkenness, but, unfortunately, in most cases the effect does 
not last. Certain undoubted instances of moral reform in such tribes T woiild 



PEYOTE. 45 

attribute to the influence of tlie Bible and Christian teaching intermingled with 
their worship rather than to the drug. 

(4) Religiously: If Christianity, the accepted religion of the most civilized 
races of the earth, has any superiority, and we contend that it has much, over 
the pagan or hybrid forms of religion practiced by aboriginal peoples, then 
anything that prevents tlie acceptance of the better and the retention of the worse 
is a detriment to those affected. This is true of the mescal worship. By this 
intermixture of a drug habit with a pretense of Christian teaching the young 
men of many tribes are being led into an absurd cult, incompatible with Chris- 
tianity, and the \Aork of missionaries of all churches is seriously interfered 
with. If this undoubted disadvantage to the Indian resulted from a religious 
creed with its attendant worship alone, we could well afford to await the change 
that follows more light, but as it springs from an imported and vicious drug 
habit, we believe that it is well within the power and obligation of the Indian 
Office- to effect its suppression. 



I Peyote delenda- est. 



\V. C. Roe. 



KxHiBrr .1. 

ME;S(A1., a MENACIC TO THE IiNUIAN.S. 

Although much has been said and written in recent years concerning the 
use of peyote among the Indians Ln the United States, so tliat it is quite 
generally known and deplored, yet it is very evident that we greatly need to 
know the real facts. Turning to the Congressional Record of last year, when 
the ■ Indian appropriation bill \\'as under consideration and tlie words " and 
peyote " had been added to the section appropriating .flOOjOOO for tlie suppres- 
sion of the liquor traffic, we find that our lawmakers treated the subject as a 
joke, as a whimsical suggestion of some fanatical Indian enthusiast. This 
last year witnessed a repetition of the same indifferent eousiilcratioi). It is very 
evident that we need to know thoroughly the chemical constituents, the thera- 
peutic value, the psychological and physical effects of the drug, if we hope 
effectually to help our Indian brother who to-day, groping under the sad 
illusion of having found a panacea for all the ills of body and soul, is drawn 
headlong into incompetency and final despair. He will not take kindly to the 
proffered help; he will reject the extended hand; he will spurn any superior 
knowledge on the subject — the habit has " got him " — but it becomes the duty 
of every Government official, of every Christian workman, of every sincere 
friend of the Indian to deal with it most intelligently, most effectively and per- 
sistently. 

Fortunatelj- we are not left in the dark. The drug has for many years been 
most carefully and scientifically analyzed. Experiments have been made on 
both animals and human subjects. For years scientific articles have been 
published in medical journals. The United States dispensatory, which is the 
legal and final authority on all chemical analysis of all drugs, contains a full 
and mo.st illuminating article. The facts are, therefore, well known to the 
scientific man. They must be made known to the public. 

Anhaloniuni Lewinii is the botanical name. The word " peyote " appears to 
be of Mexican origin, while the term " mescal buttons " is the commercial 
designation given to it. The United States dispensatory says : " Under the name 
peyote are used in Mexico for narcotic purposes certain cacti whose tops have 
entered commerce under the name of mescal buttons." Every scientific de- 
scription that I have read speaks of mescal and peyote as the same drug. 

Peyote is a species of cactus grown in northern Mexico. It is pear-shaped. 
The top, about 1^ inches in diameter, is cut off. It is very soft when moist; 
when dry, becomes brittle and hard. It has a disagreeable taste and odor. It 
is sold by dealers largely who gather them for commercial purposes and sell 
them from .$3 to $8 per thousand in border towns in Texa;?. 

It is generally eaten in its dry brittle state, 5 to 50 or more liuttons taken 
in one night. It is also frequently made into a tea. In late years it is some- 
times powdered and put in capsule form. 

From time immemorial it was used for the purpose of producing intoxica- 
tion I)y certain tribes in Mexico. Prom there it spread among the Kiowas of 
the Rio Grande, the Zunis in Arizona, and others. It is worthy of note that 
in those eai-ly days it was always used for tlie purpose of producing intoxica- 



46 PEYOTE. 

tion iit religious cei'euionies. It is said that the Ziiiii Indians selected a tew to 
annually snbniit themselves tO' intoxication, but never habitually subjected 
themselves to frequent intoxication. As early as 1720 Spanish authorities isro- 
hlbited its use. and in the old Spanish archives appears a record of prosecution 
against an Indian for having drnnk the herb called peyote. In late years it 
gradually ha.s spread to an increasing and alarming extent among the ti'ibes of 
the United States. 

Beginning in the South among the Comanches. Kiowas. Otos, Cheyennes, 
Arapahoes, and their neighbors and spreading to the noi-thern tribes the 
Omahas, Winnebagoes. Sioux, and others, thousands of our Indiiins are now 
peyote drug fiends. 

A chemical analysis has been made by the Pharmaceutical Institute of Leip- 
sig. Germany, by Drs. Prentiss and Morgan, of Washington ; by Dr. S. Weir 
Mitchell, of Philadelplua ; and other prominent names are given in the Uniterl 
States dispensatory. The analysis shows that it contains a number of alkaloids 
( Anahalonine, mescaline, anahalonidine, an<l a fourth, together with a residue). 
These alkaloids are described by the highest legal chemical authority, " as 
powerful agents ranking in strength with some of our most potent drugs." 

The chemists also state that physiological and psychical effects resemble such 
powerful and restricted drugs as mannabis indica. strychnine, and morphine, 
which, together with their derivatives, have been long restricted by law. 

But not only has a careful chemical analysi.s been made, but experimentation 
has been performed on animal and hmnan subjects. These authorities found 
that 4 to -5 mescal buttons (our Indians u.se from 5 lo 50 or more) "produce a 
peculiar cerebral excitement attended with an extraordinai-y visual dis- 
turbance." There was tVuind a grad\nilly increased dilation of the pujiil, slow- 
ing of the i)nlse and weakening of lieai-f action from 9 to 30 bents per minute. 
Uncertainty of gait like that of alcohol, tremors, Avakefulness, in some cases 
nausea was produced. There was an overestimation of time. iMinutes became 
liour.s and houi's became long periods of time. Distances are accentuated. 
There is nothin.g near. Objects close at hand appear to be moviu,g farther and 
farther away. Thei-e is a sense of dual existence. In some cases it produces a 
delirixim, often followed by seeing monsters, grotesque faces. gre\\'some shapes 
like a cat \A-ith huge claws, crawling up the body to clutch the throat. But 
the thing that fascinates and grips the imagination, producing unusual enjoy- 
ment, are the visual hallucinations, and the extraordinary effect upon the hear- 
ing. 1 he habitue enjoys " a regular kaleidoscopic play of most wonderful 
colors, and incessant flow of vision, of infinite beauty, grandeur, and variety. 
The effect produced upon the hearing makes " each note produced on the piano a 
center of a melody of other notes which appeal- to be surrounded by a halo of 
color, pulsating to the nnisic." Herein it lar,gely resejnbles cannabas indica 
and opium. 

Some 20 yeai-s ago some of I he leading drug manufacturing firms of our 
country, as the I'ai-k Davis <'o. and the llerk Co., thinking that such a powerful 
drug might have some value as a remedial agent, began to prepare it in certain 
compound.s. Tliese preparations have been iised to a flight extent in various 
forms of neurasthenlii, hysteria, and also have been alleged to be useful in 
neuralgia and rheumatic alfectionis. 

It should, however, be carefull.\- noted that it is no longer prepared. Dr. 
Francis, the chief chemist of the I'ark Davis Co., .says : " It is absolutely a 
dead issue so far as doctors and ))harmacists are concerned. We no longer 
carry it in stock." Its i-emedial value had been pi-onounced very doubtful. 
The scientific aspect of the sut)ject is thus well summed up by Dr. 'wiley, for- 
merly chief chemist of the Agricultural Department, when he said " It is an evil 
and nothing but an evil." The injurious residts that follow the habitual use 
of such a powerful and peculiar drug are well expressed in a warning given by 
Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, of Philadelphia. After careful experimentation he says ■ 
" I predict a perilous reign of the mescal habit when this agent becomes obtain- 
able. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be too much for 
some men to resist after they have set foot in this land of fairy colors where 
there seems so nnich to chai-ni and so little to excite horror or disgust "' 

Dealing as we are then with a most iiotent drug producing such extraordinarv 
psychical pleasures, need we wonder that it is eagerly sought that its use is 
defended, and that it Is playing havoc within the ranks of our Indian popula- 
tion already so weakened by disease? Thousands of our most typical virile 
and promising Indian youth, young men who have come from our Government 
schools, are the chief promoters. The old medicine superstitions no longer 



P15V0TE. 47 

appeal. Here is something new and wonderful. It retains enougli of tlie old 
to make it Indian, and he adds what he has superficially learned and ol1ser^•ed 
in bur civilization and religion. Tt appeals to his craving for leadership and to 
the lust of the flesh. And to-day we have a new semii'eligious movement nmonfr 
our Indian people, with peyote a.s a fetish that is worshipped iis soniethinn ex- 
traordinarily supernatural. 

In n\any tribes meetings are now held every night \A'ith all-ninht sessions. 
The drug is passed in a dry form or as a tea. Everyone lakes as much as 
he or she may desire, (iradually the majority present becomes intoxicated, 
enjoying the incessant and wonderful flow of vision from the inevitable reaction, 
hut with no desire for a bard day's work. 

The drug is also constantly used by many during the week. It has bei:ome 
a daily necessity, .\lthough it has no remedial value and is most dangerous, it 
is used in all forms of sickness- and disease for old and young, for the strong, 
and the new-born babe. .\m\ we need not wonder. The sick man wants some- 
thing to rid him of the sense of pain. He wants his nerves benumbed. The 
white man administers his byperdermic doses: the Indian, too, enjoys allevia- 
tion from pain and stimulation of the nervous system. Thousands and hundreds 
of thousands of people have no doubt gone of the \'\-orld in a very happy frame 
of mind through the use of opium, morphine, cannibis indica. The Indian igno- 
rantly takes his supernatural remedy by the pound instead of by the grain, by 
the cupful instead of the drops or spoonful. Meed we wonder that frequently 
an emaciated, anemic, helpless, dying patient will, under this powerful stimula- 
tion, rise from his bed. walk about, gather bis relatives and friends together, 
make a most wtmderful speech concerning the things lie has seen, shake hands, 
bid farewell, and then lie dowi; and in a few minutes die. To the untutored, it 
does seem supernatural and marvelous. Or need we wonder that Infants troubled 
with the connnon Milnients of children, when given dose after dose of tills drug. 
die of paralysis, digestive, and nervous disturbancesV And need we wonder 
when robust, sunny faces of young men as they come from school, soon become 
sallow, inky. suid<en. and their strong bodies debauched by the lusts of the 
flesh, hastened to an untimely death? What ciiu we expect of any people whose 
bodies have been enervated !\nd ruined by Rny kind of a powerful drug? The 
American Indian in his [jresent physical condition needs every ounce of physical 
strength to resist the ravages of disease. 

We are now face to face with a question: Is it a menace to progress? Is 
it merely a pleasurable indulgence? Shall we treat it with indifference — a 
Joke of politicians? Or sliall we treat it intelligently as men and women of 
high i)ntriotic and moral purposes? The Indian thinks it is his salvation. 
Never before has he seen such wonderful things. It is the herb that God gave 
for the weak. It is the magic \\-and that dispells the darkness and brings the 
light. But, ah. what delusion ! What fancied pictures ! What castles in the 
air ! Finally and certainly what a debauched ruined life ! 

The Indian has also been taught that it is a cure for the liquor habit. And 
true it is many drunkards have enten mescal and have stopped drinking liquor, 
but mescal is merely a more dangerous and potent substitute. Many use both. 
Many mescal leaders are also fair greatest drunkards. Says Dr. Richardson, 
of Denver, concerning the relative effect of alcohol and mescal : " So far as its 
results upon the human economy are concerned from a pathological standpoint. 
alcohol Is altogether the safest and least harmful. The alcoholic subject may. 
by careful system of dietetics, escape physical and mental weakness, but the 
mescal fiend travels to absolute incompetency. It is a vicious thing." 

This Mohonk conference, the Indian Department at Washington, and the 
Nation at large has never taken a doubtful stand as to the influence of liquor 
on the Indian race, but hei-e is an agent pronounced by the highest authorities 
as still more dangerous than liquor. The Indijin drunkard has been taught and 
knows his danger and penalty. The mescal enter, ignorant of the fatal con- 
sequences of drug habits, gradually but certainly is going on to his destruction. 

Frienfls, I feel confident that no intelligent person sincerely and seriously 
devoted to the cnuse of the American Indian would care to argue the question. 
We know that as a habit-forming drug, stealing upon the victim like a thief in 
the night, it will clutch him in its deadly grip. Not only this gensration, but 
the rising and future generation that will be the product of the physically, 
mentally morallv weakened present, must be considered. Immediata effects 
raav in many cases be apparently slight, some of these have strong bodies, and, 
like the alcohol drinker, the effects may seem .slight nt first. But the normal 
functions of the body can not be interfered with day after day. week after week, 



48 PEYOTE. 

^'ea^ after year without the most serious results. If the resistance to disease of 
the present generation is already alarmingly low, what shall we looJi for In 
the future? 

About 16 years ago Dr. and Mrs. Roe met a powerful and Intellectual Indian 
of the Oomancha Tribe of the Southwest. They discussed with him the phil- 
osophy of the ancient Indian ideas until the question of mescal was introduced. 
This man had four sons and a daughter. The father and the four sons went 
into mescal, using it throughout the following 16 years, with constantly in- 
creasing amounts. The four sons were married early in life, and had many 
children. There remains but one child of the otfspring of those four ,men. 
Thsir infant children were treated with mescal. The daughter, on the other 
hand, became a Christian, induced her husband to become a Christian, and now 
has a beautiful little family growing up around her. This is but one instance. 

And then industrially it is bound to become one of the greatest hindrances to 
progress. Jlany are now working their farms, but who will question the ulti- 
mate outcome of our industrial hopes for the Indian if this habit continues and 
increases. Beautiful buildings, houses, barns, farms, implements will be of 
no avail unless we get at some of the problems that lie entrenched in the lives 
of so many of our promising Indians. 

And what the effect mentally when it ilestroys the power of concentration, 
logical thinking, strength of will, bahnced judgment? Let some of our Govern- 
ment schools, superintendents, teachers, and matrons courageously tell the 
story of the mental depression and stupidity, the physical langor, and destroyed 
aspirations frequently found in their pupils who secretly use It. 

And when I think of the moral effects, when I know that it needs a clear 
mind, a strong will, a pure imagination to build chaj'acter, when I know how 
hard it is to rasist temptation and aim high under the best of circumstances, 
and then when I think of becoming morally strong with the use of a habit- 
forming, body-weakening, will-relaxing, imagination-exciting drug I stand 
appalled and cry, " O God. we will fail in all our work unless Thou dos't set 
these men free — and then they siiall be free indeed," and help us to set thera 
free. 

Friends, we need definite Federal legislation to stop this drug at the border. 
We need definite Federal legislation to stop it in interstate commerce. We 
need State legislaiion to stop it in llie States. We need power given to the 
Indian Department to deal with it as it does with liquor. We need this con- 
ference and all the organization it represents and all the influence it can exert 
to get back of it. 

I close with an appeal from the oldest daughter of Quanah Parker. (Juanah 
Parker wa.s the great chief of the Comanches, who also became the great 
mescal chief of Oklahoma, and who has so long and so astutely handled Wash- 
ington legislation. Mrs. Cox, his oldest daughter, recently before a large audi- 
ence testified as follows : 

" My father was the great chief of the Comanches. He ate mescal. He 
asked me to eat mescal. I did eat for a few years, but I gave it up. I fol- 
lowed a better road. I told my father to give it up. He would not. He 
became very sick. I got six doctors to examine him. They all said it was be- 
cause he ate mescal. I again asked him to stop; but no, 'he would not. Two 
years he was sick. He became paralyzed. One day he said he would again 
go to mescal meeting, for away. He took a train. He attended the meeting 
The next day whi'e coming home on the train he died. Oh, friends. I ask voii 
to stop that medicine, mescal." 

Shall we answer that heart cry of the daughter of Quanah Pai'ker'' 



Exhibit K. 

DKI'ATmacN'l Oi- THE I^TKKlOH, 

United States Indian Seuvxck, 

United States Indian Agency, 

Sluinviee, Okln.. June 77. t909. 

Hon. \\ ILLIAM E. .TOM-\,SON. 

Cltief Special Officrr, Salt Lakr Citii. rtali. 

Dear Sir: Replying to your letter or the lOtli instant, with ivference to the 
effects of the peyote, conunonly known as mescal. I beg to report as follows- 

First, howe\er, I would state that the use of this drug has only recently been 
started amongst the Indians at this agercy, th? fii-st to use it being the Kickapoo 



PEYOTE. 49 

Indians, who began about one year ago, the introduction coming from tlie 
Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians, located just west of us, or near El Reno, Okla. 

1. From 30 to 50 of the Indians of this agency have acquired the habit. 

2. Its effects upon the mental faculties is perhaps mora uniform than are 
the effects from tlie use of alcohol, and the observation of myself, as well as 
Hiat of those who have more definite knowledge of its uss in this locality than 
have 1, Is to the effect that in all cases it produces stupor, which is perhaps 
more intense and lasts longer tlian that produced by the use of alcohol. 

3. The psychological manifestations are practically the same in all cases, 
though it I'ecpiires a greater quantity to produce the effect ^^■ifh some than with 
others, probably owing to the strength or condition of their system. 

4. The effect is .shown almost inunedhilely after taking, and it lasts from 24 
to 36 liours. 

5. The effect produced, as showu by the outward manifestation, is different 
from the effects of alcohol when taken in quantities sufficient to render the user 
hopelessly intoxicated, in that it produces much more of a stupor than is the 
case with the user of alcohol. With the peyi.te there is very rarely any violence 
shown from it use, while quite the reverse is the case with alcohol. 

6. I have only had a limited opportunity to observe persons who have used 
peyote atregular intervals for an extended period, excepting as to 30 or 20 of 
the Kickapoo Indians of this agency wlio have been using the drug during tlie 
past few months. With them, I can safely say that the use has resulted in a 
marked lack of progress as compared with the progress being made by these 
same Indians prior to their becoming users of peyote. 

7. In a way tlie system does become tolerant to the drug. or. at any rate, as 
the use continues increased doses are taken and desired by the user, though I 
do not know that tliey are required in order to prodvice the effect. 

8. The psychological and mental effects of prolonged use tend unquestionably 
to cause inactivity both of the mind and body, and it certainly does unfit the 
user for the discharge of ordinary industrial and business functions. 

9. From the best information I can obtain the final effect of the use of peyote, 
in all cases where it has been continually used for a term of from tliree to five 
years, is death; but where Indians have used it for a few months or perhaps 
a year, while it undoubtedly weakens the system, I believe that it is imssible 
for them to fully recover from a short period of its use and consequent liad effect. 

10. Several deaths have been reported to me which were clearly caused by 
the use of the peyote, two, in particular, which resulted from an apparently 
healthy Indian dying while in the stupor from the use of peyote. 

H. I could not say as to whether or not a maximum dose would cause death 
without previous continued use. I learn from the Indians at this agency that 
the customary dose for beginners is eight peyote beans, taken in (lie form pre- 
scribed below, together with from two to five drinks of the \A'ater in which the 
beans have been steeped; one drink being that of a small cup probably holding 
about one-half pint. 

12. From the best Information I can obtain, habitual use proves fatal within 
from three to five years. 

13. From the best information I can obtain, death is caused from malnutrition 
and by a violent disturbance of the digestive organs, and also by action on the 
respiratory centers. 

The users of the peyote have described to me a feeling which they say they 
experience after using it a short time re.sembling that of suffocation. 

14. Tlie use of the peyote is reported to remove any desire for alcohol, but 
I do not understand from any of the Indians at this agency that it removes any 
desire for other narcotics ; however, so far as I am informed, none of the Indians 
here habitually use any narcotics other than the peyote bean and liquor. 

15. From my observation and the information at my command, the use of 
the peyote has never resulted in the cure of any disease, its use having re- 
sulted in quite the opposite, in so far as it weakens the system and consequently 
subjects it to disease. 

16. It is most commonly used among the Indians of this agency by first 
steeping the beau in hot water; then the bean is mashed and rolled in the 
fingers, and from 8 to 50 are taken at one time or during one meeting of the 
peyote users. In addition to eating the bean, they also drink the water in 
which the bean has been steeped, as above mentioned. It has not been used 
in conjunction with other herbs at this agency so far as I am informed. 



4700.S— 18- 



50 I'KVOTE. 

IT. The Imlians lieie claim to use the peyute in connection with their reiiS'ious 
rites, but alter giving the matter a considerable amount of thought and study, 
it is my eoncl\ision that this claim on the part of the Indians is put forward 
more in the hopes of quieting or refuting any efforts on the part of those in 
authority to stop its use than because it has any real connection with any 
reli.girins rites of the Indians. They claim that while they are under its in- 
fluence they see visions and are enabled to look into the future and foresee 
events which ai-e to happen, etc., and try from this to connect it with religion 

IS. 1 couhl not intelligently answer this question. 

.Vs to requiring our agency physician to answer these questicais. I beg to 
Sii.\- that o\ir regular physician died a short time ago, and the present physician 
is entirely new to the Indians, and has no knowledge <jf the use of the peyote 
.•imongst them. 

I am plea.si'd lo refer you to Mr. John H. Segar, of Colony, Okla., for further 
information with reference to the use of the peyote; the Indians at that place 
have been using the drug for many years and he. having been at that place for 
about H-") years has had tdnuidant opportunity to become well acquainted with 
(he v.-hole matter. 

I would aNn suggest the names of Hupt. Charles E. Shell, of the Indian 
a.gency at 1 )ai-liu.gton. Okla.. to whom I pre.sume you have also written. Also, 
the name of Peter V. Katzlaff, an additional farmer at this agency who was 
formerly hicated with the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians, but who is now 
al)sent on his v;ication. You may address him at this place. 

Any furth<'r information I can secure for you will be gladly obtained if It is 
within my power. 

V(i\n-s respectfully, 

Fkaxk .\. Thackehy. 
SKiicriiili'iideiit <iiiil Si)cci(il Dixhiir-iiitfi Aijciil. 



Exhibit L. 

afk1i).>.vi'i' of \vuj>1aal sinfo, a kiowa ikiuan of mountain view, oki. a.. on the 
u.se of peyote ok mesc.^e, gi\"en in his own words. 

■When you first eal mescal it sets your body all trembling. In a little while 
the body is so tired and one lias no strength. It blurs the eyes, and one can't 
see those that are sitting near him in the mescal feast ; can't see good at all. 
In a short time one is nervous, can't sit still, can't rest, sit down, then change 
on to one knee, then on to the other. Then (me becomes dizzy, and everything 
is whirling around, .just like ,i drunk man. The cause is that the mescal is in 
the stoniacli, dislends the stomach. Then the body hi'eaks out into a sweat. 
At this time the mescal in the stomach tastes bitter and sour. If one takes 
too much he vomits, and some other man hearing hiin vomit, he vomits too. 
Not all in the tepee do this but one. two, three, four. Those who vomit have 
tears in their eyes and on their cheeks. And the natural liquid hangs down 
out of their nose. They wipe their eyes and clean their nose and look more 
respectable. Then the man is so weak he does not wish to move or to raise his 
head oi- look around, .lust hangs his head down and is perfectly quiet', some 
times he is asleeji. In the morning, ,iust before sunrise, you feel like one who 
has passed through some fearful thing. Then there conies a happy feeling to 
think you are saved from that fearful thing. Mescal makes the heart beat 
fast like when one is badly scared in the dark, or as when one has done some 
bad thing, A man with a stnmg body does not feel like working for a day, 
and one with a \veak body for two or three days. I \-i'as well acquainted with 
three Kiowa men, strong, healthy men who died in the mescal tepee. I was 
with one of these men in the feast, and lie got great trouble In the mescal, 
and I saw him die the next night. Some times they hiccough and can't stop 
and die. And some vomit up blood. As soon as the effect of the mescal passes 
a man has a hanger for some and wishes to go to another feast. 

The dinner on the next day is the finest that can be bought, no cheap food. 
A beef the finest that can be bought. The dinner costs not less than ,$50, and 
from that ap according to the attendance. And one man will make four of 
these dinners in a year. 

I know of no kind of sickness that has ever been cured among my people liy 
the u.se of mescal. They eat and think they ai-e cured, but the sickness comes 
back and they give up and go to a white doctor. 



PEVOTE. 51 

1 am an honest. Christian man, and in the presence of (4o(l I nui lellinK 
you tlie truth. I was three years in this road ami have heen nianv thnes in 
the mescal feast, and these things happen tliat I am telling you. And for IS 
years, since the missionaries came, I have seen this bad road among my people. 
But when I gave my heai't and life to .Tesus Clirist the oUl life is like a dark, 
cloudy (Uiy. And now I am living in the bright sunshine. I know that all 
we strong Christian Indians who ever eat mescal with to see this bad road 
stopped among our people. 
Your bi-other. 

WiLLIAJI SlNCO. 

Subscribed and sworn to before me this 17th day of February. 1912. 

(-'. A'. Ol.\1!K. .Votarij }'iililir. 
My counuission expires August 18, 191.i. 

STATEMENT OF DK. HARVEY W. WILEY. 

Mr. TiLLMAx. State for the record your iiiiiiie. (iccupatioii, and 
experience as a plwsician'^ 

Dr. Wiley. Harve,y W. Wiley. For 29 years I was Chief of the 
Bureau of Chemistry of the I)epartiiient of Agriculture. I can 
hardly describe my occupation now. I am an editor, lecturer, and 
farmer, mostly a farmer. 

Mr. Tili/MAjs'. Are you a practicing physician ; or ha\'e yon been ''. 

Dr. WiUET. I am a graduate in medicine, but I was never a prac- 
ticing pliysician. 

Mr. TiLLJiAx. You may begin and in j'our own way tell what you 
know about this drug peyote — wdiat it is, what use is made of it, and 
whether you have investigated to find out its constituents; and, if so, 
tell what they are? 

Dr. WnuEY. I will detail to the committee my own personal ex- 
perience and relationship to this drug. It was brought to my atten- 
tion along about 1893, or near that time, by Mr. James Mooney, of 
the Bureau of Ethnology, who had spent many years among the 
Indians of the Southwest, and who was familiar with the use of 
peyote cactus by the Indians with whom he lived. He brought with 
him on his return to Washington quite a large number of these ripe 
and dry buttons of the cactus. He came to see me and asked whether 
I would undertake a chemical examination to determine, as far as 
possible, the physiological properties of this product. I undertook 
the task of determining both of these qualities, the chemical compo- 
sition and the physiological properties. Having no pharmacological 
laboratory of my own I asked Dr. D. W. Prentiss, professor of ma- 
teria medica at the George Washington Medical School, and his as- 
sistant, Dr. Francis P. Morgan, who was professor of pharmacology 
in the same institution, to imdertake the experimental work. Dr. 
Morgan since then has been employed — as least for 10 or 15 years — as 
a pharmacologist in the Bureau of Chemistry. I went over to the 
bureau to see if I could get him to come and give personally the 
results of that work, but he has gone into the Army and is not avail- 
able. I have an account, however, of his work. I consulted with 
frequently during the progress of it, so that I can give \ ery well 
that part of the work which I asked these gentlemen to do. 

I asked Mr. Ewell — dead now — who had been for many years one 
of my very competent assistants, to undertake the chemical work, 
which he did, with my collaboration and constant supervision and 
suggestion. 



52 PEYOTE. 

The chemical work is easily described. He found that this bean 
contained three alkaloid bodies and also a resin. He separateil 
these bodies from combination and determined the chemical character 
of each. Two of the alkaloids are crystalline and one partially so, 
but not entirely so. He delivered these alkaloids to Drs. Prentiss and 
Morgan for their physiological tests, and also samples of the whole 
button. These alkaloids themselves do not produce the intoxication 
which is produced by the button. They are, however, very toxic. 
Administered to guinea pigs and mice all of these alkaloids produce 
the same effects, practically, as are produced by strychnine — convul- 
sions, opisthotonos ; . that is, the bending of their heads backward, 
and the general condition and appearance that result from a similar 
use of strychnine. The lethal dose was also very small. It re- 
quired only a very small quantity of these alkaloids to produce death 
in guinea pigs and in frogs. Death seemed to be pi'oduced by the 
paralysis of the respiratory organs and not of the heart, because the 
heart would beat sometimes 15 or 20 minutes after the animal was 
dead. So it did not get to the heart to produce death, but produced 
paralysis of the nerves and muscles of respiration. In other words, 
death was produced by asphyxiation, and not by any sxaecific action 
on the heart. 

When these alkaloids were administered to young men by Drs. 
Prentiss and Morgan they did not produce any of the symptoms of 
intoxication and visions of a delightful character and the lack of 
coordination of the mental faculties which are produced by the 
button alone. Therefore we infer that the toxic principle — that is, 
in producing intoxication, which supervenes upon the use of these 
buttons — ^is due to the resin. In this instance it is like cannabis, 
which produces a similar kind of intoxication when given to human 
beings, the only difference being that it is perhaps more active even 
than the toxic principle of the cannabis. 

Now, my own connection with this was in the organization of the 
investigation and in following it up throughout personally by fre- 
quent consultations. After the work was done Mr. Ewell decided 
that he would like himself to become a subject of experimentation. 
I rather discouraged him, saying that Drs. Prentiss and Morgan were 
turning to that part of it. But as he was a man very anxious for 
complete investigation he wished to try it on himself, and finally I 
consented. I assigned one of his laboratory mates to be with him in 
this work. He was to take the beans on Saturday evening, so that 
the intoxication might come on a day of rest and thus not interfere 
with his work. So he took the buttons home with him and he chewed 
them in the manner described by Mr. Mooney as being practiced by 
the Indians ; he chewed them until they would form a bolus, and then 
swallowing the bolus. Meanwhile, he himself, -with paper and note- 
book, took down all the symptoms which he was able to observe ; his 
laboratory mate was with him all the time and also took notes of his 
condition. The first symptoms are those which are usually observed 
in all these cases; that is, a feeling of contentment, of relaxation, and 
of indisposition to physical exertion, accompanied by the most beau- 
tiful visions, beautiful colors, and myriads of colors of very agreeable 
character. 

It was only a short time after Mr. Ewell began to take notes until 
they became eiitirel;: incohei'ent, meaning nothing at all; and after 



PEYOTE. 53 

his recovery he took his own notes and could make nothing of them 
after the first few entries. The notes made, however, by the observer 
were coherent and were easily translatable into results. About 2 
o'clock on Sunday morning the condition of Mr. Ewell became so 
alarming to his roommate that he came with Mr. Ewell to my resi- 
dence and awakened me, the laboratory mate feeling he could not 
take the responsibility any longer. From that time on I was person- 
ally present with Mr. Ewell until his recovery, so that I had personal 
observation of his deportment. One of the strong results of the use 
of this bean is inability to sleep, which is entirely unlike morphine 
and somewhat resembles cocaine. He had no disposition to sleep at 
any time. It was 48 hours before he could sleep after he had taken 
these beans and after the excitement had gradually passed away. He 
was constantly talking and saying, " Oh, how beautiful ; oh, how 
splendid; how magnificent." I was particularly struck with this 
expression. I knew something of his views and that he was a great 
admirer of Robert G. IngersoU. One of the things he said was, " Oh, 
I wish I could talk with IngersoU just for a minute ; I could convince 
him that there is a heaven. I see it. I see the angels in the streets of 
gold." Of course, the heaven which he saw was the heaven that had 
been described to him. The Indian probably sees a heaven of a differ- 
ent kind, the chase, or something' of the kind. He saw visions that 
were perfectly entrancing, as translated from his remarks and de- 
scriptions of them. 

I soon became convinced that there was no danger to his life, as he 
had not taken any more of these buttons; but I remained with him 
all the next day and until quite late on Sunday night, when he was 
beginning to come out of this intoxication. One of the curious things 
was that after his recovery he could not recall from memory these 
visions; they seemed to have escaped entirely from his memory and 
his mental vision. While there was nothing \'iolent or dangerous 
about him, these wholly incoherent remarks showed an absence of 
events of a logical character. The centers of the nervous system, 
which respond to external sensations of pleasure, seemed to have been 
particularly excited by this drug, in that respect very much like 
alcohol in its first stages, although not producing, as alcohol does, a 
state of complete stupor. There is another difference betAveen the 
action of this drug and the intoxication produced by it from that pro- 
duced by alcohol, though at first the sensations are somewhat similar. 
For instance, persons under the influence of alcohol think their minds 
are stimulated. They think so; but accurate investigation and ex- 
periments show that alcohol always diminishes the power of the 
intellect and the power of the body to do its work. So that the man 
who thinks he makes a good speech under the influence of alcohol 
has lost his sense of coordination in what he sees, and Avhen a man 
speaks without fear he always speaks more fluently and more elo- 
quently than when under the restraint of reason and surroundings. 
So that this increase of mental activity is only apparent and is not 
real, as is easily determined by any inve'stigation. 

I woTild like to say a word about the therapeutic properties of this 
druo-. I will not deiiy that, like other powerful drugs, such as opium, 
cocMne and strychniiae, it has some therapeutic value. That is shown 
by the 'investigations conducted by Drs. Prentiss and Morgan, but 



54 PE^'OTE. 

after summing up their experiences in the relief, for instance, of 
asthma or the pains of rheumatism by this drug, they say it is evident 
there is no cure in any of these cases, but only a relief from the sense 
of oppression and of pain. So that while this drug will undoubtedly 
secure a relief from pain or from the spasm of pain, as in the case of 
asthma, it has no real therapeutic effect, nothing that would tend to 
remedy the cause of the disease, and hence its therapeutic effect is 
purely one of solace and forgetfulness. In the same way they showed 
that physical power was impaired; that there was a distinct indispo- 
sition to move, as was shown when Mr. Ewell made his experiment. 
The patient under the influence of this drug likes to remain quiet, and 
often with closed eyes, seeing these beautiful visions, which come to 
him even more vividly when his eyes are closed than when they are 
open. But there is a distinct lowering of physical vitality during 
the period of the intoxication. 

Of course, the experiments which Avere made under my initiation 
were only of a temporarj' character. They were not repeated, so that 
we had no opportunity to determine what the final effect would be by 
a repetition of this experience upon the mental and physical qualities 
of the individual. But one who is acquainted with the facts of phar- 
macology and the effects of drugs can draw this conclusion, as we 
can from all similar effects : That any undufe excitation of the nerves 
or the muscles must, of logical necessity, be compensated for in some 
way. We can not excite our minds or our bodies to undue exertion 
withput using up power, energy, and ti&sue, and that must be com- 
pensated for by its restoration. So that the effect of this sleep- 
lessness, for instance, if only for a day or two days, may entail no 
subsequent injury, yet if it is continued — sleeping being a physio- 
logical necessity — it will have a very harmful effect, because any drug 
which interferes with that necessity must produce a harmful effect. 
You can be under the influence of alcohol for once and never be able 
to distinguish any subsequent injury, but it does not follow that you 
can repeat that day after day, and as a result of this unnatural ex- 
citation in the end escape injury. That is contrary to all rules of 
logic and of sequence. Therefore, I would infer that a drug which 
had such a powerful exciting effect upon the nerve centers, and espe- 
cially those of vision and imagination, if continued day after day, 
must, of necessity, injure the nerve centers which are excited. I 
thinlv that is a conclusion which no logical man, familiar with the ' 
effects of drugs, can escape. That is shown vividly in the use of all 
of these so-called narcotic drugs; that is, the increasing quantity of 
them necessary to produce the excitation. 

If you have never used alcohol a spoonful of it may give a decided 
sensation, but the man who constantly uses it requires more and more 
of it to produce the exciting effect. The alcohol has not changed its 
(jualities at all, but his sense of perception has diminished and his 
degree of tolerance, as we call it, has increased. That is particularly 
true of opium and its alkaloids. Persons who are addicted to the 
use of opium may take doses of morphia apparently with impunity 
which would kill a person not used to it at once. Therefore, I should 
say this drug is no exception to this rule. I do not know of any 
exception, and while I can not testify to its effects when used con- 
tinuously, as a result of my own observations I think I can draw 



PEYOTK. 55 

the logical conclusion which is of some value in connection with 
the statement I have made as to other drugs of similar character. 

Mr. Ewell made a very extensive chemical examination of this 
drug, which is contained in the 18th volume of the Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, giving photographs of the several alka- 
loids, and a full description of their effect is given. Then I have here 
the report of Drs. Prentiss and Morgan, which has been reprinted 
from the Medical Record of August 22, 1896. It also contains a ref- 
erence to the chemical ^vork performed, gives the same pictures and 
gives in detail all these experiments on animals and also experiments 
on young men. 

Mr. TiixMAN'. I believe you stated that this drug has some thera- 
peutic properties of value? 

Dr. Wiley. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Ought they not to be administered under the ad\icy 
and on the prescription of a physician ? 

Dr. WiLET. Most decidedly. The more powerful the drug the more 
important it is that there shoidd be no lay administration of it. This 
is a drug which should be classed with strychnine, opium, and cocaine. 

^Ir. TiLL5iAN. You have qualified as an expert and are an expert 
in the judgment of the committee. Would you advise the absolute 
prohibition of this drug, as is provided in this bill ? 

Dr. Wiley. I surely would. 

Mr. Tillman. The statement has been made that it has an exciting 
effect upon the sexual organs? 

Dr. Wiley. I do not know anything about that ; I have never made 
any investigation along that line at all. 

Mr. Snyder. You state that while this peyote might allay pain in 
certain diseases, it would not effect a cure? 

Dr. Wiley. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Do you know Lone Wolf's wife ? 

Dr. Wiley. No. 

Mr. Snyder. She appeared before me the other day as a living ex- 
ample of one who had been cured of chronic rheumatism, and she 
looked as thought she was cured. 

Dr. Wiley. Well, that is no evidence. 

Mr. Snyder. I do not think it is, but I am simply raising tlic 
point; that is all. They claimed she was cured by this drug, and 
that many other cures had been effected in the same way. 

Dr. Wiley. I have noticed a Member of the United States Con- 
gress certifying that nuxated iron is the most wonderful healer in the 
world, but that does not convince me about nuxated iron. 

Mr. Tillman. You think this is not a cure at all for rheumatism? 

Dr. Wiley. Absolutely not; I wish I knew some cure for rheuma- 
tism. 

Mr. Tillman. Is there any? 

Dr. Wiley. None. 

STATEMENT OF DR. LYMAN F. KEBLER. 

Mr. Tillman. You may state your name, profession, and business 
connection. 

Dr. Keblee. My name is Lyman F. Kebler. I am connected with 
the Department of Agriculture; I am Chief of the Drug Division, 
Bureau of Chemistry, and have served in that capacity for about 15 



56 PEYOTE. 

years. 1 am a graduate of the University of Michigan; am also a 
graduate of the medical school of the George Washington Uni- 
versity ; and am a licensed practitioner in the District of Columbia. 
After leaving the University of Michigan I engaged in the manu- 
facture of drugs with a firm in Philadelphia for about 10 years, after 
which I came to Washington to take up the work with which I am 
now connected. 

In my work it has been my duty, and privilege as well, I may say, 
to study the effects of drugs upon animals, both as recorded in litera- 
ture and from personal observations. One of the special lines of in- 
vestigations and observations that I have conducted during recent 
years is that dealing with the habit-forming drugs, such as opium, 
morphine, cocaine, acetanilid, and similar commodities. I have not 
made any special study of peyote, and what I know about peyote has 
been gleaned entirely from literature. We have had the question 
brought up in the Department of Agriculture over and over again 
during the last 10 years, and have been requested to investigate the 
subject, so far as literature was concerned, and we had planned to 
make a study of the drug itself ; but up to the present time, on account 
of the heavy pressure upon us, first, by the food and drugs act and 
then the war work, we have not been able to go into this as fully as we 
would like. . 

From the literature I have gleaned and have come to the conclusion 
that peyote is a drug that resembles cocaine in many of its phases; 
that is, so_ far as I can see, it has a similar effect as cocaine with 
one exception, and that is in the color visions it produces, which seem 
to be characteristic of the drug, so far as I have been able to glean 
from the literature. Whether or not peyote has the same demoraliz- 
ing effect that cocaine has I do not know. I do know that coCaine 
does have a decidedly demoralizing effect on the human animal. 

I have not only read the general literature of a scientific character 
but I have prepared a synopsis of it, which I could readily leave with 
the committee, although I have not fully completed it, 'because this 
matter was only called to my attention yesterday, and I have not had 
an opportunity to get it into shape for use ; but if the committee de- 
sires, I shall be glad to ])ut it in form so that it can be used and hand 
it to the committee. 

Mr. Tillman. The committee will be glad if you will do that as 
soon as you can, Doctor. 

Dr. Kebler. Eeports have come to us from various parties who 
have studied the situation from a purely layman point of view. We 
find reports in various publications, such as the Lake Mohonk Con- 
ference publication. In that publication there are two excellent 
ariicles which portray the situation very vi\idly, and as far as I am 
able to discern they are in accord with the findings of the scientific 
()bser\ers throughout the world. I shall be glad to give references to 
literature or give a summary of it or in any way the committee 
desires. 

Mr. Tillman. You may do that. Doctor. 

Dr. Keblek. I ma,Y also say, in regard to peyote having an effect 
similar to that of cocaine, that it also resembles morphine in some 
respects in that it produces, apparently, a dreamy condition. The 
pupils are dilated m the case of peyote, whereas in the case of opium 



122 PETOTE. 

life, and therefore they must oppose anything that undermines their 
work; therefore they oppose peyote. 

Mr. TiLLMA>T. Some of these Indians claim that the use of peyote 
is sacramental, or that it is used as a sort of sacrament. They claim 
that it is an important element in their worship. I believe in allow- 
ing the fullest amount of religious freedom, and I want to ask you 
whether they believe that in good faith and want to keep it for use 
in their religious sacraments or ceremonies or as part of their re- 
ligious observance? Is it used by them in good faith as a part of 
their religious observance, or is it used by them merely as a drug for 
the happy effect it may have upon them ? Is the claim that they use 
it in their religious sacraments and ceremonies made in good faith, 
or is that merely a subterfuge ? 

Mr. Arthur. I understand that they claim that they eat it in 
order that they may see their departed ones and to bring them back. 
In our present state of enlightenment, it is very strange that the 
Bible on which Christianity is based says nothing whatever about 
peyote. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. He says that he wants to be sure that I have de- 
scribed the thing that he was talking about, and I have shown him 
a sample of peyote, and he says that is it. 

Mr. Tillman. Just one more question from me: You stated that 
while under the influence of this drug men and women are guilty of 
sexual excesses, or improper sexual relations, and I want to know 
whether or not you give that statement of your own personal knowl- 
edge or observation, or whether you give it upon some rumor? I 
want to develop that and to get the facts so that the testimony will 
be of value to the committee. 

Mr. Arthur. I do not wish to state to you anything that was 
rumor or hearsay, but only those things that I know. My wife 
could have given you valuable testimony, but unfortunately she is 
sick to-day, and could not come. Now, I want to go on and tell 
you what I know. They had been eating this peyote and a young 
man came to me and invited me to go to this place with him. He 
was a man in the church also. He said, "Let us go there and pray 
for them." We went there and they had a circular place where 
they were sitting around, men and women together. They were sing- 
ing songs, and they were passing peyote around. Two young men 
who were busy had their faces pamted blue, and they had a bunch of 
their hair tied up with a red cloth or flannel. There was one who 
was the chief of them all sitting there, and he had this peyote. 

I do not know how many peyote buttons they had eaten before I 
came there, but as I came in they were passing it aroimd again. 
Then as I came in two young meii walked out. They disappeared, 
and they did not reenter the tent. My friend and I tried to pray 
for them then and there, and we talked about this peyote. Then they 
began to leave ; some of them left before the women did, and some of 
them carried the women out. The women were under the influence of 
peyote. One man who became turned against peyote came to listen 
to what we tried to say, and they confessed it all to me, and told me 
of their sexual excesses at those times when they took those women 
out. We have never been able to attend a peyote meeting at that 
same place any more, because they call their meetings at different 
places. Some other Indians may tell you good things about this, 



PEYOTE. 1^3 

but, as for me and my people, we have seen the evils of it ; we have 
seen it make our people act like dogs, and we hate it and we are 
opposed to it. That is all I have to say. 

Mr. Tillman. How many members are there of your tribe? 

Mr. Arthur. There are about 2,000 at Fort Peck Keservation. 

Mr. Hastings. Where is the tribe located? 

Mr. Arthur. In the State of Montana ; at Poplar Creek, Mont. 
"We are between two rivers, Poplar Creek and the Missouri Eiver. 
My people are in an area covering perhaps 12 miles between the two 
rivers. They get this drug through the mails. 

Mr. Hastings. Where did you attend school ? 

Mr. Arthur. I attended the Government school at Poplar Creek 
about three years. 

Mr. Hastings. How long ago was that ? 

Mr. Arthur. I went to school in 1884. 

Mr. Hastings. How old are you? 

Mr. Arthur. About 48. 

Mr. Hastings. Are you here as a delegate representing your tribe 
or in some official capacity ? 

Mr. Arthur. I come as a delgate. 

Mr. Hastings. What is your home address ? 

Mr. Arthur. Poplar Creek, Mont. This word in parting: This 
evil now is before us like a little spark of fire, and we want it 
quenched before it spreads into a great flame. 

Mr. Tillman. Is there anybody else who wants to be heard except 
the lady who has been interpreting for us ? Do any of you Indians 
want to be heard for or against this bill ? If not, we will hear from 
Mrs. Bonnin. 

STATEMENT OF MKS. G®|BB,TrDE BONNIN. 



Mr. Tillman. State your name, why you appear here, and all about 
yourself before you begin your statement. Also state the tribe 
of which you are a member. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I am a member of the Sioux Tribe. I am secretary 
of the Society of Americans Indians. This society is nonpartisan 
and nonsectarian. I am not in any way connected with the Gov- 
ernment work; that is, the Indian service work. The motto of our 
society is, " For the honor of the race and the good of the country." 

I have lived among the Utes of Utah for 14 years and came to this 
city last spring. I am not receiving pay for this work. In this 
period of 14 years in one locality I am proud of one thing, and 
that is that I won the confidence of the Utes, and I am proud to 
say that in the Uintah Basin my signature to a statement or a check 
was honored by the banks and by the business men, who have known 
me for 14 years. That is one thing of which I am proud, because 
in 14 years people have an opportunity to find you out thoroughly, 
whether you speak the truth or not. 

Yesterday one of the gentlemen, speaking in favor of peyote, re- 
ferred to an article published by the Sunday Times about peyote, 
and he referred to that part which said : 

In order to secure its uninterrupted use it has been claimed that it is used 
as a sort of sacrament in the Indian religious ceremonies, but we know that 
in these fetes, which last all night, its use leads to the wildest intoxication and 
all kinds of orgies, in which men, women, and even the children take part, to 
the degradation of their minds. 



124 PEYOTE. 

That gentleman yesterday contradicted that statement and said 
he knew it was not true. I happen to be acquainted with the Indian 
who gave this information to the Times, and, Mr. Chairman, if you 
will observe the speaker you will see a striking resemblance to that 
Indian. However, I do "feel that the speaker yesterday, in contra- 
dicting that statement, had no intention whatever of casting any_ re- 
flection upon the veracity of the Indian who gave that information, 
because the speaker of yesterday has never met the Indian who gave 
that information, and therefore had no ground to stand on in forming 
that attitude of mind— that the person who gave that information 
did not laiow the truth. So I think it was not meant or intended to 
cast a reflection upon the veracity of the one who gave the informa- 
tion. However, as I listened to his speech I was led to believe that' 
ethnologists who go out to visit these meetings can not stay there 
day after day, month after month, year after year, and when they 
make their visits those little meetings are prearranged. I have been 
a school-teacher too long not to know that when I have a class recite 
before a visitor that immediately the air is charged with a certain 
restraint. We know that is human nature, and in these Indian meet- 
ings that are visited, when the Indians know that an ethnologist in- 
tends to write it down, they naturally can not help feeling a sort of 
restraint, and I dare say that they do not do the things at those times 
that they are in the habit of doing. 

I went out among the Utes to help the Indians, and while I at- 
tended college, and I love what civilization gives to man, the white 
man and Indian alike, I love my people. I did not expect that they 
would come to my house and ask me for what I had that I wanted 
to give them ; I knew I must visit them in their tents and take it to 
them; that I must find the^^here they are. Therefore, during all 
of those 14 years I visited tlfpPtes in their homes until I knew them 
all ; I seemed to be related tomem and seemed to be one of them. 

When peyote was first introduced among them, during the last two 
years, I saw my friends victimized, and that hurt my heart. I did 
not know the technical term of peyote; I never say the thing grow, 
but common horse sense told me that the indiscriminate use of a pow- 
erful drug was dead wrong. 

In speaking in behalf of the Indian race I must lay aside my own 
personal sense of modesty in order to tell you the truth. I had hoped 
I should not be obliged to read a statement here showing the immoral 
practices carried on there. This is only one statement; there are 
many of them that can be secured if it is necessary. I have here the 
thumb-marked statement of Sam Atchee, a Ute Indian, and signed 
by two witnesses. The statement is as follows : 

. Dragon, Utah, January 2, 1917. 

Mrs. GEKTEtlDE BONNIN. 

Fort Duchesne, Utah 
Madam : Herewith a signed statement by Sam Atchee, as requested, with two 
witnesses. Snm Atchee repeats the same statement you have written on oppo- 
site side and signs below his marli as to the correct correspondence and state- 
ment. 

Yours, respectfully. 

T. M. McKee. 
.Tanuary 2, 1917. Sam Atchee [his thumb mark]. 
Witnesses : 

T. M. McKee, Dragon, Utah. 
Thomas M. Fuller, Dragon, Utah. 



PEYOTE. 125 

My friends had come to me and told me about this thing, and it 
was a very delicate matter with me. I hated to go to Sam Atehee 
and talk to him about it, being a woman, and yet I knew it must be 
done. So I wrote to a woman and asked her about it. I said : 

Mt Deak Mrs. McKee : I am writing to aslt you to help me secure some data 
against peyote. I liave it from a reliable source that Sam Atehee made a state- 
ment to the effect that he was opposed to peyote for its demoralizing efEect upon 
the users. 

He told how he tried it at the first introduction of it to the TJtes, and how 
during a peyote meeting after the drug was taking effect he stepped out of 
doors for a few minutes and upon return came upon a scene of Immoral 
practice. 

Cactus Pete had taken one of the tJte women outside. Sam Atehee caught 
them in the act. 

Sam evidently did not eat as much as the others, or it might be said he was 
under the influence of peyote and not responsible enough to give evidence. 
This Is an undesirable subject, and yet it will be one of the strongest points 
against peyote if such a statement is signed by Atehee before two witnesses. 

How can this be accomplished? Your husband will help you. 

That was the appeal I made to that woman. 

It will help secure legal protection for the Indian if Atehee will not be afraid 
to make this statement. 

Please use your own judgment in the write-up. I know you will do what you 
can. 

Very sincerely, 

Gertettde Bonnin, Secretary. 

Those people took my letter and explained it to that Indian, and 
here is his thumb-marked statement before two witnesses, saying 
that that was true and that he was an eye witness to that. 

There are at least 30 deaths that can be attributed to the use of 
peyote among the Utes. Of these Weecheget's death in the spring 
of 1916 is most horrible. He had taken an overdose. He became 
wild ; tearing his clothing off he jumped into a deep mud hole. There 
before a crowd of onlookers of whites and Indians he dove into the 
soft mud ; then he jumped up to his feet and wildly grabbed hands- 
full of the mud and smote himself with it. Before anyone could 
help him he died in a few minutes, before this crowd of eye witnesses. 
This happened in Dragon, Utah, in the spring of 1916. 

Peyote does excite the baser passions as Sam Atchee's statement 
shows, and many other Indians have given this kind of information 
before and since this statement by Sam Atehee. 

Money is gotten under false pretenses. In the j'ear 1916 Peter 
Phelps, the peyote agent, whom the Utes have named Cactus Pete, 
took up $500 from the peyote users, telling them that he would send 
them a license to sell peyote. In 1917, a year afterwards, the license 
was not forthcoming. Weechits, a Ute, who was one from whom 
$30 had been extracted by a promise to furnish a license, wrote to 
a so-called peyote chief, Tom Morgan, Chadron, Nebr., demanding 
the return of his money. The money was not returned for months, 
while I was still in Utah, and although I have not made recent in- 
quiry I am of the opinion it is still unreturned. 

N"ow, as to graft upon the superstition of the Utes. Twenty small 
crosses of very inferior material, with glass sets, were sold by Peter 
Phelps, peyote agent, to these Utes at a dollar each. The victims 
were told to put the magic crosses away and not to wear them. Once 
in a while they were instructed to look at them. If the cross was 



PEYOTE. 61 

along the north Mexican border and farther south. It is a very 
fiery liquid, very intoxicating. I have tried it once or twice, just as 
a matter of experiment, and I do not know any more than that of the 
effect personally ; but it is a very dangerous thing — I think there is 
no question of that — and very demoralizing. Peyote, however, is a 
small cactus, not more than 5 or 6 inches in length, of about the size 
and shape of an ordinary radish, growing with only the top above 
ground, and this top is what our Indians use, after slicing it off and 
drjdng it. This is it [showing a specimen]. This is a part of what 
I brought back for scientific investigation in 1891. It has probably 
lost all of its active properties now. This is the dried top, and the 
root of it tapers down into the ground to about the depth of an ordi- 
nary radish — no more than that. The maguey from which mescal 
liquor is distilled grows as high as this room and higher — very much 
higher sometimes. They are two entirely different plants. First get 
that in your minds, those who do not know it. that mescal is a dis- 
tilled brandy, the product of the root of a certain plant which grows 
in the extreme southwest of the United States and on the adjacent 
border of Mexico. Peyote is something very different, except that 
they are both of the cactus family. It grows not much more than 
an inch above the ground and is not distilled at all. The Indians — 
our Indians — use it just in that crude, raAv state, after they have 
dried and cured it. When I asked Dr. Prentiss once about the chance 
of an overdose, he said he thought that would be impossible as used 
by the Indians in this crude form. That is the statement of Dr. 
D. W. Prentiss, that as used by the Indians in the ceremonial way, 
simply the natural dried top, he thought it practically impossible to 
take an overdose. 

In Mexico, or at least in northern Mexico, where the tribes use it, 
they slice up the whole plant. I have not any of that here now, but 
you can find it on sale in the market places down there. In Mexico 
and in that part of the United States where it grows the Mexicans 
use it as a medicine. They slice up the whole plant and make a 
concoction of it and drink it in that way. They take two or three 
and put them into a cup of water, either warm or cold, let it soak a 
while, and drink the juice for medical purposes, as Mrs. Lone-Wolf 
told us the other day. There is no habit in connection with it, prop- 
erly speaking. Men who drink liquor drink it generally whenever 
they can get it, and as much as they can get at a time. The Indians 
use this in connection with their religious ceremony, at certain inter- 
vals, in certain definite quantities for each man. Outside of that 
they do not use it except for distinct medical purposes, in what they 
consider a medical fashion. 

Well, I brought up .50 pounds of peyote, and we had it analyzed. 
Dr. Wiley putting the analysis in charge of Mr. Ewell. Mr. Ewell 
was then a young man — I should judge about 25, perhaps — with a 
reputation to make, and he was very enthusiastic over this work. He 
was also an extremely nervous man in temperament. He has been 
dead a number of years now — possibly 15 years — so I think he was 
not quite 40 when he died. He separated a number of constituents, 
five in all, but did not complete the analysis. I do not know what 
has been done by the Department of Agriculture in recent years— I 
know they have done something at the instance of the Indian Office — 



62 J'K\OTK. 

but this analysis undertaken at the instance of the Bureau of Eth- 
nologjr. \Yas never completed. After it had progressed to the separa- 
tion of these five elements Dr. Wiley sent us a brief note stating that, 
in view of the pressure of other matters, he would be forced to dis- 
continue the analysis. That put a check upon the medical investi- 
gation, because Dr. Prentiss and the other medical men were waiting 
for these I'esults and using one aftei' another, as they arrived, in the 
experimentation. 

Mr. EAvell on one occasion, without consulting others and without 
knowing anything of tlie Indian method of using the plant, tried it 
upon himself, the crude drug, I think. He told me about it when I 
saw him, I think, the next afternoon. He was then lying upon a 
lounge in his office, and when I came in he said to me. "I have been 
in heaven and I do not care whether I recover oi' not.'' Then he 
told me of his experiences. He lived on the upper portion of Four- 
teenth Street. It was November and cold weather for that season. 
He told me that without sa3dng anything to outsiders — he may have 
told one oi' two, but in a general way it was not known that he was 
going to try it — he ate two that night. The Kiowa Indians who are 
accustomed to these things say you feel no effect until you have 
taken 10, but, of course, that depends somewhat upon the individual. 
I have frequently taken seven or eight, and that is about my limit, 
because then there comes a feeling of nausea. He took two. He 
may have taken a small fraction of anotlier. but I think not, and 
instead of having his mind at ease and his body at east also, as most 
people do when the take medicines, he lay down in bed for a little 
while; then he got up' again about midnight and wrote out his will 
and then dressed himself, either before or after, I do not remember 
which, and went out upon the street to find a drug store and stay 
there, so that he might be safe in case anything happened. I forget 
who found him, but I think he met a policeman, who learned from 
him Avhere his office was and brought him over there, as he did not 
wish to go to his home. Anj'how, instead of going to bed quietly 
or even staying (juietly in his room and trying to keep his mind at 
ease, he got all ready to die. if things happened that way, wrote out 
his will before going out upon the street in a cold November night, 
and was foiind there walking about by somebody else. It took a day 
or so for him to get over it at the Department of Agriculture. I 
saw and talked with him the same afternoon, within 24 hours of his 
taking it. and although he was rather excited, he knew what he was 
doing and could talk in a very interesting fashion of what had hap- 
]oened to him, 

I have here the notes of Dr. Prentiss and the published results of 
some of his experimentations and shall read a few of the letters. 

In regard to the things that have been alleged as to the Indians' 
use of it. in the first place, as I have said, it is not a habit as the white 
man makes a habit of drinking ordinary liquors. It is something 
used in connection with a certain Indian religion Avhich dates back 
as far as our knowledge of the Indians in the Spanish territories 
goes, and includes all. or most, of the tribes of the central plateau 
and the plains region, from about the City of Mexico north to the 
Arkansas, and more recently it has come up north as far as Dakota, 
and I think into Wisconsin. The tribes west of the Great Divide, in 
New Mexico and that section, Imow nothing about it, except, perhaps 



I'HYOTE. 63 

from hearsay, unless very recently. The mescal brandy that is xised 
there, and which I believe is a bad thing, as most other people do, 
is something different entirely in nature and in the way in which it 
is taken and has no religious connection whatever. Those Indians 
that use mescal know nothing whatever about the ijeyote religion. 
It is not used among the eastern tribes, unless it may lia\e come to 
them very recently. I first knew it in 1891 with the Kiowa, Coman- 
she. and Kiowa-Apache. In the Arapnho and Cheyenne Tribes 
there was then only one man who knew anything about it, and he 
was pointed out to me as a man of superior knowledge, but. since 
then, within the period of about 25 years, it has come into these and 
other tribes. 

One great reason for the spread of tlie religion is this : The Indians 
now are largely civilized: they are becoming citizens: they are edu- 
cated, and they travel about and take an interest in each other. A 
great many of the young men who have been sent to eastern schools, 
in a climate damper than the one to which they have been accustomed, 
come back with weakened lungs, coughs, and hemorrhages, and they 
are tflkl by their Indian friends at home that if they use the peyote it 
will relieve the coughs and check the hemorrhages, and they have 
found that to be true. That is the universal testimony of the Indians, 
and it is corroborated by Dr. Prentiss" experiments. The result is 
that the young men, not the older uncivilized ones, but the younger, 
middle-aged and educated men, have taken up the peyote cult and 
organized it as a regular religion, beyond what thej' knew before 
among the various tribes. In some tribes they have their own cliuich 
houses, built at their own expense. 

The Indians claim that a certain quantity of peyote produces beau- 
tiful color effects, and this is corroborated by medical testing. I have 
never experienced this effect up to T or 8 buttons — my limit — but do 
not doubt the statement. The effect would probably be more vivid to 
a white man or one unaccustomed to it. The Kiowa consider 10 the 
minimum. 

Now, I should like to read one or two of the things that have been 
said about it, and comment upon them. Here is an article written 
upon this subject, which appeared in the Washington Times last 
Sunday, February 17, 1918, in connection with this matter. The 
article "is accompanied by a picture of the author, who claims to be a 
Sioux woman, in Indian costume. The dress is a woman's dress 
from some southern tribe, as shown by the long fringes ; the belt is a 
Navajo man's belt; the fan is a peyote man's fan, carried only by 
men, usually in the peyote ceremony. It says: 

In order to secure its uninterrupted use. it has been claimed that its use is a 
sort of sacrament in the Indian religious ceremonies, but we know that in these 
feasts which last all night its use leads to the wildest intoxication and all kinds 
of orgies in which men. women, and even children take part, to the degredation 
of their minds. 

Indian WoifAN" in Camtai. to Ficht Growinc; Vsk of Peyote Diud by In- 

' „i^^-s aiKS. Gektevde Bonxjn, ('AKIJS1.K Chaiu-^tk. Rki.attve oi- Sitting 

Rl'i.L. Descrthes Effectk of Mind I-'ofmon. 

Mrs Gertrude Bonnin, relative of the great Sitting Bull, is in Washington to 
secure legislation forbidding the use of the peyote amongst the Indians. 

While bullet and bomb are destroying the white men on the battlefields of the 
world the American Indian is called upon to light an enemy which is rapidly 



64 peyoxth;. 

undermining his race and, strange to say, it is a tiny, mystic plant commonly 
known in the West as " peyote." 

This is a species of cactus, often called mescal, and those who use it are 
afflicted with the wildest hallucinations, dreams, whose golden visions rival the 
delirious trances of opium. Yet it always results in mental and physical de- 
generacy. 

GROWS IN SOUTHWEST. 

This peyote, or mescal button, is a plant growing in southern Arizona and 
Mexico. It is liotanically classified as Anhalonium Lewinil, but the Spanish 
friars called it " devil's root." So rapidly is the habit of using peyote growing 
among the Indians that the matter has been taken up before Congress and an 
active fight is being made by both sides. 

Foremost in the work for legislation to prevent its use is Mrs. Bonnin, a 
highly educated Sioux, who is to testify before the Senate Committee on Indian 
Affairs. Mrs. Bonuin graduated from Carlisle, and spent most of her lite hi 
social work among her race. 

Seated in her cozy flat at 707 Twentieth street northwest, Mrs. Bounin talked 
earnestly of the need the Indians had for protection. About her on the walls 
hung gayly-beaded moccasins and other souvenirs of the reservation. A fine 
photo of her husband, who is an oflicer in the Army, decorated the piano. 
Highly educated, speaking English fluently, she combined the simplicity and 
directness of her race with the polish of the college graduate. 

TEr.LS HER STORY. 

"I have come to Washington," she said, '"a-; secretary of the Society of 
American Indians. I am now engaged in testifying before the Senate Com- 
mittee on Indian Affairs in regard to the baneful effects of the use of peyote 
among the tribes. A hundred and fifty thousand dollars are to be appropriated 
to prevent the use of alcohol among the tribes, aud it is our wish that the 
peyote be included in the legislation. 

A few years ago it was comparatively little known, but of late its use has 
grown alarmingly till we find it far up in Wisconsin and the Dakotas. Its 
effects are most deadly on body and mind. Numberless physicians will testify 
to this. Y^et many who are addicted to the habit are fighting to retain it as 
an article of commerce. Under its influence both men and women become lazy, 
their l)ody and mind deteriorate, its intoxicating effects degenerate all users so 
that many deaths have resulted. The effect seems to be like an opiate, for 
under its sway all moral restrain is forgotten. 

SlOtJX FiM^r. VICTIMS. 

The Sioux are becoming addicts in large numbers. Its use is .growing rapidly 
iimong the Cheyennes, the Osages, the Arapahoes, the Kiowas, the Comanches, 
the Omahas, the Kickapoos, Winnebagoes, and other tribes. The Indians cling 
to it in many cases as a gift of the deity — some thinking it will give them a 
sight of the deity himself — and all i-egard it as a great medicine and intoxicating 
stimulant. In order to secure its uninterrupted use, it has been claimed that 
it is used as a sort of sacrament in the Indian religious ceremonies, hut we 
know that in these feasts, which last all night, its use leads to the wildest in- 
loxication and all kinds of orgies in which men, women, and even the children 
take part to the degradation of their minds. 

Experiments on animals have proved it to be a powerful narcotic poison. 
The famous Dr. Weir Mitchell, who experimented with the drug, says: "I 
predict a perilous reign of tlie lialiit when the agent becomes obtainable. The 
temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be too nmcli for scmie men 
to resist after they have set foot in this land of fairy colors." 

AGENTS SEJ.I, DRUG. 

Conscienceless agents, who sliip in the peyote from Mexico, are now going 
among the well-to-do Indians of the THes ami peddling tlie stulf, disguising their 
work under the cloak of promoting a religious organization. Feasts are gotten 
0]) and the peyote used to intoxicate all who attend. Many Indians believe 
tliat the peyote is a direct message from Cod — tliat it will give one the itowei- 
to read secret tlmu.ghts and acquire witlmut stiidy supevliunian knowledge. To 



PEYOTE. 65 

them it is a cure-till for every ailment, and in attending weekly meetings in 
which its use is indulged in by the devotees, they neglect their homes and farms 
and rapidly degenerate. It has also been claimed that troops on the border 
are liable to run into those who will teach the use of peyote. 

Peyote is the Spanish way of expressing the ancient Aztec word " Povotl," 
meaning a caterpillar. This refers to the yellowisli-white down which appears 
after the blossoms on the plant. The plant itself grows with a root in the 
ground and is used when dried either by chewing or making a solu(i<in. While 
common to Mexico, it is now sliipp'ed in bags to all the tribes in the W(>sf. The 
early Spanish missionaries spoke of the ceremonies \yhich attended its use in 
Mexico centuries ago. T.aws against its use were made in the time of Monte- 
zuma. The cliief feast of tlie peyote among the Indians of northern Mexico was 
the Hikuli, which took place every October. This was a very elaborate cere- 
mony, Indians all night dancing and drinking or eating the peyote. Remnants 
of this ancient ceremony are to-day preserved in the cult feasts which many 
of the Indians weekly attend, feasts which unlit them for tlieir daily life. 

DKSCKIl'TION OF THE I'B^AST. 

In an account by Mrs. Brabant in 1909, we have a description of a feast of 
this kind at Wliite Eagle, Okla. She said that the Indians had the peyote bean 
or button lying on a crescent-sbapecl altar, and that the worshippers present 
sang, beat tom-toms, and intoxicated themselves till they imagined that they 
saw visions of the Saviour. An Arapahoe Indian claimed that he sat gazing at 
the bean till he saw emerge from it a snake with heads, then a centipede, 
and that the siialce came to him, making his own body feel as if covered with 
the skin of a snake. 

Dr. Havelock Ellis has described his feelings after having eaten three of tlie 
peyote beans or " buttons " by way of an experiment. He says his first symp- 
tom was that of Immense strength and wonderful intellectual power, but that 
later he felt faint with a very low pulse. A pale shadow seemed to hover over 
the book he read. Visions came, slowly, then rapidly. First, a vast field of 
golden jewels studded with red, crimson, and green stones — a wonderful per- 
fume — a dull, rich glow and brilliant points — rare flowers — and iridescent 
fibrous wings, as of butterflies — then a hollow revolving cylinder lined with 
marvelous mother-of-pearl — profuse and various images — living arabesques. 
Then he saw waves of light, shadows flushed with violet. Once he visioned 
"floating white drapery" and "feathery forms." 

" Thtis it is easily to be seen that the use of the peyote induces the same 
mental and physical stimulation that habit-forming drugs generate, and it 
follows that the same mental and physical evils will result." said Mrs. Bonnin. 
" My work now is to prevent the destruction of my race by securing legislation 
forbidding the use of this injurious plant in the same way that alcohol is pro- 
hibited. Some have said that as the Indians claim the peyote is used as a 
sacrament it will prevent any legislation on the ground that such would be in- 
terference with religion. But the fact that it is used in a way which outrages 
decency and induces intoxication and degeneracy precludes any such plea. 
There "is no true friend of the Indian that does not desire this curse to be 
wiped away. Yet those who profit by this vice, those who are addicted to it, 
will, of course, plead for its retention." 

Mrs. Bonnin is an earnest worker for her people. She is of the opinion that 
much of the meat supply of the country could be benefited by teaching the 
Indians to raise cattle on their immense reservations so admirably adapted to 
grazing. 

" White men come in, lease the lands, get money from banks with which 
they buy cattle," she said, " why can not the Indians, who really own and 
live" on the land, be shown how to do this? Instead, he is made to lease and 
let the vi'hite man run the business and make the money. If the tribes now 
holding vast reservations could be set to raising cattle, the meat problem would 
be easily solved. 

POLITICS BLAMED. 

" The trouble is that the agents are so often political appointees, not selected 
for good character, but as a reward for party work — and the Indian is the 
helpless victim of the white man's cupidity. I am desirous of having women 

47003—18 5 



66 PEYOTE. 

sent in tlie capacity of agents to the Indians, for I feel that in tliat case they 
would give the red men fairer treatment." 

Mrs. Bonnin expects to remain in Washington for some time and devote 
her time to fighting peyote. 

If that ATere true, of course, it would be a good thing to stamp 
out, but it is not true. I shall describe the ceremony briefly as con- 
ducted among the Kiowas and Comanche, whom I know best. The 
Indians of the same neighborhood assemble at the home of one of 
their number — whole families together — late Saturday afternoon. 
They come in wagons, or now even in automobiles. They have their 
supper together in picnic fashion, the women doing the cooking 
while the men prepare the peyote tipi and the children play about. 
Only the men take part in the ceremony, excepting when a sick 
woman or child is brought in to be prayed for. The men go into the 
church or tipi, set up for this purpose, about 9 o'clock at night. The 
meeting is opened with prayer, after which four peyotes are handed 
around to each participant and eaten. After that they take a small 
drum and a rattle, the usual Indian accompaniment to singing, and 
sing hymns, and at intervals say prayers in which they mention quite 
frequently the name of Jesus and their Indian name for God, both 
which names they now know well. They keep that up through the 
greater part of the night. At intervals there is a break in the cere- 
mony, especially at midnight, when they have a sort of baptismal 
performance. Then they go on with other prayers and other sing- 
ing until about daylight when they have a ceremonial refreshment 
of dried meat and fruit, after which they come out ; and the women, 
who have been asleep with their children in the other house, pre- 
pare dinner. They all eat dinner together — their Sunday dinner — 
and have a sociable time through the afternoon, and when it is time in 
the evening they get the Avagons ready and go back to their homes. 
A camp or settlement will have such a meeting usually about every 
two weeks or so. I know they have brought about modifications in 
some respects since, but I am speaking now of the ceremony as I 
knew it for a number of years. After having spent the afternoon 
thus with their friends, they go back to their homes and their farms, 
talking about the news and discussing religious questions. I have 
seen it many times in a number of tribes and there is nothing that 
can be called an orgy, there is nothing that can be called immoral, 
and in the tribes that I know, women and children were never 
present except when they were brought in to be prayed over as sick 
persons. I have seen occasions where a sick woman was brought 
in and sat beside her husband while prayers were said for her re- 
covery. That was the only part she took in it except that she ate one pe- 
yote after it had been prepared for her by her husband. I have seen 
a sick child brought in by its father to be prayed for in the same way, 
but without eating the peyote, after which it was laid away to sleep in 
a blanket. In thus praying over the sick the Indian worships only 
literally the Bible injunction: " Is any man sick among you, let him 
bring in the priests of the church and let them pray over him, 
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer 
of faith shall save the sick man and the Lord shall raise him up." 
I understand that in the tribes which have adopted it more recently 
women take part with the men, the result probably of the spread of 
education. 



PEYOTE. 67 

I have been present at this ceremony among the Comanche, at the 
house of Quana Parker, their noted head chief. Some of us here 
knew Quana. For those who did not know him I will say that he 
was the son of a captive white man and was the head chief of the 
Comanche, and altogether the ablest man in the history of the 
western tribes of Oklahoma. He led the outbreak of the five con- 
federated tribes against the Government in 1874, and kept his men 
out a year or two after everybody else had surrendered. He had that 
kind of persistence. After the surrender he adopted what was best 
in civilization, but held on to what he believed to be the best in 
Indian life. He spoke Comanche, English, and Spanish, had traveled 
extensively, was familiar with Washington, and lived in a fine house 
with a white man for secretary and a white woman for housekeeper. 
He told me he was very much interested in this investigation and 
that he himself, several years before I came down there, had sent 
some of this peyote to the Indian Office and asked them to make an 
analysis of it, but that he had never heard anything from it. While 
I was stopping at his house he arranged a peyote ceremony among 
the Comanche, and he told me : " In order to convince you that it 
does not kill us prematurely or break down our health, as has been 
alleged, I have invited to lead the ceremony to-night the old man 
who first brought it to us about 50 years ago." I did not know 
that until he told me, after they were all gathered together. He in- 
troduced me to the old man, who, I should judge, must have been 
far past 70 years. His voice was weak at first, but when his turn 
came he said the prayer and sang the songs. 

He was up with us all night and in the morning I had a long inter- 
view with him, through an interpreter, and afterwards made his 
picture. This old man, who had been eating it for at least 50 years 
or longer, he sat up all night and took his full part in the ceremony, 
submitted to an intervicAV, then submitted again to a photographic 
operation before he had any rest, and he was apparently none the 
worse for it. 

About daylight, while we were still inside the tepee, a messenger 
arrived and told Quana that there were some cattlemen waiting for 
him, who wanted to take him down to Texas, to Henrietta or Vernon, 
I believe, to negotiate some grazing leases for them. He sent them 
in to breakfast, and as soon as he could leave he went with them down 
into Texas to transact the business. Anybody who knew Quana 
Imows that he would not have undertaken to do business unless he 
felt that he was perfectly fit for it. On this occasion he sang a song 
of- hia own composition 'and made the midnight prayer in his own 
language, and then, for my benefit, in English. It was a prayer for 
long life and health for himself and his family and prosperity and 
good crops for his people. I still have the ceremonial wand which he 
carried on that occasion and which he gave me before parting, because, 
he said, " You are the only white man who knows our religion." 

On another occasion I have seen a boy about 12 years old, of the 
Kiowa familv with which I lived for some years, initiated into the 
religion by his father, who was one of the leaders on this occasion. 
The boy took his pevote, sat up with us ail night, and then went to bed 
and slept all the afternoon, and that was the end of it. That was 25 
years ago, and he wrote to me last year that he was doing well and 
had just built a large new house. 



68 PEYOTE. 

Now, the Indians who take this religiously in this way number 
approximately from 12,000 to 15,000. There are several of them in the 
city now, or have been very recently. Two of them were here yester- 
day and others from my own tribe within this week, willing and 
anxious to talk. Some of us here now saw them, and nobody seeing 
those Indians could be convinced that these men are addicted to any 
debilitating or demoralizing habit that makes them imbecile or kills 
them jDrematurely. 

Three years ago, in February, 1915, the Board of Indian Commis- 
sioners had a session in this city, and several -of us in the bureau were 
requested to be present. When we were asked to come we did not 
know what was wanted, but Ave found it was to be a talk in reference 
to peyote. It happened that there were a niunber of Indian delegates 
here from the tribes which have this religion, so by permission we 
invited them to be present, and they did most of the talking. I did 
some, but it was chiefly an Indian talk, and at the end of the hearing 
the chairman of the meeting expressed regret that these persons who 
were in the city and had promised to attend in opposition had not, 
shown up, and ex]3ressed his surprise that practically everything that 
had been said there by the Indians — who, as he said, were fine physical 
and mental specimens, to all appearances. — everything that had been 
said had been in favor of this religion and in favor of the plant itself, 
as the Indians use it. (See documents, Board of Indian Commis- 
sioners, Peyote hearing, Feb. 1, 1915, appended herewith.) 

Department of the Intekiok, 

Board of Indian Commissioners, 

W(if:Jiiiigton, Fehrnary 20, 19 J 8. 
Hon. Charles D. Carter, 

Chairmnn Goiiimittee on Indian Affairs, 

House of Represetitatires. Wushiii{/ton D. C. 
Dear Mr. Carter: In accordance w^th the telephone request from your office, 
there are being sent herewith some statements upon the use of peyote among 
the Indians made liefore the annual meeting of the Board of Indian Commis- 
sioners February 4, 1915. 
These documents are as follows: 

1. Statement of Mr. Mooney, Bureau of American Ethnolony, pages 1 to 14. 

2. Statement of Dr. Trun]an Nicholson, Bureau of American Ethnology, pages 
15 to 24. 

3. Statement of Mr. Otto Wells, Comanche Indian, page 25. 

4. Statement of Mr. Arthur Bonnicastle, Osage Indian, pages 26 to 28. 

5. Statement of Mr. Francs La I'lesche. Bureau of Ethnology, pages 29 to 32. 

6. Statement of Mr. Thomas L. Sloan, attorney at law, pages" 33 to 36. 

7. Accompanying documents submitted by Mi-, .lames Rlooney, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, pages .37 to 44. 

Several other documents relating to this sub.iect ai-e also being inclosed. 
Faithfully, yours, 

Malcolm McDowell, Secrcturi/. 

P- S. — The Board of Indian (Jonunissicmers is by formal vote opposed to the 
use of peyote in any of its forms and in favor of leg'.slation which will prevent 
Indians from obtaining it. 

Malcolm SIcDowell, Scrrctaii/. 

The Chairm-\n. I understand that the matter we are going to dis- 
cuss, in the first instance is peyote. Mr. Abbott, you are familiar 
with the program. Whom shall we call on first? 

Mr. Abbott. Mr. Chairman, I think everybody here is interested in 
the STibject, and many of those present would have something to say 
regardmg it, but as the time is short I presume it would be best first 



PEYOTE. 69 

to hear a statement based on personal observation and scientific re- 
search, such as Mr. Mooney, of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
is prepared to make. 

The Chairman. Mr. Mooney, for the benefit of the unsophisticated, 
will you please state just what is the position in the Bureau of 
Ethnology which you hold? 

(Mr. James Mooney stated that he held the position of ethnologist 
in the bureau and had occupied that position 30 years.) 

Mr. Mooney. To give a fair understanding of this topic would 
require, I think, more time than it is possible to spend this afternoon 
on the subject. If you choose; I can give you a brief statement. As 
a number of our Indian friends have only to-day to remain in the 
city, you may like to hear their views first. I can wait. [Pause.] 
Or I can give you a scientific statement based on the professional in- 
vestigations which I have conducted for 25 years, and then they can 
give you the Indian standpoint from their own experiences. 

The Chaihihan. We should like to hear a brief, scientific statement. 
Then, we shall have that as a background for the experiences that the 
Indians may give us. 

Mr. Mooney. I am one of the ethnologists of the Bureau of Amer- 
ican Ethnology. In April I shall have filled 30 years' service in the 
bureau. A large part of my time has been spent with the tribes of 
the southern plains, who are particularly devoted to the use of 
peyote and to the religious rite connected with it. For the most part 
of the first six years I lived as a member of a family among the 
Kiowa. In connection with a general study of Indian things among 
the Kiowa, Commanche, Apache, and associated tribes, and the Chey- 
enne and Arai^aho of Oklahoma, and se\'eral other tribes in the 
other parts of the- country, I have made peyote a subject of investi- 
gation. It is so closely connected with Inclian life in southwestern 
Oklahoma that any ethnologist going there to make investigations 
soon has it brought to his attention, and I became interested in it. 

I have gotten from the Indians their own story of the origin of 
the religious rite. You must understand th^it the use of this plant 
is not an ordinary habit, but that it is confined almost entirely and 
strictly to the religious ceremony, excepting that it is frequently 
employed also for medicinal purposes. It is not an ordinary habit 
in the way that a man takes to drinking whisky. There are certain 
times, seasons, and reasons for the use of it. I studied the ceremony 
first as a scientific observer with the Kiowa, and later in pursuance 
of a special investigation of the subject, I visited a number of other 
tribes, among them the Mexican tribes of the Sierra Madre, and as 
far south as the City of Mexico. Besides what I know of the use of 
peyote among the tribes in western Oklahoma, I know in a less de- 
gree of its use among the tribes in Mexico, from whom those to the 
north have obtained their knowledge of it. 

Peyote grows in the arid regions. It is a small cactus, with a root 
very much the size and shape of an ordinary long radish, and the 
part used by the Indians is the sliced-otf top, dried to about the size 
of an ordinary silver quarter or half dollar. Here it is [showing 
a small boxful of samples of peyote]. It has different Indian names 
in the various tribes. It is sometimes incorrectly called mescal by 
the whites, but its proper name is peyote, the Spanish derivative 



70 PEYOTE. 

from the old Aztec name. This is the dried top, the blossoming top 
of a small cactus which grows close to the ground. It grows abun- 
dantly about Laredo, Tex., where it is gathered and dried by Mexi- 
cans and shipped to the dealers in Oklalaoma, who supply the Indian 
trade. Our tribes, in the ceremonial, eat it dry, using only the top, 
because, on account of the white blossom center surrounded by circles 
of white jDoints, they regard it as the vegetable representative of the 
sun. In Mexico, not only do the Indian tribes use it in the cere- 
monial way, but the common people of Mexico use it also in a medici- 
nal way. Both Indians and Mexicans slice up the whole plant and 
make a decoction of it in warm or cold water. What I have here 
I got myself from a trader, who handled it in western Oklahoma, 
but I have also dug up the growing plant about Laredo. 

The Chairman. Does it grow in Oklahoma? 

Mr. MoojsfEY. I do not think it grows in any part of Oklahoma. 
I know it grows in Texas, about Laredo, and most of the supply 
comes from there. It may grow also about the lower Pecos. The 
Mexican Indians find it on the arid plains eastward from the Sierra 
Madre. We know it was long used, as far back as we have any con- 
nected historical record of the Indian tribes of Texas. Some old 
Spanish mission books refer to it. 

The Kiowa story of its origin is that some young men went on the 
warpath to the south and were gone for so long a time that their 
friends at home became afraid they would never return. There was 
a young woman, a sister of one of the war party, who went out to a 
hill beyond the camp every evening to watch for her brother, in ac- 
cordance with the Indian custom, and pray for his I'eturn. Finally 
one evening she fell asleep, and a spirit came to her in a dream, tell- 
ing her that there was something growing out of the ground under 
her head which would bring her to her brother if used according to 
the instructions which the spirit then gave her. When she awoke she 
looked and found a number of peyotes growing. These she gathered 
and took back to camp, and then, calling the old men together, told 
them how to prepare everything for the ceremony as the spirit had 
directed._ They set up the tepee and performed the rite, and in the 
peyote vision they saw where the young man was lying alone, wounded 
and starving, and they sent out a party and brought him home to his 
sister. There -is always a religious myth in connection with the 
peyote rite. That is the story the Kiowa tell of how the rite came to 
them. Each tribe has its own story. The Kiowa say the Comanche 
knew of it before they did. Both tribes say they got it from the 
Mescalero and Tonkawa, and probably these got it originally from 
the tribes near the Mexican border, who in turn had it from the tribes 
in old Mexico. It has come to the more northern tribes only recently. 

You have seen the plant as used. As to their method of using it 
ceremonially, they have a regular time— Saturday night running into 
Sunday mornmg. They set up a special tepee and go into it, after 
prelimmary preparation, about 9 o'clock in the evening. I have seen 
as many as 30 or more sitting in a circle inside the tepee. They have 
a drum and rattle. After an opening prayer the leader hands out 
four peyotes to each man. Each man chews up one peyote after 
another, making a pellet of each, which he swallows. 'Then the 
singmg begins. There is one regular song at the beginning, one song 



PEYOTE. 71 

at midnight, one song at daylight, and one song at the close, with 
other songs all through the night as each man chooses, two men sing- 
ing at a time, one accompanying with the drum and the other with 
the rattle. The singing goes on through the night, the drum and 
rattle passing around the circle repeatedly. There is a fire in the 
center of the tepee and a large sacred' peyote on a little crescent- 
shaped mound behind it. While two men keep up the songs the others 
are praying or remain in a state of contemplation, looking toward 
the fire and the sacred peyote. The ceremony g\;es on in this way 
through the night. At intervals the worshipers eat more peyotes. 
At midnight there is a sort of baptismal ceremony, Avhen one man 
brings in a bucket of spring water, over which the leader recites a 
prayer, after which they sprinkle themsehes with it. The leader 
stands up while making the prayer. They pray for all their friends 
and for themselves, as we pray. If there are any sick in camp, they 
may be brought in to be prayed for. If a woman is sick, her husband 
brings her in, and they pray for her and give her some of the peyote 
to eat. She does not prepare it herself, but it is prepared for her. 
With the peyote-using tribes that I know best, the Kiowa and Co- 
manche, the only occasion on which a woman is present is when she 
is there to be prayed for as a member of the family of the man who 
accompanies her. 

Of the tribes now in Oklahoma, the confederated Kiowa, Co- 
manche, and Kiowa-Apache, together with the Tonkawa, had the 
ceremony first, and from a very early period. In 1890 the Caddo 
and Wichita were little acquainted with peyote, and only one man 
in the Arapaho Tribe knew anything about it. The same is true of 
the Cheyenne. Since that time it has spread to other tribes north 
and east, and I think the farther it gets away from the old center the 
more it deviates from the original rite, but I can not speak positively. 

I have frequently seen men in this ceremony eat as many as 30 
peyotes at a time. I have heard of 90 being eaten at one sitting by 
a man among the Kiowa, but can not vouch for it; but I know that 
from 20 to 30 or from 35 to 40 is a common thing with those accus- 
tomed to the plant. I have seen old men, one at least 70 years old, 
sit up all night in this ceremony without apparent fatigue, and a 
12-year-old boy of one Kiowa family went through it for the first 
time, eating 10 in the course of the night without showing signs of 
abnormal fatigue, although he went into a heavy sleep at the end 
of the ceremony and was allowed to sleep the rest of the day until 
he awoke of his own accord. 

Some of you may have known Quana Parker, the late head chief 
of the Comanche, speaking good English, living in a fine house with 
white servants and as shrewd and able as any white man. He was 
the leader of the ceremony among the Comanche. Upon one occasion 
during my investigation I stopped at his house. He told me, " I 
have tried to get Washington to investigate this matter. Years 
ago I brought a quantity of the peyote to the Indian Office and 
asked them to investigate it, but I have heard nothing from it 
since. I am glad you are here. I want you to see how the Comanche 
use it, and in order to convince you that it does not age men pre- 
maturely or make them weak minded or crazy I have sent for the 
old' man who brought the peyote to the Comanche 50 years ago to 



72 PEY'OTE. 

lead the ceremonj' to-night." The old man was blind and very 
feeble, so that some of the young- men had to prepare him for the 
ceremony, painting his face and arranging his hair, before leading 
him into the tepee, but when his turn came to sing the midnight 
song he took the rattle and sang as vigorously as any of the others. 
They spent the night from 9 o'clock in the evening until 7 or 8 
o'clock the following morning in the tepee, sitting in a circle with 
the fire in the center, the songs going on as usual, with only the 
regular intervals of prayer, each man eating in his own way up to 
SO disks of peyote in the course of the night. The old man sang 
the daylight song with the others. After the ceremony he posed for 
his picture and gave me a long interview through an interpreter 
without showing any unusual signs of fatigue. Shortly before the 
close Quana was called out by some cattlemen to go with them down 
into Texas to negotiate an important pasture lease. He finished the 
ceremony, took a hasty breakfast, and started off with them, perfectly 
confident in his fitness to transact the business. He had made the 
midnight prayer, following it with a translation into English for 
my special benefit. It was a prayer for health, for himself and 
his family, for the welfare of his people, and for a good corn crop. 
Tlie Indians on this occasion ate about 30 pej^otes each, as Quana 
had provided a good quantity, sitting quietly most of the time in a 
contemplative condition until it came the turn of each man to take 
the drum or rattle and sing his song, Avhen he appeared to be all 
awake at once. 

In the morning the daylight song is the signal for the woman to 
prejoare tlie food. Later on there is the closing song, and with that 
the ceremony ends. Special food has been prepared for the wor- 
shippers and is eaten before they leave the tepee. Then thej^ go out 
and sit about chatting with their friends until dinner. Dinner is a 
familj' affair. The Indian families come in wagons for miles around 
as to a church gathering, just as in some i)arts of the country white 
families come in wagons to a country church, where they attend a 
service and afterwards have dinner in the open and sit around until 
the evening, when they go home.^ Thei'e is nothing at all bad about 
it, nothing whatever in the nature of an orgy. I can say from expe- 
rience that there is nothing that the most rigid white man could 
consider immorality. There is no physical or mental prostration. 
There is no collapse after it is over. There is only the natural effect 
of having been up all night with some stimulant that would prevent 
their feeling fatigue. As a matter of scientific investigation, I have 
attended the pej^ote ceremony many times. I first described it before 
the Anthropological Society of Washington in 1891, and in 1894 
brought back a considerable quantity of the dried plant, which, under 
authority of the Bureau of American Ethnology, I turned over to 
the chemical division of the Department of Agriculture for analysis, 
with the view to subsequent medical experimentation. The division 
was then under the direction of Dr. H. W. Wiley, who assigned the 
work of analysis to Mr. E. E. Ewell. Mr. Ewell had separated sev- 
eral of the chemical constituents when he was called off by Dr. Wiley, 
and the analysis was not completed. 

As a continuation of the investigation by the Bureau of Ethnology, 
we turned over the constituents that had been separated, together 



PEVOTE. 73 

with a quantity of the dried plant, to the late Dr. D. W. Prentiss, at 
that tune one of Washington's leading physicians and nerve special- 
ists. He gave a small quantity to several other collaborators, all the 
expenmentation being conducted as a part of the same Bureau of 
Ethnology investigation. Dr. Prentiss experimented here upon 
some of his patients and in the hospitals, and also in Bermuda, where 
he spent a part of the winter. He administered it both in alcoholic 
solution and in the crude form, giving special attention to patients 
suffering from nervous troubles. I have his notes here. Some of 
these notes and general results he published over his signature in 
medical journals, of which also I have copies here. He told mc that 
he considered that the Indians had discovered a valuable remedy in 
peyote. In regard to the possibility of an overdose he said he thought 
their eating it in the crude form 'made it practically impossible 'for 
them to take a dangerous overdose. He said he believed it would 
prove to be a tonic medicine, a local anesthetic, a nerve sedative, 
and an excellent aid to the healing of ulcerated membranes. This 
last I Avas particularly glad to hear, as nearly every Indian who has 
taken to peyote after being educated in eastern schools said (hat he 
did so because he came back to the West suffering from coughs and 
hemorrhages and was told that the peyote would relie\'e him!^ and he 
found that it did. My principal Kiowa assistant, who acquired con- 
sumption from living some years in the East, had been sent back 
West to die. and had taken up the use of peyote as a means of relief 
from hemorrhages. As a matter of fact, he died finally, but the 
peyote relieved the irritation and he lived 30 years longer than other- 
wise might have been the case. He was a great believer in it for this 
reason, and. though he possessed a white man's education, he was the 
leader in the peyote ceremony. 

On one occasion, before I had been with the KioAva so long, learn- 
ing that I was at a camp where they were intending to hold a peyote 
ceremony he came a distance of about 20 miles, through a hard rain, 
voluntarily, to be with me. When he came into the tepee it seemed 
as if his cough would tear his lungs to pieces. I remonstrated with 
him and wanted him to go to bed. He said, " No ; I know you need 
me here." Yet I had not sent for him. He said, " I shall eat some 
peyote and pretty soon I shall be all right." He ate peyote with the 
rest, his cough did stop, and later on he sang the midnight song with 
a clear, strong voice. 

I have seen peyote used as a medicine in certain cases of sickness, 
but as to its medicinal qualities I can not say personally. I know 
many of the leaders of the ceremony in several tribes, and can say 
here that the charge made by persons that the use of peyote drags the 
Indian down physically or renders him mentally incapable and that 
it is only the degraded, immoral, worthless ones of the tribe who use 
it is untrue. I have medical testimony and my own knowledge to sub- 
stantiate this and can give any further information you may wish 
at any time. I have also been with the Indians who use it on the 
other side of the Mexican line, but have not been with them in the 
ceremony. It seems that the peyote rite now extends north as far as 
Montana. When I first knew it, it had not crossed the Canadian 
River to the north. Besides the Kiowa, Comanche, and Kiowa- 
Apache of southwest Oklahoma, with whom I first knew it, and the 



74 PEYOTE. 

Tonka w a (Oklahoma), and Mescalero (New Mexico), who also had 
it then, it is now also with the Cheyenne, Arapaho, Caddo, Osage, and 
perhaps other tribes of Oklahoma, the Omaha and Winnebago, of 
Nebraska, the northern Arapaho, of Wyoming, the northern Chey- 
enne, of Montana, and possibly with the Sioux, of North Dakota. 

Mr. Ater. Is it possible that these men now using it were born of 
people who had used it for several generations? Would anyone in 
time become immune to its effects? 

Mr. MooNET. Entirely possible. 

Mr. Ayee. Its effect would be more marked in the first year's use 
than after five years' use ? 

Mr. MooNEY. Yes. Professional notes by expert medical men war- 
rant the general conclusion that it is a valuable medicine, for which 
we are indebted to the Indians, and that it is our business to utilize 
it after perfecting the analysis and completing experimentation. No 
reputable medical man will give a final opinion on a new drug after 
experimenting for only a few months on a few individuals. One 
important reason for the opposition to peyote is that on account of 
the confusion of names many people think that mescal and peyote 
are the same thing. This is not so. Mescal is a liquor distilled by the 
Mexicans from the root of the maguey, and the taste and effect are 
about like that of strong brandy. Peyote is not an excitant and 
does not rouse to violence or anything of that kind. It has a soothing 
effect. 

Mr. Ayek. The whole tribe use it every Saturday night? Do any 
of them use it every day? 

Mr. MooNEY. No; I think not; that is abnormal. The same per- 
sons do not commonly use it on consecutive Saturdays. The cere- 
mony is usually held on Saturday night, but not consecutive Satur- 
days by the same people in the same camp. 

Mr. Ayee. I did not know but that the effect being exhilarating 
and pleasing people got into the habit of using it all the time. 

Mr. MooNEY. I can not say that the effect is exhilarating, but it 
intensifies imagination and puts one into a pleasant state of mind. 
There is one effect of peyote that is very important. Followers of 
the peyote rite say that the peyote does not like whisky, and no 
real peyote user touches whisky or continues to drink whisky after 
he has taken up the peyote religion. It may be that the plant itself 
destroys the appetite for liquor. In addition to being the greatest 
relief known to our Indians for hemorrhages and throat distress 
acquired from living in the damp eastern climate, it is also their 
greatest shield against intemperance. 

STATEMENT OF DR. TRTJMAW MICHEISON, PH. D., ETHNOLOGIST 
BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY. 

Dr. MicHELSON. I have visited some of the tribes in which peyote 
has been in use. Its effect upon users in the different tribes seems 
to differ somewhat. I first had occasion to observe the effect of its 
use among the Northern Arapahoes, in Wyoming. I spent a few 
weeks among these Indians for linguistic purposes, and while there 
was asked to attend a meeting. I did not remain the entire night. 
I came out about an hour after midnight and went back two or 



PEYOTE. 75 

three hours later and stayed until the end. Altogether I must have 
passed eight hours or so, including the time spent the next day. 
The ceremony on that occasion was somewhat as described by Mr. 
Mooney, but differs slightly. The leader ate six peyotes, the others 
not more than four, at the highest, and most of them only two. I 
think on that occasion no woman ate any. Women are not ordi- 
narily admitted to the ceremony among the Northern Arapahoes, 
though it does happen occasionally. They are not allowed more 
than one piece of the peyote. As I say, I went in at the beginning 
of the ceremony and came out about one hour after midnight, and 
then I went back again before the morning song; and I was with 
them for the rest of the day. They were in no worse shape than 
white men might have been in after being up all night without any 
sleep. I examined them carefully for any signs of hallucinations. 
I found no trace of hallucinations. The pupils of the eyes were not 
dilated, and there was no excitement. I saw no evidence of im- 
morality. This will answer for the Northern Arapahoes. I have 
been among the tribes of Oklahoma, and there, I confess, the effect 
is different. I have not witnessed the ceremony among the Mexican 
Kickapoos, but have seen the effect, and I must say that after the 
ceremony they were in rather bad shape. It was quite evident that 
something had affected them. Some of them were unable to walk 
quite naturally and one man was unconscious for some time. 

Commissioner Atek. Were they using the same peyote as the 
Northern Arapahoes? 

Dr. MiCHELSON. I am not in a position to state whether the peyote 
used by the Mexican Kickapoos is the same as that used by the 
Arapahoes of the north, neither do I know whether it was drugged 
with anything else. I state only the actual effect as I saw it. 

I have also some knowledge of the use of peyote among the Sac 
and Fox of Iowa. I have spent many seasons with them, and they 
are no better than other tribes. The performance of the peyote 
ceremony is more secretive among them and I have not been able to 
attend any of the actual performances. I have heard, however, the 
personal narrative of a leader of the ceremony among this tribe, 
with whom I am acquainted personally. He told me that when he 
first took up peyote he ate quite a few, and in a short time he 
became quite gidcly and very soon everything before him waved more 
or less, and in the course of a few hours he fell down unconscious 
and had hallucinations; but subsequently the peyote did not have 
this effect upon him. He had hallucinations, but did not become 
unconscious or fall down. It is not universally used among the 
tribe, and it is used only on rare occasions. It is not taken up by 
all of the tribe. 

A rather noteworthy figure is the leader of this peyote ceremony, 
Tesson. He is three-quarter Indian, one-quarter French or Spanish, 
and is the most prosperous of all the tribe. He owns 40 acres of 
land of his own and has good grazing land. No one can deny that 
he is the best stockman on the reservation. I do not mean to say 
that he has the best farm, but the best stock. 

As to any immorality connected with the peyote ceremony, that 
has been reported to me by people who strictly observe old-time 
traditions. I can not confirm it. It has been reported, but how 



76 PEYOXE. 

much weight should be given the report is another question. Hal- 
lucinations do exist. As to its effect on the users of whisky, it is 
perfectly true that the users of mescal or peyote do not drink 
\\liisky. I can perhaps best illustrate this by a question I put to 
Eobert Young Bear. I asked him, " Have you ever used peyote ? " 
He said, " I did, but I quit it. I just can't behave myself. I love 
whisky." I think that puts it in a nutshell. 

It is questionable whether the use of peyote could be successfully 
put down in time. The only effective AVay to deal with it is through 
the ordinary State laws regulating the sale of poisonous drugs. If 
it is a drug, it would come under those laws. I do not say that it 
should be suppressed, but that is the only way to deal with it suc- 
cessfully. 

I also think that it is very important that the peyote used in the 
various tribes should be examined in order that we may be quite sure 
that we are dealiiig with the same jslant. I think it would be worth 
while to note its eifect in various places. There are some Winnebagos 
in Iowa who use it, as well as the Sac and Fox. Its use has also 
spread to the Winnebagos in Wisconsin. I think a short time ago 
a party from the Winnebagos of Wisconsin went to the Menominees 
of Wisconsin to persuade them to send a delegation to Washington 
for the purpose of requesting an investigation of peyote. I under- 
stand, though I can not vouch for it, but a record should be found 
in the files of the Indian Office, that the agent practically prevented 
the delegation from carrying out its Avork. It seems to me that 
before we do anj^thing there should be a thorough investigation of 
the use of peyote among the different tribes, reports upon its use and 
effect, whether or not hallucinations result, and whether or not the 
users become demoralized. The Arapahoes use it onlv on religious 
occasioiiK. The Sac and Fox get it from the Winnebagos. I think 
that the question of morality can be checked up among the various 
tribes. Some say there is a certain degree of immorality among the 
Winnebagos of Nebraska. The matter could be very easily investi- 
gated. 

There is one practical difficulty in the way of suppressing peyote. 
The Indians believe it is a cure for the whisky habit. On the other 
hand, there are those who entertain a preconceived prejudice against 
it. Take, for example, Jim Peters, a Sac and Fox whom I asked 
about peyote. He said, "It is another form of whisky." 

Jim Peters is a noted conservative Indian. I refer to Jim Peters, 
of Tama, Iowa, a Sac and Fox, who is one of the most conservative 
Indians in that tribe, and he is very much against the use of peyote; 
b\it I say that his testimony must be taken with a grain of salt, be- 
cause he is naturally prejudiced against it. Jim Peters is a pagan 
Indian, and opposed to missions or innovations of any kind. 

The Chairman. When they have these hallucinations, do they 
appear to be prompted to violence? 

Mr. MicHELsoN. I was not able to observe any desire toward 
violence. 

Mr. Kxox. You say the peyote acts as a narcotic in most cases. 
Would you think it wise to promote the sale of a narcotic? 

Mr. MiCHELSON. No. I do not approve the sale or use of narcotics. 

Mr. Knox. With this exception? 



PEYOTE. 77 

Mr. MicHELSON. I have not contended that it should be approved.. 
First of all, we want a careful analysis. If it be found to contain 
alkaloid poisons, we wish to restrict' its use. 

Mr. Kkox. I think Mr. Mooney said it had been analyzed in the 
Agricultural Department. 

Mr. MiCHELSON. No one has been completely satisfied with the 
previous analysis. 

Mr. Knox. If there was reason to suppose that upon complete 
analysis peyote would be found to be a drug, why has not the analysis 
been made already? 

Mr. MiCHELsoK. It has been a matter of absolute indifference. 
For a long time no one paid any attention to it. 

The Chairman. Are there any more questions to be asked? 

Mr. MooNEY. My name has been mentioned in connection with the 
analysis of peyote. I should like to say that I have here the state- 
ments in print of two doctors that its action is not to be compared 
with that of opium or any Imown narcotic. Its effect has been found 
to be soothing and with no injurious reaction. 

Mr. Knox. Yon say it was tried in 1892? 

Mr. Mooney. Or later. The Department of Agriculture made the 
partial analysis of which I spoke. Dr. Prentise declared it to be a 
valuable discovery in medicine :^or the purpose of healing broken 
down nerves. While he does not recommend its indiscriminate use, 
he suggests it is valuable acquisition to the medical profession. If 
you know anything of the history of medicine, you will remember 
that quinine comes to us from the Indians. It took about 200 years 
for us to adopt it. It comes to use from the Indians of South Amer- 
ica. Because it was used by them in a sort of religious rite, the mis- 
sionaries opposed its adoption, the Spanish conquerors opposed it, the 
medical profession opposed it, and it took 200 years for us to take 
it up. I think that the same thing may be said of peyote in a future 
civilization. 

Mr. Knox. Do you think it would be wise for the American Gov- 
ernment to promote without restriction the indiscriminate use of 
quinine among Indians? 

Mr. Mooney. If quinine should get to be a habit, I should think 
it well to regulate its use. 

Mr. Knox. Would you think the unrestricted use of any kind of 
medicine among a people unaccustomed to its use a wise thing 1 

Mr. Mooney. No; but certainly people who have always used a 
medicine should know something of its effects and the proper man- 
ner of using it. 

Mr. Knox. There seems to be different ideas as to the proper 
method of using medicines. 

Mr. MooNEY. It is hardly possible to imagine a mere medicine 
being used in excessive quantities — that is, as a medicine. I can not 
imagine quinine being used in such a way that a man could give 
himself up to it. 

Mr. Knox. Morphine is a medicine if properly used. 

Mr. Mooney. Yes; but it is never used in a religious rite. 

Mr. Knox. Do I understand that you defend peyote on the ground 
that it is a part of a religious rite and ought not to be interfered 
with? 



78 PEYOTE. 

Mr. MooNET. Both as a part of religious rite, and as a medicine, 
I think the question should be treated with discretion. If it is to be 
used as a medicine, it should be used under prescription from their 
own doctors. 

Mr. Knox. Do you mean white or Indian doctors? 

Mr. MooNET. Indian doctors. 

Mr. Knox. Are their doctors competent? Can they be regarded 
as competent? 

Mr. MooNEY. I am not a doctor myself, and my opinion on a 
medical point is not of great value. But the Indians have their own 
doctors, and for certain things they are undoubtedly good. In my 
opinion Indian medical theory is worthless. It is based on the germ 
idea carried to its ultimate termination. There is, however, expert 
official medical testimony to the effect that certain Indian remedies 
are valuable. I have heard a great many things that lead me to be- 
lieve that Indian surgery is of a high order. I can not speak with 
authority. I know that Indians go to their doctors and for certain 
things thej' receive help. The Indian doctor has his limitations, but 
he is competent along certain lines. If he were not, no Indians 
would be alive. 

Mr. Knox. I suppose they are alive in spite of them rather than 
because of them. 

Mr. MooNEY. Some people think that about the white doctors. 

Commissioner Ketcham. Is the reason they do not use it to excess 
and only on certain occasion, because of the difficulty of getting it? 

Mr. MooNEY. Not at all. I have a letter from the trader who 
supplies it to them. He told me that the Indians come from Okla- 
homa to get it from him, often traveling 30 or 40 miles on foot, and 
that, though they stopped at his store over night before their return 
with the peyote, they never use any of it until they get home. They 
got it for the peyote ceremony and kept it for that purpose. This 
would indicate that they do not use much of it except for ceremonial 
and medicinal purposes. I have lived in an Indian family, where the 
man was the leader of the payote rite, and kept the peyote in his 
house. His greatest pleasure in the evening was to sing the peyote 
songs to his children. He was one of the best workers in the tribe 
[pointing to the assembled Indians"!. These men are all users of it, 
and they look like a sound, healthy lot. 

Commissioner Ketcham. In Mexico is it more frequentlv used 
than in Oklahoma ? 

Mr. MooNEY. I got away from the main question — as to restriction 
of use because of scarcity. They try to get enough for the ordinary 
[-erf oimance of a ceremonial. Whenever they have the regular peyote 
rite they have about as much at one time as at another. Of course, 
it is furnished for the rite itself and is procured ahead of time for 
that purpose. I do not think the quantity used has any bearing on 
the_ scarcity or plentifulness of the supply. In Mexico' it a regular 
article of sale in the market as a medicine. In the Sierra Madre 
Mountains the Indians use it in the religious way. 

Commissioner Walker. Mr. Michelson, did I understand you to 
say that the Winnebagos were the source of supply? 

Mr. Michelson. The Sac and Fox get it from the Winnebagos 

Mr. Ayee. ^Yhat does it cost? 



PEYOTE. 79 

Mr. MiCHELsoN. It is sometimes taken as a gift. I have known a 
box as big as this (5 by 2 by 2^ inches) to be given away. I really 
know nothing about the price, but I do know it is often given away. 

Comniissioner Walker. Is there anyone here who wishes to speak 
on the other side? 

Do I understand that you have brought these Indians here to show 
us the advantages of using peyote? 

Mr. MooNEY. I have brought some of these Indians here, and Mr. 
La Fleche came on invitation and brought some of his friends with 
him, in order that you might listen to them as competent witnesses of 
the peyote ceremony in some of the tribes. They can tell their own 
stor}'. You can look at them and see whether they are physically 
or mentally degenerate. These men have been using it from child- 
hood, and their fathers and grandfathers used it. 

Commissioner Walker. We are very glad to see them here. We 
learn that each one weighs at least 200 pounds. Is the leader of the 
Comanches here? 

Mr. MooNEY. No ; the leader of the Comanches is dead. 

Commissioner Walker. I mean the present leader. 

STATEMENT OF MR. OTTO WELLS, SPOKESMAN, COMANCHES. 

Mr. Wells. I hold official position under agency government. Mr. 
President, I can't say very much more. Mr. Mooney has explained 
the whole thing to you, and what he has said is all true — that we use 
this peyote in religious ways and sickness. These boys here [point- 
ing to other Indians present] can explain better than I can ; they use 
it in their sickness and have been cured by that medicine. The only 
thing I like to mention is about the Indian Mr. Mooney mentioned — 
his name is Setkopti — Paul Setkopti — ■ I saw him with m}^ own eyes 
that he had these hemorrirages. Two years before he died I went 
to his camp and sat up with him and fixed this peyote for him to 
stop these hemorrhages. Therefore that we have this medicine, it is 
■>'aluable to us ; to whom it is used to it is valuable. 

Another thing that I would like to say is that Father Isidore Rick- 
lin [Father Isidore Eicklin, Catholic missionary among the Kiowa, 
Anadarko, Okla. He is the only missionary I know who has actu- 
ally witnessed the ceremony for himself. — J. M.] has told me that 
'this medicine is the best medicine that any person could take for 
his stomach. He has used it and quite a number have used it. They 
claim it pretty good medicine. 

STATEMENT OF MR. ARTHUR BONNICASTLE, SPOKESMAN, OSAGE 

INDIANS. 

Mr. BoNNiCASTLE. Just Want to say a few words. Mr. Mooney has 
covered the question that is before you — that is, pretty well. Some 
of the Osages learned in some way that this question was coming up 
before this board to-day and they requested me to come and be present 
this afternoon at the hearing. 

The Osages have been using peyote for the last 15 or 16 years, and 
its use was taught to them by_ John Wilson. It is used in religious 
ceremonies and as medicine in cases of sickness, and the Osages 



80 PEYOTE. 

thought that if this body of men would recommend to Congress to 
pass the bill through, stopping the use of peyote among them it would 
be an injustice, because they don't use it to excess and use it to good 
advantage — use it in religion and their prayers and in times of sick- 
ness, and they don't use it between times of religious meetings. It is 
a sacred plant to them, and it is scarce. They use it Saturday nights 
and Sunday, up until noon, and in times of sickness they don't use 
more than one, two, or three, which they boil, taking the tea there- 
from. In their religious ceremonies, women are allowed to use not 
over five and the men seven of these peyotes. That is the Osage 
custom. 

Mr. Knox. Did you ever use it yourself? 

Mr. BoNNicASTLE. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Knox. What is the effect, that you are conscious of? 

Mr. BoNNicASTLE. It trains the mind to higher ideas in worship- 
ping God. The principles laid down in the use of this peyote as it is 
taught in these meetings by the leader, teaches the Indians to things 
that will lead to better life in worshiping the Almighty ; that is, to 
train the mind to that end. I don't see any bad eflfects from its use. 

Mr. Aters. After you have used it, does it leave a desire or craving 
to use it frequently? 

Mr. BoNNicASTLE. No ; we don't go beyond what the leader gives 
out. 

. Mr. Atee. How is the leader selected? Do the people who use it 
vote for him ? 

Mr. BoNNiCASTLE. No ; he takes it upon himself to teach the use 
of it. 

Mr. Knox. Where were you educated? I notice you use good 
English. 

Mr. BONNICASTLE. At Carlisle. 

Mr. Knox. Did you use it at Carlisle ? 

Mr. BoNNiCASTLE. No, sir; after I came back. My health was not 
good at school. 

Mr. Knox. Do you think it had any effect? 

Mr. BoNNicASTLE. I was sick and they made tea and I took it at 
times. Had the stomach trouble. It was quite helpful after it was 
made into tea. 

The Chairman. After using it, are Indians able to go to work on 
Monday morning? 

Mr. BONNICASTLE. Yes, sir. It don't interfere with their business 
or interests at all. 

The Chairman. How much does it cost to the Osages, about? 

Mr. BoNNicASTLE. We send down to Laredo, Tex., for it, and it 
sells from $2.25 to $3 per thousand. 

STATEMENT OF ME. FRANCIS LA FLESCHE, BUREAU OF AMERICAN 
ETHNOLOGY, AN OMAHA INDIAN. 

Mr. La Flesche. I have had numerous opportunities to study the 
use of the peyote among the Poncas, the Osage, and my own people, 
the Omahas. I had heard extraordinary stories told about its effects, 
about the immorality that it produced, and about the promiscuity of 
the people who used the peyote at their meetings. I expected to find 
evidence of the truth of these stories. 



PEYOTE. 81 

When I went among the Osage people, some of the leaders of the 
peyote religion were anxious for me to attend their meetings, and 
wishing to know what effect this " medicine," as they called it, had 
upon each individual, I accepted the invitation. I attended a meet- 
ing at which the gentleman who has just spoken to you, Mr. Arthur 
Bonnicastle, was present, and sat with him. At about 6 o'clock in 
the evening the people entered their " meeting house " and sat in a 
circlQ around a fire kindled over some symbolic figures marked in 
the center of a shallow excavation in the middle of the room. The 
peyote was passed around, some of it in pellets of the consistency of 
dough, and some prepared in liquid form. The drum was ceremoni- 
ally circulated and accompanied by singing. From all that I had 
heard of the intoxicating effects of the peyote I expected to see the 
people get gloriously drunk and behave as drunken people do. While 
I sat waiting to see fighting and some excitement the singing went on 
and on and I noticed that all gazed at the fire or beyond, at a little 
mound on top of which lay a single peyote. I said to the man sitting 
next to me, " What do you expect to see ? " He said, " We expect to ■ 
see the face of Jesus and the face of our dead relatives. We are 
worshiping God and Jesus, the same God that the white people wor- 
ship." All night long the singing went on and I sat watching the 
worshipers. It was about 5 o'clock in the morning when suddenly 
the singing ceased, the drum and the ceremonial staff were put away, 
and the leader, beginning at the right of the door, asked each person : 
" What did you see ? " Some replied, " I saw nothing." Others said, 
" I saw the face of Jesus and it made me happy." Some answered, 
" I saw the faces of my relatives, and they made me glad." And so on, 
around the entire circle. I noticed that there were only a few who 
had been able to see faces, the greater number of the men and women 
saw nothing. It was explained to me by the leader that these revela- 
tions come quickly to those whose thoughts and deeds are pure. To 
those who are irreverent, they come slowly, although they may come 
in time. This meeting, as well as others that I have been permitted 
to attend, was as orderly as any religious meeting I have seen in this 
and other cities. 

I am thoroughlj' convinced that these Indians are worshiping God 
in their own simple way, and if their religion is interfered with by | 
the Government or anybody else, and it is suppressed, the conse- 
quences will be very grave. 

During the morning the women prepared the food which had 
been contributed by the members, while the men sat and waited un- 
til they were called to the place, where about noon the meal was 
served. When all were seated, the leader asked a member to offer 
prayer. The prayer was such as I have heard among white people. 
I saw no signs of intoxication. 

I do not know about the medicinal qualities of the peyote, whether 
it can cure consumption or any other disease that the human flesh is 
subject to, but there is one disease it has cured — the disease of drunk- 

Aboiit 15 years ago, my people passed through an extraordinary 
experience. White men came among them, generally known as " boot- 
leggers " to sell whislry and lemon extract. What the whisky was 
-made of I don't know— these "boot-leggers" would sell anything 

47003—18 6 



82 PEYOTE. 

that could pi'oduce drunkenness. My people fell into the habit of 
using this stuff — manufactured bj' white people — and kept using it 
until they were in the very depths of degradation. In their drunk- 
enness they attacked men, women, and children. Crimes have been 
committed that have never been heard of, crimes that have gone un- 
punished, and white people and Indians alike became afraid to go 
out at nights on the road for fear of meeting drunken Indians. 
There came a time when there was a lull in this storm of drunken- 
ness, and after awhile we heard that the peyote religion had been 
adopted by the Omahas, and there were not as many drunkards as 
before the introduction of it. 

Practically all of those of my people who have adopted the peyote 
religion do not drink. The pej^ote plant does much toward destroy- 
ing the appetite for intoxicants. Moreover, any use of spirituous 
liquors is forbidden by the teachings of the new religion. 

I have a respect for the peyote religion, because it has saved my 
people from the degradation which was produced by the use of the 
fiery drinks white people manufacture. 

Commissioner Knox. Do you know of any individual men who 
were drunkards and who by the use of peyote ceased drinldng 
and became sober men? 

Mr. La Flesche. Yes, sir ; I could mention a number. 

STATEMENT OE THOMAS L. SLOAN, ATTOKNEY AT LAW, MEM- 
BER OF THE OMAHA TRIBE, AT PRESENT A RESIDENT OF WASH- 
INGTON, D. C. 

Mr. Sloan. I am familiar with the use of peyote among the Omaha 
and Winnebago Indians of Nebraska, and somewhat among the 
Yankton and Rosebud Sioux Indians of South Dakota. 

The effect of the use of peyote among the Omahas has been to make 
a large number of drunkards decent, sober, honest men. The same 
is true of the Winnebagoes. I have attended at least three meet- 
ings, going through the regular ceremony from 9 o'clock at night 
until daylight the next morning. I have used the peyote in the 
same manner as the Indians to whom it was given by the leader of 
the meeting. One night I ate 14 pieces of the peyote. It happened 
that on that particular day I had driven a six-cylinder car for the 
first time. I spent the night at a peyote ceremony and drove that 
large car the following day through the hills and over the rough 
country along the Missouri River. Eating peyote had the same 
effect on me as drinking strong tea. 

I have observed the effect of the use of peyote among the Omaha 
and Winnebagoes, because I know that it has changed a large number 
of men from drunkards to decent people. It has been reported that 
there was some immorality connected with the ceremony. I am con- 
vinced that there is nothing of the kind. The old-time medicine men 
are opposed to the use of peyote. They are some of the persons who 
make detrimental remarks and spread rumors against it. 

In the first instance, when the peyote was introduced among the 
Omaha Indians, I prepared a bill and presented it to the Nebraska; 
Legislature to prevent the introduction, sale, and use of the peyote 
in the State. After some consideration, however, I thought it was 



PEYOTE. 83 

doing a great deal of good, and since then I kave become convinced 
that the peyote and the influence that goes with it have been a good 
thing for the Omaha Indians. It came at a time when the Indians 
were drinking liquor, a great many of them. Some of the opponents 
to the use of peyote are those who have grown rich out of the sale of 
liquor to Indians. There is now an active wave of Christianity 
among the Omaha and Winnebago Indians and it is a growth among 
the Indians themselves, and due m part to the religious use of peyote. 
I think that the condition of the Omaha and Winnebago Indians 
has never been better than it is at this time. 

I know of a concrete instance where the use of peyote, or the in- 
fluence that went with it, has worked a beneficial change. The fam- 
ily of Cyrus Phillips, which included a number of married sons and 
daughters, of himself and wife, and other relatives numbering 10 
men, are users of peyote. Formerly they were liquor drinkers — 
drunkards — and when they were drinlting the women and children 
had to seek shelter and protection among the neighbors. They some- 
times hid in the fields and timber for fear of personal violence. Since 
they have taken the peyote or joined the x-eligious order that uses the 

Eeyote, they have become a decent, sober, and kindly people. I have 
een at the home before and since the use of peyote. I personally 
know of the facts of which I speak. 

A former partiier in the law practice is another illustration. He 
became a drunkard. I spent time and some money in trying to aid 
him in breaking the liquor habit. He was given the Keeley treatment 
several times. It seemed useless, and his friends gave up hope. His 
Indian friends induced him to join the Peyote Society. For three 
years he has been a decent, sober fellow. I met him at St. Louis, Mo., 
where we argued a case in the United States Circuit Court of Appeals. 
I had brought with me a quantity of peyote to have it analyzed. The 
Winnebago Indians wish to know about it. They wish to know if the 
use of peyote will have any detrimental effect upon them or their 
children. I asked my friend if he wished to have some peyote. He 
said, "I would like to have a few pieces." I opened the bag in 
which I had about a peck. He took four pieces. I urged him to take 
more, but he said that was enough. That was so different from his 
desire for liquor that I felt that he had not acquired a desire for it — 
the peyote — like that which he had had for liquor. I am told by the 
older users of peyote that they do not acquire a desire or craving 
for it, such as takes hold of users of liquor and tobacco. 

AlbertJHensJey, a Winnebago Indian and a Carlisle student, was at 
one TSiine apparently suffering from consumption. Since he has used 
the peyote he has grown strong and healthy. He is a man of family 
and the father of children. 

At a fair last fall among the Winnebago Indians of Nebraska a 
child one and a half years old took the prize for being the most per- 
fect, physically, of a number of children who were entered at the baby 
contest. The parents of this child had been users of peyote for seven 
years before. 

I think whatever may be due in respect to the use of peyote, we 
should consider the conditions among the Indians who use it, and 
try to do what is best and most reasonable for their welfare and 
health. 



84 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Knox. After eating 14 pieces of peyote, did you have any 
hallucinations ? 

Mr. Sloan. None. Peyote produces strictly a mental attitude. 
Rather the mental attitude is emphasized. A Presbyterian minister 
was with me at this peyote meeting. Toward morning he said to me, 
"Sloan, what do you see when you close your eyes?" I said, " What 
do you see?" He said, "I see two colors, gold and green; beautiful' 
green fields with golden streams running through them, what do you 
see?" I said, "I see the green fields all right, but I see most ex- 
cellent golden automobile road running through the fields." 

(Before taking his seat, Mr. Sloan said:) 

Just a moment. I wish to state, for the benefit of those present, 
that Mr. Arthur Bonnicastle, who has spoken to you in favor of the 
peyote, at the time of the Boxer troubles at Pekin, China, was a 
soldier in the United States Army. He was the American soldier 
who volunteered, with other soldiers of other nations, to make a 
breach in the wall around the city for the relief of the Christians 
who were in danger of massacre. He was the American who upheld 
the honor of the United States Army ; and, with the soldiers of other 
nations, made possible the relief of those who were about to be 
slain. It is said that he was the first of those brave volunteers to go 
over the wall in that dangerous task. He is an Osage Indian of 
Pawhuska, Okla. 

(The accompanying documents, furnished by Mr. Mooney, are as 
follows:) 

The study of anhaloniiim, Lewinii (peyote) is of comparatively recent date, 
tlie subject having been brought to the attention of the medical world in 1888 
by Dr. Levs'in, of Berlin, who published at that time the results of his observa- 
tions upon the drug. In 1894 Dr. Lewin and Dr. HefCter, of Germany, reported 
the results of further study of the subject. In 1891 .lames Mooney, of the 
United States Bureau of Ethnology, in a paper, read before the Anthropological 
Society of Washington, first brought to the public attention the remarkable 
religious ceremonial use of the plant by the Kiowas and other tribes of the 
southern plains, among whom he had been conducting researches for some time. 
In 1894 he brought back to Washington for examination a large quantity of 
mescal (peyote), under the belief that investigation would corroborate the 
claim of the Indians as to its valuable medicinal properties. This was given 
over to Mr. E. E. Ewell, of the Department of Agriculture, for chemical 
analysis, and to the writers for therapevitic test. Our study of the subject has 
shown that the mescal buttons possess properties which are remarkaljle, the 
exact likeness of which is not found in any other known drug, and also that 
it possesses virtues which, wheu applied In the treatment of certain diseased 
conditions, may prove the drug a valuable addition to our present list of 
therapeutic agents. 

Peyote Documents. 

therapeutic uses. 

The conditions in which it seems probable that the use of mescal buttons will 
produce beneficial results are the following : In general " nervousness," nervous 
headache, nervous irritative cough, abdominal pain due to colic or griping of the 
intestines, hysterical manifestations, and in other similar affections in which 
an antispasmodic is indicated ; as a cerebral stimulant in neurasthenia and in 
depressed conditions of the mind — hypochondriasis, melancholia, and allied con- 
ditions of great nervous irritability or restlessness, in active, delirium and 
mania, and in insomnia caused by pain. In the last condition it acts to produce 
sleep not as a hypnotic, but by relieving the cause of the insomnia. In full 
physiological doses it produces insomnia, but in therapeutic doses it does not 
have this effect. 



PEYOTE. 85 

Th^ following cases iu which the drug was used may be mentioned briefly : 

1. Gentleman, aged 55 years. Chronic bronchitis with asthmutic attaclis. 
Much distressed by an irritative cough, which kept him from sleephig. A piece 
the size of a pea from the center of a button was administered in the afternoon 
to be dissolved slowly in the mouth. The irritative cough was speedly relieved. 
He took a similar dose at bedtime and slept well through the night,' which he 
had not done before for a long time. He returned to his home in New York 
and kept up the use of the drug with continued relief. In a letter received from 
him recently he .^itates that he has improved very much, being able to sleep all 
night without rising, which he had not been able to do for two vears. and that, 
although he had no need of it upon some days, he carried a piece of a button in 
his pocket constantly, as its use relieves the ticking in his throat at once and 
gives greater relief than any other remedy which he has ever used. It appears 
to have no curative effect — merely relieves tlie irritative cough. 

2. Gentlemen, principal of high school, aged 25. Neurasthenia of six months' 
standing. The effect of the drug in this case seemed little less than marvelous. 
Three buttons were administered within an hour. This was followed by the 
i-haract eristic color visions of the drug and relief from the bodily and mental 
fatigue with which he had suffered for six months, and he declared that he 
was " himself again, cheerful and happy." On the next day, and for several 
days thereafter, he continued to feel the beneficial effects of the drug. He has 
continued its use in dose of one-half a button when he feels it to be necessary. 
It invariably relieves the sense of bodily and mental fatigue. 

3. Lady, aged 33 years. Nervous prostration. The drug was administered in 
the case as in the last, but in smaller doses, with a marked beneficial effect. 
Mental and physical exhaustion were relieved and power to work was increased 
to a marked degree. There was no reaction. 

4. Lady, aged 49 years. Chronic phthisis with facial neuralgia and catarrh 
of pharynx, larynx, and bronchi. The fluid extract of anhalonium was ad- 
ministered with beneficial effect. The irritative cough was relieved to a marked 
extent, the spells of coughing being less frequent and less violent and prolonged. 
Although she has been taking the drug but a comparatively short time, she has 
suffered less than formerly from the facial neuralgia. 

Our study of the subject has shown that the mescal buttons possess proper- 
ties which are remarkable, the exact likeness of which is not found in any other 
known drug, and also that it possesses virtues which when applied in the treat- 
ment of certain diseased conditions may prove the drug a valuable addition to 
our present list of therapeutic agents. 

In conclusion we would say that Anhalonium lewinii (mescal buttons) must 
not be confounded with the intoxicating drink, " mescal," used by the Mexicans 
and others. This drink is the fermented juice of one or more species of agave. 
(Extracts from paper on "Mescal Buttons" (Anhalonium), by Drs. D. W. 
Prentiss, nerve specialist, and his assistant, Francis P. Morgan, read before the 
Association of American Physicians, Washington, D. C, May 2, 1896. Reprint 
from the Medical Record, Aug. 22. 1896. ) 

In my opinion, anhalonium (peyote) is a superior cardiac tonic, and, like 
nitroglycerin, its effects are prolonged after the administration of the drug is 
withdrawn. After continuously taking the drug daily for two months, no 
symptoms of its being a sedative or hypnotic have developed. If it shall prove 
to be a solvent of uric acid, it will be of the greatest service, as the heart will 
be sustained by it at the same time the dangerous element is being removed 
from the body. (D. A. Richardson, Jf. D., Denver, Colo., in the New York Medi- 
cal Journal, Aug. 8, 1896.) 

As far as I know, the Indians use it only to make medicine, as they term it, a 
ceremony peculiar to them, in invoking the great spirit to heal the adlicted one, 
and do not use it as a physical remedy. I never knew of a case that became 
addicted to continual use of it. * * * My experience is it does its work and 
leaves one in normal condition, fresh and iu fine fix; just as good as natural 
sleep ; no depression whatever. * * * I think and know it would be a decided 
success in cases you mention, nervous exhausti<}n, hysteria, and melancholia. 
* * * (Dr. W. A. Kno;t, Keokuk, Iowa, to Dr. Prentiss, Nov. "25, 1895.) 

I was much interested in the (Prentiss) articles on mescal buttons, and the 
reports tally very well with my observations of the effect of the drug. It is used 
pretty generally among our natives as medicine. (From letter of Dr. R. S. 
Wagner, physician to Batopilas Mining Works, Batopilas, Chihuahua, Mexico, 
July 2.5,' 1897.) 



86 PEYOTE. 

Mr. James jVIooney, Anadarko, Okla. : You ask uiy experience of a personal 
use of peyotes. Sometimes since, at the request of a Kiowa Indian, I tried a 
tea made from peyotes for a severe lieadache. After using about half a cup 
made from eight peyotes I began to feel a very pleasant sensation. My nerves 
seemed to be somewhat excited, but not to an extent to be unpleasant. I was 
not at all under a stupor, yet I could shut my eyes and see everything that was 
beautiful. In other words, I could think of any animal, close my eyes, and I 
would see the animal as beautiful. I could bring anything to my vision by just 
thinking of same. If I saw a dog, it was p^-etty ; if a horse, it was fat and fine, 
generally. I felt no bad effects afterwards, as I would feel after using an intoxi- 
cant. Will add that my headache was entirely gone. On the whole, it was a 
very pleasant experience and one that I would not be adverse to having again. 
Am of the opinion that the habit is not one that grows on the person using it, 
as alcohol or morphine, as Indians buying it of me never use it while here, but 
go home to use it onlv at their festivals. (George E. Blalock (trader), Navajoe, 
Okla., Nov. 14, 1893.) 

Am proud to say that the peyo'.e people don't use no kind of liquor or either 
use profane language noi- gamble of any kind, but try to improve up homes and 
more progressive in the way of farming for themselves, and stayed home more 
than other people that dances, and more religious than others. I do believe 
that if peyote be continued more years in future will do some good to the be- 
havior of Indians. I don't believe those people against peyote what they said. 
I do not think it will ruin man or do any harm, because I have use this herb for 
the last 26 solid years ; am stronger as ever and feel younger than of my age, 
as I am 50 years of age now. (From letter of Jock Bullbear, Arapaho chief and 
delegate to Washington, Nov. 13, 1911.) 

We have been trouble here at Clinton of using peyote. You know all about 
what we floing in the peyote tipi. We are pray just the same like white people. 
(From letter of Paul M. Road, Arapaho delegate. May 20, 1907.) 

Of all these (Indian) cults the two to make the most lasting, if not the most 
profound, impression were the peyote, miscalled " mescal," and the code of 
Handsome Lake (Iroquois of New York). Both aim at the suppression of 
drunkenness particularly ; both seem to uphold some ancient practices and to 
condemn others. The peyote religion differs from the code of Handsome Lake 
strongly in many ways, particularly in that it offers in the peyote " button " a 
substitute for liquor, which. It is said, successfully kills the desire for liquor. 
(Alanson Skinner, Amei-ican Museami. New York, in American Anthropologist, 
182, January, 1915.) 

" Segun las tradlciones de los indios, cuando su dios se fue al cielo, al comen- 
zar el mundo, dejo al Hikorl en la tierra como el gi-an remedio de los tarahu- 
mares. * * * Se juede decir, como consecuencia de lo anterior, que las pro- 
priedades terapeuticas del peyote corresponden a las de un verdadero tonica 
cardiaco. En algunos casos ha dado mejores resultados que la digital." 

(Translation:) According to the traditions of the (Mexican) Indians, where 
their god returned to heaven after creating the world he left the peyote In the 
ground as the great remedy of the Tarumari. * * * It is possible to say, as 
a result of the previous (experiments), that the therapeutic properties of peyote 
are those of a true cardiac tonic. In some cases it has given better results than 
digitalis. (From Bstudio Relativo al Peyote, Bulletin of National Medical 
Institute. Mexico, 1913.) 



Depahtment of the Inteeiok, 

Board of Indian Commissioners, 
OklaJwma City, Okla., Jaminry 25, 1918. 
Hon. George Vaux, Jr., 

Chairman Board of Indian GommUsioners, Washington, D. C. 
Sir : In response to a request I made of him for information relating to the 
use of peyote among the Klowas, Comanches, Wichitas, Caddoes, and Apaches of 
Oklahoma, Dr. Claude S. Chambers, a part-blood Cherokee Indian, the United 
States physician stationed at Anadarko, Okla., submits the following statement : 
Peyote is on the increase and will continue to be so as long as we have no 
backing. I have studied the Indians that use it very carefully and can not find 
that It does them the least bit of good. On the other hand, it Is very harmful in 
many ways : 

(1) It lowers their vitality and their power of resistance to any exposure 
they may have to undergo. 



PEYOTE. 



87 



tol J.° "®'°^ ^* ^^^ Indians are always in a hot lent, breathing ^oul air, etc. 

(3) Peyote has first a stimulating and later a depressing effect on the heart. 

(4) I know of a number of cases of sexual intercourse of Indians while under 
the influence of the drug. 

(5) I know of nine babies dying because of the administering to tliem of 
peyote by some medicine man. 

Respectfully submitted. 

WiixiAM H. Ketcham, 
Member Board of Indian Commisslonern. 



Mahch 29, 1916. 
Mr. George Yaux, 

Chnirnwn of the Board of Indian Contmi.tH<iner.i, Wasliingtoii. D. G. 
Dear Mr. Yaux: I was requested also by the coniuiission to make inquiries 
In regard to the effect of peyote on the Indians. I took it up with nearly all 
the Indian superintendents and assistant superintendents that I could corne in 
contact with. Each and every one says that peyote is injurious, and every 
effort should be made to abolish it. Dr. Jacob Breid has made a specialty of 
the study of it, and I asked him if he would not put in writing his opinions, 
etc., in regard to it, which I have the honor to transmit. It is a clear, concise 
statement of the pernicious effects of this drug, and made absolutely by an 
expert, and I am sure is recognized as such by the department. 
Tours, very truly, 

Edward K. Ayer, 
Memter Board of hidvin Conimisnioneris. 



Department of the Interior, 
United States Indian Service, 

.Iforoft 10, 1916. 
Mr. Edward E. Ayer, 

Phoenix, Ari^. 
My Dear Sir : Referring to your inquiry regarding the use of mescal or 
peyote by the Indians, I wish to report as follows: 

1. Peyote is taken for its physiologic effects, asi it produces a series of 
phenomena, beginning with a feeling of exhilaration and a tendency to talkative- 
ness, and then passing to a stage of intoxication, during which time there 
are visions and delusions, usually of exaltation, which in all cases are highly 
colored. There Is a complete loss of the sense of time and a feeling of entire 
self-satisfaction, which is followed by a period of depression and sleep. 

2. The habitual use of any drug — and mescal or peyote is a drug — wliich 
causes a definite series of symptoms, thus deviating from the normal, produces 
harm. 

3. The devotees of this form of intoxication are not the healthy, energetic, 
and progressive Indians. 

The same amount of peyote taken at different times or by different indi- 
riduals will produce as a rule the same symptoms. Its continued use will 
produce a habit. It Is similar in action to cannabis indica and opium, but 
not so marked or positive in its effect. No one would dare say thjat the 
promiscuous use of these drugs should be tolerated under any pretext what- 
soever. 

The Indians may believe that they use peyote in a religious way, but such 
is not the ease ; it slm:^ly creates a condition of mind and ho6j in which -there 
Is complete repose and satisfaction which is mistaken, it appears, for religion. 
It is necessaxy to produce this state of intoxication in order to get the desired 
result, and we do not have " religion " unless we have intoxication. A 
" religion " that requires drug stimulation to produce is of no value. 
Tours, very truly, 

Jacob Breid. 



Board ov Indian Commissioners, 

October 2J/, IdVi. 
My Dear Me. Secretary : Your attention is respectfully invited to the follow- 
ing resolution, unanimously adopted at a regular meeting of the Board of 
Indian Commissioners at Mohonk Lake, N. T., on October 14, 1914 : 

" Upon motion of Commissioner Dockweiler it was unanimously voted that 
the board should address a special communication to the Secretary of the Inte- 



88 PEYOTE. 

rior, recoimnending the subniissioD to Congress of a bill prohibiting the impor- 
tation of peyote into the United States; prohibiting its introduction, use, or 
sale on any Indian reservation, or the manufacture or sale of any product 
thereof. It was also voted that the communication to the Secretary of the 
Interior should refer especially to the discussion of this subject at the thirty- 
second Mohonk conference and that Commissioner Dockweiler present the 
subject in person to the Secretary of the Interior. 

"Upon motion of Commissioner Dockweiler it was voted unanimously to 
include peyote in the next Indian bill, together with other Intoxicants." 
Cordially, yours, 

Geoege Yatix, .Jr., Chairiiimi. 
The Hon. Feanklin K. Lane, 

Srci-etari/ of the Inferior. Washington, D. C. 



Washirgton, D. C, December 22, 1916. 
Mr. Malcolm McDowell, 

Secretary Board of Indian Gommixfiioners, 

Bureau of Mines Building, Washington, D. C. 
My Deae McDowell : I beg to call your attention to the Inclosed copy of a 
letter I have received from Rev. Francis C. Elast, of Germantown, Kans. 
Father EUast attends the Kickapoo Indian School. 
A'ery respectfully, 

Wm. H. Ketcham, 
Member of the Board of Indian. Commissioners. 



Decemrek 18, 1916. 
Rev. Father W. H. Ketcham, 

Washington, D. C. 
Reverend and Deae Fathieb: As you have the welfare of all the Indians 
very much at heart, I would ask you, for humanity's sake. If you could do 
something in regard to the suppression of peyote amongst the Indians. In my 
humble ophiiou this stuff is worse than opium, brutalizes the Indian, and the 
effects are noticeable in their offspring. 

Mr. Sells has done a great deal of good in favor of the Indian child, but if 
the evil of peyote is not rooted out to the very bottom, and that soon, all the 
good done is of no avail. The evil of peyote eating is reaching a calamity. 
Respectfully, 

Feancis C. Elast. 

Mr. Snyder. May I ask a question right along there? You said 
a few moments ago that there were about 15,000 of these Indians that 
partook of this drug ? 

Mr. MooNET. Approximately 15,000 of them. 

Mr. Sntdee. As a religious sacrament? 

Mr. MooNEY. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. In that locality; how many more Indians are there? 

Mr. MooNEY. I should say in the tribes that use it, it is used at 
least by four-fifths. There are certain tribes tha,t have no knowledge 
whatever of it. There are other tribes that know it, but stick to their 
own original tribal religion. You must understand that this is an 
intertribal religion. Every tribe that has not lost entirely its old 
cult has a tribal religion, centering around some sacred object or 
palladium, but this peyote cult has come and superseded the others. 
In other words, the Indian, under the influence of this peyote re- 
ligion, has given up the idea that he and his tribe are for themselves 
alone, and is recognizing the fact of the brotherhood of the Indian 
race particularly, and beyond that the brotherhood of mankind. It 
is an essential uplift, as compared with the original tribal religion. 

Mr. Tillman. Still it is not a Christian religion, is it? 



PEVOTE. 89 

Mr. MooNET. It is not a Christian religion, but it is a very close 
approximation, and, in my opinion, as Indian religions and Indian 
psychology go, it is as close an approximation to Christianity and as 
efficient a leading up to Christianity as the Indian, speaking gener- 
ally, is now capable of. By a process of evolution the Indian has 
interwoven with this pej'^ote religion the salient things of Christianity. 
1 have been present at the peyote ceremony where they put down a 
church hymn book and sang prayers to Jesus Christ in the Indian 
language. You could catch the name of Jesus constantly through the 
prayers, and they use the Christian cross sign very often in it. In 
other words, this is the Indian approximation to Christianity, com- 
ing through the channels to which he is accustomed. Its central idea 
is human brotherhood. Its cordial precepts are good will and 
sobriety. 

Mr. Tillman. In that connection, the central idea of this i-eligion 
is this bean, is it not? 

Mr. MooMET. Yes; that is what may be called the sacrament. 

Mr. Tillman. The religion itself depends upon the effect of this 
drug, does it not? 

Mr. MooNEY. Yes. 

Mr. Tillman. Now, you say they consume the night at these cere- 
monies ? 

Mr. MooNET. They stay up all night. 

Mr. Tillman. There must be something very exciting which would 
keep the average Indian up all night, must it not ? 

Mr. MooNET. No. 

Mr. Tillman. Billy Sunday can not do that. 

Mr. MooNEY. No; but Billy Sunday is quite different from an 
Indian in many ways. 

Mr. Tillman. Billy does not use peyote. In that respect, cer- 
tainly, he differs from these bean worshipers. 

Mr. MooNEY. I do not know what things he does use. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not mean to insinuate that he would use any- 
thing of that nature, do you ? I am sure he does not. 

Mr. MooNEY. No ; I do not. What I would like to say is that the 
ordinary Indian performance or dance is full of motion, whereas this 
is quiescent. They sit still, and they only rise up to say the prayer. 
They sit while they are singing their hymns, and there is nothing 
exciting in connection with it. 

Mr. Tillman. They sit there all night, do they not? 

Mr. MooNEY. They sit there all night. 

Mr. Tillman. And the only exciting thing about the ceremony is 
this bean ? 

Mr. MooNEY. I do not consider it exciting. It intensifies the imagi- 
nation. They never lose control of themselves, and they are never 
moved to undue activity. It has about the effect, I should judge, 
upon the Indian of, perhaps, coffee upon us, or I should say, perhaps, 
the effect of a cigar upon a man who smokes. I do not use tobacco, 
so I caa not say, but I have noticed my friends, when they come in 
with a number of worrying problems, after lighting a cigar, in a few 
miiiutes seem to be at peace with the world. 

Mr. Tillman. But men do not ordinarily stay up all night smoking 
cigars, do they ? 



90 PEYOTE. 

Mr. MooxEY. I should think not. 

Xow, I shall give one or two instances here. I have letters from 
Dr. Weir INIitchell. 

Mr. Snyder. Who is Dr. Weir Mitchell? Let us Imow who he is.. 

Mr. MooNEY. Dr. Weir Mitchell, recently dead, was one of the most 
prominent physicians of Philadelphia. He was for many years a 
writer upon medical subjects, and also wrote a number of books tiiat 
are standard literature, outside the realm of medicine. There was 
not anything medical going on in Philadelphia during his active 
period of which he was not a part, including the editorship of two 
or three medical journals. You can find him in Who's Who in 
America. 

I have here his description, in the British Medical Journal of De- 
cember 5, 1896, of his and Dr. Eshner's experiences. The most not- 
able mental effect upon those who take a quantity greater than they 
are accustomed to is a series of color visions. Several of these color 
visions he describes in detail in the article. With a white man a small 
quantity like that may do it. With an Indian, who is of a different 
temperament, it would take more. 

KEMAKKS ON EFFECTS OF ANHET.ONItlM I.EWINI1 (THE MESCAL BUTTON).' 

[By S. Wier Mitchell, M. D., LL. D. Edln., Honorary Member Britsih Medical Association;- 
Honorary Fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society.] 

The history of the use of mescal by the Indians of New Mexico is very well 
known in the United States, and especially through the valuable papers of Dr.. 
Prentiss, of Washington, D. C.'' 

These so interested me that I asked him to favor me with some of the extract. 
Profiting by his kindness, I made a trial of the drug on May 24, 1896, .by taking^ 
It as I now relate. 

At 12 noon of a busy morning I took fully li dram of an extract of which 
each dram represented one mescal button. I had in a half-hour a sense of 
great gastric discomfort, and later of distension. At 1 p. m. I took a little over 
a dram. Between 2 and 3 p. m. 1 noted my face as flushed ; the pupils were 
dilated midway, the pulse 80 and strong. I had a slight sense of exhilaration, 
a tendency to talk, and now and then 1 misplaced a word. The knee .ierk and 
station were normal. Between 2 and 4 o'clock I had outside of my house two- 
consultations, and saw several patients. I observed that with a pleasing sense 
of languor there was an unusual amount of physical endurance. I went rather 
quietly, taking two stairs at a time and without pause, to the fourth story of an 
hotel, and did not feel oppressed or short of breath. This is akin to the experi- 
ence, as I learn, of the mescal-eating Indians, and to that of many white men. 

Meanwhile my stomach was more uncomfortable, and I saw the first evidence 
of any change in my color records. On closing my eyes (while in my carriage), 
I held longer than usual any bright object just seen. As to this, however, I am 
not as sure as I am concerning the later phenomena. About 4.10 p. m. I drove 
home, and after taking half an ounce of extract in three doses I lay on a lounge 
and read, becoming steadily more conscious, at first of a left frontal pain (not 
severe) and soon after of a dull occipital ache felt on both sides and at or 
about the occipital bosses. Yawning at times, sleepy, deliciously at languid ease, 
I was clearly in " the laud wht-re it is always afternoon." At 4.30 p. m., rising 
to make notes, I became aware that a transjiarent, violet haze was about my 
l)en iKiint, a tint so delicate as at times to seem doubtfully existent. 

At this stage of the mescal intoxication I had a certain sense of the things 
about me as having a more positive existence than usual. It is not easy to define 
what I mean, and at the time I searched my vocabulary for phrase or word 
which should fitly state my feeling. It was vain. 

At this time, also, I had a decisive Impression that I was more competent in 
mind than in my every-day moods. I seemed to be sure of victoriously dealing 



1 Read before the American Neurological Society. 
= Therapeutic Gazette, September, 189.T. 



PEYOTE. 91 

With problems. This state of mind may be easily matciierl in the condition of 
some men when pretty far gone in alcohol intoxication. My own mood was 
gently flattering — a mere consciousness of power, with meanwhile absolute con- 
trol of every faculty. I wrote a long letter of advice dealing with a rather 
doubtful diagnosis, and on reading it over was able to see that it was neither 
better nor worse than my average letter. Yet the sense of Increased ability 
was so notable that, liking to test it, and with common-sense disbelief in Its 
flattery, I took up a certain paper on psychology which a week before I had laid 
down in despair. I grieve to say that it was less to be comprehended than ever. 
My ignorance would have remained bliss had I not made the experiment. I 
next tried to do a complicated sum, but soon discovered that my ordinary ineffi- 
ciency as to figures was not really increased. 

A mood is like a climate and can not be reasoned with. I continued to have 
for some two hours this elated sense of superiority. I was for this while In 
that condition in which some people permanently abide. 

The further test of writing a few lines of verse was tried. I found there was 
much effort needed. I lay down again about 5.20, observing that the outer space 
field seemed to be smoky. Just at this time, my eyes being closed, I began to 
-see tiny points of light, like stars or fireflies, which came and went in a moment. 
My palms were now tingling, my face a little flushed. About 5.40 the star 
points became many, and then I began to observe something like fragments of 
stained-glass windows. The glass was not very brilliant, but the setting, which 
was irregular In form, seemed to be made of incessantly flowing sparkles of 
pale silver, now going here, now there, to and fro, like, as I thought, the in- 
explicable rush and stay and reflux of the circulation seen through a lens. These 
window patterns were like fragments coming into view and fading. 

Hoping for still better things in the way of color, I went upstairs, lay dovm 
in a darkened room, and waited. In a few minutes the silver stars were seen 
again, and later I found that these always preceded any other more remarkable 
visions. 

The display which for an enchanted two hours followed was such as I find it 
hopeless to describe in language which shall convey to others the beauty and 
splendor of what I saw. I shall limit myself to a statement of a certain number 
of the more definite visions thus projected on the screen of consciousness. 

During these two hours I was generally wide awake. I was comfortable, 
save as to certain gastric conditions, which were not so severe as to distract 
attention. Time passed with little sense for me of Its passage. I was critically 
attentive, watchful, interested, and curious, making all the time mental notes 
for future use. * * * 

Especially at the close of my experience I must, I think, have been for a 
while in the peculiar Interval between the waking state and that of sleep — the 
" prsedormitum " — the time when we are apt to dream half-controlled stories ; 
but as to this I am not very sure. As a rule I was on guard, with every power 
of observation and reflection in full activity. 

A knock at my door caused me to open my eyes, and I lost whatever of wonder 
might have come after. 

After dinner I ceased to be able to see any further display of interest. Now 
and then a purple or pink fragment appeared, but that was all. For a day 
after I noted the fact that my visions could be easily recalled by a memorial 
effort, but with less and less sharpness. 

These shows are expensive. For two days I had headache, and for one day 
a smart attack of gastric distress. This came after the flrst dose, and was most 
uncomfortable. The experience, however, was worth one such headache and 
Indigestion, but was not worth a second. 

Dr. Prentiss and others describe mescal as causing Insomnia. My first expe- 
rience with the tincture was made early In the morning. I became deeply 
flushed by noon, but had no visions. I felt drowsy and slept very well the 
following night. The extract used, as stated, did make me sleepless up to 4 
a m., but neither restless nor uneasy. 

Some interesting reflections are suggested by my experience with this vision- 
breeding drug, mescal. The effect on me was more or less like what is experi- 
enced in some ophthalmic megrims, and even my most brilliant visions can be 
matched by those I reported in 1887, and hy some to be found in Dr. de Schwel- 
uitz's more recent paper. 

The mode of action of mescal Is somewhat curious, and may vary with the 
dose and the man. At first, even at the height of drug action, the visions re- 
quire one to wait with closed eyes for a minute or more. To open the eyes is 



92 PEYOTE. 

to dismiss tlie vision, no matter )io\v darli be the room. Suggestion availed me 
but little, and no act of will was competent to hold my dream unaltered. 

I found in these seeming lavs-s some resemblance to those vrhlch — in my case 
at least — appear to govern a quite ordinary and normal phenomenon. From 
childhood I, like some others, can at night, before sleep arrives, summon visions. 
These are not always .lust what I de.sire. Once present, I can not alter them; 
they shift, change, and disappear under influences not within my capacity to 
control or to analyze. To open my eyes, even in the most intense darkness, dis- 
misses these visions. Is it true of opium visions? The same law certainly 
applies to some hysterical pliantasms, but the explanation does not as yet seem 
attainable. My normal power to summon visions was entirely lost under mescal 
action. I tried to see faces, gardens, etc., but none came at command so long 
as I was under the Influence of the drug. 

For the psychologist this agent should have value. To be able with a whole 
mind to exiierinient mentally upon such phenomena as I have described is an 
unusual privilege. Here is unlocked a storehouse of glorified memorial treas- 
ures of one kind. There may be a drug which shall so release a mob of verbal 
memories, or of musical records, or, in fact, of tastes and odors. I naturally 
speak of things seen under mescal influence as glorified memories — certainly 
nothing seen in these visions was altogether outside of my known experiences — 
but everything was excessive — forms were gigantic, colors marvelously inter- 
mingled. In fact, nothing was simply the vision of a thing remembered and 
recognized except the familiar Newport Beach. 

I see no obvious therapeutic uses for mescal in massive doses. It is yet to 
be tested by continuous employment in moderate amounts, and may be of value. 

I sought so to limit the influence of mescal as to remain in full possession of 
all my faculties. The larger doses secure, as Dr. Prentiss has shown, more 
remarkable results, but may lessen the power to observe and to comment. I 
should dread a little lest excessive amounts might leave too permanent effects. 
In fact, I constantly carried for days a quite vivid image of one of these jewel 
clusters, seeing it mentally whenever my mind was turned upon the subject of 
ray visions. 

I could match this also by a painful experience of some years ago, but I have 
said enough to show the great interest of this drug for physicians and psycholo- 
gists. I predict a perilous reign of the mescal habit when this agent becomes 
attainable. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic of my experi- 
ence will, I am sure, be too much for some men to resist after they have once 
set foot in this land of fairy colors, where there seems to be so much to charm 
and so little to excite horror or disgust. 

Were I to take mescal again I should dictate to a stenographer all that I 
saw and in due order. No one can hope to remember for later record so wild 
a sequence of color and of forms. But since to talk does not disturb these 
visions, a perfect account might easily be given. No one has told us what visions 
come to the red man. I should like to know if those of the navvy would be 
like those of the artist, and, above all, what those born blind could relate ; and. 
too, such as are born color blind. In fact, a valuable range of experiment is 
here to be laid open. 

I append to my own statement that of Dr. Bshner, one of the clinical staff 
of the Infirmary for Nervous Disease. It will be seen that, although the symp- 
toms were not unlike my o\\ti, there were some interesting differences. There 
was nausea, whereas I had none; there was no distinct headache, whilst mine 
was notable. In general, the experience was in Dr. Eshner's case more un- 
pleasant than in mine or in those Dr. Prentiss has reported ; neither were the 
visions so remarkable nor the colors as vivid as were those I saw. It is as 
well to add, as concerns my own statement, that when twice in my iife I have 
had to take hypodermic Injections of morphine for several successive nights 
the drug ceased to cause sleep after the third night. Later it gave rise to 
visions of very remarkable character, which I have elsewhere described These 
were seen whether or not the eyes were closed, if only the room in which I lav 
was entirely dark. 

Dr. Eshner writes me as follows : From doses varying from 10 to 50 drops I 
noticed no effect other, perhaps, than slightly diminished frequency of the pulse 
Thus, an hour after taking 20 drops the pulse had fallen from 80 to 70 Fifteen 
minutes after a dose of 50 drops the pulse had fallen from 82 to 69 although In 
15 minutes more it was again 74. The same effect was noticed ' after lareer 
doses. 



PEYOTE. 93- 

On May 30, at 3.50 p. m., with a pulse of 78, I took a fluid drachm. At 4.25 
p. m. my pulse was 73, and I took another fluid drachm. At 4.45 my pulse was 
65, and I took a third fluid drachm. At 5 p. m., with a pulse of 61, I took 40 
minims, all of the preparation I had left. At 5.15 my pulse was .59 ; at 5.30, 64 ; 
and at 6.30, 65. 

As the constitutional facts appeared, I found I could not keep at serious work ; 
I felt some distraction, and lacked my usual mental concentration. I soon began 
to feel badly, lapsing into a condition of general malaise, with not a little pros- 
tration, and had to give us any attempt at work, however small. I found some 
comfort in lying down, and when my eyes closed I became conscious of a series 
of visual impressions, in most of which color sensations were present. The pic- 
tures were characteristically kaleidoscopic, particularly as regards uniformity 
of arrangement. They changed frequently at times like lauteru pictures on a 
screen. The designs wer.e various ; some were Oriental, with stars and crescents, 
and points of light interspersed ; others were mosaic in arrangement ; some 
were screenlike ; some fernlilve ; some sllo\^■ed cliaserl figures. Neitlier the 
images nor the light wei-e very vivid, although as a rule quite distinct. The in- 
tensity at times appeared related to the vigor with which the eyes were closed. 

At about 6.30 p. m. I arose and attempted to eat a little, but failed. Nausea 
was quite pronounced, and there was total loss of appetite. At no time did 
vomiting occur. 

I then lay down for half or. three-quarters of an hour, and the visions were 
repeated. I had intended going out in the evening, and, in the hope of gaining 
relief, I equipped myself for a bicycle ride and started off, despite my langour 
and general depression. I made my way to the park without the slighjest diffi- 
culty, and at Girard Bridge met and spoke to an acquaintance, st*(^ed under 
the bridge to view the Memorial Day illumination, and went on. I ro^e in all 
about 8 miles, going down a fairly steep declivity with ease ajid descending a 
longer and perhaps steeper declivity with almost equal ease. I perspired en 
route, not unduly, but perceptibly. I felt that my pupils must be dilated from 
the brilliancy of the light, with prismatic radiations and the large amount that 
entered my eyes. I think ocular accommodation may also have been affected, 
although the Visual langour may have been only a part of the general langour. 
Vision seemed not' alert. I was in a state of placid indifference, free from en- 
thusiasm, free from aspiration, without spontaneity. I imagine there was a 
little dryness of the secretions of the mouth and throat, because my voice ap- 
peared a little deeper and fuller than usual. I was scarcely conscious of ordi- 
nary movement, and felt as though I could scarcely make any extraordinary 
movement, although I was conscious of the necessity of making the effort, and 
of the increased exertion necessary in mounting the hill of which I have spolcen. 
In general, however, I seemed to go on by virtue of my own momentum. In a 
figurative way, 1 felt as if I were of the same density as the medium in which I 
floated, so that would yield to slight external physical impulses. The feeling is 
one that I can best describe as muscular insensibility or motor anesthesia. 1 
was a little indifferent as to how I rode, yet not careless nor without a sense 
of responsibility, but I made little effort to avoid the rougher places, and ap- 
preciated very little jolting. I sustained my equilibrium perfectly, and was not 
compelled to dismount other than intentionally. I rode slowly down Broad 
Street bv the side of a four-:n-hand, and listened with enjoyment to the strams of 
the trurnpeter I met a little messenger boy on a bicycle who made a ludicrous 
impression on me, and whom at his request I helped to a match without dis- 

"Treached home about half past 9, and called at the house of Dr. S. Weir 
Mitchell and in his absence left a note for him. I was more fortunate m finding 
Dr J K Mitchell at home, who noticed the deepening in my voice, dilation of 
the Dupiis, some Injection of the eyes, a little flushing of the face, increased 
knee ierks and active muscle jerks, a heart beat of 72, an<l. as he thought, some 
evident effort in speech. My own feeling was one of partial release of mhibi- 
«on of relaxation of restraint, and of repression. The state was not a pleasur- 
.,hle but rather a helpless one. I could write freely and with ease about what 
I had passed through and was passing through, and I experienced a certain 
freedom and fluency of expression. _„ ,, . . . . r, 

T sat UD and read from about 10 until half-past 12, the visions returning when- 
ever I closed my eyes. Now I was again able to see all sorts of new designs, 
fresco work porcelain decorations, tapestry figures, intricate laces, parquetry, 
^^fcrrnm* various kiuds of scrollwork, etc. I endeavored to picture an Amer- 
fcaumsl but on!y parually succeeded after I had retired, and then my flag 



94 PEYOTE. 

was furled. I saw coats-of-arms and shields and the like. All ('olors were rep- 
resented. I looked especially for blue, as Dr. Mitchell had told me that he had 
seen all colors but blue, and I was successful. At one time I saw various 
shadows of green, and at another especially purples, violets, lilacs, etc. In none 
of the images were people or animals or other objects than designs represented. 

As I read I was easily pleased. At this ti. ne I experienced a sense of nausea, 
with a suggestion of burning and weight in the umbilical region ; but this was 
gone by the following morning. 

Before going to bed I partook of a sandwich and some milk. I found the 
sense of taste benumbed. I was not able to fall asleep for some time. My sense 
of hearing seemed to be more receptive, but less acute. The condition might be 
described as an impairment of the auditory accommodation comparable to the 
corresponding ocular state. My breathing failed specially to attract my atten- 
tion, but seemed shallow. I was conscious of pain on being pinched. 

The night was a restless one, with some snatches of sleep of varying length, 
but I arose with ease at the usual hour, feeling not much the worse for my late 
experiences, and not at all sleepy. There remained a sense of fullness in the 
head, but no other reminder. I partook of my usual breakfast with ordinary 
relish. The preparation had a disagreeable nauseous taste, with suggestion of 
pungency. 

Here was a man, a physician, experimenting upon himself, taking 
what for a white man would be considered a large quantity of this 
drug, not in its crude condition, treating patients, making diagnoses, 
reading,^ ^|d so on. 

The I«mans say that, on the first trial, 8 or 10 generally produce 
nausea, but after that the feeling seldom recurs. 

Mr. Sntder. What is the date of that letter ? 

Mr. MooNEY. 1896. 

Mr. Hayden. I have here a pamphlet v,-hich contains this quota- 
tion from Dr. S. Weir Mitchell : 

I predict a perilous reign of this mescal habit when this agent becomes ob- 
tainable. Tlie temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be too much 
for some men to resist after they have set foot in this land of fairy colors, 
where there seems so much to charm and so little to excite horror or disgust. 

That seems to be the conclusion of Dr. Mitchell on the subject. 
From your reading of what he has written do you gather that he 
favors the use of peyote ? 

Mr. MooNEY. That is covered in the article just (juoted. Here is 
one of his letters written in 1903 : 

1-524 Wai.ni't Stkeet, 
}'h lid del phi a. Decrnihcr 2H, 1!)03. 
Mr. .Jame.s Moii.\ey, 

Darlinpton, Olcla. 

Deai! Mk. Mooney: I thank you very much for your kind note. What I 
meant in my last was that despite all we have yet learnwl I do not get clearly 
in possession of the exact nature of the charms or visions which mescal gives 
to the Indian. I wanted to know whether these were colored visions and 
hriiliant as were mine and those of Friend I'rentiss. This is not very im- 
portant, howevei-. I write now principally to thank you and to express my 
amazement at the action of the Legislative Association of (Oklahoma. I can 
see how it may open the way to much cruelty and injustice. If you were t" 
write an article calling attention to this and to the regulations of" the Indian 
Office, as you quote them, and send it to the Outlook I tliink it would be of 
service. 

Yours, very truly. Weir itiTCHKU.. 

Mr. Hayden. What was the date of that letter? 

Mr. MooNEY. 1903. I have another one here from Dr. Mitchell, 
m which he refers to his article in the British Medical Record, al- 
ready quoted, and says : 

As far as I remember, I toolt the substance of nine buttons, and had an after- 
noon and evening in fairyland. ■* * * i ^vjgi, y^y would tell me where I can 



PEYOTE. 9'5 

find the law forbidding its use in tlie United States under peimlties. It is 
really a rather harmless drug as compared with most of the others whicli men 
use, and I think such a law quite ridiculous. 
Yours, truly, 

Weir JFitchet-l. 

Ml-. Hastings. What is the date of that letter? 

Mr. MooNEY. About the same period — December 17, 1903. That 
is about the period of this experimentation. 

Mr. Hatden. In the meantime Utah and Nevada have passed such 
laws. 

Lake Mohonk Conference, 
VLster County, N. Y., Fchnianj .9, 1915. 
Dbab Mb. aiooNEY : Your letter of January 30, with inclosed acknowledgment 
of our current report, is very interesting. Since my knowledge of peyote con- 
sists of what is told me about it. I am decidedly of no definite opinion; but 
if the good people who treated the subject at Mohonk have been so completely 
deceived, perhaps some time we can hear from the other side. We want to 
get at the real facts. 

Reciprocating your good wishes. 
Very sincerely, yours, 

H. C. Phillips, Secretary. 
Mr. James Mooney, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, Washinffton^ D. C. 



Andovkr, Mass.. Jkiic 4, 1916. 
Mr. James Mooney, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, Ma-'thinjiton. I). C. 

Deae Me. Mooney: Many thanks for your letter of May 20. I should have 
answered you before, but have ))een very busy, indeed. I api)reciate all that 
you say, and have filed your letter for future reference. 

At Lake Mohonk conference next October they are going to discuss the use 
of peyote. I think it would be well to present the Indians' point of view. 
I have the stenographic copy of the statements made by yourself about the 
Indians at the Board of Indian Commissioners' meeting last February. I in- 
tend to write a circular letter to. these Indians and others and get their point 
of view. This summer I .shall write to Mr. Smiley and see if it is not possible 
to persuade him to have some of the Indians come on and present their side 
of the argument. If you can give me the names of a number of Indians to 
whom you think I should write, it will afford me great pleasure to communi- 
cate with them. I hope you can attend the _conf erence and speak yourself. 

I go to Maine June 11 to explore, and sliall be gone until September ]."i. 
My address will be Castine, Me. 
Very sincerely, yours, 

Waeken K. Moorehe.\d. 

Note. — Prof. Moorehead is a prominent scientist and archeologist, and f. 
member of the Board of Indian Commissioners. He is responsible for venti- 
lating the Wiscon.sin Indian timberland frauds. — J. M. 



a 



Walthtll, Nehe.. .\ugust 21, 191.5. 

Dear Mr. Mooney: Will you send me, if you hiive it, the address of Mr. 
Phillips, the secretary of the Mohonk conference. I had it, but it has disap- 
peared, and I have an idea, that you have it or can procure it for me, so I am 
writing you for it. , 

There are a number of the Indians here who- desii'e to send representatives 
to the conference this fall to present their side of the peyote question, if it is 
planned to be brought up, and I wish to ask Mr. Phillips if he can procure 
invitations for two from the OmahaS' and two from the Winnei)agoes. 



96 PEYOTE. 

I am planning to procure some graphophone records of some of the songs 
used by the peyote people in their exercises, to show their religious character. 
They have many songs with words and several stanzas whi(,'h show clearly 
that these people worship God and not the peyote, as some of its opponents 
claim they do. 

Let me hear from you as soon as possible about this address. It might, per- 
haps, in order to expedite matters, be a good plan for you to address Mr. 
Phillips about this and then send me his reply. I expect to be here until the 
18th of next month, and I want to be sure of the invitations before I leave, so 
that the Indians may begin to choose their representatives and to make arrange- 
ments for the payment of their traveling expenses to and from Lake Mohonk. 
Your friend, 

F. La Flesche. 

Note. — Mr. La Flesche is a prominent member of the Omaha Tribe, a gradu- 
ate at law, author, and member of the Bureau . of American Ethnology. His 
testimony before the Board of Indian Conunissioners and the More Indian Com- 
mittee appears elsewhere. — .1. M. 



Anuovek, Mass., September 13, 1915. 
James Mooney, Esq., 

Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, 

Washington, D. G. 
My Deae Mk. Mooney : I have your letter of September 8, on return from 
Maine, and at once reply. I have written to Mr. Phillips, secretary of the Lake 
Mohonk Conference, with whom I have intimate relations, and I have told him 
that he should by all means invite yourself, Mr. La Flesche, and the gentlemen 
you have named. I hand you carbon copy of my letter to him. It explains 
itself. I believe that the Indians' side of the peyote and all questions should 
be presented. We have had entirely too much white domination, not only 
in every branch of the Indian service, but in everything else as well. 
Thanking you for calling my attention to the matter, I am, 
Very sincerely, yours, 

Wakben K. Mooeehead. 



Septembek 13, 1915. 
H. C. Phillips, Esq., 

Lake Mohonlc, N. Y. 

My Deae Mk. Phillips : I hand you letter from my friend, James Mooney, 
Esq., which explains itself. I have known Mr. Mooney for 25 years. He is one 
of our leading ethnologists, and in addition to his scientific work, he has always 
been interested in Indian problems and the humanitarian side of the Indian. 
In his published reports he has often called attention to various injustices perpe- 
trated on Indians. 

I am quite aware that some of the people at Mohonk may not want to hear 
the Indians' side of the peyote question, but I think that the Indians' side 
should be presented as well as the point of view of the white people and the 
missionaries. I have not personally seen the ceremonies connected with the 
use of peyote, but to the best of my knowledge and belief, the peyote is taking 
the place of whisky. If peyote is an evil, whisky is certainly a far greater evil. 
I firmly believe that if peyote is prohibited the Indian will return to the use 
of whisky, and the attendant evils such as debauchery, gambling, etc., will 
increase. 

Be this as it may, and although some of the others would not agree with me, 
I think if Mohonk is to be a real open parliament both sides of every ques-tion 
should be presented. If those who do not believe in the use of peyote win a 
victory over the Indians, that victory will count for much more if won in open 
debate than otherwise. On the other hand, if the Indians persuade us that we 
have been given a wrong conception of the use of peyote and what it really 
means, m justice and fair play we should afEord them a hearing. 

I shall be under obligations to you if you will take this up with Mr. Smiley 
and also if the invitations can be issued to the Indians to whom Mr. Mooney 

Thanking you, and with best wishes, I am. 
Very sincerely, yours, 

\\'akkkn K. Mooeehead. 



PEYOTE. 97 

Lake Mohoxk (.'onkekhnoe ox 
THE Indians and Othek Dependent Peoples, 

Mohnrik Lake. N. Y., ticptciiibrr ?;5. JDI.'i. 
Deak lln. JIooKEHEAu: Wo liiive your letter of September 13 ns well as cue 
on the same subject from Mr. Moone.v. We are sorry there seems to lie some 
luisuuderstandiui; about takiuij up the subject of iieyote at tlic coiiference this 
fall, and that the opportunity was not srasped last fall by those who wish to 
present the other side. The fact is that this year the plans were practically 
settled some time ago as to the speeifie subjects to concentrate upou next month, 
namely, the present-day needs of Indian administration and conditions amonp; 
the Five Oivilized Tribes, and. of course, any svibject now bnuiii'ht in would not 
be given justice in the time left available after the specialized subjects were 
I'overed. Of cour.se, if the matter comes in incidentally it will be siven a hear- 
ing; but. as I have said, it hardly seems ris'ht to begin now to work up a dis- 
cussion on peyote that would be worth>- of the subject and of the conference. 
Perhaps this can be considered at some. future conference and dealt with \n-it 
and con if thou,£;ht desirable. In consideration of this, do you think we have 
chosen wisely, or do you think it would he better to give opportunity for what 
would prove to be, probably, a somewhat haphazard discussion of peyote? '\\'e 
had invited Mr. La Flesche to present the Indians' point of view on the adminis- 
tration question, but have not yet heard from him. Witii kind regards, 
"\'ery sincerely, yours. 

H. C. Phellips, Seviiidrij. 
Hon. WARitEN K. JIookehead, 

Andover, Mnsfi. 



Andover, Mass., Srptcinhcr 17. II)J'>. 
H. C. Phillips, Esq., 

Secretnri/. Mitlionk Ijikc. \. V^ 

My Deak Me. Phillips: I have your letter of Sejitember 15. I did not know 
that there was any opportunity aflrorded the Indians last fall to discuss peyote. 
All I heard was the one-sided discussion on the part of missionaries. I did not 
know that the Indians had been asked to present their side last fall. If the>- 
were and declined they have no cause to complain. If there is but one side to 
the question, that was presented last fall and there is no need for anything else. 
But if there is another side to the question, and if the taboo of peyote would 
drive the Indians to whisky and gambling, we are making a big mistake. If 
there is justice in that claim then the men who spoke at the conference last fall 
must assume responsibility for whatever happens. 

I have no desire to interfere with youi- program or change your plans. I sup- 
posed there was some time left available, particularly so since we are to have 
more discussion from the floor and not .so many " .set pieces." A lunuber of tis 
began to think that we had too many of the " polished and ornate " addresses 
and not enough speeches from the floor. Men do not talk quite so smooth when 
.speaking extemporaneously, but they certainly plead from the heart. 

Mr. Mof)ney is an old friend of nnne and he may not have been aware that 
your program «as complete when he wrote. I do not feel like asking you to 
change your program, but I don't like to see Mr. Mooney. Mr. La Flesche, and 
the others left out. Personally I would rather hear them than some of the Con- 
gressmen and others ^^'ho consume a great deal of time but do precious little 
of I'eal good for the Indian. 



Very sincerely, yours. 



Warren K. JIoorehead. 



Lake Mohonk Conference on 
Indian and other Dependent Peoples, 

Mohmik iMkc. ,V. Y.. ticpteiiilKT 8, 191.',. 
Dk\r Mk Mooney: It is a. disappointment to us to have youi- letter of Sep- 
tember 8 saying jou can not come to the conference next month, for we believe 
vou would find it of interest. It would seem after so many years almost your 
due to make fir.st-hand acquaintance with the conference, and we certainly hope 
you can do so some time. 
47003—18 7 



98 PEYOTE. 

Concernius the program for next month, it is a surprise to us that Mr. 
JMoorehead thinks the subject of peyote is to be prominently brought up this 
fall, though perhaps he may have gotten that idea by knowing the custom of 
giving opportunity at Mohonlv for free discussions. Last year. opportunity was 
given for both sides to be presented, the subject reading " Liquor and peyote as 
affecting tlie Indian problem." There seemed to be at that time no advocate 
of its use who was ready to present his side. For this fall definite subjects 
have so far lieen foi'mulated that there woidd be little chance to do justice to 
any other big topic, and it would seem better to postpone the subject to some 
year when it can have more thorough discussion. 

Mr. La Flesche has already been invited to give the Indians' point of view 
of the administration question. Would the Indians whose- names you give 
l)e likely to come if the peyote question is not up? 
Very sincerely, yours, 

H. C. Phillips, Scrretid-y. 

Mr. James Mooney, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, D. C. 



Smithsonian Institution, 
Bureau of Amebican Ethnology, 

Washington, D. C, November S, 1915. 
Mr. H. 0. Phillips, 

Secretary Lake Mohoiik Conference, Mohonh Lake, N. Y. 

Dbae Mr. Phillips : About two months ago, in accordance with the request 
of Mr. Francis La Flesche, of the Omalia Tribe, and the earlier suggestion, in 
.Tune preceding, of Prof. Warren Moorehead, a member of your business com- 
mittee and also of the Board of Indian Commissioners, I forwarded you the 
names and addresses of several representative educated Indians who were 
anxious to present the Indian side of the peyote question before your con- 
ference to be held on October 20-22, with the request that invitations be ex- 
tended to them, and stating also that in anticipation of such opportunity two of 
the tribes concerned were taking steps to raise funds to send representatives 
at their own expense. The request was warmly seconded by Prof. Moorehead 
on the ground of plain justice. 

In reply you stated, iu nearly identical letters of September 15. to Prof, 
Moorehead and myself, that the subjects for discussion at the meeting " were 
practically settled some time ago" (by whom is not stated), peyote not being, 
among them, although it might come in " incidentally." 

The Indians were not invited, and the opportunity which they had solicited to 
speak on their own behalf was not afforded. Mr. La Flesche, however, who 
had been invited to discuss the more general subject of administration, was 
present, but under the circumstances had no chance to speak upon the subject 
which his people had decided that he should present. 

I learn, however, that a Federal official took occasion to tell what he was doing 
to stamp out the peyote religion from among the tribes, and that the conference 
later adopted a resolution indorsing his effort. This seems to go beyond the 
" Incidental " limit. 

In this resolution, as in your former conference proceedings, " liquor and 
peyote" are uniformly coupled together, although the two are diametrically 
opposed to each other, the peyote adherents abjuring entirely the use of liquor, 
which Is the chief reason why some of the best educated men among the 
Indians defend the peyote teaching. The continued linking together of these 
two names is in itself an injustice, as </(inveying ii false and prejudicial idea. ' 

In your letter to Prof. Jloorehead you say : " We are sorry there seems to be 
some misunderstanding about taking up' the subject of peyote at the conference 
this fall, and that the opportunity was not grasped last fall by those who wished 
to present the other side." In reply he writes you : " I d'd not kno\\' that 
there was any opportunity afforded the Indians last fall to discuss peyote. 
All I heard was the one-sided discussion on the part of missionaries. I did 
not know that the Indians had been asked to present their side last fall. If 
they were, and declined, they have no cause to complain." To make sure on 
this point I have carefully gone over all our correspondence -covering that 
period and have inquired of other friends — some of Indian blood— to whom the 
customary pi-inted invitations were sent, and find that to none of us was au 



PEYOTE. 99 

intimation given, by circular or letter or otherwise, that peyote was to come 
up for discussion. Ttie discussion was confined to an officer interested in its 
suppression and to four missionaries, all by profession antagonistic to an 
Indian religion. No one of tliem could speak from inside experience. I ven- 
ture to say ttiat if, it were made known that opportunity would be given to 
Indians for free discussion of this subject at the Mohonk conference a dozen 
western tribes would gladly nominate delegations of their best picked men 
and send them there at their own expense for that purpose. 
With respect, 

.I.IMJS.S MOONEY. 



Platform of tlie thirty-third annual Lake Mohonk Conference on the Indian 
and Other Dependent Peoples, 1915 : 

The thirty-third annual Lake Mohonk Conference on the Indian and Other 
Dependent Peoples gratefully recognizes the progress secured toward compara- 
tive justice and rights and fair administration for the Indian. It approves the 
stress laid by the present administration on the conservation of the health of 
the Indians and its insistence on more liospitals and greater medical cars, and 
it applauds the efficient efforts to stop the sale of intoxicants and the use of 
peyote. 



Lake Mohonk Conference on 
Indian and Othee Dependent Peoples, 

Mohonk Lake, N. 7., November 8, 1915. 
Dbak Mb. Mooney : We are glad to have your courteous letter of November 3, 
for it is our endeavor to make Mohonk Conferences a synonym of impartiality, 
and with this' in view have always tried to have all sides represented in the 
discussions of any subject. It is this point of view that makes us appreciate 
heartily your stand, if you deem that we have been unjvist in the discussion of 
peyote. It was up for consideration on botli sides last fall, and most of those 
since recommended by you to speak for the use of peyote were then invited. 
Possibly we did not lay enough emphasis on the importance of the subject, 
but certainly we did not wish to discriminate, and only wish we might have 
had your recent suggestions at that time. This fall they came so near the 
conference time that there was no opportunity to introduce another subject 
as it should be brought in in order to give both sides an equal representation, 
and therefore the matter was left from the program, the brief mention of the 
subject in the conference being entirely incidental. The platform reference 
came over from last year, and simply indicates inability of anyone to control a 
platform committee. Before another conference we will hope to arrange so 
that the discussion of all topics considered make for the benefit of all concerned. 
Thanking you again for your interest. 
Very sincerely, yours, 

H. C. Phillips, Secretary. 
Mr. James Moonby, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, 

Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C. 



Lake Mohonk Conference on 
Indian and Other Dependent Peoples, 

Mohonk Lake, N. Y., Octoher 8, 1916. 
Dear Mk. La Flbsche : Many thanks for your full letter of October 3. We 
are very sorry, indeed, that you can not see your way clear to get to the con- 
ference, and appreciate the care with which you have written out your views 
on peyote and certain other matters relating to Indian affairs. As a result 
of not hearing from Mr. Mboney and not having your reply until this time, we 
have decided not to have a general discussion of peyote unless we could have 
one of you or some one who, in your opinion, was" well qualified to present the suli- 
iect. We understand, however, it will be touched upon in an address on another 
subject by Mr. Vaux, one of the Board of Indian Commissioners, who has seen 
something of the peyote religion during a recent tour of Oklahoma and who is 
somewhat inclined to your point of view — at least, he is now entertaining rea- 
sonable doubts as to the wisdom of condemning peyote. It would appear, there- 



100 PEYOrE. 

fore, that the only iittei-ance iu-ranged for in advance ^^•ould be rather In favor 
of peyote. It wouldn't be a bad thing If you should see fit to write a line to 
Conamissioner Yaux explaining the probable inability of yourself or Mr. Mooney 
to come to the conference and suggesting that he give the subject a little more 
emphasis in consideration of these facts. His address is ^ryn Mawr, Pa., and 
his full name Hon. George Vaux, .I'r. At ^present I know of no better way of 
giving effect to the sentiments in your letter, especially in view of the time- 
honored rule making it a most difflcult matter to secure the reading of a 
speech or communication by anyone except its author. Mr. Malcolm McDowell, 
the new secretary of the Board of Indian Commissioners, has also made some 
study of the' subject, and is, I think, not unfavorably impressed with what he 
also saw in Oklahoma. He will be at the conference, and perhaps in an unoffi- 
cial capacity he might be able to assist in answering any arguments that might 
possibl.v be brought up in any informal discussion from the floor. 

The question of the right of an Indian to dispose of his land by will is being 
carefully noted among the list of subjects which ought some time to be dis- 
cussed at Mohonk. It is now too neai' the conference to arrange for a formal 
paper on the subject, but by another year we may be able to get to it. The 
question of illicit traffic in liquor has been made prominent at several confer- 
ences, and Mohonk has repeatedly gone on record on that subject. It ought to 
be brought up again, and in connection with the fair discussion of the peyote 
situation, which we certainly hope to have some year soon. 

With very kind regards. 
Sincerely, yours, 

H. C. Phillips, Secretary. 

Mr. Fkancis La FlesChe, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington,. D. C. 



NovicMHKR 26. 1915. 
Ml-. H, (". Phillips, 

Secretary jAike Mohonk f'oiifereiiee. A/oliovk Ijikc. N. Y. 

Dear Mr. PniLLtps : Your kind letter of November 8 has awaited reply vmtil 
now, owing to my continued weakness. 

The names of Indians recommended by me for the jieyote discussion of October 
just past, either directly or by suggestion to Mi-. Jloorhead. were those of 
Messrs. La Flesche, Sloan, P.onnicastle. \A'arden, Wells. Peawo. So far as I 
can learn, only the first named was invited in 1914, and he states that he had 
no advance information that peyote was to be under discussion. 

AMiile working for the uplift of the Indian, we must recognize the fact that 
Ills own civilization had certain good points, which the educated men of the 
i-iice are willing to defend. 

With respect and best wishes. 

.Tajies Mooney. 



Washington. D. ("., Octolier 3. 1916. 

JIl-. H. ('. I'HILLIPS, 

Secretary Lake ilohonk Conference. 

Dear Mr. Phillips: I have received your letter of September 18, 1916. ex- 
liressing the liojie that I would attend the Mohonk conference to be held October 
18th to the 20th. I thank you for the invitation and regret that on account of 
Die pressure of my work it will not be possible for me to be present at the 
conference this year. 

You ask of me advice on two subjects. 

The first is in regard to a consideraticm of the use of the peyote by the 
Indians and to allow those Indians who favor its use to present their views 
on this question. In connection with this subject you refer to a criticism made 
by 'Sir. .Tames Mooney of the action taken by the conference last year upon 
the peyote question, 

I am inclined to agree with Mr. Mooney in his criticism, for the reason that 
at the last conference only those who were oyijiosed to the peyote were given a 
Iiearing, while those A\ho were directly concerned with its use were ignored 
and were not invited to offer their testimony to the meeting when the subject 
was to be taken up and acted upon. Similar one-sided acts in the past have 
led to serious mistakes and to the commission of injustice to the Indians at 
the hands of "-hose who dad, officially, absolute control over the Indians. 



PEYOTE. 101 

The notion has obtoined tliat the Indians wero not capablf ol' tlunlvin;;' for 
themselves, of having sentiments lilve other human beings, therefore tliey were 
not consulted or allowed a voice in the nianagement of their personal affairs. 
Laws have been enacted, and policies ]nit into practice regardless of t])c 
Indians' wi.shes and not infrequently to their in.jury. I need not point out 
instances, as everyone who is earnestly and intelligently interested in the well- 
being of the Indians is faniiliai- with the story of the wrongs that have been 
committed against them. 

During the past four years I have jiersonally made careful observations of 
the use of the peyote, which has a part in a new religion now i)racticed by thi- 
Omaha. Osage, and Ponca Tribes, and I have failed during all this time to dis- 
cover the harm that certain persons have ascribed to its use. If Inilf of what 
has been said against the peyote had been true, then many of my I'elatives and 
best friends amon.g the Omaha would be dead or in the insane asylum ; but 
they are to-day strong, healtiiy in body, and vigorous in mind, although they 
have used the peyote for many years. It should be remembered that the 
pe.vote is not taken for self-indulgence similar to the customary use of tobacco, 
hut it is employed only during the ceremonies connected with the new religion, 
which has its meetings once a week except during the bn.sy seasons of iilanting 
cultivating, and harvesting the crops, when the meetings take place about once 
a montl). 

Before I had gi\en persoial attention to the use of the peyote I entertained 
a strong pre.iudice against it and a doubt as to the influence of the religion 
of which It Is a part, but this prejudice was removed when I observed the life 
of rhose who had accepted the " new religion " and heard the i)rayei's of Omaha 
men like Ardent Sansonci. Harry Lyon, and Philip Walkei-, not once but a 
nunibev of times, and had visited tlieii' homes and had seen how they were now 
llvln,g. All these mjn were schoolmates of mine, who later in life jiassed 
through the fire of intemperance, that at one time threatened to consume the 
entii'e tribe. For a number of years a deplorable state of drunkenness pre- 
vailed among the Omaha, (luring which time assaults, abuses of women and 
children, even murder, were rampant, so that It became dangerous for people 
to be on the roads at night on account of drunken men. The agent placed 
upon the reser\-ation to look after tlie welfare of the Indians was well aware 
of this condition, but he seemed to have exerted little or no influence of an.\- 
kind to prevent the nss of intoxicants by the Indians. During this time three 
men were killed In drunken brawls. When this state of affairs was at its 
\\(n-st the Winnebago Indians, whose condition had been no better, introduced 
to the Omaha the peyote with its new religion. As a result drunkenne^ss ceased 
among those who accepted the "new religion"; it became safe for whites as 
well as for Indians to travel the roads at night and there were no moi'e abuses 
of women and children. 

The above is a mild statement of the conditions that existed before the In- 
troduction of the " new religion." The stopping of the use of Intoxicants by 
those vcho took to the "' new religion " alone makes me thankful and revives 
my hope that the Omaha will yet become sober and useful citizens. As to the 
religious part, I do not hesitate to say that the three men I have mentioned, 
as well as others, are as earnest in their faith as any believer in the Christian 
religion could be. They strive to live up to the simple teachings of the " new- 
religion," which they can comprehend. These teachings, briefly stated, are to 
inculcate truthfulne.ss, honesty, morality, the avoidance of slander, of idleness, 
and all Intoxicants. The members are taught to comfort those who are be- 
reaved and to help those who are in want. The teachings of the Christian 
religion, with its complexity of forms, these people ware not able to fully 
accept and understand. Knowing the.se facts I have stated to be true, I can 
not, with an easy conscience, .join In the hue and cry against the peyote, with 
its accompanying religious teachings. 

I hope I am not merely piling up words that may never have any effect. 
The conference has ha.stlly spoken against that in which many of the Indians 
have put their faith, and it did this without offering to the accused even the 
empty form of a hearing, an act which Is not In accord with the spirit of fair- 
ness, a spirit that characterizes the people of this country. 

Second. You ask me if you might put me down for an address on " Present- ) 
day needs of Indian administration." I will mention two of these needs. ,' 
First. The necessity at the present time of putting forth a greater effort by •/ 
those In charge of Indian affairs to stop the illicit traffic in liquor among "' 



kilU 



SEUM OF A[>iEHiCAN INDIAN 



102 FKVOTE. 

Indians, purtk-ularly anion.ir those -who are shortly to take upon themselves 
the full responsibility of citizenship. We hear reports of great progress being 
made by the liquor-suppressing force ; but, in actuality, drinking is still preva- 
lent aud the boot-leggsr is as active as over. Within the last two years two 
juni-ders have been conuuitted on the Omaha Reservation as a result of drink- 
ing, the victims being an old nian and a woman. During my stay among the 
Osage last spring an officer said to me: "The liquor traffic is still going on. 
and although I am fighting it with great odds against me I propose to keep on 
figliting. There is one thing I can say in favor of the peyote people, they are 
truthful and I can depend upon their word, while I can't believe, even tipou 
nath, those who drink." Second. A law has been enacted and is now in opera- 
tion by which the Indian whose land is held in trust by the Government is 
enabled to dispose of his property by will, subject to the approval of the Sec- 
i-etary of the Interior. While I am confident that tha educated Indian can 
exercise this right ^^•itll safety to himself and to those to whom he wishes to 
li"ive his i)roperty I have grave doubts as to the uneducated Indian, who must 
depend upon an interpi'eter for the making of his will. I would therefore sug- 
gest that where the maker of a will is an uneducated Indian, and it appeal's 
that the beneficiaries of the will are not related to him by blood, a careful in- 
quiry be made as to the circumstances surrounding the making of the will 
before submitting it to the Secretary for approval. 

Again I thank you for your invitation to speak on the Indian needs and 
i-egi-et that I am unable to be present at the conference. 
Very truly, yours, 

Fk.\ncis Ij.\ Flesche. 



Washington-. D. C, October Hi, I9JG. 
Hon. George Aaux, .Te., 

Lake Mohonlc, N. Y. 

Dkak Mk. Vaux : From a letter addressed to me by Mr. Phillips and a con- 
versation I have had recently with Mr. McDowell, I understand that in an 
address you are to make before the Mohonk Conference you will mention some 
of your personal observations made during a recent tour in Oklahoma of the 
peyote religion as practiced by the Osage Indians. I do not know how you 
were impressed with this new worship of my Osage friends or what conclusions 
you have reached concerning it, but I am pleased that you have taken the 
trouble to observe it yourself and to .iudge it fairly and impartially from actual 
personal knowledge and not from hearsay. 

At the last conference and that of the year before only those who were 
opposed to the peyote were given a hearing, while those who were directly con- 
cerned with its use as part of a worship were ignored and were not Invited to 
offer their testimony at the meeting when the sub.iect was to be taken up fuid 
acted upon. Similar one-s'ded acts in the past have resulted in serious mis- 
takes and to the conmiission of injustice to the Indians at the hands of those 
who officially had absolute control over them. 

The notion has obtained that the Indians were not capable of thinking for 
themselves, of having sentiments i:ke other human beings; therefore, they 
were ucjt consulted oi- allowed a voice in the management of their personal 
affairs. Laws have been enacted and " policies " put into pi-actice in the man- 
agement of the affairs of the Indians, regardless of their wishes and not 
infrequently to their injury. 

During the past four years I have personally made careful observations of 
the use of the peyote by the Omaha, Osage, and I'onca T)-ibes as a part of the 
new religion practiced by them, and I have failed during all th's time to dis- 
cover the harm that certain persons have ascribed to its use. If half of what 
has been said against the peyote had been true, then, manv of my relations and 
friends among the Omaha would be dead oi- in the insane' asyluiii, but they are 
today strong, healthy in body, and vigorous in mind, although they have' used 
the peyote in their worship for many years. It should be borne in mind that 
the peyote is not taken for self-indulgence, similar to the customary use of 
tobacco, but it is employed only during the ceremonies connected with' the new 
ivKgion, which has its meetings once a week, except dui-ing the busy season of 
planting, cultivating, and harvesting the crops, when the meetings' take place 
tdiout once a month. 

Before I had given personal attention to the use of the peyote I entertained 
a strong prejudice against it and a doubt as to the influence of the religion of 



PEYOTE. 103 

wh'ch it is a part: but this prejudice was removed when I (ibservcd the life of 
those who had accepted the new religion and heard the prayers of Omaha men 
like Ardent Saunsoci, Harry Lyon, and Philip Walker a number of times on 
public occasions and in private and had visited their homes and had seen how 
they were now living. All these men were schoolmates oC mine, who later in 
life passed through the lire of inremper.-nice that at one time threatened to coii- 
siune the entire tribe. For a number of years a deplorable state of drunkenjiess 
prevailed anion;; the Omaha, during: which time assaults, abuses of women and 
children, even murder were ranii)ant, so that it became dannei-ous for peoi)le to 
be on the roads at night on account of drunken men. The afivut placed upon the 
reservation to look after the welfare of the Indians was well aware of ths 
condition, but he seemed to have exerted little or no influence of any kind to 
prevent the use of intoxicants by the Indians. Hurint;- this time three men 
were killed in drunken brawls. When this state of affairs was at its worst the 
Winnebago Indians, wliose condition had been no better, introduced to the 
Omaha the peyote with its new religion. As a result, druiikenness ceased 
among those who accepted the new religiim. it l)ecanie safe for \\hites as well 
as for Indians to travel the roads at night, and there were no more abuses of 
women and children. 

I do not hesitate to say that the three meu I have mentioned, whose prayers 
I have heard, as well as others who have accepted the " new religion," are as 
earnest in their faith as any believer in the Ohristian i-eligion coiild be. They 
strive to live up to the simple teachings of the " new religion," which they 
<an comprehend. These teachings, briefly stated, are to inculcate truthfulness, 
honesty, morality, the avoidance of slander, of idleness, and all intoxicants. 
The members are taught to comfort those who are bereaved and to help those 
who are in want. The teachings of the Christian religion, with its complexity 
of forms, these people are not able to fviUy accept and understand. Knowing 
these facts I have stated to be true, I can not with easy conscience .loin in 
the hue and cry against the peyote, with its accompanying i-eligious teachings. 

The conference has hastily .spoken against that in which many of the Indians 
have put their faith, and it did this without offering to the accused even the 
empty formality of a hearing, an act which is not in accord with the spirit 
of fairness, a spirit that characterizes the people of this country. 

In the practice of this " new religion" the Indians are exercising a right 
guaranteed by the Constitution to every citizen of the United States, the right 
to worship according to the dictates of his own conscience. The Indians who 
have accepted the "new religion" worship God and ask help from Jesus 
Christ, and is not this in accord with all those who profess Chi'istianity? 

Pardoi) me for writing to you at such length upon this subject, but I feel 
that if the attacks upon this " new religion " succeed greater harm than good 
will be the result. 

Very truly, yours, 

Fkancis La Flesche. 



[Fi-om address of non. George Vaux. jr.. chairman Board of Indian Commissioners, on 
visit to Osage Indians (p. 74) in Lake Mohonlt conference report for 1916.] 

The question of peyote was one that we found a very active one among these 
Indians. I do not care about going into the discussion of that this evening, 
and possibly I should get myself into hot water if I were to say some of 
the things which I heard in the Osage country. Undoubtedly, however, there 
is in connection with the use of pe\ote, a cult or religious performance which 
should be veivv carefully investigated and the effect of it fully understood 
before \\-e can deal with the question of peyote with wisdom and without doing 
a .great deal of liarm. 

Here is a letter from one of the representative men of the Arapahoe 
Tribe, an edncated man, Jack Bull-bear, educated in the Govern- 
ment schools in the East. The name is a corruption of his proper 
Indian name, Chaq, meaning " Comanche," with his father's trans- 
lated name added. He has been a counsellor and delegate of his 
tribe for perhaps 20 or 30 years. He wrote this statement for one 
of the local papers in Oklahoma. Is there time to read this to the 
committee? 



104 PEYOTE. 

Mr. TiLLJiAx. Just let it go into the record. 

Mr. MooNEr. All right, then, here it is, with accompanying letter. 
I submit also another from him bearing on the same subject, and 
another from another member of the Arapahoe council, Avhich has 
just come to nie : 

PoLONV, Washi'I'a County, Oki.a., .1/«,// 27, 1911. 

.TaME.S ^[odXKY. 

Wdnhhiyt'in. D. (' 
Dear Fkiknd : I hiive been so busy in f;iriii ^YOl•k ever since I (.-[inie lioine 
from WMsliington, !>. ('. Onv peyote friends arc nmcli progress in farming 
tli;m ever liefore, and are trying to live up to it. All of our friends are well at 
liresent, especially of my family. I am inclosing you some of my work for tlic 
]ie.Yote people. 

Yonrs, trnlv. 

J. B. Bear. 

I'. S. — Keej) your eyes on peyote there and let >is know it at once whenever 
tbev tr.v to bi'ing up something about pe.vote. 

.T. B. B. 

AKAJ'AHOE INDIAN CHIEF EXPLAINS AliOUT AN INDIAN RELIGIOUS SOCIETY PEYOTE 

SOCIETY' IS COOD OR(l ANIMATION FOR INDIANS, ACCOBDlNfl TO PROMINENT LEADER. 

By .Tock B. Bear, Arajiahoe Indian Chief. 

There has been considei'alile agitntion lately regarding the so-called harm- 
ful effects of the peyote bean upon certain Indians who are known as peyote 
eaters. Indian agents, Indian missionaries, and others have been trying for 
several years to have laws passed prohibiting pe.yote the same as opium or 
other narcotics. The Times is in receipt of the following article on the peyote 
from the Indian peyote eater's viewpoint, written by Jock Bull Bear, a well- 
known leader of the peyote bands. This Arapahoe Indian chief is an authority 
on tills sub.iect among the Oklahoma Indians, and at present is in Washington, 
I). ('.. on ,1 mission of importance to members of his tribe. — Editor. 

PEYOTE AMONO THE INDIA.N'S. 

/"I was a student at C.-uiisle Indian Training School, Carlisle, I'a., from 18S0 
"(o 1S8.S, and was baptized as ,-i I'resb.vterian Church member. I, of course, had 
ni>- faults, and «-as a pretty unruly student. When I returned to my home 
among my tribesmen (ai the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Iteservatioii, in Oklohoma, 
I .ioined the commonly called Peyote Society. I .joined this society, however, 
among the Comanches, in 1.SS4. ' I have used the peyote bean for the last 32 
years and am now .54 .vear.s oldl" and I have six children, all grown and married, 
and I am' the grandfather of 10 grandchildren. I live in a nice little home, 
with a small farm of uiy own. All of my children have good homes. I believe 
I have all of these things because of what uiy religion has done for me. And I 
do not use any intoxicating licpior of any kind nor indulge in gambling. And my 
sons, daughters, and sons-in-law all have had experience with this little herii 
called the peyote liean, or mescal button, that has been so much talked about 
and against by the inexiierienced persons who laiow nothing about it except 
what they have heard. I speak from experience, having been a leader in this 
religious society for 2P, years. 

Now. I ain going to relate some of the things I have learned by experience 
concerning this religion, and say something about what the enemies of this 
i-eligion have said about it. In writing about the herb or peyote I am not 
(|uoting what others have siiid. but what I know from personal experience to 
be facts. 

In the first place it is not so that when a person eats two or three of the 
jieyiite beans, or mescal buttons, they will see all different kinds of colors of 
things. I have eaten from 12 to 30 peyotes at different times and did not see 
such things, nor did 1 see such things as big cats, big snakes, big centiiiedes, 
and such things, that ai-e dangerous or very laughable to human beings. 

I wish to say that our meetings consists'of iirayers and testimonies by the 
members and all those who are jiresent. Singing is also a iiart of the'cere- 
nuaiy, and the members worship Almighty (iod, the One we must trust and 



PEYOTE. 105 

obey. The service lasts in this iimmiei- ;ill night or until niornins. Every- 
thing is cari-ied on in n nice resiiectiilile niannei-. Now. in (•onii);irison ^yitll 
intoxicating liqnor or^drugs that contain alcohol or opium, the effect is entirely 
different. 

(iive one person a quart of whisky and give to another iierson 12 good 
l)eyote beans and you can soon liave a good comparison of effect, and yon 
can soon know the difference between intoxication with whisky and the pe.vfite 
religion, as we call it. It is noniutoxicating and it is harmless, nor is it danger- 
ous, any more than to driidc wine in the church or eat bread in the church. 

An Arapaho~e Indian who was a great gambler claimed to have eaten some 
peyote to help him overcome his bad habit of gambling, but he says it made 
him see snakes and centipedes instead, and the third day it made his skin feel 
like that of ,i snake. I say he is wrong and mistaken in that statement he 
made. 

There is no three days' meeting at any time. The meetings only last one 
night, not longer than from !) o'clock at night until o'clock in the morning. 
The meeting is then ended and everybody just waits for dinner and then 
everybody goes home to do what work they ha\e to do. Now the Arapahoe 
Indian just mentioned joined the Peyote Society for a few weeks, but could not 
get ahmg without gambling and drinking strong liquor, because he was not 
allowed in that religion. So he discharged himself from the Peyote Society. 
And he turned around and applied for patent in fee for his allotment. 

This was granted and he .sold it in the next few days after he got it and 
used all that money for gambling and intoxicating drinks. He did not one time 
visit sober at the assembling. He also said he saw women tear their clothes 
and iiuU their hair from their heads. I have used peyote 32 years and go to 
the meetings often in the year and I never see anything like that. 

A statement was nuide by some one that water is drawn from the peyote 
and is poured into tlie little children's ears, and many other things, many of 
which are conflicting statements, made by both white laeople and Indians. 

Xow, these persons who -speak against peyote when they don't know it. 
what it is, sliould be ashamed. I think they are a little too fast. Some claim 
that members of the Peyote Society and their children are dying off fast. I 
wish to be reasonable in this matter, but I do not think I would have so many 
children, and especially 10 .grand children, living to-day and in good health if 
it were true. I think I can speak truer from experience than those can who 
do not know for themselves. 

I think I can explain also about the articles that are used in the peyote 
ceremonies. I know what these things represent from the beginning to the end 
of the ceremony. And these who make complaint against peyote and peyote 
religious people ought to learn better about it and then they will not make so 
many false reports from just what somebody thinks or some one has beard 
about. 

These things that somebody said about it does not make it true. I don't 
think anyone ever saw those bad things that are mentioned before on account 
of using' peyote. Those who have used it many years like myself never see 
such things. Such things do not happen in that religion. 

Our religious work teaches us and our children to live right and care for our 
families and try to better our condition. We try to live as prohibition people. 
AVe trv to help our State wherever we live. 

Instead of ti-ying to surpress the use of peyote among the Indians it is better 
to encourage its use as a means of combating the liquor habit and to make them 
be better Indians. 

I do not pretend to be a preacher iimong the Indians, but only trying to help 
them to better things, good behavior, and telling them our tradition of the many 
past generations, keeping alive our unwritten book. 

Our doctrine is penniless and helpless — not like out pale-face brothers' 
religion, paving big salaries for preaching to the people. There would be no 
harm for any honest person to come to our ceremony in person to learn about 
it and know the truth about peyote. Our religions peyote members, as we might 
express it, are not against anything that is good, or in truth of worshiping, or 

Christianity. . . ^^ ^, , ,.4. 

We try to be friendly with all, and Christianity is our motto through life. 

and we so teach our children. ^^ .. , c. 4. u , 1 

\ pai-tv of respectable men. Snpt. Watsworth, a United States marshal, and a 
nhVsician all government officials, attended one of our meetings to Investigate. 
Snpt Watsworth ate some of the peyote to te.st it and made a close investigation. 



106 PKyoTE. 

The folio-wing uionuug he made a speecfh tmd said that lie had seen all of his 
S'ood friends that night and that he was very glad to be with them at such a 
gathering or meeting. The visitors \\'ent home with a good feeling toward the 
peyote religion. 

Supt. Walter Q. AVest, of Cantonment, while in tlie employ of the Government 
made a visit of the same kind. He congratulated the Indians on the good work 
they were doing and the way they carried on their religion. 

In 1913 I was in charge of a peyote meeting for Indans in Nebraska, and 
a minister attended our meeting and brought his Bible with him and reaff'some 
of the Scriptures to help along the meeting; he himself toolc eight peyotes dur- 
ing the meeting. Just before midnight he was invited to talk to the Indians. 
And he did talk to us and the read from his Bible and the next morning lie went 
away to preach in Sioux City, Iowa, and we all thanked him for attending 
our meeting, ilany othei' ministers and lawyers, as well as other intelligent 
professional men have visited the peyote meetings throughout the State of 
Oklahoma and other States. 

We do not think Congi-ess should pass any law to prohibit peyote religion of 
the Indian race to destroy that religion, as we feel we are guaranteed freedom 
of religious worship undei the Constitution of the United States. The numerous 
charges and affidavits offered by different parties against our Indian religion 
are none of them true. We are living uprightly under the United States flag, 
and helping to improve the condition of our Indian race, to make them, better 
("Christians, and to live the real civilized life. 



Cloud Chief, Okla, Febyiiary 1.2, 19.12. 

.lAMES MOONEY, 

Washington, D. C. 
Deab Fkiend : Yours A\'as received 20th of last, and was glad indeed to hear 
from a friend who has been a true friend with Indians number of years passed 
and thought would write to return tlianks for remembrance to the people of 
my race in Oklahoma. My intention was to take journey to get green peyote 
but fear by these complaints rises again against peyote at Darlington, Okla., 
by the Indian agent in charge of Mr. Treere, so the peyote people sire con- 
sidering among themselves that some one would see about these false reports 
as soon as possible, consequently in our protective about Peyote Society. If 
the people are let us lone those who are against them. We can bring out our 
people into the front of good civilization life and encourage them in the way 
of industrious, as we are prohibited among ourselves in some things that are 
not reliable for the people in the way of living and in the way of all bad habits. 
We peyote people have faith much as any other Christian or religion people 
in the world toward to the Great Spirit which is above all. I have been used 
these herbs for the last 26 years and have little experience about them, more 
than any Indian agent can or missionary among the Indians and have obtain 
a better sense ever since and more to be, so I wish you would inform me what 
the Indian Office have say about tin™, or what yon have learn from office. One 
more question I want ask you, What tribe of Indians that lives in the State of 
Texas and whei'e about if there is any? So I come to close with best regard and 
good luck to you. 
Yours, truly. 

.locK Brr.i. Bk.\i!. 
I l)eg you to reply. Good-by. 

I.Tock Bull-beai-, full blood, acci-edited council member and delegate of \ra- 
paho Indians. Okla, — .1. M.l 



Cahlton, Okt.a., Febrnary 25, 191 H. 
All". .Tajiks Mooney, 

WdHMngtmi, D. C. 

Sm: We saw in the Oklahoman paper Mrs. Gertrude Benin's testimony be- 
fore the Indian Comuiittee against the peycite. containing thei-ein many false 
statements for this reason: That in order that a person may be convinced of 
its hsirniful effects ujjon mind iind niody, there slKnild be a fair test of it by 
attending the meeting and participating in the ceremonial rites. 

You uii(lerst>'nd Ihat we believe what we see, bear. etc.. of the works of th(^ 
Civat Spirit, therefore we placed the teiiee facing toward the sunrise. We 



PEYOTE. 107 

i-iiri'ied out tlie vow or jmrposes of an individual wlui wislies and desires the 
presence of the divine power, by offerings of prayer in Indian religious doctrine. 
Just consider the Indians gathered in the tepee, having a fire blazing therein 
for the sole object of developing the spiritual temperaments in the race as well 
.■IS obtaining physical strength. This is gotten by self-reliance and self-control. 
There Is a justifiable reason for being a part or member of that Indian re- 
ligious tepee. As far as obtaining cheniical analysis of this herb or plant, or 
experiuventing uiiou animals, it may seem possible, but a person must con- 
scientiously go to it and then know the good of it. That Indian lady is not 
right but is insti,g!ited by wrong advice. 

If you are to be called before the Indian (louunittee again and should need 
any evidence, or rather true testimonials from us, write at once, as I understand 
that this fight is going on. 

The party gives an account of an Arapahoe taking peyote and from Its effects 
felt like a snake or something of Ihat sort. Upon inquiry and by even there 
is no occurrence on record, so with this little information that contains herein 
is the present attitude of us Indians. We only ask a fair and impartial trial 
by reasonable white people, not half breeds who do not know a bit of their 
ancestors or kindred. A true Indian is one who helps for a race and not that 
secretary of the Society of American Indians. Our intentions are good but ob- 
structed by sucli persons. 
Yours, respectfully, 

Cleaveb Warden. 

(Cleaver Warden, fullblood, accredited council member and delegate from the 
Arapaho Tribe, Oklahoma.) 

Mr. Tillman. I want to ask you a few questions. If you want to 
put anything in the record, you may do so. We want to hear both 
sides of this controversy. You have experimented with this drug 
on yourself, have you ? 

Mr. MooNEY. Yes, sir; in connection with observation of the cere- 
mony. 

Mr. Tillman. How many times? 

Mr. MooNEY. Oh, eight or ten times, perhaps. 

Mr. Tillman. I will ask if it affects you like it affected this man : 

A pale shadow seemed to hover over the book he read. Visions came 
slowly, then rapidly. First, a vast field of golden jewels, studded with red, 
crimson, and green stones — a wonderful perfume — a dull, rich glow and bril- 
liant points — rare floweris — and iridescent fibrous wings as of butterfles ; then a 
hollow revolving cylinder line with marvelous mother-of-pearl — profuse and 
various images— living arabesques. Tlien he saw waves of light, shadows 
flushed with violet. 

Did it have that effect upon you ? 

Mr. MooNEY. No, sir; but I believe it does have that effect, or a 
part of that effect, upon certain persons, because that is the almost 
universal testimony, even of the Indians, when they take a certain 
quantity, but I have had none of them with seven or 'eight repeatedly. 
But there is a reason. I am with these things to study them and keep 
my mind open for observation. I am not so easily affected and am 
used to staying up all night with different kinds of performances, 
writing, and so on, and do not come at it with the same mental atti- 
tude. I have also made a study of the ghost dance, and I know that 
many of the Indians would lose consciousness in that dance, but they 
believed that by going into this trance condition and becoming un- 
conscious they "would be able to meet and talk with their friends. 
children, and others who had gone before. They had full faith in 
this idea and were anxious to ha\o the experience. They were recep- 
tive, in other words. I have been through exactly the same perform- 
ance without any of those effects. 



108 PETOTE. 

jNIr. Tillman. Do you believe in spiritualism? 

Mr. MooNEY. AYeli, I could not go into that argument just now, 
but what I wish to say is this, that the white man, having a different 
faith, a different environment, and a different heredity from the or- 
dinary Indian, does not have the same motive in going into these 
things and is not affected in the same way. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you believe that by the use of drugs you some- 
times have spiritual communication with your loved ones who have 
gone before you ? 

Mr. MooNEY. No, sir ; but I see no reason at all to deny that there 
may be spirits somewhere if there is a future world. 

Mr. Tillmax. You believe there are, 'do you not? 

Mr. MooNEY. I think so. T do not affii'm that there are, because 
we can not prove it, but I believe we have no right to deny that it is 
entirely probable. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you ever experimented with any other drug 
upon yourself? 

Mr. MooNEY. Ko; I have not. I did take what is called laughing- 
gas once, just as ;in experiment, Avlien a dentist was working upon me. 

Mr. Till:man. Did you experience that sort of an effect? 

Mr. MooxEY. Not at all. There is no time during this ceremony 
\Yhen the Indian loses consciousness or loses his own initiative; no 
time at all, and there is no reaction after it, under ordinary conditions. 

I was with a dentist once, and he performed a very painful opera- 
tion without my knowing it, nnd I asked him about it and he told 
me what he had gi\en me-;-I ha^e foi'gotten now Avhat it was — so I 
asked him if he would give me another dose of it, as a matter of pro- 
fessional study. I was interested in these things, and wanted to see 
rf I could note the effect and remember it; so he did, but I do not 
loiow what hap])ened. I do not know how long the effect took to 
pass off', but he told me afterwards he had given it to me again, and 
I did not know what had happened. 

Mr. TiLLJiAX. You never experimented with cocaine, did you? 

Mr. MooNEr. No; none of those things, but I have the statement 
here in print of Dr. Prentiss, who handled the medical experimenta- 
tion, that it was something different in its action from any of these 
known drugs. 

Mr. TiLLjrAN. Is thei'e not a general similarity between the effect 
of this drug and other drugs, also whislcy, each one of which is some- 
what the same in its reaction upon the system? 

Mr. MooNEY. Whisky, I think, is exciting, and I believe the after 
effect is depressing. 

Mr. Tillmax. This is exciting and the after effect is depressing, 
.you say? 

Mr. MooNEY. Whisky. I say, is. from what I have heard, and 
hasheesh is exciting also, producing a wild excitement. I have never 
tasted cocaine or hasheesh or such drugs. 

Mr. Tili,:max. These things just differ in kind, do they not. and 
they all ha^e a similar effect upon the human system? 

Mr. MooxEY. The most that can be said about it, as the Indians 
use it. is that it clarifies the imagination. That is about the best 
wiiy of putting it. 

Mr. TiLLJFAx. It does what ^ 



PEYOTE. 109 

Mr. MooNEY. It clarifies the mentality, and in closing their eyes, 
with certain quantities, they have these color visions. 

I have also the suggestion here from, I think, Dr. Richardson, of 
Denver, Colo., who perhaps has been mentioned here, as to how he 
had used them in experimenting upon color blindness, to see if it 
could be used in that connection. 

Mr. Tillman. Dr. Richardson? 

Mr. MooNEY. Dr. Richardson. His name is theie as being quoted 
in one of those Mohonk reports, but it happens that I have one of his 
own articles. 

Mr. Tillman. Now, I will ask you if Dr. Richardson did not say 
this about peyote : 

So far as its results on the luuuaii ecououi.v are coucenieil, t'roui a i)iLtlio- 
logical standpoint, alcohol is altogether the safest and leiist harmful. The 
alcoholic subject may, b.v a careful system of dietetics, escape physical and 
mental weakness, but the mescal fien<l travels to absolute incompetency. It is 
a vicious thing. 

Mr. MooNEY. I do not know if he wrote that. I have the paragraph 
right here with me, in one of the Mohonk reports. Is that where you 
got it ? 

Mr. TiLLJiAN. I got it from this little pami^hlet Avhich I hold in my 
hand. 

Mr. MooNEY. What is it ^ 

Mr. Tillman. It is issued by the Women's Board of Domestic- 
Missions, Refoi'med Church of America. 

Mr. MooNEY. I do not know about that; but I have here Dr. Rich- 
ardson's article, or one of them, in a medical joui'nal. If you want to 
know what he says o\er his signature, I have it here. I have seen 
that quotation in the Mohonk report, but that is entirely opposite 
from what he has here. 

See Richardson, quoted in appended document. Board of Indian 
Commissioners' hearing, page 41 of manuscript. 

I submit also the statement of Dr. Prentiss, in charge of the medi- 
cal experimentation for the bureau, from the Therapeutic Gazette of 
January 15, 1896 : 

fFrom Drs Prentiss and Mason, therapeutic uses of mescal buttons (AnlwJorhim 
Letvinn), Therapeutic Gazette, Philadelphia, Jan. 15, 1896.] 

\Vlii>ther the sedative action is caused by depi'ession <if the nerve centers, 
peripheral nerves, or their nerve endings, or of the muscular fibers themselves, 
we are at present unable to state, but from concomitant nervous effects we 
ai-e inclined to the belief that it is due to depression of the nervous system and 
not of the nniscular fibers themselves 

Partial anesthesia of the skin was present in three of the cases, appearing 
when the effects of the drug began to wear off. 

The heart action is at fli'St rendered more slovv- and somewhat weaker in 
(luality This is followed by a rise to the normal in quality and rapidity, which 
continues during the period of greatest activity of the di-ug. In the cases where 
the muscular depression was greatest, slight, if any, depression of the heart 

was present. , ,, • -^ 

The respiration was unaffected in all cases except one. In this it seemed to 
partake slightlv of the general muscular depression. 

Upon the stomach the drug produced an effect which varied from a feeling 
of uneasiness and fullness at intervals to nauseaand vomiting. 

Inability to sleep for at least 12 hours after the effects of the drug commenced 
to pass off was a marked effect. 

Loss of sense of time existed in all cases. 



110 PEYOTE. 

No constant effect upou the bowels, skin, temperuture, and the amount of 
secretion of the various glands of the body was found. 

It should be remembered that the extreme effects mentioned — such as the 
production of visions, piirtial anesthesia of tlie skin, loss of sense of time — are 
the effects of an intoxicating dose. They would not ajspear, under ordinary 
circumstances, in the administration of the drug in proper therapeutic doses. 

The use of the mescal buttons as an antispasmodic in the conditions men- 
tioned — in abdominal pain due to colic or griping of the intestines, irritable 
cough due to tickling in the throat, nervous headache, and as a substitute for 
(jpium and chloral in delirium, great nervous irritability and restlessness, and 
in insomnia due to pain — is directly in the line of its physiological action. We 
found in all of our experiments that the first noticeable effect of the drug was a 
marked sedati\e and quieting effect upon the nm.scular system, and we be- 
lieved this effect to be due to n sedative action of the drug upon the nervous 
sj-stem. 

In addition to the uses mentioned we would suggest the advisability of the 
use of mescal buttons as an antispasmodic in other conditions In which this 
class of remedies is indicated, such as hysterical manifestations, spasmodic 
asthma, con^■ulsions. 

The fact that a sense of well-behig, mental, exhilaration, and happy content- 
ment follows the use of the drug, even in small doses, leads us to believe that 
it may prove of value as a cerreliral stimulant in the treatment of depressed 
conditions of the mind, such as melancholia, hyjjochondriasis, and in some cases 
of neurasthenia. It "possesses an advantage over opium in that its use is not 
followed by the unpleasant efl'ecls \vhich often attend the use of that drug. 

Jlescal buttons possess a rennirkable power in the production of visions of 
color; and on account of this property the drug is worthy of trial in the condi- 
tion of color blindness. 

The conditions, then, in which it seems probable that the use of mescal 
buttons will produce beneficial results, are the following: In general "nervous- 
ness," nervous headache, nervous irritable cough, abdominal pain due to colic 
or griping of the intestines, hysterical manifestations, and in other similar 
affections where an antispasmodic is indicated ; as a cerebral stimulant in 
depressed conditions of the mind — hypochondriasis, melancholia, and allied con- 
ditions ; as a substitute for opium and chloral in conditions of great nervous 
irritability or re.stlesisness, active delirium and mania, and in insomnia caused 
by pain ; in color l)lindness. 

The following preparations may be u.sed ; 

Tinctimi nnhalonii (10 per cent). Dose, ] to 2 teaspoonfuls (4-S gm.). 

E.rtrdctiiiii iinlialonii flvidii.iii (100 per cent). Dose, 10 to 1.5 drops (O.fiO-l 
gm. ) . 

PiiliHs anluiloiiii. Dose, 0..50-1 gm. (7 to 15 grains). 

[Anhaloniii. Experiments are now in progress to determine the identity, 
physiological action, and dose of this alkaloid.! 

The tincture should be made according to the process prescribed in the I'uited 
States Pharmacopeia for the preparation of tinctures. It should be of 10 per 
cent strength. The fluid extract should be made 100 per cent strength and in 
accordance \\itli the method prescribed in the United States Pharmacopreia for 
the preparation of fluid extracts. 

The taste of these liquid preparations is somewhat disagreeable, unless it be 
disguised by a suitable vehicle, such as a mixture of fluid extract licorice and 
elixir yerba santa. The powdered drug is best administered in wafer paper, 
cachets, or capsules. 

Mr. TiLLJiAx. This Molionk conference is a very reputable con- 
ference, is it not, of very respectable people ? 

Mr. MooxEY. They have some respectable people; yes; but thev 
have never, with one or two exceptions, had any Indian testimony, 
and about three years ago several representative Indians, educated 
men, one or two of whom are now here, asked by letter if they would 
be allowed to participate, coming at their own expense, to present 
their side of the peyote question, in accord with the wish of their 
home tribes. They were told that there was no place for them on 
the program. (See appended Mohonk correspondence.) 

Mr. Tillman. Now, to sum up, do you tell this committee that you 
favor the continuance of the use of this drug among the Indians? 



PEYOTE. Ill 

Mr. MooNEY. I favor the continuance of this pevote religion iimong 
the Indians as a religions ceremony. 
Mr. Tillman. Why? 

Mr. MooNEY. Because it is their religion, because they understand 
it, because it kills out whisky drinking among them, and because -R'e 
have medical testimony that, as they use it, it is practically impos- 
sible for them to take an overdose, and because it does not result in a 
habit. I have numberless statements to that effect here. They take 
it only as certain persons or religious denominations take the com- 
munion, or go in to a love feast, at certain definite intervals. 

Mr. TiLLMAx. I do not means this as any reflection on you, but I 
just want to get you right before the committee in the record. You 
have no personal interest in this matter, one way or the other? 

Mr. MooNEY. I have no personal interest, and I am not paid by 
the Indians for saying this ; and I am saying this perhaps at my own 
risk. I have never received or asked a dollar from any Indian. I 
speak as I do because I have studied this officially, through manj^ 
years, and because I know personally these Indians, their feelings, 
their mentality, and their ceremony. 

Mr. Hastings. What was the name of the educated Arapahoe that 
^Yrote the article you gave for the record? 

Mr. MooNEY. His name is Jock Bull Bear. 

Mr. Hastin(;s. Was his name signed to the article ? 

Mr. MooNEY. Oh, yes; his name is signed. I have also his letter 
here. I have two or three letters from him, and I have also talked 
with him frequently. I may say, in order to bring this matter to the 
attention of those who might be able to do something in regard to 
legislation, that he has two grown sons, and together they are farm- 
ing a 210-acre farm, they themselves, and not renting it out to white 
men. He owns two automobiles. Some time ago he drew up a peti- 
tion in opposition to this proposed peyote law. I suppose he had a 
white man to help him out with the grammar. And then he signed 
it and made affidavit to it, got into his automobile, and carried it 
around to different tribes and got several hundred signatures to pre- 
sent in protest against such a law. At the same time he wrote out this 
statement for a local paper in order to set forth what he knew of his 
own knowledge about this matter. That is the interest this man took 
in his religion. Men will not do that for whisky. It is a religion 
with them, and it is the universal testimony, as I know myself, that 
peyote forbids whisky. I have the idea, although I do not know, 
that peyote kills the taste for whisky. At any rate, the peyote reli- 
gion forbids the use of whisky, and the Indians stick to it, those 
tribes that have taken up peyote being the temperate tribes. 

Mr. Snydek. You said that in this particular tribe that you have 
full knowledge of that there are about 15,000? 

Mr. Mooney. No ; I said that in the tribes that are at present using 
it there are probably 15,000 Indians, and I should judge that four- 
fifths of those use it. 

Ml'. Snyder. How long have you been familiar personally with 
these people that use this peyote? 

Mr. MooNBY. About 28 years. 

Mr. Snyder. Now, what do you say as to the physical capacity of 
these people ? Has it deteriorated during that period or do you think 
it has become stronger, better, and more virile? 



112 PEYOTE. 

Ml-. MooNEY. I will not say it has become stronger or better, but 
it has certainly not deteriorated. You must remember that this 
thing, with the Southwestern tribes, is at least 80 or 100 years old. 
In Texas we laiow of it as far back as 17G0, and in Mexico we know 
of it as far back as 1540. 

Mr. Snyder. I am only asking for what vou know about it your- 
self. " ■ ■ " 

Mr. MooNEY. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. On your testimony you base the statement that you 
believe it would be better to continue the use of this peyote with the 
Indians that you have known about? 

Mr. MooNBY. I believe it would be better to let those Indians alone 
in their religion, including this peyote drug, until they, by gradual 
environment and assimilation 

Mr. Snyder. That is not what I asked you. I asked you if you 
believe it would be better for the Indians to continue its use. 

Mr. MooNBY. I believe it would be better. 

Mr. Snyder. From a physical and virile standpoint ? 

Mr. MooNBY. I do. While they do this they will not drink whisky. 

Mr. Tillman. Do the Indians in the United States grow this stuff 
or do they import it ? 

Mr. MooNEY. It is a wild plant entirely, so far as I know, a natural 
wild groAvth. 

Mr. Tillman. Does it grow in America? 

Mr. MooNEY. Oh, yes; there is a misunderstanding that it is im- 
ported from Mexico, but most that is used here grows on this side of 
the line, in Texas. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you know anything about the cost of this peyote 
bean ; for instance, what it costs in Mexico, and what it sells for 
among the Indian tribes ? 

Mr. MooNEY. I know what is used to sell for among our tribes in 
Oklahoma. The average price was about one-half of a cent per 
button. One man might use from 8 to 20 in a night, or about the 
price of a cheap cigar, once in two weeks or so. 

Mr. Tillman. Like this Avhich you see exhibited here? 

Mr. MooNEY. That would be about 1 cent's worth; yes. Here are 
two of them. 

Mr. Tillsian. About what would that cost where it is grown, sa>' 
along in Mexico or along in the neighborhood of the Rio Grande, in 
the United States ? 

Mr. MooNBY. I do not know, but I believe in the old times the 
traders used to buy them for about $3 a thousand. I bought 50 
pounds for the first experimentation, but I do not remember what 
they cost me. I bought them right there where they are produced. 
The men who handle it go out and gather it upon the hills, then they 
dry it, turning it a number of times in the sun, and then it is fit for 
this use. Since the law against its sale I understand the Indians 
go down by rail, taking their families with them, and gather and dry 
it themselves by means of an improved process. 

Mr. Hastings. Do they dry it in the same way that fruit is dried? 

Mr. MooNEY. About in the same Avay. 

Mr. Hayden. Where is the principal source of supply? 

Mr. MooNEY. The principal source of supply for our tribes has 
been in southeastern Texas and also in the southeast corner of New 



PEYOTE. 113 

Mexico, but it grows also on the main plateau in northern Mexico, 
clear down along the east side of the mountains. 

Mr. Tillman. Is there some Indian here who knows about this 
drug and who wants to speak in favor of peyote? If so, let him 
make his statement. 

STATEMENT OF MR. FRANCIS LA FLESCHE, A MEMBER OF THE 
OMAHA TRIBE OF INDIANS. 

Mr._ Tillman. You may begin and make your statement to the 
committee. You favor peyote, I believe, and are against this bill ? 

Mr. La Flesche. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. We will hear you, then. 

Mr. La Flesche. It may be a very strange thing for me to say, but 
I can not talk about peyote without a feeling of gratitude, and I will 
tell you why. 

In 1884 the allotment to the Omahas of their lands in severalty was 
completed, anda few years after the completion of that allotment 
some of the white neighbors who had dealings with the Indians said 
to them: "You people are citizens of the United States, therefore 
you can drink all the whislcy you want. Nobody can stop you. You 
are citizens." Then it would not be an exaggeration to say that prac- 
tically the whole of the tribe took to drink. To justify their drink- 
ing they would say, " The white people drink, and why should not 
we ? " Matters began to grow from bad to worse, and it was simply 
a continuous drunken orgy for several years. After a while white 
men became afraid to travel the roads on the reservation in the night, 
and the Indians themselves were afraid to travel on the roads for fear 
of meeting drunken men. Murders and rape were committed and 
lawlessness had sway, and the Indians needed help in all this trouble. 
The agent who had charge of these Indians was aware of the condi- 
tion, the Indian Office was aware of the condition, and I think the 
Indian Rights Association and the missionaries were aware of this 
desperate situation. What did they do? Nothing. They did abso- 
lutely nothing. Poor little children became afraid of their mothers 
because they drank. They became afraid of their fathers, and when 
they heard them coming home from town they ran into the ravines, 
into the bushes, so as to avoid getting hurt. 

But suddenly there came a lull in all this drunkenness and lawless- 
ness. I had a sister who was a physician, and her practice was mostly 
among the Indians, and she wrote me regularly about the condition 
of the Omaha people. She was interested and one day I got a letter 
from her in which she said : 

A strange tliinfr has happeced among- the Omahas. They have quit drinking, 
and they have talten to a new relision, and menihers of that new religion say 
that they will not drinl*: ; and the extraordinary part of the thing is that these , 
people pray, and they pray intelligently, they pray tj God, they pray to Jesus, \ 
and in their prayers they pray for the little ones, and they ask God to bring 
them up to live sober lives ; they ask help from God. 

She regarded that as something very strange, because the Indians, 
although they had missionaries for many years, could not understand 
the white man's religion ; it was too intricate a thing for them, and 
they could not understand it. But the teaching of this new religion 

47003—18 8 



114 PEYOTE. 

was something that they could understand. In connection with this 
new religion they used a plant called peyote as a sort of sacrament. 
This peyote, they said, helped them not only to stop drinking, but 
it also helped them to think intelligently of God and of their rela- 
tions to Him. At the meetings of this new religion is taught the 
avoidance of stealing, lying, drunkenness, adultery, assaults, the 
making of false and evil reports against neighbors. People are 
taught to be kind and loving to one another and particularly to the 
little ones. 

The persons who are opposed to the use of the peyote by the In- 
dians in their religion say that it makes them immoral. That has 
not been my observation. The Indians who have taken the new re- 
ligion strive to live upright, moral lives, and I think their morality 
can be favorably compared with that of any community of a like 
number in this country. To be sure, some of them go astray from 
the path of virtue, as some white people do. We read once in a while 
of some white pastor running away with a member of his congrega- 
tion, and why should the white people expect the Indians to be per- 
fect when they themselves are not always able to live up to their 
standards of morality ? They can try, and that is all that the Indian 
can do. The Indian knows what morality is as well as the white man 
does, and he tries to live a moral life. Long before he ever came into 
contact with the white man he knew morality. 

This is a matter of religion that the Indian Office and the mission- 
aries are attacking. The Omaha members of this new religion, and 
of whom I now speak, strive to refrain from the use of whisky. Some 
of them — a very few, indeed — fail to live up to the teachings against 
drunkenness and use both peyote and whisky, but as a rule the mem- 
bers refrain from the use of whisky, lemon extracts, and wines. I 
know this, because I have frequently visited them in their homes. 

Some persons who are opposed to the peyote say that the Indian 
will pray only when he is under the influence of the peyote. This is 
not true of my Omaha friends. I was at my brother's house one day, 
and the sun was just setting on a summer's day, and his wife said, 
'■ We will set the table outside; the house is warm," So the table was 
set outside and we gathered around it. My brother is not a peyote 
man, but as a prominent member of the new religion happened to be 
present as guest, my brother set before this man a glass of water 
and said to him, " Will you ask the blessing for us ? " The man had 
not taken any peyote, but without any hesitation he put his hand over 
the water and asked God to bless it. The members of this new religion 
use the water as a symbol of purity. When the man had asked the 
blessing, the water was passed around, and each person present took 
a sip of it. The man said, " Oh, God, bless this water and let it cleanse 
our spirits, let it cleanse our minds so that Ave can understand You." 
That was the burden of his prayer. And he also asked that his people 
might be kept from drunkenness, that their souls might be kept pure. 
That is what he praj^ed for. He prayed intelligently. 

The new religion of which the peyote is a part has been the means 
of delivering the Omahas from a desperate situation of drunkenness, 
and so I, for one, will say, " Let the peyote stay among the Indians." 
It is a part of their religion ; it is something that they depend upon 
for their morality; it is an aid to them. They do not worship it, but 
they worship God. 



PEYOTE. 115 

I have visited the Osage people, a very rich and interesting people, 
and I have sat with them at their meetings. They sat in a circle in a 
circular house. I will show you a photograph of one of their houses. 
[Shows photograph.] There is one of their houses. You will notice 
a little cross on top of it. The women came in and the men sat with 
them. The men sat with their wives, and the meeting was opened 
with prayer. I sat about the middle with a man. The peyote was 
ground nearly to the fineness of flour and mixed with water and 
kneaded into dough. This dough was distributed among the mem- 
bers, and each member arranged his portion in little pellets about 
the size of a hazelnut, which he swallowed one at a time. A sort of 
tea was also made of the peyote, which was given to those who pre- 
ferred it. I ■ was offered some, but I declined to take any of it, 
because I wished to keep sober, so that I could see what the people 
were doing. I was studying them. And so I passed the peyote on 
to the next man, who took it. And then the singing began. The 
singers sang about Jesus, and they had a little drum which they beat, 
and they kept passing that around, and they built a fire in the center 
of the room, which they kept burning all ithe time — they had a fire 
tender there, who kept the fire burning briskly. The people gazed 
fixedly at the fire all the time. To see whether the man who sat 
with me was sober and in his right mind — he had taken quite a 
quantity of the liquid — I said to him, " Why do you all keep your 
eyes fixed upon the fire? " And he said, "We want to see the face 
of Jesus. Sometimes we do; not always. And also we want to see 
the faces of our dead relatives, relatives who have gone, whom we 
think a great deal of. We love them, and we want to see them." 
But that did not impress. me very much, because when I was a 
youngster a lot of us boys would get together and build a fire, andi 
then sitting around we would gaze at the coals, and then we would 
say that we see horses; we see men; we see faces; we see this, that, 
or the other thing. That was a game we have often played, and I 
thought to myself, " This fire-gazing must be something like that," 
and so that did not impress me very much. 

From all that I have observed I do not think that the peyote al- 
ways takes effect, because as we sat there the singing ceased just about 
midnight, and the man who was conducting the ceremony began at 
the right and asked of each member, " What did you see ? " The man 
said, " I saw nothing." The next one said, " No ; I saw nothing," and 
the question went around to all of them and none of them had seen 
any visions. 

Then they began again, and again there came a stop toward morn- 
ing. I think it must have been about 6 o'clock, when that was re- 
peated. Some more of the peyote had been taken, and from the 
quantity that they had taken I thought they might get drunk and 
get to stabbing each other, but no, they remained perfectly quiet and 
went on with their singing, and toward morning the man who was 
presiding asked the same question of each one, " Did you see any- 
thing? " "No"; and all around nobody had seen any visions or 

I can also say of my Osage Indian friends who had taken the new 
religion that their morals can compare favorably with those of the 
white people. This is about all I have to say for the peyote. I think 



116 PEYOTE. 

the Indians should be permitted to keep the peyote for religious and 
ceremonial purposes. As far as I can see it does not hurt them. 
Some say it is injurious to their health, but most of the Omahas, 
Osages, Winnebagoes, and Poncas, who have been using the peyote 
for many years in their religious ceremonies, are strong and healthy 
looking men and women. 

Somebody has very unkindly said that these peyote people are 
lazy and will not work. I do not think this to be true. About two 
years ago I was on the Omaha Reservation. A fair was being held 
there under the supervision of the representative of the Indian Office. 
The Omaha people were bringing their cattle, their hogs, their turkeys, 
chickens, and other farni products for exhibition. The people camped 
in a wide circle as they displayed their products, and many of those 
who drew prizes were peyote people. Two men whom I know to be 
good farmers took part in. the fair. One of them attended Carlisle 
School when Gen. Pratt was at the head of that institution. These 
men were Bertram Mitchell and Amos Mitchell, both peyote men. 
Amos is a successful farmer and cultivates a large farm. He raises 
plenty of corn, and I think that before the winter is over and the 
cars come up to the little town where he markets his grain — there 
seems to be a dearth of freight cars at present — Amos will be hauling 
his corn — 3,700 bushels — there and selling it at from $1.15 to $1.50 a 
bushel. Mr. Mitchell owns an automobile, which he runs himself. 
He and his family get much pleasure out of their machine. The 
peyote has not hurt the Osages, Omahas, Winnebagoes, or the Poncos, 
and I know that it has kept many of them from the mischievous 
habit of drink. 

_ Mr. Tillman. I am interested in that meeting you mention. What 
time did the meeting close ? 

Mr. La Flesche. Close? 

Mr. Tillman. Yes. 

Mr. La Flesche. The meeting does not quite close at 

Mr. Tillman. The one you speak about ; the one in which you par- 
ticipated? 

Mr. La Flesche. About 7 in the' morning. 

Mr. Tillman. It lasted all night, then? 

Mr. La Flesche. It lasted all night. 

Mr. Tillman. Did they remain there seated in one place? 

Mr. La Flesche. They remained seated in one place all night. I 
was the only one that was restless. 

Mr. Tillman. You got very tired, did you not? 

Mr. La Flesche. I think I did. 

Mr. Tillman. You got no peyote? 

Mr. La Flesche. I did not get any peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. You took no peyote and you got very tired? 

Mr. La Flesche. I did not have any peyote, and I did get tired. 

Mr. Tillman. I thought you said you squirmed around ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I did get tired. That is what I thought I said, 
and I squirmed around a good deal. These people sat still. Why? 
Not because the peyote helped them to keep still, but they had the idea 
that if they moved they could not see the things in the fire. 

Mr. Tillman. I know ; but it has some effect on them, does it not ? 

Mr. La Flesche. Perhaps it does. 



PEYOTE. 117 

Mr. Tillman. Don't you know it does? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do not Imow that it does, because I have not 
tasted peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. You never tasted it at all ? 

Mr. La Flesche. But whether it does or not, whether it does or 
not 

Mr. Tillman. Answer the question ; have you ever used peyote ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I have never used the peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. Then you do not know what effect it has, do you ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do not know what effect it has, but this I do 
know — it kills the appetite for whisky in most cases. 

Mr. Tillman. You are sure of that ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I am sure of that. 

Mr. Tillman. Well, what effect do they tell you it has on them ? 

Mr. La Flesche. They tell me that sometimes they can see things, 
see faces, in the fire. 

Mr. Tillman. Eose-colored things, beautiful things, attractive 
things ? 

Mr. La Flesche. They do not say anything about colors. I asked 
them if they saw colors. I was investigating the thing, and I asked 
them questions, pointed questions. 

Mr. Tillman. Now, they see the Savior's face in these colors, do 
they not, sometimes ? 

Mr. La Flesche. Yes. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you believe that they actually do, or is that an 
hallucination ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I could not say, because I used to believe that I 
saw figures in the fire myself. 

Mr. Tillman. That is just imagination, is it not? 

Mr. La Flesche. I expect it was mostly imagination. 

Mr. Tillman. What position do you hold in the tribe ? Are you 
one of the officials of the tribe ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I am an ethnologist. I hold a position in the 
Bureau of Ethnology, and I have been making a special study of the 
Osage people, their history, their traditions, their social customs, all 
of those things I am covering. 

Mr. Tillman. These Osages live close to the Omahas, do they not? 

Mr. La Flesche. They live about — not very close. The Osages are 
in northeastern Oklahoma and the Omahas are up in northeastern 
Nebraska. Both tribes, as also the Pbnca, Kaw, and Quapaw, speak 
dialects of the same language, which is my own native language. 

Mr. Tillman. The Osages are at Pawhuska, are they not? 

Mr. La Flesche. They live at Pawhuska. 

Mr. Tillman. Do they use peyote ? ^ '^' 

Mr. La Flesche. I think that more than half of them do. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you understand that it is a habit that grows on 
those that use it? 

Mr. La Flesche. That is an interesting thing. 

Mr. Tillman. Well, does it or not? 

Mr. La Flesche. The whisky 

Mr. Tillman. I am asking about peyote. Let us not get off on 
whisky now. We all know about whisky. Peyote is something that 
we do not know much about. 



118 PEYOTE. 

Mr. La Flesche. Very well. The Omahas hold their meetings 
once in three weeks, sometimes in a month. If the peyote was a habit- 
forming drug they would want it every day. 

Mr. Tillman. As a matter of fact, do not many of them use it 
every day? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do not think they do. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you mean to say they never use it privately and 
only use it when they have these religious ceremonies, say every two 
or three weeks or a month, as the case may be ? 

Mr. La Flesche. There may be individuals here and there who use 
it privately. 

Mr. Hastings. Have you investigated that? 

Mr. La Flesche. I have not investigated that. 

Mr. Hastings. Did you investigate it among the Osages? Do you 
know whether or not they use it privately ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do not know whether they do or not. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you know whether any Indian tribe uses it pri- 
vately or not? 

Mr. La Flesche. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Well, have you investigated to find out ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I have inquired among both the Osages and 
Omahas, and they tell me that they do not use it privately, but only 
for ceremonial purposes. 

Mr. Hastings. So far as you know they do not? 

Mr. La Flesche. They do not. 

Mr. Hastings. How long have these Osages been using it? 

Mr. La Flesche. They have been using it for something like 18 
years. 

Mr. Hastings. And you say those who use peyote do not use whisky, 
or very few of them ? 

Mr. La Flesche. As a rule, they do not use' whisky. There are 
a very few of them who do use whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. It is an exception, then, if they use whisky and 
peyote both? 

Mr. La Flesche. It is the exception among the Omahas and the 
Osage. 

Mr. Hastings. Well, do many of the Omahas now use whisky 
at all? 

Mr. La Flesche. Quite a number of them do. 

Mr. Hastings. But they do not use peyote, those who use whisky? 

Mr. La Flesche. No; not as they use whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. How many are there in the Omaha Tribe? 

Mr. La Flesche. There are something like 1,400, 1 think. I could 
not give the exact figures, but I think that is approximately the 
number. 

Mr. Hastings. How far away is there any whisky from the reser- 
vation ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I beg pardon? 

Mr. Hastings. How far away is the nearest place where whisky 
is sold? 

Mr. La Flesche. The whisky is right there ; whisky comes there. 
Bootleggers bring it there in spite of the 

Mr. Hastings. That is not my question. How far would they have 
to bring it ? Where could the bootleggers buy it ? 



PEYOTE. 119 

Mr. La Flesche. I think the nearest place is about 18 miles. 

Mr. Hastings. Could they have bought it nearer than that? 

Mr. La Flesche. No ; I think not. 

Mr. Tillman. Now, from your statement, the use of peyote sup- 
plants the use of whisky. 

Mr. La Flesche. It does in most cases. 

Mr. Tillman. Then it must be a very attractive drug, must it not, 
to have displaced the Indian's appetite for whisky ? 

Mr. La Flesche. Perhaps. 

Mr. Tillman. I want to ask you if peyote is kept by any tribal 
custodian, or is it in the possession of individuals ? 

Mr. La Flesche. It is in the possession of individuals. 

Mr. Tillman. Then they might use it between services, and no- 
body know anything about it, might they not ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I hardly think so. 

Mr. Tillman. Why not? 

Mr. La Flesche. Because the man who wishes to give the cere- 
mony wishes to have enough to go all around. 

Mr. Tillman. If it is such an attractive and strong drug as to 
displace whisky entirely, and the individuals should have it, do you 
not think there is a good deal of danger of that individual using it 
privately ? 

Mr. La Flesche. I think not. I do not think they would use it on 
the sly. 

Mr. Tillman. That is all. 

Mr. Snyder. What would you say as to the continuation of this 
religion among the Indians if the peyote was taken away from them ? 
Would they continue these religious services, or not, in your judg- 
■ ment. 

Mr. La Flesche. Well, I do not know anything about that. 

Mr. Sntder. You can not say as to what you think would take 
place, from a religious standpoint, if this peyote was prohibited? 

Mr. La Flesche. No ; I could not say. I should think you might 
be able to find that out from among the church people here. Ask 
them if their religion could continue without the wine. 

Mr. Tillman. At whose instance do you appear before this sub- 
committee ? 

Mr. La Flesche. At my own instance. 

Mr. Tillman. Did anybody ask you to do so ? 

Mr. La Flesche. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you hear Mi-. Mooney's statement? 

Mr. La Flesche. Yes; I heard Mr. Mooney's statement. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you confer with him about your appearance 
before this subcommittee? 

Mr. La Flesche. Mr. Mooney and I conferred about this as a 
matter of study. We exchanged notes. He is interested in eth- 
nology, and so am I. , ■ , 

Mr. Tillman. You did confer together about this matter, then, 
before you appeared here, did you not? , . -r i 

Mr. La Flesche. Oh, we have been conferring about that tor I do 
not know how many years. 
: Mr. Tillman. Did he ask you to appear before this subcommittee i 

Mr! La Flesche. He told me there was to be a meeting here, and 
i wanted to come myself. 



120 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you confer with Lone Wolf and his wife while 
they were here? 

Mr. La Flesche. I asked them questions about it. 

Mr. Tillman. Did they ask you to appear before this subcom- 
mittee? 

Mr. La Flesche. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Did they know ypu were coming to appear before it? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do not think they did. 

Mr. Tillman. Well, has anybody requested you to appear here, 
eit^T^r for fi consideration or without one, at any time? 

Mv. La Flesciie. I think not. 

Mr, Tillman. Well, do you not know ? i 

Mr. La Ii'lesche. Mo; nobody has asked me to come here. 

Mr. Tillman. You came here voluntarily, then? 

Mr. La Flesche. I came here voluntarily, because I am interested 
in this matter, for it affects my own people, for whom I have a great 
affection. 

Mr. Sntdee. Are you in the employ of the Government? 

Mr. La Flesche. I am in the employ of the Government. 

(Whereupon, at 12.20 o'clock p. m., the committee adjourned to 
meet to-morrow, Friday, February 22, 1918, at 9.30 o'clock a. m.) 



Subcommittee of Committee on Indian Affairs, 

House or Eepresentatives, 

Friday, February 22, 1918. 
The subcommittee met at 9.30 o'clock a. m., Hon. John N. Tillman 
(chairman) presiding. 

Mr. Tillman. I have here a telegram from the governor of 
Nevada, which I will hand to the stenographer for insertion in the 
record. 

(The telegram referred to is as follows:) 

Oakson City, Nev., Pebrnary 20, 1918. 
House Committee on Indian Affairs, 

Washington, D. C: 
Understanding that bill prohibiting interstate shipments of the drug peyote 
has been Introduced and is to come before your committee, I take the liberty 
of most respectfully urging you to report this bill favorably. Nevada has 
passed a law prohibiting the sale of this drug and we need the Interstate pro- 
hibition act to protect our Indians. We consider this a matter of very great 
importance. 

Emmet D. Botle, Governor of Nevada. 

STATEMENT OF CHESTER ARTHUR, OF POPLAR CREEK, MONT., 
THROUGH MRS. GERTRUDE BONNIN, INTERPRETER. 

Mr. Tillman. State your name, occupation, and whom you repre- 
sent. 

Mr. Arthur. My name is Chester Arthur. 

Mr. Tillman. To what tribe do you belong? 

Mr. Arthur. To the Assinniboine Tribe. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you for or against peyote ? 

Mr. Arthur. I am against peyote. I have seen people use it, and 
I have seen the evil effects of it, and I do not want it spread among 
my people. 



PEYOTE. 121 

Mr. Tillman. Go on in your own way and tell what you know 
about its effects ; what have been its effects upon these people ; state 
whether, or not, you believe the bill should be passed, and whether, 
or not, peyote should bo entirely prohibited among the Indians. 
Cover the subject fully. 

Mr. Arthur. There is one evil above all other evils that I wish 
to mention: When they eat six or eight buttons, then they begin to 
be under the influence of it and become intoxicated. I talked with 
one who was under the influence of it, and he told me he saw and 
recognized his people, or his own relatives ; that they were dead, but 
that they came to him and appeared to him. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you believe that to be true? 

Mr. Artpiur. I do not believe it. They are under its influence 
when they believe anything like that. That looks to me like a super- 
stition, and therefore I fear it. Other Indians heard this man say 
that he had beheld those relatives who had been dead a long time, and 
the other Indians would say, " I want to see my own relatives, too," 
and that gets them to using the drug. That is the evil of it. Men 
and women who use this peyote, when under the influence of it, 
commit all manner of immoral acts. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you mean by that sexual excesses? 

Mr. Arthttb. Yes, sir. This peyote does not grow where we live, 
but it is sent through the United States mails. It is sent to our people 
in all manner of boxes — even in little match boxes. We see the evil 
of it, and we oppose it. In this day and time, when the Govern- 
ment is making every effort to civilize and educate the Indians, the 
effect of this drug is undermining the work of civilizing them and 
educating them, and is bringing them back to their old superstitious 
beliefs. Whisky plays havoc among our people, and peyote is coming 
in its footsteps, and we pray for legislation that will prohibit .its 
use as well as the use of liquor. 

Mr. Tillman. Eight in that connection, a member of the Omaha 
Tribe testified yesterday that one of the beneficial effects of this drug 
was that it displaced whisky entirely. Now, I want to ask you 
whether or not that is true, or whether it decreases or increases the 
desire for whisky ? 

Mr. Arthur. While I have not seen them with my own eyes, I 
hear that they use both whisky and peyote. I know that peyote is 
undermining all the uplift work, and in my own mind it is on a par 
with whisky. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you anything further to say? 

Mr. Arthur. I am an Indian, and I am a full-blooded Indian. I 
appreciate this opportunity that you have given me to speak. I feel 
it an honor to be allowed to speak in behalf of my people. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you a member of any church ? 

Mr. Arthur. I have joined and am a member of the Presbyterian 
Church. My work has been mainly among the young men. I am 
also a member of the board of directors of the Young Men's Christian 
Association. 

Mr. Tillman. Are the members of your church and of the Young 
Men's Christian Association against the use of this drug, or are they 

in favor of it? „ , ,r t»t , 

Mr. Arthur. The work of the church and of the Young Men's 
Christian Association is to bring up this young generation to a pure 



122 PEYOTE. 

life, and therefore they must oppose iinything that undermines their 
work; therefore they oppose peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. Some of these Indians claim that the use of peyote 
is sacramental, or that it is used as a sort of sacrament. They claim 
that it is an important element in their worship. I believe in allow- 
ing the fullest amount of religious freedom, and I want to ask you 
whether they believe that in good faith and want to keep it for use 
in their religious sacraments or ceremonies or as part of their re- 
ligious observance? Is it used by them in good faith as a part of 
their religious observance, or is it used by them merely as a drug for 
the happy effect it may have upon them? Is the claim that they use 
it in their religious sacraments and ceremonies made in good faith, 
or is that merely a subterfuge? 

Mr. Arthur. I understand that they claim that they eat it in 
order that they may see their departed ones and to bring them back. 
In our present state of enlightenment, it is very strange that the 
Bible on which Christianity is based says nothing whatever about 
peyote. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. He says that he wants to be sure that I have de- 
scribed the thing that he was talking about, and I have shown him 
a sample of peyote, and he says that is it. 

Mr. Tillman. Just one more question from me: You stated that 
while under the influence of this drug men and women are guilty of 
sexual excesses, or improper sexual relations, and I want to know 
whether or not you give that statement of your own personal knowl- 
edge or observation, or whether you give it upon some rumor? I 
want to develop that and to get the facts so that the testimony will 
be of value to the committee. 

Mr. Arthur. I do not wish to state to you anything that was 
rumor or hearsay, but only those things that I know. My wife 
could have given you valuable testimony, but unfortunately she is 
sick to-day, and could not come. Now, I want to go on and tell 
you what I know. They had been eating this peyote and a young 
man came to me and invited me to go to this place with him. He 
was a man in the church also. He said, "Let us go there and pray 
for them." We went there and they had a circular place where 
they were sitting around, men and women together. They were sing- 
ing songs, and they were passing peyote around. Two young men 
who were busy had their faces painted blue, and they had a bunch of 
their hair tied up with a red cloth or flannel. There was one who 
was the chief of them all sitting there, and he had this peyote. 

I do not know how many peyote buttons they had eaten before I 
came there, but as I came in they were passing it around again. 
Then as I came in two young men walked out. They disappeared, 
and they did not reenter the tent. My friend and I tried to pray 
for them then and there, and we talked 'about this peyote. Then they 
began to leave ; some of them left before the women did, and some of 
them carried the women out. The women were under the influence of 
peyote. One man who became turned against peyote came to listen 
to what we tried to say, and they confessed it all to me, and told me 
of their sexual excesses at those times when they took those women 
out. We have never been able to attend a peyote meeting at that 
same place any more, because they call their meetings at different 
places. Some other Indians may tell you good things about this, 



PEYOTE. 123 

but, as for me and my people, we have seen the evils of it ; we have 
seen it make our people act like dogs, and we hate it and we are 
opposed to it. That is all I have to say. 

Mr. Tillman. How many members are there of your tribe? 

Mr. Arthur. There are about 2,000 at Fort Peck Eeservation. 

Mr. Hastings. Where is the tribe located? 

Mr. Arthur. In the State of Montana ; at Poplar Creek, Mont. 
We are between two rivers. Poplar Creek and the Missouri Eiver. 
My people are in an area covering perhaps 12 miles between the two 
rivers. They get this drug through the mails. 

Mr. Hastings. Where did you attend school? 

Mr. Arthur. I attended the Government school at Poplar Creek 
about three years. 

Mr. Hastings. How long ago was that ? 

Mr. Arthur. I went to school in 1884. 

Mr. Hastings. How old are you ? 

Mr. Arthur. About 48. 

Mr. Hastings. Are you here as a delegate representing your tribe 
or in some official capacity ? 

Mr. Arthur. I come as a delgate. 

Mr. Hastings. What is your home address ? 

Mr. Arthur. Poplar Creek, Mont. This word in parting : This 
evil now is before us like a little spark of fire, and we want it 
quenched before it spreads into a great flame. 

Mr. Tillman. Is there anybody else who wants to be heard except 
the lady who has been interpreting for us ? Do any of you Indians 
want to be heard for or against this bill ? If not, we will hear from 
Mrs. Bonnin. 

STATEMENT OF MES. GBaSEirDE BONNIN. 



Mr. Tillman. State your name, why you appear here, and all about 
yourself before you begin your statement. Also state the tribe 
of which you are a member. 

Mrs. Bonnin. I am a member of the Sioux Tribe. I am secretary 
of the Society of Americans Indians. This society is nonpartisan 
and nonsectarian. I am not in any way connected with the Gov- 
ernment work; that is, the Indian service work. The motto of our 
society is, " For the honor of the race and the good of the country." 

I have lived among the TJtes of Utah for 14 years and came to this 
cky last spring. I am not receiving pay for this work. In this 
period of 14 years in one locality I am proud of one thing, and 
that is that I won the confidence of the IJtes, and I am proud to 
say that in the Uintah Basin my signature to a statement or a check 
was honored by the banks and by the business men, who have known 
me for 14 years. That is one thing of which I am proud, because 
in 14 years people have an opportunity to find you out thoroughly, 
whether you speak the truth or not. 

Yesterday one of the gentlemen, speaking in favor of peyote, re- 
ferred to an article published by the Sunday Times about peyote, 
and he referred to that part which said : 

In order to secure its uninterrupted use it has been claimed that it is used 
as a sort of sacrament in the Indian religious ceremonies, but we know that 
in these fetes, which last all night, its use leads to the wildest intoxication and 
all kinds of orgies, in which men, women, and even the children take part, to 
the degradation of their minds. 



124 PEYOTB. 

That gentleman yesterday contradicted that statement and said 
he Imew it was not true. I happen to be acquainted with the Indian 
who gave this information to the Times, and, Mr. Chairman, if you 
will observe the speaker you will see a striking resemblance to that 
Indian. However, I do feel that the speaker yesterday, in contra- 
dicting that statement, had no intention whatever of casting any re- 
flection upon the veracity of the Indian who gave that information, 
because the speaker of yesterday has never met the Indian who gave 
that information, and therefore had no ground to stand on in forming 
that attitude of mind — that the person who gave that information 
did not Imow the truth. So I think it was not meant or intended to 
cast a reflection upon the veracity of the one who gave the informa- 
tion. However, as I listened to his speech I was led to believe that 
ethnologists who go out to visit these meetings can not stay there 
day after day, month after month, year after year, and when they 
make their visits those little meetings are prearranged. I have been 
a school-teacher too long not to know that when I have a class recite 
before a visitor that immediately the air is charged with a certain 
restraint. We know that is human nature, and in these Indian meet- 
ings that are visited, when the Indians know that an ethnologist in- 
tends to write it down, they naturally can not help feeling a sort of 
resti'aint, and I dare say that they do not do the things at those times 
that they are in the habit of doing. 

I went out among the Utes to help the Indians, and while I at- 
tended college, and I love what civilization gives to man, the white 
man and Indian alike, I love my people. I did not expect that they 
would come to my house and ask me for what I had that I wanted 
to give them ; I knew I must visit them in their tents and take it to 
them ; that I must find thenrj^ere they are. Therefore, during all 
of those 14 years I visited fllS^ptes in their homes until I knew them 
all ; I seemed to be related to them and seemed to be one of them. 

When peyote was first introduced among them, during the last two 
years, I saw my friends victimized, and that hurt my heart. I did 
not know the technical term of peyote; I never say the thing grow, 
but common horse sense told me that the indiscriminate use of a pow- 
erful drug was dead wrong. 

In speaking in behalf of the Indian race I must lay aside my own 
personal sense of modesty in order to tell you the truth. I had hoped 
I should not be obliged to read a statement here showing the immoral 
practices carried on there. This is only one statement; there are 
many of them that can be secured if it is' necessary. I have here the 
thumb-marked statement of Sam Atchee, a Ute Indian, and signed 
by two witnesses. The statement is as follows : 

. Dragon, Utah, January 2, 19n. 
Mrs. Gebtkude Bonnin. 

Fort Duchesne, Utah 
Madam : Herewith a signed statement by Sam Atcliee, as requested, with two 
witnesses. Sam Atfhee repeats the same statement you have written on oppo- 
site side and signs below his marl^ as to the correct correspondence and state- 
ment. 

Tours, respectfully, 

T. M. McKbe. 
.Tanuary 2, 1917. Sam Atchke [his thumb mark]. 
Witnesses : 

T. M. McKee, Dragon, Utah. 

Thomas M. Fuller, Dragon, Utah. 



PEYOTE. 125 

My friends had come to me and told me about this thing, and it 
was a very delicate matter with me. I hated to go to Sam Atchee 
and talk to him about it, being a woman, and yet I knew it must be 
done. So I wrote to a woman and asked her about it. I said : 

My Deae JIrs. McKee : I am writing to ask you to help me secure some data 
against peyote. I have it from a reliable source that Sara Atchee made a state- 
ment to the effect that he was opposed to peyote for its demoralizing effect upon 
the users. 

He told how he tried it at the first introduction of it to the TJtes, and how 
during a peyote meeting after the drug was tailing effect he stepped out of 
doors for a few minutes and upon return came upon a scene of immoral 
practice. 

Cactus Pete had taken one of the Ute women outside. Sam Atchee caught 
them in the act. 

Sam evidently did not eat as much as the others, or it might be said he was 
under the Influence of peyote and not responsible enough to give evidence. 
This is an undesirable subject, and yet it will be one of the strongest points 
against peyote if such a statement is signed by Atchee before two witnesses. 

How can this be accomplished? Your husband will help you. 

That was the appeal I made to that woman. 

It will help secure legal protection for the Indian if Atchee will not be afraid 
to make this statement. 

Please use your own judgment in the write-up. I know you will do what you 
can. 

Very sincerely, 

Gertrude Bonnin, Secretary. 

Those people took my letter and explained it to that Indian, and 
here is his thumb-marked statement before two witnesses, saying 
that that was true and that he was an eye witness to that. 

There are at least 30 deaths that can be attributed to the use of 
peyote among the Utes. Of these Weecheget's death in the spring 
of 1916 is most horrible. He had taken an overdose. He became 
wild ; tearing his clothing off he jumped into a deep mud hole. There 
before a crowd of onlookers of whites and Indians he dove into the 
soft mud; then he jumped up to his feet and wildly grabbed hands- 
full of the mud and smote himself with it. Before anyone could 
help him he died in a few minutes, befofe this crowd of eye witnesses. 
This happened in Dragon, Utah, in the spring of 1916. 

Peyote does excite the baser passions as Sam Atchee's statement 
shows, and many other Indians have given this kind of information 
before and since this statement by Sara Atchee. 

Money is gotten under false pretenses. In the j^ear 1916 Peter 
Phelps, the peyote agent, whom the Utes have named Cactus Pete, 
took up $500 from the peyote users, telling them that he would send 
them a license to sell peyote. In 1917, a year afterwards, the license 
was not forthcoming. Weechits, a tJte, who was one from whom 
$30 had been extracted by a promise to furnish a license, wrote to 
a so-called peyote chief, Tom Morgan, Chadron, Nebr., demanding 
the return of his money. The money was not returned for months, 
while I was still in Utah, and although I have not made recent in- 
quiry I am of the opinion it is still unreturned. 

Now, as to graft upon the superstition of the Utes. Twenty small 
crosses of very inferior material, with glass sets, were sold by Peter 
Phelps, peyote agent, to these Utes at a dollar each. The victims 
were told to put the magic crosses away and not to wear them. Once 
in a while they were instructed to look at them. If the cross was 



126 PEYOTE. 

tarnishing, as, of course, it was bound to do, it was an evil omen, and 
it was the sign of approaching death to the owner of the cross. The 
Utes were told that this tarnishing of the cross was to show each 
peyote user that he or she was not as faithful as he or she ought to 
be which, of course, meant more peyote must be eaten and that more 
peynote must be purchased. The peyote agent knew that the fear of 
approaching death would make the Indian willing to pay any price 
for peyote treatment or be willing to do anything at the bidding of 
the peyote agent, if by so doing his life could be insured and pro- 
longed. Finally, the Utes were told that if they liked these magic 
crosses he. Cactus Pete, would bring 200 of them on his next visita- 
tion. These crosses could not have cost over 10 cents, and they were 
sold for a dollar each. So that the peyote agent was planning to 
make $180 on a $20 investment, to say nothing of playing upon their 
superstition. Cactus Pete took some of the Utes with him on a trip. 
While on this trip he went into a saloon and drank whisky. The 
Utes were amazed and asked why he had told them peyote cured the 
whisky habit and why he was drinking whisky. He told them that 
he was so far along in the peyote cult that he could do this, but to 
beginners, whisky was forbidden. The Utes told this. 

Peter Phelps, commonly called Cactus Pete, had still another name 
under which he was enrolled, but for cattle stealing and other things 
he dare not enter his own reservation, for he would be arrested and 
headed for the penitentiary. He is the peyote agent that told the 
Utes who owned cattle that they need not trouble themselves to ride 
in the hills to watch their stock ; that all they had to do was to stay at 
home and with the peyote in their hands ask about the cattle and that 
the peyote would tell them if anyone was trying to steal the cattle. 

I had a kodak picture of a crowd in which was this Peter Phelps. 
A visiting Sioux from Pine Ridge, S. Dak., recognized him and at 
the time told his real name, but I do not now remember it. However, 
I know the Indian who can give that information, if it is necessary. 

Now, I would like to read to you a statement from a Winnebago: 

John Semans, a Winnebago, swears to the truth of the following : " They 
say that if you eat this bean it wiB cure you from drinking whisl5;y or other in- 
toxicants and it maizes you saving and a better worker. I know that this is 
not true. There are a few who can't get drunls: enough to suit them on peyote. 
I have been to Sioux City with many of the peyote society and got drunk with 
them. This is a comman thing for them to do. I think maybe when they 
first start to use peyote they give up whisky for a little while, but they soon 
want it again. They are also spending a great deal of money on these meetings 
and to make the society grow. 

Many of the mescal or peyote eaters use from $60 to ,$100 a night and mort- 
gage their things to get money to feed the meetings. I think the leaders spend 
most of the money for themselves. I could see very plainly that the Indian 
leaders of this peyote religion are making their living off the ignorant Indians, 
so I linow that it does not make them thrifty, and, in fact, if they keep on the 
way they are doing it will not be very long until they are very poor. Another 
very bad thing that comes from eating this medicine, it makes you feel more, 
and so if anyone is passionate it makes them more so. The meetings are very 
immoral (I do not think I could tell all that I have seen in writing). With 
the young men this is a very bad thing, because they go to the meetings because 
the girls are there, and they are naturally led on to do evil things. I know 
that it afiects a person this way because I have felt it myself." 

I would like also to read what the daughter of Quanah Parker 
said about her father. Reference was made to the great Quanah 
Parker as being a peyote user. Here are the words of tlie oldest 



PEYOTE. 127 

daughter of Quanah Parker as she gave them at our camp meetings 
and as they are quoted in Rev. Watermulder's Mohonk Conference 
address : 

My father wns the great chief of the Comanches. He ate mescal. He asked 
me to eat mescal. I did eat for a few years, but I gave it up. I followed a 
better road. I told my father to give it up. He would not. He became very 
sick. I got six doctors to examine him. They all said it is because he ate 
mescal. I again asked him to stop, but no, he would not. Two years he 
was sick. He became paralyzed. One day he said that he would go to a 
mescal meeting far away. He took a train. He attended this meeting. The 
next day, while coming home on the train, he died. Oh, friends, I ask you to 
stop that medicine, mescal. 

And now, with reference to peyote as a medicine, I want to read 
a statement from a well-known medical laboratory in Detroit, Mich., 
as follows : 

Our Kansas City branch forwarded us your letter under date of April 5 
requesting us to forward you information relative to peyote. 

There is no question whatever but that tliis is the same drug as anhalonium 
(mescal buttons). 

"We formerly put out a fluid extract of anhalonium but a few years ago 
decided to omit it from our catalogue. 

We can inform you definitely that the importation of this drug into the 
United States has been absolutely prohibited. If an extract of the drug was 
administered Internally it acted as a narcotic and represented one of the habit- 
forming drugs which we procured from Mexico, 

That is from a letter dated April 11, 1916, written by Parke, Davis 
& Co., proprietors of the well-known medical laboratories in Detroit, 
Mich. 

Now, in conclusion, I would like to say that humans are humans, 
and human nature is the same regardless of color. This habit of 
using peyote is not going to be limited to the red man alone. Yes- 
terday we heard it said that it had a different effect on the white 
man, because the Indian was used to it. We know very well that 
Indians are of all kinds of temperaments and make-ups. There is 
just as much difference among Indians as there is among white 
people or any other people of any color. This habit is not going to 
be limited to the red man alone, and we already see it spreading out 
among the white men. Colorado mothers have been told that the 
soldiers on the Texas border are using peyote and have become 
alarmed, and I have heard of white people substituting for other 
habit-forming drugs the use of peyote, and they have said it was a 
good substitute; that is, when opium could not be secured. 

Three Western States have passed laws against the use of peyote, 
because they realize that this peyote menace is a growing menace to 
all America, regardless of color. Colorado, Utah, and Nevada are 
the Western States that last year passed peyote laws. And to-day, 
in the face of national prohibition, this menace is going to spread, as 
that Indian said, like wildfire, and we need now to protect all the 
citizens of America by quenching that little spark, because it will 
be easier now than later. 

I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Tillman. Where were you educated ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I was educated in a Friends' school in Indiana. 

Mr. Tillman. You are not a Carlisle graduate? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I never attended a Government school. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you married ? 



128 PEYOTE. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I am married to a Sioux Indian, who is in the Army. 
Mr. Tillman. How many people constitute your tribe? How 

many Sioux are there, approximately ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I could not say. Do you mean in my tribe or the 
whole Nation ? 

Mr. Tillman. The whole Nation. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. How many would you say, Dr. Eastman? 

Dr. Eastman. I think there are about 20,000 in the Sioux Nation, 
or at least pretty close to that. 

Mr. Tillman. I think you said you are a Christian ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I am a Christian; yes. 

Mr. Tillman. How do the bulk of the Christian people with whom 
you associate look upon peyote? Do they favor it or are they 
against it? 

Mrs. Bonnin. I have not tried to talk with them about it, because 
at first they were told it was an Indian religion, and they thought it 
was just a religion, but I think the real thing is the evil results that 
they see in the use of it. 

Mr. Tillman. The Christian people are generally against its use, 
are they not — the members of the Christian church ? 

Mrs. Bonnin. I suppose that they would be on the ground that 
they would oppose anything that was demoralizing. I do not believe, 
Mr. Chairman, that this opposition can be represented as being made 
because of a difference in religions. It is not that, because even 
Indians who are Christians become addicted to the habit of using 
peyote right along. 

Mr. Tillman. What do you think about its use as a religious secra- 
ment? Do you think that is in good faith or it it a sort of fake and 
subterfuge ? 

Mrs. Bonnin. I had a letter that I submitted to the Senate Indian 
Committee, which they were to publish in the record. I wish I had 
that with me to-day. I can tell you, however, that that letter was 
from a Winnebago Indian, who was at one time the head of the 
mescal church, and he stated in that letter that in their meetings they 
were interrupted by the police coming in because they were on drunks, 
and in order to prevent interference by the police they sent to Sioux 
City and bought a Bible, and then they began to read out of it to 
make it a religion. That is about the substance of the letter which I 
submitted to the Senate committee for publication in the record. 

Mr. TiLLiNiAN. You are one of the most intelligent witnesses we 
have mad before us, and I ■wish you would state for the record, in 
order that those Avho are not present may knoAV, how this drug is used, 
if you know or have heard. 

Mrs. Bonnin. Well, I have heard among the IJtes that they chew 
it, or they steep it and make tea of it and drink it, and as a tea 
they give it to the babies. I have heard also that it is ground up 
and put into little capsules. Those are the ways that I have heard 
about. School children and babies, of course, use it as well as adults, 
and that is the evil of it. 

Mr. Tillman. From your investigations you have no doubt but 
that this drug is responsible for a great many improper and illicit 
sexual excesses? 

Mrs. Bonnin. T know of many such cases. 



PEYOTE. 129 

Mr. TiLixMAN. As compared with whisky, which is the most harm- 
ful? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Well, I think they are twin brothers. 

Mr. Tillman. Is it true that the use of this peyote for a time de- 
stroys tlie taste for whisky? 

Mrs. Bonjnin. That is the beginning of it, but they soon begin to 
use them together. As I have told you, the Utes were surprised to 
find their leader going into a saloon and drinking whisky ; wh§n they 
asked him for an explanation, he said, " I am so far along in the 
peyote cult that I can do this, but you, as beginners, can not do it." I 
suppose that meant they must use more peyote ; that when they got 
far enough along in the cult they could use both. 

Mr. Tillman. If it does destroy the desire for whisky it must be a 
very powerful and harmful drug. 

Mrs. BoMMiN. I believe it is. 

Mr. SjsYdee. You said in your testimony that there were three 
States that had passed laws-prohibiting the use of peyote? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. What are the three States? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Colorado, Utah, and Nevada. If I may add one 
word, these State laws do not operate on Indian territories, and 
that is why we need Federal action. 

Mr. Smydek. That is the information I wanted, because I wanted 
to know why those laws were not being enforced in those States? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Because Indian land is generally considered as Fed- 
eral territory and the State feels the Government is looking after 
that territory. 

Mr. Sntdee. I think you have given us a splendid illustration of 
your knowledge of this matter, and quite convincing. 

Mr. Hastings. What is your home address? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. My home address is 707 Twentieth Street NW., this 
city. 

Mr. Hastings. I mean when you are out of Washington. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. When I am out of Washington^ 

Mr. Hastings (interposing). Where did you live before you came 
here? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I spent 14 years at Fort Duchesne, Utah. 

Mr. Hastings. Was that your home? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. That was my home for 14 years. 

Mr. Hastings. Where were you born ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I was born "at the Yankton Agency, Greenwood, 
S. Dak. I am a member of the Sioux tribe, but my life work has 
been among the Utes. 

Mr. Hastings. You have lived among them until recently when 
you came to Washington? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Yes, sir; I came here last April. 

Mr. Hastings. But prior to that time you were among the Ute 

Indians. . • , , 

Mrs. BoNNiN. For 14 consecutive years I lived with those people. 

Mr. Hastings. You taught school among them ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Yes, sir. Then later I lived on my own farm, and 

then later- 



Mr. Hastings (interposing). Where was your farm located? 
47003—18 9 



130 PEYOTE. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. In the Uinta Basin. Later I became a community 
center worlier under the auspices of the Society of American Indians. 
I tried to do community center work, which was not covered by the 
Government's work or by the missionaries' work. 

Mr. Tillman. You are not employed by any agency or any so- 
ciety ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. None whatsoever. 

Mr. -Tillman. And you are not receiving any compensation for 
the work you are doing? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. Not one cent. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you a full blood ? 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I am part Sioux and part French. 

Mr. Hastings. How much Sioux? 

Mrs. Bonn IN. Half. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you on good terms with your tribe? 

Mrs. Bonnin. Yes; and I want to say that I am on good terms 
with those people about whom I have been talking, the Utes, those 
who have become, victims of peyote. I love them; I do not hate 
them for anything that is harmful, but I want them saved, if pos- 
sible. I am on good terms with my people and with the Utes, among 
whom I have lived for 14 years. 

Mr. Tillman. And your purpose is to uplift your tribe and to 
assist them in any way you can, and in taking up this work you 
have that solely in view? 

Mrs. Bonnin. Yes, sir; that is the sole purpose. Let me tell you 
one thing in that connection. I am solely interested in uplifting 
these people, and yet I have been warned many times by my friends 
among the Utes. They have said, "We are cautioned not to talk 
about peyote and what goes on in our meetings; they tell us we will 
be awfully punished if we do that way, and now you are talking 
about this thing, about this peyote, and some harm is going to come 
to you." I said, "What harm can come to me?" They say, "Well, 
you ought to be careful; you do not know; some one might bring 
harm to you." And I have said to my friends, " I would rather 
sacrifice one life, mine, than the whole of the Indian race." 

Mr. Tillman. You never experimented with this drug yourself? 

Mrs. Bonnin. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. During all of the 14 years that you were among the 
X^tes, you did not see or come in contact with the use of this peyote 
at all? 

Mrs. Bonnin. It was not there until within the last two years; 
it is a little over two years now since it came there, but since it has 
been there it has done its undermining work — it has parted husband 
and wife and broken up happy homes. 

Mr. Snyder. Then, of course, it is apparent that the information 
j'ou have given here is from information that has come to you and 
not from your knowledge or contact with the drug itself ? 

Mrs. Bonnin. I have not used it myself; no, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. I did not mean that. I meant that you have not 
been where the drug was being used? 

Mrs. Bonnin. Yes ; I have lived there among the Utes themselves 
and it has been used there for over two years, and I have visited 
them in their meetings. 



PEYOTE. 131 

Mr. Sntdee. That is exactly what I wanted to get at. 

Mrs. BoNNiN. I visited them in their meetings, and I tried to talk 
to my friends who owned cattle and sheep, trying to show them their 
danger. 

State of Nebraska, 

County of Thurston, ss: 

I, Miss Etta Hannink, having been duly sworn, do liereby depose and say Miss 
Pearson and myself attended Eva Henry, a full-blood Winnebago girl, when 
she was sick with pneumonia. The mescal people tried to crowd into the sick 
room and feed her mescal or peyote. We forbade their feeding the mescal or 
peyote, but 35 of the mescal or peyote people crowded into the small room and 
sat all night drumming, singing, and eating the mescal or peyote. We stayed 
there all night to see that they did not feed the peyote, and we told her to be 
sure not to let them give her any. After we left in the early morning they 
tried to force her to take some of the mescal or peyote. The people were con- 
stantly going in and out of the room, hoping to force her to take the mescal or 
peyote, but she refused. I think that their practices with the sick are causing 
many of the deaths. 

The women have no part in the mescal or peyote meetings only to eat the 
mescal or peyote. They lie around in the corner of the room like a lot of dogs, 
and it is a most revolting sight. There is a great deal of immorality at these 
meetings, I think, and it is a very serious situation that we have to meet, 
because it Is destroying the character of the young people. 

Etta Hannink. 

Subscribed and sworn to before me this 13th day of October, 1911. 

Jacob Stebdee, Notary Public. 

United States Takifp Commission, 
Washington, D. C, February 23, 19X8. 
Mrs. Gektbude Bonnin, 

707 Tioentieth Street NW., Washington, D. C. 
Dear Mks. Bonnin : Mrs. Costigan and I regretted the necessity of leaving 
your important and impressive hearing on the subject of peyote yesterday 
morning before the hearing was concluded. We were compelled to do so to 
meet another engagement. 

Permit me to say that if the use of my name as one of those indorsing the 
legislation you seek will aid you I am glad to be of service in that win-. My 
information as to the deleterious effects of the drug is based on hearsay, but the 
high class of testimony which was brought to my attention leaves no shadow 
of doubt in my mind. 

It must be gratifying to you to recall that the Colorado bill was enacted into 
law following the recital of actual conditions, practically without dissent. 
Very sincerely, 

E. P. Costigan, Commissioner. 

Mr. Snyder. Then you are familiar with exactly what is going on 
there and know the whole question? 

Mrs. Bonnin. Yes, sir ; I am familiar with that. 

Mr. Hayden. Mr. Chairman, in this connection, I have obtained 
the statutes of the States of Colorado, Nevada, and Utah from the 
Supreme Court library, £tfid I think it would be well to have their 
provisions relating to peyote inserted in the record. The Colorado 
law on the subject is as follows : 

Section 1. It is hereby declared in the exercise of the police and sovereign 
power of the State of Colorado that the use of anhaloniuni, or peyote, within 
this State is dangerous to the life, liberty, property, health, education, morals, 
and safety of the citizens of this State, and is inconsistent with the good order, 
peace, and safety of the State. 

Sec. 2. No person, association, or corporation shall, within this State, use 
or sell, or keep for sale, or give away, dispo-se of, exchange, barter, or other- 
wise fui-nish anv anhaloniuni, or peyote, or any compound, manufacture. 



132 PEYOTE. 

derivative, or preparation thereof to any person wliomsoever ; and no person, 
association, or corporation sliall import into tliis State any anluilonium, or 
peyote, or any compound, manufacture, derivative, or preparation thereof for 
sale, excliange, barter, or gift ; and no person, association, or corporation sliall, 
within this State, offer any anhalonium, or peyote, or any compound, manufac- 
ture, derivative, or preparation thereof for gift, use, sale, barter, or trade. 

Sec. 3. Any person, agent, employee, representative, proprietor, the member 
or members of any association, the ofRcer or Qfficers of any corporation, or any 
other person \vho shall violate any of the provisions of this act, and any person, 
association, or corporation whose officer, agent, employee, representative, or 
servant shall violate any of the provisions of this act shall for the tirst offense 
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be punished 
by a tine of not less than $100 nor more than $300, or by imprisonment in the 
county jail not less than thirty days nor more than six months, or both such 
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Every second and sub- 
sequent offense committed within five years of the first bj' any of the 
persons herein designated shall be deemed a felony, and, upon conviction 
thereof, he shall be imprisoned in the State penitentiary at hard labor not less 
than one year nor more than three years ; and if a corporation be so convicted 
a second time it shall be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000. A 
certified copy of the entry of judgment or other proper court records showing 
the conviction of the defendant from any justice, county, or district court within 
this State shall be conclusive proof of a former conviction. 

I submit, also, the following provisions on the subject from the 
laws of the State of Nevada : 

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, furnish, or 
give away, or offer to sell, furnish or give away, or to huxe in their or his 
possession any cocaine, opium; yen shee, morphine, codein, heroin, alpha 
eucaine, beta eucaine, nova caine, anhalonium (peyote or mescal button), can- 
nabis satlva (Indian hemp or loco weeds), or chloral hydrate, or any of the 
salts, derivatives, or compounds of the foregoing substances, or any preparation 
or compounds containing any of the foregoing substances or their salts, deriva- 
tives, or compounds exceiiting upon the written order or prescription of a 
physician, dentist, or veterinary surgeon licensed to practice in this State. 

The drug laws of the State of Utah also include peyote : 

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, furnish, or 
give away, or offer to sell, furnish, or give away, or to have in their possession 
any cocaine, opium, morphine, coedin, heroin, peyote (mescal button), alpha 
eucaine, beta eucaine, nova caine, flowering tops and leaves, extracts, tinctures, 
and other narcotic preparations of hemp or loco weed (cannabis satlva, Indian 
hemp) I or chloral hydrate, or any of the salts, derivatives, or compounds of the 
foregoing substances, or any preparation or compound containing any of the 
foregoing substances, or their salts, derivatives, or compounds, excepting upon 
the written order or prescription of a physician, dentist, or veterinary sur- 
geon licensed to practice in this State. 

The following data concerning the use of peyote were prepared for 
use at the time the Colorado Legislature was considering the passage 
of the law that I have quoted. 

Data Concerning the Use of the Nakcotic Deug Peyote, or Anhalonium — 
Colorado Mothers Have Been Informed that Peyote is being Disteibutbd 
and Sold to the Colorado Boys on the Texas Border. 

reasons for enactment. 

Peyote, or anhalonium, is a known dangerous and deadly drug, similar in 
its effect to hashish, cocaine, and strychnine, but without the medicinal virtues 
of either. Introduced for commercial purposes from northern Mexico, where it 
is chiefly grown, its use has been extended among the American Indians with 
disastrous results to health, life, and morals ; and, unless the traffic is -pro- 
hibited, it threatens to find a similar disastrous use among our own people. 
Against the protests of leaders of the American Indians and of the Federal 
authorities seeking to stamp out the traffic, an insidious effort has been made 



PEYOTE. 133 

to strengthen the hold of peyote on the Indians b.v its iucoiporatlon into certain 
features of Indian worship. Federal legislation to prohibit the use of the drug 
IS now pending in Washington, and both State and Federal legislation is being 
urged by the leaders and friends of the Indian tribes throughout America. 
In corroboration of what has been said, attention is directed to the following 
statements : 

" Peyote buttons, as they are commonly called, are the dried crowns of a 
cactus which grows on the rocky, arid lands of northern Mexico, and are 
classed with intoxicants. Their use appears to be on the increase. Under 
an order of the Department of Agriculture, its importation into the I'nited 
States has been prohibited. It is too early to ascertain the effectiveness of this 
exclusion order. Appropriate legislation is being agitated to give the Indian 
Office enlarged power.s for the suppression of peyote," — Report of the Com- 
missioner of Indian Affairs to the Secretary of the Interior, .lune 30, 191."), 

Dr. Harvey W, Wiley, when chief chemist of the United States, made analyses 
and experimentations on the use of mescal, and he has given the following 
testimony : 

•• The physiological effects of the u.-^e of peyote ;ire unlike those of any other 
drug. They are somewhat similar to that of hashish, but sleep is produced by 
hashish, whereas from the peyote sleeplessness results for an hour or so. Given 
in quantities, the effect of peyote is to produce twltcliings and convulsions like 
those of strychnine when given in doses producing death. Experimentation 
was made on animals. Three or four grains taken by Dr. Morgan produced no 
effects. The third alkaloid found in the analysis of the peyote was much 
stronger and not distinguished from strychnine. The fourth alkaloid is not 
known very well. The alkaloids, rather than the resin remaining, probably 
])roduced the effects. It has no .special value as a medicinal agent, an<l is 
nothing but an evil." 

In a letter, dated April 11, 1916, Parke. Davis & Co.. proprietors of the well- 
known medical laboratories in Detroit, Jlich.. say. with reference to peyote : 

" Our Kansas City branch forwarded us your letter under date o'f April 5, 
requesting us to forward yi:>u information relative to pe.vote. 

" There is no question whatever but that this is the s.inie drug as anhalonluni 
(mescal buttons), 

" AVe formerly put out a fluid extract of anhalonium, but a few years ago 
decided to omit it from our catalogue. 

" We can inform you definitely that the importation nt this drug into the 
United States has been absolutely prohibited. If an extract of the drug was 
administered Internally, it apted as a narcotic and represented one of the 
habit-forming drugs which we procured from Jlexico." 

In another letter from the same firm, of date April 17. 1916, the following 
further information with reference to peyote is given : 

" It is very evident that the small sample of drug sent us, known to \ou as 
'peyote,' is the drug most generally known as mescal buttons, obtained frum a 
species of cactus which grows in ilexico, and which has been used by the 
natives there, presumabl,\' from time immemorial, to produce certain effects, 

"This drug has been analyzed hy chemists and found to contain two or three 
very powerful alkaloidal substance-;, to which has been given the uame of 
peliotine, anhalonine, and luescaline, 

"The sulistanee is not very well known in medicine, for, thou.gh it has been 
made available to physicians, they have not used it to any considerable extent, 
nor proved its possibilities. Experiments made on animals proved that it is a 
powerful narcotic poison. It has been asserted by some that the drug pos- 
ses.ses some narcotic properties re.sembling thuse of opium, 

" We are sorry to say that we are not sufficiently familiar with the drug 
TO be able to describe it.'^ properties when administered to human beings, nor to 
describe the effects that it produces upon human beings when used continu- 
ouslv as we understand is the case with a great many of our Indians. We 
know in n general wav. that its effect when thus used is presumed to be very 
harmful, and that consequently the United States (^xovernment is doing all lu 
its power to prevent its importation from Jlexico." .p t-^ ■, 

In a sworn statement of April 28. 1916. Paul .Tones, a bishop of I tah ; 
Henrv B Llovd a Oovernment physician: All)ert H. Kneale. a aovernment 
officei- in charge; and Gertrude Bonnin. secretary of the Society of American 
Indians and superintendent of the community center among the Ltes. say: 

"The Indians in increasing numbers are eating these peyote buttons under 
the leadership of a Sioux, known as Pete Phelps, who has introduced the 



134 PEYOTE. 

practice within tlie last year. The peyote is shipped into Utah either by mail 
or express. At present about half the Indians connected with the Uintah and 
Ouray Agency are peyote users. 

" In using it the Indians meet weekly at a night session and eat from 1 to 80 
of the buttons, depending on their familiarity with it. It is also given to those 
who are in sickness, and sometimes administered in the form of tea. 

" The effect of the peyote appears to be like that of an opiate. The users 
are stimulated to dreams and hallucinations in regard to themselves and others, 
and between times become sullen and uncommunicative. While under the 
influence moral restraints are forgotten. 

" In connection with its use in sickness several deaths have been reported 
as due to its influence. The continued use of peyote on the health and char- 
acter of the Indians appears to be so serious that we believe immediate steps 
should be taken by the Government to prevent its sale and distribution to them, 
and we would therefore ask you to bring this statement to the attention of the 
proper authorities to secure that action." 

In the thirty-fourth annual report of the Indian Rights Association (1916), 
pages 38 and 39, we flnd the following added information : 

" * * * jj- ig stated that nearly one-half of the Uintah and Ouray Indians, 
numbering 1,160 persons, have become devotees of the peyote habit. 

" The baneful effects upon the followers are soon apparent. The successful 
farmer neglects his fields and home; his health is often aifected, and interest 
is lost in the things which tend to better living. The testimony of Dr. Henry B. 
Lloyd, resident physician at Port Duchesne Indian Agency, is convincing. He 
cited the case of a victim of peyote who had always been industrious, but who, 
after being won over to the habit, relied wholly upon the medicinal benefits of 
the drug for every ailment, using it at all times to secure superhuman intelli- 
gence, to read thoughts, and to learn of the contents of books without more 
than a glance at their pages. This devotee removed his child from the Govern- 
ment school in order that he might teach him to use the drug and thereby become 
wise. Dr. Lloyd sites instances in which the use of peyote has undermined the 
health. Several deaths are reported as directly traceable to the habit. 

" From a moral and religious standpoint the effect of peyote is even more 
apparent. Its followers seem to abandon Christian teaching, and in their fre- 
quent nightly gatherings indulge in excesses through the midnight hour, in 
which men and women participate. It is claimed that in these nocturnal de- 
baucheries there is often a total abandonment of virtue, especially among the 
women. * * * The late Dr. S. Wier Mitchell, the celebrated specialist in 
nervous diseases, after a thorough investigation of the effects of peyote upon 
the system, said : 

" ' I predict a perilous reign of the habit when the agent once becomes 
obtainable. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be too 
much for some men to resist after they have set foot in this land of fairy 
colors, so much to charm and so little to disgust.' 

" Many Indians are appealing for leglislation restricting the importation and 
use of peyote. Mr. and Mrs. R. T. Bonnin, intelligent and educated Indians, 
located at the Uintah and Ouray Agency, have joined in a statement reciting 
the evil effects following the use of the drug. Rev. M. J. Hersey, missionary 
of the Episcopal Church, located within the reservation, vouches for and con- 
curs in their statement, which follows : 

FoKT Duchesne, Utah, 

October 12, 19X6. 

My Dear Mk. Bkosius : We, the undersigned Indians, make the following 
statements regarding the use of peyote among Indians, particularly the Utes, 
of Uintah and Ouray Reservation : 

It excites the baser passions and is demoralizing — ^^similar in its abnormal 
effects to that of opium, morphine, and cocaine. 

It creates false notions in the minds of the users, preventing sound logic and 
rational thought with which to meet the problems of their daily lives. Believing 
that peyote is the comforter sent by God, they re.iect the teachings of the 
church. Believing that peyote reveals the secret thoughts of man and gives 
superhuman knowledge of the contents of books, they deprecate the necessity of 
schools. Believing peyote a cure-all for every human ailment, they Ignore 
the advice and aid of physicians. Attending the weekly peyote meetings, they 
waste time, strength, and money, consequently neglecting their homes and 
farms. 



PEYOTE. 135 

3. It has spread with alarming rapidity witliin ttie last two years, and now 
has close to SO per cent of the tribe. 

4. It appears to have been the direct cause of the deaths of 25 percons 
among these Utes within the last two years. 

5. After a careful study of the spread of peyote among the Utes, where we 
have labored some 14 years, it appears to us that an unscrupulous organiza- 
tion, through its agents, is promoting the peyote cult, under a religious guise, 
solely for the easy money gotten from their superstitious victims. From re- 
liable sources we derive the information that large collections of money are 
taken up at the weekly meetings, and no accounting made whatever. The 
Utes, who had cattle, sheep, and horses, were the very ones first singled out 
by the shrewd peyote agent. It is the money from sale of stock, together with 
$15 subsistence checks, that is taken without any concern for the inevitable 
wreckage of body, mind, and soul of the pitiable victims. 

6. Since the use of peyote is spreading rapidly and is undermining the uplift 
work of the churches and our benevolent Government ; since it is an American 
principle to protect helpless, downtrodden people from the ruthless hand of the 
oppressor ; to restrain the unscrupulous greed of those who traffic upon the 
ignorance and superstition of a people, we do implore all earnest citizens of 
America for a Federal law to protect us against the traffic in and the indis- 
criminate use of peyote. 

Signed : 

Gertrude Bonnik, 
Raymond T. Bonnin. 

I have read the above, relative to the use of peyote. I hereby vouch for the 
veracity of these statements and do concur with Mr. and Mrs. Bonnin in im- 
ploring some Federal action against this great evil, peyote. 
Signed : 

M. J. Heksey, 
Episcopal MifOi ion a ry. 

" The State Board of Pharmacy of Utah proposes to urge measures before 
the coming legislature to prohibit the introduction of peyote within the State. 
The board will act in harmony with an effort seeking Federal control of the 
drug. 

" Voluminous evidence has been collected from various sources, including 
statements regarding the effect of the use of the drug upon various Indian 
tribes. These reports are available in the archives of the Indian Bureau. Hon. 
H. M. Gandy, of South Dakota, has introduced a bill (H. R. 10669) which 
seeks to prohibit thfaffic in anhalonium, or peyote, among the Indians. The bill 
stipulates suitable fine and imprisonment for violation of the provisions of the 
proposed legislation." 

In an address to the sixth conference of the Society of American Indians, 
held at Cedar Rapids, Iowa, September 26 to 30 (reported in The American 
Indian Magazine, Vol. IV, No. 3, pp. 234-237), Henry A. Larson said: 

" There have been Investigations made by medical men, chemists, and others 
as to the effect of peyote upon the human system. * * * in other words 

* * * it is a species of drunkenness. There can be no question about 
that. The lasting effect of it is the deteriorating effect upon the human sys- 
tem ; there can be no question about that, either. * * * j i^ope it will be 
possible to secure congressional enactment and State enactment which will 
prohibit the distribution of it in the mall or otherwise and the sale of it to 
Indians." 

In October, 1916, the Society of American Indians, a national organization, 
in their platform, urged " unequivocally upon Congress the passage of the 
Gandy bill to prohibit the commerce in and use of peyote among our In- 
dians, because of its known baneful effects upon the users in mind and morals." 

The foregoing quotations bear special reference to the Indian situation, but, 
as shown by the above quotation from the writings of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, of 
Philadelphia, the use of peyote may, at any time, become extensive among our 
citizens generally, and, indeed, it is known that the habit is one now rapidly de- 
veloping outside of Indian tribes. 

INDORSEMENTS. 

The proposed law with reference to peyote has been indorsed for passage by 
the following organizations: 

The State Executive Board of the Colorado Mothers' Congress, representing 
approximately 5,000 women. 



136 , PBYOTE. 

WMiimn's Christian Temperance Union, representing 3,880 women. 
Association of Collegiate Alumni. 

The City Federation, reijresentlng some 50 Denver organizations. 
The Ministerial Alliance of Denver, representing 150 churches. 
The Federated Missionary Association representing about 50,000 church 
members. 

Mr. TirxjiAN. Is there anybody else who desires to be heard on 

either side of this controversy? 

STATEMENT OF MR. JOE CLAYMORE, STANDING ROCK AGENCY, 
S. DAK., THROUGH MRS. GERTRUDE BONNIN, INTERPRETER. 

ill'. Tillman. State your name, the tribe to which you belong, and 
the position you occup}'. 

Mr. Claymoee. Joe Claymore, of Standing Rock Agency. S. Dak. 

Mr. TiLLJtAN. Now, tell us what you know about the use of this 
drug, and give us your opinion as to whether its use should be con- 
tinued or not. Be as brief in your statement as possible. 

Mr. C'latmore. I am a Sioux Indian, and I have come here as a 
delegate of the Sioux people. 

Ml'. Tillman. Give the committee all the information you have on 
the subject of peyote. 

ilr. Clay^moee. I ha^'e been told things about peyote that grieved 
my heart. There Avas a stoclnnan or herder Avho came from the 
country where peyote is well known and I had a great talk with him. 
I had heard aljout peyote, and I asked him about it as the thing 
they eat and dance. He said that the second time he ate peyote he 
became intoxicated just as much as he would be with whisky. 

Mr. TiLLJtAX. Please explain your sensations and experience. 

Mr. Claymore. This man said' the third time he ate peyote he was 
\-ery, ^•ely di'unk. He was a man who used liquor. Since coining to 
Washington I find that Washington is dry, and I have been surprised, 
since you have stopped the sale of intoxicants, why you pay no atten- 
tion to peyote. This peyote habit, Avhen it comes arnong Indians who 
are not wise, plays havoc among them. I remember that the Commis- 
sioner of Indian Aifairs is our guardian and is advising us and taking 
care of us as children, and that being true why does he not consider 
this menace'^ I have not bothered myself much about it, because I 
am not a user of this peyote. I am 70 years old. I have reached that 
age Avhere I obser\'e the things that people use, and whether they 
are detrimental to them, among Jndians as well as among white 
peo]3]e. There is one thing in which we are alike. Our country is 
plunged into a war, and our land has called for the Army, and white 
i^^oldiei's have gone and Indian soldiers have gone, and we are alike 
in one thing— our hearts hurt. The white race has great wisdom and 
power, and we are here with you, and you are in a position to help 
us in the things that are good for us in our localities. I am not a user 
of whisky and I have not seen peyote, but those things I have heard 
about it disgust me. That is all I have to say. 

ilr. Hastin(;s. I understood you to say that you had used it as 
many as three times yourself. 

Mrs. BoNNix. He was telling about a conversation he had with 
a man who had used it. 

Mr. Hastings. You have not used it personally yourself? 



PEYOTE. 137 

Mr. Claymore. Not persomiUy myself. 

Mr. Hastings. What position, if any, do you occupy in vour tribe? 
Do you occupy any official position ? ' 

Mr. Claymore. I am a delegate for our tribe. 

Mr. Hastings. Is this your first trip to Washington ? 

Mr. Claymore. I was here seven years ago; this "is my second trip. 

Mr. Hastings. This is your second trip to Washington ? 

Mr. CLAYaioRE. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. You were never here but the two times ? 

Mr. Claymore. Just two times. 

Mr. Hastings. Are you a full blood ? 

Mr. Claymore. I am part Sioux, or mixed. 

Mr. Hastings. Have you been to a white school ''. 

Mr. Claymore. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you occupy any position out there with vour 
tribe? Are you a member of the council, or do you hold any official 
position ? 

Mr. Claymore. I am often in their councils. 

Mr. Hastings. Are you a farmer? 

Mr. Claymore. I am a stockman, interested in cattle and horses. 

Mr. Hastings. How many cattle have you? 

Mr. Claymore. One hundred and eleven cattle and five hundred 
horses. 

Mr. Hastings. Have you an allotment? 

Mr. Clayjmore. Yes. sir. 

Mr. Hastings. For yourself and the members of your family, or 
have you any family? 

Mr. Claymore. Yes, sir; I have a family. 

Mr. Hastings. What is your home address? 

Mr. Claymore. Standing Eock Agency, S. Dak. I li^e 6 miles 
from Mobridge, S. Dak. 

Mr. Hastings. Do j'ou live out on your allotment ? 

Mr. Claymore. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Have you always lived on a farm? 

Mr. Claymore. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. How many children have you? 

Mr. Claymore. Five. 

Mr. Hastings. Are they grown or are they living with you ? 

Mr. Clay'more. They are grown and have families of their own. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you cultivate any of your land ? 

Mr. Claymore. Yes, sir : I have been trying to do everything I see 
white men doing. 

STATEMENT OF MR. FRANCIS LA FLESCHE, OF THE OMAHA TRIBE, 

WASHINGTON, D. C. 

Mr. La Flesche. Mr. Chairman, I wish to say that I have at- 
tended three peyote meetings among the Osage people, and not one 
of those meetings was prearranged. I have attended a peyote meet- 
ing among the Omaha people — my own people — which was not 
prearranged. I have also attended a peyote meeting among the 
Ponka people, and I was not expected to be there. I went there and 
took them by surprise. I know what I am talking about. The 



138 PEYOTE. 

Ute Indians, who are peyote eaters, may be morally bad, but I do 
not pretend to know anything about that. But I do Imow that 
among my Osage friends who are peyote eaters there is no immoral- 
ity. Those people are just as jealous of their morals as anybody 
could be. It has been stated to me by men who were not peyote 
eaters — white men and also Indians — that the peyote eaters are the 
best Indians we have. One day on the Osage reservation I was 
talking to a Government official, and he said to me: "Do you know 
these peyote eaters?" I said, "I know a little about them." He 
said, " I know something about them, and do you know that they 
are reliable? They speak the truth. They are truthful people, but 
if you take the others who drink whisky, they are not truthful." I 
think that the sAveeping charge that all peyote eaters are immoral 
is untrue and unjust. I say also that my own people, the Omaha 
people, are as moral as any community of like number. That is 
all I have to say. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you contend that the use of peyote makes them 
better citizens and more truthful? 

Mr. La Flesche. I do. 

Mr. Tillman. That is all. 

I wish to call attention to the attached clipping, taken from Mr. 
Safford's paper published in the Journal of Heredity, concerning the 
use of the peyote among the Indians: 

PRESENT USE IN THE ^T^tTED STATES. 

Efforts have been made to prevent the spread of the drug among the Indians 
of the United States, and action has been talven in the courts to prosecute 
those who have been instrumental in procuring it and furnishing it. One of 
the most recent cases Is that of the "United States against an Indian named 
Xah-qua-tah-tuclv, alias Mitchell Neck, of the Menominee Indian Reservation, 
Wis., accused of furnishing intoxicants to certain Indians in violation of the 
law. Dr. Francis P. Morgan, of the Bureau of Chemistry, was summoned as 
a Government expert. The trial developed the following facts : 

On March 15, 1914, the accused brought a supply of the drug in a dress-suit 
case to the house of an Indian family named Neconish, situated a short distance 
north of the village of Phlox, Wis., near the western boundary of the Menominee 
Reservation, at which place there was a meeting of a religious nature. The 
drug had been received by parcel post from Aguilares, Tex. The participants 
first made a line about the house to keep out the evil spirits, and then invoked 
God, begging him to make all of them good and to keep them from evil. The 
peyote was next distributed, and when it was eaten caused the partakers to 
see the evil things they had done and showed them the good things they ought 
to do. 

The ceremony began about 9 o'clock in the evening. One witness testified 
that shortly after having eaten four buttons he could see pictures of various 
kinds when his eyes were shut. First he saw God, with a bleeding wound in 
his side. This vision vanished when he opened his eyes, but reappeared when 
he closed them again. Then he saw the devil, with horns and tail, of the color 
of a negro. Then he saw bad things which he had done before, bottles of 
whisky which he had drunk, a watermelon which -he had stolen, and so many 
other things that it would take all day to tell of them. Then he saw a cross 
with all kinds of colors about it, white, red, green, and blue. He was not 
made helpless. He stated that he could have walked had he wished to do so, 
but that he preferred to sit still and look at the pictures. 

Another witness testified that he ate the peyote so that his soul might go up 
to God. The A^-itnesses who testified at this trial declared that the peyote 
helped them to lead better lives and to forsake alcoholic drinks. The defenclant 
was acquitted on the ground that the meeting was one of a religious nature. 



PEYOTE. 139 

THE PEYOTE SOCIETY. 

Tbomas Prescott, of Wittenberg, Wis., testified tliat tliere is a regularly or- 
ganized association among the Indians called the Peyote Society ; also known 
as the Union Church Society, of which he had been a priest fot-sewm^ears. In 
the weekly ceremonies of this society the peyote is either eaten or taken in the 
form of tea. In his opinion, the effect of the peyote is to make better men of the 
Indians. Many of them were formerly common vagabonds, liable to commit all 
sorts of crimes when under the influence of alcohol. After becoming members 
of the Peyote Society, however, they gave up drink, establishetl themselves in 
regular homes, and lived sober and industrious lives. 

STATEMENT OF DR. CHARLES A. EASTMAN, OF AMHERST, MASS. 

Mr. Tillman. Dr. Eastman, we will be glad to have your opinion 
on this drug, but would like you to be as brief as you can. 

Dr. Eastman. I will be as brief as I can. I am a Sioux, and am 
probably not the worst nor the best man among them. 

Mr. Tillman. Please proceed and tell us what you Imow about this 
drug. 

Dr. Eastman. I think that those who defend the use of peyote have 
confused it with the church, and they are trying to bring in a pro- 
ceeding here that is purely a subterfuge. I think the two things 
should be separated entirely. It is not an Indian idea nor is it an In- 
dian practice. The Indian practices were not to use roots for that 
purpose, or anything that would be used in the way that medicine is 
used. That is a very slight thing. That was not indulged in in the 
way this has been indulged in. This is against the general custom 
and practice of the Indians. It is more like what happened a few 
years ago during the ghost-dance craze, which, as we all know, was 
gotten up by irresponsible, reckless, and imprincipled people who 
thought that under the conditions tile Indians were suffering from 
something like that would go, and that they would get some personal 
benefit out of it. That is the way the ghost dance started, and it 
started in that quarter down there. It came from that direction, and 
this is exactly the same way. No man is more jealous of the prin- 
ciples and philosophy of the ol-d Indians than I am. and in all my 
writings, lectures, and in everything I have uttered I have tried to 
respect that which is really Indian. I think that we should contribute 
that to the body politic of this countrj\ That has been my position. 

Now, as to anything that is wrong, if it is only individual, I have 
nothing to say about it, but when it affects a whole race, as I have 
noticed this does, then I must oppose it. I see that condition is here. 
I have made a study and investigation of the peyote question ever 
since it developed, because I felt that I was not in a position to know 
all of the features of it. In the first place, I wanted to get at the 
properties of that medicine. For a long time I could not say Avhat 
the properties were. I gave very little weight to this religious idea 
in connection with the medicine, and I think that it has nothing to do 
with the church. If they have a church I think that is all right, that 
is another thing, but as to the use of peyote and keeping up its use 
all night is absolutely against all common sense. Common horse 
sense will tell you that there is no religion or any common sense in 
that. In the second place, we have come into contact with this drug 
in our country. I might say that some of the brightest boys that 
were ever educated at the Indian schools have become peyote eaters, 



140 PEYOTE. 

and those men ha^^e been ruined in their character, and you can not 
depend on them. They were bright boj's, and they are bright now 
in a way, but they have no moral stamina in them. I am sovvj to say 
that. Now', they may have a church and a well-organized church, and 
they may use this peyote there, but I am convinced, as every sensible 
person in the Indian country is to-day, that this drug, and Dr. Wiley 
described it to you, is not a safe thing to turn loose among any race 
or society of people, however moral or however religious the use may 
be. When we know that it is not a safe thing, then it is beyond all 
common sense to defend it. I must say that it is an absolutely dan- 
gerous thing among our Indian race or any other race. 

I have gone into the conditions of those boys in the school. So 
far as we Sioux are concerned, there are three classes who go into it. 
One is the class who go into it absolutely for physical reasons or 
medical relief. They have heard that it is a wonderful cure of con- 
sumptives and near consumptives and rheumatic people, and they 
rush to it. They go and waste their money for it and pay good prices 
for it. Thej' tr}^ it and then come back not any better off. Some of 
them die soon afterwards. Then there is another class that is liable 
to go into anj^thing like that. They are of the character that do not 
stick anywhere. The other class is composed of those who are op- 
posed to the white man's religion, claiming that there is something 
hypocritical in the white man's religion, and that something ought to 
be developed for the Indians that is superior to the white man's re- 
ligion. Now. tliere is nothing in that, and they have simply dropped 
back. There are a few Sioux that use it now that do not use it 
openly. Some of them are bright fellows. Some of them were the 
brightest men who M'ere educated. Two of the brightest men who 
were educated are peyote eaters, and we can not depend on them 
to-day, and nobody respects them. They are still there, but there is 
no moral stamina in those two men. Now, let me tell you something : 
My friend Lone Wolf was referred to by one member of the commit- 
tee the other daj^ as a man of fine physique. If you had seen him 15 
years ago and then saw him to-day you would not recognize him. 
He was an Apollo, and very strong physically. No Indian was su- 
perior to him 15 years ago. I am 60 years old and Mr. Claymore is 
70 years old and he can run all around. Lone Wolf is an old man 
in body and mind to-day, and he ought to be a young man. Look at 
Mr. Claymore, who is 70 years old. He was one of the models the 
artists used in this country in the great exhibitions. I think they 
used Lone Wolf in Chicago or somewhere in making a statue 15 
years ago, and now look at him. If you go on the street Avith Mr. 
Claymore you can hardly keep up with him. That is the kind of 
man he is. This man was a superb specimen when he came out of 
Carlisle. He was the center rush. He is a young man as compared 
with me and Mr. Claymore. I am 60 years old and Mr. Claymore is 
70, and he is doing wonderful work. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think that this bill should be passed ? 

Dr. Eastman. Yes, sir ; I do. 

Mr. Tillman. Who is the man that you were pointing but as being 
such a splendid physical specimen? 

Dr. Eastman. He is not here. He wjas graduated from Carlisle 
a few years ago and was the center rush there. I was saying that 
he was a splendid physical specimen, and look at him to-day. 



PEYOTE. 141 

Mr. TitLMAN. Do you say that Lone Wolf is decrepit? 

Dr. Eastman. He has a certain dignity in front. 

Mr. Snyder. Many of us have that. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you say he was 70 years of age? 

Dr. Eastman. He is only 40. I was comparing a man 70 years old 
with Lone Wolf. Here is a man who does not use peyote, and he is 
70 years old, and then look at a man 40 years old who uses peyote. 
You referred to Lone Wolf the other day as a fine physical specimen, 
but he is old in mind and in body. 

STATEMENT OF R. H. PRATT, BRIGADIER GENERAL (RETIRED), 
UNITED STATES ARMY, WASHINGTON, D. C. 

Gen. Pratt. I have not much in the way of direct testimony. I 
wanted to get before this committee practically what the doctor said 
yesterday. 

A member of the committee was speaking of Lone Wolf as being 
a very perfect man. When he was at Carlisle he was on the foot- 
ball team; he was a center rush, and he was once, during his early 
days at Carlisle, classed as the center for the all-American team. 
When Bush Brown was arranging his statuary for the Chicago 
World's Fair he asked me for a model for some of the Indian statues. 
I sent Lone Wolf to him up on the Hudson at his home, and he was 
there for weeks, because he was a very perfect man. While he was 
here in the city a few days ago, he and his wife called at my house, 
both of them having been students with me for four years. 1 knew 
Lone Wolf's foster grandfather, who was a prisoner under my care 
for three years in Florida. I have known his foster father all the 
years pretty nearly since 1867. He was selected by these chiefs who 
had no children of their own. They select a model to take their name 
and continue that name in the tribe, and Lone Wolf was picked out 
by the adopted son of old Lone A¥olf . Old Lone Wolf lost his only 
son in a fight we had with the Indians in Texas near Fort Griffin in 
1873, and he selected the man who then chose the Lone Wolf who was 
here. Both he and his wife were model physical specimens of Indian 
manhood and womanhood. Mrs. Pratt and Mrs. Lone Wolf were 
quite good friends at the school. 

My knowledge of the effects of peyote is confined almost entirely 
to hearsay, and you have had so much that is direct here that it is 
hardly worth while for me to speak of it. 1 have heard of the effects 
on some of the very excellent men that I returned to the West hoping 
that they would seize their opportunities and become distinguished 
characters out there. Lone Wolf went home in the early days in 
Oklahoma, when there were opportunities for every man of every 
race if he would only stand up and be a man. 1 anticipated from 
his return very considerable results, but he was not a very good 
politician, and the Indians who ventured into politics among their 
people and among the whites went to the wall very quickly, because 
the white people were a little to smart for them. 

I would not like to mention names; indeed, I would not feel at 
liberty to mention names, because it is not good practice to put such 
things on record, but I do know that peyote has had a very demoral- 
izing effect dn some very excellent products of the Carlisle School. 



142 PEYOTE. 

One of them was expected to be here with Lone Wolf as a delegate, 
who, I think, came here for this special purpose. 

I could not draw out of him exactly what he wanted here, and 
when he found out that I was opposed to peyote he was not very 
communicative. But there was a Carlisle Indian to come from that 
same tribe who, 15 or 16 years ago, when I was down there, was liv- 
ing in a comfortable house on the border of a little town. His prop- 
erty, or a part of it, had been taken for town-site purposes ; he had 
plenty of money, had improved his farm, and was a model farmer. 
He had learned farming among the farmers of Pennsylvania, under 
the Carlisle outing system. His wife belonged to a tribe from the 
far North. They fell in with each other at school and soon after 
they graduated they were married. Fifteen years ago I was at their 
home ; it was a fine home, and he had everything in his favor to be- 
come a foremost man in that community. But he went into the 
peyote habit and he and his wife separated. He has obtained a di- 
vorce, or she has^I do not know which — and she is living apart from 
him with her children and taking care of them by working for the 
Government. He is below where he was .financially and otherwise 
some years ago. I attribute it almost exclusively to the use of pey- 
ote, from Sill information that I have about the drug. 

I have relied upon Dr. Wiley for my opposition to it, because I 
have known the doctor for a great many years and I have great con- 
fidence in his judgment and his insight into such matters. 

I want to say a word, if I may, in regard to the testimony that was 
given here yesterday by the men from the Bureau of Ethnology. It 
is not directly relevant, and yet it is, because it has an influence upon 
their testimony. I knew the head of the Ethnological Bureau well. 
He had been in the Army and we fell in with each other, and when I 
vvas out among the Indians 45 years ago he appealed to me to give 
him certain ethnological information. He sent me books in which he 
wanted me to fill out answers to questions about language, etc., of 
different tribes of Indians. I soon found that if I obliged him I 
would have very little time for my regular duties and I had to 
abandon it. When I took the prisoners to Florida he pursued me 
there and wanted me to give him ethnological information about the 
prisoners. 

After three years in Florida and being at Hampton for a year, I 
came in contact with him again. We wrote to each other a little, and 
then I went to Carlisle, and soon after Carlisle was established, and 
a like school was established on the Pacific coast and placed under 
the care of an officer of the Army by the name of Wilkinson, a first 
lieutenant, like myself, and who had been a long time on Gen. 
Howard's staff. We were in Washington together at the instance of 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and going along the street we passed 
Maj. Powell's office. I said, "Wilkinson, here is our enemy; let us 
go in and see him." So we went in and I introduced Wilkinson. 
Maj. Powell at once began to tell us about ethnology and what he was 
doing in the way of finding out the wonderful past of the Indians 
and sending it down into history as a part of the great records of this 
country — the history of the original inhabitants of this country. He 
said, " You gentlemen are on wrong lines ; you are driving us out of 
business; if you succeed, you will get the Indians removed from their 



PEYOTE. 143 

original traits before we can accomplish all that we desire in the way 
o± gathering information for the world at large about these aboriginal 
people." 

After we got out I said, " Willdnson, I think that is just about 
as good indorsement of our work as we could have." I have found, 
in my long and very wide Indian experience, that this spirit has ani- 
mated the Bureau of Ethnology from that day to this. It is the 
things that are curious that can be portrayed in these immense books 
that they put out, picturing arrow points, Indian products, and all 
sorts of things, that can be held up as something peculiar, which 
has blocked the way of Indian education very largely; that is, by 
keeping the country misinformed about the Indians. I mean to say 
just that — misinformed. They operate as a scientific body and are so 
regarded ; they have entree to the press and they put out at Govern- 
ment expense immense illustrated books which, Congressmen like to 
send to their constituents, or to the libraries in their districts where 
they are filed away and never read. I was in the home of the super- 
intendent of one of the great Indian schools in California, and he 
had on a particular shelf the whole series of Ethnological Reports. 
Early in his career he began to gather them, and now the whole, near 
40 volumes. There were 4 or 5 feet of these great, big books, and he 
admitted he had read very little in them and did not know anybody 
w^ho had read them. Yesterday, when I was reading the Congres- 
sional Record and found a controversy in the Senate over the im- 
mense use of paper by the Government Printing Office in printing 
vast numbers of valueless books, which had led to shortage in print- 
ing paper until the Printing Office recommended that the Record 
not be sent out over the country, I said to myself, "Among others 
they ought to include these large and expensive books that come 
from the Bureau of Ethnology." My experience is that the Bureau 
of Ethnology has never been helpful to the Indians in any respect. 
You will be unable to find, if you go through all of the Indian tribes, 
where they have taken the Indian by the hand and said, " My brother, 
you can become a citizen of the United States ; you can become civil- 
ized, and you can become thoroughly useful in the United States." 
On the contrary, the ethnologists always lead the Indian's mind back 
into the past. I felt as though I ought to say this much. I would 
like to say more on the same line, but I trust you will understand 
what I mean when I say just that. 

I think that my friend, Mr. La Flesche, who has fallen under 
bureau employment, and has become very enthusiastic, is a victim. 
A few years ago, when I first knew him, he was quite a different 
sort of man, and it is not so pleasant for me to meet him as it used 
to be. What is he doing? He is not lifting up his race. He is not 
trying to do that, but he is trying to find something extraordinary 
that he may get into print in the ethnological publications, which 
will go onto the shelves of libraries throughout the United States and 
to all countries abroad to show that we are wonderfully industrious 
in research and in holding on to the past of our original peoples. 

John Adams wrote to Thomas Jefferson, June 28, 1812, " Whether 
serpents teeth were sown here and sprung up men ; whether men and 
women dropped from the clouds on this Atlantic island : whether the 
Almighty created them here, or whether they emigrated from Europe, 



144 PEYOTE. 

are questions of no moment to the present or future happiness of 
man. Neither agriculture, commerce, manufactures, fisheries, science, 
literature, taste, religion, morals, nor any other good -will be pro- 
moted, or any evil averted by any discoveries that can be made in 
answer to these questions." I say, in addition to that, that the only 
possible use they can be to themselves or to us is to make them real 
citizens; and that is, as has been proved lo you by those who have 
appeared before you, exceedingly easy to do. Take Dr. Eastman, 
Avho himself came from the tepee; take Mrs. Bonnin, and take 
others, who are here — some of them my own students — if you will 
get their past you Avill find that they have come forward in a very 
few years to a fair position and knowledge of our life, and that 
they have the ability to use, equally with us, everything which is to 
their advantage as citizens of this country. 

I say that never, since the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers upon 
this continent, has there been a day when any Indian of any tribe 
could not have quit being an Indian and migrated into our life and 
have become a thoroughly useful part of it; and, ii he had only 
stayed and exerted himself, distinction and good citizenship were 
easily his. We have had many great Indians, among them Eed 
Jacket, Tecumseh, Chief Joseph, and hundreds, even thousands, of 
others. They were great among themselves; and, if they had only 
had the education, the experience, and the environment of civiliza- 
tion, they would have been great among us. I think my position is 
perfectly clear and strong; but you could not get an ethnologist to 
acknowledge that. I think that is all I have to say. 

Mr. Tillman. You have studied this peyote subject for how many 
years ? 

Gen. Peatt. I have not studied it very much, sir ; and 1 have only 
known about it from things that have come to me. I have corre- 
sponded with my old students, and recently I took two months in 
coming across the continent, from the Pacific coast, and stopped off 
at about 30 different Indian communities to see my old students and 
to see the condition of the Indians generally. In doing that I learned 
something more about it. 

Mr. Tillman. You have made some investigation of the subject? 

Gen. Peatt. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. From that investigation, are you for it or against it? 

Gen. Pratt. For or against peyote? Do you doubt that I am 
against it? 

Mr. Tillman. I wanted to get it in the record. 

Gen. Peatt. I am absolutely against peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. You M'ere connected with the Carlisle School for 
some time? 

Gen. Peatt. I was there for 25 years; I established Carlisle and 
conducted it for 25 years. 

Mr. Tillman. You are a friend of the Indians, are you not? 

Gen. Peatt. I think so. 

Mr. Tillman. As their friend, and as one who desires to see them 
succeed and get better, you think that the abolition of this drug 
should be made by Congress at once, dp you ? 

Gen. Pratt. I do indeed, sir, even if it had no other effect than to 
prevent these nightly orgies that have been described so graphically 
by the Bureau of Ethnology itself. 



PEYOTE. 145 

Mr. Tillman. Are there any other witnesses who care to be lieard? 

Mr. MooNEY. I do not like to do so much talking myself, but there 
were some Indians, including Lone Wolf, who wanted to talk, but 
they have gone away. However, I can say u few things in answer to 
some statements that have been made. 

ADDITIONAL STATEMENT OF MK. JAMES MOONEY, 

As a preliminary I should like to say that as the chairman knows, 
and the other members of the committee, several Indians have been 
here within the past week or so ready to testify in regard to their 
personal knowledge of peyote, and not from hearsay. But these 
meetings were postponed and they have gone away. They can be 
brought back at any time, and if the committee wishes to hear them 
they will be glad to come back and speak personally in behalf-of- their 
own tribes. 

Certain things were said by one of the speakers upon which I 
, think I can throw some light. He said he had seen women carried 
out from these meetings in a helpless or unconscious condition, and 
he implied that they were treated improperly. I know what that 
means and evidently he does not. I believe he told what he saw or 
what be had heard in good faith, but what he implied did not occur. 
If he say a woman carried out it meant that the woman was very 
sick and that her husband, a member of this -peyote religion, asked 
the leader in that particular camp if he would call the men together 
on the next occasion to pray for the recovery of his sick wife, and that 
was done. Her husband brought her in there; she sat beside him 
while one man after another said prayers for her health and re- 
covery, and then her husband took her out to his own home. I have 
seen that done. I have seen that done in Quana's camp. I have 
seen Quana take his own sick wife in and take her out. I have seen 
the same thing happen among the Kiowas, and among the other 
tribes. This rape that is said to have occurred among the Utes I 
know nothing about, but I do Imow it had no connection with the 
peyote religion whatever. Whatever may have been the circum- 
stances, that is not the peyote religion. But this other thing I do 
know happens at times. I have also seen a young child carried in in 
the same way; the parents would sit down and the child would be 
placed on the mother's lap, with its eyes closed, asleep, and they 
would pray over the child, and after they had said their prayers for 
the mother they would go out carrying the child. That is all there 
is to that. 

In regard to Quana, he has been mentioned several times, and a 
statement has been read from Quana's daughter. I have seen that 
statement in the Mohonk Conference Eeport for 1914, on authority 
of a missionary. I knew Quana for 25 years or so. I have been with 
him in this peyote ceremony, which he believed in and adhered to. 
It has been stated that he died as a result of the use of this peyote. 
As a matter of fact Quana was born about the year 1840, as nearly 
as we can make out, but I think he was born a couple of years earlier 
than that, and as he died three or four years ago, he must have been 
between 72 and 75 years of age when he died. He was the oldest son 
of a white woman who was captured by the Comanche in 1835, when 

47003—18 10 



146 PEYOTE. 

about 12 years of age, and who was married to an Indian chief while 
stil] a girl, as was the Indian custom. He had been the chief of his 
tribe during its wild days and until its entrance into civilization. He 
had headed every fight for his tribe on the warpath and before 
Congress, and had led a strenuous life for years. I have looked up 
the record and find he outlived Gen. Grant, Gen. Sherman, Gen. 
Sheridan, Gen. Logan, Gen. Lee, and Gen. Washington by a number 
of years. If that is dying prematurely as a result of something he 
had prr.cticed all his life from early boyhood, I can not understand it. 

Now, in regard to an ethnologist never having helped the Indians. 
As a matter of fact, anybody who knows anything about ethnologists 
Ijnows that is not true. The Indians look upon ethnologists as their 
best friends. Ethnologists, as a matter of fact, have always endeav- 
ored to help the Indians, as is borne out by hundreds of letters from 
representative Indians showing to what extent they appreciate the 
work of the ethnologists. We have helped them in congres^onal 
matters and have been delegated to help in matters of allotment; 
some of us have been sent out to make allotments for them ; that is, 
to help choose the best land, and avoid being victimized by the white 
settlers. We have helped them to civilization in every way ; we have 
helped them in the choice of schools, in the choice of education; we 
have helped them to raise cattle and to build houses; we have gone 
into their tepees and shown them how to cook and live decently. All 
these things have been done by the ethnologists, both men and 
women. You know all the ethnologists are not men, but we have 
some Avho are women. We have, for instance, Miss Fletcher. Read 
up her record and see what she has done. 

If you want to get at the truth of this thing have the Indians come 
fi'om the tribes that are directly concerned. An Indian delegate from 
a sectarian body or alleged uplift organization is not a delegate for 
his tribe. The tribes have councils elected by themsleves, and they 
€lect these council men year after year to come here and appear for 
them. If you want to learn the attitude of these tribes as tribes have 
their regularly elected tribal delegates appear before you and get 
first-hand information from them. They will give you all the in- 
formation you want in regard to this subject, and I feel that three- 
fourths of them will speak in behalf of this religion. The men are 
there and you can send for them. 

Gen. Pkatt. I feel I would like to say one thing about the gentle- 
man who has just spoken, which is this: That I sent home to the 
Cheyenne agency one of the very finest products of the Carlisle 
School. This gentleman was around there getting ethnological in- 
formation and he had this Indian go with him, interpret for him, and 
do the things he wanted done. Among other things he had this In- 
dian do was to find an Indian who would submit to having his back 
slit, the skin lifted and thongs put in his back and beef skulls — they 
could not find buffalo skulls — dragged around while this gentleman 
dashed around making photographs of it for this Government publi- 
cation. 

Mr. MooNEr. Mr. Chairman, I want to say something right here. 
Gen. Pratt is old enough and has been a sufficient number of years in 
official position to know that he must investigate his statements before 
lie declares them. I denounce that as an absolute falsehood. That 



PKYOTE, 147 

thing was thrashed out in the public newspapers years ago. At the 
time it was answered by Indians and by white men^ and it was denied 
on investigation by every man who asserted it and he knows that ; if 
he does not loiow it he should know it. I. know it and it can be read- 
ily proven. I have correspondence in regard to all of that matter, 
and it will show that the statement just made is a falsehood. 

The fact is that I and my interpreter attended a Cheyenne Indian 
tribal ceremony for observation. Dr. George Dorez, of the Field 
Museum of Chicago, with the museum photographer, Mr. Carpenter, 
were also there for the same purpose. The Indian agent, Mr. Seger, 
was there a part of the time, and a local misisonary, who was the one 
that started the story. Dr. George Bird Grinnell, of New York, may 
have been there also, as we have been together on one such occasion. 
After it had been in progress two or three days and had apparently 
come to an end, we asked the coimcil in charge if there was anything 
else to be done, and they reported to us that it was all over and that 
the Indians would break camp in the morning. This can be attested 
to by all of the gentlemen who were present. 

Gen. Pratt. It is a matter that can be easily proven, and I will 
furnish proof. These are the places and ceremonies. You ethnol- 
ogists egg on, frequent, illustrate, and exaggerate at t]\e public ex- 
pense, and so give the Indian race and their civilization a black eye 
in the public esteem. It was well established at the time of the 
ghost-dance craze among the Indians that white men were its pro- 
moters if not its originators. That this peyote craze is under the 
same impulse is evident from what appears in this evidence. 

Mr. MooNET. You can not furnish proof, because there is no such 
proof. The interpreters came back from the council and said, " It 
is all over; we disband in the morning and go home." We said, " All 
right," and went back to our tepees. I was stopping with George 
Bent's family, in his tepee. George Bent is a Cheyenne half-breed, 
the son of Col. Brent, of Brent's Fort, of Colorado pioneer days. 
Dr. Dorsey and Mr. Carpenter occupied another tepee. The next 
morning, about 5 o'clock, George Bent ran in to me in a great hurry 
and said, " Hurry up, if you want to see a man dragging the 
skull." I did not know what he meant, except in an indefinite way, 
but I came out and I saw what was going on. There was a man who 
had determined, as a sacrificial offering, I understood, to follow the 
old custom of dragging a buffalo skull around the camp circle by 
means of a rope fastened with skewers through his shoulder muscles. 
It was in progress at that time. The man was some distance away, 
but was coming toward me, and, having my camera in the tent, I ran 
in and got it, and when he got near enough to me I made the photo- 
graph which has been referred to. But I did not arrange for that 
thing. I am satisfied that he had kept his purpose secret even from 

the council. d. j? ■ q 

Gen. Pratt. Do you deny that you gave that Indian $25 tor it i 
Mr. MooNET. I deny absolutely that I knew anything about it or 
had anything to do with it and that I had anything whatever to do 
in bringing it about, and that it was anything more than an inci- 
dental coincidence. I never spoke to or had communication with the 
man, directly or indirectly, then, before, or since, and do not remem- 
ber his name. I affirm positively, under oath if necessary, that I had 
absolutely nothing to do with it in any shape, manner, or form. 



148 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Tillman. This is not throwing very much light on the subject 
of peyote. 

The Chairman. Are there any other Indians who want to be heard 
on either side, or is there anybody else, other than Indians, who 
wants to be heard ? 

ADDITIONAL STATEMENT OF DR. LYMAN F. KEBLER. 

Dr. Keblee. I would like to say just a few words on the point 
that was brought out relative to the medicinal value of this drug and 
its effect. It has been stated here that many people go into those 
peyote meetings with hemorrhages to be cured. It is a well-known 
fact that tubercular patients with hemorrhages seldom die of the 
hemorrhages. As a rule they get well. I know of only one case of 
tuberculosis where a hemorrhage occurred where the patient died of 
tuberculosis in a number of years. So that has no effect whatever. 

Now, I want to call your attention to just one feature, namely, 
that the tubercular patient — and a great many of them are victims of 
that disease among the Indians — the tubercular patient can not be 
benefited. There could be no greater crime imposed upon those 
unfortunates than to drag them into these conditions and make them 
sit up all night with this drug, which has the effect of pulling down 
their strength, and nothing that pulls down the strength should be 
used by them. Any physician will tell you that any strain that is 
put upon a tubercular patient lessens his chances of recovery. Now, 
as to rheumatic people; there is absolutely no drug that we know 
anything about that will cure rheumatism, but anybody suffering 
from rheumatism would go a thousand miles away or any distance 
if they had any assurance whatever that they could be cured of those 
pains. There was some reference made here yesterday to the fact 
that this peyote is an equalizer of humanity, and that it draws people 
together. Gentlemen, I can show you a thousand cases where cocaine 
has done the same thing. I have seen those unfortunates in cocaine 
dens, and there you bring the high and educated and well-informed 
main into contact with the lowest. If you call that an equalization, 
then, for Heaven's sake, do it; but I do not think you can indorse 
that form of equalization. 

Mr. Tillman. There is a Catholic priest who desires to appear 
before the committee on this matter, and we will hear him Monday 
morning at 10 o'clock. If there is anyone else who wishes to be 
heard, we will hear him then, but we want to close the hearings 
between 10 and 12 o'clock Monday. 

(Thereupon the subcommittee adjourned until Monday, February 
25, 1918, at 10 o'clock a. m.) 



Committee on Indian Attairs, 

House of Representatives, 
Washington, D. C, February 25, 1918. 
The subcommittee met at 10 o'clock a. m. pursuant to adjournment. 
Present: Representatives Tillman (chairman), Hastings, and Sny- 
der. 
Mr. Tillman. The committee will please come to order. 



PEYOTE. 149 

STATEMENT OF FRED LOOKOUT, CHIEF OF THE OSAGE TRIBE OF 
INDIANS, PAWHUSKA, OKLA. 

Mr. Tillman. Give your name and the position you occupy in the 
tribe, and a preliminary statement about yourself, before you proceed 
on your statement about the purpose of this bill, which is to prohibit 
peyote among the Indians. 

What is your name, age, and tribe ? 

Chief Lookout. Fred Lockout, 50 years of age, chief of the Osage 
Tribe of Indians. 

Mr. Tillman. What is your residence ? 

Chief Lookout. Pawhuska, Olda. 

Mr. Tillman. Go ahead in your own way and make whatever state- 
ment you desire to make, and state to the committee whether you favor 
the continued use of the drug or whether you are against it, and you 
may cover the subject fully in your own way. 

Chief Lookout. We use this peyote in the worship of God among 
the Osage Indians. We worship it in a manner that is the right way. 
We are praying to God when we use this medicine that is known as 
peyote, and the Osage people, my people, use it to a certain extent. 
They use it in the right way. There is no harm in it. I like it and I 
am in favor of it. 

Mr. Tillman. Go on and finish your statement and then we will ask 
you some questions. 

Chief Lookout. For myself, as chief of the Osage Indians, I use 
this peyote myself. When I use it I use it in the right way. I live up 
to it in worship to God. I understand that some of these Indians have 
been using it the same as we have, and I want the committee to know 
that we do not use it the same way. The Osage people, as a member 
of the tribe, I know use it in the right way, and we use it like people 
going to church. We have our regular meetings. We do not use 
this peyote every day. We do not use it everywhere we go. We use 
it in the right way. We have church houses, ourselves, among the 
Osage people. We have our gatherings there and worship to God 
and use this peyote as we think is the better way amongst our own 
people. I use it myself and I know by using it I live in a better way, 
and I like it on thait account. My people are doing very well, and for 
that reason I like the use of this peyote. Since the use of peyote 
amongst the tribe of Osage Indians my young people, or my young 
men, have developed quite a good reputation. They are living up to 
their words. They are living under the laws of the State where we 
live. They are prosperous; they are gaining; and they are living a 
better life and making money, settling down in their homesteads and 
raising their own cattle and horses and everything. By using this 
peyote they have lived a whole lot better life. On the other hand, 
before they began to use peyote, my people would use whisky and it 
ruined a lot of our people. They would ruin their lives and ruin their 
homes. They did not have anything. They have gone to nothing, 
and since the use of this peyote they have gained. I recognized the 
way they were doing and this is the reason I am in favor of this peyote. 
I want the committee to hear what I have got to say. And that is all. 

Mr. Tillman. What effect has peyote upon you when you use it? 



150 PEYOTE. 

Chief Lookout. It does not have any effect upon me. When I eat ' 
this peyote I worship with it; that is, I worship to God Almighty. 
It does not have any effect on me. 

Mr. Tillman. How much do you take at one sitting or at one 
meeting? 

Chief Lookout. Four or five or seven is the limit. Seven is as high 
as we eat it. 

Mr. Tillman. Does it give you visions of the hereafter, and does 
it not bring about the faces of your dead relatives, and does it not 
have the effect of causing you to see visions ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir ; I do not see anything like that. I do not 
see anything. I do not see a hereafter. 

Mr. Tillman. How much does it cost? Is it an expensive drug? 

Chief Lookout. About $2 a hundred. 

Mr. Tillman. Does it have any effect upon you? If not, why do 
you not use something else that is less expensive and more easily 
obtained ? 

Chief Lookout. I can not find anything that I can buy for less, 
only whisky, and that makes a person drunk. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you use whisky before you began to use this 
bean? 

Chief Lookout. I Avas a terrible drunkard before I ate this peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. And do you want this committee to understand that 
the use of peyote has destroyed entirely in you the appetite for 
whislw, and that you do not want whisky any more and prefer peyote 
to Avhisky ? 

Chief Lookout. I have quit the whisky entirely, but I am using this 
peyote. ^ 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think that the use of peyote destroyed the 
taste of whisky in you ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir; I do not. 

Mr. Tillman. How many members of your tribe use peyote ? 

Chief Lookout. Most all the full-blood members of the tribe. 

Mr. Tillman. Is this a Christian religion, or is it a mere worship of 
peyote, or the drug itself ? 

Chief Lookout. We worship God Almighty ; we worship to Him. 

Mr. Tillman. Then explain to this committee where you get any 
authority from the Bible for the use of this bean in worship. 

Chief Lookout. I do not understand about the Bible. If the Bible 
gives any authority for the use of this peyote, I am not familiar 
with it. 

Mr. TiLLJiAN. Then where do you get vour authority for the use 
of it? 

Chief Lookout. All of my people use this peyote, and some other 
member of the tribe came to me and persuaded me to use it. That is 
how I came to use this peyote. 

Mr. TiLLaiAN. Does it have any effect on you ; and if it does not, 
and if the appetite does not grow on you the more you use it, why 
do you use it ? Does the appetite grow on you ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. TiLL3iAN. How many members are there of your tribe — about 
2,100 or 2,200? 

Chief Lookout. About 800 full bloods. 



PEYOTE. 151 

Mr. Tillman. Do all the full bloods use this peyote? 

C hief LooKOTJT. Most all of them. 

Mr. Tillman. Do they use it outside of the religious ceremonies? 
Do they use it privately ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir ; they do not. 

Mr. Tillman. About hew' often do they have these ceremonies? 

Chief Lookout. They do not use it regularly. They use it every 
two weeks or every week. They have these, and one man will give 
a meeting over there [indicating] ; maybe after about two or three 
weeks another man will give a meeting; and that is the way they 
use it. 

Mr. Tillman. Who buys this stuff, and where do they get it? 

Chief. Lookout. We send for it. We have it ordered from the 
wuthern part of Texas. 

Mr. Tilljian. What member of the tribe does that, and wlio is the 
custodian of this stuff and who distributes it ? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know. 

Mr. Tillman. Does it come to you as chief of the tribe, or does it 
come to some of the medicine men of the tribe ? 

Chief Lookout. There are several leaders of these peyote mem- 
bers, and each one gets it by ordering it — not certain ones. 

Mr. Tillman. Do they sell it to the other members, or how do the 
other members get it? 

Chief Lookout. They order it, I guess, like I do. That is the way 
1 do. 

Mr. Tillman. Then you order it for yourself? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you keep it in your home after you order it? 

Chief Lookout. I have it at home ; and then whenever I have got a 
meeting — I do not' use it every day just to be using it, but whenever 
I have got a meeting I will use it on that certain day. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you send for a white physician when you get 
sick, or do you depend upon the services of the medicine man of the 
tribe? 

Chief Lookout. Well, in case of sickness in my family, I always 
call a doctor. It is not used as a medicine. 

Mr. Tillman. If you get sick yourself, do you send for a physician 
yourself, or do you depend upon the medicine men of the tribe ? 

Chief Lookout. I send for a doctor. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you a member of any church, and if so, what 
church ? 

Chief Lookout. I have not got much education and I can not 
imderstand English and can not read the Bible, and I am not a mem- 
ber of any churches outside of peyote. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think this drug should be used generally 
among the Indians when it makes them lazy and when it creates in 
them an appetite for the drug, so that they feel that they are com- 
pelled to use it all the time, and that those who habitually use it in 
some places abandon work and become very dissipated on account of 
the use of it, and finally go back to using whisky with it ? If it has 
that effect on certain members of the Indian tribe, do you think it 
ought to be prohibited, or ought they to be permitted to continue 
to use it ? 



152 PEYOTE. 

Chief Lookout. I am a member of the peyote; I eat this peyote; 
I do not get lazy ; I am on a farm ; several of the men have visited 
my farm ; the Commissioner of Indian Affairs has been to my home ; 
I am farming there, and have several stock, and I am doing what I 
can to make money; I do not get lazy; I do not think the other 
Indians get lazy either, among the members. 

Mr. Tillman. How long have the members of this tribe been using 
peyote ? 

Chief Lookout. Twenty years. 

Mr. Hastings. How long have you, personally, been using it? 

Chief Lookout. Eleven years. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you keep some of it in your house? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you ever use it privately and not in connection 
with public meetings ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Does the use of it make you acquire a taste for it 
like the use of whisky? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. You say about all the full-blooded Indians of the 
tribe use peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Over half. 

Mr. Hastings. Those who use whisky also use peyote, don't they? 

Chief Lookout. I do not drink whisky myself. 

Mr. Hastings. I am not talking about you. I am talking about the 
members of the tribe who drink whisky. They use peyote, too, 
don't they ? 

Chief Lookout. In the case of a few they are bound to do it. 

Mr. Hastings. I am asking you for information. I heard a state- 
ment made by Mr. Wright, the superintendent, over before the In- 
dian Committee of the Senate, to the effect — that a good many of the 
full-blooded members of your tribe were addicted to the use of 
whisky and that quite a considerable number were placed upon what 
was known as the drunk list. I am not asking you to embarrass 
you, but for information as to whether or not those that are placed 
upon that list also use peyote? 

Chief Lookout. There are a few young boys that are that way. 
They eat this peyote and they drink whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. Those full bloods who work eat peyote and those 
who do not work eat peyote ; is that right ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Do they permit the children to eat it ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Why? 

Chief Lookout. After he has got grown he believes he will eat it. 

Mr. Hastings. Peyote does not hurt him, as you state ; it is harm- 
less ; and wliy do you not allow the children to eat it along with the 
men? 

Chief Lookout. Well, I have four children myself, and they eat 
peyote sometimes. 

Mr. Hastings. At about what age do they begin to eat peyote? 

Chief Lookout. About 10 or 12. 

Mr. Hastings. Did you ever eat enough yourself to be under the 
influence of it, like a person is under the' influence of whisky or 



PEYOTE. 153 

under the influence of morphine or under the influence of any other 
drug ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Have you seen any of the members of your tribe 
use it so that they are apparently under the influence of it? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Then you think that it does no harm, but that in a 
religious way it does good ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Are any of the full-blood Osages members of any 
Christian church? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir; there are some Osages who belong to 
the churches ; not to this peyote but to other churches. 

Mr. Hastings. I mean full bloods. 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Yes, sir. And you say that peyote is never used 
privately in the homes, not only by yourself but not by any other 
members of your tribe? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Does anybody have peyote for sale there at Paw- 
huska ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. It has to be ordered through the mail ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Where do the members of the Osage tribe order it 
from? 

Chief Lookout. Some town in the State of Texas. 

Mr. Sntdek. You say there are about 800 full-blood Indians in 
your tribe? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. And about 400 of them use peyote and belong to the 
religious society that uses peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Over half of the 800. 

Mr. Sntdee. Are there any white people living around or near this 
reservation ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. About how many? 

Chief Lookout. A good many. 

Mr. Sntdee. 5,000 or 6,000? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir; about 5,000 or 6,000. 

Mr. Sntdee. How long since you have actually had any peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Last Saturday, one week ago, we had a peyote 
meeting. 

Mr. Sntdee. You have not had any since you have been here in 
the city of Washington? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. How many of the 800 full-blooded Indians of your 
tribe use whiskey? 

Chief Lookout. There are some who use whiskey yet, but I do 
not know just exactly how many. 

Mr. Sntdee. Is it illegal to sell whiskey in this reservation? 

Chief Lookout. It is illegal, but they get it in some way. 



154 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do you ever see out in that territory any of these 
inspectors that the Government puts out there to keep whiskey from 
coming into these reservations? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir; I have seen them. 

Mr. Sntdee. How many Indians are arrested, say, in a month for 
the use of liquor? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know, but they arrest them every once 
in a while and put them in jail. 

Mr. Sntdee. How long, do you know, of your own knowledge, 
since anyone was arrested for bringing whisky into the district ? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know. 

Mr. Sntdee. Can you state whether it is two months, three months, 
or six months? 

Chief Lookout. I can not make a statement. 

Mr. Sntdee. You have been asked whether you fed this peyote to 
your children and you stated that you did not until they were along 
in years. Is that a fact? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do the Indians who belong to this religious society 
and take peyote, as a rule, feed it to their children previous to their 
becoming 15 or 16 years of age?' 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. They d.o feed it to them when they are young chil- 
dren ? 

Chief Lookout. When they are about 10 or 12 years of age. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do you know any of the white families who live at or 
near the reservation? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do you know whether it is customary for white peo- 
ple to feed whisky to their children before they are 12 years of age ? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know. 

Mr. Sntdee. You do not know of any case at all? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do you know of any case where the white people feed 
their children peyote before they are 12 years of age? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do you know of any white people that use peyote at 
all? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir; I know one. 

Mr. Sntdee. Do the white people come to these meetings where 
they have these religious services with reference to peyote ? 

Chief Lookout. They do not come in to the meeting, but they come 
outside where they have the dinners or the gathering outside. 

Mr. Sntdee. You say that about 400 of the 800 people that are 
full-blood Indians worship at this shrine of peyote. How about the 
400 Indians ? How do they operate as to religion ? What churches 
do they go to ? 

Chief Lookout. All those they do not come to the peyote meet- 
ings, they go to the Baptist Church and Holiness meetings. 

Mr. Sntdee. When you say there are 800 full-blood Indians you 
mean 800 young people, etc. You do not mean that there are 800 In- 
dians of full age, full bloods, do you? 

Chief Lookout. There are 800 members of the tribe — men, women, 
and children. 



PEYOTE. 155 

Mr. Shydee. You say that these Indians have been taking peyote 
for 20 years? ^^ 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. You yourself have been taking it for 11 years? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. What do you say as to the stability and- the physical 
ability of these people to-day as compared to 11 years ago when you 
started to use peyote ? 

Chief Lookout. They are better ; they are better people now ; they 
feel better. 

Mr. Snyder. Do they work better? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir; they work better. 

Mr. Snyder. Do you believe that the farms and the industries of 
that section of the country are in a better productive condition to- 
day than they were 11 years ago when you commenced to use peyote ? 

Chief Lookout. They are. 

Mr. Snyder. What would these 400 full-blood Indians do for a 
religion if peyote was taken away from them ? 

Chief Lookout. It would ruin the Osages to stop the use of this 
peyote. They will go back to the back-life ; they will go to drinking 
whisky or do anything. They will not try to gain anything if this 
peyote stops; it will be a ruin to my tribe, and that is the reason I 
am talking in favor of it. 

Mr. Snyder. Now, I want to ask you a few questions about how 
they organize these men around peyote. Is it not this way : Some 
leader comes into a small community, and starts to organize a society, 
about the same as a man might come in and organize a society of the 
Moose, the Elks, the Eagles, or Knights of Pythias? Is not that 
about it? 

Chief Lookout. We have no regular organization like you mention, 
but we are just regular members of this peyote church. We worship 
together in one body. 

Mr. Snyder. "V\1iat I am trying to get at is hoAv it comes from one 
settlement to another? In your tribe, they are pretty generally 
worshiping at this shrine. There may be 100 miles away another 
Indian tribe. How do they organize this other tribe. Do not you 
send somebody from your tribe over there to introduce this into that 
locality ? 

Chief Lookout. I could not tell you whether peyote is original to 
my tribe, but it has been handed down from Indians to Indians — other 
tribes. We just got it from other tribes, not Osages. We got it 
from them and we started in that way. 

Mr. Snyder. What I have been trying to bring to a conclusion here 
is whether or not peyote is being distributed to the Indians as a com- 
modity of sale, or whether it is being introduced as the principal 
item in a religion for the purpose of organizing the Indians into a 
religious society throughout all the country in which Indians live. 
Whether some men who are interested in the production and sale of 
peyote are endeavoring to interest the Indians in it in order to sell 
peyote, or whether it is actually a religious rite, as this man says, and 
handed down year after year, and the Indians a re being interested in 
it on account o'f the benefit that they get from the religion that comes 
from peyote? 



156 PEYOTE. 

Chief Lookout. It is a worshiping religion ; that is all it is. 

Mr. Sntdee. You have used this peyote 11 years, and you seem 
to me to be a very intelligent man. Since I have been on this com- 
mittee in three years, it strikes me that you are the most intelligent 
witness, from an Indian standpoint, that I have seen here, and finally 
I want to ask you a little bit more about this whisky business. It 
is a singular thing to me that in a district where whisky is pro- 
hibited, so many Indians are able to get whisky. Why do they get 
it, and how far do they have to go to get it? Is it brought in to 
them or do they go out and bring it in themselves? 

Chief Lookout. I will have to tell you I do not know how they 
get it, but they get it some way. Some people sell it to them — 
smuggle it. 

Mr. Sntdee. Don't you think, as a prominent member of the tribe, 
it would be about as important for the Indian Department to see to 
the keeping of whisky out of that tribe as keeping this peyote out? 

Chief Lookout. We would like to keep the peyote, but we can not 
stop whisky. They get it in some way. The Indian Office has tried 
in every way, I guess, to keep men there to keep Indians from getting 
whisky, but they have failed so far. They are getting whisky right 
along. 

Mr. Sntdee. Does the whisky do great damage to the men that 
get it out in that locality? Do they get drunk and disorderly and 
lazy and indolent? 

Chief Lookout. They do ; yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntdee. I will not ask any more questions. I understand you 
to say that peyote is of great benefit in your belief to your people and 
that without the use of it it will break up your tribe and they would 
practically go back into the wilds of the country ? Is that correct ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes. 

Mr. Tillman. You state, I believe, that you attribute the progress 
and improvement of the Osage Indians entirely to the use of peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. I believe you stated that it was not used as medi- 
cine at all; it does not cure disease; and they do not think that it 
cures and assists disease in any way. 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. They do not bring sick people to these meetings for 
the purpose of healing them ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Kapplee. May I say a word in addition to what Chief Look- 
out has said ? I would like to supplement what the chief said in ref- 
erence to peyote. I was formerly the attorney for the Osages and I 
came in contact with a good many full bloods, and in consequence of 
it I know something about the use of the peyote. The way I under- 
stand it they have a number of lodges, and those Indians that belong 
to these lodges have their meetings regularly every week. At these 
meetings each one takes peyote and water. Now, it has been demon- 
strated that among the Osages they never do use it to excess. I have 
been told that they probably use between six and seven beans a per- 
son at a sitting. Such limited use has been proved to be harmless. 
So far as the Osages are concerned — and I am speaking for the 
Osages only — I think we can prove by testimony that has been given 



PEYOTE. 157 

down at the Indian Office by Indians — reputable Indians of the 
tribe— that it has not been harmful, but, on the contrary, it has been 
most beneficial. Those Indians that use peyote do not use whisky, 
whereas previously many of them did use whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. You heard the testimony of Chief Lookout and 
you heard the testimony which I elicitated by questions which I pro- 
pounded to him as to whether or not that those people who use peyote 
use whisky, and his statements to the contrary. 

Mr. I^ApptEE. It is a well-known fact that the Osage Indians who 
use peyote do not use whisky, but there may be one or two who have 
fallen from grace. 

Mr. Hastings. What I want to do is to get the facts in this record. 
Suppose we permit him now to be interrogated. I would like to 
hear that from him. I want to ask Chief Lookout whether any of 
those people 

Mr. Kapplee (interposing). That belong to his lodge? 

Mr. Hastings (continuing). Well, any of the full-blood Osages 
who use peyote — whether they use whisky also. I asked him that 
awhile ago. 

Chief Lookout. I made a statement that some of these peyote men 
can not help but drink, some of them. 

Mr. Hastings. Some of them use both whisky and peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Those are not good members.* 

Mr. Hastings. I am asking if some of them use both? 

Chief Lookout (through his interpreter). No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. You did not ask him that. You are answering me 
yourself, and I want you to ask Chief Lookout, so that I can get it 
"from him as to whether or no some of them use peyote, also use 
whisky. 

Chief Lookout. Peyote members do not drink whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you mean to say that no person who uses peyote 
drinks whisky? 

Chief Lookout. They do not drink whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. Did you not state a while ago that some of those 
who used peyote also used whisky ? 

Chief Lookout. I did say that, but the outside member come in. 

Mr. Hastings. Then, you mean, if I understand you, that those 
who belong to the peyote society do not use whisky ? Those who are 
in good standing do not use whisky ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. As I understand, then, you want to be understood 
as saying that some of those who use whisky occasionally come into 
the peyote society and use peyote, but are not good members of it, 
is that it ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Are any of those Osages that are placed upon the 
drunk list by the superintendent of the Osages members of the 
Peyote Society? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know. 

Mr. Snydek. Do you know of any single Indian that you can 
namej a member of the Peyote Society, that uses whisky? 

Chief Lookout. I know one. 



158 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Sni'dee. Do you know any particular person who is not a 
member of the Peyote Society Avh'o uses peyote and liquor? I want 
to know if you know yourself personally ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir ; I know one. 

Mr. Snyder. Do you know more than one? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir ; I know a few. 

Mr. Snyder. Do j'ou know more than 10 ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Do you know more than 9 ? 

Chief LooKorrT. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Then, you do not actually known more than two, do 
you? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. You know more than two, but you do not know more 
than nine? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Now, you say there are 400 full-blood Indians that 
do not belong to the Peyote Church ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snydek. And you say you know one member of the Peyote 
Church that does take whislij'? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Do you know more than one member? Do you know 
two members that take whisky ? 

Chief Lookout. No, sir. 

Mr. Sntder. So that you finish by saying that out of 400 that 
belong to the Peyote Church, you only know of one that drinks 
whisky, and out of 400 that are outside of the Peyote Church, you 
actually know 2, but you know less than 9 that use whisky? 

Chief Lookout. I really do not pay any attention to the drunkards. 
I only go along and take care of myself. Of course they drink, but 
only a certain amount of it. 

Mr. Hastings. You say there are about 800 members of the Osage 
tribe — men, women, and children — 1 mean full-blood ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. And you say about 400 of these belong to this 
peyote society and use peyote? 

Chief Lookout. Eight at it. 

Mr. Hastings. Of course, you are just giving rough estimates? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Now. as a matter of fact, practically only the adults 
among the full-blood Osages, men and women, and those children 
above 12 years of age, belong to the peyote society, don't them ? 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. And the children do not belong? 

Chief Lookout. The smallest ones do not. 

Mr. Hastings. And you estimate that there are about 400 of the 
grown people and people over 12 years of age — men, women, and 
children — among the Osages, who belong to this peyote society, and 
those 400 who are under that do not belong to it — under 12 years of 
age? 

Chief Lookout. Yes. sir. 

Mr. Hastings. In other words, practically all of the full-blood 
Osage Indians belong to this society? 



PEYOTE. 159 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Now, the truth is, those who drink and those wlio do 
not drink belong to that society, don't they ? 

Chief Lookout. Those who are members of the peyote do not drink 
whisky. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you know a single, solitary full-blood Osage 
that IS an adult that does not belong to the society? 

Chief Lookout. One of the old chiefs, Nick Washington, is not a 
member of the peyote. 

Mr. Hastings. Does he drink ? 

Chief Lookout. I do not know. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you know any other person that is a grown 
person and a full-blood Osage that does not belong to the peyote? 
^Vhat I understand you to say is that practically all of the adult 
Osages do belong. 

Chief Lookout. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Go ahead, Mr. Kappler. 

STATEMENT OF MR. CHARLES J. KAPPLER. 

Mr. E^APPLEE. My understanding was that only members of these 
lodges used this peyote, and it is stated by them, and they think that 
they can prove it, that these Indians do not drink whisky. They 
may have been previously whisky-drinking Indians, but by the 
use of peyote in their religious ceremonies they have overcome this 
habit. They attend meetings every week, and from what they say, 
they only use seven or eight beans. That has been shown to be 
harmless. I am not able to express better than what these Indians 
have written as to the effect that peyote has had on those who use 
it in their religious ceremonies, and I would like to read a paragraph 
and put the balance of it in the record, because it emlDraces the 
information they have prepared in the way of a petition : 

We have been using the peyote for about 20 years, and feel confident that it 
has been of great benefit to us in our worship of God. The peyote, us used in 
our worship, has been tlie means of maldng stronger and better men and 
women of our tribe ; it has given us higher ideals of duty toward our God 
and Government, and a greater respect for our wives and children. We have 
never known or heard of a single instance in which the use of peyote in our 
religious worship has resulted in injury to either the mind or body. There is 
a great fear among the members of our tribe that if the use of peyote is pro- 
hibited our people will return to strong drink and other evil habits. Under 
such conditions we think that it would be unwise to prohibit the use of 
peyote in our religious work at this time. 

We further believe that the use of peyote is a great help to the Osage Indian 
Tribe, because a great many of them have now started to farming and are 
endeavoring to use their best opportunity. 

I had a talk with the superintendent, Mr. Wright, not very long 
ago, when he was here, and he told me that the Osages who use 
peyote are more industrious, more reliable, and attend to and pro- 
vide for their families better, and save more money than those Indians 
who do not belong to the peyote lodges. As an instance of that, he 
pointed out himself the chief here as being one of the most sub- 
stantial Indians he has ever come in contact with, one of the most 
intelligent, and one of the most industrious. He is a fine farmer. 
1 think the chairman can say what the chief's farm consists of. 



160 PEYOTE. 

because he was down there one year. He raises cattle, hogs, and 
chickens, farms his allotment, and has become a first-class farmer. 

The claim made by the Osages is that peyote has never been harm- 
ful to them, and they point to the chief and many others in their 
tribe as indicating that the effects of using peyote has been very 
beneficial to them. 

I know in one case where an Indian down there had been a whisky- 
drinking Indian. He was in the Spanish-American War in 1898, 
and after that went over to China in the Boxer uprising and was one 
of the first to scale the walls. He came back and became a member 
of one of these peyote societies, and he is a very industrious and 
capable Indian to-day and is at present connected with the agency 
at Pawhuska. 

My suggestion would be that if this committee should come to the 
conclusion that the use of peyote should be prohibited, then I would 
ask that an exception be made where it could be shown that it is used 
for religious purposes only by the Indians. Suppose you take this' 
bean away from them. '\Vliat will happen? They will all be dis- 
contented and disgruntled and claim the Government is interfering 
with their religion. They will say, " Why don't you take the bread 
and wine away from the Christian religion ? " They must have 
their bread and wine. I saw an article in the paper yesterday that 
shows that the Government takes cognizance of all of these little 
things. I do not know whether I have the article in front of me 
or not, but it was where the Food Administration made an exception 
in the conservation of wheat by allowing the Christian churches to 
have wheat enough to make host and the Hebrews to make matzon 
in order to carry on their religious ceremonies. What excuse can be 
given for depriving these Indians of the essential thing that they 
use in their religion ? 

As I was going to say, if you are going to prohibit it, I would 
suggest that you make an exception and allow them to use this 
peyote to a limited extent for religious ceremonies only, and you 
can throw safeguards around it that will prevent it from being used 
for any other purpose. I would like to have these petitions included 
in the record. 

Mr. TiLDMAN. They will be included, and I want to ask a few 
questions. 

(The papers referred to are as follows:) 

Hominy, Okla., February 7, 1918. 
Hon. Ohaeles X>. Cabtee, 

Chairman House Indian Committee, Washington, D. C. 

Sik: We, the undersigned members of the Osage Tribe of Indians, respect- 
fully asl^ that the use of " peyote " be aUowed In religions worship and church 
services among the members of our tribe. 

We understand that the Constitution of the United States provides that 
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or pro- 
hibiting the free exercise thereof." We understand that certain treaties regard- 
ing this matter were made between the United States Government and the 
Osage Tribe of Indians, and that the same was recently abolished. 

We have been using the peyote for about 20 years, and feel confident that 
it has been of great benefit to us in our worship to God. The peyote as used 
in our worship have been the means of making stronger and better men and 
women of our tribe ; it has given us higher ideals of duty toward our country 
and Government, and a greater respect for our wives and children. We have 
never known or heard of a single instance in which the use of peyote In our 



PEYOTE. 161 

religious worship has resulted in injury to either the mind or body. There is 
a great fear among the members of our tribe that if the use of peyote is pro- 
hibited that our people will return to strong drinks and other evil habits. Under 
such conditions we think that it would be unwise to prohibit the use of peyote 
in our religious work at this time. 

We further believe that the use of peyote is a great help to the Osage 
Indian Tribe, because a great many of them have now started to farming and 
are endeavoring to use their best opportunity. 

God is truth! Religion is one's belief as to what this truth is, and we all 
hold certain opinions, and all working for the same goal, notwithstanding the 
fact that there are many views on this subject. In using the peyote we are 
living more peaceable, honorable, and Christlike. You will find in all national- 
illes people who do wrong and delight in violating the la\\s of God and man, but 
we have very few of this type among our tribe, sis the court records will show. 
While using peyote our people have advanced along many lines, to wit, stock 
raising and improving our farms. We are educating our children as best we 
can to make useful men and women and that our posterity will equal that of 
any race of people. 

We know that whisky is made by the white man, and that they make it for 
some special purpose which we do not know, only we know by our people of 
Osages that those who drink the whisky are not the best class of people and 
not in good condition, and that they spend much of their time and money for 
whisky and are habitual drunkards and have not the virtue, truth, and honesty 
that all men should have. The members of our tribe who use peyote are entirely 
different from those who drink whisky, and are trying to live an honest life and 
refrain from immoral habits. 

Whereas we have been known by all races of men that we, the red men 
or American Indians, are the owners of this country, for God created the red men 
upon this land and gave us the ways and customs of living, gave us certain 
food to eat which are grown from the earth, and that these were made on 
purpose for the red men, and that some of these foods are unknown by other 
races of men. We believe that God made heaven and earth and all things upon 
the earth and grown from the earth. We are from the earth ; we have no 
written tongue, but have been given hearts and minds to go by. We are 
ignorant, but have eyes to see with in order to guide ourselves in the ways God 
wishes us to go. 

God gave us bows and arrows for weapons to search for food ; He gave us 
certain animals and birds to kill and eat ; He gave us fire and water with which 
to cook our food ; and He will raise our children from generation to generation 
as long as there are red men in the American country. 

During our church days we have special dinners with our children and women, 
and we ask God to help us refresh our foods and water and to give us strength 
and pure hearts and minds. 

We beg you to give this matter your most serious and careful consideration, 
as it is a very grave and important matter to us ; and we will greatly appreciate 
anything you vnll do for us so we may continue the use of peyote in our church 
work. 

Respectfully, 

John Abbott. 
Ramon Logan. 
Edgab McCaetht. 
Mi-KAH-WAH-TIA-KAH [his mark]. 

To the Senate and Souse Committees on Indian Affairs: 

We, the undersigned members of the Osage Tribal Council, respectfully peti- 
tion your honorable committees that no legislation be enacted which will prevent 
the members of the Osage Tribe of Indians using peyote in their religious cere- 
monies. The lodges among the Osages using peyote in their religious ceremonies 
were established by Chief Black Dog and Chief Clermont In 1896. Peyote is 
used by the Indians in the same manner and with the same purpose in view 
that wine is used among Christian denominations. Since its use by the Osages, 
it can be shown that those who use it are better men and women, both physi- 
cally, mentally, and morally, and that they are more industrious than those who 
do not use It ; that a good number of Indians who formerly used whisky have 
been reformed by becoming members of one of the lodges, and have become good 
and upright persons. Peyote has been used for religious purposes among the 

47003—18 11 



162 PETOTE. 

Osages for many years ; that any attempt at this time to interfere witli its use 
for that purpose would create discontent and dissatisfaction, and would be con- 
sidered by the Indians an unwarrantable interference with their freedom of 
religion. The Osages have never been accused of using peyote to excess, as 
has been reported to the Indian Office from other tribes ; and in order to demon- 
strate to Congress and the department that the Osages never have and do not 
intend in the future to abuse the use of peyote, they are willing that its use 
among the lodges of the Osages shall be supervised by the superintendent. 

The fear of the Osages is that the Government will attempt to deprive them 
of peyote, which they use in their religious ceremonies the same as wine is used 
by other religious organizations, which would make it impossible for them to 
carry out their religion as they were taught by Chief Black Dog and Chief 
Clermont, and thus making theni retui-n to the conditions prevailing among the 
Indians when everybody used whisky in some form. It can be proven that the 
condition prevailing among the Osage lodges using peyote is vastly superior 
to the condition of the Indians who do not belong to the lodges ; and it has been 
shown that the use of peyote in the religious ceremony of the Osages has had 
a tendency to reclaim a great many Indians who were addicted to the use of 
liquor and who have since become industrious, honest, and reliable men and 
women. 

We respectfully pray that in the event Congress enacts legislation concerning 
the use of peyote that provision be made for the use of peyote by any of the 
Indian lodges in their religious ceremonies under the strict supervision of the 
Indian superintendent. 

Feed Lookout, 
Eves Tallchief, 
Edgae McCaethy, 
Abthue Bonnecastle. 
Representing Blackdog and Glaremont Lodges. 

Mr. TiLLjfAN. Who prepared that statement that you read to the 
committee ? 

Mr. Kappler. It was sent to me. I suppose it was prepared by the 
Indians down there ? 

Mr. Tillman. Who sent it to you ? 

Mr. Kappler. John Abbott. Do you know who prepared this, Mr. 
Abbott? 

Mr. Abbott. I did. 

Mr. Kappler. It was prepared by these Indians. 

Mr. Tillman. You were an attorney, you say, for the Osage In- 
dians? 

Mr. Kappler. Yes, sir ; for six years. 

Mr. Tillman. You are an intelligent white man. Do you tell this 
committee that you believe that the use of this stuff destroys the 
appetite for whisky ? 

Mr. Kappler. I am talking only from what I have heard and have 
seen among these Indians. I am relying on what these Indians say. 

Mr. Tillman. It must be very powerful if it does that. 

Mr. Kappler. It evidently has a counteracting effect on whisky. 

Mr. Tillman. Don't you know it must be a very strong and potent 
drug which destroys the Indians' love for whisky ? 

Mr. Kappler. I only know that they use a few of these beans and 
they are satisfied. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think the committee should discriminate in 
favor of these Indians and prohibit the use among other Indians 
where the use is proven to be deleterious ? 

Mr. Kappler. No, sir; but I say that you could make provision 
throwing safeguards around its use. These Indians claim that they 
only use seven beans at a sitting. It has been shown that such limited 
use is harmless. 



PEYOTE. 163 

Mr. Tillman. Do you know what drug has been found in this 
pean? 

Mr. Kappler. I have read several statements in the record. 

Mr. Tillman. You believe those statements, don't you ? 

Mr. Kappler. Well, I admit they are professional statements, but 
I am not familiar with it myself. 

Mr. Tillman. You are not a chemist yourself, are you ? 

Mr. I^PPLER. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Or a physician ? 

Mr. Kappler. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. If reputable physicians state that this is actually 
worse than cocaine and as bad as many other drugs, would you favor 
its continuance ? 

Mr. Kappler. No, sir; I would not, but I say in a case of this kind, 
where a man has been using it for 11 years, and others of the tribe 
longer, and you find a specimen like the one before you in the person 
of Chief Lookout, it shows it is harmless. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you ever had anything to do with cocaine 
fiends? 

Mr. Kappler. I have been in Chinatown in San Francisco. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you ever hear a cocaine fiend that did not say 
that the stuff was harmless ? 

Mr. Kappler. I suppose they do. 

Mr. Tillman. As a matter of fact, is not this drug one particular 
form of a habit- forming drug? 

Mr. Kappler. The only reply I would make to you is to say that 
from my experience with the Indians who have used it that is not 
true. 

Mr. TrLLMAN. You never used it yourself ? 

Mr. Kappler. No. When I see men here like Fred Lookout and 
half a dozen others I could mention, who have used it a dozen years, 
and instead of proving harmful it has proven beneficial, then I should 
say that its limited use in religious ceremonies is not harmful. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you know Dr. S. Weir Mitchell ? Did you know 
him in his lifetime ? 

Mr. Kappler. Yes, sir. I have heard of him. 

Mr. Tillman. If he said : 

I predict a perilous reign of this mescal habit when this agent becomes 
obtainable. The temptation to call again the enchanting magic will be. too 
much for some men to resist, after they have set foot in this land of fairy 
colors, where there seems so much to charm and so little to excite horror or 
disgust. 

Do you know whether or not he stated the facts with reference to 
peyote as they exist ? 

Mr. KLappler. Among the Osages ? 

Mr. Tillman. Among anybody ; I am talking about peyote ; I am 
not talking about the Osages. 

Mr. Kappler. I can only speak for the Osages. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not know of any reason why the drug would 
not have the same effect upon the Osages as upon the Sioux ? 

Mr. Kappler. It has the same effect on a man who takes one di'ink 
and another who drinks a whole bottle. 

Mr. Tillman. Is it not a fact that an attractive drug like that of 
alcohol has a tendency to increase the appetite for the same? 



164 PKYOTE. 

Mr. IvAPPLER. It may have in some cases, but I am talking par- 
ticularly of the Osages, where it has not had that effect, and you have 
had the physical examples before you. 

Mr. TrLLMAN. Suppose Dr. Eichardson, of Denver, says of peyote: 

So far as its results on the human economy are concernecl, from a pathological 
standpoint, alcohol is altogether the safest and least harmful. The alcoholic 
subject may, by a careful system of dietetics, escape physical and mental weak- 
ness, but the mescal fiend travels to absolutely incompetency. It is a vicious 
thing. 

Do you know of any reason to suspect that he did not know what 
he was talking about ? 

Mr. Kappler. I imagine he did. He was a professional man. 

Mr. Tillman. And would not this have the same effect on the 
Osages as on the others? 

Mr. Kappler. If they use it to excess, it would; but it has not 
proven harmful to th'e Indians of the Osage Tribe in the limited wa}^ 
they use it, and it Avould not be a wise thing, in my opinion, to 
prohibit its use in religious services. 

Mr. Tillman. Suppose Prof. E. B. Putt, of the North Dakota 
Agricultural College and Government Experiment Station, writes — 

I should not care to repeat the experiment with a dose exceeding four mescal 
buttons. The muscular paralysis is so complete that one might cease breathing, 
thus ending the experiment. 

If it has that effect upon the human anatomy, it is a very harmful 
drug, is it not ? 

Mr. Kappler. The fact is that they have been using it for 20 years. 

Mr. Tillman. They have been using opium for twenty hundred 
years. 

Mr. Kappler. Yes ; but there are cases that you ought to discrimi- 
nate against. As I say, we can show, and we have shown, that the 
effect of it has not been harmful to them. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you want this committee to understand that the 
thing would not have the same effect upon the Osages as upon the 
Sioux? 

Mr. Kappler. It all depends upon hoAv it is used. It is the same 
as if a man drinks a bottle of whisky or takes two drinks. 

Dr. Eastman (Sioux Indian). This drug is used in connection 
with religion. The evidence shows that it has no bearing upon the 
religion; it is merely to use in that meeting; that is all. It is of 
no medicinal assistance, and there is no spiritual assistance, accord- 
ing to this last witness. I do not see wherein this dangerous drug 
could be used in connection with this religion to help religion. I 
can not see that from your statement or from the testimony of the 
witness who preceded you. 

Mr. Kappler. This is not a medicine. 

Dr. Eastman. It has not a spiritual connection at all. 

Mr. Tillman. Is there anybody else that wants to be heard on 
either side of this question? I have an idea that we had better close, 
perhaps. Mr. Scott Ferris, a member of the Oklahoma delegation, 
expressed a desire to appear before this committee in opposition to 
the bill. He is now engaged in hearing an important controversy 
before the public lands committee and can not leave. He authorized 
me to say to the committee and for the record that he is opposed to 



PEYOTE. 165 

the passage of this bill; that the Indian tribes in his district, the 
Comanches, and the Wichitas and one or two others are very anxious 
that peyote be not prohibited ; that they use it for medical purposes 
and also as a sacrament in religious worship, and he is very positive 
that it is not harmful in any sense, and is very much opposed to a 
favorable report on this bill. 

Mr. Kappleb. May I interrupt you to ask whether or not those re- 
ports from doctors you read are on mescal or peyote ? 

Mr. TnjiMAN. The terms are used interchangeably. 

Mr. Kapplee. Mescal is a liquor as I understand it. 

Mr. Tillman. Made from these buttons. The mescal he is speak- 
ing about, that is the particular thing he is discussing here. 

I think we have perhaps given everybody a fair and impartial 
hearing, and so far as I know we will have no more hearings before 
this committee. 

Mr. F. H. Daikee (representing the Indian Office). I have an 
amendment that the Indian Office asks, without any connection with 
any other phase of the bill. It does not concern peyote at all. 

The Chaieman. All right. We will not pursue this investigation 
any further. 

Additional Statement or Mes. Geetrude Bonnin. 

PEYOTE CAUSES KACE SUICIDE. 

Charley Wash, a splendid Ute, became a peyote user. Previous to the intro- 
duction of peyote among the Utes, Charley Wash was doing well. He had a 
home for his wife and family. He was happy with them and worked for them. 

After becoming a peyote headman, he failed. 

His home was wrecked by this peyote snare and delusion. 

Peyote was administered indiscriminately when his wife was undergoing the 
greatest of human sacrifices, that of giving birth to a babe. Ute women who 
were there told me how the misguided friends doped the mother until she was 
unable to help herself; and how in their excitement and ignorance they applied 
fatal force ; and a mutilated mother, mangled wee babe, dead in their hands, 
was the inevitable end. These innocent victims of peyote were buried together. 

At once, when Charley Wash ceased his peyote worship and wept for his dead 
wife and babe, the peyote agent, together with those with whom he operated, 
sent for Charley Wash. Charley AVash lived at Eandlette, Ufah. The peyote 
agent stayed in Dragon, Utah. 

Charley Wash went to them. There they kept him filled with peyote till the 
man could not grieve for his dead nor care even about himself. 

I talked with the physician who lived at Randlette and whose services had not 
been called because peyote was preferred, and he told me that excessive indis- 
criminate use of peyote had the effect of deadening the muscular action, and 
that it was the most dangerous thing that they could have given in childbirth, 
especially without other proper aids at hand. 

In behalf of the mothers of the human race I implore legal protection against 
peyote. 

If Emma Goldman is condemned for propaganda on birth control, the peyote 
agent who introduces a pernicious peyote drug that kills both mother and child 
must be dealt with In like manner. 

No matter what name the peyote wears as a guise, the use of it is harmful ; 
therefore it must be prohibited. 

Life is the greatest gift. I am pleading for the life of the Indian race. Mr. 
Chairman, were the life of your loved one threatened by a pernicious drug, 
would you care a straw what the ethnologists had written about the drug; 
how many years they had studied the drug? No; because the civilized man 
has studied for centuries other habit-forming drugs; but that study does not 
warrant anyone giving it to another in the name of religion to-day. 

The other day a gentleman told us that peyote people pray also without 
peyote ■ that at a dinner the peyote man asked God to bless a glass of water. 
In view of the need of these times, to economize, as Mr. Hoover urges us, and 
also in the face of the national prohibition move, and because the Indian needs 



166 PEYOTB. 

his rational mind to meet his fond hope for full citizenship, and remembering 
also that the highest authoritative statement upon drugs has condemned 
peyote — in view of all these things it must follow that the use of a glass of 
water at a dinner be encouraged to all Americans. In this instance may the 
great Congress of our land say, " Amen," to the glass of water, by prohibition 
of peyote, twin brother of alcohol, and first cousin to habit-forming drugs. 



The Buebaxj of Catholic Indian Missions, 

Washington, D. C, February 26, 1918. 
Hon. John M. Tillman, 

House of Representatives, 

Washington, D. G. 
My Dear Me. Tillman : As your subcommittee has been considering the ques- 
tion of peyote, I beg to submit the following in support of the effort looking to 
its legal suppression : 

1. The unanimous testimony of all the Catholic missionaries to the Indians, 
and, I believe, the testimony of the missionaries of other religious organizations 
working among the Indians is to the effect that the use of peyote results in 
great mental, moral, and physical injury to the Indian people. I inclose here- 
with a letter from Rev. Francis 0. Elast, who has had occasion to observe the 
effect of peyote eating among the Kickapoos of Kansas. During a period of 
many years missionaries have been writing in this strain to this office, and I 
have duly forwarded their letters to the honorable Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs and, since 1909, have repeatedly endeavored to induce the Indian Office 
to take a stand against the importation and use of peyote. 

2. I have also received letters from the Indians begging that something be 
done to prevent the introduction of peyote among their people. Letters of this 
kind came to me especially from various Sioux reservations and satisfied me 
that not only the missionaries, but even those Indians who wish to advance 
their people, are convinced of the baneful effects of this drug. I also received 
one letter from an Indian of the Arapaho Tribe in Wyoming who had been 
addicted to peyote telling me of the in.iury its use had done him and pleading 
with me to warn others who were in danger of being led into the same habit, 
which interested persons have endeavored to propagate and protect under the 
guise of religion. 

3. With the exception of certain Indians who use peyote, I have never yet 
heard the habit defended or advocated by any persons actually living in the 
Indian country. I am inclosing herewith a statement of Dr. Claude S. Cham- 
bers, United States physician stationed at Anadarko, Okla.. which I recently 
submitted to the Board of Indian Commissioners, of which I am a member. 
I call attention to the fact that the Kiowa Agency is one which is held up as an 
example by those who advocate the use of peyote. Dr. Chambers himself is a 
member of the Cherokee Tribe. He has practiced medicine for a number of 
years among various tribes of Indians, and I am convinced that if he were not 
sure of his ground his inclination would be to humor the Indians and let them 
have their way. 

4. The Board of Indian Commissioners has continuously advocated legislation 
for the suppression of peyote. I am inclosing herewith resolutions adopted by 
the board to this effect, beginning March 7, 1912. Previous to that year the 
board devoted a great deal of time to the investigation of the sub.1ect, and before 
it both the advocates and the antagonists of peyote put forth their respective 
claims. Since that time the individual members of the board have, as occasion 
offered, been gathering information relative to peyote eating and the peyote 
" cult." 

5. I personally have had a number of conferences with Indians who advocate 
peyote, particularly with representatives of the Kiowa Agency tribes and with 
the Quapaws. I have spent hours with them discussing the question and trying 
to view it from every possible angle. My personal friendship for these tribes in 
particular and for the Indian people in general would incline me to Indulge 
them in anything not harmful to them from which they derive, or imagine they 
derive, consolation and benefit ; but having carefully studied the question for 
many years, my very friendship for them compels me to oppose the use of peyote 
and to express the hope that the Government of the United States may inter- 
vene to suppress the noxious traffic and habit. 

Respectfully submitted. 

William H. Ketcham, Director. 



PEYOTE. 167 

From minutes of annual meeting of the Board of Indian Commissioners, 
March 7, 19] 2: 

Voted, That tlie Board of Indian Commissioners favor legislation or executive 
action extending all restrictions applicable to the use of and traffic in intoxi- 
cating liquors, so that such restrictions shall apply also to the use of and traffic 
in mescal, or peyote. 

From minutes of annual meeting of the Board of Indian Commissioners, 
January 17, 1913 : 

Resolved, That the Board of Indian Commissioners reiterates its recom- 
mendations of March 7, 1912, in regard to the use of and traffic In mescal 
(peyote) ; that it urges the Indian Office to make careful inquiry as to the 
spread of the mescal haijit; and that it favors in every way legislation and 
executive action looking to the total elimination of the evil. 

From minutes of Lake Mohonk meeting of the Board of Indian Commis- 
sioners, October 14, 1914 ; 

Upon motion of Commissioner Dockweiler it was unanimously voted that 
the board should address a special communication to the Secretary of the 
Interior recommending the submission to Congress of a bill prohibiting the 
Importation of peyote into the United States, prohibiting its introduction, use, or 
sale on any Indian reservation, or the manufacture or sale of any product 
thereof. It was also voted that the communication to- the Secretary of the 
Interior should refer especially to the discussion of this subject at the Thirty- 
second Lake Mohonk Conference and that Commissioner Dockweiler present 
the subject in person to the Secretary of the Interior. 

Oklahoma Citt, Okla., January 25, 1918. 

Hon. George Vaxix, Jr., 

Chairman, Board of Indian Commissioners, Washington, D. C. 

Snt: In response to a request I made of him for information relating to the 
use of peyote among the Kiowas, Comanches, Witchitas, Caddoes, and Apaches 
of Oklahoma, Dr. Claude S. Chambers, a part blood Cherokee Indian, the 
United States physician stationed at Anadarko, Okla., submits the following 
statement : 

" Peyote is on the increase and will continue to be so long as we have no back- 
ing. I have studied the Indians that use it very carefully and can not find that 
it does them the least bit of good. On the other hand it is very harmful in many 
ways: 

"1. It lowers their vitality and their power of resistance to any exposure 
they may have to undergo. 

" 2. In using it the Indians are always in a hot tent, breathing foul air, etc. 

" 3. Peyote has first a stimulating and later a depressing effect on the heart. 

" 4. I know of a number of cases of sexual intercourse of Indians while under 
the influence of the drug. 

"5. I know of nine babies dying because of the administering to them of 
peyote by some medicine man." 

Respectfully submitted. 

WnxiAM H. Ketcham, 
Member, Board of Indian Commissioners. 



Washington. D. C, December 22, 1916. 
Mr. Malcolm McDowell, 

Secretary Board of Indian Commissioners, 

Bureau of Mines Building, Washington, D. G. 
My Deab Mb. McDowell : I beg to call your attention to the inclosed copy of 
a letter I have received from Rev. Francis C. Elast, of Germantown, Kans. 
Father Elast attends the Kickapoo Indian School. 

Very respectfully, ^^ „ ,^ 

Wm. H. Ketcham, 

Member of the Board of Indian Commissioners. 



December 18, 1916. 

Rev. Father W. H. Ketcham, 

Washington, D. C. 
ReveefnO and Deab Father : As you have the welfare of all the Indians very 
much at'heatt, I would ask you, for humanity's sake if you could do some- 
tting in regard to the suppression of peyote amongst the Indians. In my 



168 PEYOIE. 

humble opinion, this stuff is worse than opium, brutalizes the Indian, and the 
effects are noticeable in their offspring. 

Mr. Sells has done a great deal of good in favor of the Indian child, but If 
the evil of peyote is not rooted out to the very bottom, and that soon, all the 
good done is of no avail. The evil of peyote eating is reaching a calamity. 
Respectfully, 

Francis C. Eiast. 



House of Repeesentatives, 

Committee on Indian Affairs, 

Washington, March 11, 1918. 
Deab Judge: There is submitted herewith for your consideration in con- 
nection with the peyote bill letter of Frank Sweezy which was referred to me 
by Hon. Scott Ferris. 

I will thank you to call the attention of your subcommittee to the contents 
of this communication. 
Very truly yours, 

C. D. Caktfji. 
Judge J. N. Tillman, M. C, 

Washington, D. C. 



Greenfield, Okla., Fehruary 2S, 1918. 
Hon. Scott Febkis, 

Deab Sib: I am writing this letter to you to inquire about peyote. I have 
used it myself and know what it is and what it is good for and I don't see 
anything bad in it. I have used it for 34 years and I am not 46 years old 
and I am in good health to-day and I have healthy children going to school. 
And the way I use it ; I use it from Saturday evening, and next, on Sunday, 
I have meeting, prayer. I do not disturb with other religions nor interfere 
with them. 

I use this peyote individually, and I ^lave heard a lot of things about peyote 
which are not so, and I have read lot things about peyote, bad things, but they 
do not know anything about it. They compare peyote to whisky, and that is 
not so. But peyote is altogether different. As you are Member of the House 
of Representatives I would ask you to write to me and let me hear from, 
you how they act on peyote bill, and let us know how we can make to have 
firm use. If you look In the New Testament, in Romans, cha:pter 14, you may 
know what is said. 

" I am, yours, truly, 

Fbank Sweezy. 

o 



F E "ST O T E 

HEARINGS 

BEFORE A 

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS 



OF THE 



HOUSE OF EEPEESENTATIVES 



ON 



H. R. 2614 



TO AMEND SECTIONS 2139 AND 2140 OF THE REVISED 

STATUTES AND THE ACTS AMENDATORY THEREOF, 

AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES 



SATURDAY, MARCH 23, 1918 



r- ■ 



PART 2 




WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

1918 



PEYOTE. 



Subcommittee of the Committee on Indian Affairs, 

House of Representatives, 

Saturday, March 23, 1918. 

The subcommittee, composed of Representatives Tillman, Hastings, 
and Snyder, this day met, Hon. John N. Tillman presiding. 

Mr. Tillman. Will the gentleman in charge of the speakers intro- 
duce the speakers as you wish them to be heard. 

Mr. Cleaver Warden. Mr. Chairman, I want to introduce the rep- 
resentation from the Cheyenne Indian Reservation, making our ap- 
pearance before the subcommittee for our statements upon our prac- 
tical experience on the question of peyote. Mr. Boynton, who is here, 
speaks the Cheyenne and Arapahoe languages, and will act as inter- 
preter for one of the Cheyenne chiefs, if it is agreeable for the other 
Cheyenne representatives. 

Mr. Tillman. Whom do you want to speak first? 

Mr. Warden. I think myself that the proper thing to do would be 
to call on the old man first. 

Mr. Tillman. Who is he? 

Mr. Warden. Little Hand. 

STATEMENT OF CHIEF LITTLE HAND, CHEYENNE, WATONGA, 

OKLA. 

(Chief Little Hand presented a certificate to Mr. Tillman, which 
is copied in the record in full, as follows :) 

United States Indian Sekvice, 
Cheyenne and Akapahoe Indian Agency, 

Darlington, Okla., October S, J896. 

This is to certify that Little Hand is hereby appointed as a leader and 
adviser among the Indians on the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Indian Agency in 
District No. 2 from the 8th day of October, 1896, to continue as such until 
June 30, 1897, unless this warrant of appointment be sooner revoked by the 
agent or acting agent under the direction of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. 

E. Woodson, 
Captain, Fifth Cavalry, Acting United States Indian Agent. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you going to interpret for him, Mr. Warden? 

Mr. Paul Boynton. I was going to object to him interpreting, as I 
am interested myself to make a talk, and there are two or three of 
these Cheyennes, and they ought to have their own interpreter. 

Mr. Tillman. Ask him who he wants for an interpreter. We do 
not care. 

Mr. Reuben Taylor. I am a Cheyenne counselor. 

Mr. Tillman. Where do you live? 

169 



170 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Taylor. Kingfisher, Okla. 

Mr. Tillman. What is your tribe? 

Mr. Taylor. Cheyenne. 

Mr. Tillman. You are to interpret for whom? 

Mr. Taylor. For Little Hand. 

Mr. Tillman. Tell him to stand up and ask him to state what 
tribe he represents, and his name and address, and then tell him to 
begin in his own way and tell all he wants to about peyote. 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " My friends, I come from Watonga for the 
special purpose of telling about this peyote." 

Mr. Tillman. Tell him to go ahead in his own way. 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " Look at me, an old man." 

Mr. Tillman. How old is he? 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " I am 68 years old." 

Mr. Tillman. Now, tell him to tell all he laiows about peyote, and 
say just what he wants to say. 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " I am come here for a special purpose about 
this peyote. Here I am, and I am going to tell you the facts of it. 
I am not going to tell what that man tells me, or this one tells me, but 
my own experiences. When I heard this story about peyote I wanted 
to come to you and you must have the facts of it." 

Mr. Tillman. Tell him that is what we want to hear — the truth 
and his own experience ; go ahead and tell it at length. 

Mr. Taylor. He says he was sick with rheumatism, and these young 
men saw him sick and came and visited him and said, " You had bet- 
ter take peyote and we will worship for you and pray for you and 
it will do you good," and so it did ; and he went in the tent where they 
worship and he could hardly move, but just lay there for a time, and 
when he did move he could not help himself. So after he used three 
of them he commenced to move and turned on his back. After a while 
he could sit right up. That very night as he used this herb inside 
the tent where he was he got up and tried to step on his foot, and it 
did not hurt. These young men sitting around commenced praying 
to God — asked for God's mercies; they received answer from God, 
and that is why this pain was stopped, he says. So when he is at 
these meetings like that they always keep quiet and some of them 
just give prayers, and nobody makes any disturbance; they would 
not make any noise. He says they always keep quiet and sit still, and 
only those who give prayers are the ones to talk inside the tent. 
He says the meetings are on Saturday nights, so that they would not 
interfere with any kind of work. On Sunday morning they all go 
out. He says they offer prayers when they go out Sunday morning, 
and then they have the dinner. 

He says, " I am going to tell you about this peyote. I do not come 
to make any statement or tell a lie or anything of that kind. I come 
to tell the truth. We heard that these missionaries were going to 
make a complaint about this peyote. I am one of the head chiefs, 
and when I heard anyone tell me any kind of story I never picked it 
up, because I am the head chief, until when I see in the tent with 
my o^'<'n eyes and take a part in it. 

" There are four different tribes here to see you about this peyote, 
and you gentlemen are appointed as men to look after the facts, and 
we are now here to see you on behalf of these four different tribss. I 



PEYOTE. 171 

want you to take our word for it. We come here to tell the truth of 
it. All these stories what the missionaries tell are not so. I wish 
you to give consideration to this peyote matter in deciding whether 
it is to be taken away from us, and we want you to take our word 
for it. That is all." 

STATEMENT OF MR. JAMES MOONEY, ETHNOLOGIST, BUREAU OF 
AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY, SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 

Mr. MooNET. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, I have known these 
men for 28 years. They speak four different languages — the Kiowa, 
(Comanche, Cheyenne, and Arapahoe — and each language is different 
from the others; but all of them have a common sign language by 
which they can understand all that is said. If agreeable to the com- 
pany if anyone is talking they can say the same thing in the sign lan- 
guage for the benefit of the others. 

Mr. Tillman. I want to ask the witness a few questions. Ask him 
what effect this peyote has on him when he takes it. 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " I am just taking it like a piece of meat or 
bread, and it kind of affects me quiet." 

Mr. Tillman. Some of the witnesses before the committee have 
said that it makes them feel kind and loving toward all of their 
brethren and toward all the world ; that when they take eight or nine 
of these pills they do not want to get angry with anybody, and that 
they love all mankind and especially their brethren, and even their 
enemies. Does it have that effect upon him when he uses it? 

Mr. Tayloe. It has that effect upon him. He feels kind toward 
his fellow men. 

Mr. Tillman. Some of the people testified that if you take two or 
three of the beans that it will paralyze the muscles, and that if they 
take just the right amount of it they can see rosy visions and rainbow 
colors, and that it has the effect of exhilarating them, and makes them 
feel better. Does it have that effect upon him ? Ask him to explain 
that. 

Mr. Taylor. He says, " I come to tell you what I know " ; and I can 
not expect you to ask him all kinds of questions, because he comes to 
testify to what he told you. 

Mr. Tillman. We want to get the facts. 

Mr. MooNEY. I think Mr. Boynton could explain to him what you 
want. 

Mr. Tillman. Ask him if he sees visions and if it makes him feel 
loving and kind and affectionate toward everybody. 

Mr. Paul Boynton. Little Hand says he never say anythmg of 
visions of that kind ; that he only felt kind ; that was all. 

Mr. Tillman. Ask him how long he has been using it. 

Mr. Boynton. He says, two years. 

Mr. Tillman. Ask him if it will cure any other disease except 
rheumatism, or whether it will cure all diseases. 

Mr. Boynton. He says that all kinds of ailments are cured by this 
peyote, for the reason that a prayer is offered before it is taken. 

Mr. Tillman. To particularize, ask him if he thinks it will cure 
consumption or cancer or pneumonia or serious troubles like that, in 
connection with prayer. 



172 PEYOTE. 

Mr. BoTNTON. Little Hand says that he is not far enough along 
in this peyote, but from what he can see he believes that, of course, at 
certain stages of any disease it can not be cured, as,, for instance, we 
have had the experience of knowing by looking at the consumptive, 
where that disease has gone so far, that probably he could not get 
well. But, he says, his son was coughing all night before he used 
peyote ; coughed all night and could not hardly sleep. Then, the boy 
was told to go into these meetings and use this herb, where there is 
a prayer offered before using this herb. So the boy went into the 
meetings several times, and he says when he left at this time his boy 
was fat. 

Mr. Tilljman. Ask him if he ever uses this privately outside of 
these meetings ? 

Mr. BoTNTON. Just Saturday nights he goes, when he can get to 
any of these meetings. 

Mr. Tillman. He does not use it at home privately at all? 

Mr. BoTNTON. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Ask him if he ever drank whisky? 

Mr. BoxNTON. He never drank whisky. 

Mr. Tillman. Some of the witnesses before this subcommittee 
said that this peyote destroyed the taste and desire for whisky. Ask 
him if it is his experience that that is the fact ? They say they were 
drunkards, and when thej'' began to use peyote they quit using 
whisky. Ask him if it has had that effect on his tribe or any one he 
knows. 

Mr. BoYNTON. Little Hand says it must be so from what he has 
seen; he knows a great many of the boys that have used liquor ex- 
cessively, but whenever they go into these meetings several times he 
notices they do not use liquor like they used to. 

Mr. Tillman. Has he any of the beans with him? 

Mr. BoTNTON. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Have any of you any of these beans with you ? 

(Mr. Boynton produced one and handed it to Mr. Tillman.) 

Mr. MooNET. That is the dried top of this little cactus, which 
grows about that high [indicating]. 

Mr. Tillman. Tell him that if he wants to make any further 
statement we will be glad to hear it. 

Mr. BoTNTON. That is all. 

Mr. Tillman. Who else wants to be heard? 

Mr. Piawo. I would like to speak now. 

STATEMENT OF WILBUR PIAWO, COUNSELOR OF THE COMANCHE 
TRIBE, FORMER CARLISLE STUDENT. 

Mr. Tillman. State your name, the trib« to which you belong, 
what position you occupy in the tribe, and your age, and all about 
yourself before you begin your testimony. 

Mr. Piawo. I am counselor of my tribe and a former student at 
Carlisle. 

Mr. Tillman. What is your age? 

Mr. PiAwo. Thirty-five.' 

Mr. Tillman. What is your tribe? 

Mr. PiAwo. Commanche. 



PEYOTE. 173 

Mr. Tillman. How did you come to appear before this committee; 
state why you are here, and all about it. 

Mr. PiAwo. I came here to appear before the committee in the 
matter of peyote and was sent here by my tribesmen. 

Mr. Tillman. You may begin, please, in your own way and make 
whatever statement you want to make with reference to peyote. If 
you are for it, say so, and if you are are against it, say so ; tell the 
subcommittee, for the benefit of the full committee, just your position 
upon the subject of peyote and its use. Make your statement just as 
full as you like. 

Mr. PiAwo. I want to make a little statement to give my experi- 
ence, which of course will be very small, in support of peyote. I 
had been away from home to school and after, arriving from school 
I went to the use of whisky and gambling, and when I was using 
these things right along I was told to try the use of the peyote, 
and by the use of peyote I think I have let these things drop. When 
I started in the use of it I began to change in my mind, to think of 
the life I had been living, and by going to these meetings and with 
the help and prayer of the men that were in the meetings I think it 
began to dawn upon me the w'rongs that I had been doing, and so it 
set me thinking on these matters, and I have changed and ever since 
then I have been sticking to the worship of this religion. It is a 
religion that the Indians have practiced long before they have seen 
the white man, according to what my people saj% and they are still 
worshiping in this form. 

Mr. TiLLMAx. How old did you say you are? 

Mr. PiAAvo. Thirty-five. 

Mr. Tillman. How long have you used peyote? 

Mr. PiAwo. I have used it since 1906. 

Mr. Tillman. How long did you use whisky before you began the 
use of peyote ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Oh, about tw'o years. 

Mr. Tillman. You say this destroyed the taste and desire for 
whisky ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. How was that; what Avas the cause of it, do you 
think? What is your theory about the reason it destroyed the taste 
for whisky on your part? 

Mr. PiAwo. Why, it set my mind to thinking about the wrong that 
it has and the effect that whisky has upon men. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think the use of this bean caused your mind 
to reflect upon that subject ? Was that the cause of it ? 

Mr. PiAw^o. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. It must be rather strong and powerful in its effect 
if it destroys th^ taste for whisky, must it not? 

Mr. PiAwo. I do not quite understand you. 

Mr. Tillman. You said this quite destroys the taste for whisky. 
What effect does the bean itself have on you ? 

Mr. PiAwo. It don't have any effect on me, only it makes me feel 

kind. ^ . , J! 1 1 • 1 

Mr. Tillman. But it does have that effect ; it makes you teel kind 

and pleasant toward your neighbors and other people? 
Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 



174 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Tillman. How many beans do you take at one time, how 
many pills? 

Mr. PiAwo. Sometimes I take three or four. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you ever take more than that ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you ever take less than that number? 

Mr. PiAwo. I have taken less than that. 

Mr. Tillman. Why do you change the size of the dose; why do 
you not take just exactly the same number every time^ 

Mr. Piawo. Well, I don't know the reason for that, but I just feel 
like taking a certain amount and I just take it. 

Mr. Tillman. The missionaries among the Indians are against 
this, chiefly, are they -not? 

Mr. Piawo Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. What is their object in being against it; can you 
explain that? 

Mr. Piawo. I can not do it. 

Mr. Tillman. They do not sell it themselves, do they ? 

Mr. Piawo. No. 

Mr. Tillman. They do not use it, do they ? 

Mr. Piawo. No. 

Mr. Tillman. What is the reason they are against it and want to 
see it abolished ; can you give any reason ? 

Mr. Piawo. I can not gve any reason. 

Mr. Tillman. Three States in the Union have prohibited the use 
of this within the borders of those States. Can you give any rea- 
son why they did that? 

Mr. Piawo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. How much do these beans cost? 

Mr. Piawo. I don't know what they cost. Our people have a way 
of going down into Texas and getting them for themselves. 

Mr. Tillman. They go hundreds of miles to get those ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. And spend quite a good deal of money for them? 

Mr. Piawo. I do not know what it costs them. I never had a 
chance to find out. 

Mr. Tillman. Of course, going back and forth costs quite a lot, 
and they go for the purpose of getting this bean and only for that 
purpose ? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Does it cure diseases? 

Mr. Piawo. That I could not say very much of, because I did not 
have the experience. 

Mr. Tillman. You have never been cured of any trouble, of any 
physical ailment by the use of the bean ? • 

Mr. Piawo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. You use it purely as a religious sacrament, do you? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. And at the same time the effect is pleasant upon 
you? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. How often do you use it? 

Mr. Piawo. Once in a great while. 



PEYOTE. 175 

Mr. Tillman. Do you keep any of it at your home, or in your 
pockets ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Did you ever use it privately outside of a meeting? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Are you a member of any Christian church? 

Mr. Piawo. I am a member of a Methodist Church. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you attend the Methodist ceremonies? 

Mr. Piawo. No, sir; I was a member when I was at school, and 
when this school broke up the church moved from there. 

Mr. Tillman. Where did you attend school ? 

Mr. Piawo. At Anadarko, Okla. 

Mr. Tillman. The white people do not use this, do they? 

Mr. PiAwo. I don't know. 

Mr. Tillman. When you go to the meetings how long do you i"e- 
main there? 

Mr. Piawo. All night. 

Mr. Tillman. What do you do in those meetings except eat the 
peyote ? 

Mr. Piawo. Pray and sing. 

Mr. Tillman. T>o women attend these meetings as well as men? 

Mr. Piawo. Sometimes. 

Mr. Tillman. Do they use peyote also? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. How many members of your tribe use it, approxi- 
mately ? 

Mr. Piawo. That I don't know. I do not exactly know. 

Mr. Tillman. What kind of work do you do ? 

Mr. Piawo. Farming. 

Mr. Tillman. You own your farm, do you? 
• Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. You have stock on the farm? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. What per cent of your tribe use this peyote and 
belong to the peyote cult ? 

Mr. Piawo. About 80 per cent. 

Mr. Tillman. Well, now, the subcommittee of the Committee on 
Indian Affairs are interested only in doing the right thing and the 
just thing by the Indians. We have not any personal interest in this. 
In fact, I have not an Indian in my district, and personally I want 
to do the right thing, and all we are trying to do is to get at the truth. 
Some Indians, very prominent Indians — Dr. Eastman and Mrs. 
Gertrude Bonntn and others — have come before us, and they say this 
is ruining the Indians in many places, and three States in the Union 
have legislated against it and driven it out, and Mr. Hayden, of 
Arizona, a Member of Congress not far from where the peyote bean 
is grown, has introduced this bill to prohibit the use of peyote among 
the Indian tribes. , i • 

I can assure you and the others present that the only desire we 
have is to do the right thing and to do what is best for the Indian. 
A gi-eat many of them say it does destroy for a time the taste for 
whisky, but that after awhile they will get back to whisky and use 
both peyote and whisky, and some of them say it excites the sexual 



176 PflYOTE. 

passions and th:'it people under the influence of it commit all kinds 
of sexual excesses with people other than their own wives, and alto- 
gethei' they have made a vei-y strong indictment against peyote. 

Dr. Wiley, of national reputation, says it is a poisonous drug, and 
he gaA e the constituent elements of it. They have analj'zed it, which 
they can do very readily. Physicians say that it is a soul-destroying 
and bocl3f-destroying drug and that it ought to be prohibited. 

Xow. you do not think any of those things are true? 

Mr. PiAAvo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Can you give us anj^ reason why the missionaries 
are against the use of it? 

Mr. PiAwo. I can not give no reason. 

Mr. Tillman. They are, though, as a matter of fact, are they not? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. If you want to make any further statement along 
that line you can make it. 

]Mr. Sntder. You say that the use of peyote has destroyed the 
desire for whisky ; is that right ? 

]\Ir. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

^Ir. Snyder. What do you say as to the possibility of your associa- 
tion Avith the men who worship aroimd this shrine of peyote and 
the religious belief that you have taken up from this association 
being the reason for the lack of desire for liquor ? Do you not think 
that that has something to do Avith it? What I mean is this: Do you 
not believe that on account of your religious belief and the coming 
into your mind of the better thoughts of civilization and religion 
that you were led away from whisky rather than because of the use 
of peyote? 

Mr. PiAAvo. By iising it that came into my thought. 

Mr. Snydek. But you would not have used it at all if you had 
not come into those meetijigs where peyote was being used? 

Mr. PiAAvo. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And there you began to learn that the men you came 
in contact Avith Avere getting to be better men? 

Mr. PiAAvo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And you got to he a better man by the use of it? 

Mr. PiAAvo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And you at that time began to learn of the wrongs 
that you had Ijeen committing on account of the use of Avhisky? 

Mr. PiAAvo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And by reason of that information your mind was 
led into better channels of thought? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. That Avas Avhat took you aAvay from Avhisky more 
than the use of peyote. In other words, you did not use peyote as 
often as you used whisky ? 

Mr. PiAAvo. No ; I don't quite understand that. 

Mr. Sntder. Before you entered this society of peyote users and 
became one of them, did you not use a good deal of whisky at in- 
tervals ? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And you did not use the whisky for a religious sac- 
rament ? 



PEYOTE. 177 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Snydee. When you did join this pevote ^()cietv and be,o-i\n 
the use of peyote you discontmued the use of whiskv ? ' " 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. What I am tiving to get at is whether or not the use 
ot peyote actually took away from vou an appetite for whisky or 
whether it was on account of the association that you had come 
into. 

Mr. PiAwo. I think the use of the peyote has taken tlie use of 
whisky awaj'. 

Mr. Snyder. That is all right. I just wanted to get a definite 
statement from you. I have had an idea since listening to all the 
testimony in this case that the use of pevote was not of such an 
important nature as was the effect of the' association that you had 
come into — that surrounded the use of peyote— wliere you had got a 
better idea of things, a better idea of the future, and that led vou to 
understand more fully the harm that you got from the use of liquor; 
that peyote, being used as a religious' sacrament and a society being 
formed around it, you men have got to be praying men and better 
men, and therefore have got into your mind, rather than the taste 
of liquor out of your system, the good effects that come from this 
association which uses peyote^ 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. I may be entirely wrong. You say finally that you 
believe the use of peyote has taken away from you the desire for 
whislry ? 

Mr. PiAW'o. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. So your idea and mine are not at all alike. That is 
all I wanted to ask. 

_Mr. Hastings. I want to put Mr. Snyder's question a little bit 
differently to you. You know, sometimes a drinking man joins the 
church ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. And after he joins the church he sees the evil of his 
ways and quits drinking. Now, do you regard the users of peyote 
as belonging to a certain religion or religious societ}^, and when you 
join this religious society it has an influence over the Indians in the 
way of destroying the desire and the taste for whisky, or, rather, 
preventing you from using whisky, much after the fashion that join- 
ing the church has with white men? Do you understand that? 

Mr. PiAwo. I don't quite understand. 

Mr. Hastings. I do not know that I could make it much i^lainer. 
What I was trying to get from you was whether you think the taking 
of the peyote and eating it destroys your taste for whisky, or whether 
your joining the peyote society puts your mind in a different frame, 
so that 3'ou are like a white man who joins some church and does 
not want to use whisky thereafter. 

Mr. Piawo. Yes. 

Mr. Hastings. Do you think it is the influence of the society, the 
influence of the religion, the influence of the association, that keeps 
you from drink, peyote only being used in connection with your reli- 
gion, or do you think it is the peyote itself that keeps you from the 
desire for whisky ? 



178 PEYOTE. 

Mr. PiAwo. I think it is the association that I get from people that 
use it. 

Mr. Hastings. You do not think, then, that if you would use 
peyote individually — that is, if you had it in your home or in your 
pocket and all Indians had it and carried it around and used it — 
that that would destroy the taste or desire for whisky, but you think 
you have got to use it in connection with your religious service ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Of what tribe are you a member? 

Mr. PiAwo. Of the Comanche Tribe. 

Mr. Hastings. What is your name ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Wilbur Piawo. 

Mr. Hastings. About how many members of your tribe use peyote? 

Mr. Piawo. About 80 per cent. 

Mr. Hastings. Of the grown people, or adults? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. How old do children get before they use it? 

Mr. Piawo. I don't know much about that. 

Mr. Hastings. How young are the youngest whom you have seen 
using peyote? 

Mr. Piawo. I have seen children use it. 

Mr. Hastings. Ten years old, 12 years, 14 years, 16 years ? 

Mr. Piawo. I have seen them 10 years old. 

Mr. Hastings. Any younger than 10? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes ; but I have not seen any myself personally. 

Mr. Hastings. But they do use it ; you have known of them using 
it, but you do not know it yourself personally ; is that it ? 

Mr. Piawo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. How long does the influence of peyote stay with 
you after you take it? I mean by that, if you attend one of these 
meetings and you use three or four or five of these beans, how long 
can you feel the effects of it after, say, you have taken the last bean, 
when you get up and leave the meeting or if you remain there. Does 
it stay an hour, two hours, three hours, half a day, or a day? I 
mean the physical effect, making you feel good and happy, and so 
forth. I do not mean the religious effect ; I mean the personal effect 
upon you- 

Mr. Piawo. You mean 

Mr. Hastings. If you take a drink of whisky, say one drink, you 
may feel that for an hour. Or if you take a larger quantity you 
may feel the effect of it for two hours. If you take a dose of mor- 
phine you may feel the effect of it a certain length of time. What 
I am trying to get at is, if you were to eat three or four beans how 
long could you feel it, in the same way that you would feel whisky 
or morphine, the influence of it, the effect of it? 

Mr. Piawo. I don't feel any effect of it. 

Mr. Hastings. You don't "feel any effect at all? I thought you 
said it made you feel kind of happy and kind to everybody. 

Mr. Piawo. What I mean is, when I got in this society that is what 
made me feel good. 

Mr. Hastings. It is like when a white man went to church he 
would feel better toward everybody around? 

Mr.' Piawo. Yes, sir. 



PEYOTE. 179 

Mr. Hastings. You think it is that kind of a feeling, and it does 
not have any personal physical feeling, I mean a feeling akin to the 
influence of whiskey or morphine or anything of that kind? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. If that be true, why could you not eat 20 or 25 
of these beans without having any bad effect upon you? 

Mr. PiAwo. I just don't feel like eating those. 

Mr. Hastings. Did you ever see anybody at any of your meetings 
that peyote seemed to affect in a physical way ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. You never did see one? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. You understand what I mean. You have seen 
people under the influence of intoxicants ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. Some slightly, and some what you would call 
drunk. This committee is asking you, and as Judge Tillman said, 
all we want to do is to develop the truth. Have you ever seen any- 
body that you observed from their demeanor, their walk, their 
actions, were under the influence of peyote, like you could those who 
had been under the influence of whisky? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir ; I have not. 

Mr. Hastings. It does not have that effect on them at all? 

Mr. Piawo. I have not seen any. 

Mr. Hastings. You have been there all your life and you have 
been using it since 1906 — 12 years — and you have attended a good 
many of these meetings and have used it yourself, and you are in a 
position to know, are you not? 

Mr. PiAwo. I don't go regular to these meetings. 

Mr. Hastings. How many have you attended in a year, say last 
year? 

Mr. Piawo. Well, last year I attended three. 

Mr. Hastings. You have attended about that number each year in 
the past 10 or 12 years, have you not ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Hastings. At any one of these meetings that you ever attended 
in your life did you ever seen any person who had used peyote that 
appeared to be under the influence of it, like where a person had 
been under the influence of any intoxicant or drug ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir; I have not. 

Mr. TiLi-MAN. You did state that peyote made you feel kind and 
happy and pleasant toward other people, did you not ? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. That is true, is it not ? 

Mr. PiAwo. The society that I have got into that is what has made 
me feel in that way. 

Mr. Tillman. Why not get rid of this altogether and not go hun- 
dreds of miles for it if the association alone is what makes you feel 
good ? 

Mr. PiAWO. That is the sacrament that they use in these meetings. 

Mr. Tillman. It must contribute somewhat toward making you 
happy, else you could get along without it. This is really the god 
you worship, is it not, this peyote bean ? 



180 PEYOTE. 

Mr. PiAwo. I do not quite understand. 

Mr. TiLLMAx. This is what j^ou worship, is it not, the bean itself? 

Mr. PiAwo. No; we worship God. 

Mr. Tillman. Why not get rid of the bean, since you have to go 
so far to get it 'I You could keep your association, and if the asso- 
ciation is what makes you good and happy and has improved you 
why not get rid of this bean entirely ? Or why not substitute some 
other vegetable which is harmless, less expensive, and which grows 
in your community ? 

Mr. PiAAvo. I don't know about that. 

Mr. TiLLitAK. This bean is what has the happy effect on you, is 
it not? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes. 

Mr. TiLLJiAx. And without this bean you would not have any 
peyoie church, would you ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Sntdei;. In the Methodist Church that you used to belong to 
you had a ceremony known as communion, did you not? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And in that service you used wine and bread? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Do I understand that in the Peyote religious society 
you use this bean for the. same purpose that the bread and wine are 
used for in the Methodist Church? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And do you state here that that is the only use that 
is made of it in your religious ceremonj'? 

Mr. PiAwo. It also is used as a medicine. 

Mr. Snyder. I am speaking about your religious ceremony. Do 
you use it during the religious ceremonj' for the purpose of healing 
some one who may be brought into the meeting? Is that correct? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. These meetings are usually for the purpose of assist- 
ing some one who is in trouble. Is that correct? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. A sick woman would be brought in to be prayed for? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. And you use this peyote bean the same as it is used 
in another church for communion service, around which you pray, 
and you do that when you have these meetings for the benefit of some 
person that is brought in to be blessed or prayed for? 

Mr. PiAM'o. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Is that right? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Sntder. What do you think would become of your religious 
society if the bean was taken away from you entirely ? What would 
happen to the association ? 

Mr. PiAAvo. I do not know what would happen to them, but I don't 
think they will exist much longer. 

Mr. Sntder. I know you can not tell what would happen, but you 
can tell what you think would happen. Would the society break up, 
in your judgment; would it break up and discontinue? 

Mr. PiAwo. Yes, sir. 



PEYOTE. 181 

Mr. Snydeh. And you do not think there is anything else that could 
be brought in to take the place of the peyote to keep the society 
together ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Snyder. Why could you not take the form of the Methodist 
Church or the Baptist Church or the Episcopal Church or the Cath- 
olic Church and use bread and wine in place of the peyote bean? 

Mr. PiAwo. Well, I don't know about that; but it is the way the 
Indians have been worshiping in the past. 

Mr. Snyder. Of course, it is the desire of this committee and of the 
white people of the country to bring the Indian in closer connection 
with the white people and to get them to follow as nearly as possible 
in the walks of the white man. You have adopted nearly every other 
form or usage of the white man, and, while I would be loath to take 
away from you any religious sacrament that you think is absolutely 
necessary for your race m order to keep up this society that has beeii 
started and which I am certain is doing a lot of good, yet there is a 
feeling in the country, as I see it from this investigation, that this 
peyote bean as well as doing good does harm, and I should think that 
there was yet a possibility of its being done away with. 

So I am trying to impress you now with the thought that 3^00 ought 
to begin to arrange to take into your religious society a form that is 
nearer and that comes closer to the white man's idea, and it would 
seem to me that you Indian men here — and you are intelligent men; 
there is no doiibt about it; I have listened with a great deal of sur- 
prise to the splendid judgment of you men in giving this testimony — 
it would seem to me that you should at once consider the idea of tak- 
ing into this religious ceremony of yours the white man's practice of 
using wine and bread in place of the peyote button. That is just a 
thought I want to leave with you men before you go away. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not know what this bean contains, do yovi? 

Mr. PiAwo. No; I don't. 

Mr. Tillman. You never had it analyzed, did you ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. If you knew that it contained two or three deadly 
poisons would you think you should continue to use it ? 

Mr. Piawo. I don't know. 

Mr. TpiLLMAN. You do not know whether you would or not. How 
long were you a member of the Methodist Church? 

Mr. PiAwo. Three years. 

Mr. Tillman. They do not take sacrament of bread and wine every 
time they have a meeting, do they? 

Mr. Piawo. I think they do. 

Mr. Tillman. You have been to prayer meetings where they did 
not have any sacrament, have you not ? 

Mr. PiAWO. No. 

Mr. Tillman. Have you not been to morning meetmgs and even- 
ing meetings when they did not take any sacrament at all ? 

Mr. PiAwo. No. 

Mr. Tillman. They never have any meetmg of the peyote men 
and women when they do not take this bean, do they? 

Mr. Piawo. No. 



182 PEYOTE. 

STATEMENT OF PAUL BOYNTON, FORMER STUDENT OF CARLISLE 
AND FORMER INTERPRETER OF THE AGENCY, CHEYENNE AND 
ARAPAHOE TRIBES. 

Mr. Tillman. Please state your age. 

Mr. BorNTON. Forty-nine. 

Mr. Tillman. What tribe do you represent ? 

Mr. BoYNTON. The Cheyenne and Arapahoe. 

Mr. Tillman. You are an intelligent Indian, and talk English 
well. Go on and make your own statement. 

Mr. BoYNTON. I am half Cheyenne and half Arapahoe. 

Mr. Tillman. Tell the committee what you desire to about this 
peyote bean, and what your wishes are with reference to this bill 
that is pending before the subcommittee. 

Mr. BoYNTON. I am one of the delegates from the Cheyenne and 
Arapahoe country that was selected by the society, or Peyote boys 
as we know it. I don't know whether I was sent here just because 
1 know so much about it, or just because I don't know anything 
about it, but I am here now before the committee to state the facts 
that I have proven myself by my own practical experience and 
knowledge of this herb. I am not a man that uses the herb like the 
rest of them — my fellow men. I use it once in a while. How I 
came to use the herb was something about 25 years ago. But I find 
now that I did not go into it like I ought to. Some of these men 
here of my own tribe, both Cheyennes and Arapahoes, know just 
who I am and what I was — one of the worst gamblers, the greatest 
drinker. In fact, I was a robber, robbing the gambling games, shift- 
ing the cards just to get the money from those people ; and I heard 
that when they used peyote they would quit drinking. Well, I 
didn't know so much about that, but I wanted to prove it myself 
just to see — ^to find out whether it had any power to make me quit 
drinking or not, and all my evil habits. I went and used this 
peyote two or three or four times. Of course, I did not see into 
it at once, but gradually in time I began to see. There was some- 
thing mysterious in this that I could not explain; there was some- 
thing very mysterious that I could not tell. It had something to 
do with me — to raise my ideas, it seems like. 

I began to feel as though by using peyote, in my conscience I 
ought to live right, I ought to talk right, I ought to think right. 
I began to see the difference in whisky and peyote. When I used 
to use liquor I was out on the streets, probably not knowing half 
the time what was taking place during that day ; my thoughts were 
not mine ; I did not know them. But when I used peyote my thoughts 
were serious about nature, about my future; I felt seriously when I 
was under the influence of this herb. I went further aad saw and 
proved what people had told me — ^that it was medicine to cure dis- 
eases. Then I went and watched and proved, and saw for myself at 
certain times that certain people were made well. I looked further 
into this. I saw that it not only cured fever or all kmds of ail- 
ments, but I went further into this; I saw that I used to be con- 
tinually sick; I was sore all over. I had disease which was caused 
by my evil doings, my evil habits. Those made me continually ill 
every day. Through the conscience of this peyote I was made well, 



PEYOTE. 183 

because I could think higher, I could see that there was something 
greater than the medicine itself. I saw that God planted the herb 
that I was using, so I says, " I am going to use God's herb. If there 
is such a thing as all things are possible to God, why something 
must be possible, because God planted this herb and blessed it, and 
I am going to take God's blessing." 

As an instance of one of the main proofs I am going to tell about 
my wife. She was sick for about six months. Something it seems 
like was goring kind of here like. [Indicating.] It was sticking 
out like that, and I kept coaxing her to go to a doctor. Of course, 
she was afraid they might operate on her. In time she had gotten 
down in the bed ; could not sleep. I had to sit up on ths chair, side 
of her, and she was crying at diiferent times through the night be- 
cause she was paining. 1 offered to hire doctors — Indian doctors. 
She would not do it. Well, of course, I was so worked up I didn't 
know what to do. So I says, " I am serving God through the con- 
science of this peyote; I am serving in my blind way, and if the 
power in my prayer will cure my Avife I am going to try and prove 
it." I went to work and told my wife. I says, ''I am serving God, 
but I know that on your part there is no God, you are not serving- 
God with me," I says. " But I am serving God, and I nm going to 
use God's herb so that soreness will be gone, because I have learned 
to see and feel in my heart that all things are possible to God," I 
says. 

She says, "All right; all right. I will take the herb just as you 
will give it to me." I took the herb. I think I must have had about 
15 in a quart. I put these there in a quart and boiled it, and I took 
and strained it in another cup, stirring it, and it was clear, and I 
let it cool off. In about an hour afterwards it was cooled, and my 
thought was by giving God's herb to my wife she Avould be well. 
I took this cup full and I prayed for my wife, telling her I was 
taking God's blessing that he blessed when he created this world. 
I told my wife. " Now, wife, you are taking God's herb and you must 
have vour whole faith in it! ' I believe God will make you well, and 
if there is such a thing as all things are possible to God, I have asked 
God that I wanted to prove this; I wanted to see this disappear; 
leave you; and I do hope that my prayer will be answered." 

Then we sat there, both of us, and my daughter was sitting there, 
all of us sitting there, and I said, " I hope God will bless my prayer 
and this soreness will leave you." My wife took this drink. In 
about 10 minutes afterwards I took her another one and give it to 
her Then I prayed again and told God I would hke to see this 
soreness go; that my wife is the only one that cares for my home. 
Why, in about half an hour my wife says, « Paul, I am kind of sick; 
I want to throw up." I says, •' Yes; thank you : that is goad. Our 
prayer is answered; my prayer is answered. God has blessed us. 
I savs " I have asked God to take this away right before our eyes. 
Xow God is going to take it out; God is going to prove his blessing 
through this herb. The blessing is in this herb and has gone into 
your body, and I know that God is going to take this out. Now, get 
up and throw it over there." i t i, i 

She eot up and sat down on her knees and threw up and I had 
my hand over her forehead, and she threw up, and it was something 

47003— 18— PT 2 2 



184 PEYOTE. 

green like that came out. After she throwed up she lay down again, 
and I am very sorry to say I did not go and investigate about this, 
but next morning — it must have been about 8 or 9 o'clock — when she 
woke she got up herself and she woke me up and said, " Paul, come 
here and feel this." I woke up and she was standing on the side 
of my bed, and we could not find that big lump that was there. I 
says, '^ God took it out, and from this time you must leam to worship 
with me and serve God together and use God's herb," I says. 

Xow, gentlemen, we have been accused by the parties, the churcli 
people probably, that this degenerates us. No. My own physical 
appearance ought to j^rove it to you. Do I look sick? There is not 
a thing I can complain of in my body. I use the herb. You see I 
am trying to express my thoughts in a sensible way. I would not 
say that the taste cured the taste of the whisky; the taste of this 
peyote cured the taste of my appetite for liquor ; no, sir ; I would not 
say that. But the idea, the principle in it — the religious, holy idea 
that I got in the effects of it — is what helps these men following this 
religion. 

Mr. Tillman. God would not need this little peyote bean to work 
wonders with you. 

Mr. BoYNTON. 'V'NTiat is that? 

Mr. Tillman. God would not need to use this peyote bean to work 
such wonders on you or your wife. Can he not do these wonders 
without the use of this bean? 

Mr. BoYNTON. Why, the power of prayer and of faith I had in 
God, asking God that we would take his herb, one of his gifts. I 
believe he put that power to have that eflFect on that soreness. 

Mr. Tillman. You think that is the only drug that he put any 
power in to cure human ills? 

Mr. BoYNTON. Sir? 

Mr. Tillman. You think that is the only drug he put that power 
in to cure human ills ? 

Mr. BoYNTON. I believe there is more than that; it cures sin, 
spiritually. 

Mr. Tilljian. You do not send for a white doctor when you get 
sick, do you? 

Mr. BoYNTON. No, sir. 

ISIr. Tillman. Woidd you prefer now to use this peyote and your 
prayers rather than to have a white doctor treat you for disease of 
any kind? 

Mr. BoYNTON. I will first pray. I will serve God first. 

Mr. Tillman. You believe in faith cure and prayer? 

Mr. BoYNTON. Yes, sir. 

'Mv. Tillman. There are physicians in this town who perhaps 
make a hundred thousand a year practicing medicine with intelligent 
white joeople. You would not send for one of them if you were to get 
very sick? 

Mr. BoY^TON. I would do the best I could. 

Mr. Tillman. With this stuff here? 

Mr. BoYNTON. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not think the white man, after centuries of 
civilization and after centuries of study and practice of medicine. 



PEYOXE. 185 

can do as much to cure disease as you can by the use of this bean and 
by your prayers, do you ? 

Mr. BoTNTON. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. You understand it can be analyzed by chemists, wlio 
can find out exactly what is in it? 

Mr. BoYNTON. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not believe that? 

Mr. BoTNTON. I know there was a good trained doctor in Okla- 
homa City who was going to get this extract. He is using peyote 
extract and analyzed it, I suppose. He is treating patients in Okla- 
homa City. I noticed at different times when I have come through 
there he has several patients there, and I notice he has this peyote 
water. 

Mr. Tillman. Who is that doctor? 

Mr. BoTNTON. He is a white doctor. 

Mr. Tillman. And is licensed to practice medicine? 

Mr. BoTNTON. And he is using now this herb. 

Mr. Tillman. You do not know this contains three alkaloid bodies 
and also a resin ? Dr. Wiley says : 

Two of the alkaloids are crystalline and one partially so, but not entirely so. 
He delivered these alkaloids to Di-s. Prentiss and Morgan for their physiological 
tests, and also samples of the whole button. These alkaloids themselves do not 
produce the intoxication which is produced by the button. They are, however, 
very toxic. Admini.'itered to guinea pigs and mice all of these alkaloids pro- 
duce the same effects, practically, as are produced by strychnine — convul- 
sions, opisthotonos ; that is, the bending of their heads backward, and the 
general condition and appearance that result from a similar use of strychnine. 
The lethal dose was also very small. It required only a very small quantity 
of these alkaloids to produce death in guinea pigs and in frogs. Death seemed 
to be produced by the paralysis of the respiratory organs and not of the heart, 
because the heart would beat sometimes 15 or 20 minutes after the animal was 
dead. So it did not get to the heart to produce death, but produced paralysis 
of the nerves and muscles of respiration. In other words, death was produced 
by asphyxiation, and not by any specific action on the heart. 

That is the testimony of Dr. Wiley, who for 29 years was Chief 
of the Bureau of Chemistry in the Department of Agriculture. Do 
you know whether Dr. Wiley would be a good authority on a ques- 
tion of this kind ? 

Mr. BoTNTON. No, sir; I don't believe 

Mr. Tillman. I will read further : 

When these alkaloids were administered to young men by Drs. Prentiss and 
Morgan they did not produce any of the symptoms of intoxication and visions 
of a delightful character and the lack of coordination of the mental faculties 
which are produced by the button alone. 

You take the button and use it ''. 

Mr. BoTNTON. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Tillman (reading) : 

Therefore we infer that the toxic principle — that is, in producing intoxication, 
which supervenes upon the use of these buttons— is due to the resin. In this 
instance it is like cannabis, which produces a similar kind of intoxication when 
given to human beings, the only diiterence being that it is perhaps more active 
even than the toxic principle of the cannabis. 

If you knew this was deadly poison and that if you used an over- 
dose of it it would kill you, you would be a little particular about 
taking it? 



186 PEYOTE. 

Mr. BoYMTON. I don't know anything about that. 

Mr. Tillman. You believe in faith cures and you think you can 
take these beans and cure yourself of diseases that white doctors, 
splendidly educated, gradiiates in medicine, and practicing for years 
could not cure, do you? 

Mr. BoYNTox. Yes, sir. 

STATEMENT OF MR. WILLIAM E. SAFFORD, ECONOMIC BOTANIST, 
UNITED STATES BEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 

^Ir. Saffgrd. I am personally acquainted with Dr. Wiley and Dr. 
Morgan, AA'ith whom I have talked about peyote. I have written 
about the customs of the Indians in connection with the. use of nar- 
cotic plants. I hesitated to come here, and only did so at the invita- 
tion of these Indians. I do not want to appear to intrude. But 
there is one thing I AvouJd like to say in the beginning — that in con- 
nection with my studies of economic ])lants I have found that, 
although the Indians of America, of Xorth and South America, have 
Avidely different languages and widely different customs, there is 
one thing which is common to them all — their veneration for certain 
plants, which they use ceremonially. Columbus and his companions, 
when they first landed on the island of Santo Domingo, encountered 
the use of an herb by the natives very similar in its effects to peyote, 
used very much like peyote, not only as a religious ceremonial but as 
a means for curing disease, and it was regarded with reverence by 
tliose people for the spirit there was supposed to be in the plant. 

In old Mexico the early Catholic missionaries encountered diffi- 
culty in spreading their religion on account of the religion of the 
^'lexicans. These Mexicans thought, as many Indians of the present 
day think, that all plants had spirits. Even when they went to cut 
down a great tree to make a bridge they would say in propitiation, 
" Don't be angry with us for cutting you down ; we are going to 
make a bridge of you to span a mighty river, and thousands of 
people will go across," and at that time they performed certain 
ceremonies and burned a certain incense to propitiate it. Plants which 
yielded poisons they believed contained evil spirits, some of them 
evil and offensive in their effects. Other plants having narcotic or 
medicinal properties they regarded with awe and veneration, and 
they made prayers to them, exactljr as this man has spoken of doing, 
asking the spirit of the plant to take away this sore spot or to re- 
move the black sickness or this green sickness, saying, " You have the 
l^ower to overcome the bad things which are in us." 

That Avas done 300 years ago among the Mexicans in old Mexico. 
Among our own Virginia Indians they used the jinison weed. A 
form of the jimson Aveed is used similarly by the Zuiiis and by the 
Indians of California. All of them have a veneration for this weed 
on account of the power which was in it and which they attributed to 
some spiritual cause. They knew nothing of poisonous alkaloids, but 
according to their conception it Avas the spirit of the plant, more 
powerful or less powerful, that did harm or good to those who used it. 

The poisonous alkaloids contained in peyote differ only in nature 
from those in nicotine and caffeine. We all know how ceremoniously 
tobacco was used, not only for smoking by the early Indians in all 



PEYOTE. 187 

their ceremonial treaties, but also in their prayers. In Mexico they 
would bathe their hands in the smoke and use it as incense and pray 
to the spirit of tobacco to accomplish this end and that end and to 
overconie evil-. Tobacco, peyote, the jimson weed, and a certain tree 
in Haiti, from the beans of which narcotic snuff was made, were the 
four principal plants used in this Avay, but the ceremonial was very 
similar in all cases, and in all cases the art of healing was associated 
with the profession of priestcraft. The priests and the physicians 
were the same, just as they were in the time of Christ, when the wise 
men came to visit Christ in his manger. And going back further 
into the Asiatic and Greek ceremonials, we find the same thing, they 
used similar drugs, some belonging to the very same families of the 
plants that were used in this country. They used them for cere- 
menials as well as for curing disease. They did not understand 
chen.ic als, but they did know the effect Avhich these things had. 

Xow, as far as the effects which peyote causes, which I have inves- 
tigated very carefully and have written several papers about, they 
are these: Those who have taken peyote, in a limited amount, have 
had a pleasant sensation from it. If they take a greater amount, it 
causes certain hallucinations, and in this stage, when certain things 
are suggested to them, they see them. If you say " You see certain 
people, do you not? " they will see them. Dr. Morgan told me about 
their trying to see the different colors which were sviggested to them. 
When it was suggested to certain Indians that they would see the 
devil, they saw the devil with his cloven feet; when it was said that 
they could see Christ, they even described the wounds in His hands, 
because they had seen pictures of them. And it was these things that 
were held up as hallucinations. 

But it is only the practice which has been handed down from 
generation to generation, from century to century, the effects of these 
narcotics which they attributed to sonu^hing supernatural. I have 
the reports of Spanish Catholic missionaries to their home govern- 
ment of their attempts to stop the use of peyote innong the Indians 
300 years ago, containing the testimony which they took at tlie 
time.' and I translated it from the Spanish exactly as it was. 

Xow. I want to say this, that there is nobody who more sincerely 
wishes good for the Indians than I do. I have traveled in many 
countries, and wherever I have gone I have tried to be a blessing to 
the people I have visited, and am only telling as well as I can the 
facts of the case. When the Mexicans wished to procure peyote, 
which they called God"s flesh then (teo nanti a(fl). just as a witness 
called it God's herb a moment ago. they sent messengers to northern 
Mexico and southern Texas, to the xery same locality where peyote 
now is gathered. *The-e messengers, before they were sent from the 
City of Mexico were consecriited by the use of aromatic incense, re- 
sembling the fragrant cedar which now the Indians use in their 
ceremonies. Then thev used the copal balsams in Mexico. The 
Oklahoma Indians take branches of cedars and burn them and hold 
their hands in the flames; they bathe their necks and faces to-day 
before they enter the congregations of the peyote takers. They go 
down to the river and wash all the sweat from their bodies and 
clean their finger nails, and their ears, and rub themselves with 
fragrant sage brush, somewhat like the Catholics who use holy 



188 PEYOTE. 

water before they enter a Catholic church. They regard this peyote 
not as an intoxicant but as part of the ceremonial which they use 
in their own religion. They are proud of the peyote ceremony be- 
cause it is the Indian religion and has come down to them from their 
forefathers; and it is not for this man or that man among them to 
say " I will change it." One might just as well suggest to a Catholic 
to stop the use of bread and wine in the holy sacrament. I mean 
that this is the way the Indians feel about a proposed change of 
their ritual, which has become well established and crystallized. 

These messengers, who were consecrated before they went from 
Mexico City to get the peyote, if they turned up by mistake one 
of these plants, would reverently replant it and put earth about it, 
saying, " Don't be offended, we want you for a good purpose." When 
the messengers went back to the city of Mexico they would be met 
by the people who received them with tears streaming down their 
faces. From our point of view tliis is a superstitious practice, but 
from their point of view it is a part of their religion; and just as 
certain features of their religion have been blended with certain 
features of the Christian religion of the present time, so it was in the 
earlv days; they blended their religion with certain features of the 
Catholic religion. In those days they captured some of the users 
of peyote and imprisoned them and called them witches: and when 
they made them worship according to the Catholic faith, the Indian 
would sometimes clandestinely put a piece of peyote on the altar 
under the images of the Virgin and so that they might think, 
" There is God's herb and Ave will know we are in his presence when 
we say our prayers." 

Peyote is undoubtedly a narcotic and if taken in excess it has bad 
effects. In all the cases I have investigated I have not found any 
instance where it was taken to excess. Tobacco and even coffee, if 
taken to excess, is poisonous. Everybody knows the veneration with 
which tobacco has always been regarded by the Indians. And so 
it is with peyote, whose alkaloids, like nicotine, are poisonous and 
v^'ould have a pernicious effect if taken in excess. 

In Florida the Indians had another herb which they used very 
much in the same way. It was a species of holly Ilex voinitoria. 
whicli in the form of a concentrated decoction cavised vomiting. 
The Spaniards living at St. Augustin. who came to Florida before 
the English came into possession, saw the herb they were using and 
they used it as a substitute for tea. It has a pleasant stimulating 
effect, and was used just as Paraguay tea, another species of IIpx, 
is used in Paraguay now. I have the story of a mariner who was on 
his way from Jamaica to Philadelphia and was cast ashore on the 
Florida coast and was taken by the Indians to the Spaniards at 
St. Augustine. He was given tea made from this holly. Ilex 
romlforta, which the Florida Indians used ceremonially. Several 
times a year the Indians came together there, formed a circle, very 
much as the peyote users do, and they brewed the " black drink," a 
concentrated extract of the holly; and the people took this to make 
them vomit, believing that with it they threw up their evil; and it 
was a ceremony which was to regenerate and purify them. 

There is one thing in connection with these religious ceremonies 
of the American Indians that I have found — that thev had nothing 



PEYOTE. 189 

to do with sexual appetites; nothing to do with anv irreguhirities or 
<ic!^;uichery among the sexes. As a matter of fact, most of the 
tr.l es went to the opposite extreme. In British Guiana and up the 
Amazon Kiver the women were not allowed to issue from the 
houses when these ceremonies were being enacted. The very first 
man who crossed the American continent from Florida over 'to the 
Pacific Ocean mentions the ceremonies which he saw in connection 
with the herb they used at that time; if a woman heard the nuister 
of ceremonies call out "Ola"' as she was sitting she could not rise; 
or if she was walking, she had to stand still; and if any woman 
passed by when it was brewing and the pot was uncovered,'it had to 
be prepared all over again. So they went to the extreme of banish- 
ing the women entirely from their ceremonies of this nature. 

All the narcotics are somewhat similar to tobacco. They were 
all venerated, and in all cases it was the spirit behind them — the 
spirit in the plants — with which they undertook to drive awav the 
evil and bring them he\p from God. I realize the evil which would 
result if they undertook to cure malignant diseases with drugs of 
this kind. I have not anv more faith in the beneficient eU'ects of 
peyote than I have in faith cures. I think harm may be done liy it 
if used medicinally, but I know this; that by taking away this ritual 
from the Indians it would humiliate them greatly and I would be 
afraid that if deprived of it they might fall back into their okl l)ad 
habits. It woulcl be a faith forced upon them if they had to adopt 
the cei'emonies of the Christian churches, and they would feel that 
nothing Avas left to them of their ancient customs and their ancient 
traditions if peyote were taken away from them. 

Mr. Tillman. Do vou know Dr. Claude S. Chambers, of Ana- 
darko. Okla. ? 

Mr. SAFroRD. No, sir. 

Mr. Tillman. Here is what he says about peyote. He is part 
Cherokee blood. He says: 

" Peyote is on the increase and will continue to be so long as we 
have no backing. I have studied the Indians that use it very care- 
fully and can not find that it does them the least bit of good. On 
the other hand it is very harmful in many ways : 

■• 1. It lowers their vitality and their power of resistance to any 
exposure thev may have to undergo. 

■'2. In using it the Indians are always in a hot tent, breathing 
foul air. etc. 

•• 3. Peyote has first a stimulating and later a depressing effect on 

the heart. 

"4. I know of a number of eases of sexual intercourse ot Indians 
while under the influence of the drug. 

•' 5. I know of nine babies dying because of the administering to 
them of peyote by some medicine man." 

Mr. Saffoed. I suppose he speaks from experience as far as the 
effect' of peyote on children is concerned, but it seems to me that the 
Indians' faith in taking peyote and their resolution to live good 
lives is very much like what certain Christians mean when they say, 
"I have gotten religion." Some of those who get religion may fall 
afterwards. 



190 PEYOTE. 

Mr. Tillman. Do you think that is an answer to these charges? 

^Ir. Saffokd. Xo, sir: but I do thinlc it is not the fault of the 
Indians' religion if some of the members of their society fall from 
grace. 

Mr. TiLLJiAN. You think it would humiliate these Indians to haYe 
tliis taken away from them ? 

ilr. Saffoed. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Till.man. It might humiliate the heathen mother who wished 
to toss her child into the Ganges to deny her that privilege. 

]Mr. Safford. I have sympathy for everybody who wishes to uplift 
and help the Indians, and I would be the last in the world to speak 
lightly of the sincere efforts of Christians to make the Indians lead 
good lives. I am presenting the Indians' point of view ; they have 
all testified that since joining the j^eyote society they have turned 
from evil and sought the good. 

^Ir. S^-YDEi!. Kef erring to the testimony of this Dr. Chambers Mr. 
Tillman just spoke about, and particularly to the nine babies who 
liad just lost their lives from using this drink, do you think it would 
be difficult for some 23hysician among the white people who had the 
desire to shoY- these people that such a thing Y'ould have been impos- 
sible if they had been treated by a white doctor? 

Mr. Saffoed. I think it Avould be quite possible to attribute the 
death of children to peyote, even if it was not the cause. I should 
think it would be quite possible to make them discontinue such use 
of the drug in ti'eating young children, if Ydiat Dr. Chambers says 
is indeed true. 

Mr. TiLLSJAX. But they will not send for a Y'hite doctor. 

Mr. Safford. There is Avhere good missionary work could be clone. 

^[r. Tillman. They said the missionaries are against this drug. 

^Ir. Safford. Thev are, sir ; and, although I am in sympathy with 
missionary Y'ork in its efforts to uplift the Indians, I think Y-e should 
lecall that the antagonism of the missionaries ma^^ be caused by ex- 
actly Y'hat was expressed by the Spanish missionaries in early 
^Mexico. They said that the use of these ceremonial drugs prevented 
the conversion of the Indians to Christianity : they did not oppose 
them on account of their narcotic effects. 

STATEMENT OF J. W. WALDO, KIOWA. 

Mtr. Waldo. I Y'ant to state Y'hat I know as to Avhy the doctor 
Y'ould make such a statement. The Indians y'ouIcI not have any- 
thing to do Y'ith him out there, some of them, for the reason that 
he was so proud of himself to be a big doctor down there. The In- 
dians would send for him to come to their homes, but he would send 
for them and tell them to come in to him. He said, " I ain't got time 
to go out there," and finally the Indians got onto what his object it 
ancl they cut him out. And that is how he came to make that kind of 
a statement. The babies can die from other causes without using 
peyote; a good many do die without using it; you have to die some 
day. The peyote did not kill them children. 

Mr. Tillman. Does anyone else want to make a statement? 

Mr. Waldo. There are two who want to be heard. 



PEVOTE. 191 

STATEMENT OF CLEAVER WARDEN, ARAPAHOE INDIAN, TRIBAL 
DELEGATE, FORMER AGENCY INTERPRETER. 

Mr. Warden. I am from the Arapahoe Tribe. 

Mr. Tillman. State whether you are for peyote or against it. 

Mr. Warden. I want to give to the committee as briefly as I can 
the testimony that I linow from my own practical experience at home. 
That will perhaps substantiate the support of peyote on the part of 
the Indians who are using this herb in Oklahoma ancl perhaps at 
other places throughout the United States. 

First, I want to tell the committee that I have to a certain extent 
been in the employ of a scientific institution. One of tlieni is the 
Chicago Museum and another is the Xew York City ]\Iuseuni, and 
I have worked under ^Lr. Mooiiey and some other people and I have 
made somewhat of a careful study of my people in every way they 
do, in their mode of life particularly, and more especially trying to 
look into a proper way of carrying out their doings. Now, Sitting 
Bull, an Arapahoe Indian, was at one time a scholar of home mis- 
sionary in Utah. That man came into Our country as a member of 
the Arapahoe and Cheyenne tribe of Indians, and he started to 
teaching there and he did a good many things contrary to his teach- 
ing. One time he came on to my place where we had a meeting at 
home: a social meeting. There he had an opportmiity of coming 
into our presence. He was in a condition I was sui'priscd to see 
when he came into our meeting. You would not begin to recognize 
him from his photo. He sat there with his eyes all twisted up, his 
nose one side, and his mouth every direction, slobbering, partially 
paralyzed: had a partial stroke of paralysis. He could hardly take 
a seat. He was put to one side there and perhaps he was told what 
to do. Gentlemen of the committee, in that tent there is order, and 
where there is order there is contentment; where there is a (iodiy 
feeling prevailing. After being there that night and by the use of 
this peyote, he walked out with the rest in the morning. 

There came a man from Watonga, a white man brother of ours. 
He pointed to him there; he said, " Our besv friend there at one time 
is a Avreck from evil practices; he disobeyed the law. Pie so admits. 
Look at him, size him up; what do you think of him? He is not 
going to get Avell; he is going to die."' I says. "Xo; he is going to 
get well." "How is he going to get well?" he says. I says, "If he 
goes at these meetings with good intentions, goes to proper places, 
he will get well." That was my faith for him. That is one instance. 

Xow there are several. I think a good many, who know my own 
experience. 

Mr. Snyder. What happened to Sitting Bull? Did he come out 
all right ? 

Mr. Warden. He come out of it. He is there now well, perfectly 
well. He can smile, he can tell you how he came out. how he con- 
(juered. He is there now a Christian. He is home in all peace and 
contentment of Godliness. There is no such thing as immorality 
surrounding his home. He is there listed as a Menonite member 
now. That is the work of peyote. 

Now take the case of the daughter of a friend of mine attending 
the school there in the district. I was called to come and look after 



192 l^EYOTK. 

this girl. Upon inquiry I found out slie had accidentally swallowed 
a couiDle of pins. One of them she said she vomited up; the other 
was in her throat. The physician, under the direction of the super- 
intendent, was instructed to look after the girl. They had tried 
every way to obtain a means of getting it out by examination, but 
they' failed to do it. They had tried; I do not know what they did. 
She told me that they had felt her neck and stuck their fingers in 
her mouth and looked inside, and she said she did not want to tell. 
But I brought her home to my place to my family ; she belongs to my 
f amily on account of marriage. We gave her what we thought would 
be soothing for her system — iood, something of vegetable kind. That 
didn't help at all. Then I concluded, I said, " Here I am. knowing 
these people in my neighborhood that are being made well by this 
IJeyote; why woidd not it be a proper thing for me to take her of her 
own free will." We took her and she swallowed that like we do. 
Sometime afterward she was out and she says, '' I had a fit from this; 
I can't swallow the \m\ that sticks in there." It was in her throat. 
" Xow." I said, " Ave are going to try again." So we gave her the 
peyote. On that day in the morning she had peyote in her system 
and she was running around with my boy and she came back to the 
house. She was out chasing rabbits with my boy, and my wife asked 
her to gather .some wood and take it to the kitchen, and she did, and 
when she went out there and while she bent ovei' there she coughed, 
she said, and that pin dropped on top of the wood. It was all clotted 
with blood, just a little of the pin in sight. That is an illustration, 
Mr. Chairman. 

Xow, I Avill not go very much further, but it is enough for me to 
convince the committee of the good of peyote to say this. I was a 
student at one time at Carlisle, Pa., and I know when I returned home 
I was in such a shape as Paul Boynton was. I know that, because I 
had a hemorrhage — if I wished to enjoy life and see the good doings 
of others I must do what they do, and of my own free will I con- 
scientiously went and joined that society. I was made well upon 
that. 

STATEMENT OF REUBEN TAYLOR, WESTERN OKLAHOMA 

DISTRICT. 

Mr. Tatlor. I am a minister among the missionaries, and that is 
mj' certificate. [Exhibiting paper.] Of course, my district asked 
me to co'me before the committee about this peyote. I was in school 
in 1886 in Kansas Institute, and I used to walk with crutches when 
I returned home. Dr. Morton, of Kansas City, told me I would have 
to use these crutches in my lifetime, use them all the time. And there 
were my friends, and some of them used the peyote, and they urged 
me to come into theii' meetings. So I Avent there and went in four 
times in the meeting, and I dropped my crutches from that very time, 
and I walked back home. That is my testimony I give before the 
committee. 

I have got a wife ; she had a hemorrhage, and she was going to the 
doctors, and they could not do any good, and I knew peyote is a good 
medicine, and it was used in worship ; so I took my wife in there, and 
she was nothing but bones, and she could hardly talk. I took her in 



PEYOTE. 193 

there, and she go in two or three times and never had a hemorrhage. 
And now she weighs about 360 pounds. 

Aiid I used to be poorly, too. I used to be nothing but bones, and 
now I am health}-. Perhaps I am fatter than all of you fellows, 
because I had peyote. 

I remember way back in the historj' of the comitry, the people 
came over to this country looking for free worship, and they found 
it light in the United States, and us fellows ask why we should not 
have ours. By the Constitution the people made you can not take a 
man's conscience to worship God. And so I come here to testify, 
Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for your attention. 

Mr. Warden. I want to ask just a question I want you to know 
before we will go from this house. What I want to ask you is to 
remember these speeches of these different tribes made before you, 
that you may do just by them and not just go ahead and hear what 
this man told you and that man. You must not take that kind of 
stories, because we all know sometimes people tell a little different 
from what the stories ought to be. Therefore I ask you to do this 
for us. 

Mr. Tillman. The committee has given all witnesses a fair hear- 
ing. We close these hearings definiteh- and finally now, and will not 
have any more. We thank all of you. 

(Thereupon, at 12.15 o'clock p. m.. the subcommittee adjourned.) 



X 



M/ 



r =* 



I \ 



^" ^ %y 









Si- 



■ ] 



I 






- ( V 



/L^ 



T 



y 



/ 






/ 



"^ - ^.v vw , _ ' /^ ^^'<:4 



^j 



- U r ^ j 

^ '^- ' }^\ p, T' ' -^ '^ -,'" 



\\ 



» V 






,, ' 7r j,\.' fP > 



/ 



; , -I \ I 



I 



/ y /\ 






; uw. 






^ o-'i ) 






I 









} ' : 



w^ 



1 " V 

f t 






I'l 1 fi 



'-1 : 









1 \ V 









c =^ 









/ -tl-. 









I- , V ^ 



\ ' ^ 



^^ 1^. ' / ; .* :" a ^^' 



r>Y 



/*, 






i< -^ 






- 1 



, 7 '"> . 



"''u ' -, ;/i 



> , ' ^' i 



;\ • ' ■' 






H 



1 1 



\, 



-A 






A"i^ -1^ -1 -i- () ' ' ) \ 



^ /n ^ 



^ \ 



K^' l^^^) 















> ,1 '^ ' M>^ r^( -^V) - \' 



■V N 



I -( \ 






I 






,C ^ ^ O •- %'^ ' ^^ ^'* A^i^ 

1 ' , . 



\ y( 



' ^ .\ T"' 



' %' 



I i> 



1 









' 1 






> J 



y \ 



\ 



1 '' 



V, / 



) 



-^ \ 






' i 









1' 






I l\ 






\ ' 1 



,\'< 



r '^ 



/. 



\ 1 



\ ' \ 



I V >, 



I 






\ 






Y^i ^,1 






n 



' )^ 



f t \ 
I \ r 



^^ ' I ,> '^ ^ 



\ ,1 ',t V ' .^ ';/ , .,1 



1 ) 



\4- 



-V./\-l 






1 "^ 






s > 



^\ i 






( I' 









l^ 






), 1 '\ . ; ' ,1 V ^ , M ^^ 



.^iv„,, , 



I ^ / V S ' ^. 



/''fM'.. 



^1 









;;.A^ 






\ 



' -'I \ \K 



1 S 



iff' » 






\ \' 



I V 



.( >^ 



^ ' 



I A >\ 



^■^ \ I 1 









fO ^^ 



1V \ I ( ^ 









\ 1/; A 






i^^:i- 















V'.' ,1 ''' ■ i.i^''\, *■• ■"-*■ r- 



=:■ '^\:}^'"'" ' '■'■^' '■ ; ';^'^^'.^v -^C';; >?'":'^^ '(--V"-:- '/^^I'r v^*'^ 






.'V' 





















\ ' 



-r . "l:v^'' 















>.'(' '^'^-^i'-c/^u'^^r'-K'^V''''^' 



\'. ..nl m.'i "M J ' ' \ /■' 
(■ .') '11--, ' ' N--' t '.VA (, ' 









,«■•:>'.: -Hi-r 









.'. -I 


















V.;V'i-/, ^ 'iQ^ x^ ^', h 






