SECTION ON NEUROLOGY 


Ultrasonically Produced Changes in the Blood-Brain Barrier 
L. Bakay, T. F. Hueter, H. T. Ballantine Jr., 
and D. Sosa 
Studies on Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25) 
Harris Isbell, R. E. Belleville, H. F. Fraser, 
Abraham Wikler, and C. R. Logan 


Temporal Lobectomy with Removal of Uncus, Hippocampus, 
and Amygdala Arthur A. Morris 
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Presumed Allergic Purpura 
L. M. Sanghvi and R. Sharma 


Effects of Chlorpromazine on Chronic Lobotomized 
Schizophrenic Patients: A Controlled Study 
Harry Freeman and Herbert S. Cline 


SECTION ON PSYCHIATRY 


The Human Body and the Human Being (Special Article) 
James E. Shea 


Malignant Tumors in Psychotic Patients 
Otto F. Ehrentheil 


NOVEMBER 1956 


VOLUME 76 NUMBER 5 


Activation of Psychosis by a Combination of Scopolamine 
and Alphka-Chloralose 
Russell Monroe, George Jacobson, and Frank Ervin 


Adrenal Cortical Function in Anxious Human Subjects 
Harold Persky, Roy R. Grinker, David A. Hamburg, 
Melvin A. Sabshin, Sheldon J. Korchin, 
Harold Basowitz, and Jacques A. Chevalier 


Delirium with Low Serum Sodium 
Walter Weilti 


Complete Contents on First Inside Page 


AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION Publication 


A.M.A. 
| 
NEUROLOGY 
AND | 
PS} Chi \ 
JT BN BEEABEE J 


COLONIAL HALL 
One of Fourteen units in "Cottage Plan" 


Gan Neweus Disorders 


Maintaining the highest standards since 1884, Josef A. Kindwall, M.D. 
Carroll W. Osgood, M.D. 
William T. Kradwell, M.D. 
Benjamin A. Ruskin, M.D. 
to stand for all that is best in the contemporary seats Menai 
care and treatment of nervous disorders. James A. Alston, M.D. 
Edward C. Schmidt, M.D. 
Isaac J. Sarfatty, M.D. 
* 


the Milwaukee Sanitarium Foundation continues 


Photographs and particulars 


sent on request. Waldo W. Buss, Executive Director 


Chicago Office—1!509 Marshall Field Annex Bldg. 
25 East Washington St.—Wednesday, !-3 P.M. 
Phone—Central 6-1 162 


MILWAUKEE SAMTARIUM: FOUNDATION, INC. 


Wauwatosa Wisconsin 


ws 
| 
i 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


VoLUME 76 


NOVEMBER 1956 Numer 5 


ORIGINAL ARTICLES 


SECTION ON NEUROLOGY 


PAGE 
Ultrasonically Produced Changes in the Blood-Brain Barrier 


L. Bakay, M.D.; T. F. Hueter, Ph.D.; H. T. Ballantine Jr., M.D., 


Studies on Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25) 
Harris Isbell, M.D.; R. E. Belleville, M.A.; H. F. Fraser, M.D.; 


Abraham Wikler, M.D., and C. R. Logan, Lexington, Ky. .......... 468 
Temporal Lobectomy with Removal of Uncus, Hippocampus, and Amygdala 
Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Presumed Allergic Purpura 
L. M. Sanghvi, M.R.C.P. (London), D.T.M.H. (England), and 


Effects of Chlorpromazine on Chronic Lobotomized Schizophrenic Patients 
Harry Freeman, M.D., and Herbert S. Cline, M.D., Worcester, Mass. .. 500 


OBITUARIES 
REGULAR DEPARTMENTS 


SECTION ON PSYCHIATRY 


The Human Body and the Human Being (Special Article) 


Malignant Tumors in Psychotic Patients 


Activation of Psychosis by a Combination of Scopolamine and 
Alpha-Chloralose 
Russell Monroe, M.D.; George Jacobson, M.D., New Orleans, and 


Adrenal Cortical Function in Anxious Human Subjects 
Harold Persky, Ph.D.; Roy R. Grinker, M.D.; David A. Hamburg, 
M.D.; Melvin A. Sabshin, M.D.; Sheldon J. Korchin, Ph.D.; 
Harold Basowitz, Ph.D., and Jacques A. Chevalier, Ph.D., Chicago .. 549 


Delirium with Low Serum Sodium 


REGULAR DEPARTMENTS 


| 
| 
| 


A. M. A. 
Archives of Neurology and weeny 


VoLUME 76 NOVEMBER 1956 NUMBER 5 


Coryricut, 1956, By THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 
Published monthly by the AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATI@N. Editorial and Circulation Offices: 
535 North Dearborn Street, Chicago 10, Illinois. Publication Office: Thompson Lane, Box 539, Nashville 1, 
Tennessee. Change of Address: Notice to the circulation office should state whether or not change is per- 
manent and should include the old address. Six weeks’ notice is required to effect a change of address. 
Second-class mail privileges authorized at Nashville, Tenn., Aug. 6, 1956. 


EDITORIAL BOARD 


SECTION ON NEUROLOGY 
HAROLD G. WOLFF, Chief Editor 
525 East 68th Street, New York 21 
BERNARD J. ALPERS, Philadelphia PERCIVAL BAILEY, Chicago 
CHARLES D. ARING, Cincinnati DEREK E. DENNY-BROWN, Boston 
WILDER PENFIELD, Contributing Member, Montreal 


SECTION ON PSYCHIATRY 
ROY R. GRINKER Sr., Chief Editor 
Institute for Psychosomatic and Psychiatric Research 
29th Street and Ellis Avenue, Chicago 16 
STANLEY COBB, Boston DOUGLASS W. ORR, Seattle 
GEORGE E. GARDNER, Boston FREDERICK C. REDLICH, New Haven, Conn 
M. RALPH KAUFMAN, New York JOHN WHITEHORN, Baltimore 


as STIN SMITH, Editor, A. M. A. Scientific Publications 
GILBERT S. COOPER, Managing Editor, Specialty Journals 


AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS | 


A. M. A. Specialty Journals 
Monthly 


A. a A. Archives of Internal Medicine. Paul S. A. M. A. Archives of Pathology. Paul R. Cannon, 
Rhoads, M.D., Chief Editor, American Medical M.D., Chief Editor, Department of Pathology, Uni- 
Association, 535 N. Dearborn St., Chicago 10. versity of Chicago, The School of Medicine, 950 
Price $10.00; Canada, $10.50; Foreign, $11.50; in- E. 59th St., Chicago 37. Peice, $10.00; Canada, 
dividual copy, $1.00.* $10.50; Foreign, $11.50; individual copy, $1.00.* 


A. M. A. Archives of Dermatology. Herbert Rattner, 
A. M. A, Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry. 
Ave., Harold G. Wolff, M.D., Chief Editor, Neurology, 
$1.25 we 525 E. 68th St., New York 21; Roy R. Grinker Sr., 
individual copy, 91.69. M.D., Chief Editor, Psychiatry, Institute for Psy- 
A. M. A. Archives of Ophthalmology. Francis Heed chosomatic and Psychiatric Research, 29th St. and 
Adler, M.D., Chief Editor, 313 S. 17th St., Phila- Ellis Ave., Chicago 16. Price, $14.00; Canada, 
delphia 5. Price, $12.00; Canada, $12.50; Foreign, $14.50; Foreign, $15.50; individual copy, $1.50. 
$13.50; individual copy, $1.25.+ 


, A. M. A. Archives of Otolaryngology. George M. 

4. Coates, M.D., Chief Editor, 1721 Pine St., Phila- 

American aca seocia- delphia 3. Price, $14.00; Canada, $14.50; Foreign, 
tion, 535 N. Dearborn St., Chicago 10. Price, $15.50; individual copy $1.50.t 
$14.00; $14.50; Foreign, $15.50; individual 


copy, $1.2 

pian A. M. A. Archives of Industrial Health. Prof. Philip 
A. M. A. Journal of Diseases of Children. Robert Drinker, Chief Editor, Dept. of Industrial Hygiene, 

B. Lawson, M.D., Chief Editor, 1000 N. W. 17th Harvard University School of Public Health, 55 

St., Miami 36, Fla. Price, $12.00; Canada, $12. 50; Shattuck St., Boston 15. Price, $10.00; Canada, 

Foreign, $13.50; individual copy, $1.25.t $10.50; Foreign, $11.50; individual copy,’ $1.00.* 


* Price to students, interns, and residents: $6.00 in + Price to students, interns, and residents: $7.00 in 
U. S. & possessions. U. S. & possessions. 


t Price to students, interns, and residents: $8.00 in 
U. S. & possessions. 


The price for individual copies applies only this and the previous calendar Nottys | issues older than 
- ears are available through alter J. Johnson, Inc., 111 Fifth Avenue, Future reprints 
back issues will be available through Johnson Reprint Corporation, 111 Fifth } a Be New York 3. 


The Journal of the American Medical Association. Weekly. Annual Subscription Price: Begun $15.00. 
Canadian, $17.00. Foreign, $21.50. Price to students, interns, and residents: $9.00 in U. S. & possessions. 
Quarterly Cumulative Index Medicus. Issued Twice a Year. Subscription Price, Catender Year, $25.00. 


Checks, money orders, and drafts should be made payable to the American 
Medical Association, 535 North Dearborn Street, Chicago 10. 


- 
| 
a 
3 


YOUR 


GUIDE TO 


CURRENT PUBLICATIONS 


Quarterly 


Cumulative 
Index Medicus 


WITH AUTHORS AND SUBJECTS... 


Divided into sections, one devoted 
to books and the other to periodical 
literature, the QUARTERLY CUM- 
ULATIVE INDEX MEDICUS con- 
tains a list of current publications 
alphabetized as to authors and sub- 
jects. The exact bibliographic refer- 
ence is given under the author with 
titles in the original language, while 
titles under subjects are all in Eng- 
lish. The index also includes a 
listing of journals, addresses and 
publishers. 


SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $25.00 PER YEAR 
CANADIAN AND FOREIGN $27.00 PER YEAR 


AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 
535 NORTH DEARBORN STREET 
CHICAGO 10, ILLINOIS 


The QUARTERLY CUMULATIVE 
INDEX MEDICUS appears twice a 
year; volumes are cloth bound and 
cover periodicals for six months as 
indicated on the publication. These 
two volumes will be a convenient 
and inclusive reference for current 
medical literature. 
practitioners, 


Invaluable for 
specialists, teachers, 
editors, writers, investigators, stu- 
dents and libraries. 


Instructions to Contributors 


Communications regarding editorial management, subscriptions, reprints, etc., should 
be addressed to Specialty Journals, American Medical Association, 535 North Dearborn 
Street, Chicago 10. 

Articles, book reviews, and other materials for publication should be addressed to 
the Chief Editor of the Specialty Journal concerned. Articles are accepted for publica- 
tion on condition that they are contributed solely to that journal. : 

An original typescript of an article should be provided; it must be double or triple 
spaced on one side of a standard size page, with at least a 1-inch margin at each edge. A 
carbon copy should be retained by the author. An article in English by a foreign author 
should be accompanied by a draft in the author’s mother tongue. Improvised abbreviations 
should be avoided. 

The main title of an article may not contain more than seventy characters and spaces; 
a subtitle may be of any length. The subtitle should be sufficiently detached from the main 
title that a punctuation mark as strong as a colon can be used in the Table of Contents to 
separate it frem the main title; it must not begin with “with.” 

The author’s name should be accompanied by the highest academic or medical degree 
which he holds. If academic connections are given for one author of an article, such con- 
nections must be given for all other authors of the article who have such connections. 

A Case Report must be preceded by an introductory paragraph containing at least 
thirty words before the details of the case are given. To avert the possibility of legal action, 
patients’ initials and hospital case numbers should not be published. 

Material quoted from another publication must be quoted exactly if the original is in 
English—spelling, capitalization, punctuation, etc., unchanged. Material taken largely from 
another cane ap must be credited to the original author, whether quoted exactly or 
merely abstracted. 

Each article should be accompanied by a summary in the present tense, presenting the 
—_ points of the article, but in somewhat more generalized terms than in the article 
itself. 

If it is necessary to publish a recognizable photograph of a person, the photograph 
must be accompanied by written permission of the subject himself if an adult, or of the 
parents or guardian if a child, to publish his photograph. An illustration which has been 
published in another publication must be accompanied by written permission from the 
author and the original publisher to reproduce it in an A. M. A. Specialty Journal. 

The maximum illustration allowance is ten illustrations within a total of 100 sq. inches 
or $100, whichever is of greater advantage to the author. When no restrictions are placed 
by the author upon cropping, reducing, and grouping, the publisher is often able to use 
twenty or more illustrations in one article with the $100 allowance. See an issue of this 
journal for examples. Oversized originals should be photographed and a print submitted. 
Large photomicrograph prints will be reduced in scale unless portions to be cropped are 
indicated by the author. 

Any cut-off marks should be made on the margins (or mountings) rather than on the 
illustration itself. Charts and drawings should be in black ink on hard, white paper. 
Lettering must be large enough to permit necessary reduction. Glossy prints of x-rays are 
requested. Paper clips should not be used on prints, since their mark shows in repro- 
duction, as does writing on the back of prints with hard lead pencil or stiff pen. Labels 
should be prepared and pasted to the back of each illustration showing its number, the 
author’s name, an abbreviated title of the article, and top plainly indicated. Charts and 
illustrations must have descriptive legends, grouped on a separate sheet. Tables must have 
captions. ILLUSTRATIONS SHOULD BE UNMOUNTED. 

References to the literature should be numbered in the order in which they are referred 
to in the text or listed in alphabetical order without numbers. A chronological arrange- 
ment, with all entries for a given year alphabetized according to the surname of the first 
author, may be used if preferred. References should be typed on a special page at end of 
manuscript. They should conform to the style of the Quarterly Cumulative Index Medicus, 
and must include, in the order given, name of author, title of article (with subtitle), name 
of periodical, with volume, page, month—day of month if weekly or biweekly—and year. 
Names of periodicals should be given in full or abbreviated exactly as in the Quarterly 
Cumulative Index Medicus. Reference to books must contain, in the order given, name of 
author, title of book, city of publication, name of publisher, and year of publication. Titles 
of foreign articles, if originally in a generally known Romance or Germanic tongue, must 
either all be in English translation or all be in the original language. Titles in other 
languages must be translated. The author must assume responsibility for the accuracy of 
foreign titles. 

Matter appearing in the A. M. A. Specialty Journals is covered by copyright, but as a 
rule no objection will be made to its reproduction in a reputable medical journal if proper 
credit is given. However, the reproduction for commercial purposes of articles appearing 
in the A. M. A. Specialty Journals, or in any other publications issued by the Association, 
will not be permitted. 


AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 
535 North Dearborn Street Chicago 10 


= 
4 


“ANTABUSE' appears to be the most effective 


means of treating the chronic alcoholic...” 


A\E 
\ 
Ye Neg Smith, J. A.: Postgrad. Med. 16:316 (Oct.) 1954. 
= 


A CHEMICAL FENCE” FOR THE ALCOHOLIC. “Antabuse” helps the alcoholic resist his compul- 
sive craving for alcohol, and enables him “to respond more readily to measures aimed at 
the correction of underlying personality disorders.” Bone, J. A.: J. Nat. M. A. 46:245 (July) 1954. 
“Antabuse” brand of DISULFIRAM (tetraethylthiuram disulfide) is supplied in 0.5 Gm. tablets, 
bottles of 50 and 1,000. 


Complete information available on request 


& Ayerst Laboratories «© New York, N. Y. © Montreal, Canada 


5546 


INDEX TO 
NEUROPSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTIONS 
SPECIAL SCHOOLS and SANITARIA 
Advertising in 
A.M.A. Archives of NEUROLOGY and PSYCHIATRY 


Display announcements of the following institutions appear regularly in A. M. A. 
Archives of NEUROLOGY and PSYCHIATRY. For advertisements of those institutions 
which run on an every-other month basis it would be y to It the advertis- 
ing section of a previous or subsequent issue. 


James Martin Woodall, M.D., Medical Director 


LIVERMORE SANITARIUM 


. Geo. S. Hughes, Medical Director 


Livermore, Calif. 


0. B. Jensen, M.D., Superintendent and Medical Director 


J. Cotter Hirschberg, M.D., Director 


MILWAUKEE SANITARIUM FOUNDATION, INC. ............ Wauwatosa, Wis. 


Samuel Liebman, M.D., Medical Director 


Barclay J. MacGregor, Manager and Registrar 


Benjamin Simon, M.D., Director 


and BELLE MEAD FARM COLONY ...............++0. Belle Mead, N. J. 
Dr. J. J. Kindred, Founder and Consultant 


ue 

ae Wm. Ray Griffin, M.D. 
G. M. Schlomer, M.D. 

vi Dr. Groves B. Smith, Superintendent 
; : Dr. J. Dennis Freund, Medical Director 

| 


INFLUENCING THE SAFETY 
OF ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY 


‘ANECTINE’ 


CHLORIDE brand 
SUCCINYLCHOLINE CHLORIDE 


“..femoves practically all of the previous risks inherent in the treatment.’ 


respiratory 
safety 


cardiovascular 
safety 


orthopedic 
safety 


over-all 
safety 


“... patients treated with this muscle relaxant, though often 
apneic, are readily ventilated with oxygen. Skin color remains 
excellent.”’? 


“The most important [observation] is the elimination of 
hypoxia or anoxia.’ 


“The arterial blood pressure is found to rise during the 
[unmodified] electroshock. When the muscular spasms and the 
asphyxia are eliminated with the administration of succinyl- 
choline and oxygen, a slower and more even rise is noted;.. .’”* 


“In ordinary electroshock therapy the heart rate is found to 
be irregular and greatly increased. Muscular relaxation pro- 
duced by succinylcholine is noted to result in a slower and more 
even rate.’’* 


“.. the occurrence of fractures and dislocations has been 
reduced to zero.” 


“No fractures occurred in the group during therapy.’’® 


“Modification of electro-convulsive therapy with thiopental 
sodium and succinylcholine chloride is a much safer treatment 
as shown by the absence of fractures and medical complications 
in our series of 7,500 treatments.” 


references: 


1. Saltzman, C., Konikov, W., and Relyea, R. P.: Dis. Nerv. System 16:158, 1955. 2. Nowill, 
W. K., Wilson, W., and Borders, R.: A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 71:189, 1954. 8. 
Steven, R. J. M., Tovell, R. M., Johnson, J. C., and Delgado, E.: Anesthesiology 15:623, 1954. 
4. Holmberg, G., et al.: A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 72:78, 1954. 5. Wilson, W. P., 
and Nowill, W. K.: ibid. 71:122, 1954. 


“ANECTINE’ Chloride brand Succinyicholine Chloride INJECTION For intravenous injection 
20 mg. per cc. 
Multi-dose vials of 10 ce. 


BURROUGHS WELLCOME & CO. (U.S. A.) INC., Tuckahoe, New York 


is 


relaxes 
body 
and the 

mind 


@ well tolerated, nonaddictive, essentially nontoxic 


well for 


@ no blood dyscrasias, liver toxicity, Parkinson-like syndrome or nasal stuffiness 
@ chemically unrelated to chlorpromazine or reserpine 
1 @ does not produce significant depression 


@ orally effective within 30 minutes for a period of 6 hours 


lo anxiety and tension states, muscle spasm. 


THE ORIGINAL MEPROBAMATE 


Tranquilizer with muscle-relazant action 


DISCOVERED AND INTRODUCED 
BY Ai WALLACE LABORATORIES, New Brunswick, N.J. 


2-methyl-2-n-propy!-1 ,3-propanediol dicarbamate —U.S. Patent 2,724,720 


SUPPLIED: 400 mg. scored tablets. Usual dose: J or 2 tablets t.i.d. 


Literature and Samples Available on Request 


THE MILTOWN MOLECULE 


cm 3706-8 


34 
| 
7 


ection on 


Muasonically 


L. BAKAY, M.D. 

T. F. HUETER, Ph.D. 

H. T. BALLANTINE JR., M.D. 
and 

D. SOSA, M.D., Boston 


It has been demonstrated in recent years * 
that frequencies 
ranging from 0.9 to 2.5 megacycles (mc), 
and at intensities of from 200 to 1500 watts 
per square centimeter, may be used to pro- 
the 


Histological ex- 


focused ultrasound of 


duce circumscribed small lesions in 


central nervous system. 
amination of the tissue damaged by focused 
ultrasound does not reveal the mechanism 
of destruction, although the morphological 
appearance of ultrasonic lesions differs 
specifically from other types of lesions.? 

A cardinal point in understanding the 
effect of nervous 


tissue is knowledge of the reaction of the 


ultrasound on central 
cerebral capillaries to this type of injury. 
oth the absence of gross hemorrhage and 
the existence of edema have been reported 
by some investigators.+ Thus, the extent of 


Received for publication April 27, 1956. 

From the Department of Neurosurgery, Massa- 
chusetts General Hospital. 

This work was supported by a research grant 
(DA-49-007-ND-523) from the Department of 
the Army, Office of the Surgeon General, and in 
part by a research grant (B212-C 3) from the 
National Institute of Neurological Diseases and 
Blindness, National Institutes of Health, U. S 
Public Health Service. 

* References 6, 7. 
+ References 2, 3. 


Changes in the 


NEUROLOGY 


capillary damage and its possible role in the 
development of a lesion are important from 
the point of view of the physiological effect 
of ultrasound. For this reason a general 
investigation of the changes in the blood- 
brain barrier produced by focused ultra- 
sound has been undertaken. 


Ultrasonic Irradiation Technique 


In the work to be reported here, focused ultra- 
sound of a frequency of 2.5 me. is applied by 
stereotactic procedures® to specific sites within the 
cat brain. A detailed account of the physical and 
biological aspects of this method has been given 
elsewhere.t 

The schematic diagram of Figure 1 illustrates 
the manner in which the focused ultrasonic beam 
is applied to the brain of a cat, whose head is 
fixed in a standard Horsley-Clark holder. 

A portion of the skull is removed at the port 
of entry of the converging ultrasonic beam to 
eliminate beam distortion and absorption caused by 
bone. The dura, however, need not be opened. 
the passage of ultrasound is effectively 
blocked by even the thinnest layer of air, a 
“coupling pan” filled with degassed saline is at- 
tached with its lower rim to the scalp of the 
animal. Figure 1 also shows in a schematic fashion 
the use of stereotactic coordinates, the letter L 
representing lateral displacement from the mid- 
line, the letter H representing vertical displacement 
above the zero plane of the coordinate system. 
In the Jasper-Marson stereotactic “Atlas” used 
by us, the coordinate zero plane is located 10 
mm. above the plane passing through the ear-bar 


Since 


t Ballantine, H. T.; Hueter, T. F.; Nauta, W. 
J. H., and Sosa, D.: Focal Destruction of Nervous 
Tissue by Focused Ultrasound: Biophysical Factors 
Influencing Its Application, to be published. 
Hueter, Ballantine, and Cotter.’ 


457 


| 
arrter 


Mid-line of App. @ Coord. System~ 
\ 


\. Degossed \ 
Saline 


Coupling Pon 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


/ 
/ 


A. Fig. 1—Schematic 


drawing of stereotactic 


Focal Region 


| 


App. Zer 


Ear Bar Line 


line. The ultrasonic applicator, consisting of a 
piezoelectric quartz plate and a polystyrene lens, 
is positioned by external mechanical coordinates, 
as shown in Figure 2, such that the center of the 
ellipsoidal focal region of highest sound in- 
tensity coincides with the coordinates of the par- 
ticular brain structure to be affected. In most 
cases the target has been subjected to pulsed 
irradiation to allow for dissipation of the ultra- 
sonically produced heat. The results discussed in 
this paper have been observed with ultrasonic 
doses of about 30 to 50 pulses of 0.4 second’s 
duration, administered at the rate of one per sec- 
ond and at a focal intensity of approximately 
600 watts per square centimeter. 


Tracer Methods 


A standard dose of 0.5 mc. of P® was injected 
intravenously, 10 minutes to 5 days after ultra- 
sonic irradiation. A trypan blue solution, contain- 
ing 0.1 gm. of the dye per kilogram of body 
weight in 0.45% NaCl, was injected into a leg 
vein 5 to 45 minutes after administration of the 
isotope. Five to fifteen minutes after the injection 
of the vital dye the arterial system of the cat 
was perfused with 90-200 cc. of isotonic saline 
through the aorta. Such a rinsing is necessary 
in experiments of short duration to remove trypan 
blue from the cerebral blood vessels. The per- 
fusion does not affect the dye deposited in a 


458 


irradiation procedure used 
in the production of 
focused ultrasonic lesions 
in the cat brain. 


Tissue Depth 
of focus 


cerebral lesion. After the saline perfusion, the 
brain proper was also perfused with a 10% 
formalin solution through both carotid arteries. 
Control experiments have indicated that this rapid 
perfusion does not change the deposition pattern 
of radioactive phosphate in the brain and does 
not remove the tracer from the cerebral tissue. 

The dosage factors must be carefully controlled 
in comparing the effect of the blood-brain barrier 
on vital dyes and isotopes. We have followed 
3roman’s technique* in using trypan blue. A 
minimal dose of 0.1 gm. per kilogram of body 
weight was prepared fresh before injection in 
0.45% NaCl, amounting to about 10-15 cc. of 
solution. This was boiled and filtered to avoid 
formation of microcrystals. Following intravenous 
injection the solution was left to circulate for 10-15 
minutes before the cat was killed. Satisfactory 
concentrations of the dye in the blood vessels 
could be checked on the removed brain: There was 
distinct vital staining of the dura, hypophysis, 
choroid plexuses, and area postrema, while the 
brain proper remained unstained after saline per- 
fusion. 

Equally important is the dosage of radioactive 
phosphate. It is necessary to inject a dose of 
relatively high radioactivity, especially in experi- 
ments of short duration, because it is known that 
only a small fraction of the dose administered 
will be taken up by the brain (less than 0.1%)2 
On the other hand, it is necessary to obtain a 


| 

Scalp Ouro | 

/ 

1Omm 

> 5 | 

| 

| 


ULTRASONIC BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER LESIONS 


Fig. 2—View of devices used in the stereotactic 
ultrasonic irradiation of cat brains. Center: ultra- 
sonic applicator with cable leading to radiofre- 
quency generator and with removable pointer 
indicating the position of the focal point. Upper 
right : mechanical coordinate system for positioning 
of applicator. Below center: open pan for coupling 
liquid to provide sound conduction between appli- 
cator lens and brain. Bottom: stereotactic head 
holder. 


sufficiently high cerebral isotope concentration in 
order to minimize the error in determining the 
P™ content in tissue samples. 


me. an 


We have found 0.5 
and convenient dose in_ short 
experiments. Naturally, the amount of this buffered 
solution of P® must be small (0.5 to 2.0 cc.) and 
carrier-free to avoid interference with the amount 
of circulating plasma, its osmotic properties, and 
its total phosphate content. 


adequate 


Blood samples for P® determination were taken 
before the start of the trypan blue injection. A 
second blood sample was taken just before per- 
fusion. 

The main purpose of the trypan blue injection 
was to show the exact location and extent of the 
lesion. The vital dye serves as a secondary tracer 
to facilitate the localization of P™, the primary 
tracer, which is invisible in the gross specimen. 
This was particularly important in deeply situated 
small lesions. When not colored, such small lesions 
are invisible to the naked eye and can be revealed 
only in serial microscopic sections; however, by 
that time they are of no value for P™® determina- 
tion, for several that 


reasons. One reason is 


significant amounts of the tracer are washed out 
of the sections during routine histological prepara- 
tion. Another is the considerable decay of radio- 
activity during the time needed for procuring of 
the sections. 

Occasionally the lesion, even when stained with 
trypan blue, was so small that it escaped direct 
detection if it fell accidentally between two trans- 
verse cuts of the brain, which were placed 1 to 2 
mm. apart. It could still be detected by trans- 
illuminating the brain sections; since a thin sec- 
tion of fresh brain is quite transparent to light, 
the vitally stained lesion 
defined dark spot. 


shows up as a well- 

In most cases the brain was cut transversally 
through the lesion, and one-half the specimen was 
fixed in 10% formalin and examined histologically 
with cell and myelin stains, while the other half 
was stored under —20 C and used for P™ determi- 
Colored photographs were prepared from 
each specimen, using a Kodak Close-Up apparatus 
with Kodachrome A Film. Black and white pic- 
tures were also made of most of the specimens 
for illustrative purposes and to serve as_ photc- 
graphic control of the radioautographs.§ 

The P* content of various portions of the brain 
was determined by radioautography and by direct 
tissue counting. 


nation. 


Serial cross sections of the brain, 
including those containing the lesion, 0.5-1.0 mm. 
in thickness, were placed on Kodak No-Screen X- 
Ray Films. The films were developed in 48 to 76 
hours. The sections were then cut into pieces 
according to the density differences of these contact 
radioautographs. The were weighed on 
aluminum planchets, dried, and counted for radio- 
activity by scalers. The final values were expressed 
in counts per milligram of wet tissue per minute. 
For comparative purposes the tissue counts of 
different experiments were calculated to a standard 
plasma P™ level. 

For finer microradioautographs were 
prepared using the contact method described above, 
but with thin sections (50u-100g). The exposure 
time of these autographs varied from 7 to 14 days. 

Microscopic examination of trypan blue deposi- 
tion was carried out on frozen unstained sections 
of 20u, 50u, 1004, and 200u thickness, mounted on 
glass, and covered with Kayser jelly. 


pieces 


details 


Experimental Results 


Trypan Blue.—None of the ultrasonic 


lesions produced in this series of experi- 


§$It was found difficult to reproduce the blue 
staining of lesions on black and white, even when 
they were colored quite brilliantly. This could be 
done only by using orange filters and prolonged 
exposure time, but even the best results could 
be classified only as moderately adequate. 


459 


| 
| = 
ya 
|_| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


ments failed to stain vitally with trypan 
blue. The brilliant blue coloration of the 
injured area formed a sharp contrast with 
the rest of the brain, which showed no 
trace of coloration after the perfusion of 


Fig. 3 (Cat 41).—Small, round ultrasonic lesion 
in the midbrain, three days after irradiation, vitally 
stained with trypan blue (left). Corresponding 
radioautograph (right) showing high P* con- 
centration in the lesion and in the choroid plexus 
of the lateral ventricle. 


Fig. 5 (Cat 70). 
—Bilateral me- 
dium-sized, spindle- 
shaped ultrasonic 
lesions in and be- 
low the lateral 
geniculate bodies, 
three hours after 
irradiation. Left: 
vitally stained spec- 
men; right: corres- 
ponding radioauto- 
graph. 


Fig. 6 (Cat 44).—Ultrasonic lesion of one day's 
duration, showing the “island-and-moat” pattern. 
A, vital staining with trypan blue; B, correspond- 
ing radioautograph; C, myelin-stained microscopic 
section. 


460 


its blood vessels. The vital staining of the 
lesion occurred almost immediately after 
irradiation, certainly within a few minutes, 
and was therefore the only means by which 
small lesions could be identified at an early 


Fig. 4 (Cat 71)—Left: small 
ultrasonic lesion three hours after ir- 
radiation, placed caudal to the lateral 
geniculate body and stained with try- 
pan blue. Right: Corresponding radio- 
autograph revealing maximum P® de- 
posit in the lesion. 


stage, as the injured tissue did not show 
any other visible evidence of damage when 
not stained. Barnard, Fry, and associates * 
have called attention to the fact that no 
histological change is observed in the irradi- 
ated animal killed within five to nine min- 
utes after exposure. They found the first 
evidence of tissue injury in the white matter 
15 minutes after irradiation. Small lesions 
(less than a millimeter in diameter) were 
round and discrete in our preparations and 
showed uniform staining with trypan blue 
(Figs. 3 and 4). Larger ones, while still 
homogeneous, were apt to be somewhat 
spindle-shaped, their longer axis being par- 
allel to the axis of the ultrasonic beam (Fig. 
5). Large lesions showed the characteristic 
“island-and-moat” pattern, described by 
Barnard, Fry, and associates. A_ typical 
lesion of this kind produced by us is shown 
in Figure 6. The island itself stained faintly 


a 
ee C 
« f 


ULTRASONIC BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER LESIONS 


with the vital dye or was quite void of 
stain, while the moat was strongly colored, 
forming a dark-blue ring in the specimen. 

The pattern of trypan-blue staining of 
any ultrasonic lesion depends on the extent 
of tissue destruction. The lesion area does 
not seem to change in size during the first 
few days after irradiation. There is evi- 
dence of an additional zone of edema, show- 
ing faint blue discoloration during the first 
hours. This effect, however, seems to be 
reversible and subsides with the regression 
of edema. 

The elapsed time between trypan blue 
injection and death seemed to have little 
bearing on the intensity and size of the 
vitally colored area, according to our ob- 


Time from U. S. 
Radiation to Death 


hr. 
3 hr. 
3 hr. 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 


3 days 


the only part of the brain in the vicinity 
of the lesions which contained similar 
amounts were the choroid plexuses, which 
are not protected by any particular barrier 
and amass large amounts of P** from the 
circulating blood through their vast capillary 
network. 

Small medium-sized lesions were 
rather homogeneously saturated with radio- 
active phosphate (Figs. 3, 4, 5, and 6), but 
in large lesions the island-and-moat pattern 
materialized: relatively small concentra- 
tions in the island and massive deposition 
in the moat. 

The accompanying Table shows the P*? 
content of ultrasonic lesions at various in- 
tervals after irradiation. The plasma con- 


and 


rts of Central Nervous System 


Time from P?? 
Injection to Death, Min. 


Cerebral 
Plasma Cortex Lesion 


46.0 2.3 33.8 
26.0 4.0 22.6 
23.7 


* Values are expressed in counts per minute per milligram of tissues. 


servations, which ranged from five minutes 
to six hours. 

Radioactive Phosphate. — Radioactive 
phosphate concentrated heavily in the dam- 
aged area shortly after intravenous injection 
of the isotope. Although this accumulation 
of P®* in the injured tissue was not less 
remarkable than that of trypan blue, as can 
be seen in the radioautographs, it formed a 
quantitative rather than qualitative contrast 
with the normal brain. There was some P*? 
uptake by the uninjured brain immediately 
after administration of the tracer, especially 
along the superficial layers of the cortex 
and ventricular lining, but this was quite 
insignificant compared with the large 
amounts deposited in the lesion. Indeed, 


centration diminishes with the lapse of time 
from the injection of P®*. The concentration 
of the isotope in the cerebral cortex shows 
little variation from one to three hours after 
injection. However, the P*? concentration 
of the irradiated area definitely follows the 
decline of plasma concentration with time. 
Consequently, the ratio between the P*? con- 
tent of the lesion and that of the normal 
cortex diminishes from 15:1, in the first 
hour, to 5:1 to 6:1, at the end of the second 
hour, and to 3:1, at the end of the third 
hour. This indicates that there is a linear 
relationship between the P%? concentration 
of the irradiated area and that of the 
plasma, while, on the other hand, no such 


461 


| | | 
Cat | | 
76 50 | 
71 105 | 
67 120 
49 105 2.8 2.8 | 6.7 
47 140 5.8 5.1 14.0 
44 150 9.8 3.8 8.9 
36 180 5.5 3.0 7.5 
39 200 5.8 3.6 10.1 
41 160 10.0 3.1 7.7 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


relation exists between normal brain and 
plasma. 

Comparison of the Tracers—The funda- 
mental similarity between the two tracers, 
trypan blue and P**, was their unfailing 
concentration in the area of the lesion. We 
were not able to find a single instance which 
would have revealed absence of deposition 
or concentration in the area of damage of 
only one of the two agents. The island-and- 
moat pattern of larger lesions was charac- 
teristic for both tracers, although much 
more pronounced when studied with trypan 
blue. Four or five days after a large ultra- 
sonic lesion is produced, trypan blue stains 


only a thin margin; most of the lesion re- 


time 


At the 


concentration is still heavy in the entire 


mains unstained. same 
lesion, although the center contains only 
about 50% of the isotope, as compared with 
the marginal zone. 

The lesion as outlined with P** in radio- 
autographs was consistently larger than was 
the blue staining of the area (Fig. 5). This 
may indicate that the barrier damage when 
studied with a smaller-particle-sized tracer 
( ps? ) 
outlined with larger-particle-sized trypan 
blue. The difficulty which arises in compar- 
ing the two methods with absolute accuracy 


is more extensive than it is when 


will be discussed below. 

Tissue Resistance—We found clear evi- 
that tissues of the central 
nervous system are more resistant to dam- 
age than others, thus confirming the results 
of other investigations. Particularly damage- 
resistant was the gray matter, both cortical 
and nuclear, such, for instance, as the lateral 


dence some 


geniculate body and other midbrain ganglia. 
Large ultrasonic doses administered to the 
internal capsule or other parts of the cen- 
trum demonstrated the large 
differences in susceptibility among various 


semiovale 


types of tissues. At early stages after ir- 
radiation all white matter of the involved 
region was stained blue, but this coloration 
stopped sharply at the innermost layers of 
the cortex or thalamus. A lesion of this 
kind is shown in Figure 7. 


2 


Fig. 7 (Cat 52).—Large bilateral ultrasonic 
lesions outlined by vital coloration with trypan 
blue. Note the selective damage of white matter 
in one of the hemispheres. 


Fig. 8 (Cat 39) —Small ultrasonic lesion (Solid 
arrow) in the medial geniculate body and corres- 
ponding radioautograph. Dotted arrow points to 
the “echo lesion.” 


Echo Lesions —Oceasionally second 
lesion could be detected at the base of the 
brain, visible on the surface of the ventral 
aspect of the temporal lobe (Fig. 8). These 
“echo lesions” are likely to occur whenever 
the diverging beam beyond the focus en- 
counters concave regions of the base of the 
skull, and when a heavy dosage factor is 
employed, evidenced by a large-sized lesion. 
They may be avoided by angulated irradi- 
ation and by the choice of a dosage just 
sufficient to reproduce a small lesion. On 
coronal sections they were cone-shaped, 
with their wide base situated over the base 
of the skull. When they were small, they 
were stained uniformly blue; but when they 
were large, the blue was confined to the 
fringes of the lesion. 

Microscopic Picture of Vitally Stained 
Ultrasonic Lesions.—Larger lesions, with 
a diameter of more than 2 mm., frequently 


Lf 

46m 
| 


ULTRASONIC BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER LESIONS 


show a characteristic island-and-moat_ pat- 
tern. On gross inspection the center of such 
a lesion may look fairly intact and show 
little or no vital staining, while the moat 


as round, uniformly vital-stained areas. On 
microscopic unstained 
frozen sections the following observations 


have been made (Fig. 9): 


examination of 


Fig. 9 (Cat 75).—A, bilateral vitally stained ultrasonic lesions, 30 minutes after irradiation. 
Arrow points to the lesion placed in the lateral geniculate body. B, microscopic picture of the 


same region 


which surrounds the island in a ring-like 
fashion shows severe tissue destruction and 
stains intensely with trypan blue. In myelin- 
stained slides one can see that strands of 
myelin sheaths are stained and easily de- 
tected within the island. In the surrounding 
moat the tissue destruction is complete. 
Small, distinct ultrasonic lesions in the 
fringe area between gray and white matter 
are more suitable for study of alterations 
in the blood-brain barrier because the dam- 
age is not so severe and widespread and can 
be observed more easily. Such lesions are 
not more than 1 or 1.5 mm. in diameter 
and can be detected in the gross specimen 


Only vital coloration with trypan blue used. C 
vitally stained nerve cells, revealing severe damage. 


and PD, enlarged view of two 


The injured area is fairly sharply out- 
lined, and the entire lesion shows a faint 
blue staining with trypan blue, which is 
quite diffuse and involves the entire tissue. 
This can be seen only by a small magnifi- 
cation because the very light blue discolora- 
tion is not visible under strong transillumi- 
nation and high magnification. Out of this 
light-blue background the nerve cells stand 
out very markedly, owing to their intense 
staining with trypan blue, which is much 
stronger than that of other tissue elements. 
The nerve cells show, in addition to this 
diffuse staining, morphological evidence of 
acute damage. They vary greatly in size 


463 


a... 
i.% 
wy # + 
4 
es 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


and form a marked contrast with the nerve 
cells lying near by, but outside the bound- 
aries of the lesion. These normal neurons 
show no evidence of damage; neither are 
they stained with trypan blue. The nuclei 
of the damaged neurons are small, dark, 
and pyknotic, and their nucleolus is all but 
invisible. The nucleus is displaced from its 
central position to the edge of the cytoplasm. 
The plasma also shows signs of shrinkage; 
some of the cells are quite spindle-shaped, 
and their texture is dense. We could see no 
satellitosis, neuronophagia, or ghost cells in 
these experiments of short duration. 

It is also interesting that in experiments 
where the brain was examined within two 
or three hours after ultrasonic irradiation 
the vital staining and damage was seen only 
in the nerve cells, without any participation 
of the glia. The myelin sheaths, on the 
other hand, showed definite swelling and 
irregularity even at this early stage. 

The capillaries looked normal within the 
small lesions. Their lumina were empty, 
due to the perfusion; their walls showed no 
anatomical changes and stained with trypan 
blue—a normal reaction. The perivascular 
space around larger vessels revealed no 
anatomical evidence of damage, such as en- 
largement or cellular infiltration. 

On the basis of his own experiments and 
an extensive survey of the literature, Spatz ® 
differentiates three types of vital staining 
in the central nerve tissue. 

1. Diffuse imbibition of the tissue. This 
is a rapidly developing situation which con- 
sists of a very light blue discoloration for 
the entire tissue, without selective staining 
of the cells. It indicates, from a patho- 
physiological point of view, the penetration 
of the tissue by trypan blue, which escaped 
from the blood vessels as a result of damage 
and increased permeability of the blood- 
brain barrier. In our material this process 
alone can account for the diffuse staining of 
the lesion. 

2. Granular or vacuolar incorporation. 
This stage is secondary to the diffuse im- 
bibition. It consists of the uptake of the 


dye granules by normal cells. This is a 


4o4 


process which involves only living cells and 
is characteristic of the glia. It takes at least 
24 hours to develop after the injection of 
the dye, and consequently this stage was not 
encountered in the experiments reported 
here. 

3. Diffuse coloration of the cells. In this 
process the entire cell stains deeply and 
diffusely, so that it forms a marked con- 
trast with the faintly colored tissue back- 
ground. This situation occurs very early 
after the injection of trypan blue and is 
a sign of severe cell damage. Such diffuse 
staining of cells could be seen in the neurons 
of our lesions, demonstrating the direct cell 
damage caused by ultrasound; on the other 
hand, the diffuse background staining of the 
entire tissue is evidence of the ultrasound- 
inflicted damage to the blood-brain barrier. 

Occasionally the lesion was so slight that 
no trace of damage could be observed in 
either cell- or fiber-stained sections, in spite 
of clearly visible, minute trypan blue stain- 
ing prior to sectioning. 


Comment 


The data obtained from these experiments 
indicate that within the area of damage 
caused by focused ultrasound the blood- 
brain barrier is altered and made easily 
permeable to trypan blue and _ radioactive 
phosphate. This results in local accumula- 
tion of the dye and in high concentration of 
P*? within the lesion. The time-concentra- 
tion curves of the isotope in plasma, normal 
brain, and ultrasonic lesion give evidence 
of an abnormally rapid exchange of phos- 
phate between plasma and lesion. Further- 
more, after ultrasonic irradiation there is 
characteristically a fast initial uptake of 
phosphate, followed by a gradual decrease. 
While this is characteristic of most par- 
enchymatous organs, normal brain takes up 
phosphate at a slowly increasing rate. 
Owing to ultrasonic tissue damage, it would 
seem that the injured area of the brain 
turns into a “non-barrier-protected” region. 
This is a common sequence of other severe 
cerebral injuries, and similar concentrations 


wis 

j 
| 


ULTRASONIC BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER LESIONS 


of vital dyes and isotopes can be observed 
in lesions due to trauma, heat, and chemical, 
toxic, or allergic reactions. 

Specific, and experimentally useful, how- 
ever, is the with which 
ultrasonic lesions can be produced at prede- 


relative ease 
termined sites and of variable magnitudes, 
without apparent damage to the blood-brain 
barrier and blood supply of tissues inter- 
posed between the ultrasonic applicator and 
the lesion. There is, for example, no needle 
tract and consequent barrier disruption be- 
tween the deep lesion and the surface of the 
brain. 

These experiments also furnished com- 
parable data on the mode of action and 
extent of penetration into the brain of a 
vital dye (trypan blue), on the one hand, 
and of an isotope ( P**), on the other hand. 

As one of us was able to point out previ- 
ously,! there is a_ striking resemblance 
between the deposition of radioactive phos- 
phate and that of vital dyes in those portions 
of the brain which do not seem to possess 
a protective barrier (choroid plexus, tuber 
cinereum, area postrema, etc.) and in the 
central nervous system proper provided that 
the barrier system is disrupted (by trauma, 
vascular disease, tumor, etc.). One can add 
to this statement the fact that no type of 
lesion has been found so far in the central 
nervous system in which high concentration 
of P* or vital staining with trypan blue 
could be found alone, dissociated from one 
another. 

Yet there is a profound, basic difference 
between the behavior of vital dyes and iso- 
topes. In the trypan blue, we 
witness the action of the blood-brain barrier 
against an artificial agent of large molecular 
size which does not participate in cerebral 
metabolism. Its penetration is governed by 
an “all or none” law. It does not enter the 
nerve tissue under normal circumstances, 
but it penetrates if the permeability of the 
barrier increases. Radioactive phosphate, on 
the other hand, is an ion, interchangeable 


case of 


with nonradioactive phosphate, constantly 
present in large amounts in both plasma and 


brain and participating in fundamental 


central 
system. There always is a direct or indirect 
interchange of 


metabolic actions of the nervous 
plasma and_ brain 
phates; the change in barrier permeability 
reflects only an increase or decrease of this 
exchange. 


phos- 


Of great significance is the selective ac- 
tion of the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier 
on different substances. Although anatom- 
ically different, this barrier, together with 
the blood-brain barrier, comprises a physio- 
logical entity which provides a stable chem- 
ical environment for the vulnerable central 
nervous system. The difference between the 
passage of this barrier by trypan blue and 
P%? is even greater than that of the blood- 
brain barrier: It is quite impermeable to 
trypan blue, but phosphate passes it 
(through the vessels of the choroid plexus 
and meninges) fairly rapidly. 

The similarity in the action of both trypan 
blue and radioactive phosphate as represent- 
atives of vital dyes and isotopes manifests 
itself in those regions of the brain where 
barrier permeability is increased. These in- 
volve, in addition to the specific areas of 
choroid plexus, tuber cinereum, area pos- 
trema, ete., cerebral injuries, cerebrovascu- 
lar disorders, toxic damage, infections, and 
tumors. All these lesions are characterized 
by distinct trypan blue staining and by a 
large concentration of P%*. The onset of 
this deposition of vital dyes and that of P** 
are equally rapid; it occurs within a few 
minutes following administration of the 
agent. However, the duration of deposition 
is different. The time limit of distinct try- 
pan blue staining does not exceed 7 to 10 
days, while significantly increased isotope 
concentration is detectable in a lesion for 
at least 2 months after injection of the 
tracer. The extent of barrier damage seems 
to be consistently larger when studied with 
P*® than when studied with vital staining. 
Comparative observations on ultrasonic 
lesions of the brain, using the two sub- 
stances simultaneously, corroborates this 
statement. The lesions as outlined by dark- 
ening of the films on radioautographs were 
consistently larger than the corresponding 


46 


‘ 


A. M. 


blue discoloration in the specimen. Natur- 
ally, one has to be very careful in this 
comparison. The radioautographic density 
is not an absolute and completely true image 
of the isotope concentration of a given area. 
It varies considerably with the size of grain 
and thickness of the emulsion on the film, 
with the length of exposure, and with the 
thickness of the specimen and its distance 
from the film. The resolution of the image 
is best when the thicknesses of sections and 
emulsions and the space between the two are 
reduced to a minimum. It is particularly 
difficult to obtain clear resolution in brain 
tissue (which tears easily) when using P*, 
which has a high-energy beta radiation. 
For this latter reason nuclear tract deter- 
mination, which would otherwise give very 
valuable data, is not feasible. 

Nevertheless, we were able to make two 
observations relevant to these technical as- 
pects. 1. 
than trypan blue even in 50 sections, which 
yield 


P®? showed a larger-sized lesion 


good radioautographic resolution, 
with a minimal amount of scattered radia- 
tion. 2. There was a clear-cut increased 
density, characteristic of the lesion in sec- 
tions which were taken just beyond the 
vitally stained portion, where actually no 
trypan blue could be detected. 

The microscopic changes following ultra- 
sonic irradiation of the cerebral gray and 
white matter were recently described in 
great detail by Barnard, Fry, and Brennan.* 
They state that the blood vessels in the 
white matter do not appear to be altered 
morphologically by ultrasound. No erythro- 
cytes appear in the matrix of any white- 
matter lesions even 12 hours after exposure. 
Our experiments corroborate this observa- 
tion. They indicate, however, that, notwith- 
standing the lack of visible change in the 
structure of irradiated capillaries, there is 
ample evidence of a profound disturbance 
in capillary or blood-brain-barrier perme- 
ability, as evidenced by the rapid and mas- 
sive deposition in the brain of trypan blue 
and P**. We therefore are led to conclude 
that the physiological capillary damage is 
probably just as severe as the neuronal dam- 
466 


A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


age and it is due only to the technical short- 
comings of the conventional histological 
methods that the morphological evidence 
cannot be seen on routine microscopic ex- 
amination. In addition, one can safely 
assume that the capillary damage is revers- 
ible over long periods of time, in contra- 
distinction to the destruction of the nervous 
elements. 

Actually, Barnard, Fry, and associates,|| 
found it conceivable that some of the edema 
which follows irradiation comes from a 
changed permeability of the capillaries. 
However, we cannot agree with their state- 
ment that the swelling of the perineuronal 
spaces leads to distortion of the shape of 
nerve cells. In our opinion, the latter is 
due to direct ultrasonic damage of the cells. 
It occurs simultaneously with the derange- 
ment of the blood-brain barrier, but is not 
necessarily caused by edema. 

The island-and-moat pattern of heavy 
lesions cannot be explained easily, unless 
one invokes chemical changes preventing the 
action of proteolytic enzymes within the 
island. One possible factor appears to be 
overheating of the lesion’s center. The re- 
sistance of gray matter to ultrasonic dam- 
age may be related to its smaller coefficient 
of ultrasonic absorption, together with the 
relative vascularity of the tissues, which 
would result in smaller amounts of ultra- 
sonically produced heat and thus to a slow- 
ing down of reaction kinetics. It seems 
worth noting that the lateral geniculate 
body, which was found by us to be ex- 
tremely radiation-resistant, is considered to 
be one of the most vascular regions of the 
cat’s brain. This group of cells is supplied, 
according to the measurements of Camp- 
bell,® by two to three times as many capil- 
laries as the basal ganglia, thalamus, and 
hippocampus, and its relative vascularity is 
even more pronounced when compared with 
the white matter of the centrum semiovale. 


Summary 


The effect of focused ultrasound on the 
blood-brain barrier was studied in cats. The 


|| References 2 and 3. 


a 
4, 
4 


ULTRASONIC BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER LESIONS 


animals were killed from 10 minutes to 5 


days after irradiation, having received 
single intravenous injection of radioactive 
phosphate and trypan blue within 10 min- 
utes to 3 hours before death. 
Ultrasound-produced lesions stained se- 


They 


revealed large P** concentration as com- 


lectively with trypan blue. also 


pared with the surrounding normal brain 
tissue. The variation of the P** concentra- 
tion of the lesions with time elapsed from 
the administration of the isotope directly 
follows the changes in plasma P* concen- 
tration. Such a linear relationship does 
not exist between normal brain tissue and 
plasma. These observations point to a pro- 
found alteration of the blood-brain-barrier 
permeability within the confines of lesions 
produced by ultrasound. 

Small lesions show a uniform deposition 
of trypan blue and P%*. Large lesions fre- 
quently reveal an “‘island-and-moat”’ pattern, 
with greater tissue destruction and tracer 
deposition in the moat than in the central 
island. 

Gray matter, whether cortical or nuclear, 
was found to be more resistant to ultra- 
sound than white matter. 

The mode of actions and usefulness of 
trypan blue and P** as tracers are com- 
pared and discussed. 

The microscopic picture of cerebral dam- 
age produced by ultrasound is presented 
with special regard to the significance of 
vital 


staining and to the morphological 


changes of neurons. 


W. J. H. Nauta, of the Department of Neuro- 
physiology, Walter Reed Army Hospital, Wash- 
ington, D. C., gave help in histological interpreta- 
tion, and E. Francis and J. A. Rosenthal, of the 
Medical Acoustics Research Group, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, assisted in the experiments. 


REFERENCES 


1. Bakay, L.: The Blood-Brain 
Special Regard to the Use of Radioactive 
topes, Springfield, Ill, Charles C Thomas, Pub- 
lisher, 1956. 

2. Barnard, J. W.; Fry, W. J.; Fry, F. J., and 
Krumins, R. F.: Effects of High Intensity Ultra- 
sound on the Central Nervous System of the Cat, 
J. Comp. Neurol. 103 :459-484, 1955. 

3. Barnard, J. W.; Fry, W. J.; Fry, F 
Brennan, J. F.: Small Localized Ultrasonic 
Lesions in the White and Grey Matter of the Cat 
Brain, A. M. A. Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 75:15- 
25, 1956. 


4. Broman, T.: 


Barrier, with 


Iso- 


. J., and 


Permeability of the Cerebro- 
spinal Vessels in Normal and Pathological Condi- 
tions, Copenhagen, Ejnar Munksgaard 
1949. 

5. Campbell, A. C. P.: Variation in Vascularity 
and Oxidase Content in Different Regions of the 
Brain of the Cat, Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 
41 :223-242, 1939. 

6. Fry, W. J.; Mosberg, W. H.; Barnard, J. 

W., and Fry, F. J.: Production of Focal Destruc- 
tive Lesion in the Central Nervous System with 
Ultrasound, J. Neurosurg. 11:471-478, 1954. 
. F.; Ballantine, H. T., and Cotter, 
Production of Lesions in the Central 
with Focused Ultrasound: A 
Study of Dosage Factors, J. Acoust. Soc. America 
78 :192-201, 1956. 

8. Jasper, H. H., and Ajmone-Marsen, C.: A 
Stereotaxic Atlas of the Diencephalon of the Cat, 
National Research Council of 


Forlag, 


7. Hueter, T 
W. 


Nervous System 


Canada, Ottawa, 


Ont., Canada. 

9. Spatz, H.: Die Bedeutung der vitalen Far- 
bung fur die Lehre vom Stoffaustausch zwischen 
dem Zentralnervensystem und dem iibrigen KGrper, 
Arch. Psychiat. 101 :267-358, 1933. 


Studies on oLysergic Acid Dicthylamide 


(LSD-25) 


|. Effects in Former Morphine Addicts and Development of Tolerance During 


Chronic Intoxication 


HARRIS ISBELL, M.D. 

R. E. BELLEVILLE, M.A. 

H. F. FRASER, M.D. 
ABRAHAM WIKLER, M.D. 
and 

C. R. LOGAN, Lexington, Ky. 


The striking mental changes induced by 
the diethylamide of lysergic acid (hereafter 
referred to as LSD) have been studied ex- 
tensively in Europe,* Great Britain,+ and 
the United States.t In minute doses (20y 
to 120y) LSD induces a peculiar mental 
state characterized by anxiety, signs of au- 
tonomic dysfunction, perceptual distortion 
(chietly visual), alterations in mood and 
affect, synesthesias, feelings of depersonali- 
zation, and hallucinations. The drug is ap- 
parently the most effective and safest agent 
for inducing an experimental, but reversible, 
psychosis in nonpsychotic subjects. 

Various interpretations have been placed 
on the mental state produced by LSD. Some 
European authors refer to it as a “toxic 
psychosis of the exogenous reaction type” 
or a “diencephalosis,’§ presumably because 
the autonomic signs suggest effects on the 
hypothalamus. The resemblance of some of 
the psychic manifestations which follow 
LSD to symptoms of the major psychoses 
has been stressed by others.|| The LSD re- 

Received for publication May 24, 1956. 

From the National Institute of Mental Health, 
Addiction Research Center, U. S. Public Health 
Hospital. 

* References 1-5. 

+ References 6-9. 

t References 10-20. 


§ References 1, 21. 
|| References 4, 12, 14. 


468 


‘ 


action has been referred to as 
schizophrenia” or “experimental psychia- 
try.” Because some of the symptoms in- 


‘experimental 


duced by LSD also occur in schizophrenia, 
it has been suggested that schizophrenia may 
be due to a toxin,?! to a deficiency of some 
metabolite necessary for brain function, 
or to some metabolic tissue disturbance.+ 
A defect in the degradation of epinephrine 
involving either adrenochrome** or ad- 
renoxine *® has been postulated. Another 
hypothesis, based on competitive actions of 
serotonin and LSD in excised smooth 
muscle preparations, postulates either a de- 
ficiency or an excess of serotonin in the 
brain.** Recently it has been shown that 
both reserpine and serotonin prolong the 
sleeping time of mice treated with hexo- 
barbital.2*7 LSD abolishes the prolongation 
of sleeping time induced by either sub- 
stance.* Since reserpine causes depletion 
of serotonin stores in the brain,} some re- 
lationship between serotonin and mental 
function is inferred. Further, LSD is pre- 
sumed to cause mental symptoms by 
“competing with” serotonin for neuronal 
receptor sites. 

All of these theories are based on re- 
semblances between the LSD reaction and 
the major psychoses. The effects of LSD 
last only a few hours, and practically all 
experiments with the drug have been 
“acute”; i. e., single doses of LSD were 
given at intervals of days or weeks. The 

{| References 22, 23. 

# References 5, 24. 


* References 27, 28. 
+ References 28, 29. 


: : 


TOLERANCE TO LSD 


chronic experiments that have been done 
involved administration of the drug to psy- 
chotic patients in whom the LSD response 
was difficult to assess. It, therefore, seemed 
desirable to determine whether resemblance 
of the LSD reaction to the major psychoses, 
which are chronic diseases, would become 
more or less prominent when the drug was 
administered chronically to nonpsychotic 
persons. It is the purpose of this paper 
to describe the reaction induced by LSD in 
former morphine addicts, to show that the 
intensity of the reaction is measurable, and 
to report the rapid development of tolerance 
(loss of effect) to LSD when the drug was 
administered daily for 3 to 85 days. 


Characteristics of the LSD Reactions in 
Former Opiate Addicts 


The patients who volunteered for the experi- 
ments were male drug addicts who had been absti- 
nent from opiates for three months or more when 
the studies were carried out. None of these 
patients was psychotic; all had either character 
disorders or inadequate personalities, and the 
majority were Negroes. Because of the great 
differences in economic and ethnic backgrounds 
and personality types, and, possibly, physiological 
differences resulting from antecedent opiate addic- 
tion, it was necessary to determine whether the 
LSD reaction in these subjects was similar to the 
reactions observed by other investigators in other 
kinds of people in different environments. Prelimi- 
nary experiments were, therefore, carried out 
using 12 white and 12 Negro male subjects. 

Methods.—The experiments were conducted in a 
closed ward devoted to research. The 
subjects were observed in individual rooms but 
were free to leave between observations and to 
mingle with other patients in a common dayroom. 
The drug was always given orally, and the subjects 
were fasting. Doses of LSD varied from 20y to 
300y (total dose), or approximately 0.25y to 5y 
per kilogram of body weight. Results were con- 
trolled by using placebos and a randomized order 
of administration of LSD and placebos in all 
experiments. Pulse rate, systolic and diastolic blood 
pressures, respiratory rate, and rectal temperature 
were determined at hourly intervals, after 10 min- 
utes’ rest in bed, and 2 hours before and 8 hours 
after administration of either placebo or LSD. 
Brief psychiatric examinations were carried out 


clinical 


approximately two, four, and six hours after ad- 
ministration of the drug. Pupillary diameter was 
determined once hourly, as follows: The patient 


into a dark room, seated in a chair 
under constant light, and asked to look at a white 
spot on a wall 10 ft. (3 meters) away. The size 
of the pupils was compared with those of black 
circles of known diameter on a card which was 
held Neurological 
examinations, including pupillary reactions to light 
and accommodation, station and gait, coordination, 
deep tendon and superficial skin reflexes, and tests 
for abnormal reflexes were carried out hourly. 

Results —Response to Various Doses: 
Reactions to zero dosage (placebo) were 
generally negligible. Doses of LSD of less 
than ly/kg. of body weight induced only 
mild effects. Autonomic changes were 
slight. Mental effects consisted chiefly of 
anxiety and mood changes, primarily in the 
“euphoric” Perceptual distortion 
was rare, and no hallucinations were re- 
ported. Doses of ly to 2y per kilogram 
induced more striking effects. The auto- 
nomic and neurological changes became defi- 
nite and measurable. Mental 
including anxiety, mood changes, and per- 
ceptual distortion, occurred in all patients, 
and many reported “elementary” hallucina- 
tions (kaleidoscopic patterns of light and 
color with the eyes closed) and occasionally 
“true hallucinations” (perception of some- 
thing that could be described as a definite 
thing, animal, or person). Feelings of un- 
reality and symptoms of depersonalization 
were common. 

Doses of 3y/kg. or more induced a reac- 
tion which was too severe to be tolerated 


was taken 


alongside the patient’s eyes. 


direction. 


changes, 


on more than one occasion by most patients. 
A dosage range of ly to 2y per kilogram 
was adopted for most work, and the de- 
scriptions below are based on doses of this 
order. 

Time Course: The effects of ly to 2y 
of LSD per kilogram were apparent within 
30 minutes after oral administration, became 
maximal in one and one-half to two hours, 
remained maximal to the fourth or fifth 
hour after administration, and thereafter 
gradually declined. Usually, eight hours 
after the drug patients had recovered except 
for some residual nervousness and anxiety. 
All symptoms disappeared completely within 
16 hours. 


469 


> 
= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


“Nonmental” Effects: Statistical analysis 
of the data showed no significant change in 
temperature, pulse rate, or respiratory rate. 
Systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 
significantly elevated. 

The only consistent neurological changes 
were dilatation of the pupils and accentua- 
tion of the deep tendon reflexes. Occasion- 
ally, twitching of the muscles and tremors 
involving muscle clonus occurred in patients 
Waves of 
goose flesh were noted in some patients. 

“Mental” Effects: The effects 
seemed to be identical with those described 
in the literature in nonaddicts. Changes in 
mood in the direction of either euphoria or 


who had severe mental reactions. 


mental 


depression, difficulty in concentration, feel- 
ings of strangeness, anxiety, nervousness, 
and dream-like states were reported. Motor 
activity varied. Some patients were con- 
stantly active; others became very quiet and 
withdrawn. 

Various alterations in all sensory modali- 
ties were described: acute or dull hearing, 
“sandpaper” feel of clothes, metallic tastes, 
bad odors, sensations of the body being 
light or heavy, and a great variety of visual 
changes. Actually, alteration in vision was 
the only sensory change reported by all pa- 
tients. The subjective visual phenomena 
included blurring; changes in perception of 
depth and distance ; distortion in size, shape, 
and color of objects, persons, and the pa- 
tient’s own body; lights and colors on clos- 
ing the eyes or looking at the wall, which 
formed kaleidoscopic patterns not suggestive 
of any real thing (“elementary hallucina- 
tions”), and, rarely, “true hallucinations” 
(perception of persons or things not really 
present). Frequently, patients saw their 
hands or feet transformed into animal paws 
or into the extremities of a dead person. 
Similar sensations were experienced on look- 
ing at other persons. Auditory hallucina- 
tions were infrequent. The sensorium was 
clear, and insight (realization that the ef- 
fects were due to the drug) was usually 
maintained. Affect, though difficult to judge, 
seemed appropriate. 


generally During 


470 


marked reactions most patients expressed 
fears of dying or of becoming permanently 
insane. 

Symptoms which might be classed as 
“depersonalization” included the changes in 
the appearance of the extremities described 
above, “feelings” of being outside one’s own 
body, and difficulty in recognizing oneself 
in a mirror. Patients also mentioned diffi- 
culties in deciding whether a thought re- 
ferred to a real event or object or was 
merely a thought. Such experiences, while 
puzzling, did not form a part of an organ- 
ized delusional system. Patients usually 
stated that such phenomena had not really 
occurred and were due to the drug. 

Marked quantitative variations in the de- 
gree of reaction of different subjects to the 
drug were noted. A dose of 2y/kg. might 
induce only nervousness in one subject, 
while another subject might experience per- 
ceptual distortion and true hallucinations 
with loss of insight on the same dose. The 
same subject, however, responded each time 
to the same degree and in the same way 
as long as the testing situation was held 
constant. 

Psychological Tests: In a preliminary ex- 
ploratory experiment, six Negro males were 
given a_ battery of psychological tests 
( Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Scale, Gold- 
stein-Scheerer Cube and Color-Form Sort- 
ing Test, the test, and the 
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inven- 
tory [MMPI]) while receiving no drug 
and again at the height of the LSD reaction, 
after receiving a dose of ly to 2y/kg. of 
LSD. 

Comparison of 


Rorschach 


the Wechsler-Bellevue 


subtest scores and the intelligence quotients 
obtained 


control conditions (no 
drugs) with those following LSD showed 
a decrease in all verbal subtest scores. Scores 


under 


on all performance tests, except the digit 
symbol, increased slightly, but the increases 
were less than those expected from the prac- 
tice effects. When corrected for the ex- 
pected practice effects, all subtest scores 


When 


showed some decrease after LSD. 


= 
be ad 
| 
: 


TOLERANCE TO LSD 


the intelligence quotients after LSD were 
corrected for the expected practice effect, 
the verbal I. Q. decreased 8.63 points, the 
performance I. Q. 6.07 points, and the full- 
scale I. Q. 7.43 points. Although the num- 
ber of subjects is small, these decreases 
probably represent a substantial impairment 
of intellectual function. 

No loss of conceptual or abstract ability 
was found on repetition of the Goldstein- 
Scheerer Cube and Color-lForm tests during 
LSD intoxication. ap- 
parent that patients exerted a great deal of 
effort in order to complete the tasks. Much 
of the effort took the form of acquiring a 
“set,” i. e., making bodily adjustments in- 


However, it was 


dicating an attitude of attention. Possibly, 
this effort was related to difficulty in con- 
centrating. 

When responses on the Rorschach test 
before and after LSD administration were 
compared, some variation in several of the 
scoring categories was observed in each pa- 
tient. However, the basic pattern of the 
test responses remained the same. When the 
Rorschach tests of all six patients were an- 
alyzed as a group, changes were noted in 
several factors under LSD: There was a 
decrease in total number of responses (R), 
in F+ per cent, and in Z (organizational 
activity), and a trend toward a D approach 
at the expense of W. Perhaps the most sig- 
nificant effect was a decrease in the use of 
form and an increase in the use of factors 
other than form. In every subject, either 
Sum C or Sum Y was increased. Although 
the changes can be considered only as trends 
because of the small number of subjects, 
they seem to indicate increased emotionality 
and a breakdown or loosening of intellectual 
control in patients who characteristically 
maintained rigid control. 

Such striking changes were observed in 
the MMPI profiles after LSD in the orig- 
inal six subjects that it appeared the MMPI 
might be more sensitive than other psy- 
chological measuring the LSD 
response. A separate study, which is being 


tests in 


reported in detail elsewhere,{ was therefore 
undertaken. Briefly, 24 subjects were tested 
in random balanced order under no drug, 
placebo, and LSD (50y-130y) conditions. 
The MMPI was given one and one-half 
hours after administration of placebo or 
LSD. Statistically significant elevations were 
found in the Psychasthenia (P<0.01), Schiz- 
ophrenia (P<0.01), Paranoia (P<0.05), 
and Taylor Anxiety Scales (P<0.05). 


Methods of Measurement and Analysis 


On the basis of the preliminary work described 
above, methods for measuring both the “mental” 
and the “nonmental” aspects of the reaction were 
developed. Pupillary diameter, systolic blood pres- 
sure, and change in patellar reflexes were chosen 
as objective and measurable signs of the LSD 
reaction. Systolic blood pressure was measured 
after 10 minutes’ rest in bed, using the standard 
auscultatory method. Pupillary diameter was esti- 
mated as described above. Patellar reflexes were 
graded according to the following system: 
Grade 0: No response elicitable, even with rein- 

forcement 
Grade 1: 

forcement 


Response elicitable only with rein- 


Grade 2: Response elicitable without reinforce- 

excursion after light tap less than a 
6-in. arc and not repetitive 

Grade 3: Response elicitable with light tap; ex- 
cursion greater than 6-in. arc 

Grade 4: Response very quick, forceful, and 
repetitive; almost complete extension of leg 
These measurements were made at hourly inter- 

vals for two hours before and eight hours after 


ment ; 


administration of LSD. Data obtained were 
plotted on graph paper and the area under 
each curve measured with a planimeter, thus 


summarizing the data for each particular measure- 
ment in one figure. The average of the pre-drug 
measurements was used as the base line in each 
case. 

Mental effects induced by LSD were assessed 
in two ways: 1, The questionnaire devised by 
Abramson and associates” was administered hourly 
for two hours before and for eight hours after 
LSD. The number of positive responses on the 
questionnaire was counted over the entire eight- 
hour period after administration of LSD, but 
answers to questions which were also. scored 
positive before administration of the drug were 
eliminated. The questionnaire includes such items 


t Belleville, R. E.: MMPI Score Changes In- 
duced by Lysergic Reid Dithylamide (LSD-25), 
to be published. 


471 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


confused,” 
This ques- 


as “I am trembling inside,” “I am 
“Things seem near or far away,” etc. 
tionnaire has several disadvantages—it may sug- 
gest symptoms; few positive responses are given 
to many of the questions, and it does not cover all 
the mental phenomena observed after LSD. The 
questionnaire, however, has the advantage that a 
systematic record of certain symptoms is obtained 
at definite intervals before and after administra- 
tion of the drug. 

2. The degree of mental effect was also assessed 
by conducting a short psychiatric examination be- 
tween the second and fourth hour after admin- 
istration of the drug. In carrying out this exami- 
special attention was given to anxiety, 
nervousness, perceptual distortion, presence or 
absence of hallucinations, and _ insight, 
“grade” was assigned to the reaction according to 
the following scheme : 

Grade 1: Anxiety and nervousness, without per- 
ceptual distortion or hallucinations 

Grade 2: Anxiety, nervousness, and visual per- 
ceptual distortion without “true” hallucinations 

Grade 3: Anxiety, nervousness, perceptual distor- 
tion, and “true” hallucinations, but with insight 
maintained 

Grade 4: Same as Grade 3, except that insight 

(realization that the effects are due to the drug) 

is lost 

The grading the time 
course and on the response to increasing dosage 
observed in the preliminary work. The system has 


nation, 


and a 


system was based on 


the disadvantage that the various grades may not 
form a continuous scale (Grade 2 may not be 
twice that of Grade 1). It gives no information 
concerning the quantitative aspect of the symptoms 
which go into determining the grades. Also, Grade 
4 was seldom reached with doses of less than 
3y/kg. 

These methods were tested by determining the 
response to graded doses and by determining the 


Patellar reflext 


Pupillary diameter? 


| Blood pressuret 


| Questions§ 


Grade§ 


* Data on seven patients only. 

+ Data on six patients only. 

t Expressed as mean area under curve (square inches). 
§ See text for method. 


472 


reproducibility of the reaction in the same sub- 
jects. 

Response to Varying Doses.—Eight non- 
tolerant Negro males were used in this ex- 
periment. They were given, under “blind” 
conditions and in randomized order at 
weekly intervals, a placebo and 0.25y, 0.5y, 
0.75y, ly, 1.5y, and 2y per kilogram of 
body weight of LSD. Two of the patients, 
who were very sensitive to LSD, did not 
receive the 2y dose, and one did not receive 
the 1.0y dose. Observations were carried 
out as described above. Results obtained 
with the various doses are shown in Table 
1. Allowing for the omission of the sensi- 
tive patients in the 1.5y and 2y columns, 
the degree of change in all measurements 
increased with the dose. Peak effects were 
attained at the 1.5y/kg. dose except for 
blood pressure. Statistical analysis, using 
a t-test for paired observations *® showed 
that changes from placebo to LSD were 
significant (P<0.05) for all measurements 
at all doses except 0.25y/kg. Differences 
between doses that varied as much as ly/kg., 
e. g., between 1.0y/kg. and 2.0y/kg., were 
statistically significant, whereas differences 
between doses varying 0.5y/kg. or less, e. g., 
between 0.5y/kg. and 1.0y/kg., were not sig- 
nificant. 

Although the number of patients used was 
small, the results showed that the degree of 
effect was related to the dose and _ that 
methods were useful in assessing the in- 
tensity of the LSD response. 


Taste 1.—Effects of Increasing Doses of LSD-25 


See text. 


Dose, 
q 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 | 1.0° } 1.5 2.0t | 
0.5 1.18 1.60 1.89 2.10 2.04 1.93 
| 0.4 1.10 2.29 3.57 | 3.64 4.27 3.66 
: es 1.82 2.91 2.93 4.00 4.24 4.87 5.35 
4 26 42 56 30 | 65 42 
’ | 0 0.2 0.63 1.5 0.7 1.6 1.5 


TOLERANCE TO LSD 


Reproducibility —T welve Negro males re- 
ceived 60y of LSD on three separate occa- 
sions at intervals of at least one week. Tests 
with LSD were interspersed in randomized 
order with placebos. The results were an- 
alyzed as described above and are shown 
in Table 2. Statistically, the results were 
identical on all three tests, thus proving that 
TaBLe 2.—Reproducibility of 


Response to 


fourth experiment a special effort was made 
to assess the degree of tolerance and to 
determine the speed with which tolerance 
was lost on discontinuation of the drug. 


EXPERIMENT males and six 
white males received in randomized order for three 
days either a placebo or LSD twice daily. LSD 


was administered in doses of 10y, 20y, and 30y 


1—Five Negro 


60y LSD on Three Separate Occasions 


Measure 


Patellar Reflex* 


Pupillary Diameter* 
Blood Pressure* 


Questionst 


Gradet 


* Expressed as the mean 


+ Means + standard errors. For methods, see text. 


the measurements used in assessing the 
LSD reaction are reproducible in the same 
subjects from time to time, provided test 
conditions are held the same. 


Tolerance 


Four experiments were carried out. In 
Experiments 1 and 2, the period of admin- 
istration of LSD was relatively short, and 
questionnaires and assessment of the clini- 
cal degree of reaction were the only meas- 
urements obtained. In Experiments 3 and 
4, administration of LSD was carried on 
for longer periods of time, and measure- 
ments included effects on blood pressure, 
pupillary diameter, and knee jerk. In the 


+ the standard error of the area under curves (square inches). 


Trial 
1 2 3 
3.01+0.52 


3.32+0.47 3.01+0.38 


3.02+0.18 


3.7340.37 


3.02+0.20 


2.40+0.36 2.30+0.18 2.39+0.38 
101+24 97429 93+19 
1.5 +0.32 1.1 +0.3 1.5 +0.11 


at 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. on the first, second, and third 
days, respectively. On the fourth day all patients 
were given 75y of LSD (approximately ly/kg.) 
at 9 a.m., and questionnaires and clinical rating 
were obtained as described above. During the 
following week the experiment was repeated except 
that those patients who had received LSD were 
given placebos and vice versa. Results are shown 
in line 1 of Table 3. The decreases in the number 
of positive questions and in the clinical grade 
observed after three days’ pretreatment with LSD 
as compared with three days’ pretreatment with 
placebos were significant (P<0.05) by the f-test 
for paired observations.” 

EXPERIMENT 2.—Four white and 4 Negro males 
received in randomized order either placebos or 
LSD at 9 am. daily for seven days. The initial 
dose of LSD was 20y, increasing stepwise to 75y 
on the seventh day. On the eighth day all patients 


Tasie 3.—Tolerance to LSD After Administration for Three Days (Experiment 1) 
and Seven Days (Experiment 2)* 


Questions 


Experiment 
Nontolerantt 
1 98+25 
2 88+31 


Figures are the means + standard errors. 
After administration of placeto for three or eight days. 
After administration of LSD for three or eight days. 


Tolerantt 


22+9 


Clinical Grade 


Nontolerantt Tolerant} 


1.9540.35 


0.64.0.2 


1.7 +0.5 0.60.2 


473 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


in both groups were tested with 75y of LSD, and 
questionnaires were obtained and clinical grades 
assessed. In the second half of the experiment, 
the LSD and placebo groups were reversed. Re- 
sults are shown in line 2 of Table 3. Significant 
decreases in both questions (P<0.05) and grade 
(P<0.01) were observed, which, however, were 
greater than that seen after the three-day 
schedule described in Experiment 1. 

EXPERIMENT 3.—Six Negro males served as 
subjects for this experiment. Five of these had 
been diagnosed as having character disorders and 
one as having an inadequate personality. No 
evidence of psychosis was found on _ psychiatric 
examination of any of these patients. Intelligence 
quotients ranged from 84 to 125. Prior to chronic 
intoxication, patients were tested at weekly inter- 
vals and in randomized order with doses of 0, 90y 
to 130y, 140y to 150y, and 180y of LSD (approx- 
imately ly to 1.5y, 1.5y to 2y and 2y to 3y per 
kilogram). 


no 


Measurements were made as described 
above. Following completion of the initial testing, 
five patients were placed on a single daily dose 
of 90y to 130y of LSD once daily for seven to 
eight days. The dose was then increased to 150y 
for three days and then to 180y for three days. 
One of these five patients withdrew after the 


AR 
$Q. IN. 

PATELLAR 
REFLEX 


PUPILLARY [} 
SIZE 


SYSTOLIC 
BLOOD 
PRESSURE 


0 


DEGREE OF 
MENTAL 
EFFECT 


ANSWERS ON 
QUESTIONNAIRE 


VAI 


PRIOR TO C 
ADMINISTRATION 


Fig. 1—Tolerance to LSD in Experiment 3. 


c 


ninth day. The sixth patient, who had a very 
severe reaction to the 180y test dose, began chronic 
intoxication with a dose of 50y of LSD, which was 
gradually increased to 180y by the 22d day of 
chronic intoxication. Questionnaires were obtained 
daily, and the clinical grade was assessed daily. 
Pupillary size, knee jerks, and blood pressure were 
At 


the end of the 14 days of chronic administration 


measured at intervals of three to four days. 


in four patients and of 22 days of chronic intoxi- 
cation in one patient, LSD was discontinued without 
the patients’ knowledge, water being given in its 
place. Five patients were tested with a single dose 
of 120y to 130y two to six days after discontinua- 
tion of LSD. 

Results —The _ results 
graphically in Figure 1. 


are protrayed 
On the left, in 
individual blocks, are shown the mean re- 
sponses of the six patients to the three 
doses of LSD and to placebo prior to 
chronic intoxication. The results on patellar 
reflex, pupillary size, and systolic blood 
pressure are expressed in terms of the area 
under the time action curves (see ‘Methods 


py) 


DAY OF CHRONIC ADMINISTRATION 


TOLERANCE TO LSD 


of Measurement”). Degree of mental ef- 
fect and number of positive answers were 
assessed as described above. The mean re- 
sponses to LSD during chronic administra- 
tion are shown on the right, in the large 
block. In reading the Figure, it is necessary 
to remember that one patient withdrew 
after the ninth day and that the measure- 
ments obtained during only the first 14 days 
of chronic intoxication of the patient who 
received the drug for 22 days are included 
in the values shown. A rapid decline in 
the degree of response during chronic ad- 
ministration, despite the increase in the 
dose of LSD, is obvious. Statistical analy- 
sis, using a method for paired observa- 
tions,*” showed that the differences between 
the results before and after three days or 
more of chronic administration were highly 
significant statistically (P<0.01) for all 
measurements. 

Patients did not notice the transition from 
LSD to water at the end of the period of 
chronic intoxication. The reaction was as 
intense three days after discontinuing LSD 
as prior to chronic intoxication. 

The development of tolerance can best be 
illustrated by comparing the reaction of one 
patient to a dose of 180y before and during 
chronic intoxication. When this dose was 
given prior to chronic intoxication, the pa- 
tient became extremely anxious and felt 
that he was being shocked with electricity. 
His body seemed to shrink and enlarge. His 
hands appeared to have extra fingers. People 
and objects changed size, shape, and color. 
The walls 


shadows and colors. 


were a_ flickering of 
He felt that he would 
die or would become permanently insane. 
Blood elevated 60 mm. of 


mercury; pupils were maximally dilated; 


pressure was 
knee jerks were very hyperactive; spon- 
taneous tremors of large muscle groups were 
observed, and ankle clonus could be elicited. 
After recovery from this severe reaction, 
the patient wished to drop out of the ex- 
periment but, after considerable persuasion, 
agreed to continue. He was started on 50y 
of LSD once daily, and this dose was in- 


creased until he again received 180y of LSD 
on the 22d day. At this time he had no 
subjective effects, sat quietly, read, and 
watched His reflex, pupillary, 
and blood pressure changes were minor. 
EXPERIMENT 4.—This experiment 
to Experiment 3 but was more prolonged. 


television. 


similar 
Seven 
Negro male subjects, all of whom had been diag- 
nosed as 


was 


served as 
Intelligence quotients ranged from 71 to 
128. None of the patients presented any evidence 
of psychosis on psychiatric examinations. In one 
patient the results of the Wechsler-Bellevue In- 
Scale suggestive of an organic 
intellectual defect. This patient had a history of a 
head injury with a period of unconsciousness for 
several hours. Neurological and spinal fluid ex- 
aminations were completely negative in this pa- 
tient. 
Prior to 


having character disorders, 
subjects. 


telligence was 


with LSD, all 
seven subjects were repeatedly tested with doses of 
ly to 2y of LSD per kilogram. Intensity of the 
reaction was assessed as described above. Patients 
were then placed on one dose of the drug daily, 
the mean dose being 1.28y/kg. daily. After seven 
days the mean dosage was increased to 1.55y/kg. 


chronic intoxication 


This level was maintained for 77 days, except as 
specified below. The degree of effect induced by the 
original mean dose of 1.28y/kg. was assessed on 
the 7th day of chronic intoxication, and the degree 
of the effect induced by the mean dose of 1.55y/kg. 
was measured on the 14th and 21st days. There- 
after the 1.55y/kg. level was maintained, and at 
intervals of two weeks the patients were tested with 
a double (3y/kg.), triple (4.5y/kg.), and quad- 
ruple (6y/kg.) dose in an effort to assess the de- 
gree of tolerance which had been developed. 
After these tests had been completed, the drug 
was withdrawn without the patients’ knowledge 
for periods of one, two, and three days. The 
patients were then tested with the original mean 
dose of 1.28y/kg. of LSD. Between withdrawals 
of LSD, the patients were made tolerant again 
by administration of the 1.55y/kg. dose daily. 
The drug was finally withdrawn completely and 
the experiment terminated. 

Results —The results are shown in Figure 
2. In this Figure the mean results prior to 
chronic intoxication are shown in the first 
block; the means of the tests carried out 
during the first 21 days of chronic intoxica- 
tion are shown in the second, third, and 
fourth blocks. The fifth, sixth, and seventh 
sections show the results after the double, 
triple, and quadruple doses of LSD. The 
final three sections show the results after 


475 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


withdrawal of LSD for one, two, and three 
days, respectively. Decline in the LSD ef- 
fects during the first 21 days of chronic 
intoxication is apparent. All decreases from 
preintoxication means are statistically sig- 
nificant. In this experiment, the degree of 
tolerance to the effects of LSD on knee 
jerks, pupillary size, and blood pressure, 
while definite, seemed less than in Experi- 
ment 3. Almost complete tolerance to the 
“mental” effects was developed, since the 
double, triple, and quadruple doses of LSD 
did not restore the original degree of mental 
reaction. Tolerance, however, was lost as 
rapidly as it was gained, since the original 
degree of mental reaction had been restored 
by the third day after discontinuation of 
LSD. 

No abstinence symptoms followed with- 
drawal of LSD in either Experiment 3 or 
Experiment 4. In fact, none of the patients 
realized that LSD had been replaced by a 
placebo. 


Comment 


The effects induced by LSD appear to be 
the same in former opiate addicts as in 
nonaddicts, despite great differences in 
ethnic backgrounds, socioeconomic status, 


476 


Fig. 2.—Tolerance to 
LSD in Experiment 4. 


life history, personality patterns, and the 
environment in which testing with LSD was 
carried out. This fact indicates that the 
LSD reaction is, to some extent, independ- 
ent of these variables. The LSD reaction 
appears to be a specific toxic psychosis 
which is mimicked only by intoxication with 
mescaline. It differs in its clinical features 
from the toxic psychoses induced by scopo- 
lamine, cannabis, cocaine, or withdrawal of 
alcohol and barbiturates. 

Under the conditions of these experi- 
ments, the LSD reaction, when viewed in 
toto, had only a superficial resemblance to 
the chronic forms of any of the major 
psychoses. Symptoms suggesting schizo- 
phrenia which occurred in various patients 
included depersonalization, derealization, 
confusion, withdrawal from other persons, 
and changes in response to psychological 
tests. Affect, however, usually seemed ap- 
propriate, and auditory hallucinations were 
rare, as were ideas of reference and control. 
Systematized delusions were never observed. 
The outstanding change after LSD appears 
to be visual perceptual distortion. The 
kaleidoscopic changes in size, form, and 
color of objects, persons, and the patient’s 
own body are very characteristic of the 


| 
CURVE 
PATELLAR 4 
REFLEX 
size 
* 
PRESSURE 
' 
OF 
MENTAL 
EFFECT 
025 
das 
so 
ANSWERS 
10 
Dose 
MCG/KG. 5 
40 3 Yy 
Yj YA 
7 4 2x 3x 4X 2 3 
TOLERANT DAY OF CHRONIC EFFECT OF INCREASING DAYS OFF LSD 
‘ADMINISTRATION DOSE WHILE TOLERANT 
a 
4 
= 
g 
: 


TOLERANCE TO LSD 


LSD psychosis and are not a common part 
of the symptomatology of schizophrenia. 
The neurological signs induced by LSD are 
also not found in schizophrenia. 

If it had been possible to maintain the 
original degree of effect throughout the 
experiment, the resemblance of the LSD 
psychosis to schizophrenia might have be- 
come more pronounced. It is conceivable 
that schizophrenia is associated with some 
chronic perceptual disorder and that a per- 
son who is having peculiar sensory experi- 
ences may develop peculiar explanations 
for these experiences. Such explanations 
might be interpreted by a person who is not 
experiencing such distorted perception as 
delusional thinking, and hence as evidence 
of schizophrenia. 

The data establish the development of 
tolerance to LSD unequivocally. Two other 
laboratories § have also demonstrated this 
phenomenon in human subjects, and another 
has shown tolerance to the pyretogenic ef- 
fect of LSD in rabbits.** Tolerance to LSD 
develops more rapidly, is greater in degree, 
and is lost more rapidly than is tolerance 
to any other drug with which we are fa- 
miliar. Toierance to LSD is not associated 
with the development of physical depend- 
ence (symptoms on withdrawal of the drug) 
as it is in morphine, barbiturates, and al- 
cohol addictions. The data shed no light on 
the mechanisms of the tolerance. Further 
neurophysiological, biochemical, psy- 
chological studies will be necessary to eluci- 
date the reason for the declining effect of 
LSD on chronic administration. 


Summary 


In former opiate addicts, the diethylamide 
of lysergic acid (LSD-25) induced anxiety, 
mood changes, feelings of unreality, visual 
perceptual distortion, optical hallucinations, 
depersonalization, and derealization. Con- 
comitantly, resting blood pressure was ele- 
vated, pupils were dilated, and the tendon 
reflexes accentuated. Characteristics 
of the LSD reaction appeared to be the 


were 


References 31, 32. 


same in former opiate addicts and in non- 
addicts. 

The degree of both the “mental” and the 
“nonmental” changes increased with the 
dose of LSD. The intensity of the reaction 
induced by LSD remained the same when 
the same dose was repeated after an in- 
terval of a week or more. 

When LSD was given daily, tolerance 
was evident after administration for only 
three days. After tolerance was well de- 
veloped, administration of as much as four 
times the standard dose of LSD did not re- 
store the original intensity of the reaction. 
On discontinuation of LSD, tolerance was 
lost as rapidly as it was developed. 


REFERENCES 


1. Stoll, W. A.: Lysergsaure-diathylamid, ein 
Phantastikum aus der Mutterkorngruppe, Schweiz. 
Arch. Neurol. u. Psychiat. 60:279, 1947. 

2. Becker, A. M.: Zur Psychopathologie der 
Lysergsaurediathylamidwirkung, Wien.  Ztschr. 
Nervenh. 2 :402, 1949. 

3. Condrau, G.: Klinische Erfahrungen an 
Geisteskranken mit Lysergsaurediathylamid, Acta 
psychiat. et neurol. 24:9, 1949. 

4. Fischer, R.; Georgi, F., and Weber, R.: 
Psychophysische Korrelationen: VIII. Modellver- 
suche zum  Schizophrenieproblem : 
diathylamid und  Mezcalin, 
Wehnschr. 81:817, 1951. 

5. Arnold, O. H., and Hoff, H.: Untersuchun- 
gen Uber die Wirkungsweise von Lysergsaure- 
diathylamid, Wien, Ztschr. Nervenh. 6:129, 1953. 

6. Mayer-Gross, W.: Experimental Psychoses 
and Other Mental Abnormalities 
Drugs, Brit. M. J. 2:317, 1951. 

7. Sandison, R. A.: Psychological Aspects of 
the LSD Treatment of the Neuroses, J. Ment. Sc. 
100 :508, 1954. 

8. Sandison, R. A.; 


Lysergsaure- 
Schweiz. 


Produced by 


Spencer, A. M., and 
Whitelaw, J. D. A.: The Therapeutic Value of 
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Mental 
J. Ment. Sc. 100 :491, 1954. 

9. Liddell, D. W., and Weil-Malherbe, H.: 
The Effects of Methedrine and of Lysergic Acid 
Diethylamide on Mental Processes and on the 
Blood Adrenaline Level, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. & 
Psychiat. 16:7, 1953. 

10. Busch, A. K., and Johnson, W. C.: LSD-25 
as an Aid in Psychotherapy, Dis. Nerv. System 
11:2, 1950. 


Illness, 


477 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


11. Forrer, G. R., and Goldner, R. D.: Experi- 
mental Psychological Studies with Lysergic Acid 
Diethylamide (LSD-25), A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. 
& Psychiat. 65 :581, 1951. 

12. DeShon, H. J.; Rinkel, M., and Solomon, 
H. C.: Mental Changes Experimentally Produced 
by L.S.D. (d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide Tar- 
trate), Psychiat. Quart. 26:33, 1952. 

13. Savage, C.: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide 
(LSD-25): A Clinical-Psychological Study, Am. 
J. Psychiat. 108 :896, 1952. 

14. Rinkel, H.; DeShon, H. J.; Hyde, R. W., 
and Solomon, H. C.: Experimental Schizophrenia- 
like Symptoms, Am. J. Psychiat. 108:572, 1952. 

15. Hoch, P. H.; Cattell, J. P., and Pennes, 
H. H.: Effects of Mescaline and Lysergic Acid 
(d-LSD-25), Am. J. Psychiat. 108 :579, 1952. 

16. Rinkel, M.; Hyde, R. W.; Solomon, H. C., 
Hoagland, H.: 
II. Clinical and Physio-Chemical Observations in 
Experimental Psychosis, Am. J. Psychiat. 111 :881, 
1955. 


and Experimental Psychiatry : 


17. Savage, C.: Variations in Ego Feeling In- 
Acid 


1955. 


. and Clausen, J.: 


duced by D-Lysergic Diethylamide, Psy- 
choanalyt. Rev. 
18. Landis, C Certain Effects 
of Mescaline and Lysergic Acid on Psychological 
Functions, J. Psychol. 38 :211, 1954. 
19. Abramson, H. A.; Jarvik, M. E.; Kaufman, 
M. R.; Kornetsky, C.; Levine, A., and Wagner, 


M.: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25): I. 


Physiological and Perceptual Responses, J. Psychol. 
39 :3, 1955. 


20. Abramson, H. A.; 


Kornetsky, C.; Jarvik, 
M. FE.; Kaufman, M. R., and Ferguson, M. W.: 
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25): XI. Con- 
tent Analysis of Clinical Reactions, J. 
40:53, 1955 


Psychol. 


21. Blickenstorfer, E.: Zum Aatiologischen Prob- 
lem der Psychosen vom akuten exogenen Reak- 
psy- 


Arch. 


tionstypus: Lysergsaurediathylamid, ein 


chisch wirksamer toxischer Spurenstoff, 


Psychiat. 188 :266, 1952. 


22. Woolley, D. W., and Shaw, E.: A Biochem- 
ical and Pharmacological Suggestion About Cer- 
tain Mental Disorders, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 
40 :228, 1954. 

23. Woolley, D. W., and Shaw, E.: Some Neu- 
rophysiological Aspects of Serotonin, Brit. M. J. 
2:122, 1954. 

24. Mayer-Gross, W.; McAdam, W., and Wal- 
ker, J.: Lysergsaure-diathylamid und Kohlenhydrat- 
stoffwechsel, Nervenarzt 23 :30, 1952. 

25. Hoffer, A.; Osmond, H., and Smythies, J.: 
Schizophrenia; A New Approach: II. Result of a 
Year’s Research, J. Ment. Sc. 100:29, 1954. 

26. Rinkel, M.; Hyde, R. W., and Solomon, 
H. C.: Experimental Psychiatry: III. A Chemical 
Concept of Psychosis, Dis. Nerv. System 15:259, 
1954. 

27. Shore, P. A.; Silver, S. L., and 
B. B.: Interaction of Serotonin and Lysergic Acid 
Diethylamide (LSD) in the Central 
System, Experientia. 11 :272, 1955. 

28. Shore, P. A.; Silver, S. L., 
B. B.: Interaction of Reserpine, Serotonin, and 
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) in the Cen- 
tral Nervous System, Science 122 :284, 1955. 

29. Pletscher, A.; Shore, P. A., and 
B. B.: Serotonin Release as a Possible Mechanism 
of Reserpine Action, Science 122:374, 1955. 

30. Edwards, A. L.: Statistical Analysis for 
Students in Psychology and Education, New York, 
Rhinehart & Co., Inc., 1946. 

31. Cholden, L. S.; Kurland, A., and Savage, C.: 
Clinical Reactions and Tolerance to LSD _ in 
Chronic Schizophrenia, J. Nerv. & Ment. Dis. 
122 :211, 1955. 

32. Abramson, H. A.; Jarvik, M. FE.; Garin, 
M. H., and Hersch, M. W.: Lysergic Acid Die- 
thylamide (LSD-25): XVII. Tolerance Devel- 
opment and Its Relationship to a Theory of Psy- 
chosis, J. Psychol. 41:81, 1956. 

33. Gogerty, J. H., and Dille, J. 
to the Pyretogenic Effects of Lysergic Acid Die- 
thylamide, J. Pharmacol. & Exper. Therap. 116: 
450, 1956. 


Srodie, 
Nervous 


and Brodie, 


Jrodie, 


M.: Tolerance 


sho 
ay 
ae 
\ 

1 
478 


Temporal Lobectomy aitth Kemoval of 
Hippocampus, Amygdala 


Results for Psychomotor Epilepsy Three to Nine Years After Operation 


ARTHUR A. MORRIS, M.D., Washington, D. C. 


live years have elapsed since my initial 
report on the results of temporal lobectomy 
for psychomotor epilepsy (Davidson Lec- 
ture).' Bailey and Gibbs *; Green, Duis- 
and McGrath*; Bailey, Green, 
Amador, and Gibbs,* and others ¢ have re- 
ported their results. 


berg, 


Encouraging results 
have been obtained, and each investigator 
has cautioned against premature conclu- 
sions. I cannot emphasize too strongly that 
the operations employed in my series are 
considerably different from those used by 
other workers. The uncus, the hippocampal 
gyrus, and the amygdaloid nucleus were also 
removed during each of the 
operations. 


“Standard” 


This report concerns 36 private patients 
having uncontrollable psychomotor seizures 
who have been subjected to temporal lobec- 
tomy. The follow-up period 
since Operation is five years (first operation, 
Oct. 27, 1946; last, Oct. 21, 1952). 

The basis of removing epileptogenic foci 


average 


Received for publication Sept. 15, 1955. 
This study was supported in part by a grant 
from the Doctors Hospital Research Foundation. 

Chief of Neurosurgery, Doctors Hospital; In- 
structor Neurosurgery, Georgetown 
School of Medicine. 

Read before the Section on Nervous and Men- 
tal Diseases at the 104th Annual Meeting of the 
American Medical Atlantic City, 
June 7, 1955. Also presented before the Neuro- 
surgical Society of America, Pebble Beach, Calif., 
March 19, 1955. 

* Reference 2. Bailey, P., in discussion on article 
by Gibbs, Gibbs, and Fuster.” 

+ References 6-8. 


University 


Association, 


associated with pathological lesions has been 
carefully formulated by Penfield and _ his 
co-workers.{ But as late as 1952 Penfield 
had concluded that “excision of normal 
cerebral cortex rarely, if ever, gives a good 
therapeutic result.’"!* Previously, Gibbs and 
co-workers had established the relation- 
ship between the anterior portion of the 
temporal lobe and psychomotor epilepsy 
(either in pure form or in association with 
convulsions). Bailey and Gibbs later re- 
ported on temporal lobe operations in 25 
patients and found only 14 patients with 
gross pathological lesions. Later, Bailey, 
Green, and associates * commented that the 
chances of obtaining a good therapeutic re- 
sult were greater when a pathological lesion 
was present than when the only evidence of 
abnormality electroencephalographic. 
Thus, excision of normal cerebral cortex 
was made on the basis of electroencephalo- 
graphic evidence, and some good results 
were obtained. This fact initially occurred 
to me during study with Pope, Jasper, 
Elliott, Penfield,4 who showed that 
after implantation of alumina-cream-filled 
linen discs in monkeys focal, clinical, chemi- 
cal, electroencephalographic, and pathologi- 


and 


cal correlates of human focal epilepsy were 
found. In one animal a “mirror” electro- 
encephalographic focus was induced, and 
the seizures subsequently changed from 
focal to generalized. Excision of the pri- 
mary focus caused disappearance of the 
“mirror focus” after one month. 
mal remained free from seizures for two 
years, when it was killed. Yet at autopsy 
the “mirror” focus appeared pathologically 


~ ¢ References 10 and 11. 


The ani- 


479 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


normal, but it had most likely been the 
factor which caused the generalized sei- 
zures. In this series one-half of the patients 
had excisions based on focal electroencepha- 
lographic changes only, without gross path- 
ological changes being noted. 

Sleep records were not acceptable in any 
patient in this series whose psychomotor sei- 
zures did not occur in sleep. Records were 
made and acceptable only within the para- 
meters in which habitual psychomotor sei- 
zures occurred, Attention to fine details in 
the clinical history will provide the only 
methods of activation necessary. If seizures 
occur in early morning before breakfast, 
electrical recordings are best made during 
those hours. This is an extremely laborious 
method of study, but I believe it is necessary. 
The natural history of the disease fails to 
dictate that in most cases sleep or any artifi- 
cial means of activation is a part of the psy- 
chomotor attack. Avoidance of sleep will 
eliminate a number of bilateral temporal foci. 
Furthermore, sleep gives inconsistent re- 
sults, since at one time sleep is effective 
in producing the temporal spike focus, while 
at other times, in the same person, sleep is 
entirely noncontributory. Also, in certain 
persons, the whole brain does not fall asleep 
at the same time, so that an initial focus of 
slow waves will vary in different subjects. 
All this complicates the interpretation of 
sleep records, and if medicines are used to 
induce sleep the interpretation is further 
complicated. 

There were 25 male and 11 female subjects, 
with ages ranging from 14 to 51 years. The indi- 
cations for operation were (1) disability due to 
frequent and severe psychomotor seizures, in 15 
cases, (2) disability due to psychomotor seizures, 
interseizure psychiatric disorder, and institutional- 
ization, in 7 cases; (3) disability due to psycho- 
motor seizures and interseizure psychiatric dis- 
order, in 11 cases, (4) and disability due to 
psychomotor seizures and neoplasm, in 2 cases. 
One patient was operated on when his professional 
job was at stake because of frequent seizures, 
although he was not disabled. In all patients the 
seizures were uncontrolled after many years’ use 
of anticonvulsant drugs. The duration of medical 
treatment for psychomotor seizures before opera- 


tion averaged 14 years—6 years with adequate 


420 


control and 8 years without adequate control. A 
complete outpatient and _ hospital neurological 
survey was made. This included (1) multiple 
electroencephalograms, demonstrating a consistent 
unilateral anterior temporal focus; (2) general 
and neurological history and examination; (3) 
blood and sugar, calcium, and phos- 
phorus determinations; (4) spinal fluid examina- 
tion; (5) pneumoencephalography; (6) bilateral 
closed arteriography, and (7) observation of psy- 
chomotor attack. Patients were selected for opera- 
tion provided the electroencephalographic focus 
was consistently unilateral. If any lack of corre- 
lation between the side of the electroencephalo- 
graphic focus and the results of the various 
objective tests was encountered, the patient was 
not considered for operation. 

All operations with electrocorticograms 
performed with use of local anesthesia without 
preoperative medication. In later general 
anesthesia with thiopental (Pentothal) sodium and 
endotracheal nitrous oxide was used, since electrical 
studies were not made. 

Patients with uncontrolled, long-standing, 
frequent psychomotor seizures are pitiful, 


serology 


were 


cases 


for their need of help is very great. The sei- 


zures, psychiatric disturbances, and _ intel- 
lectual deterioration contribute severely to 
their total disability. All this results in an 
intolerable social stigma. A promising op- 
eration should not be denied these people. 


The “Standard” Operation 


In the first 15 patients a frontotemporoparietal 
osteoplastic craniotomy, utilizing four burr holes, 
was made with the use of local anesthesia (Fig. 
1). At the inferior and anterior margins of the 
craniotomy considerable bone was removed so as 
to expose the anterior middle fossa. must 
gain access to the inferior surface of the tem- 
poral lobe with as little retraction as possible. The 
dura was opened, and the anterior temporal, in- 
ferior frontal, and inferior parietal areas were 
exposed. Superficial temporal, frontal, 
and inferior parietal electrical recordings were 
made. Afterward, intratemporal recordings were 
made with a Grass depth electrode. 
of the electrical studies show, in general, that a 
spike focus was most consistently demonstrated 
approximately 4 cm. deep within the 
temporal convolution. It resided in an area with 
its midpoint 4.5 cm. from the tip of the temporal 
lobe, as measured along the Sylvian fissure. When 
postage-stamp subdural electrodes were used, the 
discharge most commonly arose from the inferior 
and medial surfaces of the temporal lobe, being 
confined to an area approximately 2.5 cm. in 


One 


inferior 


The results 


second 


peed 

4 

| 

= 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


sion \ 


Posit of 
ton « 
4 burr hole 


Inion 


Fig. 1. — Frontotemporoparietal 


osteoplastic 
craniotomy (“standard” operation) 


diameter 
focal 


In other words, no discrete pinpoint 
discharge could be obtained from super- 
ficial or depth recordings. After repeated findings 
of this kind, electrical studies at operation were 
discontinued, and a “standard” lobectomy was used 
in 21 additional patients 

In the next 21 patients the operative approach 
was similar to that routinely used in the temporal 
approach for retrogasserian rhizotomy. The bony 
removal anteriorly, however, is much greater. The 
anterior 7 cm. of the temporal lobe can be ex- 


Sylvian fissure 


.. Additional bone 


posed through this opening (Fig. 2). The an- 
terior 6.5 cm. of the tip of the temporal lobe, as 
measured along the Sylvian fissure, is routinely 
removed. This removal included the uncus, the 
anterior 2-4 cm. of the hippocampal gyrus, the 
amygdala, and the anterior divisions of the first, 
second, third temporal convolutions. The 
island of Reil was always exposed but never re- 
moved. After the removal is completed, one 
should visualize the middle cerebral artery, the 
lateral surface of the island of Reil, covered with 
piarachnoid, the opened tip of the temporal horn 
of the lateral ventricle, the posterior communi- 
cating artery, the anterior choroidal artery, the 
third nerve, the tentorial edge along the medial 
rim of the middle fossa, and, occasionally, the 
posterior cerebral artery (Figs. 3 and 4). Most 
frequently the anastomotic vein of Labbé was left 
intact; but when it occupied a position within 
the anterior 6.5 cm. of the temporal lobe, it was 
coagulated and partly removed. The descending 
horn of the lateral ventricle was always opened 
in order to identify the amygdala clearly. This 
mass was usually removed through a _ transven- 
tricular approach so that its removal could be 
complete from the visual anatomic standpoint. 
In removing the temporal tip by suction, care was 
always taken to avoid coagulation if possible, and 
hot moist packs and thorough irrigation were used 
freely. The subpial method of resection was 
always carefully employed so as to preserve nor- 
mal circulation in the surrounding cortex. The 
wound was always thoroughly irrigated in order 


and 


Fig. 2.—The anterior 
temporal lobe is exposed 
from the tip to beyond 
the vein of Labbé and 
from the Sylvian fissure 
to the floor of the middle 
fossa. 


481 


\) 
J 
/ 
\ 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


Third nerve 
Uncus 


Fig. 3—After removal 
of the anterior 6.5 cm. of 
the temporal lobe the is- 
land of Reil and adjacent 
structures are easily iden- 
tified. 


Area of Sylvian 


removal 


fissure 


Rolandic 


figsure 


Fig. 4—The area of removal is shown. Note that the ventricle is entered and that fre- 
quently one may visualize the posterior cerebral artery. 


to obtain perfect hemostasis. The dura was always 
closed tightly, and the temporal muscle, fascia, 
and subcutaneous and cutaneous layers were closed 
with interrupted fine black nonabsorbable surgical 
(silk) sutures. 


482 


Effect of Operation upon Number of 
Seizures 
Long-term operative results may be 
judged on two bases: (1) freedom from 


ie Cerebral a horn of, 
an Post communicating a \ 
\ id a. 
\ Int. carotid a 
\ 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


psychomotor seizures only, and (2) free- 
dom from all types of seizures. The latter 
method has been used by Penfield and Steel- 
man.* I have prepared two tables so that 


TABLE 1.—Classification of Results Based ona 


(36 Patients) 


end of a five-year average follow-up, a total 
of 75% have had successful operations. 
Two other patients have “fair results,” and 
seven patients have little or no improve- 


Method of Analysis by Penfield and Steelman 


“fair results” 


Group 4: Group 3: Group 2: Group 1: Group 0: 
| Type of No Attacks 75% 50% 25% N 
| Attack Since Leaving Improved Improved Improved Improvement 
| Hospital or Better 
Psychomotor seizures only 1(33.3%) 1(33.3%) 1(33.3%) 
| Predominantly psychomotor 
with grand mal seizures 13(50%) 9(34.6%) 1(3.8%) 1(3.8%) 2(7.8%) 
Predominantly psychomotor 
| with grand mal and petit 1(14.3%) 2(28.5%) 1(14.3%) 3(42.9%) 
| mal seizures 
| Total 15 12 2 2 5 
| 75% had successful 6% had 19% had unsuccessful | 


operations 


both types of analysis may be studied 
(Tables 1 and 2). From the patient's stand- 
point the more worth-while analysis in this 
group is “freedom from psychomotor sei- 
zures only,” since these were their disabling 
seizure type. The number of associated 
grand mal and/or petit mal seizures was 
never great enough to induce disability, for 
patients with this type were not selected for 
operation. Utilizing the latter classification 
(Table 1), one finds that 15 patients have 
had no attacks since leaving the hospital 
and an additional 12 patients are 75% im- 
proved or better. Thus, as judged at the 


TABLE 2.—Status of Thi 


rty-Six Patients 


operations 


ment. Judged in another way, 28 pa- 
tients (78%) have been entirely free 
from psychomotor seizures since leaving the 
hospital. Three other patients are improved 
and five patients unimproved, but no patient 
worse. Both analyses closely correlate 
the fact that, at present, 30 patients are eco- 
nomically independent, whereas all but one 
of these were disabled prior to operation 
(Table II). Over half the patients are also 
free from grand mal attacks. In contrast to 
the experience of Bailey and Gibbs,” only 
one patient has a greater number of grand 
mal attacks since operation. It is clear that 


is 


Four to Nine Years Following Operation 


No. of 


Patients Free Average Time 


Type of No. of from All Types Elapsed Since 
Attack Patients of Seizures Operation 
} Since Operation for All Patients 
| 
Psychomotor seizures only 3 1(33.3%) 4 yrs. 8 mo. 
Predominantly psychomotor with grand mal | 
seizures 26 13(50%) 5 yrs. 6mo | 
Predominantly psychomotor, with grand | 
mal and petit mal seizures 7 1(14.3%) 4 yrs. 10 mo. 
Total 36 15(41.7%) 5 yr. | 


483 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


when classical petit mal seizures occurred 
either in combination with psychomotor 
seizures or in combination with grand mal 
and psychomotor seizures, operation was 
successful in only two out of seven cases, 
so that I have come to look on the presence 
of classical petit mal seizures associated 
with bilaterally synchronous spike-and- 
wave 3-per-second electrographic activity as 
a contraindication to temporal lobectomy for 
the treatment of psychomotor seizures. 

If one were to eliminate the patients with 
classical petit mal seizures from an opera- 
tive category, one should be able to develop 
an operative success of approximately 83%. 


Influence of Operative Type upon 
Results 


Thirty-one patients had a “standard” uni- 
lateral operation. Three patients had uni- 
lateral bi-gyrectomy, and one patient had 
unilateral tri-gyrectomy. Only one of these 
four patients has obtained an excellent re- 
sult, and that patient had a superficial astro- 
cytoma in the first and second temporal con- 
volutions. The patient with a_ bilateral 
temporal lobectomy has had 50% to 75% 
improvement in the number of attacks but 


No. | 
Type of Operation of Cases 
Improvement 
Unilateral bi-Gyrectomy 3 1 
Unilateral tri-Gyrectomy 1 
Unilateral anterior temporal 
lobectomy \includes uncus, 31 3 
amygdala, and  hippo- 
campus) 
Bilateral temporal lobectomy 1 
Total 36 4 


is still disabled by his seizure problem. 
Thus, it is clear that almost all the good 
operative results have followed the more 
radical, but “standard,” operation (Table 3). 


TABLE 3.—Influence of Type of Operation upon Operative Results 


Influence of Familial Neurological 
Disorders 


When brain tumor is eliminated, the pres- 
ence of neurological familial disorders limits 
considerably the likelihood of freedom from 
all seizures after operation. Yet there is 
just as much chance for a satisfactory re- 
sult as was obtained in the total group. To 
counterbalance the initial statement, it may 
be stated that there is a chance for a greater 
improvement in psychiatric and social fac- 
tors than was found in the total series. 
Definitely, then, the presence of neurological 
disorders in the family is not a contraindi- 
cation to operation (Table 4). 


Gross and Microscopic Pathological 
Changes 


During operative inspection one-half of 
the patients showed gross pathological 
changes (Table 5). An absence of gross 
pathological findings did not lower the op- 
erative success. Thus, a well-demonstrated, 
consistently unilateral electroencephalo- 
graphic anterior temporal focus is just as 
good an operative indication as a localized 
organic lesion in the anterior temporal re- 


Operative Results 


25% to 50% 50% to 75% 75% to 95% | 100% 
Improvement | Improvement | Improvement | Improvement 


1 1 

3 11 
5 12 15 


gion. One must think of focal physiological 
abnormalities in the same manner as one 
thinks of focal organic pathological lesions. 
They are both measurable, but the organic 


>... 

Ps, 

| 
- 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


TABLE 4.—Relationship 


History of Neurological No. of 
Disorder in the Family Patients 
Epilepsy 5 
Depressive psychosis 2 


Brain tumor 


to 


Migraine 


lesion is more acceptable to most neuro- 
surgeons. 

Thickening of the meninges and avascular 
gyri were observed in one-third of the cases. 
Adhesions between the arachnoid and the 
dura, anterior temporal discoloration, atro- 
phy of gyri, and small- to medium-sized 
softened areas were observed in approxi- 
mately one-fourth of the cases. Focal areas 
of increased tenacity, vascular deformity, 
and congestion were observed in one out of 
six cases. A small anterior choroidal artery, 
a superficial cyst, a tumor without preopera- 
tive evidence of it, and a vascular malfor- 
mation were among the uncommon findings 
at operation. 


The tissues removed at operation were 


Taste 5.—Gross Pathological Changes Observed 
at Operation 


Gross Pathological Finding No. 
None 18 | 
Thickening of meninges 12 | 
Avascular gyri ll 
Adhesions between arachnoid and dura 10 | 
Anterior temporal discoloration 10 
Atrophy of gyri 10 
Softened areas 10 
Focal areas of increased tenacity 7 
Vascular deformity 6 
Congestion 6 


Small anterior choroidal artery 


Cyst (superficial) 2 
Tumor without preoperative evidence 2 
Vascular malformation 1 


of Neurological Disorders in the Family 


Results of Operation 


Only 2 had satisfactory operation; 1 has been free of all 
seizures for 5 yr. 


Both had satisfactory operation | 
| Both have been free from seizures 
One had no improvement; other had 75%-95% improve- 


ment 


Seven, had successful operations 


subjected to microscopic study in every case. 
The findings are tabulated in Table 6. The 
most marked changes were found in the 
uncus, closely followed by those in the 
hippocampal gyrus. Varied changes were 
also noted in all portions of the temporal 
lobe. However, microscopic changes were 
not observed in all cases. There were 17 
cases in which microscopic changes were 
not noted, and the operative result in this 
group as compared with that in the group 
with microscopic changes was not appreci- 
ably different. Gliosis, increased satellitosis, 
shrinkage of nerve cells, neuronophagia, and 
other chronic degenerative changes were 
noted. Two astrocytomas were found at 
operation, and it is of considerable interest 
that there was no preoperative evidence of 
tumor. One of these tumors was entirely 
confined to the first temporal gyrus, the 
uncus, and the hippocampal gyrus. No 
microscopic evidence of tumor could be 
found in the second or third temporal gyrus. 
Four specimens from the island of Reil 
were available for study. Three of these 
specimens showed abnormal changes, where- 
as one was normal. In the specimen with 
the normal island of Reil the temporal lobe 
biopsy tissue was also normal. After lobec- 
tomy in this case the electroencephalograph- 
ic spike focus was unaltered. <A_ single 
undercut 1 cm. long in the island of Reil 
eliminated the spike focus. It has been five 
years since operation, and this patient has 
been free of all attacks with the exception 
of two minor ones. He is not taking any 
anticonvulsive medication, has subsequently 


485 


| | 
| 
2 | 
| 
| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


Ist 


Temporal 


Gyrus Gyrus 


Astrogliosis 

Shrinkage 

Neuronophagia 

Satellitosis 

Chronic degenerative changes 
Demyelination 

Apparent loss in capillaries 
Meningeal thickening 
Astrocytoma (cystic 
Astrocytoma (piloid) 


Apparent increase in vascularity 


Numerous corpora amylacea 


Totals 93 


become a rabbi in an effort to discharge his 
gratitude, and is happily married. 


Relationship Between Side of EEG 
Focus and Operative Result 


The left, or dominant, side was resected 
in three-fourths of the patients. This sug- 
gests that left temporal lobe lesions induce 
greater disabilities. [I cannot recall ever 
seeing a patient with psychomotor epilepsy 
who was left-handed and who had a right 
temporal lobe focus. The dominant lobe 
being more fully developed, it may have a 
more complicated effect on behavior and 
psychiatric patterns, since these factors are 
closely allied to psychomotor seizures. Yet 
the improvement in behavior and psychi- 
atric patterns is just as great when the non- 
dominant temporal lobe is removed ( Fig. 5). 


Relationship of Aura and EEG Focus 
to Operative Result 


The commonest aura was related to the 
epigastrium (Table 7). The majority of 
the group with an aura of this type demon- 
strated deep unilateral anterior temporal 
electrical foci after the patients had been 
free of medication for five or more days. 
Sixty-six per cent of these patients have 


486 


2d 
Temporal 


Taste 6.—Microscopic Findings 


3d | 
Temporal Uneus Hippocampal 


Island 
Gyrus Gyrus Rei 


104 145 


Amygdala not satisfactory for analysis owing to suction method of removal. 


been free from all types of seizures since 
operation, whereas only 41.7% of the entire 
Thus, 


an epigastric aura with a deep unilateral 


series could be classified similarly. 


anterior temporal electrical focus definitely 
increases the likelihood of an excellent op- 
erative result. This finding is especially 
interesting, since the epigastric aura has 
often carried the stigma of idiopathic epi- 
lepsy rather than of temporal epilepsy. One 
should not deduce, on the other hand, that 
every patient with a convulsive seizure prob- 
lem who has an epigastric aura either will 
show a temporal focus or will profit from 
a temporal lobectomy. However, the ab- 
sence of an aura does not argue against a 
worth-while result, since two-thirds of this 
group obtained a satisfactory result, al- 
though they are not free from all seizures. 
One patient, disabled by frequent daytime 
psychomotor and grand mal seizures, has 
suffered with only rare nocturnal grand mal 
fits and is entirely economically independent. 

Déja vu occurred in five patients, and 
three have been entirely free from all seiz- 
ures since lobectomy. Other aurae are tabu- 
lated in Table 7. When focal motor seizures 
accompanied the epigastric, visual, somato- 
sensory, or forced thought aura, the result 
was excellent in five of six cases. 


12 ll 13 19 16 3 

pA 12 12 14 1s 15 3 

13 “4 15 19 17 

ad Is 16 2 

10 9 12 16 12 
5 6 il 9 
fae 10 10 10 15 “4 4 

4 5 5 0 
2 3 2 ‘ 
125 | 48 
sg 

| 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SIDE OF EEG 
FOCUS AND OPERATIVE RESULT 


LEFT 


118 


RIGHT 


BILATERAL 


[) SIDE OF OPERATION 
[ SATISFACTORY 
OPERATIONS 


ONE PATIENT SHOWED A BILATERAL 
EEG FOCUS ON MEDICATION, BUT A 
CONSISTANT UNILATERAL FOCUS 
AFTER WITHDRAWAL FROM MEDI- 
CATION. 4 PATIENTS HAD NORMAL 
EEG's WHILE ON MEDICATION 


Fig. 5.—Relationship between side of EEG focus and operative results. 
tT ABLE 7. —Relation ah of Aura, EEG Focus, and Ove rative Result 
No. of | Type of | Site of EEG | Operative 
Patients | Aura | Focus | sults 
| 
s | Gastric or epigastric only | 5-Deep temporal anteriorly Excellent, all 5 
| 1-Diffuse temporal Poor 
| 1-Posterior temporal | Poor 
| 1- Anterior but superficial: Satisfactory 
1 Ez pigastrie or or feeling of fright Anterior and superficial Satisfac tory 
1 or déja vu Deep anterior temporal E xce 
1 Epies astric, cephalic, or r dizziness Deep anterior temporal Excellent 
5 Deja vu All had deep foci except one, | Excellent, 3 
whose focus was superficial Satisfactory, | 
Poor, 1 
Fear One with superficial ‘and 1 ‘with Excellent, 7 
deep anterior temporal Satisfactory, 1 
6 None 3 with deep and 3 with superfic ial " Satisfactory, 4 
anterior temporal % Better, | 
Not improved, 1 
3 Forced thinking Al with deep anterior temporal Excelle ent, 1 
rei 75% improved, 2 
2 Confusion “all with deep anterior r temporal Excellent. 1 
foci Poor, 1 
1 “Motor ey eye movements Deep anterior temporal 50%: 75% improv ement 
2 Motor Aphasia | Deep anterior temporal Both with satisfactory results 
1 Olfac tory Deep anterior temporal Satisfactory 
1 Visual Deep anterior temporal Excellent 
1 | Tingling of hand | Deep anterior temporal Excellent 
1 Cephalic Deep anterior temporal Satisfactory 


487 


— 
LLL 
| 
} 
| 
= 
\ 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


Operative and Postoperative 
Complications 


In obtaining access to the lowermost por- 


tions of the temporal lobe for inferior 
temporal electrical recordings, a minor peri- 
pheral facial weakness occurred in eight 
cases, and in each case complete recovery 
took place within 6 to 12 months. One of 
my most grateful patients is a man who had 
a hemiplegia without facial 
occur approximately six hours following 
recovery from anesthesia. This patient has 


involvement 


made a 90% recovery, has been free from 
all attacks for seven years, has subsequently 
married, has one child, and has worked and 
supported his family since operation. There 
three 
patients there was an increase in abnormal 
behavior, which rapidly subsided after the 
withdrawal of phenacemide (Phenurone). 
These patients had unsuccessful operations, 
and additional medication was _ instituted. 
One other patient had weakness of the 
right side of the face and right arm and 
hand, with a minor motor aphasia. There 
was complete recovery of speech in three 
months, and three and a half years later 
there was a 90% recovery of motor func- 
tion. During the interim he was not dis- 
abled and worked as a painter. One other 


have been no operative deaths. In 


patient was said to have developed postop- 
erative osteomyelitis of the bone flap, which 


necessitated removal and subsequent tanta- 
lum cranioplasty elsewhere. His result from 
the initial procedure has been excellent, 
and no convulsive seizures have occurred 
in the five years and three months since 
operation. One patient subsequently had a 
reactivation of an acute paranoid § schizo- 
phrenic condition and has required institu- 
tionalization for the past five years. A 
pathological survey of the tissue removed 
revealed diffuse cerebral changes suggestive 
of Pick’s atrophy. There 
from seizures. 


was no relief 


Medical Treatment Before and After 
Operation 


The patients had received’ an average of 


488 


14 years of medical treatment before opera- 
tion was performed. The group was sub- 
jected to an average of eight years of 
treatment, without adequate control. 

Medical therapy has been discontinued in 
almost one-fourth of the patients for at least 
two years and not more than six years. 
One-third of the group have been main- 
tained on a markedly reduced medical 
regimen (i, e., less than three-fourths of 
the preoperative dose). Ten other patients 
are taking the same dose as they took prior 
to operation. Only five patients have greater 
dosage schedules since operation (Table 8). 
Since all the unsuccessful operative results 


Taste 8.—Use of Medicines Following Operation 


Medical Therapy 
Patients whose medicines are markedly 
reduced 


Patients entirely without all medicines 
from 1-5 yr. 


Patients taking same amount of medicine 
as they required preoperatively 


Patients who have taken a greater dose 
of medicines since operation 


are in the last two categories, it appears 
that medical treatment does not alter the 
operative analysis. In several cases there 
was a temptation to increase the dose of 
this 
avoided so that the postoperative analysis 
would not be complicated. It is quite clear 


anticonvulsant medicines, but was 


that after operation a lower anticonvulsant 
dosage accomplished a greater control in 
all but five patients. Even though one does 
not obtain an “excellent” operative result, 
many patients and their referring physicians 
will be grateful for the improved response 
to medication. 

Ten patients developed psychomotor sta- 
tus epilepticus before operation, after sudden 
withdrawal of medication in the hospital. 
One patient had 10 to 12 attacks daily; he 
became maniacal, and one university hos- 
pital demanded his discharge. When he was 
transferred to another university hospital, 
his study had to be carried out on the locked 
wards. Another patient, who had 8 to 10 


| 

No. | 
} 13 
| 4 
58.3% 

4 
| | 
= 

aa 

ag 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


attacks daily, was confused the entire day, 
and could not recall her name, date, birth, 
or the place she lived. 

If one were to reason that 18% of the 
operative group who are free from psycho- 
motor seizures are free because of improved 
medical treatment, the operative success 
would be reduced by only 10%. Thus, 68%, 
instead of 78%, would be free of seizures 
as a result, most likely, of operation. The 
18% has been taken from studies by Me- 
Naughton."! 


Relationship Between Psychiatric 
Disorder and Operative Results 
The majority of patients with psycho- 
motor seizures have mild or severe person- 
(Table 9). When 


ality changes severe 


ure problem is not directly related to the 
severity of personality change. However, 
a study of the case histories of some of the 
patients suggests that if operation had been 
performed earlier the chance for success 
Of 
psychotic patients whose psychoses were 
unclassified, only 60% had a worth-while 
operation, but in some instances remarkable 


would most likely have been greater. 


reversals of personality changes were rated 
as more beneficial to the patient than was 
relief from psychomotor seizures. Five pa- 
tients had schizophrenia, and it is significant 
that, although the operation furnishes use- 
ful value in controlling psychomotor at- 
tacks, there is a poor over-all operative 
result. Of the six cases of manic-depres- 
sive states, all but one has had more than 


TaBLe 9.—Relationship Between Psychiatric Disorder and Operative Result 


No. of 
Patients 


Psychiatric 
Disorder* 


Severe personality 14 


Results of 
Operationt 


7 


Comment 


Satisfactory, 5 | Changes are about even that, other things being equal. 
changes Fair, 4 a satisfactory result will be obtained, with person- 
Poor, 4 ality improvement 
Excellent, } 
| Mild personality 10 Satisfactory, 5 90% of this group had a successful operation ; 
changes Excellent, 4 
Poor, 1 | 
Unclassified psychosis & pees, 3 Only 60% had worth-while operation 
‘air, 2 
Poor, 3 | 
Schizophrenia 5 Satisfactory, 1 | Operation has useful value in controlling psycho-| 
Fair, 1 motor attacks but furnishes poor over-all results | 
Poor, 3 | 
Manic-depressive | 6 | Excellent, 1 | All but one is more than 75% improved since operation. | 
state | | Satisfactory, 4 with marked relief from depression 
| Poor, 1 
| Hallucinations 3 Excellent, 2 | Two have been entirely free from hallucinations and 
Poor, 1 all forms of seizures; 1 is unchanged and is institu- 
| tionalized 
Hysterical 1 Poor Slightly below normal intelligence with no change in| 
| personality seizures or personality 
| Mental retardation 2 Excellent, 1 | Operation provided 1 patient with freedom from 
| Fair, 1 | seizures for 7 yr.; in other case family notes operation) 
worth-while after 3 yr. 


*A patient may be listed under several classifications. For example; 


“Schizophrenia” and “Hallucinations. 


one schizophrenic with hallucinations was listed under 


tExcellent means complete freedom from seizures plus decided favorable change in psychiatric disorder; satisfactory, 75 % improve- 
ment in all seizures and psychiatric disorder; fair, 50% improvement in all seizures and psychiatric disorder; poor, less than 50% 


improvement in all seizures and psychiatric disorder. 


personality changes are present, the chances 
are about even that a seizure-free result 
will be obtained, as well as an improvement 
in personality. When mild personality 
changes are present, there are 9 chances 
out of 10 that the patient will have a suc- 
cessful operation. The duration of the seiz- 


75% improvement since operation, and 
there has been a remarkable relief from 
the depression. Mania and its allied reac- 
Halluci- 


nations were present in three patients, and 


tions are also easily controlled. 


two of these have been entirely free from 


hallucinations and all forms of seizures 


489 


|| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


since operation. However, one patient has 
had no effect on his seizure problem and 
remains institutionalized, with chronic 
hallucinations. This patient had a bilateral 
temporal lobectomy, which included bilateral 
removal of the amygdaloid nucleus. One 
patient with a hysterical personality had a 
poor operative result, with no change in 
seizures or personality. Two mentally re- 
tarded patients came to operation. One of 
these patients presents the oldest postopera- 
tive result (nine years) and has been en- 
tirely free from seizures. The family is 
well pleased with the operative result, and 
they constantly write me of their gratitude. 
The other patient has only a fair result, is 
disabled, and is economically dependent 
(Table 9). 

Many abnormal psychiatric and social 
factors were improved after operation. 
These have been tabulated in Table 10. The 
most marked improvement was noted in 
mood, independence, tolerance of people, de- 
pression, increased interest in job, irritabil- 
activity, and social contact. 


ity, worry, 


Initiative, behavior, and memory were im- 
proved in three-fourths of the patients. It 
was interesting that judgment, evaluation, 
perception, insight, and calculation, al- 
though improved in a high percentage of 
patients, were lowest in factors analyzed. 
These latter factors, often referred to as 
functions of the temporal lobe, are noted as 
being least improved. It is therefore clear 
that from this type of change following 
operation patients are more socially accepta- 
ble and have a better chance of increasing 
their job rating. At present all but seven of 
these patients are working and are eco- 
nomically independent (Table 11). 

It is evident that temporal lobectomy, in 
psychomotor epileptics, will remove or sub- 
stantially change cerebral interconnections 
so that the final psychiatric effect is of de- 
cided benefit to the patient. This is also 
a common observation in the well-controlled 
nonoperative patient. One patient who had 
daily feelings of wanting to kill her mother 
has been free of these disturbances since 
operation. Five patients have had no im- 


Patients Given 

Scores 

Before Operation 
By Examiner 


Psychiatrie and Normal 


Social Variations 


Tasie 10.—Relation of Psychiatric and Social Factors and Operative Results 


Patients with | 
75%-95% 
Improvement 
Since Operation 


Percentage Increase 
Toward Normal 
Since Operation 


Mood 4 
Dependence upon others 
Tolerance of others 
Depression 

Interest in job 
Irritability 

Activity 

Worry 

Sociability 

Initiative 

Behavior 

Memory 

Judgment 

Evaluation 

Perception 

Insight 

Calculation 


General appearance 


625 


490 


“| 

| | 

| 

25 

> a4 60) 

4 23 | 875 

21 525 

a 23 460 

385 

19 380 

2 358 

or 

2 337 

2 337 

25 287 

| ) au 240 
| 
163 
9 30 158 

= 


: 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR: EPILEPSY 


Tasie 11.—Status of Patients Four to Nine Years After Unilateral Temporal Lobectomy 
for Psychomotor Seizures 
No. of 
Patients Employed Dependent 
Type of Keeping and at Institutionalized 
Attack House Home 
Males Females Fully Partly } 
Psychomotor seizures only 2 1 1 1 l 
Predominantly psychomotor with 
grand mal seizures Is . 19 i 2 2 2 
Predominantly psychomotor with 
grand mal and petit mal sei- 
zures 4 3 2 2 
Total 24 12 23 2 ) 4 
a6 40 Economically 6 Fully 


independent dependent 


* One patient died four years after operation with eclampsia, two weeks following childbirth. 


provement in personality, and none of this 
group has a successful operation with re- 
spect to eliminating the seizures. Another 
patient, who made four attempts at suicide 
in six preoperative months, has been free 
from seizures, is economically independent, 
married, and has been adjusted for six 
and a half years. 

Memory changes contribute to a_ satis- 
factory postoperative result. One patient, a 
physician’s former secretary, did not recall 
her wedding 16 years previously. Now, six 
years since operation, she is free from 
seizures, has returned to her job, and re- 
calls her wedding and its associated events. 
Seizures were so frequent in another pa- 
tient that his conversation was not intelligi- 
ble and his memory suffered severely. In 
the four postoperative years, seizures have 
been rare, occurring only in sleep; his mem- 
ory is excellent, and he has established an 
electrical service company. 

There are 15 patients who exhibited pro- 
gressive mental deterioration for years be- 
fore operation and in whom there has been 
an arrest of this process since operation. 
For five of this group operation was not 
successful in elimination of seizures. The 
electroencephalogram has improved in each 
of these patients. 


Economic Status of Patients Three to 
Eight Years After Operation 


Many types of analysis are applicable to 
postoperative studies, but the most practical 
analysis is one concerning the economic abil- 
ity of the patient to function in normal 
life and to retain his economic independence 
for a long period. In this group, of 24 
male and 12 female patients, 23 are fully 
employed and 2 are partly employed. Five 
are keeping house, making a total of 30 
patients who are economically independent 
(Table 11). Six patients are fully de- 
pendent, four being institutionalized. The 
completely disabled man with predominantly 
psychomotor seizures and with grand mal 
seizures has proved the one who most likely 
will work and fully support his family 
after operation. The presence of petit mal 
seizures lessens the likelihood of a good 
postoperative work record. All patients are 
living except one. This patient had psycho- 
motor, grand mal, and petit mal seizures and 
a poor postoperative result. She died four 
years after operation, with eclampsia two 
weeks following childbirth. 

One-half of the patients with economic 
independence work as laborers, in clerical 
jobs, or as housewives. One patient, for- 
merly institutionalized for six years, has 


491 


|_| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


been free of seizures for three years, is a 
licensed electrician, has worked regularly 
for five years, and fully supports himself. 
Another patient, a long-term dependent 
upon his family, his self-supporting and 
fully employed as an aircraft architect. One 
patient with a poor result is working at 
a better job because all of his attacks have 
been nocturnal during his five postoperative 
years. 

Freedom from the disabling forms of 
seizures, economic independence, and dis- 
turbing psychiatric complaints offers the 
greatest postoperative benefit in terms of 
practical living. If these factors are con- 
sidered in summation, 66% of the patients 
have successful operative results (Table 12). 


Type of Analysis 
Applied to Group 


Freedom from all types of seizures 
Freedom from psychomotor seizures only 
Freedom from grand ma! seizures only 
Freedom from economic dependence 


Freedom from disturbing psychiatric complaints 


Comment 

The “standard” operation used in this 
series is quite different from that used by 
others.2, The anterior 6.5 cm. of the tip 
of one temporal lobe is routinely removed. 
This includes the first, second, and third 
convolutions; the uncus; the hippocampal 
gyrus, and the amygdaloid nucleus. Empha- 
sis is placed on removal of the last three 
structures. This removal can be made on 
either side without inducing a neurological 
clinical sign or a psychiatric behavorial or 
personality change. At operation electrical 
studies show that the focus resides in an 
area about the uncus, the anterior hippo- 
campus, and the amygdaloid nucleus. Re- 
stricted procedures in the temporal lobe 
when automatism is the major concern has 
been successful in only one of four cases. 

I have selected the method of Penfield and 
Steelman *® (Table 1) to analyze the cases, 
but I have subdivided the classification to 


492 


show that there three 
with psychomotor seizures only, and 
that the majority had predominantly psy- 
chomotor and grand mal attacks. Clinical 
petit mal attacks associated with primary 
bilateral synchronous 3-cps wave-and-spike 
activity is rarely affected by temporal lobec- 
tomy, for the disturbance is probably a pri- 
mary condition of the centrencephalic 
Yet the fact that one patient is 
free from attacks and two others are 75% 
improved or better suggests that the anterior 
temporal areas removed have some influence 
on centrencephalic function. This has been 
well demonstrated by a number of stimula- 
tion experiments.§ 

The presence of epilepsy 


were patients 


system. 


in the family 


Results in 
36 Patients 


41.7% 
58% 


66% of patients had 
successful operations 
when all practical 
factors have been 
totally evaluated 


| 


85.7% 


66.6% 


reduces the likelihood for freedom 
seizures but reduce the chance 
for a worth-while operative result. Genetic 
epileptic influence usually implies a primary 
centrencephalic disorder. When this exists, 
the areas removed must function as an 
entry into the mechanism involved. 


from 


does not 


Pre- 
sumably this takes place largely by way of 
the amygdaloid connections with the brain 
stem. 

Excision of electrographic lesions is not 
a new concept, for this has been emphasized 
repeatedly where there is an associated 
organic lesion.|| However, in the absence 
of organic changes, excisions of electro- 
graphic foci have not been thoroughly 
studied. One-half of the patients had no 
gross pathological changes, and only one 
of this group showed microscopic altera- 
tions. Thus, there were 17 patients who had 


§ References 15, 16, and 17. 
|| References 10 and 11. 


ig 
os TaBLe 12.—Postoperative Results in Terms of Practical Living 

| 
j 

<4 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


excisions based primarily upon electroen- 
this 


group are not appreciably different in re- 


cephalographic evidence. Results in 
gard to the number of seizures. However, 
this group enjoys a slightly better psy- 
chiatric and social status, possibly because 
of the absence of brain damage to other 
parts. All this supports the idea that cer- 
the 
graphic pattern are quite helpful in assigning 
a proper diagnosis to any form of inter- 
It is 
proper to think of focal physiological lesions 


tain alterations in electroencephalo- 


mittent behavorial or seizure state. 


in the same manner as one thinks of focal 
pathological lesions. 

The epigastric aura has had favorable 
Pa- 
tients having some form of epigastric aura 
the 
group. The chance to obtain freedom from 


reclassification in the past 10 years. 


constitute most successful operative 
all types of seizures is increased by 25%. 
Such relationships imply that the epigastric 
aura arises from the anterior temporal area 
and should no longer be a signal to classify 
the attack as “idiopathic.” 

All but six patients have some type of 
aura. In this small group without aurae 
no one is free from seizures, although four 
have a satisfactory result. The differentia- 
tion of a case with automatism due to an 
ictal centrencephalic discharge and one due 
to a cortical discharge probably depends on 
the presence of an aura in the latter case. 
Differentiation can prove very difficult, but 
of attacks 
longed electrical studies will add further 


clinical observation and pro- 


knowledge. One must remember that bi- 
lateral rhythms occur quickly, often with 
little evidence of lateral temporal surface 
It follows, then, that any evi- 


dence of an aura should arouse suspicion 


discharge. 


of a focal, temporal, pathological, or elec- 
trical lesion. 

One that 
charges are capable of operating in the 


may consider electrical dis- 
hippocampus without a discernible alteration 
of neocortical activity. This is clearly ob- 


{ References 2 and 19. 


served in animals,# and I believe I have 
observed it in man. It is conceivable that 
frequent discharges of this kind may alter 
the patient’s ability to form permanent mem- 
ory mechanisms. In other words, there are 
many subclinical seizures 
which produce a profound accumulative ad- 


psychomotor 


verse effect on memory. If so, removal of 
this structure could improve memory 
mechanisms. This may explain the favor- 
able alterations in memory following an 
excellent operative result. 

That psychomotor fits can occur in the 
absence of the uncus, hippocampus, and 
amygdaloid nucleus is evidenced by four 
Penfield 
has also demonstrated this in a patient who 
had these structures removed for attacks of 
automatism without relief from attacks. 
Four years later removal of the remaining 
hippocampal gyrus, insular cortex, and all 
of the auditory cortex resulted in a relief 
of automatism.'' Automatism also con- 
tinued in one patient after bilateral temporal 
lobectomy. 


unsuccessful cases in this series. 


Severe personality, mental, and transient 
psychotic states are common in patients hav-: 
ing uncontrolled psychomotor seizures. This 
state is favorably altered by temporal lobec- 
tomy. The favorable response is sometimes 
of more practical advantage than freedom 
from psychomotor seizures. This accounts 
for the higher rating by the patient and 
the family than by the surgeon. There is 
no difference in the outcome in the presence 
or in the absence of a pathological lesion. 
I have not observed a postoperative com- 
plication of behavior, mental, or personality 
state, except three in which it 
was due to phenacemide and in one case in 
which an acute paranoid condition was re- 
activated. 


in cases 


Automatism may occur, without con- 
vulsive attack, from a discharge of the 
“centrencephalic” system. In this case 4- 
to 6-cps, bilaterally synchronous rhythms 
can be recorded. I have excluded all such 


cases from operation. Practically all cases 


# References 15 and 16. 


493 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


with automatism will show (a) bilaterally 
synchronous 3-cps wave-and-spike activity; 
(b) anterior temporal spike, sharp wave, 
or slow wave, and (c) bilaterally syn- 
chronous 4- to 6-cps waves. It would seem 
that there are several ganglionic mechanisms 
to explain automatism. 

It is evident that the anterior temporal 
region in psychomotor epileptics is con- 
cerned with mood, depressive reaction, in- 
terest, memory, sociability, initiative, be- 
havior, judgment, insight, and other factors, 
for these factors are greatly changed by 
operation (Table 5). However, this con- 
clusion is not a totally valid one, for free- 
dom from seizure produces an influential 
state on general well-being. 

The psychomotor state, or automatism, is 
truly a seizure. It is not akin to the “auto- 
matism” which follows convulsive seizures, 
since the former occurs at a higher organiza- 
tional level. The latter is akin to 
confusion. Hughlings Jackson’s doctor with 
psychomotor seizures did solve complicated 
problems during the seizure,’* but I do not 
believe he could have done it during the 
“automatism” which follows a convulsive 


more 


seizure. 
The psychomotor seizure of focal tem- 


poral origin can easily be recognized in most 
cases by the presence of an aura plus some 
of the common behavioral findings listed in 
Table 13. Amnesia is an essential com- 
ponent, but the duration is of less impor- 
tance. 

It is reasonable that focal seizures should 
become a problem of the neurosurgeon, for, 
as McNaughton has pointed out, they con- 
stitute the poorest results from medical 
therapy.’? This is truest of the focal tem- 
poral group. In 18% there were one or 
more attacks per week, while in only an- 
other 18% no attacks or rare small attacks 
in one year. 

Many bilaterally synchronous rhythms 
disappear after temporal lobectomy, indi- 
cating the ability of the temporal lobe to 
activate the centrencephalic system or to 
function as an integral anatomic part of 
this system. Thus, many patients with bi- 
lateral synchronous seizure discharges, for- 
merly rejected from operation, may 
actually be good candidates. Bilateral lo- 
bectomy may be beneficial to selected bi- 
temporal seizure problems, The only true 
electroencephalographic pattern of “idio- 
pathic” epilepsy is the spike and dome of 
petit mal epilepsy. All other bilateral syn- 


Taste 13.—Behavioral Findings Associated with Psychomotor Seizures 


Behavioral Findings 


Behavioral Findings 


Incoordination 

Confusion 

Staring 

Negativism 

Searching 

Swallowing 

Confused talking 

Does not answer 

Fumbling with environment 
Groping 

Smacking lips 

Chewing 

Walks without incoordination 
Undressing 

Shouting 


Screaming 
Running 
Pushing 
Rubbing 
Laughing 
Plucking 


Rage 

Appearance of daydreaming 
Crying 

Throwing objects 

Spitting 

Singing 

Whistled in church 

Stealing 


494 


b 
i No. of } Times 
| Times | 
— | 
4 | 7 
q 
| 6 
| | 
| | | 5 | 
| 18 
4 
17 | 
| } 4 | 
7 | | 
17 | 
4 
| | 3 
2 
q | 12 | 
| ll | 
1 
10 | | 
| 1 
4 


chronous rhythms should be suspected of 
arising from unilateral focal regions. De- 
pendence upon the pneumoencephalogram 
and arteriogram to demonstrate an organic 
change in structure must be abandoned, for 
only 36% showed changes in either of these 
studies that lateralized the lesion. All of us 
are familiar with unbelievably large in- 
tracranial masses without pneumoencephalo- 
graphic or arteriographic changes. 

One must not assign all importance to 
freedom from seizures. Psychiatric and 
social disturbances were so often improved 
that the patient and his family would rate 
the success of the operation higher than 
the surgeon’s independent rating. This im- 
provement makes for easier acceptance into 
society the rating. 
Schizophrenics with psychomotor seizures 


and increases job 
do not make good candidates for operation. 
Although the seizures may be controlled, the 
lack of change in schizophrenic behavior 
minimizes the favorable effects on the num- 
ber of seizures. Hallucinations have been 
eliminated by unilateral temporal lobectomy 
in nonpsychotic patients who have psycho- 
motor seizures. However, one schizophrenic 
patient and 
hallucinations is unchanged after bilateral 
temporal lobectomy (including removal of 
both amygdaloid nuclei). This observation 
would suggest that the mechanism of 
hallucinations is different in psychomotor 
epilepsy and in psychosis. 

The economic status of a previously 
long-term dependent group of patients is of 
practical importance. The economically de- 
pendent person who after operation attains 
his economic independence also attains ad- 
ded psychiatric and social advantages. One 
advantage kindles another, so that favorable 
adjustment to life situations of stress is 
found. At the time of writing, 30 of 36 
patients have economic independence. 


with psychomotor seizures 


Summary 


A completely disabled patient with med- 
ically uncontrolled psychomotor seizures 


who shows a consistent unilateral electrical 


TEMPORAL LOBECTOMY—PSYCHOMOTOR EPILEPSY 


focus in the anterior temporal region has 
a 41% chance of being free from all sei- 
zures for five years after temporal lobec- 
tomy. There is a 78% chance of being free 
from psychomotor seizures, a 58% chance 
of being free from grand mal seizures only, 
a 66% chance of attaining freedom from 
disturbing psychiatric complaints, and an 
86% chance of gaining economic independ- 
ence, In summation, two of three patients 
will gain a successful operation when all 
practical factors have been totally evaluated. 
This compares favorably with results in 
many other neurosurgical procedures em- 
ployed today. These deductions are based on 
the results in 36 patients who have been 
followed for an average of five years since 
one anterior temporal lobe was removed. 
It is essential that the removal include not 
only the temporal tip but also the uncus, 
the hippocampal gyrus, and the amygdaloid 
nucleus. 


REFERENCES 


1. Morris, A. A.: The Surgical Treatment of 
Psychomotor Epilepsy, M. Ann. District of 
Columbia 19 :121-131, 1950. 

2. Bailey, P., and Gibbs, F. A.: The Surgical 
Treatment of Psychomotor Epilepsy. J. A.M. A. 
145 :365-370, 1951. 

3. Green, R., Jr.; Duisberg, R. E. H., and 
McGrath, W. B.: Focal Epilepsy of Psychomotor 
Type: A Preliminary Report of Observations on 
Effects of Surgical Therapy, J. Neurosurg. 8:157- 
172, 1951. 

4. Bailey, P.; Green, J. R.; Amador, L., and 
Gibbs, F. A.: Treatment of Psychomotor States 
by Anterior Temporal Lobectomy, A. Res. Nerv. 
& Ment. Dis. Proc. (1951) 31:341-346, 1953. 

5. Obrador, S.: Personal Experiences in Surg- 
ical Treatment of Epilepsy, J. Neurosurg. 10 :52-63, 
1953. 

6. Guillaume, J.; Mazars, G., and Mazars, Y.: 
Surgical Indications in So-Called Temporal Epi- 
lepsy, Rev. neurol. 88 :461-501, 1953. 

7. Petit-Dutaillis, D.; Christophe, J.; Pertuiset, 
B., and Dreyfus-Brisac, C.: Semaine hop. Paris 
29 :3838-3847 (Dec. 2) 1953. 

8. Bailey, P.: Observations on Surgical Treat- 
ment of Psychomotor Epilepsy, Zentralbl. 
Neurochir. 14:195-206, 1954. 

9. Penfield, W., and Steelman, H.: The Treat- 
ment of Focal Epilepsy by Cortical Excision, 
Ann. Surg. 126:740-762, 1947, 

10. Penfield, W., and Erickson, T.: Epilepsy 


495 


A.M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


and Cerebral Localization, Springfield,  IIl., 
Charles C Thomas, Publisher, 1941. 

11. Penfield, W., and Jasper, H.: Epilepsy and 
the Functional Anatomy of the Human 
Boston, Little, Brown & Company, 1954. 

12. Penfield, W., and Baldwin, M.: Temporal 
Lobe Seizures and the Technique of Subtotal 
Temporal Lobectomy, 136 :625-634, 
1952. 

13. Gibbs, E. L.; Gibbs, F. A., and Fuster, B.: 
Psychomotor Epilepsy, Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 
60 :331-339, 1948. 

14. Pope, A.; Morris, A. A.; Jasper, H.; Elliott, 
K. A. C, and Penfield, W.: Histochemical and 
Action Potential Studies on Epileptogenic Areas 
of Cerebral Cortex in Man and the Monkey, A. 
Res. Nerv. & Ment. Dis. 26:218-233, 1946 

15. MacLean, P.: The Limbic System and Its 
Hippocampal Formation, J. Neurosurg. 11 :29-44, 


1954. 


Brain, 


Ann. Surg. 


16. Kaada, B. R.: Somato-Motor, Autonomic 
and Electrocorticographic Responses to Electrical 
Stimulation of Rhinencephalic and Other Struc- 
tures in Primates, Cat and Dog, Acta. physiol. 
scandinav. (Supp. 83) 24:1, 1951. 

17. Jackson, I. H.: Selected Writings of John 
Hughlings Jackson: 1. Epilepsy and Epileptiform 
Convulsions, edited by J. Taylor, London, Hodder 
& Stoughton, 1931. 

18. Jasper, H. H.; Ajmone-Marsan, C., and 
Stoll, J., Corticofugal Projections to the Brain 
Stem, A. M.A. Arch. Neurol & Psychiat. 67 :155- 
166, 1952. 

19. Gastaut, H.: The Epilepsies, American Lec- 
ture Series, Springfield, Ill, Charles C Thomas, 
Publisher, 1954. 

20. Gibbs, F. A.; Gibbs, E., and Fuster, B.: 
Anterior Temporal Localization of Sleep-Induced 
Seizure 
Am. 


Discharges of 
Neurol. A. 


Psychomotor 
72:181-182, 1947. 


Type, Tr. 


q 
| 
1 
ig 
; 
a 
496 
‘Re 


= 


Al lergic P. urpura 


L. M. SANGHVI, M.R.C.P. (London), 
D.T.M.H. (England) 
an 
R 


d 
. SHARMA, M.D., Jaipur, India 


That the Guillain-Barré syndrome may, 
at least in some instances, be a manifesta- 
tion of hypersensitivity has been suggested 
by several writers.* this 
syndrome and other clinical manifestations 


Association of 


of hypersensitivity has been reported in 
cases following administration of serum and 
typhoid-paratyphoid (T.A.B.) vaccine.+ The 
case to be described exhibited nonthrombo- 
cytopenic purpura, arthritis, and edema in 
following 
upon a streptococcal skin infection. To our 
knowledge it appears to be the first instance 
of this nature. 


association with the syndrome 


Report of a Case 


A married, well-built, well-nourished housewife, 
aged 41, was admitted to the hospital on Nov. 7, 
1955, with complaints of shooting pains in all four 
limbs and marked weakness, pain in the joints, 
edema of the face and arms, and extensive sub- 
cutaneous hemorrhages. The illness had started on 
Oct. 5, 1955, with slight swelling and pain in the 
joints and puffiness of the face and arms. A week 
later pain developed in the muscles of the upper 
limbs, with marked weakness. By Oct. 16 the lower 
limbs were also involved. On Nov. 1 she had severe 
shooting pains in the limbs, which she described as 
electric currents. Owing to increase in muscular 
weakness, she could not move her limbs at all and 
became confined to bed. On Nov. 3 she noticed red 
areas of varying size under the skin. These soon 
became extensive and covered the limbs. 

She gave a history of having had an urticarial 
eruption for three days five years previously and 


Recorded for publication April 6, 1956. 
Department of Medicine, S.M.S. Medical Col- 
lege. 
* References 2, 9, 12-14, 16. 
+ References 8, 9, 13. 


of similar attacks off and on for six months two 
years before admission. During the preceding year, 
off and on, she had had pustular eruption on the 
left leg. She denied having had any injection of 
serum or vaccine or blood transfusion. 

On admission the patient looked very ill, and 
was in agony due to the severity of pain in the 
limbs. She was apprehensive and afraid of the 
slightest movement or touch, which was extremely 
painful. The temperature was normal, the pulse 
120 and respirations 20 per minute, and the blood 
pressure 150/100 mm. Hg. There was some puffi- 
ness of the face and slight edema of the arms, as 
well as swelling of the ankle, knee, and wrist 
Extensive ecchymoses and purpuric spots 
practically covered the limbs, and a few pustules 
were present on the left leg. Neurological exam- 
ination revealed normal intelligence, speech, cerebral 
functions, and cranial nerves. There were flaccid 
paralysis of all muscles of the extremities, most 
marked distally; slight wasting of the forearm, 
hand, and leg muscles, and marked muscular ten- 
derness. The biceps, triceps, knee, and ankle jerks 
were absent, and the abdominal reflexes and plantar 
responses were normal. There were marked hyper- 
esthesia of the skin of the soles and impairment of 
superficial sensations and vibration sense below the 
middle of the thighs and arms. The optic discs 
were slightly congested. 


joints. 


Laboratory examination showed a total leucocyte 
count of 29,000 per cubic millimeter, with 80% 
polymorphonuclear cells and 20% lymphocytes; red 
cells 4,500,000 per cubic millimeter; hemoglobin 
14.5 gm. per 100 cc.; a negative Kahn test; normal 
platelet count and bleeding and clotting times, and 
an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 68 mm. in one 
hour. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a 
protein content of 180 mg. per 100 cc. on Nov. 8, 
of 130 mg. on Dec. 1, and of 100 mg. on Dec. 12, 
with normal cell counts. The total leucocyte count 
gradually decreased to 26,000 on Nov. 11, to 18,200 
on Nov. 18, and to 9,200 on Dec. 29. The E.S.R. 
on Dec. 29, was 15 mm. in one hour. Smear from 
a pustule showed streptococci. 

Therapy consisted of penicillin, thiamine and 
ascorbic acid, acetylsalicylic acid, antihistaminics, 
and, later, physical therapy and cyanocobalamin 


(vitamin B,,). Ten days after admission the shoot- 


497 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


ing pains had ceased. There was gradual, though 
very slow, improvement in muscle power, and by 
Dec. 15 she could walk with support. She was then 
given prednisolone (Deltacortril) 20 mg. orally 
daily for three weeks beginning Dec. 24, without 
any apparent hastening of the recovery. At the 
time of discharge from the hospital, on Jan. 30, 
there was only slight residual weakness. The hemor- 
rhages were gradually absorbed. 


Comment 

The Guillain-Barré syndrome, of poly- 
radiculoneuritis with albuminocytological 
dissociation, has been known to follow a 
variety of infections, bacterial and viral, but 
all attempts to identify an etiologic infec- 
tious agent have proved unsuccessful.* The 
syndrome has sometimes followed paren- 
teral introduction of foreign proteins into 
the body after immunization procedures or 
blood transfusion. It has been reported to 
follow successive normal parturitions.™ 
Search for a pathogenic factor in these 
cases suggests an allergic antigen-antibody 
reaction as the common denominator. There 
are grounds for this allergic theory, though 
they cannot be considered conclusive. The 
uniform latent period following infections 
and inoculations is not inconsistent with the 
period required for the development of a 
hypersensitivity state. Occurrence of the 


syndrome after serum sickness also suggests 
relationship to such a state. The outstand- 
ing histopathological changes in autopsied 
cases of the Guillain-Barré syndrome are 
pronounced swelling and edema of the nerve 
fibers.1° 


Edema of various tissues is com- 
mon in serum disease. It is now generally 
agreed that this edematous response, in this 
syndrome and other neurological complica- 
tions developing after serum administration, 
may represent an allergic response of the 
central nervous system similar to the edem- 
atous reactions in the skin. Since skin 
and nerve tissue are both ectodermal in 
origin, they might be expected to react 
similarly. Miller and Stanton,® reviewing 
the literature concerning the neurological 
complications of serum injection and pro- 
phylactic inoculation, suggested that the 
common factor in the pathogenesis of 


498 


the encephalitic, myelitic, Landry, Guil- 
lain-Barré, radicular, polyneuritic, and 
mononeuritic syndromes was anaphylactic 
hypersensitivity. Sanghvi and Gupta '* sug- 
gested that all neurological syndromes of 
hypersensitivity be grouped together under 
a common title of “disseminated hypersensi- 
tization neuropathy.” Finally, the concept 
of allergy has led to the trial of corticotro- 
pin and cortisone in the treatment of the 
Guillain-Barré syndrome, and experience so 
far indicates that they are of value in 
reversing the course of illness in many 
cases,t thereby providing therapeutic sup- 
port for this concept. 

Reitman,” in a review of literature, could 
find only two cases, in addition to one of his 
own, which fulfilled the criteria of the 
Guillain-Barré syndrome and which were 
associated with manifestations of serum 
sickness. Miller and Stanton,® in their re- 
view of cases following typhoid-paratyphoid 
vaccine inoculation, mention that a local 
reaction at the site of injection is common, 
whereas a generalized urticaria appears to 
be rare. Association of allergic manifesta- 
tions and the syndrome after bacterial in- 
fection does not appear to have been 
reported. The case reported here, with signs 
and symptoms of polyradiculoneuritis and 
albuminocytological dissociation, be 
classified as fulfilling the criteria of the 
Guillain-Barré syndrome and illustrates the 
occurrence of the syndrome in association 
with purpura of Schénlein’s type, following 
upon streptococcal skin infection. This type 
of purpura accompanied by a normal plate- 
let count has been attributed to specific 
allergens.§ 

This association of allergy-like manifesta- 
tions with Guillain-Barré syndrome provides 
support for the theory that an antigen-anti- 
body reaction is the chief mechanism under- 
lying the Guillain-Barré syndrome. 


Summary 
Association of purpura with the Guillain- 
Barré syndrome is reported. This associa- 
t References 1, 4, 5, 10, 11, 16, 17. 
§ References 3 and 7. 


| 
4 
a 
4 
Wa 


ALLERGIC PURPURA IN GUILLAIN-BARRE SYNDROME 


tion supports the theory that an allergic 
reaction is the underlying pathogenic factor 
of the Guillain-Barré syndrome. ~ 

Dr. L. R. Sarin, Superintendent, S. M. S. Hos- 
pital, permitted the publication of this case. 


REFERENCES 
1. Blood, A.; Locke, W., and Carabasi, R.: 


Guillain-Barré Syndrome Treated with Corticotro- 
phin (ACTH), J.A.M.A. 152:139-140 (May 9) 
1953. 

2. Brain, W. R.: Diseases of Nervous System, 
Ed. 3, New York, Oxford University Press, 1947, 
pp. 795-798 

3. Clement, D. H., and Diamond, L. K.: Purpura 
in Infants and Children: Its Natural History, 
A.M. A. Am. J. Dis. Child. 85:259-278 (March) 
1953. 

4. Crozier, R. E., and Ainley, A. B.: Guillain- 
Barré Syndrome, New England J. Med. 252 :83-88 
(Jan. 20) 1955. 

5. Fiese, M. J.; Cheu, S., and Radding, J.: 
Guillain-Barré Syndrome in Infectious Mononucle- 
osis: Report of a Case with Recovery Following 
Administration of Cortisone, A. M.A. Arch. Int. 
Med. 92 :438-441 (Sept.) 1953. 

6. Haymaker, W., and Kernohan, J. W.: 
Landry-Guillain-Barré Syndrome : Clinicopatholog- 
ical Report of 50 Fatal Cases and a Critique of the 
Literature, Medicine 28:59-141 (Feb.) 1949. 


7. Gairdner, D.: The Schonlein-Henoch Syn- 
drome (Anaphylactoid Purpura), Quart. J. Med. 
17 :95-122 (April) 1948. 

8. Kamman, G. R., and Weisberg, M.: Poly- 


neuritis with Facial Diplegia (Neuronitis) Follow- 
ing Serum Sickness in Adult, Minnesota Med. 23: 
789-791 (Nov.) 1940. 

9. Miller, H. J., and Stanton, J. B.: Neuro- 
logical Sequelae of Prophylactic Inoculation, Quart. 
J. Med. 23:1-27 (Jan.) 1954. 

10. Newey, J. A., and Lubin, R. I.: Corticotropin 
(ACTH) Therapy in Guillain-Barré Syndrome, 
J. A.M. A. 152:137-139 (May 9) 1953. 

11. Plum, F.: 


Multiple Symmetrical Poly- 
neuropathy Treated with Cortisone, Neurology 
3 :661-667 (Sept.) 1953. 

12. Pullen, R. L., and Sodeman, W. A.: Infec- 


tions Polyneuritis (Guillain-Barré Syndrome), Am. 
J. M. Se. 211:110-122 (Jan.) 1946. 

13. Reitman, N., and Rothschild, K.: Non- 
Infectious Nature of Guillain-Barré Syndrome with 
Possible Explanation of Albumino-Cytologic Dis- 
sociation, Ann. Int. Med. 32:923-934 (May) 1950. 

14. Sanghvi, L. M., and Gupta, K. D.: Dissemi- 
nated Hypersensitisation Neuropathy, Indian M. 
Gaz. 89 :484-491 (Aug.) 1954. 

15. Scheinker, I. M.: Pathology and Patho- 
genesis of Infectious Polyneuritis (Guillain-Barré 
Syndrome), J. Neuropath. & Exper. Neurol. 8 :184- 
193 (April) 1949. 

16. Seltzer, H. S.; Lichty, D. E., and Conn, J. 
W.: Case of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (Infectious 
Polyneuritis) with Apparent Response to ACTH, 
Univ. Michigan M. Bull. 18:27-31 (Jan.) 1952. 

17. Stillman, J. S., and Ganong, W. F.: Guillain- 
Barré Syndrome: Report of a Case Treated with 
ACTH and Cortisone, New England J. Med. 246: 
293-296 (Feb. 21) 1952. 


499 


oN 
‘ 


Effects of Chlorpromazine on 


A Controlled Study 


HARRY FREEMAN, M.D. 
and 


HERBERT S. CLINE, M.D., Worcester, Mass. 


There have been numerous articles attest- 
ing to the therapeutic efficiency of chlorpro- 
mazine in psychoses. There has also been 
a notable dearth of controlled studies utiliz- 
ing placeboes to evaluate the role of the 
enthusiasm of the psychiatrist, the ward per- 
sonnel, and the patients themselves. A 
search of the literature has noted only two, 
those of Gardner, Hawkins, Judah, and 
Murphree? and of Kovitz, Carter, and 
Addison,” both dealing with chronic schizo- 
phrenic patients. 

The present study is of the double-blind 
variety, in which the effects of chlorproma- 
zine and placeboes on two matched groups 
of chronic schizophrenic patients 
noted. It was not intended, primarily, as a 
therapeutic investigation but was organized 
to determine the threshold dose of the drug 
which would produce an effect distinguish- 
able from that obtained on administering 
placeboes. 


were 


Method and Material 


The technique used in evaluating the status of 
the patients was as follows: After an interview, 
a modification of the Malamud-Sands Rating 
Scale*—15 items—was scored to determine the 
effects upon various phases of the clinical picture. 
This scale is shown in Table 1. The deviation 
from the normal in each item is rated on a six- 
point scale onseither side of the base line and a 
total score obtained by the addition of the numbers 


Received for publication Jan. 9, 1955. 
Dementia Praecox Research Project, Depart- 
ment of Mental Health, Worcester State Hospital. 


500 


for each item. The first seven items can be ob- 
served directly, and the next eight can be deter- 
mined from the responses during the interview. 
In a general way, the gradations on the left repre- 
sent those attitudes which are directed away from 
the subject, and those on the right indicate inter- 
nally directed forms of behavior. The higher the 
score, the more abnormal is the clinical status of 
the subject. The chief value of the rating is that 
it represents an attempt to quantify changes in the 
various elements in the behavior of the patients 
over the period of the study. 

The subjects of the investigation were chronically 
disturbed schizophrenic patients on whom lobo- 
tomies had been performed after failure of all 
previous therapies. There were 20 male patients, 
divided into two groups and matched primarily 
onthe basis of means of the rating scores and 
secondarily on the basis of age, duration of hos- 
pitalization, and years since lobotomy. One group 
was given placebos and the other group chlorproma- 
zine, but the identity of the medication was un- 
known to the psychiatrist doing the ratings (H. S. 
C.), the ward personnel, and the patients. The 
medication was given solely by mouth and twice 
daily, in individual envelopes, so that the identity 
and the dosage of the tablets was known only to 
one of us (H. F.). The placebos, of course, had 
an appearance identical with that of the drug 


Results 


The results of the study are shown in Fig- 
ure 1. Here are depicted the mean scores 
for the placebo and chlorpromazine groups 
in successive weeks. The chlorpromazine 
was administered in a dosage noted at the 
bottom of the Figure, 200 mg. daily for the 
first four weeks, 400 mg. daily for the next 
two weeks, 600 mg. daily for the next two 
weeks, 800 mg. daily for the next three 
weeks, and then placeboes for the next four 
weeks. 

The mean scores show a sudden drop in 
the first week of treatment, then a variable 


q 
q 
: 
; 


sseussetd aq 
Joapminy 


IQnop aarssasqa 


SHOP 


oneyied y 
ILA 


Pesseudap A[deaq 


any 


snoiodnis 


smefqoid 

Buy syxeuou 

aupiyds 


AATSSASGO 


SUOISIAA TO.) AH 
1d 
quapuodsed 

sul yoo 

Apnug 


jo 


MOP 
“IPS 


ayenbepeul 


Sul 


as0qqnis 


| 
| 


snouasoxe mafqoid 
jo Jo Alqeqoid JO BAAN 
sassovoid 
suOT 
aapjonpoid 
yoeeds-jo-ysnd yov0edg 
suo}oRel 
juepuedad atqnisedang Ayajsuodsay 
uojsseidxa 
B1000(] 941871 sounsvedd y 


| | 
| 
| | | | 
| 
| 
| 
—- 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Taste 2.—Means and Ranges of Variables Used 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


in Matching Patients in Placebo * and 


Chiorpromazine * Groups 


| 


Placebo 


| Chlorpromazine 


| 
| 


Chronological age 


Mean 


36.3 


Range 


Mean 


Range 


| 

| Years in hospital 

| Years postiobotomy 


| Pretreatment rating 
score 


* Ten patients each. 
degree of fluctuation over the next seven 
weeks, but no consistent change. It was for 
this reason that the dosage was varied. It 
was not until the dosage had been increased 
to 800 mg. daily that the chlorpromazine 
group showed a decrease in its mean score. 
This was noted within a week and continued 
to drop irregularly in the next two weeks. 
It is evident, then, that for this group of 
patients the threshold dosage lay between 
600-800 mg. daily. At the end of three 
weeks of medication at this level of dosage, 
the patients who were taking chlorproma- 
zine were given placeboes. For three weeks 
there was no essential change in the mean 
score, but during the fourth week the score 


rose again above the level noted preceding 
the 800 mg. dosage period. It is apparent 
that the “tranquilizing” effect of the drug 
lasts between three and four weeks after 
the medication is omitted. 

There are several points of interest in this 
trend which may be described in more de- 
tail. Initially, the chlorpromazine group had 
a slightly, but not significantly, higher score 
than the placebo group. This was due pri- 
marily to the fact that the ratings for ‘ 
“affect,” 

(delusions ) 
were higher. During the first week of the 
study the scores dropped in both groups, but 


‘mo- 


tor activity,” “appearance,” and 


‘subjective reorganization” 


in the chlorpromazine-treated patients there 
was a greater fall in these same items, so 
that the mean scores for the first week of 
medication were the same. The decrease in 
scoring may be primarily due to the enthu- 
siastic hopefulness of both the psychiatric 
personnel and the patients at the onset of a 
new therapeutic study, so that the patient- 
doctor rapport was increased and the abnor- 
mal phenomena either seemed not so 
abnormal or were less obviously displayed. 
Certainly, the per subject 


gross scores 


35 


RATING SCORES 


a 


zoo , l 


CHLORPROMAZINE 800 
(MG.) 4 COO 


@—e@PLACEBO GROUP 
@ -®CHLORPROMAZINE GROUP 


WEEKS OF MEDICATION 


| 

mm 2349 384 30-57 

7 75 1-16 8.2 1-13 
| 34.0 27-48 | 

a 
\ 

30 \ 

\ 

\ 

A \ 
4 
\ 
= \ 
a 
a 
| 
~ 

10 
502 


CONTROLLED STUDY OF CHLORPROMAZINE 


showed a lessening in 9 of the 10 patients 
in each group, indicating a universality of 
operating factors. 

Following the initial drop in scores there 
is a secondary rise which reaches its maxi- 
mum in the fourth week of the study and 
which is more marked in the placebo-treated 
group. This increase was present in six of 
the nine patients in each group. The other 
patients in each group showed a decrease. 
The distribution of trends for each group 
was the same, but one of the chlorproma- 
zine-treated patients (on a dosage of 200 
mg. daily) showed such a marked decrease 
in scores as almost to offset the increases in 
the six. 

The reason for the increase in scoring is 
obscure. The patients were living on three 
different wards, an equal number from each 
group on each ward. It would, therefore, be 
unlikely that some factor common to the 
hospital environment would affect patients 
on different wards. It is also difficult to pre- 
sume that an endogenous variability would 
affect 12 out of the total group of patients 
simultaneously. It would seem more likely 
that the variable factor may be the judgment 
of the psychiatrist. 


At 
for each group was essentially the same 
from the first to the eighth week of medica- 
tion, so that we may conclude that the 


any rate, the general level of scores 


dosage of chlorpromazine up to this point 
was not sufficient to affect the group as a 
whole. At a dosage of 800 mg. of chlorpro- 
the 
differentiate. 


mazine, values for the two groups 


The data have been analyzed to determine 
the significance of the difference between 


the the 


variation observed previously and achieve a 


two trends. In order to include 
more reliable base line, for each subject the 
sum of the scores obtained during the three 
weeks before the 800 mg. daily dosage was 
introduced (weeks 6 to 8) was compared 
with the sum of the scores obtained during 
the three weeks on the 800 mg. daily dosage. 
The difference between the two sums was 
computed for each subject. The values are 
3. For the placebo-treated 
group the median value for the three pre- 


seen in Table 


800-mg. weeks was 76.5; for the chlorpro- 
There 


statistically significant difference between 


mazine-treated group, 71.0. is no 


TABLE 3.—Sums of Scores in Placebo-Treated and Chlorpromazine-Treated Groups 
for the Three Weeks Before the 800 Mg. Daily Dosage Was Begun and 
Differences Between These Sums and Those Obtained During 


the Three VW 


Placebo Group 


‘eeks at a Daily Dosage of 800 mg. 


| 


Chlorpromazine Group 


| 


Difference in 


Sum of Scores Sums of Scores 


Subject No. | Before 800 Mg. | Under 800 Me. 

Dosage Dosage* 
1 83 —13 
2 37 
3 cs — 6 
4 107 -1 
} 5 43 0 
| 6 78 + 2 
7 75 +8 
89 +8 
| 9 97 +19 
10 68 +21 

Median 76.5 


Difference in 


Sum of Scores Sums of Scores 


1 0 
2 87 0 
3 P40) +8 
4 87 +18 
5 +2 
+20 
7 38 +23 
8 73 +25 
9 70 +34 
10 76 +40 


* Plus signs indieate improvement in score. 


t Difference between corresponding values for chlorpromazine and placebo groups is statistically Zsignificant. 


Mann-Whitney U-test.‘ 


P=0.02 by 


503 


| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


the two figures. The median difference * 
between these values and the sum of the 
scores obtained in the 800 mg. daily dose 
period was +1 for the placebo group and 
+20.0 for the chlorpromazine group. The 
differences between these values is statis- 
tically significant, the probability being 0.02. 
This difference between the two groups ot 
patients is not affected by the initially higher 
values for the placebo-treated group be- 
cause (a) there was no significant difference 
between the pre-800-mg. dose values in the 
two groups; (b) there was no relationship 
between the initial levels and the shift in 
values during the 800 mg. daily dose period. 
It should be noted at this point that this 
statistical technique is conservative, since 
it takes into account the trend before the 
medication has achieved its maximum effect 
at the end of the three-week peeriod of 
medication at the 800 mg. dose. 

As the medication, at what we consider an 
adequate dosage, was given for only a short 
period of time, a therapeutic judgment 
would not be very valid but is given for 
what it is worth. On the basis of the rating 
scale, in the placebo group, seven showed 
no improvement and three showed a mild 
Of the chlorpro- 
mazine group, five showed a mild improve- 
ment and five showed a moderate degree of 
improvement, the latter referring purely to 
better hospital adjustment. One patient in 
each group was in seclusion throughout the 
whole study, and each showed a similar de- 
gree of mild improvement. In view of the 
similarity of numbers in each group show- 
ing a slight change, it should probably be 
considered that this level of improvement in 
drug-treated patients should be attributed to 
the altered environmental situation. 

Four of the chlorpromazine-treated group 


degree of improvement. 


showed an improvement in their scores be- 
fore the 800 mg. daily dosage level was 
reached. Two had shown a mild improve- 
ment, one at the 400 mg. dosage level and 


one at the 600 mg. dosage level, with no 


* Positive changes indicate improvement in the 
score. 


504 


further improvement at the larger dosage 
levels. Two had shown a moderate degree 
of improvement, one at 200 mg., with no 
further improvement, and one at 400 mg., 
with further improvement at the 800 mg. 
dose. 

In order to determine what elements of 
the rating scale changed during this period 
of maximum dosage, we have used the same 
technique as that for the individual total 
scores, namely, to add the scores for each 
item before the 800 mg. dosage was insti- 
tuted and compare it with the ratings during 
the three weeks this dosage level was main- 
The results are shown in Table 4. 

In the placebo-treated group, none of the 
changes were significantly different from 
one another, indicating a completely random 
variation. For the chlorpromazine-treated 
group, there were eight items that showed 
significant trends from their base line in 
the direction of 


tained. 


improvement (positive 
changes )—mimetic expression, responsivity, 
hostility reactions, socialization, speech, 
feeling, perception, and thought processes. 
However, if the variation in the placebo 
group is taken into consideration, significant 
differences are found in only four—respon- 
sivity, socialization, perception, and thought 
processes. Again, it should be noted that this 
technique is conservative in that it takes into 
account the improvement before the maxi- 
mum has been reached, thus diminishing the 
magnitude of the trends. At any rate, it is 
encouraging that in these chronic, loboto- 
mized schizophrenic patients there is im- 
provement not 


only interpersonal 


relationships (as shown by the first two 


items) but also in the intrinsic psychotic 
processes in so far as this can be detected 
in the psychiatric interview. 


As has been noted in Figure 1, once the 
medication has been omitted, there is a re- 
version to a previous score, or even above 
it, between the third and fourth weeks. The 
individual scores showed this “rebound” in 
all the subjects, although three of the five 
patients who had previously shown a mod- 
erate degree of 


improvement clinically 


4 
i4 
7 
# 
4 
y 


CONTROLLED STUDY OF CHLORPROMAZINE 


TaBLe 4.—Changes in Ratings for Individual Items in the Three Weeks Before the 
800 Mg. Dosage of Chlorpromazine Was Begun as Compared with Changes for the 
Three Weeks During the 800 Mg. Daily Dosage, with Comparison of these Changes 


Change 


Appearance 

Motor activity 
Mimetic expression 
Responsivity 
Hostility reactions 
Socialization 
Attention 

Speech 

Mood 

Affect 

Feeling 

Perception 
Thought processes 
Subjective reorganization 


Insight 


im the Two Groups 


Chlorpromazine 


P Value 


Placebo Chlorpro- 
mazine rs. 
Placebo, 
Change P Value 


0.05-0.02 


promazine is in- 
s test for paired 


t Difference between corresponding values in individual items for chlorpromazine-and placebo-treated groups is statistically 


significant by the Mann-Whitney U-test. 


maintained this level during the period in 
which the chlorpromazine was omitted. A 
study of the individual items shows this 
same trend. In Figure 2 is shown a com- 
parison of the changes in the items while 
the patient was taking chlorpromazine (800 
mg. daily dose); (week 8-week 11) with 
those after omission of the drug for four 
weeks (week 1l-week 15). On the left is 
shown the values under this 
dosage; on the right, the increases after 
omission. It may be seen that, with the 
exception of “speech” and “attention,” all 
the items on the right changed about as 
much as or more (in the opposite direction ) 
than the ones on the left. The most striking 


decrease in 


‘ 


reversals are seen for “subjective reorgan- 
ization” (delusions), “affect,” “perception” 
(hallucinations ), activity,” and 
“hostility reactions.”” Thus, in both thinking 
processes and ward behavior the patient 
reverted to his previous behavioral charac- 
teristics, evidence of a merely suppressive 
effect of the drug. 


“motor 


So far as untoward effects were con- 
cerned, no serious ones were noted in this 


small group. Complete blood counts, taken 


every two weeks throughout the study, 
Three 


tients showed some degree of unsteadiness, 


showed no consistent change. pa- 
one of whom exhibited a mask-like facies. 
These patients had shown only a slight im- 
provement, while the five who were mod- 
showed abnormal 


erately improved 


symptoms. Thus, there seemed to be no 
relationship between clinical improvement 
and drug toxicity. Withdrawal of the drug 
resulted in a prompt disappearance of such 
symptoms. 

It was previously mentioned that in four 
patients improvement in the rating scale was 
evident at lower doses than 800 mg. The 
reason for this is unknown. There was no 
relationship between the threshold dosage 
and age, duration of hospitalization, years 
since lobotomy, or the clinical status as evi- 
denced by the rating score. 


505 


10 
—2 0 
19° 0.05 2 = 0.10 
22° 0.02 0.05t 
1s* 0.01 3 0.05 
13 2 
4 | — 
10° 0.05-0.02 —2 0.07 
13° 0.02 0 Re 0.05t 
0.001 ~2 00st 
* Difference between sums of rating scores for individual items for three weeks before 800 mg. dose of -—— 
pa those obtained during the three weeks at the 800 mg. dose is statistically significant by Wilcoxon 
= 


4. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


A 
CHLORPROMAZINE 


INCREA 


B 
CHLORPROMAZINE OMITTED 


APPEARANCE 


MOOD 


SUBJECTIVE 
REORGANIZATION 


AFFECT 


ATTENTION 


PERCEPTION Fig. 2.—Changes in 


mean rating scores for 
each item (A) during 


SPEECH 


chlorpromazine therapy 


EELIN 
F ad (800 mg. daily for three 


MOTOR 
ACTIVITY 


weeks), and (B) during 
omission of  chlorpro- 


mazine for four weeks. 


HOSTILIT 


REACTIONS 


THOUGHT 
PROCESSES 


SOCIALIZATION 


INSIGHT 


RESPONSIVITY 


L 


MIM 


ETIC 
XPRESSION 


CHANGE IN SCORES 


1.00 50 100 


1.50 


Comment 


It is evident from the trend over the 11- 
week period that the administration of any 
substance, no matter how innocuous, coupled 
with the inevitable increased attention, re- 
sults in some degree of improvement in 
behavior even in __ long-institutionalized 
schizophrenic patients. Such improvement 
is evident early and soon reaches a limit. A 
drug demonstrates its potency only when 
its therapeutic results exceed the point at- 
tained by the placebo situation. For this 
reason, “slight” or “mild” degrees of im- 
provement should be questioned as being 
solely due to pharmacological effects of the 
medication. 

In this study the effective oral dose of 
chlorpromazine has been found to be be- 
506 


tween 600 and 800 mg. daily. This amount 
is somewhat higher than those used in the 
with a_ chronic 
schizophrenic population, one! at 100-400 
mg. and the other? at 500 mg., but is far 


lower than that employed in some therapeu- 


other controlled studies 


tic studies, e. g., Kinross-Wright,® in which 
the average dose was 2400 mg. It may well 
be that had the lower dosage levels been 
maintained for a longer time than two 
weeks a change in the rating scale would 
have been noted. On the other hand, 9 of 
the 10 patients showed changes in the rating 
scale within one to two weeks after the 
institution of a given level of dosage, so 
that on the basis of consistency it would 
seem that the results obtained were valid. 


- 
§ 
be 
q 
a 


CONTROLLED STUDY OF CHLORPROMAZINE 


The reasons for the wide variation in thera- 
peutic dosages are obscure. 

The rapid onset of changes in behavior at 
this level of dosage (within a week) and the 
duration of effects once the medication was 
discontinued (four weeks) suggest that the 
maintenance dosage may be intermittent 
rather than constant, with a consequent eco- 
nomic saving and a minimizing of compli- 
cations. 

The most encouraging result of this study 
was the significant improvement in thought 
and the in hallucina- 
tions. For this to occur in chronic psychotic 
patients argues for a better prognostic out- 
look than has hitherte been considered 
possible with any other form of therapy. 


processes reduction 


Summary 


Twenty male lobotomized schizophrenics, 
who had been hospitalized an average of 10 
years, were divided into two groups 
matched for age, duration of hospitalization, 
years since lobotomy, and psychiatric status 
(Malamud-Sands Rating Scale). One group 
was given placeboes and the other chlorpro- 
mazine by mouth, on a double-blind basis. 
When the chlorpromazine dose was _ in- 


creased to 800 mg. daily, the scores on the 


rating scales for the two groups were differ- 
entiated, the placebo group showing little or 
no change, whereas the chlorpromazine 
group showed a significant trend to better- 
ment in their scores. An analysis of 15 
items which were used in the rating scale 
showed that on 4—responsivity, socialization, 
perception (hallucinations), and thought 
processes—the improvement in the chlor- 
promazine group was statistically significant. 

Dr. John E. Lane assisted in the statistical 


analysis, and Smith, Kline & French Laboratories 
supplied the chlorpromazine and placebo tablets 


REFERENCES 


1. Gardner, M. J.; Hawkins, H. M.; Judah, 
L. N., and Murphree, O. D.: Objective Measure- 
ment of Psychiatric Changes Produced by Chlor- 
promazine and Reserpine in Chronic Schizophrenia, 
Psychiat. Res. Rep. 1:77-83, 1955. 

2. Kovitz, B.; Carter, J. T., and Addison, 
W. P.: A Comparison of Chlorpromazine and 
Reserpine in Chronic Psychosis, A.M.A. Arch. 
Neurol. & Psychiat. 74:467-471 (Nov.) 1955. 

3. Malamud, W., and Sands, S. L.: A Revision 
of the Psychiatric Rating Scale, Am. J. Psychiat. 
104 :231-237 (Oct.) 1947. 

4. Walker, H. M., and Lev, J.: Statistical 
Inference, New York, Henry Holt & Co. Inc., 
1953. 

5. Kinross-Wright, V.: The Intensive Chlor- 
promazine Treatment of Schizophrenia, Psychiat. 
Res. Rep. 1 :53-62, 1955 


507 


Obituaries 


ROBERT PAUL BING, M.D. 
1878-1956 


Robert Bing’s death brings to an end the career of one of Europe’s most 
illustrious neurologists and severs one of the last golden links with the past. 
Neurology was Bing’s obsession. Taking neurological meetings seriously, he could 
always be found, in and out of the lecture hall, scribbling notes for inclusion in 
a new edition of one of his books. Then he would return to his commodious 
bachelor quarters, lined by shelves of books which reached to the ceiling, to tran- 
scribe his new extracts into more usable form. He was a devotee of eponyms, 
for to him the names of neurologists had personal, if not historical, significance. 
To Greek also he was addicted. He coined such words as “erythroprosopalgia” 
and “anisosthenia,” which usually fell on deaf ears. Once he wrote to a colleague: 
“There is no doubt that “hemifacial atrophy’ is better because more logical than 
‘facial hemiatrophy, though the adjective ‘hemifacial’ as a Helleno-Latin hybrid 
like a lot of medical terms—could provoke philological criticism.” 


ROBERT PAUL BING, M.D. 
1878-1956 


Bing could express himself vigorously, and often did, as in answer to the 
Kompendium” should 


query put to him whether the chapter on aphasia in his 


not be modified: “Now, as you know, the question of aphasia is the battlefield 
of divergent opinions. In the U.S.A. the ‘noétic’ school (with Kurt Goldstein 
as its most conspicuous representative) has numerous adherents who try to prove 
that aphasic syndromes are not essentially due to lesions of localized cerebral foci, 


but to more or less generalized psychic deterioration. I need not say that this 


508 


4 

q 
= 


OBITUARIES 


point of view is irreconcilable with the doctrines of aphasia proposed by myself as 
well as by Dejerine, Liepmann, Oppenheim, James Purves-Stewart, Walshe, 
Lotmar, Isserlin, Alajouanine, Mingazzini, Henschen and the immense majority 
of neurological clinicians—at least in Europe.” 

Bing was the kind of man who preferred the quiet of his study. He could enjoy 
an hour with a musician, a painter, a man of letters, a general, or a big dealer 
in peanuts, but after that he had to have his rest. His mother figured very strongly 
in his life. On Jan. 15, 1951, he wrote me, then in nearby Neustadt: “Profoundly 
distressed by the sudden passing away of my mother (aged 94, the last of my near 
relatives), and needing absolute rest after this severe shock, I do not feel able to 
receive you at this time. Rest is very necessary to me anyway.” 

Bing is best known for his “Kompendium.” This small volume, dealing with 
the principles of localization of lesions in the nervous system, appeared in German 
in 1909 and saw fourteen editions. It found its way into seven other languages— 
French, English, Spanish, Polish, Hungarian, Greek, and Russian. In the earlier 
days practically every American neurologist cut his teeth on this book. A man 
always alert for a pointed story, Bing liked to tell how he happened one day upon 
a Russian version of his “Kompendium,” published without his consent, in a 
bookstall in Basel. The next day he asked a Russian acquaintance, “And how is 
it that in Russia a book can be translated without permission of the author?” The 
Russian replied, “When someone translates the Bible, does he have to get per- 
mission from God?” 

Robert Bing was born in Strasbourg on Aug. 5, 1878, and some years later 
moved with his family to Basel. Accorded the M.D. degree in 1901 by the Uni- 
versity of Basel, he took a three-year (1902-1905) Studienaufenthalt, during 
which he worked with Munk in Berlin, Horsley in London, Babinski and Dejerine 
in Paris, and Edinger in Frankfurt am Main. Back in Basel, he became the leading 
spirit in a campaign to have clinical neurology recognized as a specialty in Switzer- 
land. By 1907 he established, at his own expense, a neurological dispensary 
| Nervenambulatorium) and continued to support it without outside financial 
assistance for forty-seven years, when its doors were finally closed (1954). In 
1918 he joined with others in founding the Swiss Neurological Society and was its 
president from 1919 to 1922. From 1919 onward he was editor of the Schweizer 
Archiv fiir Neurologie und Psychiatrie. He became Extraordinarius to the Uni- 
versity in 1918, but not until 1932 was he made persdnlicher Ordinarius, which 
carried appointment to the chair of neurology in the University, the first in 
Switzerland. He was elected vice-president of the International Neurological 
Congress in Bern in 1931, received an honorary degree from the University of 
Liége, was elected Ritter in the French Legion of Merit, and was made honorary 
member of several national academies and associations. Despite all this recognition, 
Bing remained a modest man. Once asked to prepare a preface for a colleague’s 
book, Bing replied: “He has overwhelmed my work and my person with so much 
panegyrical praise and eulogy that I feel obliged to avoid everything calling forth 
. the ‘Société d’admiration mutuelle.’” 

Bing’s contribution to neurology was enormous. He was author of some 200 
articles, including chapters for several Handbiicher, and, perhaps most important 
of all, he guided about 250 students in the preparation of their dissertations. 

In 1952, the medical faculty of Basel renewed his medical diploma, issued to 
him 50 years previously, and paid tribute to his pioneering work in neurology. 


509 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


About March 1, 1956, he delivered the concluding lecture of the winter semester. 
A colleague described it as “a vigorous lecture, still abounding with those refresh- 
ing ideas which for a half-century had brought graduates in neurology to him 
from all corners of the earth.” Two weeks later, on March 15, 1956, he died, of 
a sudden heart attack. 


Bing was once asked to name the 15 publications from his own hand of which 
he was fondest. They follow: 


Uber angeborene Muskeldefekte, Arch. path. Anat. 170:175, 1902. 

Anatomie und Entwicklungsgeschichte des Gehirns von Ceratodus Fonteri, in Zoologische 
Forschungsreisen in Australien und dem malayische Archipel, edited by Richard Semon, 
Jena, G. Fischer, 1904, Vol. IV, p. 513. 

Beitrag zur Kenntniss des endogenen Riickenmarksfasern beim Menschen, Arch. Psychiat 
39:74, 1904. 

Eine kombinierte Form der heredofamiliaren Nervenkrankheiten, Deutsches Arch. klin. 
Med. 83:199, 1905. 

Myopathia rachitica, Jahrb. Kinderh. 68:649, 1908. 

Die Bedeutung der spino-cerebellaren Systeme, Wiesbaden, J. F. Bergmann, 1909. 

Uber alkoholistische Muskelveranderungen, Med. Klin. 5:613, 1909. 

Gehirn und Auge, Ed. 2, Munich, J. F. Bergmann, 1923. 

Hyperkinésies organiques et psychogenes, Schweiz. Arch. Neurol. u. Psychiat. 18:163, 1926 
(with B. Walthard) Quelques aspects anatomo-pathologiques de la myélite herpétique 
expérimentale, Schweiz. Arch. Neurol. u. Psychiat. 22:3, 1928. 

Die multiple Sklerose, Basel, Benno Schwabe & Co., 1932. 

Das Prinzip der “Enthemmung” in der Physiopathologie, Schweiz. Arch. Neurol. u. 
Psychiat. 32:177, 1933. 

Somatische Faktoren in der Gestaltung psychogener Symptome, Schweiz. med. Wchnschr. 
66 :953, 1936. 

Lehrbuch der Nervenkrankheiten, Ed. 8, Basel, Benno Schwabe & Co., 1947. 

Kompendium der topischen Gehirn- und Riickenmarksdiagnostik, Ed. 14, Basel, Benno 
Schwabe & Co., 1953. 


Wess HayMAKer, M.D. 


j 
be 
a 
4 
a 
510 


News and Comment 


ANNOUNCEMENTS 


Health Research Facilities Program.—On July 30, 1956, the President signed the 
Health Research Facilities Act of 1956, which authorizes the appropriation of funds not to 
exceed $30 million for each of three years to assist in the financing of the construction of 
facilities for research in the “sciences related to health.” The Act defines “sciences related to 
health” as including medicine, osteopathy, dentistry, and public health, and fundamental and 
applied sciences when related thereto. The assistance is to be in the form of grants in aid to 
public and nonprofit institutions on a basis of not more than 50% for the Federal share. Items 
not creditable for matching purposes include (1) costs for the acquisition of land or off-site 
improvements and (2) obligations made prior to the award of the research facilities grant 
concerned. The Congress has now appropriated $30 million to the Public Health Service, 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, for this program. These funds are now 
available and will remain available until expended. 

The funds are to be used to provide additional research facilities through the construction 
and/or equipping of new buildings or the expansion, remodeling, alteration, and/or equipping 
of existing buildings. 

The new law provides for the appointment of a National Advisory Council on Health 
Research Facilities. It is expected that this Council will meet in the near future to establish 
policies and approve regulations for the administration of the new program. The Surgeon 
General is not permitted to award a research facilities grant in aid which has not previously 
been approved by the Council. 

Application forms, as well as additional information, will be supplied promptly upon request 
to the Division of Research Grants, National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, 
Bethesda 14, Md. 


Congress of Neurological Surgeons.—The sixth annual meeting of the Congress of 
Neurological Surgeons will be held at the Palmer House, Chicago, Nov. 1, 2, and 3, 1956. The 
secretary is Dr. Philip D. Gordy, 1007 Delaware Ave., Wilmington, Del. Dr. Wilder G. Pen- 
field will be the guest speaker. 


Congress of the American College of Surgeons—The 42d Clinical Congress of the 
American College of Surgeons will be held in San Francisco, on Oct. 8 to 12, 1956. 

The Neurological Surgery Advisory Council has arranged the program for the Clinical 
Congress, including two Surgical Forum sessions devoted to reports of research in the field 
of neurosurgery. On Friday, Oct. 12, there will be a panel discussion on “The Surgical Man- 
agement of Intracranial Aneurysms and Arteriovenous Malformations,” from 9 to 10:30 a.m., 
moderator, Russell Meyers, M.D., Iowa City, and a panel discussion on “Surgical 
Management of Cerebrovascular Disease Not Including Aneurysms and Arteriovenous Mal- 
formations,” from 10:30 a.m. to 12:05 p.m., moderator, E. S. Gurdjian, M.D., Detroit. The 
discussions will take place in the Nob Hill Room of the Fairmont Hotel. 


SOCIETY NEWS 


New Officers of American Electroencephalographic Society—At the Tenth Annual 
Meeting of the American Electroencephalographic Society, held in Atlantic City, June 15-17, 
1956, the following were elected to office: President, Dr. John R. Knott, Psychopathic Hos- 
pital, lowa City; President-Elect, Dr. Robert S. Dow, 1010 Medical Dental Bldg., Portland 5, 
Ore.; Secretary, Dr. J. K. Merlis, 150 S. Huntington Ave., Boston 30; Treasurer, Dr. Peter 
Kellaway, Baylor University, Houston, Texas. 


511 


Books 


Clinical Recognition and Management of Disturbances of Body Fluids. By John H. 
Bland. Second Edition. Price, $11.50. Pp. 552, illustrated. W. B. Saunders Company, 
218 W. Washington Sq., Philadelphia 5, 1956. 


The first edition of this work was titled “The Clinical Use of Fluid and Electrolyte.” The 
present edition, though extensively rewritten, retains as its aim the presentation of deviations 
in fluid and electrolyte distribution in a form which will be useful at the bedside. After a 
very brief historical resumé, there are two chapters which present the basic physiological 
considerations in a lucid fashion. This is followed by a general clinical discussion and then 
by consideration of specific disease states in which fluid and electrolyte disturbances are promi- 
nent. Fluid disturbances in congestive failure, diabetes, renal disease, adrenal insufficiency, 
shock, and following surgery are presented, as well as a discussion of fluid metabolism in 
children, in the aged, and following exposure to heat. Three new chapters deal with fluid 
and electrolyte metabolism in diseases of the liver, in pulmonary disease, and in association with 
head injury. For each clinical state, consideration of normal mechanisms and their derange- 
ments is followed by a discussion of available therapeutic regimens and the dangers or 
complications with which these may be associated. Though dosages are often included, detailed 
regimens of therapy are wisely avoided. The book is written in simple language, with many 
diagrams to aid in visualizing the problems discussed. It is particularly well suited for the use 
of medical students and house staff but could be used with profit by physicians in their daily 
practice. 


Multiple Sclerosis. By Douglas McAlpine, Nigen D. Compston, and Charles E. Lums- 
den. Price, 35 s. Pp. 304, with 115 illustrations. E. & S. Livingston, Ltd., 16 and 17 
Teviot Pl., Edinburgh, 1955. 


This volume was written by a neurologist in collaboration with a general practitioner and 
a pathologist. The three main objectives stated in the preface are “first to widen the general 
conception of the disease; secondly to provide an account of the early symptomatology and 
treatment; and thirdly to review the pathology and the relationship of multiple sclerosis to 
other dymyelinating diseases.”’- 

Each of these objectives is fulfilled. Various etiological factors are reviewed, as well as 
the theories of etiological mechanisms. A large section is devoted to the early symptomatology 
of the disease, emphasizing that it is the pattern of the behavior that renders multiple sclerosis 
unique. Clinical observations on the local spread of the disease are recorded and discussed 
The cerebrospinal fluid is analyzed in respect to cells, protein, and colloidal reactions, along with 
the electrophoretic and immunochemical methods of quantitative analysis. The course of the 
disease is reviewed and the prognosis as to disablement and life expectancy is considered. 
Differential diagnosis is presented comprehensively, and treatment is outlined. The pathology 
of the disease and related demyelinating processs is illustrated by excellent plates of gross 
and microscopic changes. Throughout the entire volume there is frequent reference to various 
series of patients reported in the literature, as well as to the authors’ own series of 1072 cases 
of multiple sclerosis, from 1930 to 1952. There are frequent brief case histories to illustrate a 
given fact. 

This is a comprehensive, critical review of the problem of multiple sclerosis for the clinical 
neurologist or practitioner. 


| 
- 
3 
512 


ection on 


(Special Article) 


JAMES E. SHEA, M.D., New York 


This paper is a review, by no means 
unprecedented, of some psychosomatic as- 
pects of human behavior. Its scope com- 
prises motivations and values, as well as re- 
flex ares and glandular secretions. For man 
is a physical body, capable of specifically 
human behavior—hate, tenderness, preju- 
dice, hope, and despair. His ways are com- 
plex and contradictory ; his actions puzzling 
and not easily predictable. What do we 
know, and what do we think we know, about 
the nature of man? 
Traditionally, man has been regarded as 
a being composed of body and soul. In fact, 
the majority of Americans even today pro- 
fess a belief in a soul which occupies the 
body and survives it after death. It is a 
matter of individual thinking how this con- 
cept of body and soul is perceived. Prob- 
ably the body is regarded as a dwelling 
which the spirit (or soul or mind) inhabits. 
When the spirit acts—through its attributes 
of courage, faith, humility, or the rest— 
it uses the body to achieve its end. Thus, 
when the spirit is angered, the fist flies out. 
True, the spirit is somewhat affected by the 
limitations of the housing unit. Some poor 
souls are rendered feebleminded by defec- 
tive masonry in the belfry. But it is further 
presumed that all dwellings are pretty much 
alike, built of standard bricks and straw. 
This notion about the interplay of body and 
soul, translated into sophisticated 
terms, is the implicit philosophy of the 


Received for publication June 2, 1956. 


“dynamic” school of psychiatric thought. 
To quote Ancel Keys’: 

Professional workers who deal with mental 
disease may be placed generally into two cate- 
gories. The majority of practicing psychiatrists 
appear to regard the body as merely a vehicle or 
residence in which the mind pursues its own way 
to health or disease with relative independence 
from the state or history of the body. With the 
exception of gross trauma to the brain itself, they 
are inclined to recognize no physical factor as 
important in the etiology or in the treatment of 
the major psychoses and psychoneuroses. . . . On 
the other hand, there are the organicists, those 
experts who see or suspect, mostly the latter, an 
important physical aspect in mental disease—as 
cause or at least as a major influence. 

The “organicists,” then, do consider the 
body of the psychiatric patient. But it would 
be a mistake to think that they—the “or- 
ganicists’”—are themselves altogether lack- 
ing in crudity. Thus, Smith ? was prompted 
to write: 

Our laboratory and clinical studies of alcoholics 
during the past several years have convinced us 
that alcoholism is a metabolic disease. Although 
alcoholism manifests itself primarily as a behavior 
problem, it occurred to us that perhaps the behavior 
disturbance was not the disease itself, but merely 
a symptom of an underlying metabolic process. 
There are many examples of behavior disorders 
arising from disturbed metabolic states. 
thyroidism, pernicious 


Hyper- 
anemia, the menopausal 
state and cerebral arteriosclerosis frequently be- 
come apparent clinically because of the behavior 
disturbances they engender. 

This is a good example of the conviction 
of many workers. It is difficult to make 
explicit these beliefs, since they are largely 
irrational and amorphous in the believer’s 


mind. But the “organicist’” does seem to 


513 


3 
\ 


believe that mental disease (a concept he 
frequently does not stop to define) is caused 
by malfunctioning of the organs of the body. 
The belief is blurred in outline, even as 
conjecture: Perhaps the hypothalamus is 
the culprit. Or almost certainly the pitui- 
tary. And don’t forget the genes. At any 
rate, shock treatment cures depressions, and 
lobotomy cures schizophrenia. Eventually 
some biochemist surely will find a cure for 
kleptomania, truancy, and marital incom- 
patibility. 

It should be clear that neither view—the 
“dynamic” or the “organic’”—is of itself 
adequate to explain the phenomena of 
human behavior. One is at first tempted to 
scoff at a formulation such as Meduna’s *: 

Human behavior can be understood in terms of 
the physiologic function of three sets of structures. 
The first set of structures is composed of afferent 
pathways conveying stimuli from within or with- 
out the organism of the brain. A stimulus arriving 
at the brain sets into motion a reverberating cir- 
cuit between the cortex, thalamus and hypothala- 
mus. The second set of structures utilizes positive 
and negative feed-back mechanisms. A _ positive 
feed-back mechanism is utilized when a stimulus 
arriving at these higher centers is experienced as 
pleasant. .. . If the arriving stimulus is experienced 
as unpleasant .. . a negative feed-back mechanism 
comes into play to obviate or minimize the im- 
pact of the stimulus. The circuits between cortex- 
as the stimuli, arriving through the afferent path- 
ways, upset the homeostasis of the nervous sys- 
tem... 

Therefore, if we conceive of a psychoneurosis 
hypothalamus-thalamus-cortex reverberate as long 
as a failure of homeostasis, the psychoneurosis 
will depend upon the threshold of the structures 
participating in the reverberations between the 
cortex and lower structures of the brain. It is 
then predictable that every psychoneurotic condi- 
tion, regardless of its symbolical content, can be 
treated by purely physical means. Thus, if the 
treatment can increase the threshold of stimulation 
of any part of the intrinsic feed-back mechanism 
of the brain, and suspend the reverberations with- 
in the system, the psychoneurosis will be modified 
or alleviated. 

This sounds to the unfamiliar ear like 
the wilder outrages of science fiction, but, 
actually, it is not inconsistent with present- 
day hypotheses concerning the organization 
of the brain, as the work of Penfield and 
Kubie (to be quoted later) will show. 


514 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


The reason it strikes us so harshly is 
not that most of us know so little about 
neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, but that 
it leaves out of account any recognizable 
human emotion. “A _ positive feed-back 
mechanism is utilized when a_ stimulus 
arriving at these higher centers is experi- 
enced as pleasant.” Experienced as pleasant 
—there’s the rub. Why are some stimuli 
experienced as pleasant? This is not really 
a problem for IBM, as Meduna seems to 
suggest. No one would quarrel with his 
formulation (though one might disagree 
with it) were it offered as the mechanism 
whereby emotions are implemented. But as 
a psychological theory it does rather drasti- 
cally minimize the importance of the “sym- 
bolic content’ of the psychoneurosis. There 
is ready acceptance of the view that the hy- 
pothalamus, as well as the adrenal gland, is 
involved in the hatred a man might feel for 
his neighbor, but why does he hate his 
neighbor? Is it because of reverberations 
in the cortex-hypothalamus-thalamus cir- 
cuits? Or because the neighbor’s radio is 
blasting the still of the dawn’s early light? 

The quarrel is not easily settled, even by 
the psychosomatic truce-maker. We speak 
still of “functional” psychoses as distinct 
from “organic” psychoses. We dichotomize 
phenomena into “mental” or “physical.” 
Protest against this led Stanley Cobb* to 
the following declaration: 

I would like to make three assumptions which 
I believe can be upheld by scientific data in 1951. 

First: No biological process goes on without 

change of structure. 

Second: Whenever the brain functions, there is 

organic change. 

Third: The brain is the organ of the mind. 

If we accept these three, we must admit that 
“organic” change takes place whenever a person 
has a thought. This is an important function of 
the brain. All function is organic, so, the slang 
the terms 
meaningless. 


use of “functional” is 
The same argument can be repeated 
substituting the terms “physical” and “mental.” 
This is undeniably true, but it is a truth 
which can lead to grotesque distortion in 
assessing human beings. This danger is il- 
lustrated by Walter Bruetsch,® who stated: 


“organic” or 


4 
a 
4 
wa 
a 
‘ 
on 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


In answer to Dr. Cobb, who insists that we 
should forget about “either or,” I may say that 
for some time I felt the same way. I changed 
my mind, and now I am quite emphatic that we 
should say “either or.” This is particularly im- 
portant in teaching because otherwise the student 
will never learn how to make accurate etiological 
diagnoses, which are so important for an intelligent 
treatment program. It is highly important, in my 
opinion, that a student learn to differentiate, for 
instance, between a depression as the initial symp- 
tom in a brain tumor or in general paresis, and a 
depression of psychogenic basis. Otherwise he will 
be a confused person the remainder of his profes- 
sional life. 

The issue is important, since it determines 
our treatment of patients. “Organic change 


takes place whenever a person has a 
thought.” Conceded, though, to quote 
Bishop ®: 


It is difficult to conceive of a neural pattern 


corresponding to anxiety or to a dissociation from 
reality. If there is one, it must be too hopelessly 
complex to be recorded by any current apparatus. 

We can even imagine, without too much 
strain, that pathological organic change takes 
place whenever a person has a delusional 
thought—for example, when the schizo- 
phrenic thinks he is Napoleon. But what of 
the deviationist in Russia thinks 
Khrushchev is not Napoleon? What of his 
poor addled brain? Does the thought pro- 
duce the organic change, or does the organic 
change produce the thought? (I do not 
mean in point of time, since obviously they 
occur concurrently; I mean in terms of eti- 
ological primacy—or what is known in logic 
as Efficient. Causality. ) 

Gerard* says: “When experience leaves 
an enduring trace, it must be some sort of 
material imprint; and, so to speak, there 
can be no twisted thought without a twisted 
molecule.” This is true in a way, but not 
necessarily in a neuropathological way. 
Error, or misconception, is not the same as 
disease. The cerebral molecular constella- 
tion of one who believes that Lincoln was 
the first president is different from the con- 
stellation of those who believe it was Wash- 
ington. But if this is the result of poor 
instruction in history, how ought we to re- 
gard this twisted molecule ? 


This point is crucial, and one not to be 
dismissed by deploring the unscientific di- 
chotomizing of mind and body. There are 
conditions, as Hoch § has demonstrated with 
mescaline, in which the organic change pro- 
duces the thought. In the case of mescaline, 
these thought changes consist of delusions 
and hallucinations. There are other condi- 
tions in which the thought almost certainly 
produces the organic change. 

The anxious, expectant father, pacing 
the hospital corridor, would be a classical 
example of the latter. It might be useful 
to look at the behavior of this expectant 
father, caught at this particular anxious 
moment. There is some evidence that people 
vary in their ability to withstand anxiety 
and deprivation. (This will be taken up 
again later, in a discussion of “physical’’ 
factors in neurosis.) We cannot wisely ig- 
nore the brain in which the reverberations 
are cycling, or the possibility that some 
brains are inferior circuits as circuits go. 
But we cannot ignore, either, the milieu in 
which the expectant father functions: his 
forgotten, but still active, sexual taboos ; his 
rekindled competitive strife with father and 
siblings; his economic status. Perhaps one 
should even nod in passing to the Oedipus 
complex and castration anxieties. 

The point is this: There is no valid reason 
why psychiatrists should subscribe to a 
“dynamic” versus an “organic” school of 
thought. However organically grounded 
they may be, abstractions such as guilt, 
self-contempt, and philosophical convictions 
are a necessary concern of the student of 
human behavior. The psychiatrist should 
conceive of them simultaneously as abstrac- 
tions and neural patterns. 

There is danger in any overemphasis on 
neurophysiology or neuropathology. It leads 
to a fatal oversimplification; to the belief 
that there will be no mental disease, and, one 
gathers, no human misery, if the neuro- 
pathology of people can be set right: Every- 
one will agree on the meaning of life and 
the proper living of life once metabolism 


is sufficiently understood. It is almost as 


51 


| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


though such thinkers, in their haste to re- 
treat from the thickets of metaphysics, be- 
come entrapped in what can only be called 
a sort of metachemistry. 

It is likewise a dangerous oversimplifica- 
tion to ignore the physical substratum in- 
volved in the suffering of our patients. In 
many conditions—even perhaps in certain 
neuroses—the altered physical state is the 
main site of the problem. It is unreasonable 
to expect the tools of psychotherapy—trans- 
ference, insight, reeducation, encourage- 
ment, dream interpretation—to be helpful 
in all behavior disorders not directly attrib- 
utable to large holes in the head. 

Our knowledge of human behavior is 
regrettably incomplete, even though the bio- 
chemists know a little, as do the psychody- 
namicists. We must work toward the day 
when the two disciplines will be correlated 
and we can justifiably speak of the bio- 
chemistry of psychodynamics. 

Some questions which must be answered 
are these: 

1. In a given disorder, for example, 
schizophrenia, is there evidence of a heredi- 


tary predisposition, when heredity is de- 


fined as “the transmission of potential 
physical and mental properties from parents 
to children through genes”? 

2. Is there a known pathological state 
of the body accompanying the condition? 
Again, to take schizophrenia as an example, 
is there a metabolic alteration in the enzy- 
matic range underlying the schizophrenic 
symptomatology ? 

3. Is the metabolic disorder the cause 
of the symtomatology or its result? For 
example, there is evidence that sugar metab- 
olism is altered in patients hospitalized 
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Yet some 
workers are disposed to believe that this 
altered metabolism is the result of the schizo- 
phrenic’s anxiety and not its cause. 

4. Can we be sure that the changes found 
in certain conditions are specifically causa- 
tive? Perhaps they are only tantalizing 
indices of some as yet unknown specific 
causes. For example, most observers will 
concede that a high preponderance of manic- 


516 


depressives have a stocky build. 
the phrase “stocky build” rather than 
technical term because 
shall speak later on the technical difficulties 
involved in constitutional typology.) But 
stockiness is not the executive cause of the 
disorder, obviously. If it were, how could 
we account for the one-third of manic-de- 
pressives who are not stocky, or for the 
millions of stocky humans who do not de- 
velop manic-depressive psychosis? * 

5. How safe are we in arguing from anal- 
ogy, or in presuming that facts true in one 
condition are applicable to another? For 
example, suppose that it is eventually proved 
that manic-depressive depression is caused 
by a disordered metabolism in the hypo- 
thalamus. What bearing does this have on 
normal grief? Is it merely an exaggeration 
of the bodily changes which accompany 
normal grief? Or are we misled by our 
own experiences with grief into thinking 
that the depression of the manic-depressive 
must be of the same nature? Perhaps the 
two are not really comparable, except in 
their grosser manifestations. 

This paper will attempt to answer the 
above questions as they are applied to cer- 
tain problems, namely, schizophrenia, alco- 
holism, homosexuality, and temperament, 
normal and abnormal. From a considera- 
tion of these, we shall learn something of 
the genetic, metabolic, and anthropometric 
factors in humans. The task is formidable, 
first, because of difficulties in methodology, 
and, secondly, because we are examining 
forms of behavior and not specific diseases. 
As Hoskins says®: 

It has yet to be proved that schizophrenia is an 
entity. It may be comparable to such diagnoses 
as “headache” or “hypertension,” each of which 


has a common core manifestation but each of 
which may represent very dissimilar disorders. 


(I use 


some more 


Schizophrenia 


Our knowledge of the genetics of schizo- 
phrenia stems largely from the work of 
Kallmann,'® whose findings are compatible 
with those of other workers, such as Lux- 
enburger, Rosanoff, Essen-Moller, and 
Slater. 


4 
ita 
4 

4 

ore 

a 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


It is Kallmann’s contention that schizo- 
phrenia develops only in the carriers of a 
specific type of predisposition or potential 
vulnerability, and that this predisposition 
increases in proportion to the degree of 
blood relationship to a family member show- 
ing the psychosis. In other words, he uses 
the twin-study method to prove his conten- 
tion. 

The procedure is as follows: One studies 
the incidence of schizophrenia in the gen- 
eral population, step-sibs, half-sibs, full sibs, 
two-egg co-twins and one-egg co-twins. If 
the incidence is found to be overwhelmingly 
greater in one-egg than in the 
others, this is presumed to prove the pres- 


co-twins 


ence of genetic, as opposed to purely en- 
vironmental, influences. 

Kallmann’s findings are based on a study 
of 953 twin index families. The incidence 
of schizophrenia in the relatives of a schizo- 
phrenic patient are as follows: 


Two-egg co-twins .........14% 


Rather astonishingly, the incidence in one- 
egg twin partners is 86.2%. This seems 
convincing proof of the presence of a gene- 
tic factor as a strong causal component of 
schizophrenia. In this connection, Slater ™ 
Says: 

Given that schizophrenia is a process which once 
set going is likely to produce irreversible change, 
we may easily account for its hereditary basis by 
a single mutant gene. 
that by itself this gene is not enough, and that 
other genetical and constitutional factors play a 
part, and the environment may itself either tend 
to protect the predisposed individual or to pre- 
cipitate the psychosis. If the abnormal gene is a 
recessive one, the schizophrenic represents a homo- 
zygote and the schizoid personality may be a 
heterozygote. On the other hand, and this pos- 
sibility would be available for either a dominant 
or recessive hypothesis, the schizoid personality 
might contain the entire specific genetical pre- 
disposition required to develop the disease, but be 


It can be shown, however, 


protected by subsidiary genes. 

It is evident from this statement that: our 
knowledge of how genetic factors operate 
is highly speculative. But our failure to 
understand the means whereby a result 
is obtained should not lead us to deny the 


We do how the 


biotics combat bacteria, but no one doubts 


result. not know anti- 
their effectiveness in many diseases. 

The work on the metabolic aspects of 
schizophrenia is so extensive that only the 
briefest outline is possible in this paper. A 
very full bibliography can be found in 
Altschule’s recent book.!* In trying to eval- 
uate the significance of biochemical changes, 
it is wise to heed the warning of Hemphill 
who state: 

Great caution must be observed in interpreting 
abnormalities of total metabolism or of the endo- 
crine notably 
phrenia. They may be secondary to a primary dis- 


and Rees, 


system in mental illness, schizo- 
turbance of brain or to a central process responsi- 
ble. for the mental as well as the physical picture, 
or may themselves be the factor that determines 
the abnormal mentation. 

Typical of the conflicting reports are the 
papers of Hoagland and his associates and 


Bliss and his The Hoagland 
group '* studied the response of the adrenal 


associates. 


to stress in 200 normal subjects and 100 
male schizophrenics who had been hospital- 
ized for two and a half years. The patients 
and the normal control groups were sub- 
jected to a purely chemical stress (the in- 
gestion of sugar by the Exton-Rose tech- 
nique ), to a psychomotor fatiguing test (the 
operation of a pursuit meter), and to a psy- 
chologic frustration test (target-ball test). 
The schizophrenic patients, in general, dis- 
played abnormal and inadequate adrenal 
stress responses as compared with the con- 
trols. It is interesting that chronic schizo- 
phrenic patients, when not subjected to 
special stresses, give evidence of adrenal 
cortical secretion differing relatively little 
from that of normal controls. It is in re- 
sponse to stress that more marked group 
differences appear. 

The chronic schizophrenic displays both 
quantitative and qualitative abnormalities of 
adrenal stress responses which appear to be 
specifically at the level of the inability of 
his adrenal cortex to respond to pituitary 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by 
release of normal amounts and normal ratios 
of steroid hormones. 


517 


: 
|_| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


On the other hand, the Bliss group !® 
States: 

Heretofore, all investigators have used as indi- 
cators of glandular activity such measurements as 
changes in the number of circulating lymphocytes 
and eosinophils; alteration in the concentrations of 
sugar, amio acids, and inorganic phosphate in the 
blood; variations in the urinary levels of potas- 
sium, sodium, uric acid, the creatinine-uric acid 
ratio, inorganic phosphates, 17-ketosteroids, and 
corticosteroids, or alterations in the sodium content 
of sweat. 

Each of these elements, it is true, may be in- 
fluenced by adrenocortical steroids, but with the 
exception of the urinary 17-ketosteroids and corti- 
costeroids, all are nonspecific and often unreliable 
indicators of adrenocortical activity, since their 
concentrations are influenced by so many other 
physiological processes. Even in the case of the 
17-ketosteroids, although they are metabolic prod- 
ucts of steroids originating in the testes and 
adrenal cortex, Sayers”™ states: 

“Urinary 17-ketosteroid output should be rejected 
as an index of adrenocortical activity . . . because 
of the lack of correlation between the rate of 
17-ketosteroid excretion and adrenocortical activity 
as determined by other measures.” 

Consequently any conclusions about adrenal cor- 
tical activity based upon this evidence must be 
cautiously assessed with an awareness of the limi- 
tations of the techniques. 

The findings of the Bliss group, using a 
technique of measuring adrenal steroids in 
the blood, are as follows: 

Adrenocortical function of chronic schizophrenics 
was investigated. The concentration of adrenal 
steroids (17-hydroxycorticosteroids) in the peri- 
pheral blood was determined at 8 a.m.; after the 
intravenous administration of various amounts of 
ACTH or of a pyrogenic substance (Piromen) ; 
and after the subcutaneous injection of regular in- 
sulin. These drugs were employed to assess adreno- 
cortical and pituitary-adrenocortical responsivity. 
Similar studies were made upon a comparable 
group of normal subjects. The adrenocortical and 
pituitary-adrenocortical reactivity of chronic 
schizophrenic and normal subjects were equiva- 
lent. There was no evidence of any impairment 
of adrenocortical physiology in the chronic schizo- 
phrenic patient. 

Information concerning brain enzymatic 
changes is extremely scanty. To quote from 
Pope 17: 

Most of the published material on enzymes in 
psychiatric conditions has been reports of studies 
on blood or cerebral spinal fluid and these un- 
fortunately afford little insight into the state of 
affairs in the cerebral tissue itself... . The study 


518 


of enzymes in the brains of those with mental ill- 
ness has been limited to a few pioneer investiga- 
tions. . . . Only with the advent of the various 
forms of psychosurgery has it become possible to 
obtain brain tissue in the form of biopsies under 
relatively standardized and biochemically sound 
conditions. The pioneer quantitative work on brain 
enzymes in the mentally ill has been that of Dr. 
Winifred Ashby upon carbonic anhydrase. The 
exact role of this enzyme in the nervous system 
is unknown, but her work has indicated that 
embryologically its appearance coincides with the 
onset of function, and it is to be supposed that it 
has an important role in the hydration and dehy- 
dration of carbon dioxide and hence in the mainte- 
nance of tissue acid-base balance. . . . Dr. Ashby 
has reported abnormalities in its distribution in the 
brains of schizophrenics, with decreases in some 
cortical areas relative to the rest. She feels that 
this might be of significance in relation to hypo- 
thetic changes in relative rates of discharge of 
the neurons in the affected areas. 

Pope summarizes a report of his own 
work on biopsy specimens of two groups 
of lobotomized patients. The first group 
was composed of nonpsychotics lobotomized 
for intractable pain or psychoneurosis. The 
second was composed of profoundly psy- 
chotic patients having a diagnosis of schizo- 
phrenia. He states: 

When the cholinesterase activity of each biopsy 
specimen as a whole was computed and compared 
with the clinical diagnosis in the case of those 
twelve patients most rigidly fulfilling the clinical 
criteria described, it was found that five of seven 
patients among the deteriorated schizophrenics 
exhibited an overall cortical cholinesterase activity 
in excess of the range of activities found among 
the relatively normal pain-psychoneurosis patients 
Obviously, these are far too few observations to 
be more than suggestive, and even though this 
trend were fully established, its meaning is ob- 
scure. All that can be directly inferred is that the 
prefrontal cortex of some of the deeply psychotic 
patients hydrolyzed acetylcholine faster than usual 
If cholinesterase activity is an index of the rate 
of turnover of the system metabolizing acetyl- 
choline, and if the latter is a compound of critical 
importance in the physical chemistry of impulse 
initiation, propagation, and synaptic transfer, it 
might suggest a chronic increase in rate of neu- 
ronal discharge in the cortex in question. Such an 
hypothesis would not be entirely out of line with 
certain other reported findings.” 

What is to be made of all this? Is it a 
likelihood that the person who succumbs to 


schizophrenia is normal as regards his bodily 


= 
LA 
a 
] 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


equipment, and that the psychosis is the 
result only of early and grievous depriva- 
tions of love and maternal support? Per- 
haps. But another hypothesis must be en- 
tertained. It has been stated by Hoskins ® 
as follows: 

I would propose that the schizophrenic psychosis 
represents an end result of a generalized failure 
of adaptation that arises from defective evolution 
of the maturing processes. It is possible that the 
postulated immaturity might have its fundamental 
origin in a specific pathology—e. g., abnormalities 
of one or more enzyme systems in the brain. . . . 
The psychosis might be regarded as a functional 
disintegration of the personality due to an in- 
ability to meet the demands of maturity with the 
resources of the immature. 


Alcoholism 


Let us turn now to a consideration of the 
work on the “organic” aspects of alcoholism. 

Most of the publications in this field 
come from Smith, Lovell and Tintera, and 
Williams. No real work on the genetics of 
alcoholism has been published up to the 
present. 

There has, likewise, been no attempt to 
evaluate cases from the anthropometric 
Smith * speaks of abnormal 
hair distribution of the alcoholic, and Tin- 
tera and Lovell’® refer to the “younger 
asthenic males whom we have come to re- 
gard as highly potential alcoholics.” Such 
statements are not convincing as serious 
attempts to correlate data within the frame- 
work of any of the usual present-day sys- 
tems of constitutional typology. 

Concerning metabolism, however, the sit- 
uation is different. Here, a great deal of 
work has been done, much of it of question- 
able scientific value. The claim has been 
made that alcoholism is a metabolic disease. 
The alcoholic is thought to suffer from an 
adrenal insufficiency, possibly secondary to 
a pituitary deficiency. 

This claim is very difficult to prove. As 
Bliss has pointed out, the various tests used 
to measure adrenal function—blood sugar 
curve, eosinophil count, 17-ketosteroid elim- 
ination, and so on—are not specifically in- 


point of view. 


dicative of adrenal function. In severe 


cases of hypoadrenalism the interpretation 
of these tests is easy enough. But in mar- 
ginal—not to say hypothetical—states of 
deficiency the meaning of a flat blood sugar 
curve, for example, is questionable. It can 
indicate anything from liver disease to in- 
sufficient food intake in the previous few 
days. 

Concerning blood sugar, Lovell and Tin- 
tera state: 

In the study of alcoholic patients, hypoglycemia 
was found universally during their “dry” periods. 
The average fasting blood sugar level was 60.9 mg. 
per 100 cc., the range varying from 54 mg. to 80 
mg. per 100 cc. 

There is no mention of the number of 
patients studied or of the period of sustained 
sobriety at which the study was made. It is 
doubtful whether a single fasting blood 
sugar determination is much of a test of 
adrenal function. Moreover, the effect of 
emotion on blood sugar has been extensively 
and carefully investigated by Portis and 
Alexander,2® among others, who found 
marked fluctuations in blood sugar levels in 
many people, most of whom were not alco- 
holics at all. 

Likewise, Lovell and Tintera?* state: 

In addition to their effect upon the utilization of 
carbohydrate, the adrenal cortical steroids play a 
role in regulatory androgen function. Many alco- 
holic patients reveal deficiencies in this regard as 
determined by urinary 17- ketosteroid determina- 
tion. 

Again, no mention is made in this paper 
of the number of alcoholic patients studied, 
or of other tests of adrenal function, or 
of why the authors did not utilize the tech- 
niques of adrenal stress response which 
Hoagland found useful in the study of 
schizophrenics. True, in another paper,”! 
these authors do state, “Our patients, now 
numbering over 1000 on whom 17-ketoste- 
roid determinations were made, revealed al- 
most universal deficiencies in this regard.” 
The exact 17-ketosteroid excretion figures 
are not mentioned. 

As a matter of fact, it is often hard to 
interpret the significance of 17-ketosteroid 
excretion rates. Lovell and Tintera’s con- 
trol group, for example, showed the same 


519 


. 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


low 17-ketosteroid excretion figures as did 
their patients, and for this reason were con- 
sidered to be potential alcoholics. 

Voegtlin’s ** investigations do not confirm 
the helpfulness of hormonal therapy re- 
ported by Lovell and Tintera. the 
particular hormone preparation used by 
these authors is one of very slight, almost 
nonexistent, strength, this is not hard to 
understand. In a study of 39 alcoholic pa- 
tients treated with prolonged courses of cor- 
tisone and lipoadrenal extract, he found 
that “less than 20% of the patients observed 
for a period of one year remained absti- 
nent.” 

There appears to be considerable evi- 
dence that adrenal dysfunction is common 
enough in alcoholism, secondary to the al- 
coholism, as shown by Lester and Green- 
berg ** and others. But until carefully 
controlled work is done (preferably using 
the measurement of concentration of ad- 
renal steroids in peripheral blood), the 
question of a primary predisposing metabol- 
i¢ disorder in the alcoholic must be con- 
sidered unanswered. 

Williams ** has advanced the geneto- 
trophic theory of the etiology of alcoholism. 
A critique of this theory was published by 
Popham,”* and what follows is largely a 
restatement of his views. Briefly, this 
theory is to the effect that certain persons 
possess distinctive, inherited metabolic pat- 
terns which predispose them to alcoholism. 
Alcoholism is said to be a genetotrophic 
disease because it is thought to arise fun- 
damentally 


Since 


from nutritional deficiencies 
which, in turn, are genetically controlled. 

The alcoholic is regarded as a person 
who possesses, because of genetic blocks, a 
biochemical spectrum featuring a relatively 
heightened need for vitamins or other ele- 
ments of nutrition, not supplied by the diet. 
There is diminished production of one or 
more specific enzymes. The relative nutri- 
tional deficiency of such persons leading to 
an inability to utilize essential foodstuffs in 
the diet is thought to cause a craving for 
alcohol. 


20 


The rational therapy for such persons 1s 
simple: the feeding of vitamins, for ex- 
ample, in amounts necessary to satisfy the 
deficiency. 

The background from which this theory 
springs is intricate and compounded of ele- 
ments such as genetics and biochemistry, 
with which the average doctor is not fa- 
miliar. For example, what is meant by 
“distinctive metabolic patterns”? It is not 
a concept generally accepted biochemically, 
and certainly there is no real evidence for 
metabolic individuality in relation to alcohol. 

Even the laboratory procedures used by 
Williams must be considered somewhat sus- 
pect. Thus, he establishes the fact that rats 
fed a vitamin-deficient diet will choose to 
drink an aqueous solution of alcohol when 
offered a choice between such a solution and 
water, and that the amount of alcohol drunk 
will be significantly decreased if certain 
substances, vitamins or others, are added to 
the deficient diet. 

Sut what does this mean? A choice be- 
tween an alcohol solution and water may 
be no choice at all if the animal requires 
calories of a type which are available to it 
only from the alcohol. The reason that rats 
choose an alcohol solution in preference to 
ordinary water has not been comprehended: 
Is it a matter of taste, of calories, or a need 
for a central nervous system depressant? 
Is it because sufficient carbohydrate or fat 
or protein is lacking in the diet? 

Lester and Greenberg *® conducted ex- 
periments in which they offered their rats 
a third choice, with interesting results. The 
third choice offered was, in one instance, a 
sucrose solution; in another, a saccharine 
solution, and, in the final instance, a solution 
of fat with solid sucrose added. All of these 
resulted in decreased alcoholic intake, with 
sucrose leading the list. Lester and Green- 
berg concluded that the effects of the sucrose 
may be due to its palatability, its caloric 
content, and its form, or to still other causes, 
since fat, solid sucrose, and saccharin all 
reduced the intake of alcohol but not to the 
same extent as the solution of sucrose. In 


q 
ay 
q 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


fact, a solution of sucrose almost abolished 
the intake of alcohol. These findings dem- 
onstrated that there is no preference for 
alcohol specifically. 

It must be emphasized that Williams’ 
work was, with one exception, conducted 
on rats and that rats do not drink for the 
same reasons as do humans. Attempts to 
confirm Williams’ theories in humans are 
few and in general do not bear out his con- 
tentions. Thus, Smith, Dardin, and Brown ** 
gave pantothenic acid and other components 
of the vitamin B complex to chronic alco- 
holics, with unimpressive benefit. 


Homosexuality 


In an examination of the genetic and so- 
called “organic” aspects of homosexuality, 
again, we are greatly indebted to Kallmann.'° 
He examined a consecutive series of 95 pre- 
dominantly or exclusively homosexual twin 
index cases of the male sex. In the two-egg 
group, nearly 60% of the co-twins of dis- 
tinctly homosexual subjects show no evi- 
dence of homosexuality at any age, and only 
11.5% of this group of co-twins have been 
given homosexuality ratings of 5 or 6 on 
Kinsey’s schema. 

In contrast to this, overt homosexuality 
was found to be present in 44 out of 45 
one-egg twins. These twins, moreover, 
tended overwhelmingly to be similar in the 
role they take in their individual sex activi- 
ties, as well as in the extent of feminized 
appearance and behavior displayed by them. 

To forestall objections that perhaps the 
twins inducted each other into homosexual 
practices, Kallmann found that, in general, 
the concordant twin partners claim that they 
developed their sexual tendencies independ- 
ently and often apart from each other. All 
of them categorically deny any mutuality in 
overt sex relations. 

Many will concur with Kallmann in the 
statement 7°: 

These twin data throw considerable doubt on 
the validity of purely psychodynamic theories of 
certain types of homosexual behavior patterns in 


adulthood, while strengthening the hypothesis of 
a gene controlled disarrangement in the balance 


between male and female maturation (hormonal) 
tendencies. The adaptational equilibrium between 
the potentialities of organic sex differentiation and 
the consequent pattern of psychosexual behavior 
are apparently so labile that the attainment of a 
maturational balance may be disarranged at dif- 
ferent developmental stages and by a variety of 
disturbing mechanisms. In any case, the inter- 
sexuality theory, or, more precisely, a genetically 
oriented “imbalance” theory—although still based 
on statistically insufficient and cytologically uncon- 
firmed evidence—can no longer be regarded as 
an implausible explanation for certain groups of 
male homosexuals. 


The intersexuality theory may need fur- 
ther discussion. It was developed by 
Lang,** who, in turn, used the theory of sex 
intergrades of Goldschmidt. Male-sex inter- 
grades are organisms which morphologically 
show all typical male characteristics, al- 
though their cells are genotypically deter- 
mined by a female set of chromosomes. 

Goldschmidt did his work on the gynan- 
dromorph, an insect with male and female 
characteristics mosaically distributed 
throughout its body. He found that he could 
experimentally establish successive stages of 
intersexuality from the full male through 
slightly and markedly feminized males to 
the completely transformed female-sex in- 
tergrade. He also experimentally produced 
a set of intersexes ranging from complete 
female through all intermediate stages to 
the male-sex intergrade. 

From this starting point, Lang argued as 
follows: If it is true that a percentage of 
male homosexuals are real male-sex inter- 
grades who are genetically female but who 
have lost all female morphological sex 
characteristics except their chromosome for- 
mula, then an undue preponderance of males 
should be found among the siblings of male 
homosexuals. If hereditary factors were 
operating in accord with the discussed genet- 
ic theories of intersexes, the effect would 
be more pronounced in persons with more 
complete renunciation of heterosexual ac- 
tivity. 

Lang studied 1015 cases of homosexuality 
taken from the police files in Germany. He 
found a male-female ratio of 121:100 rather 
than the normal 106:100. In the group aged 


521 


A. M. A.. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


over 25, which would consist of the more 
confirmed homosexuals, the ratio was 128.3: 


100. 

Obviously, this theory is open to certain 
doubts from the statistical point of view, 
even assuming that one can translate into 
terms of humans what is true of gynandro- 
morphs. As a theory, it is ingenious but 


unverified. Similarly unsatisfactory are 
most other investigations of the “organic” 
factors in homosexuality. 

Anyone who wishes to survey the avail- 
able knowledge in their field is referred to 
the work of Beach,?* who says in part: 

An exaggerated notion of the specificity of hor- 
monal effects upon mating behavior in lower ani- 
mals together with lack of appreciation of the 
relative importance of sociopsychologic versus 
physiologic influences in man, has led some investi- 
gators to conclude that sexual aberrations in the 
human may be referred in rather simple fashion 
to endocrine abnormalities. . . . 

It has been widely accepted that gonadal hor- 
mones are behaviorally sex-specific; this is to say 
that ovarian hormones normally facilitate feminine 
mating responses, while testicular hormones are 
ordinarily associated with the masculine sexual pat- 
tern. In one sense this is true, but the form of 
behavior which is elicited by endocrine manipula- 
tion is a joint product of the chemical constitution 
of the hormones and the genetic constitution of 
the organism under observation. It cannot 
safely be concluded that masculine sexual per- 
formance is always inhibited by estrogen and may 
be stimulated only by androgen. Goodale” states 
that a sexually inactive capon which was im- 
planted with ovarian tissue later began to crow 
and tread hens. 

Therefore, male and female behavior is 
not to be conceived of simply in terms of 
male and female In this 
respect, the work of Ellis*' is pertinent. 
He surveyed the reports of sexual behavior 
and libido of 84 human hermaphrodites and 
found that in the great majority of cases 
the preferred sex role and direction of desire 
corresponded to the masculine or feminine 
upbringing, regardless of the nature of the 
external and internal sexual morphology. 
He concluded that the determination of psy- 


chogenic sexuality in these cases depended 


sex hormones. 


522 


primarily upon environmental factors and 
was relatively independent of possible hor- 
monal effects. 


Typology 


Let us turn now to the intricacies of con- 
stitutional typology. This particular subject 
has a long history. It dates back at least to 
the time of Hippocrates, who distinguished a 
habitus apoplecticus (short and fat) from a 
habitus phthisicus (long and thin). 

Different anthropometric classifications 
have prevailed at different times. At present 
the best-known systems are those of Kret- 
schmer,** Rees and Eysenck,** and Shel- 
don.** Since Sheldon’s system is the most 
influential in this country, it will be dis- 
cussed in greater detail. 

Sheldon says: 

[A] somatotype is a series of three numerals, 
each expressing the approximate strength of one 
The 
first numeral always refers to endomorphy, the 
second to mesomorphy, and the third to ecto- 
morphy. When a 7-point scale is used, the soma- 
totype 7-1-1 is the most extreme endomorph, the 
1-7-1 is the most extreme mesomorph, and the 
1-1-7 is the most extreme ectomorph. 


of the primary components in a physique 


Endomorphy, or the first component [refers to] 
relation predominance in the bodily economy of 
structure associated with digestion and assimila- 
tion. [It implies] relatively great development of 
the digestive viscera. 

Mesomorphy, or the second component [refers 
to] relative predominance of the mesodermally 
derived tissues, which are chiefly bone, muscle and 
connective tissue. 

Ectomorphy, or the third component [refers to] 
relative predominance of the skin and its ap- 
pendages, which include the nervous system. 

In addition to these, Sheldon measures 
such various components as the following: 

(a) “Dysplasia,” calculated from five 
bodily regions. 

(b) “Gynandromorphy. The g compo- 
nent. The degree of predominance of fem- 
inine characteristics in a male physique, or 
of masculine characteristics in a female 
physique.” He calculates also primary and 
secondary g—primary referring to those 
gynandroid characteristics which are readily 
manifest in the standard somatotype photo- 


a 
AS 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


the 


gynandroid characteristics picked up on 


graph, and secondary referring to 
closer inspection, especially at physical ex- 
amination. 

(c) “The t component. The component of 
thoroughbredness. A rating on the aesthetic 
quality of the physical structure... . The 
t component is really aesthetic pleasing- 
ness.” This component is also divided into 
primary and secondary. 

(d) “Aesthenia.” This is not to be con- 
fused with Kretschmer’s aesthenic type of 
Sheldon 
refers not to the somatotype but “to 


the word, it 
the 


condition of being abnormally weak for the 


physique. As uses 


somatotype.”” 
(e) 
to bodies which are “strong, often extremely 


“Gnarled mesomorphy.” This reférs 


strong, but are usually heavy and cumber- 
some, with massive torsos and short legs. 
They are built close to the ground and sug- 
gest stunted, gnarled trees growing near the 
timberline.” 

(f) “Aplastic mesomorphy.” This refers 
to mesomorphs who have not “filled out” to 
a normal degree. “These 
youngsters somehow suggest leaves which, 
touched by frost, never unfolded properly 
yet have retained sufficient or even high 
vitality.” 

There can be no doubt that Sheldon has a 
system. How good a system it is, however, 
is quite another matter. In the first place, it 
is not as objective as the uninformed might 
think. In fact, Sheldon explicitly defends 
his right to subjective evaluations. In “Va- 
rieties of Human Temperament,’’®* he com- 
pares the task of the constitutional 
psychiatrist to that of a leather sorter or a 
wine taster. In “Varieties of Delinquent 
Youth,”™* he says: 

It is not quite a foolproof measure. For judg- 
ments of t [by ¢ he means, as above, the com- 
ponent of thoroughbredness] to have validity, the 
judges must have both aesthetic intelligence and 
integrity. They must be able to recognize beauty 
of proportion even though they may have racial 
and somatotype preferences or prejudices of their 
own. Achievement of such aesthetic integrity is 
not as difficult as might be feared. I have found 
that the average graduate student, when first un- 


mesomorphic 


dertaking a series of ratings of primary t from a 
radically mixed series of somatotype photographs, 
achieves a correlation of about +.80 with my 
ratings. For a few the correlation is almost per- 
fect at the outset. For a few it 
+.50. 

The issue is clear. Validity is established 
when the student’s aesthetic judgments con- 
form to Sheldon’s. And Sheldon—one must 
presume—knows what’s beautiful. 

Sheldon’s statistics have not escaped crit- 
icism. Adcock ** undertook a study of Shel- 
don’s figures 


is as low as 


but, in spite of several 
attempts, discovered that he was faced each 
time with the problem of finding the root 
of a negative number. He remarks, “Ob- 
viously there is something peculiar about 
these intercorrelations.’’ Lubin says about 
the intercorrelations that “the peculiarity is 
so great that one is forced to ask whether 
it may not be outside the boufids of math- 
ematical probability.” 

In considering typology, what particular 
measurements ought to be made? Evidently 
not just those of Sheldon’s. Other “consti- 
tutionalists,”’ such as Eysenck, criticize Shel- 
don for not giving sufficient importance to 
the factor of body size. The latter says,** 
“The general body size may be of greater 
importance for personality than body type.” 

Even working within the framework of 
Sheldon’s system, there is the possibility 
that the somatotype may not remain con- 
stant, despite his assertion that it does. This, 
at any rate, was the conclusion of Lasker,®® 
an anthropologist, who placed 34 volunteers 
on an insufficient diet for 24 weeks. During 
this period the subjects lost an average of 
24% of their body weight. Photographs 
were taken at the beginning and at the end 
of this period, and the somatotyping tech- 
nique was applied. Lasker found that every 
subject showed a significant change in soma- 
totype, all the measurements tending to de- 
crease. 

Eysenck * 
work : 


says, concerning Sheldon’s 


The figures given by him are interesting, but 
like so much else in his work, they are given en 
passant, without very much information being 


* Eysenck,™ p. 70. 


523 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


vouchsafed regarding conditions of the experi- 
ment, the controls adopted, or any of the other 
attendant circumstances which must be known 
before a judgment can be made. 

The difficulties of body typology are tri- 
fling, however, when compared with at- 
tempts to deal with types of personality or 
temperament. Thus, Kretschmer,** with 
some approximate justice, can divide people 
into pyknic, asthenic, athletic, and dysplastic 
body types. But when it comes to tempera- 
ment, he speaks, for example, of the “sensi- 
tive, cold, aristocratic type” and of “the 
type of pathetic idealist.” 

Sheldon ** speaks of “viscerotonia, the 
first component of temperament . . . endo- 
morphy is the same component measured at 
a purely structural or morphological level.” 
Viscerotonia comprises 20 traits, among 
which are listed “love of physical comfort, 
tolerance, need of people when troubled, 
love of polite ceremony.” 

“Somatonia” is the second component of 
the least-con- 


temperament measured at 


ditioned level of dynamic expression. Meso- 
morphy is the same component measured at 


the morphological level. Sheldon lists 20 
traits which can be used to measure this 
component. They include “the energetic 
characteristic,” “psychological callousness,” 
“the unrestrained voice,” and “claustropho- 
bia.” 

“Cerebrotonia” is the component of tem- 
perament which corresponds with ectomor- 
phy, and its 20 traits include “love of 
privacy,” “agrophobia,” “need of solitude 
when troubled,” and “vertical mental cleav- 
age, introversion.” 

Factor analysis is a discipline at least as 
difficult as psychoanalysis and as contro- 
versial. But, to evaluate typology, some 
understanding of it is needed. A competent 
working knowledge of this subject can be 
gained from a study of Eysenck’s “Dimen- 
sions of Personality.”** Despite methodolog- 
ical controversy, many serious workers find 
factor-analytical confirmation of the theory 
that the shape of the body and the per- 
sonality are related in some fashion as yet 
largely unknown. 


524 


For example, Kees conducted an an- 
thropometric investigation of 200 soldiers 
suffering from effort syndrome. The group 
as a whole was found to be significantly 
more leptomorphic than a comparable con- 
trol group. The term leptomorphic corre- 
sponds to Kretschmer’s asthenic or Shel- 
don’s ectomorphic group. 

Rees and Eysenck,** using their own sys- 
tem of typology, which examined 18 body 
measurements, and of personality typology, 
which included 200 psychiatric trait ratings, 
conducted an investigation on 400 neurotic 
British soldiers and 100 non-neurotic sol- 
diers. Their findings follow : 

1. “The leptomorphs tend to show a 
higher proportion of schizoid personality 
traits than do the eurymorphs.” (The 
eurymorph group is the same as the pyknic 
or endomorphic. ) 

2. “The neurotic group contains a signifi- 
cantly higher number of leptomorphs and 
eurymorphs and a significantly smaller num- 
ber of mesomorphs than does the normal 
group.” 

Seltzer *' conducted an investigation of 
258 normal Harvard undergraduates. His 
findings are summarized thus: 

Individuals possessing disproportions have a 
greater frequency of personality traits indicating 
lesser stability, lesser integration, greater sensitivity 
and complexity of the personality and lesser 
capacity for making easy social adjustments. 

Conversely, individuals with traits indicating 
“soundness,” stability, integration, vitality and 
strength of personality have fewer disproportions 
in their physiques than the average of the group. 


Similar were the impressions of Cabot, 
who found in 212 normal boys “a most strik- 
ing superiority of the athletosomes . . . in 
regard to such traits or patterns as com- 
petitiveness, influence, ascendence, social 
leadership.” He postulates a theory that 
“constitutional advantage of ‘good’ physique 
is a strong determinant of traits funda- 
mentally social in genesis and development.” 

But, as usual, there is dissension. 

Fiske ** conducted his studies on 133 boys, 
aged 13 to 17, who were students at a 
private school. He found that on intelligence 
testing there was no significant relationship 


4 
Fa 
d 
|__| 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


to somatotype group. Regarding personality 
tests, he found that “the number of signifi- 
cant findings in this study of adolescent boys 
is not greater than chance expectancy. The 
use of Sheldon’s improved procedure for 
classifying physique yielded the same paucity 
of significant relationships to physique that 
has been found in earlier studies.” 

Kleinberg and his associates ** conducted 
their investigation on two groups of stu- 
dents: the first, Columbia undergraduates; 
the second, Barnard undergraduates. Con- 
cerning their results on the male subjects, 
the conclusions are these: 

From a group of 153 subjects, homogeneous in 
age, sex, education, social and economic back- 
grounds, two sub-groups, leptose and pyknic, were 
selected on the basis of physical criteria. A number 
of mental tests were administered to both groups 
and their performances were compared. No reliable 
differences were found between the physical groups 
on any mental tests. 

The most surprising dissident voice of all 
is Sheldon’s. In “Varieties of Tempera- 
he says: 

If anything is demonstrated conclusively by the 
study as a whole, it is this: that neither the soma- 
totype alone, nor any other single factor, will 
suffice to “explain” a personality. Persons of the 
same somatotype frequently develop into singularly 
different kinds of people. . .. So many (apparently 
secondary) variables are at work that the specific 
manifestations of temperament can be predicted 
from the somatotype only within very wide limits. 

How wide these limits are can be shown 
by quoting his conclusions in Chapter 7: 

Among the two hundred cases, perfect agree- 
ment between somatotype and temperament occurs 
in 14 cases. Eleven cases show “radical disagree- 


ment” [his phrase] between temperament and 
somatotype. 


Temperament and morphology are not to 
be easily correlated, then, any more than are 
sexual disposition endocrinology. 
Equally difficult is any attempt to correlate 
morphology and heredity, and heredity and 
temperament. On this score, Cattell * says : 
Evidence [of the role of heredity in personality] 
is regrettably fragmentary and so uneven in re- 
liability that it is very difficult as yet to construct 
any scientifically satisfactory over-all picture. 

Hall ** says: 

In order to have a science of psychogenetics it 
is not sufficient to determine merely that certain 


behavior traits are genetically transmitted. This 
is the first step. Genetic analysis, the mapping of 
chromosomes and the specification of the modus 
operandi of the genes are also necessary functions 
of the psychogeneticist. 


Conclusions 


| have sought in this paper to examine 
some of the evidence concerning the “physi- 
cal” factors involved in human nature and 
human behavior. As a result of this study, I 
have arrived at certain conclusions. 

1. There is incontrovertible evidence that 
certain modes of behavior are genetically 
determined. Among these are certain cases 
of homosexuality and schizophrenia. The 
evidence is equally strong in manic-depres- 
sive psychosis and other conditions, which 
for reasons of space are not discussed in 
this paper. 

2. It is likely that genetic factors are in- 
volved in criminality and psychoneurosis. 
Temperament, also, probably has its genetic 
aspects. That is to say, genes may well 
have something to say about whether we are 
delinquent or law-abiding, happy or gloomy, 
radical or conservative. 

3. The importance of the genetic element 
varies enormously in different conditions. It 
plays a more important role in Huntington’s 
chorea, for example, than in juvenile delin- 
quency. Environmental factors, in the case 
of the latter, provoke the predisposed, or 
the somewhat predisposed, in a fashion that 
is not true of specific neurological disorders. 
The topics under discussion in this paper— 
schizophrenia, alcoholism, homosexuality, 
temperament—were chosen to illustrate pre- 
cisely this point, and were not the result of 
a Wagnerian obliquity on my part. 

4. The ways in which the genes operate 
to produce their result is almost completely 
unknown. There are virtually no hypothe- 
ses, good, bad, or indifferent. Listen to what 
the geneticists have to say: 

Haldane ** says: “Each gene is responsi- 
ble not for a unit character such as form 
or color, but for a unit biochemical process. 
Its status in the cell may be compared with 
that of an organ in the whole body.” 


525 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


Catcheside ** says: “A gene is primarily 
a hypothetical entity postulated to explain 
the results of breeding experiments.” 

Penrose *® says: 

According to present-day standards in human 
genetics, it is insufficient to classify diseases as 
recessive, dominant or sex-linked. . . . With im- 
perfectly recessive conditions (usually called 
dominant) i. e., those which are manifested in the 
heterozygote, variations of severity as between 
individuals and at different times in the same af- 
fected subject are the rule. Sometimes the con- 
dition amounts only to a susceptability to a disease 
or a diathesis. 

And, finally, Kallmann ™ says: 

No adequate estimate can as yet be made as to 
the total number of genes in a human chromosome. 
_. , While chromosomes are visible microscopically 
and can be analyzed chemically as _ consisting 
largely of nucleo-proteins . . . it is not yet possible 
to see or to analyze directly a gene unit. What is 
known about the chemical structure of genes is 
based on evidence obtained either by the ultra- 
violet action spectrum of gene mutation, or by com- 
parison with viruses. Genes are believed to be 
minute protein particles with high degree of spe- 
cificity and the stability of their specific properties 
apparently rests on certain protein or nucleic com- 
ponents, or both.” 

5. It may be that certain behavior dis- 
orders are the result of biochemical changes, 
either in the brain or in the body as a whole. 
But the evidence is as yet inconclusive and 
fragmentary. The experts in biochemistry, 
such as Pope, are most modest in their 
claims. This is not to say, however, that bio- 
chemical changes are unlikely etiological 
agents. We must conclude only that at pres- 
ent we just do not know. 

6. There is evidence that morphology and 
behavior are somehow related. For example 
(and it is almost the only valid example), 
there is a genuine difference in body build 
between groups of schizophrenics and 
groups of patients with manic-depressive 
psychoses. But how much farther in this 
direction can we go at present? It is im- 
possible to explain behavior, as Sheldon + 
tries, with this formulation: 

This is a viscerotonic-nice personality but cere- 
brotonia appears to be at least normally repre- 
sented. He lacks aggression and lacks sonototonic 
energy in general... . The temperamental pattern 


+ Sheldon,“ p. 621. 


526 


is probably normal to this sonototype, with an 
endomorphic control room matched against an 
ectomorphic boiler and driving machinery. 

What is “cerebrotonia,” after all? Only 
a word, not a thing, in the sense that ACTH 
and adrenaline are things. Even as a word, 
or a concept, it hardly represents an advance 
over “libido” or élan vitale. Here, again, we 
must be content with a moderate conclusion, 
namely, that physique does determine tem- 
perament in some fashion too complicated 
for us to understand with our present 
knowledge. 

7. It is obvious that psychiatry in the 
future will profit from more extensive and 
precise knowledge of the biochemistry of 
thought and emotion. But even lacking this 
knowledge, there is something we can do. 
We should try, in our thinking, to encom- 
pass both the “dynamic” and the “physical” 
point of view. We should try to think of 
the frightened, anxious patient in terms of 
his stress-ridden adrenal glands and me- 
tabolite-laden cortical cells. But we should 
give due regard, also, to the content of the 
fear, in all its furtive complexities. Such 
a dualistic approach can have important 
therapeutic consequences. To quote Kubie ™: 

There may be a neurophysiological mechanism 
for both normal and pathological repetitive phe- 
nomena, and this mechanism may consist in part 
of reverberating circuits along which nervous im- 
pulses not only can re-excite themselves, but in so 
doing may also isolate themselves in varying de- 
grees from external influences. For example, such 
an isolation could conceivably occur whenever the 
time relationships in the circuit are such that when 
the excitatory process has subsided, the whole cir- 
cuit goes into a refractory state. Under such cir- 
cumstances there would seem to be no way in 
which action currents from elsewhere in the nerv- 
ous system could exert an influence upon the closed 
circuit. This would constitute an organic limita- 
tion on any form of psychotherapy. 

Here we must remind ourselves that however 
plausible the hypothesis, the existence of such 
circuits remains a hypothesis. Yet the mere hypoth- 
esis opens up various alternatives to current con- 
ceptions both of the pathogenesis and of the 
maintenance of the neurotic process. For instance, 
structural or biochemical variations in the central 
nervous system might render one nervous system 
more liable than others to the formation of self- 


exciting circuits. Precise investigations of such 


4 

i 

= 


THE HUMAN BODY AND THE HUMAN BEING 


constitutional variants as these wait upon the de- 
velopment of refined electrophysiological and 
microchemical techniques. Such a closed circuit 
might offer a possible physiological explanation of 
the well-known clinical fact that once such repeti- 
tive disturbances are established, whether as a 
result of organic or of psychological causes, they 
may prove resistant to psychological influences. 

In affective disturbances, where this is par- 
ticularly true, the circuitous courses of the rever- 
berating waves with their autonomic involvement 
are of special interest, and in this connection it is 
relevant to note that such isolating circuits could 
explain the effidacy of shock therapies which by 
interrupting reverberating circuits could render 
the individual accessible both to external psycho- 
logical influences and to his own inner controls. 

From the viewpoint of therapy, then, it 
might at times be irrelevant to determine 
whether the disorder is the result of hered- 
ity or environmental factors. A fear, or an 
attitude, or a trait, however it arose, may be 
locked in the cells of the patient’s body, stone 
deaf or inaccessible to psychoanalytic blan- 
dishments and pleas. Every psychotherapist 
must have encountered many such patients. 
It should follow that the “dynamicist” need 
not banish from his thoughts the idea of 
electroshock or psychosurgery, the gas mask, 
or the hypodermic needle. In reciprocation, 
perhaps the “organicist’’ will forego the 
temptation to think of all human unhappi- 
ness as the by-product of a high blood pres- 
sure, or a low blood sugar. 

For truth is very elusive, and the whole 
truth about anything lies quite beyond hu- 
man grasp. We must never forget that there 
is dust in the air and a mote in the eye. 
In psychiatry, all our present-day techniques 
for influencing human behavior are not so 
brilliantly effective that we dare become 
complacent. This is as true of histamine 
therapy, carbon-dioxide therapy, and shock 
therapy as it is of psychoanalysis in its 
original form or its various heretical de- 
rivatives. 

It is my suggestion that our knowledge 
will grow if we renounce our sectarian 
biases and listen to what our neighbor in 
the next camp, or discipline, has to say. 


REFERENCES 


1. Keys, A., in The Biology of Mental Health 
and Disease, Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 
Paul B. Hoeber, Inc. (Medical Department of 
Harper & Brothers), 1952, p. 515. 

2. Smith, J. J.: A Medical Approach to Prob- 
lem Drinking: Preliminary Report, Quart. J. 
Stud. Alcohol 10:251-257, 1949. 

3. Meduna, L. J.: A Neurophysiological Theory 
of Psychoneuroses, J. Nerv. & Ment. Dis. 110:438, 
1949. 

4. Cobb, S., in The Biology of Mental Health 
and Disease, Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 
Paul B. Hoeber, Inc. (Medical Department of Har- 
per & Brothers), 1952. 

5. Bruetsch, W., in The Biology. of Mental 
Health and Disease, New York, Paul B. Hoeber, 
Inc. (Medical Department of Harper & Brothers), 
1952, p. 326. 


6. Bishop, G. H., in The Biology of Mental 
Health and Disease, New York, Paul B. Hoeber, 
Inc. (Medical Department of Harper & Brothers), 
1952, p. 161. 


7. Gerard, R. W.: The Biological Roots of 
Psychiatry, Am. J. Psychiat. 112:81-90, 1955. 


8. Hoch, P. H.: Experimentally Produced 
Psychoses, Am. J. Psychiat. 107 :607, 1951. 

9. Hoskins, R. G.: The Biology of Schizo- 
phrenia, New York, W. W. Norton & Company, 
Inc., 1946. 

10. Kallmann, F. J.: Heredity in Health and 
Mental Disorder, New York, W. W. Norton & 
Company, Inc., 1953. 


11. Slater, E.: The General Aspects of Per- 
sonality and Neurosis, Tr. International Congress 
of Psychiatry, Paris, Hermann & Cie, 1950, vol. 
VI, pp. 133-134. 


12. Altschule, M. D.: Bodily Physiology in 
Mental and Emotional Disorders, New York, 
Grune & Stratton, Inc., 1953. 

13. Hemphill, R., and Rees, W. L., in Perspec- 
tives in Neuropsychiatry, edited by Derek Rich- 
ter, London, H. K. Lewis & Co., Ltd., 1950. 

14. Hoagland, H., in The Biology of Mental 
Health and Disease, Milbank Memorial Fund, New 
York, Paul B. Hoeber, Inc. (Medical Department 
of Harper & Brothers), 1952, pp. 434-447. 


15. Bliss, E. L.; Migeon, C. J.; Hardin Branch, 
C. H., and Samuels, L. T.: Adrenocortical Func- 
tion in Schizophrenia, Am. J. Psychiat. 112:358- 
365, 1955. 


16. Sayers, G.: Adrenal Cortex and Homeosta- 
sis, Physiol. Rev. 30:241-320, 1950. 

17. Pope, A., in The Biology of Mental Health 
and Disease, Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 
Paul B. Hoeber, Inc. (Medical Department of 
Harper & Brothers), 1952, pp. 457-466. 


527 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


18. Lovell, H. W., and Tintera, J. W.: Alcohol- 
ism: Recent Advances in Its Treatment, M. Times 
80 :191-198, 1952. 


19. Lovell, H. W., and Tintera, J. W.: Endo- 
crine Treatment of Alcoholism, Geriatrics 4:274- 
280, 1949. 


20. Portis, S. A., and Alexander, F.: A Psycho- 
somatic Study of Hypoglycemic Fatigue, Psycho- 
som. Med. 64:41-60, 1944. 

21. Lovell, H. W., and Tintera, J. W.: Hypo- 
adrenocorticism in Alcoholism and Drug Addiction, 
Geriatrics 6:1-11, 1951. 


22. Voegtlin, W. L.: Treatment of Alcoholism 
with Adrenal Steroids and ACTH, Quart. J. 
Stud. Alcohol 14 :28-37, 1953. 


23. Lester, D., and Greenberg, L. A.: Alcohol- 
ism, 1941-1951: A Survey of Activities in Re- 
search, Education, and Therapy: JII. The Status 
of Psychological Knowledge, Quart. J. Stud. 
Alcohol 13 :444-452, 1952. 


24. Williams, R. J.: Nutrition and Alcoholism, 
Norman, Okla., University of Oklahoma Press, 
1951. 


25. Popham, R. E.: Critique of Genetrophic 
Theory of Etiology of Alcoholism, Quart. J. Stud. 
Alcohol 14:228-237, 1953. 

26. Lester, D., and Greenberg, L. A.: Nutrition 
and the Etiology of Alcoholism, Quart. J. Stud. 
Alcohol 13 :553-560, 1952. 

27. Smith, J. A.; Dardin, P. A., and Brown, 
W. T.: Quart. J. Stud. Alcohol 12 :381-385, 1951. 


28. Lang, T.: Zur Frage nach der genetischen 
Struktur von Homosexuellen und deren Eltern, 
Arch. Julius Klaus Stift. 20:51, 1945. 

29. Beach, F. A.: Hormones and Behavior, New 
York, Paul B. Hoeber, Inc. (Medical Department 
of Harper & Brothers), 1948. 


30. Goodale, H. D.: Note on the Behavior of 
Capons When Brooding Chicks, J. Animal Be- 
havior 6:319-324, 1916. 

31. Ellis, S.: The Sexual Psychology of Human 
Hermaphrodites, Psychosom. Med. 7 :108-125, 1945. 

32. Kretschmer, E.: Physique and Character, 
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1925. 

33. Rees, W. L., and Eysenck, H. J.: A Factorial 
Study of Some Morphological and Psychological 
Aspects of Human Constitution, J. Ment. Sc. 
91 :8-21, 1945. 

34. Sheldon, W. H.: Varieties of Delinquent 
Youth: An Introduction to Constitutional Psy- 
chiatry, New York, Harper & Brothers, 1942. 


35. Sheldon, W. H.: Varieties of Temperament : 
A Psychology of Constitutional Differences, New 
York, Harper & Brothers, 1942. 

36. Adcock, C. J.: A Factorial Examination of 
Sheldon’s Types, J. Personality 16:312-319, 1948. 

37. Lubin, A.: A Note on Sheldon’s Table of 
Correlations Between Temperamental Traits, Brit. 
J. Psychol., Statist. Sect. 3:186-189, 1950. 

38. Eysenck, H. J.: Dimensions of Personality, 
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, Inc., 1947. 

39. Lasker, G. W.: The Effects of Partial Star- 
vation on Somatotypes, Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 
5 :323-342, 1947. 

40. Rees, W. L.: Physical Constitution, Neurosis 
and Psychosis, Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. 37 :635-638, 
1944. 

41. Seltzer, C. C.: Body 
Dominant Personality Traits, Psychosom. Med. 
8 :75-97, 1946. 

42. Cabot, P. S. de Q.: The Relationship Be- 
tween Characteristics of Personality and Physique 
in Adolescents, Genetic Psychology Monographs, 
Vol. XX, No. 1, Provincetown, Mass., The Journal 
Press, 1938. 

43. Fiske, D. W.: A Study of Relationships to 
Somatotype, J. Appl. Psychol. 28 :505-519, 1944. 

44. Kleinberg, O.; Asch, S. E., and Block, H.: 
An Experimental Study of Constitutional Type, 
Genetic Psychology Monographs, No. 16, Province- 
town, Mass., The Journal Press, 1934, pp. 139-221. 

45. Cattell, R. B.: Personality, New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1950, p. 126. 

46. Hall, C. S.: The Genetics of Behavior, in 
Handbook of Experimental Psychology, edited by 
S. S. Stevens, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., 1951, Chap. 9. 

47. Haldane, J.-B. S.: Introduction to Biochemi- 
cal Aspects of Genetics, Biochemical Society 
Symposia, edited by R. T. Williams, London, 
Cambridge University Press, No. 4, 1950. 

48. Catcheside, D. G.: Gene Action and Muta- 
tion, in Biochemical Aspects of Genetics, Bio- 
chemical Society Symposia, edited by R. T. Wil- 
liams, London, Cambridge University Press, No. 
4, 1950, p. 32. 


49. Penrose, L. S.: Garrod’s Conception of In- 
born Error and Its Development, in Biochemical 
Aspects of Genetics, Biochemical Society Sym- 
posia, edited by R. T. Williams, London, Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1950, No. 4, p. 10. 

50. Kubie, L. S.: Some Implications for Psycho- 
analysis of Modern Concepts of the Organization 
of the Brain, Psychoanalyt. Quart. 22:21-68, 1953. 


Disproportions and 


a 


Malignant in 


|. Studies of Incidence 


OTTO F. EHRENTHEIL, M.D., Bedford, Mass. 

The observation that malignant tumors are 
rare among patients in psychiatric hospitals 
has been reported frequently.* More re- 
cently, however, it has been contended that 
the frequency of malignant tumors is just as 
high among psychotics as in the general 
population and that the previous notion was 
based on a misleading statistical method. 
However, the observations reported in both 
these groups of papers were based on mor- 
tality records, and it appears necessary to 
check the validity of the published opinions 
and conclusions by studying, in the setting 
of a large psychiatric hospital, the annual 
incidence of malignant tumors, that is, the 
number of cases first diagnosed during the 
study year. The present study is, as far as 
it could be ascertained, the first dealing with 
this aspect of the problem. 


Present Investigation 


During a three-year period from Dec. 31, 
1951, to Dec. 31, 1954, a total of 46 cases 
of malignant tumors were discovered in this 
hospital. Included in this number are those 
cases in which a malignant tumor was sus- 
pected before Dec. 31, 1951, but in which 
the diagnosis was proved by biopsy, opera- 
tion, or postmortem examination after this 


Received for publication June 15, 1956. 

From the Medical Service, Veterans Administra- 
tion Hospital, Bedford, Mass., and the Depart- 
Medicine, Tufts University Medical 
School, Boston. Physician, Medical Service, Vet- 
erans Administration Hospital; Clinical Instruc- 
tor in Medicine, Tufts University Medical School. 

* Reference 1, cited by Warren and Canavan.’ 
References 2-6. Freeman, W., cited by Warren 


ment of 


and Canavan.’ 


+ References 7-10. 


sychotic P. atients 


date.t Not included are those cases diag- 
nosed only clinically before, but not yet 
proved histologically, on Dec. 31, 1954. 
Furthermore, patients admitted to the hos- 
pital with the diagnosis of cancer or admitted 
in the same year as the discovery of the 
malignant tumor were not included, since it 
was felt that the malignancy may have pro- 
duced a deterioration of the total picture and 
may, in this way, have led to the hospital 
admission. 

These 46 cases of malignant tumors oc- 
curred in 44 patients, two patients having 
independent cancers in two different sites. 
A breakdown of the data on the 46 ma- 
lignant tumors is given in Table 1. 

t To be exact, there were 45 cases in which the 
diagnosis of malignancy was proved  micro- 
scopically and 1 in which it was not. However, 
this one case was included, as the patient showed 
metastatic carcinomatosis of the lung by x-ray 


and a subsequent intravenous pyelogram showed 
a kidney mass. 


TABLE 1.—Data on Forty-Six Malignant Tumors 
in Forty-Four Patients 


Site Number 


3 
3 
i 
6° 

Intestines 1 
2 

Plasma-cell 2 
Perineural ole 
Mucous membrane of i— 


* One patient had a skin cancer and a prostatic cancer. 


t One patient had skin cancers and a lung cancer; he had 
been operated on for skin tumors seven times: Epidermoid 
cancers of the skin were removed in 1947, 1948, 1959, and 1953; 
basal-cell cancers of the skin were removed in 1948 and 1952. 
In 1953 a primary lunge tumor was found by y-ray and sub- 
sequently proved by autopsy. 


529 


| 
= 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


TABLE 2. 


—Malignant Tumor Incidence Rates per 100,000 White Male Population and Expected 


and Actual Incidence in the V. A. soapieal, Bedford, Mass. 


2t 3 


4 


5t 6§ 7 


Average 
Length of 
Hospital 
Stay, Yr. 


No. of 
Patients 


During 3-Year Period 
12/31/51 to 12/31/54 


Number of 
Patient-Years 
Observed 


Annual 
Incidence 
Rate per 

100, 

White Male 
Population 


Actual 
Incidence 
V.A. Hosp. 


Expected 
Incidence 
| in V.A. Hosp. 


09999098 
Pe roa 


od 


~ 


3,091.4 


46 independent 
cancers in 44 
patients 


* Column 1: 


The age reference to a single year was necessary so that all patients could be included in one table. 


The ages 
of the patients are related to the year 1953, even though some patients may have died in 1952 or may have been admitted in 1954. 


+ Column 2: Each patient was counted only once, though he may have had a number of separate admissions to the hospital. 


+ Column 5: 


The figures are taken from U. 8. Public Health en No. 29 


Government Printing Office, Washington, D. 


The annual incidence rate is the number of cases per 100,000 population first diagnosed during the study year. 


29: Morbidity from Cancer in the United States, 1955, p. 87, 


§ Column 6: The figures for the expected incidence are arrived at pf a erns the number of observed patient-years by 
the incidence of cancer per 100,000 and then dividing the product by 100 


In Table 2 the incidence of newly discov- 
ered malignant tumors in the V. A. Neuro- 
psychiatric Hospital, Bedford, Mass., 
compared with the incidence found in the 
general white male population as reported 
in Public Health Monograph No. 29.§ 

Comment.—The reader may ask whether 
it is legitimate to increase the size of the 
sample by the device of using the case 
findings of three computing 
patient-years and to use these figures for 
determining the annual incidence rate. The 
answer is that this calculation is made pos- 
sible by the fact that, insofar as the dis- 
covery of cancer is concerned, the patient 
can be considered as an “independent sam- 
ple” each year; that is, the nondiscovery of 
cancer in a patient in one year does not 
influence the nondiscovery or the discovery 
of cancer in the same patient in the next 
year. 

a may further be asked why the table for 


p. 87. 


is 


years for 


“Dorn and Cutler,” 
530 


malignant tumors in the white male popula- 
tion was used. The answer is that the per- 
centage of nonwhite patients in this V. A. 
hospital is on the average less than 3%. 
As the table for cancer in nonwhite men 
shows the incidence to be lower than among 
whites, a correction of the figure for the 
expected cancer incidence would have to be 
scaled slightly downward and the findings 
of this study would not change but, rather, 
would be more marked. 

Analysis of the findings in Table 2 re- 
vealed that there is no significant statistical 
difference in the incidence of cancer in the 
two populations. The apparent higher figure 
in the psychotic population is very likely 
due to the closer medical observation given 
to patients in a V. A. Psychiatric Hospital 
than in the general population. Thus, it is 
apparent that the result of this study is 
contradictory to many statements in the lit- 
erature (see “Comment”) which held that 
cancer is rare among psychotics. 


|| Dorn and Cutler," p. 89. 


a 
| | | 
in 
| 
15-19 14 5 25.0 0 
20-24 103 84 25.4 0 
7 25-29 285 455 35.5 0 
-: 30-34 454 866 62.7 1 
i 35-39 336 609 96.3 0 
40-44 175 311 169.4 ( 0 
45-49 121 214 271.6 
4 50-54 * 151 315 516.0 0 
ad 55-59 512 1,215 816.9 | “4 | 
60-64 375 308 1,208.2 12 
65-69 149 358 1,532.9 ll } 
70-74 26 2,107.8 | 2 | 
e | 80 & over 13 32 | | 0 
Totals 2,735 = 5,462 33.6 
i 
= 


MALIGNANT TUMORS IN PSYCHOTIC PATIENTS 


General Comment 


The findings and conclusions of this in- 
vestigation, namely, that no difference exists 
in the incidence of malignant tumors in psy- 
chotic and in the general population appear 
to be especially interesting when they are 
compared with findings and conclusions pre- 
viously reported. Most writers on this sub- 
ject had used for their investigations the 
proportionate mortality rate, and the results 
of their studies will be summarized briefly. 

In the report for 1909 of the Commission- 
ers in Lunacy for England and Wales,’ it 
is stated “There remains one morbid condi- 
tion (cancer) which is responsible for an 
increasing number of deaths in the general 
community from which it would almost ap- 
pear as if the insane enjoyed some immu- 
nity.” Warren and Canavan? cite in their 
paper a number of authors {| who reported 
a low incidence of cancer mortality among 
psychotics. The number of cancer deaths 
found in mental institutions was only one- 
third the number in the general population. 
Warren and Canavan’s own investigation 
was based on legal autopsies in a period of 
20 years performed in cases of sudden or 
unexpected death at various state mental 
hospitals. They reported among 2627 autop- 
sies 114 cases of cancer, or an occurrence 
of 4.3%. They consider this figure ex- 
tremely low, and their findings seemed to 
be in agreement with those of other authors 
(Hahnemann,’ Chevens,* Lind,5 Lombard,® 
Freeman,# and others). As a result of 
their investigations, Warren and Canavan * 
speculate that “evidence is accumulating that 
a constitutional predisposition to cancer, per- 
haps hereditary, exists. Heredity may also 
be of importance in insanity. We must at 
least consider the hypothesis that the soil 
best suited for the development of cancer 
differs from that in which insanity de- 
velops.” 

As opposed to this statement, there are 
reports in the literature noting the oc- 
"4 References 3-6. Freeman, W., cited by Warren 


and Canavan.’ 
# Cited by Warren and Canavan? 


currence of malignant tumors in psychotic 
patients to be not smaller than, but just 
the same as, that in the general population 
(Opsahl,? Copeman and Greenwood,® Peller 
and Stephenson®). Scheflen!* discussed 
this controversy and showed that the two 
groups of investigators used two different 
statistical methods. The proportional mor- 
tality rate for cancer shows how often can- 
cer is found in the autopsy material, and 
this proportion was always found to be low 
in a psychiatric hospital. This, according to 
Scheflen, gives misleading results. He 
pointed out that in Massachusetts the annual 
death rate was about seven times as great 
in the institutionalized psychotic population 
as it was in the general population. This 
higher death rate of psychotics obtained else- 
where in the United States and in _ the 
sritish Isles. Scheflen then stated: 

Populations can be compared for specific causes 
of death on the basis of proportionate mortality 
rates only when they have equal or nearly equal 
death rates. In other words, if the members of 
one population are dying seven times as fast 
of tuberculosis, for instance, as those of another, 
they will not survive to die of cancer. Propor- 
tionate mortality rates, based on the total deaths, 


are dependent, then, on the death rate from all 
other conditions. 


The same explanation was given by Peller.!° 
According to him, dementia paralytica, 
tuberculosis, alcoholism, and suicide are so 
much commoner in mental hospitals than in 
the general population of similar age distri- 
bution that even a higher cancer incidence 
and mortality are compatible with a di- 
minished ratio of cancer in proportion to all 
other deaths. If, however, the number of 
cancer deaths is viewed in relation to the 
number of psychotic patients in the par- 
ticular age group (Peller), there seems to 
be almost no difference between the psy- 
chotic and the nonpsychotic population (can- 
cer death rate in contradistinction to 
proportional mortality rate for cancer). 
Scheflen ?* has tried to establish the cancer 
death rate for the Worcester State Hospi- 
tal by studying the records of all patients 
who died there from 1928 to 1942. He 
found (a computed series of ) 295 cases of 


531 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


death from malignant tumors, in 144 of 
which autopsy was performed. These deaths 
occurred among 55,000 patient-years (num- 
ber of patients multiplied by the period of 
hospitalization). On the basis of his re- 
search, Scheflen came to the conclusion that 
“the opinion that cancer is rare in psy- 
chiatric hospital patients, relatively or ab- 
solutely, does not seem justified.” 

The results of my own studies are in 
agreement with Scheflen’s and Peller’s find- 
ings and were arrived at by another sta- 
tistical approach, namely, the annual inci- 
dence rate. This latter method has the great 
advantage that less unproved assumptions 
are necessary. Scheflen made the assump- 
tion that the occurrence of cancer in the 
cases of death without autopsy was pro- 
portionately the same as in the cases with 
autopsy. This assumption is probably cor- 
rect, but it can be neither proved nor dis- 
proved. No such assumption was necessary 
in computing the incidence rate in our hos- 
pital. Last, but not least, the incidence and 
prevalence rates are much closer to the daily 
work of the clinician than are statistics based 
on mortality rates. I was more fortunate 
than the previous authors in having at my 
disposal the monograph of the U. S. Public 
Health Department on the morbidity from 
cancer. 


Incidence of Malignant Tumors in the 
Various Psychiatric Diagnostic Groups 


The fact that no difference exists between 
the incidence of cancer in the psychotic and 
that in the nonpsychotic population. still 
leaves open the question of whether a dif- 
ferential incidence exists among the various 
psychiatric diagnostic groups. This question 
requires examination, since quite a number 
of investigators * reported a higher oc- 
currence of cancer in paranoid patients than 
in patients with hebephrenic and catatonic 
schizophrenia. However, since these studies 
were based on mortality statistics, it appears 
to be of interest to determine whether the 
described difference is also found when the 


* References 12-15. 


532 


study dates are based on microscopically 
verified newly diagnosed cases and not on 
mortality statistics. 

Table 3 lists all the cases of malignant 
tumors and shows the age of the patients, 
their psychiatric diagnoses, and the site of 
the tumor. The data in this Table become 
more meaningful when they are seen in re- 
lation to the distribution of the male 
ford hospital population grouped according 
to age and psychiatric diagnosis. This is 
done in Table 4, for the hospital population 
as of June 30, 1953. 

Using the information in Table 4 and the 
cancer incidence rates for the white male 
population given in U. S. Public Health 
Monograph 29,+ we arrive at the following 
findings : 


1. In 1509 observed patient-years in the 
paranoid group, the expected incidence of 
malignant tumors was 7.4 and the actual in- 
cidence was 10 (in 9 patients). 

2. In the combined group of catatonics 
and hebephrenics were 2208 patient-years, 
and the expected incidence of ‘malignant 
tumors was 12.1 and the actual incidence 
13 (in 12 patients). 

3. In the combined groups of patients 
with the catatonic, hebephrenic, simple, and 
undetermined types of schizophrenia (all 
the schizophrenics except the paranoids), we 
find for a total number of 2871 observed 
patient-years an expected incidence of 15.0 
malignant tumors and an actual incidence of 
20 (in 19 patients). Thus, on the basis of 
the admittedly limited experience of the 
tumor clinic of our hospital, no evidence has 
been found which supports the contention 
that the incidence of malignant tumors in 
schizophrenics is greater in the paranoid 
than in the nonparanoid type. 


Summary 


The problem of the occurrence of ma- 
lignant tumors in psychotic patients, which 
previously had been studied by using mor- 
tality data, was investigated by determining 
the annual incidence. 


+ Reference 11, p. 87. 


3 
| 
| | 
a 
a 
: 
— 
‘al 
ag 
: 


IV 


I I £ L |ate] | t+6 | I | I 
| | 


Hd | da d | 


Od 


lg || dav H das a 


| at I | 4 | 1 | iv jaso! stv | ss | | 

| | |_| 


Ayawo 19 


Iv | dq} tv 


| dnoipn oy 


$2°0 £9 | oor | ge | 0" | ] | Vol | or 
| | 
| | | 
| | | | | | | 
| | | 
s | ¢ 6 | 9 |S" zs | uo} owed 
| | | | 
| Pal ze | 9 4 | we | 
| ya 
| | | 
} (ULM 
| | | 
I 6 8 19 60 862 | 16 09 | | ost | 962 
| } 
oz | e | oa | | 9 | 991 49430 
£ 0% 18 | 2 | se or | zoe ody 
| fe | Lt ss | 66 | z9 L | I | 
| | | | 
9 | | o | 9s | | w | 26 Le £09 prouweg 
| 
| | 69 ¥9 6g | o | w | | | | og sjsouseiq 
40 | <2 | 02 | 09 ss | | | ve | +z 0% | 1} | 
| 


a 
al 
ia 
N 
£ 
3 


MALIGNANT 


Contrary to the conclusions of some pre- 
vious studies, it was found that no signifi- 
cant difference exists between the incidence 
of malignant tumors in psychotics and that 
in the general population. 

On the basis of an admittedly small sam- 
ple, it was found that the occurrence of 
cancer among paranoids and that among 
other schizophrenic groups does not seem 
to be different. 

Results of investigations based on the 
proportionate mortality rate and on the an- 
nual death rate from malignant tumors 
among psychotics are discussed and com- 
pared with the results of this study. 

Miss Ann Kelley, the Medical Records Librarian 
of the V. A. Hospital, Bedford, Mass., 
in compiling the statistical data. 


helped 


REFERENCES 


1. Report of the Board of Control of the 
Commission of Lunacy for England and Wales, 


for 1909. 


2. Warren, S., and 


: Canavan, M.-M.: Fre- 
quency of Cancer in the Insane, New England 
J. Med. 210:739-742, 1934. 

3. Hahnemann, V.: Cancer Mortality and Men- 
tal Diseases, Ugesk. leger 93:1132-1139, 1931. 

4. Chevens, L. C. F.: Correlation of Causes of 


TUMORS IN PSYCHOTIC PATIENTS 


Death with Type of Insanity, J. Ment. Se. 77 :562- 
577, 1931. 

5. Lind, W. A. T.: Cancer and Chronic In- 
sanity, M. J. Australia 2:378-379, 1928. 

6. Lombard: House Document No. 1200, Com- 
monwealth of Massachusetts, Boston, 1925. 

7. Opsahl, R.: Frequency 
Patients with Mental Diseases, 
legevidensk. 94:771-790, 1933. 

8. Copeman, S. M., and Greenwood, M.: Min- 
istry of Health, Publication No. 
36, 1926. 

9. Peller, S., and Stephenson, C. S.: Cancer in 
Mentally Ill, Pub. Health Rep. 56:132-149, 1941. 

10. Peller, S.: Cancer in Man, New York, In- 
ternational Universities Press, 1952. 

11. Dorn, H. F., and Cutler, S. J.: Morbidity 
from Cancer in the United States: I, U. S. Public 
Health Monograph No. 29, U. S. Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare, 1955. 

12. Scheflen, A. E.: Malignant Tumors in In- 
stitutionalized Psychotic Population, A.M. A. 
Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 66:145-155, 1951. 

13. Lewis, N. D. C.: Research in Dementia 
Praecox: Past Attainments, Present Trends, 
Future Possibilities, New York, National Com- 
mittee for Mental Hygiene, 1936. 

14. White, W. A.: The Social Significance of 
Mental Disease, Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 22 :873- 
900, 1929. 

15. Sheldon, W. H.; Stevens, S. S., and Tucker, 
W. B.: The Varieties of Human Psysique, New 
York, Harper & Brothers, 1940. 


of Cancer Among 


Norsk mag. 


Great Britain, 


535 


= 


of Psychosis by a o 
Scopolamine and Abpha-Chloralose 


RUSSELL MONROE, M.D. 

GEORGE JACOBSON, M.D., New Orleans 
and 

FRANK ERVIN, M.D., Mandeville, La. 


The investigation of physiologic concomi- 
tants of disturbed behavior has been of in- 
terest for many years. In particular, the 
use of the EEG has been emphasized since 
the days of Hans Berger, and some mean- 
ingful correlations have been made in the 
case of “psychopathic” or aggressive be- 
The value of the EEG 
in recognizing epilepsy and epileptic equiva- 
lents is common knowledge. 


havior disorders. 


However, in 
spite of much work on psychosis and a 
fairly widespread agreement that there is a 
“higher incidence” of EEG abnormalities in 
hospitalized psychotic patients than in the 
general population, little other meaningful 
correlation has For a good 
referred to. 


been noted. 
review, Ellingson® may be 
Interest in this subject has been renewed in 
recent years by the description of subcorti- 
cal electrophysiologic abnormalities in psy- 
chotic patients by Heath, Sem-Jacobsen, 
Delgado, and others. These investigations 
have raised the question as to whether there 
is in some or all psychotic patients a coinci- 
dent neurophysiologic dysfunction which can 
be consistently demonstrated. If such an 
abnormality could be demonstrated in at 
least a subgroup are psychotic patients, an 
important clue might be afforded the fur- 


Received for publication June 12, 1956. 
Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Tu- 
lane University School of Medicine (Dr. Monroe 


and Dr. Jacobson). Research Unit, Southeast 


Louisiana Hospital, Mandeville, La. (Dr. Ervin). 
Aided in part by research grant from The Com- 
monwealth Fund. 


536 


ther investigation and more rational therapy 
of schizophrenia and other psychoses. 

That 
turbed cerebral function and behavioral ab- 


there is correlation between dis- 
normality has long been emphasized in the 
case of the psychomotor epileptics, whose 
complete seizures may well resemble psy- 
chotic states, as Hughlings Jackson clearly 
recognized. More recently, Ervin, Epstein, 
and King * have pointed out the high inci- 
dence of a personality disorder often similar 
to schizophrenia in patients in whom tem- 
poral spike abnormalities were present in 
the EEG, whether or not they had frank 
psychomotor seizures. Similar observations 
have been made by Hill '® and others. 

The possibility of electrophysiologic dys- 
function in the schizophrenic (not ordinarily 
detectable on the EEG) raises the question 
of whether proper activation might make it 
detectable, as is often the case in epilepsy. 
Our attention was drawn to a report by 
Sercel* suggesting the use of a mixture 
of scopolamine and a-chloralose (SAC) for 
the activation of the EEG in epileptics. In 
his small group of patients, all three with 
psychomotor epilepsy became acutely psy- 
chotic under this drug combination. He 
states this was not a typical psychomotor 
seizure. The French literature had empha- 
sized the value of this drug combination in 
activating epileptic records, particularly be- 
cause it did not produce clinical seizures 
(Baruk*). A recent article by Verdeaux 
and reported on a group of 
124 patients with “doubtful spells, char- 
acter disturbances, impulsive behavior, or 
psychasthenic symptoms,” whom they com- 
pared with 121 patients with overt epilepsy. 


associates 


* References 7 and 8. 


a 
| 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 


this that 
hypersynchrony and/or the appearance of 


In group of patients he noted 
spikes was the characteristic effect on the 
electroencephalogram. In 73 psychiatric pa- 
tients, hypersynchrony appeared 48 times 
and was described as the characteristic of 
this group. The epileptic group, on the other 
hand, commonly showed spikes (except in 
cases of petit mal, where definite spike-and- 
dome complexes appeared). This author did 
not note behavioral changes in detail, al- 
though he did mention “states of satyriasis, 
confusional states, and certain psychic mani- 
festations that French 

larval epilepsy of Morel.” 


psychiatrists call 

An earlier paper by Monroe and asso- 
ciates ' describes the effects on the EEG 
of the first 30 psychiatric cases in our group 
given this drug. The common effect on the 
EEG was slowing and slight build-up in 
amplitude of the record. The most frequent 
change in the patient group was the appear- 
ance of paroxysmal, high-amplitude, hyper- 
synchronous discharges, usually of a 
slow-wave type, which were either focal or 
generalized. Some patients showed, in addi- 
tion, focal or generalized spike discharges, 
and a few patients showed only isolated 
spikes in response to the activation, 

The physiologic basis of the EEG effect 
of SAC is not clear. Choralose has long 
been used as a laboratory anesthetic, and 
one of its characteristics is its both depress- 
ing and stimulating action on the central 
nervous system. lor example, on peripheral 
sensory stimulation in animals, the evoked 
secondary response is suppressed in the cor- 
tical sensory receiving area while the pri- 
mary response becomes exaggerated. It has 
also been noted that in animals under 
chloralose anesthesia a light tap on a limb 
may precipitate a motor seizure, as in the 
strychninized animal. The general impres- 
sion is that chloralose produces an extreme 
facilitation of cortical responses while inhib- 
stem, re- 
sponses, and indeed producing anesthesia. 
Gestaut ° has emphasized the double, appar- 
ently parodoxical effect of chloralose on 
cerebral excitability, the 


iting other, particularly brain 


demonstrating 


lengthening of the cycle of excitability of 
the cortex seen with all anesthetics, includ- 
ing the barbiturates, but coincidentally the 
increase in the amplitude of the cycles, 
similar to that produced by convulsive sub- 
| Metrazol] ). 
That the excitatory effect is primarily in 


stances ( pentylenetetrazol 
the cortex is suggested by some work of 
Moruzzi,*> who has demonstrated that the 
excitatory effect is abolished by decerebra- 
tion in mammals and does not appear in 
pigeons, who have little cortex (see also 
Rosenblueth and Cannon '*). As both sleep 
and stimulants are used clinically for EEG 
activation, it is not surprising that a drug 
with the combined properties 
above would be a potent activator. 


described 


Jecause of these interesting physiologic 
properties, it was felt that administration of 
scopolamine-a-chloralose with simultaneous 
behavioral and EEG observations might 
prove a fruitful research technique. The 
purpose of this project was to investigate 
(1) whether there was a specific group of 
psychotic patients in whom the administra- 
tion of SAC would produce EEG abnor- 
malities; (2) whether behavioral disturb- 
ances could be produced in a significant 
number of psychotic patients; (3) whether 
the behavioral disturbances induced corre- 
lated with specific EEG abnormalities, and to 
what extent the behavioral changes were 
similar to the patient’s spontaneous symp- 
toms, rather than a simple toxic effect of the 
drug, as seen in alcohol or bromide intoxi- 
cation, or some new pattern of disturbance, 
such as that produced by lysergic acid di- 
ethylamide (LSD) or mescaline, and (4) 
whether there was a specific symptom com- 
plex characteristic of those patients activated 
which would allow their recognition as a 
clinical diagnostic group. 


Method 


chloralose activation in our 
studies was similar to that employed by Bercel.* 
All the patients had had a previous routine EEG. 
A 10- to 15-minute base-line EEG recording was 
made on the day of the experiment, including at 
least one 3-minute period of hyperventilation. 


The technique of 


Scopolamine-a-chloralose was dissolved in water 


537 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


and given by mouth. EEG recordings were started 
with hyperventilation every 15 or 30 minutes. 
Records were followed for as long as two to three 
hours, or until maximal EEG abnormalities ap- 
peared. In some patients, follow-up studies were 
done during the next 24 hours. Also, pulse rates 
were taken as an additional method of following 
the effectiveness of the chloralose. Side-effects 
were essentially those reported in the original 
study.” 

In all of the subjects, both volunteers and pa- 
tients, a combination of 500 mg. of chloralose and 
0.5 mg. of scopolamine hydrobromide was used. 
When the study was begun, this combination of 
drugs was the only available product that contained 
pure a-chloralose. Recently, however, a-chloralose 
has become available, and it is planned to use this 
preparation in the future, since comparative studies 
reveal that scopolamine has no potentiating effect 
as far as behavioral or EEG changes are con- 
cerned. 

The experimental set-up included an EEG room 
with one-way mirrors so that the subject could be 
under constant observation. One of us or an EEG 
technician was always in attendance. The standard 
technique for electrode applications to the scalp 
and the EEG recordings was used. A brief mental- 
status examination was usually performed at the 
beginning of the test and again at the end. In 
addition to this, the patients were encouraged to be 
spontaneous in reporting of symptoms, feelings, 
thoughts, or sensations during the test period, but 
no direct questions were asked. At the end of the 
study, the subjects were carefully questioned about 
specific changes in affect or thought content, par- 
ticularly regarding the appearance of symptoms 
spontaneously occurring in the past. If these were 
reported only on direct questioning, their validity 
was carefully weighed. 

The control series consisted of 31 subjects. The 
first 15 were primarily laboratory workers, physi- 
cians, and other personnel connected with the pro- 
ject. Of these 15 subjects, 4 showed borderline 
EEG abnormalities during the base line which 
were intensified on activation through the admin- 
istration of chloralose. The second group of 
voluntéers consisted of 16 subjects, mostly nurses, 
medical students, secretaries, etc., and, of these, 3 
showed borderline abnormalities in the base-line 
EEG. It is interesting to note that the second 
group of volunteers were primarily “solicited vol- 
unteers,” who worked either in the medical school 
or at the hospital used in conjunction with the 
study. They showed a high incidence of emotional 
problems, many attending the outpatient psychiatric 
clinic; and there was a high incidence of previous 
head injury or neurologic disorder in this group. 
Many were obviously motivated to volunteer to 
“find out more about thernselves.”” This group was 


538 


a dramatic reminder of the importance of distin- 
guishing between “controls” and “volunteers,” par- 
ticularly in psychological investigations. 

Half of the neurology patients had a proved 
diagnosis of focal cortical disease on clinical, lab- 
oratory, or operative examination. In two cases 
only equivocal findings were present on neurologic 
examination. The other neurologic patients were 
a group of suspected epileptics for whom careful 
hospital work-up, including routine EEG’s, had 
failed to clarify the diagnosis and for most of 
whom the EEG was normal or borderline. 

The psychiatric patient group is not a cross 
section of a usual hospital population, since many 
of the early cases examined had marked impulsive 
or “episodic” behavior, although later cases were 
selected at random. Our hospital population also 
contained many patients diagnosed as schizophrenic, 
although no secondary symptoms of delusions or 
hallucinations had ever been present. This weighted 
patient sample probably accounts for the higher 
incidence of base-line EEG abnormality than is 
usually seen and may produce a higher per cent of 
activation with SAC than a chronic hospital pop- 
ulation would show. No patients or volunteers 
over 50 or under 17 years of age were used. All 
of the psychiatric patients had neurologic work- 
ups and routine skull x-rays. 


Results 


Electroencephalographic Findings.—Fig- 
ures 1 and 2 summarize the experimental 
findings; however, certain important details 
need elaboration. Of the 15 neurologic pa- 
tients who have proved central nervous sys- 
tem lesions, 13 showed focal activation on 
the side of the lesion (if it was lateralized) 
after the administration of SAC. This oc- 
curred despite the fact that eight had either 
normal or borderline EEG’s during routine 
electroencephalographic studies.} The two 
who did not show activation had minimal 
localizing signs and symptoms, with no x-ray 
or operative evidence of focal lesion. The 
16 epileptics reported all had minimal symp- 
toms and signs, and 13 of the 16 had normal 
or questionable electroencephalograms dur- 
ing the usual routine recording. It is to be 
noted that after SAC 15 of the 16 had defi- 


+ By borderline EEG we mean slight build-up 
on hyperventilation with immediate return to nor- 
mal, questionable amplitude asymmetry, slightly 
slow or fast records, or questionable focal or ran- 
dom spikes. 


4 

= 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 7 
Experimental Gp. Baseline EEG Activated EEG Behavioral Responses 
| Border- Abnor- Border-| Abnor- | Reloxa- | Minimal Clouding [Recurrence tie 
Sub-Group [Normal | jine | mal jine | moi | tion change in| of Seizure discrete beh 
| | Behevior |sensorium | symptoms 
Without per- 
sonality dis-] 16 | 2 1 13 6 14 2 3 
|History ot | | | 
S |neuro. complif 2 2 | 2 2 
S | cation(4) | | | 
> | Wwith known | 
personality | 3 2/|3 7 
disorder(8) 
Total = 3! 14 i711 | 8 3 
257 6 | 2 | 
Total = 31 ei 3 28] 19 6 | 
| 
“ar 23| 8113 }10 | 1 | 33] 2 | 0 | 2 2 | 18 | 
| 
Total = 65 37 | 13 | 15 | 15 | 2 | 48] 12 23 4 2 24 | 


Fig. 1—Summary of reactions to scopolamine-a-chloralose (SAC). 


nite evidence of EEG abnormalities compat- 
ible with the clinical diagnosis. A detailed 
report of these patients is now in prepara- 
tion, but they are mentioned here to support 
the concept that the paroxysmal hyper- 
synchrony or spiking activity seen after 
administration of SAC is an augmentation 
of a real potential for this type of physio- 
logic response. 
ported by the consistent augmentation of 
any slight abnormality in the EEG in all 
groups studied. If this is true, it is striking 
that of the 65 psychiatric patients 48 should 
show definite paroxysmal electroencephalo- 
graphic activity after the administration of 
SAC, although only 15 had any abnormali- 
ties during routine electroencephalograms. 
This group of 48 patients does not include 
those who showed mild generalized slowing 
in the record, which we feel is characteristic 
of the toxic effects of SAC. (This effect 
can be elicited in normals who have not 
shown activation with the usual dose of 
500 mg. if the dose is raised to a toxic 
level.) To us this suggests that in a large 


This concept is also sup- 


group of severely disturbed patients, one 
of the physiologic abnormalities heretofore 
not conclusively demonstrated is this tend- 
ency toward 
(Hill 7°). 

Our small group of volunteers, however, 


cortical hypersynchrony 


showed a high incidence of similar activity, 
with 17 of 31 demonstrating paroxysmal 
hypersynchrony after SAC. However, de- 
tailed reinvestigation of the group revealed 
that in eight volunteers detailed psychiatric 
and psychological studies in the departmen- 
tal outpatient clinic done prior to this study 
showed evidence of severe personality dis- 
order, with a diagnosis of probable psycho- 
sis. Four others had a good history of 
central nervous system complication; three, 
of severe head trauma; one, of migraine. In 
this particular group of 12 volunteers, 11 
showed activation. Only 3 of the 19 in the 
group who did not have evidence of dis- 
turbed behavior or a borderline base-line 
EEG were similarly activated. It is obvious 
from the above that a carefully screened 


539 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


100. 
EEG 
901 abnormal! EEG 
80! Borderline EEG 
70! 
60! 
o 
& 50! 


baseline 
EEG 


boseline 


activated 
EEG 
octivoted 
activated 
EEG 
| 
| 


EEG 


G | 
Normal Volunteers with 
psychiatric or 

neurologic disorders 

(12) 


volunteers 
(19) 


Fig. 2.—EEG responses to activation. 


group of volunteers is needed to serve as 
“normal controls.” 

In agreement with Baruk,* we found that, 
despite this CNS activation, only 3 of the 
127 subjects had actual seizures. Two had 
psychomotor seizures associated with auto- 
matic movements, bizarre behavior, clouding 
of sensorium, and amnesia; the other lost 
consciousness and had occasional myoclonic 
jerks in the upper extremities, which could 
be aggravated by passive movement, after 
the onset of psychotic behavior. She re- 
sponded readily when 4 grains (0.25 gm.) of 
phenobarbital sodium was given intraven- 
ously, regaining consciousness immediately. 

Behavioral Response -—The SAC used in 
this study is marketed in Europe as a seda- 
tive.t The usual clinical response is a sense 
of lassitude, even weakness, indifference, 
and light sleep. Other effects are minimal 
behavioral changes (Fig. 1), such as loss of 
inhibition, mild euphoria, expression of 
warm, dependent needs, sometimes slightly 
seductive behavior, and occasionally exces- 
sive gaiety or silliness. Accompanying this 


540 


response there may be minor motor changes 
with myoclonic movements, particularly in 
the hands, aggravated by spontaneous or 
passive movement in the extremity. There 
may be a slight ataxia, and occasionally a 
positive Romberg sign, dizziness, and weak- 
ness. 

Of the 127 patients who took medication, 
9 showed a severe organic type of reaction. 
This was marked by clouding of sensorium 
with disorientation, memory loss, and per- 
severation, followed by amnesia. In many 
others of the group, mild 
difficulties in finer intellectual performance, 


experimental 


such as complicated calculations, awareness 
of the passage of time, or quick response 
to questions of orientation and recent mem- 
ory, could be elicited, as well as slight vague- 
ness in recalling the experience. However, 
as reported below, the clouding of sensorium 
Was not in any way proportionate to the 
disturbed behavior shown in those that had 


a psychotic reaction. 


Kuhlmann, Paris. 


Y 

EEG EEG 

30 Yj 
ZG baseline 
Yj boseline EEG 

20 

= | ZG; Yj EEG y 
lesions (16) patients 
(15) (65) 

4 

q 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 


Activation of Psychotic Behavior.—Oft 
the 48 psychiatric patients with EEG activa- 
tion, 24 showed evidence of psychotic re- 
actions, as described below (Fig. 3). In 


100 


90. Other subjects 

so} Psychiatric patients 

70 Sedative Effect Psychotic Effect 

60] 62 

50, 48 

40. 

301 

20) 65 

Percentages based Percentages based 
on total number of on total number of 
subjects Gpotients octivated EEG's. 

Fig. 3.—Behavioral responses to activation. 


every instance this was accompanied by 
paroxysmal hypersynchrony, although not 
correlated with the degree of EEG change. 
Many patients showed the paroxysmal 
hypersynchrony without evidence of psy- 
chotic behavior. Of the 62 subjects, who 
included the volunteers and the neurologic 
patients, 45 showed EEG activation but only 
2 demonstrated psychotic reactions. One be- 
came agitated, confused, depressed, and sui- 
cidal, had persistent vomiting, and showed 
hysterical acting out, requiring overnight 
hospitalization. A subsequent detailed medi- 
cal history revealed that similar reactions 
had occurred on two occasions in the past 
when she had general anesthesia. The other, 
a neurologic patient with grand mal and 
psychomotor seizures, was actually hospital- 
ized on the psychiatric service at the time 
because of the bizarreness of these seizures. 
He was of borderline intelligence but did 
not demonstrate psychotic behavior except 
during ictal states; he, therefore, was in- 
cluded in the neurologic group. Although 


he was oriented under the drug, he halluci- 
nated a vision of his girl friend, talked with 
her, and tried to get up from the bed to 
hug her. The low incidence of psychotic 
behavior in those patients who have not in 
the past shown similar behavior spontane- 
ously suggests that the phenomenon induced 
by SAC is not similar to the specific psy- 
chosis-inducing effect of LSD or mescaline. 
Moreover, normals who have shown no evi- 
dence of EEG activation or psychotic be- 
havior under the drug, but who have taken 
high doses of SAC, show the toxic phenom- 
enon of sleepiness, confusion, and disorien- 
tation, with amnesia, but no_ psychotic 
behavior. This supports the concept that 
SAC behavioral activation reflects an activa- 
tion of true psychological potentiality for 
psychotic behavior. Figures 2 and 3 sum- 
marize in graphic form both the EEG acti- 
vation and the behavioral activation of the 
experimental group under SAC. 

In the group of 26 patients who showed 
psychotic behavior (Fig. 4) a predominant 
reaction was acting out of sexual, angry, or 
fearful impulses, which occurred in 14 
cases; 12 complained of feelings of unreality 
or depersonalization; 9 had definite fear and 
rage reactions not accompanied by acting 
out; 9, depressions, while only 3 had overt 
hallucinations and 2 delusions; 6 showed 
extensive confusion, which was not just 
clouding of sensorium; only 2 had severe 
disorientation, and 3 had complete amnesia 
for the experience. 

In view of the predominance of acting 
out and depersonalization manifest under the 
SAC and the fact that the overtly psychotic 
behavior was frequently similar to the spon- 
taneous behavior shown by the patient (in 
22 of the 26 patients), it was felt that this 
drug might differentiate a group of pa- 
tients characterized by impulsive acting out 
of an episodic nature. Of the 26, 16 had 
definite evidence of impulsive behavior, and 
19 showed episodic behavior disorders. Of 
the remaining experimental subjects who 
were psychiatric patients but who did not 
show psychotic behavior under the influence 


541 


: 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


Psychotic Reactors No Psychoses 

— 
<= 
= 
© 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 2 30 40 50 


Percent 


Percent 


Fig. 4—Summary of psychotic reactions to scopolamine-a-chloralose (SAC). 


of this drug, only 5 out of 41 had histories 
of impulsive behavior, while 8 out of 41 had 
a history of episodic disturbances. It is 
interesting to note that approximately half 
of the psychiatric patient group was rou- 
tinely taking one or another “ataractic” drug 
at the time of the test. There was no appar- 
ent effect on EEG changes, and probably no 
reduction in the psychosis-inducing potential 
of this procedure. It would seem from the 
above that the SAC activation of psychotic 
behavior does occur in those who are pre- 
disposed to this type of behavior. This 
observation has certain implications in terms 
of the mechanism of episodic psychotic epi- 
sodes and possible choices for treatment. 
Correlation of Behavioral and EEG Ac- 
tivation.—In this extended series, the corre- 
lation noted by Monroe™ in the original 
As would be 
expected, when the patient reported drowsi- 
ness or sleep, there were typical drowsy or 
sleep recordings on the EEG. High-ampli- 
tude generalized slow activity was often 
associated with markedly confused behavior, 


study was not as precise. 


542 


but other patients would show slowing to 
a similar degree without the confusion. Of 
the 26 subjects who manifested psychotic 
behavior under the influence of this drug, 
9 had both paroxysmal or high-amplitude 
theta-delta and spiking activity, which might 
be generalized or localized. Only three in 
this group had moderate generalized slowing 
alone. The remainder presented high-ampli- 
tude, paroxysmal theta or delta activity, 
which might be focal, show a shifting focus, 
or ultimately become generalized and con- 
tinuous. Thus, at the moment, we can make 
no specific correlation between scalp record- 
ings and the various types of behavioral 
changes. As reported in the previous 
study,!! nine patients with subcortical elec- 
trodes in at least the septal, hypothalamic, 
and hippocampal region, as well as on the 
cortex, have not helped in making correla- 
tions between behavior and electroencephalo- 
grams. 


Report of Case 


To clarify the type of patient most likely 
to show both the electroencephalographic and 


& ious Hi 
impulsive 
isodic 
Episod 
Behavior si 
ti 
Psychotic S 
Acting out 
Depersonal 
Feor ’ 
Depression 
Erotic 
ion 
Hallucinati 
Delusions 
Disorientat| 
dj 
° 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 


the behavioral activation under SAC, we 
would like to present in detail one case 
history, accompanied by a discussion of the 
similarities and differences in those patients 
who showed no electroencephalographic ac- 
tivation after the administration of SAC. 

A 27-year-old housewife, a mother of two men- 
tally retarded children, was admitted to the hos- 
pital in February, 1945, for evaluation and 
treatment of episodic psychotic reactions, lasting 
from a few hours to a weeks, and severe 
enough on six occasions to require hospitalization 
or incarceration in jail. These episodes, described 
as “spells” by her husband, were preceded by 
mounting - irritability, hypochondriasis, and severe 
occipital headaches. As the attack progressed, 
there would be withdrawal and lack of emotional 
response, accompanied by a staring, vacant look 
in the eyes; this would be followed by outbursts 
of rage and destructiveness, at time the 
patient would be physically toward her 
husband or self-mutilative, and, in 
suicidal. These “spells” 
would be accompanied by visual hallucinations, par- 
ticularly of her children cringing in fear, or at 
other times of her mother, husband, and children 
calling her names and admonishing her. She would 
break up furniture, tear off her clothes, and try to 
tear her hair “to get the snakes out of it.” These 
attacks would be accompanied by varying degrees 
of confusion and disorientation. Although she 
claimed complete amnesia for the episodes, de- 
tailed questioning revealed that there was generally 
some hazy recollection. Following the attack, there 
would be a period of depression and remorse. 
Amobarbital (Amytal) sodium intravenously would 
often control the behavior and sometimes abort 
the attacks. At other times hospitalization was 
required for as long as two months, with the pa- 
tient receiving EST and subcoma insulin. During 
the intervals between these attacks, the patient 
was hostile and irritable, constantly taunting her 
husband about past mistakes and suspiciously ac- 
cusing him of extramarital affairs, whereas she 
herself was occasionally promiscuous. She had 
constant hypochondriacal complaints, which led to 
frequent visits to her doctor and several hospital- 
izations with two laparotomies. 

The patient is the oldest of five children, the 
others being boys, born into a 


few 


which 
abusive 
children, or 
fact, on 


two occasions 


family of low 
economic and social status. The emotional climate 
of the home was unstable. The father, who ap- 
parently was affectionate toward the patient and 
gave her some emotional security, was described, 
nevertheless, as an alcoholic who was irresponsible 
and frequently away from home philandering. On 
the other hand, the mother, who was reliable and 


supported the family, was described as having a 


personality much like the patient’s, being par- 
ticularly hostile and restrictive toward the patient, 
while favoring the boys. The mother never al- 
lowed the patient to socialize freely, and during 
adolescence restricted her social activities, while 
accusing her unjustly of sexual promiscuity. She 
conveyed to the patient her own suspiciousness and 
sense that the world was a hostile place. 

The patient says of herself, “I was always dif- 
ferent and confused.” She was shy and isolated, 
while quick-tempered and belligerent, rebelling 
against authority and fearful of school. She had 
numerous phobias, particularly concerning darkness 
and fire. The latter had some realistic basis, since, 
at the age of 3 years, she sustained severe third- 
degree burns over her body and face, requiring 
repeated plastic surgical operations, which had left 
her face considerably scarred and distorted. She 
was attached to her father but furious about his 
philandering, with her anger directed toward the 
girl friends more than toward the father himself. 
However, after her father’s divorce and subse- 
quent marriage, she accepted both her father and 
his wife, often expressing a desire to go and live 
with them. Her childhood and adolescence were 
characterized by isolation, and only superficial emo- 
tional relationships with peers or family. She met 
her husband in the hospital while undergoing a 
plastic operation, married him shortly thereafter, 
and had difficulties in adjusting to the marriage 
from the start. Sexual adjustment was always 
poor, with the patient failing to attain orgasm 
until the last year or so. Attempts at coitus, as 
well as her pregnancy and delivery, were accom- 
panied by much acting out of the aggressive be- 
havior described above. 

Aside from the scarring on the face, hands, 
and trunk, physical and neurologic examinations 
were noncontributory. Laboratory findings were 
all negative except for the electroencephalogram, 
which showed some short runs of 6, 7, and 7% 
per second activity and a small build-up on hyper- 


_ ventilation, with immediate return to normal. The 


record was read as a generalized slightly slow 
record, consistent with, but not indicative of, 
epilepsy. 

At the time of admission to the hospital, the 
patient was somewhat irritable and suspicious but 
otherwise cooperative, showing no evidence of the 
episodic behavior described above. Intellectual test- 
ing and a routine mental status examination re- 
vealed no abnormality. However, during the course 
of her hospital stay, she would show the typical 
“spells,” which would generally last for 24 hours, 
but might persist for weeks. Attempts to control 
the behavior with anticonvulsants, such as diphenyl- 
hydantoin (Dilantin), phenobarbital, and trimetha- 


dione (Tridione), were wunsuccessful, as were 


reserpine and chlorpromazine. The behavior could 


543 


best be aborted by amobarbital sodium 7% grains 
(0.5 gm.) intravenously, followed by maintenance 
doses of 334 grains (0.25 gm.) by mouth or in- 
tramuscularly three times a day. 

This type of patient presents a real diag- 
nostic problem, not fitting descriptively into 
any of the usual diagnostic categories. This 
is the type of history one often obtains from 
patients with temporal lobe spikes, as has 
been described in detail in two previous 
papers by Ervin and Epstein.§ In fact, one 
of the patients in our series was written 
up in detail by Epstein and Ervin § (Patient 
M. G.). If one would emphasize in the 
history the episodic nature of her symp- 
toms, as well as the clouding of sensorium, 
the diagnosis would be psychomotor epilepsy 
with a rather prolonged ictal response. If 
one would emphasize the schizoid and para- 
noid features in her personality, as well as 
the prolonged agitation and homicidal-sui- 
cidal behavior accompanied by visual and 
auditory hallucinations, the tendency would 
be to consider this person a catatonic schiz- 
ophrenic. On the other hand, the impulsive 
behavior extending far back into childhood 
would suggest childhood behavioral dis- 
orders characteristically described as the 
impulsive hysterical acting out in adulthood. 
This type of diagnostic dilemma was typical 
of almost all the patients in this series who 
showed the psychotic response to activation 
with SAC. 

The episodic impulsive behavior was most 
frequently an expression of rage, varying 
from childish temper tantrums, in which the 
patient would lie down on the floor, kick, 
and scream, through impulsive and sudden 
outbursts of physically abusive behavior to- 
ward those closest to him, to, rarely, the 
more organized acted-out dissocial behavior, 
such as stealing and forging checks. Quite 
often this rage was turned on the self, with 
bizarre suicidal attempts or self-mutilation. 
At other times, the episodic behavior was 
more typical of seizural states with loss of 
consciousness, but rarely typical grand mal 
attacks; more frequently there were diffuse 
automatic movements characteristic of psy- 


References 7 and &. 


544 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


chomotor epilepsy. These episodic attacks 
were frequently accompanied by disorienta- 
tion and amnesia, but not invariably so. 
The amnesia often seemed more a conscious 
malingering to deny responsibility for the 
hostile acts committed, as, for instance, was 
dramatically represented in one patient who 
was hospitalized because her behavior was 
accompanied by amnesia. Immediately after 
hospitalization, to gain her release, she 
proved the amnesia was a fabrication by 
relating in minute detail the events of the 
preceding 24 hours for which she had pre- 
viously claimed complete amnesia. At times 
the episodic behavior was more typical of 
catatonic mutism, and at other times it was 
just episodic depersonalization or seductive 
and self-destructive acting out. 

The behavior between the episodic out- 
bursts would be characterized by poor inter- 
personal relationships and social adjustment, 
usually accompanied by narcissistic, self- 
centered preoccupation, irritability, para- 
noid trends, and lack of close emotional 
attachments. 

Contrariwise, in many 
patients who had definite 
chosis but whose symptoms were well struc- 
turalized, with organized and 
adequate, if bizarre, control, and who were 
characterized previously by obsessive-com- 
pulsive rigid personalities, generally did not 
show electroencephalographic activation or 
marked behavioral changes under chloralose. 

We seldom had the opportunity to run 
EEG records at the time of a spontaneous 
attack. 
the seizure was associated with spontaneous 
high-amplitude slow waves, similar to those 
induced by SAC. However, in the case here 
described, during the spontaneous attack 
there was no change in the scalp recordings 
from the base-line record, which showed a 
slight abnormality with 6 and 7% per second 
generalized slow waves. 


those 
evidence of psy- 


instances, 


delusions 


In several instances when we did, 


Comparison with Other Drugs 


Fourteen of the subjects in this study 
had intravenous amobarbital sodium given 
slowly while they were interviewed: Five 


7 
i 
. 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 


were given d-LSD-25; 3, mescaline; 5, 
pentylenetetrazol, and 2, intravenous alco- 
hol. Although some of the patients demon- 
strated episodic behavior as an obvious 
release phenomenon (under the influence of 
alcohol, for instance), we did not find that 
the patients who showed psychotic behavior 
under SAC responded in a similar manner 
when given amobarbital sodium intraven- 
ously to the point of slurring of speech 
without inducing sleep. 
tended to 


If anything, they 
normalize under amobarbital 
sodium, whereas those patients who showed 
a release phenomenon, with more psychotic 
behavior, under amobarbital did not respond 
in a similar manner with SAC. The reac- 
tions of the patient described above will be 
reported in some detail, with any deviations 
in the response of the other patients men- 
tioned. 

March 29, 1955: Chloralose. During the base- 
line recording the patient was pleasant and 
friendly, cooperative, and oriented in all spheres. 
Forty minutes after the drug she was crying and 
depressed. At one hour she complained of numb- 
ness in her right hand and arm. She described 
an “odd feeling,” similar to that when her attacks 
come on, which, on questioning, suggested deper- 
sonalization. At 70 minutes she was expressing 
diffuse rage and tearing up the bedclothes. She 
admitted and her in- 
ability to take care of them. Eighty-five minutes 
after the drug she complained of shakiness and 
showed 


concern about her children 


occasional myoclonic jerks in the arm. 
Ninety minutes after the drug she began hallucinat- 
ing, with her and husband appearing 
before her and admonishing her for being bad. 
She verbally responded to these hallucinations. At 
that time, though somewhat was 
still perfectly oriented. At 100 minutes she began 
screaming, “Where am 1?” and now appeared dis- 
oriented, thinking that she was in a different town 
and different hospital, although, on repeated ques- 
tioning, she remembered vaguely where she was. 
More depression was seen now and less rage. At 
this time she revealed some significant dynamic 
material which had been inferred from the clini- 
cal history, namely, that she was overwhelmed with 
the responsibility of raising her children, felt 
guilty that she had been abusive and tried to kill 
them, and admitted that she expected retribution 
from her mother, who would not allow her to grow 
up and be a mother in her own right; therefore, 
the children must belong to her mother and are 
really her father’s children. She expressed guilt 


children 


confused, she 


over these incestuous fantasies, as well as fear of 
retaliation from her mother. Often, during an 
acute attack, she discussed leaving the children 
with her mother and moving to a distant city to 
live with her father. Except for the hallucina- 
tions, which occurred in only three instances, this 
is a rather typical activation of psychotic behavior 
by SAC. 

May 23, 1955: Pentylenetetrazol, 700 mg., in- 
jected slowly intravenously. Except for mild sub- 
jective sensations of anxiety, there were no changes 
in behavior. During the next 24 hours, she par- 
ticipated in all ward activities, went on passes with 
her husband, and had no difficulty in sleeping and 
no somatic complaints. Most of the other patients 
who received Metrazol had some somatic side-ef- 
fects; otherwise, this response was a fairly typical 
one. 

May 27: Chloralose repeated. Interestingly, at 
this time, the patient showed no hallucinations and 
no bizarre acting out of rage or marked fear and 
depression. She had the same feeling of deper- 
sonalization and showed more clouding of senso- 
rium, with organic confusion and perseveration. 

May 30: d-LSD-25, 100y. Forty minutes after 
the drug was given, the patient complained of 
feeling tense and “paralyzed,” that she 
couldn’t talk, although there was no obvious 
impairment in her speech. At 45 minutes she 
became nauseated and complained of blurred vision. 
One hour after administration of the drug, eye 
pressure revealed red lights, “maybe Indians.” At 
90 minutes she stated that she had to get up and 
go home to her children; she was crying and 
struggling. There was some difficulty in remem- 
bering the doctor’s name, as she seemed to be in 
a “trance-like When her attention was 
secured, she was oriented and in contact with her 
surroundings. Two hours after the drug was given, 
a blocking agent was administered, which modified 
the subsequent response. At one time, she brieffy 
hallucinated her children, but there was no concept- 
ual elaboration on the basis of dynamic material, as 
described under the first chloralose reaction. 

June 1: Mescaline sulfate, 500 mg. I. V. The 
immediate response was a sensation of being cold. 
“My skin is burning.” 


stating 


state.” 


She also complained of 
difficulty in breathing; she vomited, and described 
sensations in her legs as if they were “drawing 
up.” She expressed anger at the doctor, as well 
as her husband, but would laugh while talking 
about it. She did mathematical problems quickly 
and was oriented in all spheres. One and one-half 
hours later, she complained of aches and pains in 
her back and neck; she saw lights flashing, saying 
it was as if “you look sparkly.” There were no 
marked emotional changes, nor did she hallucinate 
at this time. In comparison with SAC, LSD and 
mescaline seem to induce more somatic complaints, 


545 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


less acting out, more perceptual distortions, but 
less conceptual ones. 

June 3: Repeated chloralose plus amobarbital 
sodium, 7% grains. At this time, the patient re- 
sponded to the chloralose as she did in the first 
experiment, again becoming agitated, rageful, tear- 
ing up things, and hallucinating her children and 
husband, the children being frightened, and the 
for her rageful behavior. 
After amobarbital was given the patient quieted 


husband admonishing 


down, no longer expressed anger and resentment, 
but, rather, showed expiatory behavior: “Do you 
like me?” and “Nobody's going to kill me, are 
they?” She said she was no longer angry at her 
husband or the doctor, and stated that, although 
she occasionally saw her children, “they are now 
smiling.” In other instances when 


several amo- 


barbital sodium was given, after a psychotic 
reaction with chloralose, a similar type of response 
would wherein the 
particularly the frightening and rageful affect, was 
reduced. 


June 6: Spontaneous attack. 


ensue, psychotic material, 


On the ward she 
was restless, paced the floor, was no longer co- 
operative, and refused her medicine, stating, “I 
feel one of my moods coming on, and I am going 
to tear up everything.” She 
from the hospital and expressed a desire never 
She threatened the per- 
sonnel, threw about the belongings in her room, 
She 
began tearing up her clothes and had to be force- 
Twelve hours after the start of 
the spontaneous seizure, she was quieter, less agi- 


tried to run away 
to see her doctors again. 
and by evening was depressed and crying. 
ably restrained. 
tated, and expressing some guilty feelings about 
behavior, which she remembered 


clearly. This illustrates that the episodic psychotic 
behavior was not always accompanied by amnesia. 


her previous 


Comment 


There has been an increasing awareness 
among psychiatrists and neurologists of a 
borderline group of severe behavior dis- 
orders, variously diagnosed as psychomotor 
epilepsy, hysterical acting out, or schizo- 
phrenia. The diagnostic category in which 
these patients are placed depends not only 
on the orientation of the physician, that is, 
whether he is a neurologist, a psychoanalyst, 
or a psychiatrist, but also on the acuteness 
of onset, the duration of disturbed behavior, 
and the degree of sensorial changes and sub- 
sequent amnesia. Therapeutic trial, either on 
anticonvulsive medication or on the usual 
somatic therapies for schizophrenia, partic- 


546 


ularly EST and insulin, has not aided in the 
proper diagnostic categorization of these 
patients because of their poor response to 
all somatic therapies, although it has been 
our experience that they often show marked 
improvement with intensive psychotherapy. 
Base-line EEG’s are usually normal or 
equivocal, and electroencephalograms are 
usually impossible to obtain during acute 
attacks, so that laboratory procedures offer 
little diagnostic clarification. The compli- 
cated conceptually organized patterns of be- 
havior manifest during these spells, and 
often concomitantly expressed in dreams, 
usually reveal dynamically significant ma- 
terial, particularly expressions of rage and 
destructiveness toward Oedipal figures or 
sibling rivals, have reinforced the psycho- 
logical importance of such episodic behavior, 
and perhaps oftentimes tended to minimize 
adequate neurologic and laboratory work- 
ups. As mentioned sin the paper originally, 
many of our patients were selected for this 
study on the basis of being in this borderline 
group, although subsequently we made a 
conscious attempt to select them at random. 
To us it was not surprising, then, that many 
of the patients in this group, like the epilep- 
tic or focal neurologic patient, showed an 
activation of cerebral hypersynchrony under 
SAC. Without postulating a common etio- 
logic relationship between epilepsy and these 
episodic psychotic states, we now believe 
that it can be demonstrated that both have 


this common potential for cerebral hyper- 
synchrony. It seems to us that the historic 


observation of incompatibility between epi- 
lepsy and schizophrenia is best reformulated 
as follows: The massive cerebral discharges 
involving the motor areas and resulting in 
typical grand mal seizures do seem to pro- 
test against or alleviate the psychotic mani- 
festations that otherwise might be present. 
However, we would like to suggest the idea 
that there may be a closer relationship 
mechanistically among these episodically dis- 
turbed patients, in categories now variously 
diagnosed as hysteria, psychomotor epilepsy, 
catatonic schizophrenia, episodic alcoholism, 


4 


SAC ACTIVATION OF PSYCHOSIS 


and impulsive dissocial behavior, than there 
is with those patients in the same diagnostic 
category who show sustained, nonepisodic, 
disturbed behavior. 

Interestingly, Karl Menninger,'’? in his 
revision of psychiatric nosology, based on 
modified psychoanalytic concepts, has come 
to similar conclusions, grouping together a 
number of episodic clinical syndromes under 
the heading of “Regulatory Devices of the 
Third Order: Episodic Discontrol.”” In de- 
scribing this group, he states: 

The dangerous in- 
stinctual impulses is always something of a catas- 
trophy. 


uncontrollable emergence of 
Clinically and empirically we know 
these catastrophies in two forms; as continuous 
phenomena over a considerable period of time, and 
as a relatively brief episodic discontinuous phe- 
nomenon from which there is prompt recovery with 
a continued tendency for them to recur. It would 
seem that these episodic explosions serve to relieve 
enough tension to prevent the development of the 
continuous form. 

Recent neurophysiologic studies have re- 
vealed that in both man and animals elec- 
trical subcortical 
structures, particularly the septal and hip- 


stimulation of certain 
pocampal-amygdaloid regions, can induce 
dramatic changes in behavior with or with- 
out changes in sensorium. In a recent ar- 
ticle, French and associates * demonstrate 
that it is precisely these subcortical areas 
which would show seizural activity when 
the cortex is stimulated with parameters of 
that 


type” after-discharges. If there was subse- 


currents would elicit local “seizural- 
quent spread of this local response, it would 
occur most frequently in the septal-amygda- 
loid region. Thus, it is not hard to conceive 
that the spontaneously induced hypersyn- 
chronous activity might result in rather com- 
plicated behavioral changes, and that these 
do not necessarily have to be accompanied 
by loss or impairment of consciousness or 
dramatic clouding of sensorium. We must 
admit, however, that our present study thus 


far has not revealed any precise correlation 


of central nervous system, electrophysiologic 
activity, and behavior. In view of the crude- 
ness of our clinical technique, particularly 
the use of scalp recordings of the electro- 


physiologic activity of the cortex, this is 
not surprising. However, the present data 
do give impetus to more intensive study of 
the electroencephalogram in psychotic pa- 
tients using activators, and also suggest 
renewed efforts in developing the “anticon- 
vulsant” group of drugs, which may hold 
some hope for at least a pharmacological 
adjunct to our present psychotherapeutic 
efforts in those patients with episodic be- 
havior disorders. 


Summary 


Electroencephalographic and behavioral 
activation with chloralose and scopolamine 
was done on a group of volunteers, neuro- 
logic patients, and psychiatric inpatients. 
There was a low incidence of EEG activa- 
tion in volunteers without psychologic dis- 


In the 


neurologic patients with evidence of focal 


orders or neurologic complications. 


central nervous system lesions, there was 
almost always EEG activation compatible 
with the diagnosis, even though previous 
EEG’s had been normal or equivocal. In 
patients with a good history of epilepsy but 
normal or equivocal EEG’s, there was again, 
almost inevitably, electroencephalographic 
activation compatible with the clinical diag- 
nosis. 

Surprisingly, 48 of 65 psychiatric inpa- 
tients also showed electroencephalographic 
activation, with the appearance of high- 
amplitude paroxysmal delta-theta activity 
and/or focal or generalized spikes. 

Of the 48 activated psychotic patients, 24 
demonstrated an exacerbation of psychotic 
behavior while under the influence of chlora- 
lose and scopolamine, as compared with only 
2 of the 45 volunteers or neurologic pa- 
tients who showed electroencephalographic 
activation. The psychotic behavior was usu- 
ally characterized by rageful acting out, 
depersonalization, and confusion, and, rare- 
ly, by hallucinations and delusions. The 
reaction to the drug was usually similar to 
the spontaneous psychotic behavior previ- 
ously shown by the patient. Activation of 
the psychosis by scopolamine-e-chloralose 


547 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


seemed to occur predominantly in a group 
of patients who had shown clinically the 
impulsive acting out demonstrated under 


the drug. 


REFERENCES 


1. Adrian, E. D.: Afferent Discharges to Cere- 
bral Cortex from Peripheral Sense Organs, J. 
Physiol. 100:159-191 (Sept. 8) 1941. 

2. Adrian, E. D., and Moruzzi, G.: Impulses in 
Pyramidal Tract, J. Physiol. 97 :153-199 (Dec. 14) 
1939. 

3. Bercel, N. A.: Experience with Combination 
of Scopolamine and Alpha-Chloralose (S. A.C.) in 
Activating Normal EEG of Epileptics, Electro- 
encephalog. & Clin. Neurophysiol. 5 :297-304 (May) 
1953. 

4. Baruk, H.: 


mentale et 


Action physiologique expéri- 
clinique scopochloralose: Scopo- 
chloralose et bulbocapnine; application a quelques 
problemes de la catatonie expérimentale, Ann. med.- 
psychol. 94:702-712 (Nov.) 1936. 

5. Council for International Organizations of 
Medical Mechanisms and Con- 
sciousness; a Symposium, edited for the Council 
by J. F. Delafresnaye, Springfield, HL, Charles C 
Thomas, Publisher; London, Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, 1954. 


6. Ellingson, R. J.: Brain Waves and Problems 


Sciences: Brain 


of Psychology, Psychol. Bull. 53:1-34 (Jan.) 1956. 

7. Ervin, F.; Epstein, A., and King, H. E.: Be- 
havior of Epileptic and Nonepileptic Patients with 
“Temporal Spikes,” A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. & 
Psychiat. 74:488-497 (Nov.) 1955. 

8. Epstein, A., and Ervin, F.: Psychodynamic 
Significance of Seizure Content in Psychomotor 
Epilepsy, Psychosom. Med. 18:43-55 (Jan.-Feb.) 
1956. 

9. French, }. D.; Gernandt, B. E., and Living- 
ston, R. B.: Regional Differences in Seizure Sus- 
ceptibility in Monkey Cortex, A.M.A. Arch. 
Neurol. & Psychiat. 75:260-274 (March) 1956. 

10. Hill, Denis: EEG in Episodic Psychotic and 
Psychopathic Behavior, Electroencephalog. & Clin. 
Neurophysiol. 4:419-442 (Nov.) 1952. 

11. Monroe, R. R.; Heath, R. G.; Miller, W., 
and Fontana, C.: EEG Activation with Chloralo- 
sane, Electroencephalog. & Clin. 
8 :279-287 (May) 1956. 

12. Menninger, K.: Regulatory Devices of the 
Ego Under Major Stress, Internat. J. 
Analysis, 35 :412-420, 1954. 

13. Rosenblueth, A., and Cannon, W. B.: Cortical 
Responses to Electric Stimulation, Am. | 
135 :690-741 (Feb.) 1942. 

14. Verdeaux, G.; Verdeaux, J., and Marty, R.: 
L’Activation des électroencéphalogrammes par le 
chloralose, Electroencephalog. & Clin. Neurophysiol. 
6:19-28 (Feb.) 1954 


Neurophysiol. 


Psycho- 


Physiol. 


4 
= 4 
: 
548 


uman Subjects 
H, bj 


Plasma Level and Urinary Excretion of Hydrocortisone 


HAROLD PERSKY, Ph.D. 

ROY R. GRINKER, M.D. 
DAVID A. HAMBURG, M.D. 
MELVIN A. SABSHIN, M.D. 
SHELDON J. KORCHIN, Ph.D. 
HAROLD BASOWITZ, Ph.D. 
and 


JACQUES A. CHEVALIER, Ph.D., Chicago 


The hormones of the adrenal cortex con- 
tribute significantly to processes of adjust- 
ment to noxious stimuli,’ although much 
disagreement exists as to their mode of 
action.* Physical stresses, such as trauma 
or surgery, considerably increase the blood 
level of the adrenocortical hormone hydro- 
cortisone,‘ as well as the excretion of several 
of its metabolites, tetrahydrocortisone and 
tetrahydrohydrocortisone.+ Psychological 
stresses imposed in various ways also raise 
the blood and urine levels of these hydroxy- 
corticoids.t 

From the available data, it seems justified 
to conclude that many kinds of stress in- 
crease the secretory activity of the adrenal 
cortex. However, it is possible that in- 
creased blood levels of hydrocortisone may 
result from diminished hepatic disposal and 
that increased urinary excretion is respon- 

Received for publication July 2, 1956. 

Institute for Psychosomatic and 
Psychiatric Research and Training, Michael Reese 
Hospital. 


From the 


This study was supported in part by the U. S. 
Army under Contract No. DA-49-007-MD-469 
through the Medical Research and Development 
Board, Office of the Surgeon General, Department 
of the Army, and by the State of Illinois Mental 
Health Fund. 

* References 2, 3. 

+ References 5, 6. 

t References 7-9. 


sible for the larger quantities of urinary 
hydroxycorticoids. Direct proof of an in- 
creased secretory rate by the adrenal cortex 
could only be obtained through the deter- 
mination of the adrenal vein minute-output 
of hydrocortisone under basal and_ stress 
conditions. Since this is not feasible in 
intact humans, it becomes necessary to rely 
on indirect evidence elicited by a total meta- 
bolic study of hydrocortisone during basal 
conditions and following the induction of 
specific stresses. 

We have been engaged for some years in 
a program of research into the psychoso- 
matic organization of anxiety, the theoretical 
assumptions of which have been reported 
previously.'"° In this paper we present a 
comparison of the quantities of hydrocorti- 
sone in the plasma and the amounts of tetra- 
hydrocortisone and tetrahydrohydrocortisone 
excreted in the urine in anxious and control 
subjects uhder experimental conditions. 
Other findings concerning the production 
and disposal of hydrocortisone will be pre- 
sented in subsequent publications. 


Subjects, Experimental Design, 
and Methods 


The experimental subjects (El) consisted of a 
group of 21 patients, 12 men and 9 women, on a 
psychiatric service of a general hospital. Their 
ages ranged from 20 to 58 years, with a mean of 
38.7. years. All patients had in common some 
degree of anxiety or anxiety The 
criterion for anxiety was the patient’s experience 
of a feeling of dread and foreboding—as if some- 
thing dangerous were about to happen. The pres- 
ence or absence of anxiety was determined by 
two psychiatric observers who were engaged in 
the anxiety research program of the Institute. 
If anxiety was present, they estimated its intensity 
on a seven-point scale. This estimate was based 


proneness. 


549 


|| 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


on the patient’s verbal report of his emotional 
experience at the time, augmented by such non- 
verbal signs as facial expression and motor and 
autonomic activity. Thus the evidence for these 
ratings came from two sources: (1) observation 
of the entire experiment by two psychiatrists 
through a one-way-vision screen, and (2) psy- 
chiatric interviews, before and after the experi- 
mental stress, designed specifically to elicit infor- 
mation about the patient’s experience at each point 
in the experiment. 
consensus 


The final ratings represent a 
estimate of the independent ratings 
made by the two observers. The patient group 
was in good health, as judged by physical ex- 
amination, and were not receiving interfering 
medication. 

On each of four successive days, three blood 
samples were drawn from every member of Group 
El: 9:00 am., 10:30 am. and 2:30 p.m. These 
samples will be referred to as pre-, post-, and 
extra-post-values, respectively. The pre-sample of 
the first day (“base day”) was drawn on the pa- 
tient’s nursing unit, but all of the other pre- and 
post-samples were drawn in the experimental room. 
The extra-post-samples were drawn on the nurs- 
ing unit. On the “base day” the subjects were 
brought to the experimental room in order to 
familiarize them with the room and the apparatus 
required for various physiological and psychological 
procedures carried out as part of the larger study. 
On each of the last three days (Day 1, Day 2, 
Day 3), a stressful interview, lasting about 30 
minutes, was interposed between the pre- and post- 
samples of blood. The interview attempted to 
evoke overt anxiety in the patient by discussing 
specific psychological problems known to be dis- 
turbing to the patient. Three of the twenty-one 
subjects withdrew from the experiment because 
the procedure was too disturbing emotionally. 

Complete 24-hour urine outputs were collected 
on each of the four testing days for every subject. 
The urine was collected in two portions: one for 
the period from 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., and the 
other from 2:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. of the following 


day. The first six-hour quantity of each day 


bracketed the total experimental testing period. 
The base day was initially included in the de- 


sign for Group FE1 to familiarize the subjects 
with the experimental room, apparatus, and pro- 
cedures. It was assumed that the plasma hydro- 
cortisone level would follow a normal diurnal 
course on this day, since no stress interviewed was 
included. However, it was found that the plasma 
hydrocortisone level increased even more than on 
any of the experimental days, a finding which 
might be due to the strangeness of the prepara- 
tions procedures. Consequently, a second 
group, of eight subjects (E2), from the same pa- 
tient population, who resembled the experimental 


50 


and 


subjects (El) in respect to anxiety, was also 
tested under considerably less disturbing condi- 
These subjects remained on own 
nursing units instead of being taken to the labora- 


tory; only two blood samples were drawn from 


tions. their 


each subject, and no other test procedures were 
carried out. The blood samples were drawn at 
the pre- and post- times of the Group E1 subjects. 
No stress interview was conducted with these 
Group E2 subjects. Thus the conditions for test- 
ing this group represented a better “basal state” 
for anxious patients than did those on the “base 
day” for Group E1. 

In order to compare the anxious subjects with 
normal subjects, two groups of controls were em- 
ployed. The first group consisted of 16 doctors, 
nurses, and technicians (Cl), ranging in age from 
24 to 45 years, with a mean of 32.2 years. Seven 
of these subjects were men and nine were women 
The Group Cl subjects were not hospitalized and 
were in good physical health. On five 
separate occasions, spaced a week apart, a blood 


each of 


sample was drawn at 9:00 a.m. from every member 
of this group in a laboratory room similar to the 
experimental room employed for Group El sub- 
jects. On the first of these five occasions, a 24- 
hour urine sample was collected. The purpose of 
the first-day blood and urine sampling was to 
enable comparisons to be made between anxious 
subjects and normal controls with respect to their 
“basal” state. The repetitive blood collections from 
the Group Cl subjects were made in order to de- 
termine whether any trend in plasma hydrocorti- 
sone level occurred over a period of time some- 
what greater than the duration of the Group El 
experiment. No interview was conducted 
with the control subjects. 

The second group of control subjects consisted 
of 24 college students (C2), 20 male and 4 female, 
with a mean age of 21.9 years. Half (12) of the 
Group C2 subjects were found to be less anxious 


stress 


than either patient group in a diagnostic psychiatric 
interview three days prior to blood sampling. All 
of the students were carefully examined and found 
to be in good physical health. 
was drawn from every student at 9:00 a.m. on 
each of three successive days. 


A blood sample 


All samples were 
drawn in the same laboratory setting as that em- 
ployed for subjects of Group Cl. No stress inter- 
view was conducted with this group. The students 
served two purposes: (1) Being unfamiliar with 
the laboratory setting, they were expected to re- 
act to the novelty of a new situation and to have 
anticipatory anxiety about the strange laboratory 
setting, and (2) they supplied information about 
the trend of plasma hydrocortisone level over a 
period of days comparable to the time span of the 
Group El experiment. 

All blood samples were centrifuged immediately, 


4 


ADRENOCORTICAL FUNCTION IN ANXIETY 


and the plasma content of hydrocortisone was de- mental subjects’ levels ranged from 8.7y 
eet a! the a of page and § a to 34.5y per 100 ce., while the levels for the 
rine samples were kept in the refrigerator with- : : 

normal controls of Group Cl ranged from 
out preservation until the entire 24-hour collection | 
was completed. The hydroxycorticoid content was 2.4y to 21.6y per 100 cc. Only one subjec 
determined according to the method of Reddy, in the control group had a plasma hydro- 
Jenkins, and Thorn™ as modified by Brown and cortisone level greater than the mean of the 
his co-workers. As a check on the completeness 


; : ys anxious-patient group. The range for Group 
of the urine collection, the creatinine content was 


determined for every sample.” 


C2 subjects extended from 4.7y to 25.6y 
per 100 ce., and here, again, only two mem- 
Results bers were above the mean of the anxious- 
Plasma Hydrocortisone Level patient group (E1). The variability of the 
The concentration of hvdrocortisone in 2:00 a-m. hydrocortisone level is not signifi- 
the plasma constitutes a balance between the ©@ntly greater in the experimental than in 
secretory rate of the subject’s adrenal cortex the normal groups on the pre-stimulus day. 
of and ex- Lhe difference in level between the anxious 
cretion by the peripheral tissues and kidneys. subjects and the normal controls indicates 
The 9:00 a.m. plasma level of hydrocorti- that the balance between production and 
sone on the “base day’ was about 60% destruction in the absence of experimentally 
greater in the anxious subjects (I-1) than in imposed stress is pegged at a considerably 
either of the control groups (Table 1). This higher level in the anxious subjects. 


TABLE 1. ~“Base-Day” Plasma Hydrocortisone Pre-Levels of Anstons and Normal Subjects 


Plasma 
| Hydrocortisone 
| | | Level, 7/100 Ce. 
| Group No. of Standard 
} } Subjects Mean Deviation 
Experimental (E,) ist } 19.5 6.6 
| Normal (C;) 16 12.1 5.9 3.58 <0.005 
| (C:) 24 12.7 5.3 3.70 <0.001 | 


* Between E, and the other groups. 
+ In this and in the succeeding Tables, the number of subjects in each group may vary slightly because of an occasional loss of 


a sample. 
difference is statistically significant at better The mean hydrocortisone pre-level (9:00 
than the 1% level of confidence. The normal a.m.) of the anxious patients (Group E1) 
values obtained from our control groups did not vary greatly over the four days of 
agree closely with the reported values for testing, as shown by an analysis of variance 
physically healthy subjects.|| The experi- (Table 2). 
11, 12. tained a constant 9:00 a.m. level, of hydro- 

|| References 14, 16-19. cortisone for a period ranging from three 


The normal controls also main- 


TABLE 2.—Repetitive Plasma Pre-Lei els of Anxious Normal Subjects 


Plasma Hydrocortisone Level, y/100 Cc.* 
Group No. of Occasion | Occasion md Occasion Occasion Occasion Occasion 
Subjects | Interval | 1 | 3 4 5 F P 
Experimental (E,) 18 | Daily \ 19.544.7 20.9+6.1 18.646.2 18.1+6.8 1.46 Not sig. 
Normal (C,) | 16 | Weekly 41 V5.8 12.544.1 12.6+4.0 12.0+4.3 11.743.3 009 Not sig. 
Normal (C,) 12t | Daily | 13.54+6.2 | 12.346.3 10.8+3.6 } 0.78 Not sig. 
| | | | 


* Mean-+standard deviation. 


t Only 12 of the 24 subjects are included, since the between-day treatments of these 12 are identical. 


=] 
551 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


days, for Group C2, to four weeks, for 
Group Cl. The relative constancy of level 
within each group suggests that the differ- 
ence between the anxious group and the con- 
trol group is biologically, as well as statis- 
tically, different. 


Effect of Stress Interview on 
Plasma Hydrocortisone Level 


Although the plasma hydrocortisone levels 
of anxious patients are considerably higher 
than those of normal subjects, an increase in 
anxiety might be expected to raise this hor- 
monal level even more. In order to under- 
stand the changes in level that occurred and 
to appreciate the statistical techniques em- 
ployed to compare the change in level on 
the stress days with the change in level on 
the “base day,” some information concern- 
ing the diurnal course of the plasma hydro- 
cortisone level is appropriate. Bliss and his 
associates 1 have demonstrated that in nor- 
mal subjects the blood hydrocortisone level 
changes during the day; it achieves a peak 
in the morning and then falls until late 
afternoon, after which it remains relatively 
steady, returning to the original high level 
by the following morning. The sharpest rate 
of fall occurs between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 
noon, the period during which the bulk of 
our procedures occurred. Anxious patients 
also manifest this diurnal pattern, as can be 
seen from the data of Group F2 in Table 3. 
Over comparable periods of the day, the 


TABLE 3.—Change in 


| 


No. of 


Subjects Occasion 


Experimental (EF :) | 


Experimental (E,) | | “Base day” 


19.546.6 


21.7427.3 
| 18.146.6 


| Day 3 


| 


Experimental (E,;) | 18 


19.3+5.9 


Plasma Hydrocortisone Level, 
Cc* 


decrease in plasma hydrocortisone level of 
Group F2 subjects is about the same as that 
of normal controls. The change of level in 
Group E2 is therefore presumed to repre- 
sent the diurnal decrease in plasma hydro- 
cortisone level that would occur in anxious, 
hospitalized patients not subjected to any 
intended stress. When this diurnal decrease 
is subtracted from the change in hydro- 
cortisone level for Group F1, the difference 
may be taken to represent the effect of the 
imposed stress. 

On any given experimental stress day, 
the change in level (post- minus pre-value ) 
for Group FE1 did not differ significantly 
from that for the anxious “control” sub- 
jects of Group E2 (Table 3). The greatest 
relative response occurred on Day 2, but 
this failed to achieve significance. Specific 
subjects on each of the experimental days 
did manifest large increments in plasma 
hydrocortisone; indeed, the two highest 
levels achieved, 62.5y and 42.3y per 100 cc., 
reflecting increases of 49.8y and 23.7y per 
100 ce., respectively (57.4y and 31.3y per 
100 cc. when diurnal fall is subtracted), 
occurred in the subjects who were unable to 
continue with the total experiment because 
of the intensity of disturbance aroused in 
them by the stress interview. On each of 
the experimental days, the anxious subjects 
did not exceed their own “base-day”’ change 
from pre- to post-level (Table 3). Actually, 
the “base-day” change in level was signifi- 


Plasma Hydrocortisone Level Following a Stress Interview 


| 

Post-Minus 
Pre-Increase 

Due to Stress§ 


Post- Minus | 
Post- Pre- 
—7.H+ 6.81 


O.1+ 7.52 | 


| —6.144 7.12 
—3.29+10.00 


15.645.1 


14.847.3 
| 
| 


13.34+6.7 —5.99+ 8.20 
| 


* Mean+standard deviation. 
+ Between E , and E, on each occasion. 


t Between E, on “base day" and FE, on each of the three experimental days. 
§ Post- minus pre-value after the diurnal decrease has been removed. 


$ Significant at better than the 5% level of confidence. 
Significant at better than the 2% level of confidence. 


552 


4 

| 

| 

| | 

Group | 

tt 7/100 Ce. 

Pre- | | 

a |} 

| Day 0.47 2.28 | 1.42 

| | Day 2 1.09 132 | 4.27 
| 
— | 0.48 2.649 1.57 


ADRENOCORTICAL FUNCTION IN ANXIETY 


cantly greater than the change on Day 1 or 
Day 3. 

The failure to detect a significant change 
in plasma hydrocortisone in response to the 
stress imposed on Group E1 may be due to 
an inappropriate time of sampling in relation 
to the time of the stress interview. It was 
with this possibility in mind that an addi- 
tional post-stress sample (extra-post-sam- 
ple) was built into the experimental design. 
The extra-post-sample was drawn four 
hours after the post-sample and an average 
of four and one-half hours after the stress 
interview. Although a few subjects did re- 
spond with a prolonged elevation or a de- 
layed rise in plasma hydrocortisone, the 
group as a whole did not manifest a signifi- 
cant increase in level during the pre- to 
extra-post-period. Actually, the mean extra- 
post-value was even lower than the post- 
value on every experimental day. This is the 
expected diurnal course of plasma hydro- 
cortisone. However, when the change in 
anxiety resulting from the stress interview 
was rank-ordered for each subject according 
to intensity (high, medium, low), the mean 


increase in hydrocortisone level for the 
group with respect to extent of change in 
anxiety was significantly different, as shown 
by an analysis of variance (Tables 4 and 5). 
The increase in hydrocortisone level after 
diurnal change was subtracted was not very 
large (5.0y per 100 cc.) on the day on which 
the subjects experienced their greatest 
change in anxiety. A slight decrease of only 
0.8y per 100 cc. occurred on the occasions 
when anxiety changed the least. The change 
in hydrocortisone level is related to the 
change in anxiety in a linear fashion. This 
is true not only for the group as a whole 
but also for each individual. The post-level 
achieved on the day of greatest increase in 
anxiety, corrected for diurnal fall, is 28% 
greater than the pre-level for the anxious 
group and 90% greater than that of the 
normal control group, Cl. The moderate 
rise in plasma level of the anxious subjects 
parallels the moderate increase of anxiety 
resulting from the stimulus interview. 

On the “base day” of Group E1, the 
change in level was significantly greater 
than the change in level for Group E2 


TABLE 4.—Effect of an Increase in Anxiety Rating on Plasma Hydrocortisone Level 


Plasma Hydrocortisone Level, y/100 Ce.* 


Occasion 


Post- Minus Pre- 
Post- Minus Increase Due to 
Pre- Stress 


Post- 


Day of maximum anxiety increase for 
each subject 17.88+6 04 
Day of median anxiety increase for each 
subject 18.71+6.10 


Day of minimum anxiety increase for 


each subject 21.9647.48 


15.3146.99 —2.57+8.28 


15.4346.02 —3.28+5.44 


13.6145.52 —8.3748.45 


* Mean-+standard deviation, for 17 subjects. 


Taste 5.—Analysis of Variance of Changes in Plasma Hydrocortisone Level (Post- Minus 


Ratings 


Source of Variation df 


Mean 
Square P 


Between subjects 


Between levels of change in anxiety 
ratings 


Liner 
Quadratic 


Error 


77.11 Not sig. 


<0.05 
<0.02 
Not sig. 


Pre- 
4.99 
4.28 
_ $$ = j 
16 
17025 3.09 
ql) 285.94 6.19 
32 46.18 
Total 50 
| 
553 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


(Table 3). The extent of disturbance pro- 
duced by the “base-day” experience of 
Group El was greater than on any of the 
stress days, and also caused a higher mean 
the afternoon. Thus 
Group E1 maintained a higher plasma hy- 
drocortisone level over a longer period of 
time on the “base day” than on any experi- 
mental day. 


extra-post-level in 


Urinary Hydroxycorticoid Excretion 


After its release into the circulation, hy- 
drocortisone is extensively modified by the 
liver,§ and the metabolic products are ex- 
creted (almost in entirety) by the kidney.” 
The metabolism of the hormone 
both ring and side-chain reduction and oxi- 


involves 


dation, as well as conjugation. No quantita- 
tive balance studies have been made to date 
for the relationship of hydrocortisone and 
end-products. three 
major types of metabolic products have been 
identified and measured roughly: the dihy- 


its inert However, 


droxyacetone side-chain compounds, consist- 
ing chiefly of tetrahydrocortisone and 
tetrahydrohydrocortisone,® the glycerol side- 
chain compounds of the “cortol’”’ ( pregnane- 
3a, 118, 17a, 20a, 21-pentol) and “cortolone” 
(3a, 17a, 20a, 21-tetrahydroxypregnane-11- 
one) type 78 and the 17-ketosteroids.4 This 

{ References 20, 21. 

# Munson, P. L.: Laidlow, J. C.; Goetz, F. G.; 
Jenkins, D., and Thorn, G. W.: Effect of Corti- 
costeroids on 17-Ketosteroids and Androgen Ex- 
cretion, unpublished data, cited by Thorn and 
associates.* 


rough division has been achieved by the use 
of steroid classificatory reagents, such as 
phenylhydrazine, periodate, and dinitroben- 
zene. In the present study only one moiety 
of the hydrocortisone metabolites was 
assessed quantitatively: the phenylhydra- 
zine-reacting substances present in an acid- 
butanol extract of urine ( Porter-Silber 
reaction). The latter substances are almost 
exclusively tetrahydrocortisone and _ tetra- 
hydrohydrocortisone, with small amounts of 
hydrocortisone and cortisone. More than 
95% of the chromogenic material is con- 
jugated as the glucuronide or sulfate. Since 
this fraction is about one-fifth of the daily 
hydrocortisone production by the normal 
adrenal gland,* one must be extremely 
cautious in drawing conclusions from 
changes in this measure, inasmuch as any 
differences found may reflect shifts in the 
metabolic pattern rather than alterations in 
adrenocortical function. 

The 24-hour excretion of phenylhydra- 
zine-reacting substances  (hydroxycorti- 
coids) on the base day in anxious subjects 
(Group E1) is 70% greater than in normal 
controls (C1) (Table 6). The value for our 
control group is identical with those reported 
for normal subjects by other investigators. 
The increased urinary output of steroid by 
the anxious patients was not due to increased 
urinary output, since the volume in the two 
groups did not differ significantly; the nor- 
mals actually put out a slightly larger volume 

* References 14, 25. 

+ References 13, 14. 


TABLE 6.—“Base-Day” Urinary Excretion of Hydroxycorticoids by Anxious and Normal Subjects 


Group 


Experimental 


Control (C:) 


Urine Hydroxycorticoids, Mg.* 


| 


P.M.t 


4.7743.53 8.04+5.20 


2.52+1.50 4.7742.38 


* Mean+standard deviation. 

+ Period from 8:30 a.m, to 2:30 p.m. (6 hours). 

t Period from 2:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. next day (18 hours). 
§ Complete data for only 16 of the 18 subjects. 


554 


2.29 


| | | 
A.M.+t Hr. | 

= 
| | 
t 1.52 2.35 

P Not sig. | <0.05 <0.05 


ADRENOCORTICAL FUNCTION IN ANXIETY 


(1525873 ce. vs. 1418+909 cc.; t=0.34; 
P not significant). During the period from 
8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. on the base day, the 
anxious subjects excreted more hydroxy- 


following the stress interview. However, as 
with the plasma hydrocortisone level, no sig- 
nificant increase in urinary output was noted 
on any experimental day (Table 7). Specific 


Change in Urinary Hydroxycorticoid Excretion in Eighteen Anxious Patients in Group E1 


Following a Stress Interview 


TABLE 7 
Urine 
Occasion Hydroxycorticoid 
| } Excretion, 
| Mg./Day* | 
Base day 8.20+4.02 
Day 1 8.2347.12 
Day 2 6.2045.54 
Day 3 79227.74 


* Mean-+standard deviation. 


Comparison of Level Comparison of Variance 


| 


tt | P F } P 

| 
0.33 | Not sig. 2.09 Not sig. 
1.33 Not sig. 1.27 Not sig. 
0.03 Not sig. 2.47 <0.05 


+ Between base day and each of the experimental days, a valu ot 2.12 is necessary for the 5% level of significance. 


corticoids, but this difference was short of 
significance; only in the afternoon and eve- 
ning did a clear differentiation between the 
anxious and the normal subjects with re- 
spect to hydroxycorticoid excretion occur. 
This increased excretion is related to the 
higher levels of hydrocortisone in the plasma 
of the anxious subjects for the three sam- 
pling times as compared with the normal 
controls. 

The excretion of hydroxycorticoids in 
anxious subjects ranged from 0.00 to 15.70 
mg. on the “base day,” while the normal 
controls (C1) ranged from 0.30 to 8.86 
mg., with only one normal value above the 
mean of the anxious group. The anxious 
group was considerably more variable than 
the controls with respect to the quantity of 
hydroxycorticoids excreted on the “base 
day.” The difference exceeded the 0.01 level 
of significance, as shown by the F-test.*® 

Since the plasma level of hydrocortisone 
and the urinary output of hydroxycorticoids 
of anxious subjects are increased to about 
the same extent (60% to 70%) over those 
for normals, it seems reasonable to conclude 
that the adrenal cortex in anxious patients 
is “set” to secrete hydrocortisone at an 
increased rate. 

Effect of the Stress Interview on Urinary 

Hydroxycorticoid Excretion 

It was anticipated that the urinary output 

of hydroxycorticoids would be increased 


subjects did respond with enormous in- 
creases in hydroxycorticoids, amounting to 
as much as 28.0 mg. per day. Because of the 
wide range of responses, the group varia- 
bility was greater on every experimental day 
than on the “base day,” with Day 3 achiev- 
ing significance (o*7=60.00 vs. =24.24; 
F =2.47; P<0.05) and Day 1 just short of 
significance. 

No difference in hydroxycorticoid output 
occurred between occasions representing the 
extremes in anxiety arousal. This is dis- 
tinctly different from the plasma hydrocorti- 
sone response similarly analyzed. 
While no explanation is available to account 
for this difference between the urine and 
the plasma results, it may be that the change 
in plasma bears a direct relationship to the 
stimulation of the adrenal gland under the 
applied stress, whereas the urinary output 
reflects a variety of secondary effects of the 
stress, such as alteration in hepatic function. 
Since these influences may be operating in 
an antagonistic fashion, a clear differentia- 
tion between days with high and low changes 
in anxiety by means of the urinary hydroxy- 
corticoid output may be impossible. : 


Comment 


The anxious patient has been shown to 
maintain a considerably elevated blood hy- 
drocortisone level and to excrete more 
hydroxycorticoids than less anxious controls. 


555 


| L 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


In these respects he resembles the psycho- 
logically disturbed subjects of Board and his 
colleagues,” Elmadjian,® and Hetzel and his 
co-workers.® Furthermore, he responded to 
the application of a psychological stress of 
moderate intensity and short duration with 
a small rise in blood hydrocortisone level 
(after correcting for diurnal variation) but 
not in urinary hydroxycorticoid excretion. 
Relatively less disturbed subjects manifest 
an increase in urinary hydroxycorticoid out- 
put following a roughly similar stimulus,® 
while the output of normal men under the 
considerably greater stress of prolonged 
combat resemble our patient group by re- 
maining unchanged.* 

It is difficult to explain the elevated blood 
and urine steroid levels of the anxious sub- 
ject in any fashion other than by assuming 
that his adrenal cortex has been stimulated to 
produce greater amounts of its major ster- 
oidal product. While not satisfying the 
severest criteria, the combination of elevated 
plasma hydrocortisone and urinary tetrahy- 
drocortisone levels has been accepted by 
other investigators as constituting presump- 
tive evidence for increased 
secretion.2 Alternative hypotheses might be 
acceptable if only the blood level or urinary 
excretion were but with both 
these indices increased, no other explanation 
seems likely. That various biological events, 
in addition to an increase in adrenocortical 
activity, may occur which could further 
differentiate the anxious patient’s hydro- 
cortisone metabolism from others is a dis- 
tinct possibility which cannot be dismissed 
without further investigation. It should be 
recalled, for example, that the conjugation 
of benzoic acid with 
form hippuric acid is considerably enhanced 


adrenocortical 


increased; 


aminoacetic acid to 
in severely anxious subjects.”® 

The likelihood that the elevated plasma 
and urinary levels of hydroxycorticoids rep- 
resent only disgorgement by the adrenal of 
stored hormone rather than continuous syn- 
thesis is slight in view of the fact that over 
several days of careful examination the same 


t References 27, 28. 
556 


high levels were maintained. Furthermore, 
in at least some subjects the quantities of 
hydroxycorticoids excreted were equivalent 
to the estimated amounts produced daily by 
the gland.2* The acceptance of the hypoth- 
esis of increased adrenocortical synthesis 
need not be based on indirect evidence alone. 
Direct techniques are presently available for 
the estimation of adrenocortical capacity § 
which can be applied in future studies. 
What is the mechanism of adrenocortical 
activation in psychological stress? Hetzel 
and his associates® accept the view that 
adrenocortical activation occurs in response 
to increased catabolic processes occurring in 
the psychologically stressed as well as in the 
physically stressed organism, evidenced by 
increased nitrogen excretion and oxygen 
consumption. However, in a previous study 
of severe chronically anxious patients ?* it 
was found that the subjects maintained 
nitrogen balance while on a normal protein 
intake and had a normal basal metabolic 
rate throughout a testing period of four 
days. It seems more reasonable to assume 
that psychological activate the 
adrenal cortex through the functions of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary system rather than 
by an indirect peripheral pathway. 
Although the adrenal cortex appears to be 


stresses 


hyperfunctional in chronically anxious men, 
the imposition of an additional anxiety- 
evoking stress did not elicit a large increase 
in their blood and/or urine hormone levels. 
The reason for this relative lack of response 
cannot be insufficiency of the function of 
the gland, since these subjects responded to 
intravenous corticotropin (ACTH) with 
large increments in blood and urine hor- 
mone content.{ It is probably not due to 
pituitary insufficiency, since Sayers and his 
co-workers have shown that the pituitary has 
a large capacity to meet emergency demands 
for ACTH.# Two other explanations, not 
as fully explored, remain: (1) a failure of 


§ References 30, 30a. 

Persky, H.: Adrenal Cortical Function in 
Anxious Human Subjects: Production of Hydro- 
cortisone, in preparation. 


# References 31, 32. 


g 
: 


ADRENOCORTICAL FUNCTION IN ANXIETY 


the central nervous system “triggering” 
mechanism for ACTH release to increase its 
stimulating activity in response to acute 
stress, or (2) an increase in utilization of 
adrenocortical hormone following acute 
stress, resulting in hormone levels in the 
blood and urine not differing from the pre- 
stress state. Neither possibility has been ex- 
amined extensively in anxious subjects. 
Increased hormone utilization is known to 
occur after a variety of physical stresses,® 
and the sequence of events leading from the 
central nervous system to the discharge of 
ACTH by the pituitary remains to be ex- 
plored. 

The stress stimulus which we imposed on 
our anxious human patients could not ethi- 
cally be too traumatic, so that the intensity 
of the elicited emotional responses was not 
great; nor did it persist for an extended 
period of time. It would be expected that 
the effect of the stress interview on adreno- 
cortical hormone production would be slight. 
However, when over a period of days there 
was an increasing intensity of emotional 
arousal, there was a concomitant increase 
in the level of hydrocortisone in the plasma. 


Summary 

Plasma hydrocortisone level and urinary 
hydroxycorticoid excretion were 60% and 
70% greater, respectively, in anxious sub- 
jects on a “base day” than in normal con- 
trols. The elevated blood and urine levels 
were maintained in the anxious subjects 
over a four-day testing period. When a 
stress interview was administered to every 
anxious subject on each of the last three 
days, it failed to increase significantly either 
the blood or the urine hormone levels in the 
group as a whole. When the stress days 
were segregated into high, medium, and low 
days for each subject, the change in plasma 
hydrocortisone level was significantly greater 
on the day of greatest increase in anxiety 
than on the day of least change in anxiety. 
The elevated plasma and urine hormone 
levels in the anxious subjects are taken as 
evidence that the adrenal cortex is secreting 
at a higher rate than in normal controls. 


Miss Betty Lou Day, Mrs. Stiscie Cutler, and 
Mr. John Cowen assisted with the chemical de- 
terminations and did some of the statistical com- 
putation, and Dr. Helen Heath was _ responsible 
for a considerable part of the conception and 
execution of the statistical analyses. 


REFERENCES 


1. Selye, H.: The Physiology and Pathology of 
Exposure to Stress, Montreal, Acta, Inc., 1950. 

+ 2. Ingle, D. J.: The Role of the Adrenal Cor- 
tex in Homeostasis, J. Endocrinol. 8:23, 1952. 

3. Engle, F. L.: General Concepts of Adreno- 
cortical Function in Relation to the Response to 
Stress, Psychosom. Med. 15:565, 1953. 

4. Sandberg, A. A.; Ejik-Nes, K.; Samuels, 
L. T., and Tyler, F. H.: The Effects of Surgery 
on the Blood Levels and 17- 
Hydroxycorticosteroids in Man, J. Invest. 
33 :1509, 1954. 

5. Cope, C. L., and Hurlock, B.: Some Aspects 
of Adrenal Cortical Metabolism, Clin. Sc. 13:69, 
1954. 

6. Birke, G.; Franksson, C., and Plantin, L. O.: 
The Excretion Pattern of 17-Ketosteroids and 
Corticosteroids in Surgical Acta 
18:201, 1955. 

7. Board, F.; Persky, H., and Hamburg, D. A.: 
Psychological Stress and Endocrine Functions: 
Blood Levels of Adrenocortical and Thyroid Hor- 
mones in Acutely Disturbed Patients, Psychosom. 
Med. 18:324, 1956. 

8. Elmadjian, F.: Adrenocortical Function of 
Combat Infantrymen in Korea, Ciba Foundation 
Colloquia in Endocrinology, 1955, Vol. 8, p. 627. 

9. Hetzel, B. S.; Schottstaedt, W. W.; Grace, 
W. J., and Wolff, H. G.: Changes in Urinary 17- 
Hydroxycorticosteroid Excretion During Stressful 
Life Experiences in Man, J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
15:1057, 1955. 

10. Grinker, R. R.; Korchin, S. J.; Basowitz, 
H.; Hamburg, D. A.; Sabshin, M. A.; Persky, 
H.; Chevalier, J. A., and Board, F. A.: A Theo- 
retical and Experimental Approach to Problems 
of Anxiety, A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 
76 :420, 1956. 

11. Nelson, D. H., and Samuels, L. T.: A 
Method for the Determination of 17-Hydroxy- 
corticosteroids in Blood: 17-Hydroxycorticosterone 
in the Peripheral Circulation, J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
12:519, 1952. 

12. Eik-Nes, K.; Nelson, D. H., and Samuels, 
L. T.: Determination of 17, 21-Hydroxycortico- 
steroids in Plasma, J. Clin. Endocrinol. 13 :1280, 
1953. 

13. Reddy, W. J.; Jenkins, D., and Thorn, 
G. W.: Estimation of 17-Hydroxycorticoids in 
Urine, Metabolism 1:511, 1952. 

14. Brown, H.; Willardson, D. G.; Samuels, 


Metabolism of 
Clin. 


Stress, endo- 


crinol. 


557 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


L. T., and Tyler, F. H.: 17-Hydroxycorticosteroid 
Metabolism in Liver Disease, J. Clin. Invest. 
33:1524, 1954. 

15. Folin, O., and Wu, H.: A System of Blood 
Analysis, J. Biol. Chem. 38:81, 1919. 

16. Bliss, E. L.; Sandberg, A. A.; Nelson, D. H., 
and Eik-Nes, K.: The Normal Levels of 17- 
Hydroxycorticosteroids in the Peripheral Blood 
of Man, J. Clin. Invest. 32:818, 1953. 

17. Silber, R. H., and Porter, C. C.: The De- 
termination of 17, 21-Dihydroxy-20-Ketosteroids 
in Urine and Plasma, J. Biol. Chem. 210 :923, 1954.+ 

18. Robinson, H. J.; Bernhard, W. G.; Grubin, 
H.; Wanner, H.; Sewekow, G. W., and Silber, 
R. H.: 17, 21-Dihydroxy-20-Ketosteroids in 
Plasma During and After Pregnancy, J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. 15 :317, 1955. 

19. Klein, R.; Papadatos, C.; Fortunato, J., and 
Byers, C.: Acid-Hydrolyzable Corticoids of Serum, 
J. Clin. Endocrinol. 15:215, 1955. 

20. Schneider, J. J., and Horstman, P. M-.: 
Effects of Incubating Compound E and Related 
Steroids with Various Surviving Rat Tissues, J. 
Biol. Chem. 196 :629, 1952. 

21. Nelson, D. H.: Determination of Adrenal 
Cortical Steroids in Blood, in Transactions of the 
Third Conference on the Adrenal Cortex, E. P. 
Ralli, Editor, New York, The Josiah Macy, Jr. 
Foundation, 1952. 

22. Hellman, L.; Bradlow, H. L.; Adesman, J.; 
Fukushima, D. K.; Kulp, J. L., and Gallagher, 
T. F.: The Fate of Hydrocortisone-4-C™ in Man, 
J. Clin. Invest. 33:1106, 1954. 

23. Fukushima, D. K.; Leeds, N. S.; Bradlow, 
H. L.; Kritchevsky, T. H.; Stoken, M. B., 
Gallagher, T. F.: The Characterization of 


and 
Four 


New Metabolites of Adrenocortical Hormones, J. 
Biol. Chem. 212 :449, 1955. 


24. Thorn, G. W., and others: Pharmacologic 
Aspects of Adrenocortical Steroids and ACTH in 
Man, New England J. Med. 248 :369, 1953. 

25. Silber, R. H.: Estimation of Hydrocortisone 
Secretion: Method of Calculation from Urinary- 
Excretion Data, Clin. Chem. 1:234, 1955. 

26. Snedecor, G. W.: Statistical Methods Ap- 
plied to Experiments in Agriculture and Biology, 
Edition 4, Ames, Iowa, The Collegiate Press, Inc., 
1946. 

27. Romanoff, E. B.; Hudson, P., and Pincus, 
G.: Isolation of Hydrocortisone and Corticosterone 
from Human Adrenal Vein Blood, J. Clin. Endo- 
crinol. 13:1546, 1953. 

28. Hudson, P. B., 
Analysis of 


and Lombardo, M. E.: 
Human Adrenal Vein Blood and 
Adrenal Glands for Steroidal Substances, J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. 15:324, 1955. 

29. Persky, H.; Grinker, R. R., and Mirsky, 
I. A.: The Excretion of Hippuric Acid in Sub- 
jects with Free Anxiety, J. Clin. Invest. 29:110, 
1950. 

30. Eik-Nes, K.; Sandberg, A. A. 
D. H.; Tyler, F. H., and Samuels, L. T. 
in Plasma 17-Hydroxycorticosteroids 
During the Intravenous Administration of ACTH: 
I. A Test of Adrenocortical Capacity in 
Human, J. Clin. Invest. 33:1502, 1954. 

30a. Persky, H., and Heath, H.: The Effect 
of Intravenous ACTH on Plasma Hydrocortisone 
Level in Man, J. 
lished. 


; Nelson, 
: Changes 
Levels of 


the 


Clin. Endocrinol., to be pub- 


31. Sayers, G.: The Adrenal Cortex and Homeo- 
stasis, Physiol. Rev. 30:241, 1950. 

32. Sydnor, K. L., and Sayers, G.: Blood and 
Pituitary ACTH in Intact and Adrenalectomized 
Rats After Stress, Endocrinology 55:621, 1254. 


4 
. 
558 
4 
7 


WALTER WEZiTI, M.D., Seattle 


Delirium immediately following surgery 
is a common incident and is often attribut- 
able to the anesthesia, but delirium occur- 
ring two or three days later is a puzzling 
psychiatric and medical problem. What has 
been learned about the role of electrolytes 
in heart disease, and more recently in sur- 
gery, now sheds valuable light on this prob- 
lem. 

In brief, every patient who undergoes 
major surgery experiences an electrolyte dis- 
turbance that may cause a psychotic or 
delirious reaction. 


Whether it does or not 
will f 


three factors: (1) the 
severity of the disturbance; (2) the treat- 
ment provided to control it, and (3) the 
presence of other factors which contribute 


depend on 


to clouding of consciousness, such as seda- 
tion, hypoxia, fever, toxins, and circulatory 
collapse or impairment. 

The clinical picture usually associated 
with low serum sodium and referred to as 
the low-salt syndrome consists primarily of 
weakness, anorexia, and lethargy. The pa- 
tient may or may not be disoriented, de- 
lusional, or comatose. His responses may 
While this 


description is commonly found in medical 


be slow and reflexes sluggish. 


literature, case reports of central nervous 
system disturbance due to electrolyte imbal- 
ance are few. Saphir! reports 10 cases 
in which low sodium chloride levels were 
associated with psychoneurotic-like symp- 
toms—apprehension, loss of 


energy, feelings of depression, insomnia, 


restlessness, 


headache, tremor, hyperreflexia, abdominal 
cramps, and gastrointestinal disturbances. 


Submitted for publication June 1, 1956. 

From the Department of Psychiatry, with as- 
sistance from the Division of Cardiology, Depart- 
ment of Medicine, University of 
School of Medicine. 


Washington 


These followed excessive salt loss by per- 
spiration with inadequate oral intake of 
salt. They were treated successfully with 
salt by mouth over a one-week period. 

Moore, writing on the low sodium syn- 
dromes of surgery,” reminds us that dis- 
orientation or coma may occur. He 
three types of low serum 
sodium seen in patients who have under- 
gone surgery: 


de- 


scribes basic 


1. Low serum sodium due to severe injury or 
major surgery. Following trauma, sodium 
shifts from the serum to the body tissues, 
while total body sodium and body water re- 
main normal. 

2. Water intoxication or dilution of sodium, due 
to administration of too much water in the 
presence of an antidiuretic effect. This is 
seen in patients with chronic heart, liver, or 
kidney disease. 

3. True sodium deficiency, as seen in dehydra- 
tion when body sodium and body water are 
low. The serum 

sodium 


lowered 
exceeds the water 
either through extrarenal routes, i. e., fistula 
drainage, vomiting, and diarrhea,“ or through 
pathological renal 


sodium level is 


when loss 


loss, 


loss. 

Low sodium levels also occur in heart 
disease, as a result of vigorous use of diu- 
retics, low-salt diet, and high fluid intake. 
When the sodium-depressing effects of this 
treatment are added to the sodium-depress- 
ing effects of major surgery, we would ex- 
pect to find a_ greater incidence of 
low-sodium symptoms. Recently, the ex- 
tended use of surgery in heart disease has 
brought more than its share of postoperative 
disturbances of consciousness which seem to 
be due to precisely this effect. 


Observations 


The following is a report of the various 
disturbances of the central nervous system 
seen in a survey of 27 consecutive patients 
following mitral commissurotomy. 

Of this group of 27 patients, 9 showed 
neurotic-like symptoms, i. e., apprehension, 


559 


|_| 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


restlessness, asthenia, irritability, headache, 
or depression when their sodium level was 
at its lowest ebb. These were noted by the 
ward physician during routine care. The 
mean of the lowest serum sodium levels 
reached in these patients was 130 mIiq/L, 
actually slightly higher than the mean low 
of the asymptomatic group. Normal serum 
sodium concentration ranges from 138 to 
143 mEq/L. 

Since these patients were subjected to 
many physical and emotional stresses, the 
neurotic-like symptoms could not clearly be 
attributed to the low sodium levels. All 
patients had been advised of the very real 
risk to life involved in the surgery. All 
experienced considerable pain, as well as 
total immobilization and confinement to oxy- 
gen tents. In view of this, it can only be 
allowed that the electrolyte imbalance pre- 
sent may have played a contributory role 
in the production of symptoms. 

Of the 27 patients, 6 showed some degree 
of delirium, i. e., clouded consciousness, 
delirium, or coma. Of these, one became 
delirious following an alcohol infusion 
(serum sodium 134 mEq/L), one became 
comatose during a state of shock (serum 
sodium 130 mEq/L), and one was confused 
and disoriented during fever (serum sodium 
131 mEq/L). Because of the presence of 
these other deliriogenic factors, the part 
played by the moderate depression of serum 
sodium is questionable. However, in the 
remaining three cases of this group, coma 
and delirium were felt to be clearly attribu- 
table to exceedingly low sodium levels. 

These three cases were the only ones to 
attain levels below 121 mEq/L. They were 
among the first 11 patients to undergo op- 
eration. Their routine care included (1) 
preoperative restriction of salt to 250 mg. 
of sodium per day, (2) complete salt de- 
nial by mouth (no food) and by vein for 
two days after surgery, (3) unlimited water 
by mouth plus supplementary dextrose in 
water by vein for two days after operation. 
Because of the high incidence of delirium 
with this regime (3 out of 11 patients), 
the routine was changed to provide restric- 


560 


tion of fluids just before surgery. This 


slight dehydration kept sodium concentra- 
tions high enough to prevent low-sodium 
delirium in the remaining 16 patients. 


Report of Cases 


The following cases illustrate the rela- 
tionship of symptoms to sodium levels. 

Case 1—A 56-year-old woman was referred 
to the hospital for a commissurotomy after 20 
years of known rheumatic heart disease. She had 
always considered herself a worrier, frail in phy- 
sique, and nervous in temperament. On the eve 
of her operation she was terrified by the sudden 
death of the woman in the neighboring bed. How- 
ever, the next morning she went to the operating 
room without expressing, or in any way resolv- 
ing, her mounting fear of death. 

The preoperative serum sodium level was 142 
mEq/L after six weeks of preparation on a 250- 
mg. sodium diet (Fig. 1). Within 24 hours after 
surgery it had fallen to 128 mEq/L. The patient 


SERUM ELECTROLYTE CONCENTRATION (mEq) 


SURGERY 


Fig. 1 (Case 1).—Period of delirium between 
dotted vertical lines. All electrolytes are depressed 
in this period. At top of figure, negative sodium 
balance is shown in black columns below the base 
line. Positive sodium balance is shown above the 
line. Total column height equals the sodium in- 
take; hatched columns superimposed represent 
sodium loss, and the difference between the two, 
net salt gain, is shown in white. 


4 
<a 
q 
EL. 
a 75 
SODIUM 25 
BALANCE O 
-7 ‘delirium: 
150 
140 
130 No 
120 
4 
4 
H 
. |s0 cl 
H 
' 
20 
: a 2 4 6 8B W [2 Post op days 
4 
4 
a 


DELIRIUM WITH LOW SERUM SODIUM 


was obviously anxious and complained of chest 
pain, but her thinking was clear and rational. On 
the second day confusion of thought appeared and 
her anxiety changed to uncontrolled panic. She 
prayed desperately to be spared from death and 
failed to recognize or heed her doctors. At the 
onset of her delirium her serum sodium was seen 
to be 113 mEq/L. Vital signs were normal. The 
lungs were clear, and circulation apparently ade- 
quate. She was receiving dihydromorphinone 
U.S.P. (Dilaudid) three times a day for pain, 
pentobarbital (Nembutal) at night for sleep, and 
her usual preoperative dose of digitoxin, as well 
as streptomycin and penicillin. 

This very low sodium level, and the fact that 
intake and output records showed a positive water 
balance, suggested that water intoxication or low 
sodium was responsible for her delirium. Hyper- 
tonic (5%) saline was given intravenously over a 
period of five hours. This brought the serum 
sodium up to 122 mEq/L and produced some 
clearing of the delirium. For the next two days, 
fluids were limited to 1 liter per day, and small 
amounts of saline were given parenterally. As 
the delirium continued to clear, signs of right 
heart failure appeared, so that the sodium and 
water had to be titrated to a narrow midzone 
between cardiac decompensation, on one side, and 
delirium, on the other. 

On the fourth postoperative day, the patient 
was responsive and alert but still disoriented 
(serum sodium 123 mEq/L). On the 10th day 
her sensorium was completely clear and the serum 
sodium was 135 mEq/L. 

This case illustrates the abrupt decline 
in the serum sodium level that follows major 
surgery. Intake and output studies showed 
an uncompensated loss of about 90 mEq/L 
of sodium from the body in the two days 
following surgery (Sodium balance, Fig. 
1). However, the serum sodium level fell 
from 142 to 113 mEq/L, indicating a loss 
of 174 mEq/L from the body’s 6 liters of 
blood. Since only 90 mEq left the body, the 
remaining 85 mEq must have shifted to 
the body tissues. 

It can briefly be stated that organic fac- 
tors that embarrass cerebral function dimin- 
ish the patient’s internal defenses, providing 
an open door for irrational expression of 
emotion. As would be expected, the con- 
tent of the delirious productions were in 
this case determined by the patient’s per- 
sonality reaction pattern and her immediate 
fear of death. It is not to be overlooked 


that all patients are greatly threatened by 
this dramatic and still new operation. All 
are advised of the real dangers before they 
are accepted for treatment. However, as 
will be seen in the following case, not all 
patients have as much fear or as poor 
methods of dealing with it, even during deli- 
rium, as the above patient. 

Case 2.—A_ 47-year-old placid and passive 
woman had been partially incapacitated with rheu- 
matic fever and heart disease since the age of 7 
years. She had had several embolic accidents, one 
causing hemiplagia, from which she had _ slight 
residual stiffness of her left hand. For 18 months 
before admission to the hospital, she was unable 
to do more than move slowly about the house 
because of symptoms of right and left heart fail- 
ure. 

This patient remained in the hospital three 
months on a measured intake of 250 mg. of sodium 
per day. During this preparatory period, the 
edema disappeared but the serum sodium remained 
at about 144 mEq/L until the time of surgery 


JP 
> -75 coma 150 
g Na 140 
S 
130 Na 
\ 120 
7 110 
5 
4 
110 
ci 
}ooe 
90 
| 
35 
25 
2 6 8 10 Post-op days 
SURGERY 


Fig. 2 (Case 2).—Period of coma between dot- 
ted vertical lines. All electrolytes are depressed 
during this period. At top of figure, negative bal- 
ance is shown in black columns below the base 
line. Positive sodium balance is shown above the 
line. Total column height equals the sodium in- 
take; hatched columns superimposed represent 
sodium loss, and the difference between the two, 
net salt gain, is shown in white. 


(Fig. 2). The day after surgery, it fell to 131.2 
mEq/L, and the second day, to 120 mEq/L. Fol- 
lowing surgery, the patient received nothing but 


561 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


water by mouth and only dextrose in water by 
vein for two days. Though she took in 2000 and 
3000 cc. of water on these days, she lost, via chest 
drainage and urine, only 530 and 485 cc., respec- 
tively. Allowing for insensible water loss, she still 
had a positive water balance of about 3000 cc. 
At the same time, her sodium balance was nega- 
tive, i. e., moderate loss with no replacement. 
On the morning of the second postoperative 
day she showed no evidence of delirium or con- 
fusion on pointed examination. The serum sodium 
was 120 mEq/L, the temperature 99.8 F., the 
pulse rate 86 per minute at the wrist, the blood 
108/68, minute. 
Skin color was good. That afternoon, 45 minutes 
after being given dihydromorphinone hydrochlo- 
ride, grain 1/32 (1.88 mg.) hypodermically (she 
had been receiving this amount three times a day 
since surgery), she became semistuporous and re- 
mained so for 12 hours. 
upward and were parallel. Vital signs and skin 
color remained good. After partial clearing, she 
was given dihydromorphinone HCl, grain 1/64 
(0.94 mg.), and again lapsed into semistupor. For 
two and a half days her state of consciousness was 


pressure and respirations 16 a 


Her eyes were turned 


responding,” or 
No bizarre behavior, delusions, hallucina- 
tions, or emotional expression was noted by the 
The sodium level remained at 
120 mEq/L in spite of a saline infusion (75 


described as “semicoma,” “not 


“coma.” 
ward physicians. 


mEq/L) until the fourth postoperative day, when 
it rose to 130 mEq/L. On the fifth day, she re- 
gained complete consciousness, and the serum so- 
level found to be 134 mEq/L. She 
continued to receive dihydromorphinone, without 


dium was 


any effect on her state of consciousness. Later in 


x 


888s 


her hospital stay, she suffered an acute febrile ill- 
ness, with a temperature of 103 F., but showed no 
further central nervous system disturbance. 
Here, sedation superimposed on serum 
sodium depression seemed to produce a 
coma which was unannounced by any of 
the better-known symptoms of the low-salt 
syndrome. The then outlasted the 
action of the dihydromorphinone, clearing 
only when the sodium level rose to 130 
mEq/L. The typical large-scale and dra- 
matic effect of major surgical trauma in re- 
ducing serum sodium 


coma 


is apparent again 
here, and by comparison the influence of 
diet and diuresis seems insignificant. How- 
ever, the next case demonstrates that they, 
too, are capable of producing delirium, with 
or without the help of surgery. 

Case 3.—A 27-year-old man had had rheumatic 
heart disease since the age of 13 and had been 
in the hospital many times for embolic phenomena, 
respiratory infections, and cardiac decompensation. 
He had had both right and left hemiplegia, and 
there was some suggestion of a residual slurring 
of speech. He was characterized by his family as 
headstrong and_ stubborn 
juvenile behavior problem. 


mild 
In January, 1950, he 
for pneumonia, and for seven 
days, during the febrile period, he showed con- 
fusion, disorientation, and uncooperativeness. 

In December, 1950, when he was hospitalized for 
mitral commissurotomy, he was neither dyspneic 


and had been a 


was hospitalized 


nor cyanotic on admission. On a low-salt diet his 


2 
SURGERY 


gery. 


> 0 30 
HOSPITAL DAYS (2 yeors later) 


Fig. 3 (Case 3).—On the left is shown a period 
of confusion when sodium was depressed by sur- 


On the right delirium occurred two years 


later, when sodium was reduced to the same low 
level by medical and dietary means. 


j 

4 

Z 

7 

ASL 

ai 

cramps delinum 

| ' ' 

—_ 

562 


DELIRIUM WITH LOW SERUM SODIUM 


serum electrolytes were in low-normal range (Fig. 
3). The blood chloride level was 105mEq/L, CO: 
22 mm/L, and serum sodium, estimated from 
these Figures, 139 mEq/L. On the third day after 
his commissurotomy, he began to lose chloride by 
emesis. However, he remained clear in thought 
and cooperative in manner until the fifth day. He 
then complained of an inability to focus his 
eyes, pain in the left chest, and continued nausea. 
The ward 
cloudy.” 


physician “Sensorium seems 
His COs level was down to 13 mm/L; 
the chloride was 88 mEq/L, and serum sodium, 
roughly 113 mEq/L. The hematocrit was 48%. 
The confusion and difficulty in focusing his eyes 


noted, 


continued through the eighth postoperative day, 
at which time there were noted a bilateral positive 
Babinski reaction and a 
looking to the right 


definite nystagmus on 
The COs was then 20 mm/L, 
the chloride 90 mEq/L, and the serum sodium 
estimate 122 mEq/L. Two days later an eye ex- 
amination showed vision to be 20/20 in the right 
eye and 20/30 in the left. This notation was made: 
“Patient has impaired word and color interpreta- 
tion and appears to have some loss of accommoda- 
tion. He has improved the past few days and now 
can name colors fairly well. I feel this is a cere- 
bral condition and advise neurological observation. 
The eyes appear normal objectively.” 

During the period of clouded consciousness and 
visual complaints (5th to 10th postoperative days), 
the patient maintained normal blood pressure and 
a temperature elevation of not more than 2 de- 
grees (F). There was no evidence of increasing 
circulatory or respiratory embarrassment. The 
BUN ranged from 10.8 to 15.0 mg. per 100 ce. 
He received only acetylsalicylic acid for pain and 
pentobarbital, 90 m¢g., 
talis, 100 mg, and (Mercuhydrin), 
0.5 cc. daily. Because of anorexia, his liquid, no- 
salt diet was poorly taken. 


for sleep. He was on digi- 
meralluride 


His physical condition 
improved steadily after this period, and no further 
note was made of his mental status. 

The cause of the clouding of sensorium 
was not recognized by the physician, and 
no specific steps were taken to correct the 
electrolyte disturbance. It was only when 
the patient returned to the hospital in 
congestive failure two years later that the 
cause of his postoperative delirium was sur- 
mised to be low serum sodium. 

At this failing circulation and extreme 
edema required that every measure be taken to 
reduce his serum sodium, although it was already 
just below normal (136.3 mEq/L). His COs was 
26 mm/L, 102 mEq/L, potassium 4.7 
mEq/L, and hematocrit 50%. By salt restriction, 
diuresis, and the withdrawal of salt-containing 
ascites fluid from the abdomen, the sodium level 


time, 


chloride 


was reduced to 122 mEq/L by the eighth hospitai 
day. At this point the patient became restless 
and began to complain of abdominal cramps. 
These were thought to be due to low serum sodium, 
but were only slightly relieved by 200 cc. of isotonic 
saline intravenously. 

By the 30th day his serum sodium had dropped 
to 114.1 mEq/L. 


cerebral 


At this low level no signs of 
disturbance were noted for 24 
Then two factors were added which further dis- 
torted the electrolyte picture: (1) Vomiting be- 
gan, resulting in loss of chloride and depression of 
serum sodium, and (2) 


hours. 


water was given intra- 
venously (1500 cc. of 5% dextrose in H:O), dilut- 
ing all electrolytes. While this solution was 
running in, the first signs of confusion appeared, 
with slowing of speech and thought and a markedly 
uncooperative attitude. The patient could not re- 
call the names of his doctors. Serial subtractions 
(100—7, etc.) were slow and faulty, requiring 165 
seconds and involving five errors. 

A few hours later, vomiting recurred, and ab- 
dominal cramps became severe. He was given % 
grain (30 mg.) of codeine hypodermically and an 
hour later began complaining that the room was 
changing—“The 
with 


door 
breath.” 


gets big and then small 
The curtain around the bed 
“changed” to a darker blue; the colors on the fa- 
cial-tissue box were changing from coral and blue 
to orange and green. Such a shift toward yellow in 
vision is sometimes associated with digitalis in- 
toxication. 


each 


However, this patient was receiving 
only 0.1 mg. of digitoxin daily. He felt that he 
was changing into someone else’s body and then 
back into his own with each breath. “Voices sound 
different, but I can’t explain how—they just seem 
different.” The time of day and his location seemed 
to shift from moment to moment. He was baffled 
and slightly alarmed by these distortions in per- 
ception but was also able to consider them ob- 
jectively. At this point his thinking was much 
slower, and after each serial subtraction he had 
to be brought back to the problem by the examiner. 
Temperature and respiratory rate were normal. 
The pulse showed the irregularity of 
fibrillation but had not been accelerated. 
vomiting and dyspneic. 


auricular 
ile was 
The circulation time was 
doubtfully recorded at 53 seconds (arm to tongue). 
No increase in his degree of cardiac failure and 
no decrease in oxygenation could be detected dur- 
ing this period of hydration and delirium. 

After about two hours, he began to try to fix 
the shifting illusions by commanding the nurses 
and still: “Don’t move—don't 
move; don’t talk.” At the slightest movement in 
the periphery of his vision, he would shout: “You 
moved! You moved! Now it’s gone. You'll change.” 


doctors to stand 


A 5% saline solution was started intravenously 
at a fast drip, and within 15 minutes, 50 cc. of 


563 


) 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


5% saline havirig been given, he remarked, “Things 
are the same again now.” He looked about the 
room, approving of his visual impressions. “My 
hand seems small again; it seemed to get big 
before.” When he had received 450 cc. of saline, 
his sodium level was 120.0 mEq/L and the po- 
tassium 4.7 mEq/L. At this point he was still 
slightly confused but experienced no more illu- 
sions. 

The next day he appeared calm and clear and 
recalled his sensations of the night before. “I 
had a peculiar floating feeling. It made me sick 
when things moved. I thought I could make ’em 
stand still. Now everything is normal again.” 
However, as the acute delirium cleared, a sus- 
piciousness and open resistiveness were seen to 
remain. He refused to talk to certain of the ward 
personnel, insisted on leaving the hospital, and 
tried to run out in his bedclothes when his parents 
refused to take him home. Although his serum 
sodium ranged between 121 and 131 mEq/L, he 
became less confused but more belligerent and 
uncooperative, until further metabolic studies be- 
came impossible. On his 45th hospital day, he was 
discharged to his parents because nothing short of 
physical restraint could keep him in the hospital. 

Three weeks later he returned to the hospital 
with rapidly failing circulation and_ respiration. 
During the day he was clear in thought but ir- 
ritable. At night he became irrational and shouted 
threats that he would leave the hospital or commit 
suicide. The serum sodium varied from 126 to 
129 mEq/L. Death due to circulatory failure oc- 
curred a week after this last admission. 

This case again illustrates the dramatic 
and prolonged (10 days) depressing effect 
of surgical trauma on the serum sodium 
when treatment is not applied to correct it. 
The patient’s return to the hospital two 
years later provided a clear demonstration 
that depletion of sodium alone, without 
the shift produced by major surgery, is 
capable of producing the same degree of 
delirium. The administration of sodium 
brought prompt clearing, but the sodium 
level could not be allowed high enough to 
maintain total clarity of thought without 
overloading the circulatory system. Treat- 
ment was gauged to avoid the extremes of 
both delirium and circulatory failure. The 
psychotic-like picture that followed the delir- 
ium and lasted until the patient died, four 
months later, was thought to be facilitated 
by his confusion, as well as by the distress- 
ing effect, of his inexorable decline. Its 
content and pattern, however, seemed to 


564 


be determined by the predominantly head- 
strong and rebellious elements in his per- 
sonality. 


Summary and Conclusion 


Reduction of sodium concentration in 
the blood is capable of causing delirium. 
This, in turn, is reversible by the admin- 
istration of sodium. 

Some of the mechanisms by which serum 
sodium is reduced are discussed, with par- 
ticular attention to those encountered in 
major surgery and in the treatment of car- 
diac edema. A dangerous combination of 
sodium-depressing mechanisms is seen to 
occur when sodium-depleted cardiac patients 
undergo major surgery. 

From a survey of 27 patients who had 
mitral commissurotomies, 3 cases of low- 
sodium delirium are reported. Symptoms 
began only when the serum sodium reached 
121 mEq/L or lower. However, clearing 
occurred only when the level returned to 
130 mEq/L or higher. 

That delirium may also occur without 
major surgery was apparent in a case in 
which stringent deprivation and diuresis of 
sodium were used in the treatment of car- 
diac edema. 

Since delirium may be the only detectable 
sign of sodium depression, it is suggested 
that a serum sodium determination be done 
in any undiagnosed disturbance of con- 
sciousness occurring within the first week 
after major surgery. 130 
mkq/L would direct treatment toward care- 
ful restoration of the sodium or to dehydra- 
tion to increase its concentration. An abrupt 
favorable response to this may be considered 
a confirmatory diagnostic test, although com- 
plete clearing of delirium may not occur for 
days. Levels above 130 mEq/L would di- 
rect attention to other possible causes of the 
delirium. 


Levels below 


REFERENCES 


1. Saphir, W.: Chronic Hypochloremia Simu- 
lating Psychoneurosis, J.A.M.A. 129:510-512 
(Oct. 13) 1945. 

2. Moore, F. D.: The Low Sodium Syndromes 
of Surgery, J.A.M.A. 154:379-384 (Jan. 30) 
1954. 


q 

A 

a 

4 


Books 


Book Reviews 


Aspects de la psychiatrie moderne. By Jean Delay. Price, not given. Pp. 115. Presses uni- 

versitaires de France, 108 boulevard Saint-germain, Paris 6", 1956. 

In this small book the professor of psychiatry at the University of Paris has collected 
three addresses which he made, respectively, when he assumed the chair of psychiatry, 
at the opening of the First World Congress of Psychiatry, and before the 52d Congress 
of French-speaking neurologists and psychiatrists. 

In the first two addresses Professor Delay outlines the two lines of development of 
psychiatry in the first half of the twentieth century—the biological and the psychological. 
The treatment of the subject is almost identical in the two addresses except that, in the 
second, .he mentions the names of those who will treat of the various aspects in the ses- 
sions of the Congress. Delay develops the theme that this dualist approach is merely 
two aspects of the Janus-headed subject of psychiatry and that the two tend to come 
together in the psychosomatic approach. Nothing new is developed in these addresses, 
which present simply a rapid summary of developments. 

The first address, however, begins with a charming French custom, which should be 
more widely imitated. When a French professor takes possession of a chair in his in- 
augural lecture, he outlines the direction which he expects to follow in his teaching and 
investigation and relates his orientation to the influence of his teachers. These intimate 
sketches of the men under whose influence his professional character was developed often 
recall to our memory humble workers in the field who might otherwise remain obscure or 
even entirely unknown to the medical world, but whose influence was entirely out of propor- 
tion to their international reputation. The international reputation of many physicians rests 
too often on extraneous factors, such as the profusion of their writings (and often on their 
obscurity, which gives a false impression of profundity) or on the influence of one or more 
propagandists who spread their renown abroad. If one wants to know the real value of a man, 
it is often to be found in just such a brief and intimate acknowledgments as are found in 
these inaugural lectures. This reviewer was happy to have recalled to his memory that remark- 
able man—Edouard Pichon—whose inexhaustible knowledge of medieval France was a source 
of continual astonishment. His repertory of ancient French songs made the salle de garde at 
the Salpétri¢re a recreation of the true Gallic spirit, without an experience of which no man 
can understand France 

The last address is quite different. In it Delay attempts to answer two questions: (1) 
In what measure can a psychological disequilibrium favor creative activity? (2) In what 
measure can the latter aid in establishing a new equilibrium in the personality? After reading 
the fifteen pages devoted to the first question, to this reviewer the problem seems to be as 
mysterious as the leap from the psychic to the organic taken by a hysterical patient was to 
Freud. Delay tries to distinguish what he calls process from development. Process, as he uses 
the word, implies a rupture in the personality, which can create nothing new but can only 
liberate in Jackson’s sense. A neurosis, on the other hand, can be creative. When one tries 
to analyze this part of the address, the dualism is not clear; the neurosis should be opposed 
by the psychosis, which the processus is supposed to cause. And here one comes up again 
against the strange reluctance of the French psychiatrists to use the insight of Janet, who 
showed long ago that a neurosis is also the result of a processus of obscure nature which 
lowers the psychological tension and liberates activity on a lower plane of adaptation to 
reality. From this point of view the neurosis appears also as a dissolution, and the psychologi- 
cal distinction which Delay attempts to establish between the neurosis and the psychosis dis- 
appears. The creativity which is released in the neurotic being on a lower level of adaptation 
to reality appeals mainly to other neurotics. 

In answering the second question, the author seems to succeed better. Such literary methods 
of psychotherapy have been resorted to not only by poets and romancers but also by many 
eminent psychiatrists who succeeded in such creative activity not only in quieting their own 
anxieties and curing their own psychoneuroses but also in provoking similar attempts on the 


565 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


part of other psychiatrists, hence the many warring sects, since much of this endeavor takes 
into account only a small part of psychiatric reality and is therefore on a low plane of the 
intellectual hierarchy, as Pierre Janet knew only too well. 

This last address merits the serious consideration of psychologists. It raises very im- 
portant questions and treats them with the charming eloquence of the best French tradition. 


The Object Relations Technique. By Herbert Phillipson, M.A., Clinical Psychologist, 
Tavistock Clinic, London. Price 21s. Pp. 230. Tavistock Publishers, Ltd., 2 Beaumont 

St., London WI; The Free Press, Glencoe, III, 1955. 

This work presents a statement of the basic theoretical framework developed by the 
British school of psychoanalysis, which emphasizes the importance of unconscious object 
relations in determining the subsequent perceptual world and interpersonal relationships, 
and a testing technique that is a logical extension of that framework into the field of 
psychological assessment. The theory of object relations that has been developed by 
Fairbairn and others, in England, has focused on the importance of unconscious object 
relations of a fantasy nature which were incorporated at an early stage and never relin- 
quished and which play a vital role in determining the nature of the phenomenal world 
in the adult. The derivation of the testing technique from the theoretical rationale is an 
important step methodologically that should lead to a direct communication among the 
clinicians who proceed from the same framework, thus eliminating the many test-centered 
and esoteric conceptual systems that now pervade the field. This close relationship be- 
tween technique and theory may, however, serve to limit the usefulness to those who 
work within the more classical analytic framework. Further exploration with the tech- 
nique will be needed to evaluate these limitations. The test is an interesting one and 
consists of 12 cards representing ambiguous social situations, from lone figures to group 
constellations, as well as variations in the degree of structure and the introduction of 
color. One detailed case study and several briefer analyses are presented, and they pro- 
vide a base line for the use of the test, as well as an interesting example of the applica- 
tion of the rationale on which the test is based. These studies, combined with the 
definitive data from a sample of 50 patients in an outpatient psychiatric clinic and 40 


normal adolescent girls, suggest the wide range of material that can be expected from the 
technique. 


Present-Day Psychology. Edited by A. A. Roback, Ph.D. Price, $12.00. Pp. 995. 
Philosophical Library, Inc., 15 E. 40th St., New York 16, 1955. 

This symposium, an outgrowth of the editor’s “History of American Psychology,” 
presents a broad overview of psychology during the past quarter-century, purporting to 
treat not only the traditional areas but also areas that are inaccessible or usually neg- 
lected. Consisting of forty chapters, prepared by thirty-eight authorities, the volume 
is divided into five parts: topical departments, fields, dynamic and clinical psychology, 
methods, and psychological borderlands and humanistics. A tremendous diversity of 
subjects is represented. They range from general neurology, sensation, cognition, para- 
psychology, and animal, abnormal, educational, social, and military psychology, to 
psychodiagnostics, projective techniques, psychosomatics, psychotherapy, psychodrama, 
hypnotherapy, speech, and the psychology of literature, art, aesthetic judgments and reli- 
gion, to name but half the topics included. 

The editor’s claim that this is perhaps the most comprehensive survey of psychology, 
outside of an encyclopedia, certainly appears to be justified. Yet it leaves much to be 
desired. The chapters are uneven in coverage and aim. Some are simply reviews or 
bibliographic summaries of the literature, while others present the writer's own highly 
specific view in a particular area of interest. Still others, unfortunately too few, deal 
with contemporary issues in theory and the nature and implications of differing frames 
of reference toward similar psychological problems. Noteworthy in this last category is 
Dr. Magda Arnold’s superlative discussion of the present status of emotion, a most 
stimulating and thought-provoking article prepared at a level that would almost warrant 
publication in a professional journal. Although it is true that Dr. Arnold is graciously 
allowed at least twice as many pages as other contributors, the fact that excellent pre- 
sentations are possible in the regular space allotted is demonstrated by Dr. Paul Bakan’s 
cogent evaluation of the current approaches to perception. These essays stand in sharp 


566 


4 
4 
ig 
1 
= 


BOOKS 


contrast to the disappointingly meager and sterile chapter on adolescence, which over- 
simplifies and abounds in platitudes, and to the chapter on child psychology, which is 
scarcely more substantial. The two chapters on methods, containing discussions of sta- 
tistics and probability and an orientation termed “intergrational psychology,” are so vague 
and general as to be of little value. 

While in most instances the language is as free from technical jargon as one may reasonably 
expect, a startling exception is encountered in Dr. James C. Moloney’s essay on body image, 
which, although of extremely high caliber, is written in complex psychoanalytic idiom and is 
difficult reading even for those fortunates familiar with the terminology. 

In the light of such considerations, one cannot help wondering about the audience for 
whom this book is basically intended. Sad to relate, neither the editor’s prefatory re- 
marks nor this reviewer's labored efforts provide much clarification of this question. 

Nevertheless, despite these limitations, there is much material that is worth while. 
Most of all, the reader will discover in this symposium information that simply is not 
available elsewhere within the confines of a single volume. The adherents of Stekel, 
Adler, and Sullivan, as well as those of Freud, are permitted to have their say. Subjects 
such as the psychology of character and attention, which present-day theorists tend to 
subsume under the larger rubric of personality, on the one hand, and the adaptive aspects 
of cognitive functioning, on the other, are here isolated for separate scrutiny. The six 
chapters devoted to humanistics are rather unique and interesting and point to other 
varieties of human endeavor with which psychologists could well be more concerned. 


The Nurse and the Mental Patient: A Study in Interpersonal Relations. By Morris S. 
Schwartz and Emmy Lanning Shockley. Price, $3.50. Pp. 289. Russell Sage Founda- 
tion, 505 Park Ave., New York 22, 1956. 


Experiencing the Patient’s Day: A Manual for Psychiatric Hospital Personnel. By Robert 
W. Hyde, in Collaboration with the Attendants of Boston Psychopathic Hospital. 
Price, $2.20. Pp. 214. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 210 Madison Ave., New York 16, 1955. 

Newer knowledge of group dynamics and of interpersonal relations has had a pro- 
found effect on psychiatric theory and practice. The recent interest in the population 
of mental hospitals by social psychologists and anthropologists has brought new life into 
the so-called milieu therapy for psychiatric patients in state institutions, psychiatric units 
in general hospitals, and sanitoria. 

These two books are concerned with the practical problems involved in understanding 
and treating mental patients by the nurse (Schwartz and Shockley) and by the psychiatric 
aide or attendant (Hyde). Both authors use the same method—a frank and open dis- 
cussion of the day-by-day situations that the nurse or aide encounters on the psychiatric 
ward. From these, certain general principles are extrapolated. Hyde makes much of the 
attendant’s fears of the patient because of the same things he fears most in himself. 
Schwartz and Shockley suggest a continuous process of asking questions, getting answers, 
making changes, evaluating results, and again modifying procedures. 

Both are good books—they contain much information for the nurse and aide, and 
they outline a process by which psychiatrists in their own institutions may set up a 
similar teaching program. 


Patterns of Mothering. By Sylvia Brody, Ph.D. Price, $7.50. Pp. 446. International 
Universities Press, Inc., 227 W. 13th St., New York 11, 1956. 


For a long time psychiatrists, and especially psychoanalysts, have been aware that 
the crucial period for the development of healthy and sick personalities lies in the first 
weeks of life and that this development is dependent upon the crucial transactions be- 
tween mother and infant. Reconstructive attempts from psychiatric interviews and deep 
analysis of the patient’s memories of the past have not sufficed to do more than focus 
attention on this early period. Many small studies have been reported of observations 
on the early mother-child relationships in the first weeks of life, but these have been 
sporadic and for the most part not well conceived or documented. Therefore, when Dr. 
Brody’s book appeared, the medical profession looked forward with a great deal of 
anticipation to learning about her long-term careful studies of the behavior of mothers 


567 


A, M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


and infants in the first period of life. Her book far surpasses expectations in the care- 
fulness of observation, the scientific analysis of the data, and the excellently and well- 
written exposition of her results. 

Dr. Brody has studied the behavior of thirty-two mothers of infants between 4 and 
28 weeks of age. She rightfully contends that at this period the mother and infant 
constitute a unit of study for which direct observations are necessary to determine 
individual differences and general patterns. It is hypothesized that the feeding behavior 
is nuclear to any typology of maternal behavior. Her work is expounded in three parts: 
one, a method of quantitative analysis of maternal behavior; two, a typology of maternal 
behavior, and, three, the unique qualities that maternal feeding behavior contributes to the 
development of infantile personality. 

The first part of the book deals with the literature on maternal behavior and con- 
siders adequately the literature on animal observation and experimentation, cultural 
data, and clinical data. The author points out that little is known of the processes 
through which maternal behavior is linked to behavior in the infant. The literature 
on infantile growth is thoroughly reviewed, and the question of the optimal range of 
stimulation and restraint of the mother in its effect on the child is raised. From an 
analysis of the literature on the feeding behavior of infants, the author points out that 
little is known concerning the effect of rhythm or activity of the infant as it calls forth 
maternal responses that determine what aspects of this situation save the infant from 
irreparable harm. 

In the second part of the book, Dr. Brody describes the methods of her observations. 
The mother and baby are observed for four hours by three investigators in an office 
visit. Following this, a home visit is made to describe the environment. Then the 
mother fills out a questionnaire, answering the specific questions that the observers have 
raised. Often movies are made of the mother-child relationship. In the method and in 
the book are adequate descriptions of the mother and child during the observational 
period of thirty-two cases. Essential activities are selected for rating, and scales of 
maternal response according to six variables are dealt with statistically. These include 
feeding, cleaning, moving, touching, offering of objects, and speaking. For the purposes 
of typology there is a division of the subjects into four groups for all six activities, and 
intercorrelations are made. In order to avoid a bias in regard to the significance of these 
groups, they are labeled only as A, B, C, and D. In the Appendix the author presents 
the actual forms for case analyses and the observational records. She includes the 
statistical data in easily understood tables. 

Each group is described in terms of maternal attitudes. The question is raised: Is 
feeding the independent variable by which to assess maternal behavior? The answer 
is “yes” from twenty-two of twenty-four mothers of infants of 12, 20, and 28 weeks of 
age. The answer is “no” for eight infants 4 weeks of age and two older infants. For 
each group the feeding behavior of the mother is carefully described. 

In discussing the uniqueness of the maternal responses, the author states that the 
response of the mother to the instinctual needs of the infant in any phase of his psychic 
development spreads and governs her general responses to the infant. There seems 
to be some correlation between infant development and maternal behavior, but it does 
not assume causal significance. The influence of the infant’s activity on the mother does 
not seem as significant as the mother’s feeding technique which is more related to her 
own personality and attitudes and experience than to the infant’s age and activity level. 
The author tends to minimize the influence of the child on the mother. The child’s ego 
functions emerge not only because of maturation of inborn structures but also because 
of an identification and imitation of maternal behavior, 

Dr. Brody then goes on to attempt to correlate maternal behavior with the mother’s 
method of dealing with her beating fantasies. These fantasies are defenses against her 
past active incestual wishes toward her father. If considerable masochism remains, the 
mother subjugates her own ego to that of the child and indulges and overprotects him. 
If there is a struggle against the masochistic wishes, there results an anxious mother 
who fears doing too much for her child. If the mother represses her masochistic im- 
pulses, she has a tendency to be more equal with the child and does not worry about 
him or make too many demands on him. 

If the mother has developed a reaction formation against her masochistic impulses, 


568 


1 
‘ 
is 
> ‘ 
~ 


BOCKS 


she attempts to take the active role of the father and become dictatorial and controlling. 
If the mother identifies with the aggressor in dealing with her beating fantasies, she 
becomes sadistic toward the child. 

It is in this last aspect of the work that the author takes off into the use of psy- 
choanalytic theory in an attempt to describe the formation of the specific and unique 
maternal behaviors. Here her argument is weakest because she does not have objective 
material to document her hypotheses. Nevertheless, she has the privilege of suggesting 
that this area of uniqueness of maternal personality can be tested and correlated with 
maternal behavior toward young infants. Aside from this last section, the book is an 
exquisite example of an objective and scientific and well-controlled series of observations 
in an area of great significance for the science of psychiatry. There are an excellent 
bibliography and an adequate index. The book is a fascinating document and most 
interesting to read and is recommended for all persons in the various disciplines con- 
cerned with human behavior. 


Culture, Psychiatry and Human Values. By Marvin Kaufmann Opler. Price $6. Pp. 
260. Springfield, Ill., Charles C Thomas, Publisher, 1956. 


Opler’s book “Culture, Psychiatry and Human Values” is an important milestone 
in the growth and development of the field of social psychiatry. Indeed, an alternative 
title for the book would be “Principles of Social Psychiatry.” Students in this area 
(psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nurses, etc.) will find an excellent review of 
relevant topics, ranging from the implications of cultural and subcultural relativity upon 
psychiatric theory to the therapeutic significance of the social structure of a psychiatric 
hospital. The bibliography will be especially useful for psychiatrists, in that it brings 
together pertinent material from a wide variety of sources, including many significant 
papers outside the range of those most commonly quoted in psychiatric journals. 


The book contains lucid documentation of studies which illustrate inadequacies 
of many psychiatric beliefs. For example, attention is called to Roth and Luton’s 
investigation in Tennessee which revealed that rural communities had high rates of 
mental incapacitation. Another example involves the oversimplified belief of ‘“‘com- 
plexity” of modern culture as a primary cause of current problems. Although the stereo- 
type of Rousseau’s primitive man leading the happy and simple life has been abandoned 
by anthropologists, it remains quite alive in psychiatric circles. 


Throughout the book there is evidence of thoughtful consideration and _ practical 
understanding of problem areas in psychiatry and psychoanalysis. Opler is deeply 
committed to developing methods which will aid in the integration of the epidemiological 
and clinical approaches. At one point he states, “Put differently, neither the psychogenetic 
nor the epidemiological approaches meet the requirements of etiological knowledge 
when used singly. When used together, the first to provide a rounded verification of 
psychiatrically valid hypotheses, and the second to test statistically the hypotheses 
concerning groups of people, the combined methods of research may yield the kind of 
data which withdraws support from competing explanations and really withstands 
rigorous scrutiny.” This delineates a basic purpose for the book. 


Two groups draw the major share of the author’s criticism. Perhaps Opler most 
sharply disagrees with Mead, Benedict, and LaBarre when they focus on “cultural 
psychopathology.” Repeatedly the point is made that such analogizing between clinic and 
culture is much too gross and omits crucial nuances. Opler is also critical of psychoan- 
alytical theory, saying, “While vast insights were developed in the Freudian movement, 
and in other psychiatric theories, the drive in the former movement towards a unitary 
theory of pan-human psychic development was premature. The universal theory did not 
adequately account for variations in human behavior across cultural lines, or between 
different disease processes, or even within a range of symbolic mechanisms of inter- 
personal communication. It had little to say about positive aspects of culture in inter- 
personal relations for creative and productive purposes.” At another point he states 
that the epiphenomenal view of culture, as illustrated by Freud’s “Totem and Taboo,” 
has shattered “against the hard facts of cultural relativity.” Similarly, he points out the 
limitations of Lowie and Malinowski when they exclusively ascribe a_ biological-need 
basis to culture. 


569 


= 


A. M. A. ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 


While making an independent synthesis of his own field of anthropology with social 
psychology, psychiatry, and psychoanalysis, Opler shows a definite bias toward certain 
ideologies and groups of psychiatrists. These include Sullivan, Fromm-Reichinan, 
Fromm, Thompson, and Horney, in addition to his colleagues at Cornell, Rennie and 
and Diethelm. The extent of the bias seems to reflect one weakness in the synthesis 
that emerges. It appeared to the reviewer that the book lacked depth in its handling 
of biological systems, varying from the omission of psychosomatic and physiological 
literature relevant to its thesis to a de-emphasis of genetic, constitutional, and matura- 
tional factors that are relatively unaffected by cultural variation. Opler is optimistic 
about ultilizing his theoretical model in a multidisciplinary study. In the stress of 
actually converting such broad experimental designs into practice, however, many pro- 
jects begin to reduce toward a hard core of basic beliefs. It is at that point that struc- 
tural weaknesses of the design and biases clearly emerge. Of course, the test of Opler’s 
synthesis will involve its usefulness in investigating current hypotheses and developing 
new ones. It is certainly too much to expect at this time that an all-embracing theory 
of social psychiatry can be formulated. Any current design must have many weaknesses. 
Opler has provided us with a general model, which is being applied already by the 
Cornell group. The findings in that multidisciplinary study involving a large urban 
population in New York City should provide positive feed-back to other groups inter- 
ested in social psychiatry, as well as to Opler and his colleagues. 


Outside of a tendency to be slightly repetitious when citing information about refer- 
ences previously discussed, the author has presented a well-written, readable book. It 
can be highly recommended as an excellent current summation of social psychiatry. 


j 
4 
bie 
t 
g 
570 
‘a 


 PARKINSONISM 


A r t an e 
HYDROCHLORIDE 
Trihexyphenidy! HCI Lederle 


effective over long periods 


ARTANE is a strong antispasmodic, effective in all 
three types of Parkinsonism—Postencephalitic, Ar- 
teriosclerotic, and Idiopathic. Unlike certain other 
such drugs, it does not lose effectiveness when given 
over long periods. It is usually well tolerated, and has 
no deleterious effect on bone marrow function. 


ARTANE is supplied in 2 mg. and 5 mg. tablets, and 
as an elixir containing 2 mg. per teaspoonful (4 cc.) 
Dosage: 1 mg. the first day, gradually increased, 
according to response, to 6 mg. to 10 mg. daily. 


tasorarories vivision 
awenscaw Cyanamid comrauy PEARL RIVER, NEW YORK 


4 
4 j 
: 
4 
‘ 
d 
ve 
a 
; 
4 
U.S. PAT. OFF 
= ay = 


All of 

these articles have 

appeared in TODAY'S HEALTH 
and are now available 

in one pamphlet. 


ALCOHOLISM 


an 


important 


problem 


in today’s living 


ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS 


Written from the standpoint of a member, the basic 
treatment procedures are described and the psychological 
problems confronting the alcoholic are discussed. 


ALCOHOL AND CIRRHOSIS OF THE LIVER 


Relationship between alcohol, diet and cirrhosis. Increasing 
stress on nutritional differences. 
by Russell S. Boles 


HOW TO HELP A PROBLEM DRINKER 


Understanding the alcoholic’s capabilities, the necessity of 
help, causes of his condition. 
by Edward A. Strecker and Francis T. Chambers, Jr. 


THE TREATMENT OF ALCOHOLISM 


Tracing the steps from convincing the alcoholic that he is sick 
through treatment and cure. 
by Lewis Inman Sharp 


CONDITIONED REFLEX TREATMENT 

OF CHRONIC ALCOHOLISM 

Its place among methods of treatmcnt today, 

its development and correlation with personality factors. 
by Walter L. Voegtlin 


INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES FOR THE 
TREATMENT OF ALCOHOLISM 

Comparative differences, in drinking, with 

the last century, new establishments and methods of treatment, 
lack of trained personnel. 

by E. H. L. Corwin 


THE ABOVE SIX PAMPHLETS ARE AVAILABLE 
IN BOOKLET FORM FOR ONLY 50 CENTS 


ADDRESS REQUESTS TO: 


HOW EXPERTS MEASURE DRUNKENNESS 
A partial transcript of an actual courtroom case. 
H. A. Heise 

8 pages, 15 cents 


BARBITURATES, BOOZE AND OBITUARIES 

A discussion of the dangers of mixing alcohol and bar- 
biturates. 

Donald A. Dukelow 

4 pages, 10 cents 


ORDER DEPARTMENT 
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 
535 NORTH DEARBORN STREET 


CHICAGO 10, ILLINOIS 


7 
a 


RIVER CREST SANITARIUM 


FOR 


NERVOUS, MENTAL, AND ALCOHOLIC PATIENTS | 
Layman R. Harrison, M.D. Martin Dollin, M.D. 
Physician in Charge Clinical Director 
Russell N. Carrier, M.D. Arthur Gordon, M.D. Katherine C. Kindred 
Consultant in Psychotherapy Consultant in Medicine Administrator 


Approved for resident training in Psychiatry 


A private hospital for the care and treatment of nervous and mental dis- 
orders. /\ll accepted types of treatment available. Individualized atten- 
tion to psychotherapy, insulin and electroshock therapy. | 
A cottage maintained expressly for elderly women with problems of 
senility and continued care. We also have accommodations for men 
requiring continued care. 

River Crest is located in a beautifully wooded and landscaped park of 
about twelve acres, secluded but easily accessible by subway, bus or pri- 
vate car. 

| Full cooperation with referring physicians, who will find it convenient to 
| visit or participate in the treatment of their patients while at River Crest. 


Ditmars Boulevard and 26th Street 

| ASTORIA, L. L, NEW YORK CITY 
AS 8-0820 

TWENTY MINUTES FROM TIMES SQUARE 


THE LIVERMORE SANTARIUM and PSYCHIATRIC CLIMC 


Livermore, California 
Telephone: Hilltop 7-3131 
Oakland Office—411 30th Street 
FOR THE TREATMENT OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISORDERS 


THE OPEN CONVALESCENT DEPARTMENT, for nervous and general patients; the COT- 
TAGE DEPARTMENT, for mental patients. Features: near Oakland and San Francisco; ideal 
climate; large beautiful grounds; hydrotherapy, athletic and occupational departments; clinical labora- 
tory; large nursing force. Rates include room, suitable diet, medical care, general nursing and routine 
examinations 


HERBERT E. HARMS, M.D.—Superintendent 


THE SOUTHARD SCHOOL THE MENNINGER CHILDREN’S CLINIC 
Intensive individual psychotherapy in a Outpatient psychiatric and neurologic 
residential school, for children of ele- d 
mentary school age with emotional and evaluation and consultation for infants 
t behavior problems. and children to eighteen years. 


Department of Child Psychiatry 
THE MENNINGER FOUNDATION 


J. Cotter Hirschberg, M.D., Director Topeka, Kansas; Telephone 3-6494 


MARY POGUE SCHOOL, Inc. 


Complete facilities for training, educationally and 
socially, the retarded and epileptic. Girls from 8 and 
boys from 4— separate living accommodations. 
Small classes. Individual assistance. Physical and 
occupational therapy and recreational programs. 
Long term residential care available. 
Institutional member I.H.A. and A.H.A. 

Catalogue on request. 


G. H. Marquardt, M.D. Barclay J. MacGregor 
Medical Director Registrar 


65 Geneva Road, Wheaton, Ill. (near Chicago) 


RING SANATORIUM 

Eight Miles from Boston—Founded 1879 
For the study, care, and treatment of emotional, mental, personality, and habit 
disorders. 
On a foundation of dynamic psychotherapy all other recognized therapies are used 
as indicated. 
Cottage accommodations meet varied individual needs. Limited facilities for the con- 
tinued care of progressive disorders requiring medical, psychiatric, or neurological 
supervision. 

Full resident and associate staff. Courtesy privileges to qualified physicians. 

BENJAMIN SIMON, E. Wuirte, M.D. 


Director Assistant Director 


Arlington Heights, Massachusetts MIssion 8-0081 


“Beverly Farm” HOME AND SCHOOL FOR 
INCORPORATED Nervous and Back- 


ward Children 


INCORPORATED 1922 


12 buildinzs Can accommodate 350 children, 
220 acres of land with contemplated educational 
f b improvements for a larger num- 
300 feet aoe, ber. Can accept some suitable 

Mississippi River case for life. 


Address all « ications to DR. GROVES B. SMITH, SUPERINTENDENT 
“Beverly Farm” GODFREY, MADISON COUNTY, ILLINOIS 


DEVOTED TO THE ACTIVE TREATMENT OF 


MENTAL and NERVOUS DISORDERS 


Specializing in Psycho-Therapy, and Physiological therapies includ- 
ing: 


© Insulin Shock © Electro-Narcosis 


2828 S. PRAIRIE AVE. © Electro-Shock © Out oat Shock Therapy 
CHICAGO 
Phone VIctory 2-1650 ALCOHOLISM Treated by Comprehensive Medical- 


J. DENNIS FREUND, M.D. 
Medical Director Psychiatric Methods. 


= — 
a 
4 | 
| | 


when the patient’s anxiety is complicated by depression .. . 


both symptoms often respond to 


THORA-DEX* 


(a combination of Thorazinet and Dexedrine?) 


“Thora-Dex’ is a combination of a specific anti-anxiety agent, “Thorazine’, 
and a standard antidepressant, ‘Dexedrine’. The preparation is of unusual 
value in mental and emotional disturbances and in somatic conditions com- 
plicated by emotional stress—especially when depression occurs together 
with anxiety, agitation or apprehension. 


The patient treated with “Thora-Dex’ is generally both calm and alert .. . 
with normal interest, activity and capacity for work. 


Smith, Kline & French Laboratories, Philadelphia 


“‘Thora-Dex’ Tablets are available in two strengths: 
10 mg. “Thorazine’ 25 mg. “Thorazine’ 
2 mg. ‘Dexedrine’ 5 mg. ‘Dexedrine’ 


“‘Thora-Dex’ should be administered discriminately and, before prescribing, the 
physician should be fully conversant with the available literature. 


«Trademark Reg. US. Pat. Off. for chlorpromazine, S.K.F. 
tT.M. Reg. U.S. Pat. Off. for dextro-amphetamine sulfate, S.K.F. 


— 


Established 1916 
Asheville, North Carolina 


An Institution for the diagnosis and treatment of Psychiatric and Neurological illnesses, 
rest, convalescence, drug and alcohol habituation. 

Insulin Coma, Electroshock and Psychotherapy are employed. The Institution is 
equipped with complete laboratory facilities including electroencephalography and 
X-ray. 

Appalachian Hall is located in Asheville, North Carolina, a resort town, which justly 
claims an all around climate for health and comfort. There are ample facilities for 


classification of patients. 
Wo. Ray Grirrin, Jr. M.D. 
Ropert A. Grirrin, M.D. 


Mark A. GriFFin, Sr., M.D. 
MarK A. GrirFin, Jr., M.D. 


lor further information write APPALACHIAN HALL, Asuevitte, N. C. 


ADAMS HOUSE 


Established 1877 


A non-commitment sanitarium and clinic, 
club-like in physical setting and atmos- 
phere, applying re-educational psycho- 
therapeutic methods in the study and 
treatment of the psychoneuroses exclu- 
sively. 

Located in suburban Boston contiguous to and 

overlooking the Arnold Arboretum 


James Martin Woodall, M.D., Medical Director 


990 CENTRE STREET, BOSTON, 
Jamaica Plain, MASS. 


BALDPATE, Inc. 


Georgetown, Mass. 
Geo. Fleetwood 2-2131 


Located in the hills of Essex County, 
30 miles north of Boston 


For the treatment of psychoneuroses, 
personality disorders, psychoses, alco- 


holism and drug addiction. 


Occupation under a trained therapist, 


diversions and outdoor activities. 


Harry C. Sotomon, M.D. Gerorce M. Scutomer, M.D. 


Consulting Psychiatrist Medical Director 


=| 
Appalachian Holl 
Nis 
| 
= j 
’ 
| 
4 
= | 
4 


HALL-BROOKE 


An Alive 


A licensed private hospital devoted to active treatment, analytically- 
oriented psychotherapy, and the various somatic therapies. 

A high ratio of staff to patients. 

Large occupational therapy building with a trained staff offers 
complete facilities for crafts, arts and recreation. Full program of 
outdoor activities. 

Each patient is under constant, daily psychiatric and medical 
supervision. 

Located one hour from New York on 120 acres of Connecticut 
countryside. 


HALL-BROOKE 
Greens Farms, Box 31, Conn., Tel.: Westport, CApital 7-5105 


George S. Hughes, M.D. Robert Isenman, M.D. 
Leo H. Berman, M.D. John D. Marshall, Jr., M.D. 
Alfred Berl, M.D. Blanche, Glass, Ph.D. 
Louis J. Micheels, M.D. Mrs. Heide F. Bernard and 


Samuel Bernard, Administrators 
NEW YORK OFFICE, 46 East 73 Street 
Telephone: Lehigh 5-5155 


North Shore Health Resort 


on the shores of Lake Michigan 
WINNETKA, ILLINOIS 


NERVOUS and MENTAL DISORDERS 
ALCOHOLISM and DRUG ADDICTION 


Modern Methods of Treatment 


MODERATE RATES 
Established 1901 Accredited by The Joint Commission on 


Licensed by State of Illinois Accreditation of Hospitals 


SAMUEL LIEBMAN, M.S., M.D. 


Medical Director 


225 Sheridan Road Winnetka 6-0211 


THORAZINE’ 


helps to keep more patients out of mental hospitals 


With ‘Thorazine’ “more patients will be released after shorter periods 
of hospitalization and fewer patients will require re-hospitalization. 
More patients can be treated in the community, at clinics or in the 
psychiatrist’s office without being hospitalized at all.””! 


‘Thorazine’ should be administered discriminately; and, before prescribing, the physician should 
be fully conversant with the available literature. 


For information write: 


1. Hoffman, J.L.: in Chlorpromazine and Mental Health, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1955. 


~ ‘ 
N 
~ 
| 
4 


