The Elements of Mazatec Witchcraft 


by 

Jean Bassett Johnson 

University of California, Berkeley 


Introduction 

The present short study proposes to give a body of new 
data collected recently from a little known group inhabiting 
a portion of the northeastern comer of the state of Oaxaca, 
Mexico. In addition to these data, a limited amount of 
comparative material will be presented, with the purpose of 
pointing out the general unity of witchcraft beliefs and 
practices in the region conceived as a cultural entity. The 
new data were collected during the summer of 1938 by a 
small party of which the writer was a member. Thanks are 
due the Instituto Panamericano de Geographia e Historia of 
Mexico for financial assistance. 

The Mazatecs number, according to the latest census 
figures, 55, 343 individuals. The percentage of monolingua- 
lity is 81.76. In the entire Republic this figure is exceeded 
only by that of the Choles, who have a monolinguality of 
more than 89 percent. 1 There are two dialects spoken in the 
Mazatec territory, the so-called Mazateco-Popoloca dialect, 
and the Mazateco-Huautla dialect, called Izcateco by Bel- 
mar. 2 Roughly speaking, the former dialect is spoken by 
those who inhabit the hot, low-lying tierra caliente, while 

1 Census figures supplied by Mr. B. Be van. See also »The Chinantec». 

2 Belmar, p. 1. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



I2Q 

the latter is found in the cooler, mountainous, coffee-growing 
region known as the tierra templada. 

In territories adjacent to the Mazatec are found Chinan- 
tec, Aztec, Mixtec, Cuicatec, and Zapotec-speaking peoples. 
These share with the Mazatec and with each other a basic 
complex of traits relating to every phase of life. This is most 
apparent in the several cases of »border» towns inhabited 
by two language groups. Because witchcraft is present and 
practiced extensively throughout the entire region, and 
because the data, although scant enough, are comparatively 
full for that phase of life, some of those data will be briefly 
presented here. 

The following information on the practice of curing by 
witchcraft was obtained in the Mazatec town of Huautla de 
Jimenez. 3 The brujo (witch) was first contacted through 
the good offices of Sr. D. Jose Dorantes, a Mazatec merchant 
of Huautla. The pretext given to the brujo was that one of 
the members of the party had a sick relative in Mexico City. 
After nearly a week's, delay the brujo agreed to take the case, 
and after several discussions with us as to the nature of the 
ailment, he arranged a meeting with us. The meeting took 
place at his home on Saturday, July 16, and lasted from ten 
P. M. to two A. M. There were eight people present at the 
ceremony, including the members of the party, Sr. Dorantes, 
the brujo , and his wife. The brujo’s wife was apparently 
asleep, although she occasionally sat up and interjected a 
remark. 

The brujo is an old man, certainly at least seventy years 
of age. Aside from wearing high, buttoned shoes and a wide 
brimmed felt hat, he appears like other townspeople. He has 
a slight case of pinto , and is somewhat palsied. He speaks 
no Spanish. 


* I am indebted to Louise Lacaud, Irmgard Weitlaner-Johnson, and Ber¬ 
nard Bevan for their generosity in permitting me to use this material, of 
which they were the principal collectors. 

9 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



130 

The brujo sat in front of a small low table. Above the table 
were two of the customary religious prints in color. On the 
table was a Mixtec basket containing six eggs. Also neatly 
arranged on the table were 48 maize kernels, a candle, a red 
paper package containing tobaco molido, scissors, white cot¬ 
ton string, a guaje (gourd vessel) also containing tobaco 
molido , a small square of bark paper, a paper parcel of copal, 
and a large red and blue guacamaya feather. 

On a w^ll shelf to the left of the table stood a night light 
and a lighted candle; and a large number of large mush¬ 
rooms, wrapped in banana leaves. There were also two 
dried orchids, and a short staff entwined with dried yellow 
flowers. Under the table was a goblet shaped copal burner, 
of the usual size and shape. 


Procedure 

1. The brujo asked the symptoms of the disease, although 
not in great detail, as these had already been explained 
at former meetings. 

2. He chewed three mushrooms, and a stick of some 
unknown substance. 

3. He took the six eggs from the basket, and placed them 
in two rows on the table. There were two turkey 
eggs, two speckled hen eggs, and two plain white hen 
eggs. 

4. He invoked St. Peter and St. Paul, followed by a large 
number of other saints and local virgenes, including 
those of Guadalupe, La Soledad de Oaxaca , and the 
Virgin of Chihuahua. 

5. He instructed the relative of the sick person to place a 
piece of copal in her right hand, while she repeated 
the name of the sick person. She then placed the 
pieces of copal in the burner and, 

6. The brujo added copal dust and lit it. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



7 - 


i 3 i 

He asked where the patient was bom and where the 
afterbirth was buried. He said that disease came from 
a dry wind, aire. 

8. He made the sign of the Cross and invoked the spirit 
of the sick person. 

9. He invoked large numbers of saints in a rambling 
repetitive prayer not unlike a litany, which was follo¬ 
wed by an invocation of the duenos , ( reyes ) of the 
rocks, rivers, mountain, thunder, earth, stars, plants, 
sun, moon, and la’a, a species of mountain-dwelling 
dwarf. 

10. He then prayed directly to God, saying »King of- 

—?», and to San Antonio, a prayer of supplication. 
He picked up the maize kernels. 

11. He made four twisting signs over the table, as if about 
to cast dice, and saying, »In the name of the Father* 
Son, Holy Ghost, and Blessed Trinity». 

12. He scattered the 48 kernels over the table. Some fell 
on the dirt floor, were picked up and laid on the edge 
of the table. Pausing a little, as though in deep con¬ 
centration, he read the pattern, and divined as follows; 

1 st throw- »Confusion-» science» is uncertain if 

it can assist». 

13. More prayers, much as above, but comparatively short. 
2nd throw- »Still confused, but a little clearer». 

14. Tong prayers, with further invocations of everybody 
already mentioned; prayers to the chief saints, and to 
God, Son, and Trinity, etc. He implored them for 
aid as though he were already supported by the lesser 

saints, that is, on the intercession principle. »San- 

says, and San-says», etc. 

3rd throw-»Possible hope». 

4th throw-»Death. I can see the funeral. The spirits 
are not with me, but hope is not entirely lacking». 

5th throw- »If you believe and have faith, there is hope ». 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



132 


6th throw-»She is already much better, but you must 
have faith in me». 

7th throw- »She is now well, and you can send a tele¬ 
gram to prove it!» 

The old man said that he had cured since he was thirteen 
years old, and was now over seventy. He added that the 
science he practiced was very old, came from the antepasados , 
and descended from father to son. During the ceremony he 
burned copal three times, at first on the floor between his 
legs, and later holding the burner in his hand. He smoked a 
cigar between invocations and casting the maize. 

The brujo said that every word spoken with sincerity was 
heard by Heaven, and that all the objects on the table repre¬ 
sented the Powers, which are like a bank upon which one 
could draw, if one had something upon which to draw. He 
said that he was able to draw upon the Powers, even though 
unable to read, write, or speak other languages. 4 

Questioned as to the significance of the objects upon the 
table, the brujo said that the prayer is written on the bark 
paper with the guacamaya feather. To further aid the cure, 
he said that he would pray in the church and bum candles. 
Questioned again as to whether we could do anything further 
to aid the cure, he promised instructions later. The follo¬ 
wing evening he brought six little parcels of eggs, cacao , 
copal, feathers, and bark paper. Each parcel was separately 
wrapped in brown paper, and contained an egg, two or three 
cacao beans, copal, and a tiny feather wrapped in a small 
piece of bark paper. These were to be buried in the patio of 
the home of the patient, oriented east and west. 

In addition to the above method of curing by intercessory 
prayer, maize divination, and egg parcels, the widespread 
practice of curing by suction is very common in the Mazatec 
region. A type of witchcraft is also practiced in church by a 
body of professional brujos , either male or female, whose 

4 The above is Sr. Dorantes very free translation of the brujo s explana¬ 
tion. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 33 


practices strongly resemble those of the Aztec huehuete . 
Their procedure consists of praying or interceding for or 
against a person. These brujos have a special method of 
diagnosis and treatment of disease, which consists princi¬ 
pally of »laying on hands ». They also bless and sell bunches 
of shrubs which they rub over the images of the saints. 
By this means, some of the magical power of the saints be¬ 
comes resident in the shrubs. The services of the magic 
prayer-makers, exclusive of the cost of the candles with 
which they must be supplied, is nominal. Depending upon 
such factors as the type of the case, and the length of the 
prayer demanded, the service may cost anywhere from ten 
or fifteen centavos to one or two pesos. This is much chea¬ 
per than the charges of the brujos who divine with maize 
and make the egg parcels; their charge is seldom less than 
five or six pesos. 

In addition to the above methods, which may cause sick¬ 
ness or death as well as cure, there is another type of »black » 
witchcraft practiced by a particular type of brujo. This 
practice consists of an invocation and spell which causes a 
piece of rope or vine to become a serpent when it is thrown 
in the direction of the enemy. It then goes to the enemy 
and destroys him. 

From the town of San Cristobal Mazatlan, the legendary 
capital of the Mazatecs, comes the information concerning an 
especial type of supernatural enchantment. This is caused 
by dwarfs of the mountains, the la a, little old men who 
appear at twelve noon and midnight. They have the faces 
of little boys, but they are old and very strong. They seize 
upon a passerby, throw him down, and put a strong spell 
on him. There is an especial type of brujerta (witchcraft) 
to cure this sort of enchantment; if one is not speedily cured, 
one will die. 

There is yet another type of dwarf, namely, the chikushi, 
who live in caves in the mountains. People go to the caves 
and make sacrifices to them; if one is ill, one sacrifices a turkey. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 34 


The use of the parcel with the egg, copal, etc., is found in 
Mazatlan, although the bark paper is not ordinarily used. 
In its place the corn husk is used, known by its Aztec name, 
tolomaxtle. The bark paper, however, is known in Mazatlan, 
and comes from a tree bearing the Aztec names of Yulusuchil, 
Yuluxuchil, Soloxuchil, and Xoloxochil. In the Mazatec 
dialect of Mazatlan, the tree is called tishu. The meaning 
of the apparatus of curing was given as follows: cacao repre¬ 
sents wealth, eggs represent strength, the feather represents 
the witness (Sp. testigo), and the bark paper or com husk 
represents the vow, (Sp. promesa). 

Mushrooms are also eaten by the brujos of Mazatlan, as is 
general throughhout the entire Mazatec area. Many varie¬ 
ties are eaten, among which the most common are the follo¬ 
wing: 

1. Hongitos de San Ysidro, the »little mushrooms of San 
Ysidro», which are called in Mazatec steyi and tsamiye. 

2. Desbarrancadera , in Mazatec, tsamikishu. These are 
very small mushrooms. 

3. The tsamikindi, which are smallest of all the narcotic 
mushrooms eaten by the brujos. 6 

While the brujo is under the influence of the narcotic 
mushroom, it is the mushroom which speaks, and not the 
brujo. During this time, the brujo stays with his patient. 
They are alone in a comer of the house. The brujo sings, 
dances, and prays while under the influence of the mush¬ 
room. He would go mad if he took more than six mush¬ 
rooms, and the patient would die. The brujo calls upon all 
the saints, and tells where the harm befell the patient. He 
then orders the egg, copal, etc., to be buried in the house, 
oriented east and west. Aguardiente is frequently buried 
with the parcel. The patient must go on a diet for fifty 
days, and practice continence during this time. The lack 
of a cure is attributed to a breach of these restrictions. Both 

. * See R. E. Schultes, for identifications of the mushrooms. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 35 


sexes practice witchcraft throughout the region. Certain 
persons are able to send* the »spirit» of a man into a deer; 
when the deer is killed, the man dies. 

Methods of maize divination vary with the individual 
diviner. The reading of the pattern of the cast maize is 
generally the basis for the divination. In Mazatlan there 
is an extraordinary variation of this: the maize kernels are 
thrown upon twenty cards bearing animal pictures. The 
pattern is interpreted from a cuaderno, a notebook which 
may be obtained in any store. 8 

Throughout the whole of the Mazatec area, the articles 
of witchcraft, save the mushrooms, are sold openly in the 
markets. The entire complex, that is, eggs, feathers, copal, 
cacao , and bark paper, are generally sold together. They 
are quite expensive: large feathers cost from twenty to 
fifty centavos , bark paper about* thirty centavos for a piece 
4 "x6 ", while cacao and copal are usually sold two beans or 
pieces for one centavo. There are two grades of bark paper, 
the coarse, which is cheaper, and the fine grade, which is 
more expensive. 

From the Mazateco-Popoloca towns of S. Pedro Ixcatlan 
and San Jose Independence comes the following informa¬ 
tion regarding curing and witchcraft. 7 

»The witch puts down a petate , and over it a white cotton 
cloth. Around the sheet he places small antique figures. 8 
Then he casts the maize three or four times and divines 
) - 

6 The material referring to Mazatlan was made available through the 
courtesy of Miss Douise L,acaud and Mr. B. Be van. Dr. Alfonso Caso has 
suggested that the cards used in this type of divination may represent the 
hitherto undiscovered Mazatec tonalamatl, which is reported to consist of 
twenty animal names. See Bauer, p. 865. 

7 Material collected by Irmgard Weitlaner-Johnson. Her informant was 
Sr. Mauricio Vista, a native of S. Pedro Ixcatlan, now seving as Secretario 
Municipal in S. Jos£ Independence. 

8 Such a figure is preserved in the Municipal offices in S. Jos6 Indepen¬ 
dence. It is a copal censer of Mixtec origin, with three legs and a long 
handle, now missing. 


Digitized by 


Google 



136 

according to the pattern. Sometimes the pattern says that 
it is necessary to kill two chickens. They kill the chickens 
and throw them upon the cloth. If they jump around a 
great deal, the person will get better. Then they make a 
broth (of the chickens), and call in four witnesses, who eat 
the broth at the corners of the cloth. Afterward, they take 
a leaf of cacao , and put in eggs, and make a parcel with cacao 
and a little feather of the guacamaya. Cacao indicates money 
which the patient pays. Also they put in a stem of bamboo, 
which indicates aguardiente . The egg indicates strength. 
They wrap up the eggs, etc., in parcels, and bury them where 
there are crossroads, or where the sick person is, or they hide 
them. The bones of the chickens are buried. They use 24 
kernels of maize. They take them from the middle of the 
ear; the ear has twelve rows of kernels. The witch speaks 
his own (special) language». 

»They have in the center of the cloth a little figure, and 
they cast shells sometimes. Then they kneel down in an 
especial way around the little figure». 

»In order to make rain, the witch goes to the mountains, 
where there are springs. He enters a cave, praying. He brings 
one or two turkeys. When he enters the cave, it thunders, 
because the spirits are angry. It is said that the thunder is 
caused by little old men. The witch sprinkles water about 
so that it will rain. He leaves the birds alive there, as a 
token of payment. Chickens also are taken». 

»When witches are curing, they call upon the »Tord of the 
mountains, of the earth, of the water, of the sun, etc.» 

»When a person dies, they collect a seed called »Alegria », 
and put a little bunch of them with the corpse. This indi¬ 
cates money in the other world, so that the dead person will 
not die of hunger*. 

»To find a lost animal or object, one takes some mush¬ 
rooms at night. One commences to speak (after falling 
asleep). It is not permitted to keep an animal around which 
might cry out and disturb the sleeper, who goes on speaking 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



137 


while another person listens. The sleeper tells where the 
lost animal or thing is, and the next day there it is when 
they go to find it. In addition to the mushrooms, some people 
use a seed called »Semilla de la Virgen», others use »Hierba 
Maria ».» 

»The people also fear the Masters of the earth, who live 
underground. Each place also has its spirit, and these spi¬ 
rits are able to kill those who have annoyed them.» 

»At night, persons' real names are not said. They are 
called by the name of any object whatsoever, for example, 
»chair», »table», etc. If real names were used, one would 
become ill — the masters of the mountains would take one's 
fortune, cause one to become ill, and one would die.» 

»When the owl cries in the night, someone is going to die». 
»Witches powder the claws of the tigre and make a drink of 
it, which they give to the sick person whom they are curing ». 

From the foregoing data, the essential unity and cohesi¬ 
veness of the witchcraft beliefs and practices in the Mazatec 
territory is readily seen; and it is also possible to show a 
similar unity between the practices of the Mazatecs and those 
of peoples in adjoining regions. It will not be difficult to 
show that practically every element, viewed singly in its 
occurrence among the Mazatecs, also occurs among the 
majority of the other groups, although the significance of 
any given element may vary to a considerable degree as it 
is traced from group to group. 

To the sputh and east, immediately adjoining the Maza¬ 
tec territory, are the Cuicatecs. They are a small group, 
numbering 9, 221; only 62.29 percent of the group are mono¬ 
lingual. Those who are known as witches have a certain 
knowledge of the herbs of the fields, and are equipped with 
bits of cork, crystals, marbles, beans, feathers, little idols 
of stone, herbs, etc. The witches practice as doctors and 
diviners, and earn honoraria, and it is believed that they 
can cause sickness in other persons by their black arts. In 
order to cause a person to become ill, they take a gift to the 


Digitized by 


Google 



138 


»IvOrd of the mountain», which consists of a chicken, eggs, 
bamboo tubes of tepache, candles, and copal. These the wit¬ 
ches leave on the mountain. In order to cure, they suck, 
and extract from the patient beans, hairs, fish-bones, etc. 
In cases of serious illness, they also take a gift to the »Tord 
of the mountain», and if the patient dies, the witches dis¬ 
claim the fault, saying that the aire was very strong. 

They believe in the evil eye. — In Teutila they believe in 
naguales, and in the owl as a bird of evil omen. — He who 
carries with him a guacamaya feather will have luck with 
women. — Pisiete is prepared in the following manner in 
Teutila: a leaf of fresh tobacco is well ground, mixed with a 
handful of lime, and sometimes a clove of garlic is added. 
This is sprinkled about where they work, in order to repel 
serpents or other venomous creatures. The same prepara¬ 
tion serves to bewitch an enemy. The powdered pisiete is 
taken in the mouth and blown toward the enemy; it is be¬ 
lieved that thus the enemy becomes sick or dies. If the 
bewitched one notices that someone has blown toward him, he 
can protect himself by drawing a line in the earth and spitting 
in the line, this being sufficient to protect him from danger. 

Concerning agricultural sacrifice among the Cuicatecs, 
it is stated that in San £ndres Teotilalpam they still sacrifice 
animals in the fields in order to obtain a good harvest. Dogs 
are turkeys are the victims. The dogs are burned alive, and 
the turkeys are decapitated, and the seed and agricultural 
implements are sprinkled with their blood. 9 

• Adan, E. p. 149 et seq. »Hay entre ellos de cierta habilidad y con- 
ocimiento en el manejo de las yerbas del campo, llamados brujos, — su 
equipo profesional consiste en bagatelas, como tapones de corcho, cristales, 
canicas, frijoles, plumas, idolitas de piedra, yerbas, etc. Estos individuos 
fungen, cobrando honorarios, como medicos y adivinos, y se cree que tienen 
poder para producir, por medio de su arte, enfermedades en otras personas. 
— Para enfermar a un enemigo Uevan al »Senor del Cerro» un presente 
que consta de una gallina, canutos de tepache, vela y copal que los brujos 
dejan en el cerro. Para curar dan chupetones y extraen del cuerpo del 
paciente, frijoles, cabellos, espinas de pescado, etc. En casos de enferme- 


Digitized by 


Google 



139 


The pisiete mentioned above figured in the curing ceremony 
described from Huautla de Jimenez; it was also prescribed 
by the brujo as a part of the treatment, and was to be admini¬ 
stered to the patient by »pricking it in the veins ». We listed 
the substance as tobaco molido. Starr, in his »Notes upon the 
Huautla district», states that »Pisiete is a green powder of 
the leaves of a plant. It is universally carried in little gourds 
which are fastened on the girdle. — It is used by the people 
to take away fatigue and also in brujeria. In brujeria it is 
used a) to protect against witchcraft and b) to cause witch¬ 
craft. It is used in brujeria before the sun rises; a pinch is 
placed between the lower lip and the teeth, a sip of wine 
is taken, and formulae repeated. — It was impossible to 
gain the formulae ». 10 

. Bauer also mentions the use of pisiete among the Maza- 
tecs 11 , as does Seler, who renders it by the proper Aztec 
name, picietl. 12 

dades graves llevan tambien presente al »Senor del Cerro» y, si el enfermo 
se muere, los brujos se disculpan diciendo que no tenia remedio, que el 
aire era muy fuerte». »Creen en el mal de ojo, — En Teutila creen en 
los naguales, y en la lechuza como ave de mal agiiero. — El que lleva 
consigo una pluma de guacamaya tiene suerte con las mujeres. — El 
pisiete lo preparan en Teutila de la siguiente manera: se coge una hoja 
de tabaco fresco, se muele bien, mezcl&ndola con una punado de cal y, 
algunas veces, se le agrega un diente de ajo; esto se riega donde trabajan, 
para ahuyentar a las viboras o cualquier bicho venenoso (es cierto que se 
ahuyentan). Esta misma preparadon del pisiete sirve para hacer dafio 
a los enemigos: se coge polve pisiete en la boca y se sopla a la persona ene- 
miga; se cree que con esto adquiere enfermedad o se muere. Hay manera 
de defenderse, or sea la contra del pisiete: si el atacado Uegase a notar 
que lo han soglado, inmediatamente raya la tierra y escupe en la raya, 
siendo suficiente para que no le pase nada. — En S. Andres Teotilalpam 
sacrifican todavia animales en los campos para obtener buena cosecha: 
perros y guajolotes son las victimas; a los perros los queman vivos y a 
los guajolotes los degiiellan y rocian la semilla e instrumentos de labranza 
con la sangre.» 

10 Starr, p. 74. 

11 Bauer, p. 862 

18 Seler, »Zauberei*>. 


Digitized by 


Google 



140 

Sacrifice to ensure fertility of the fields also occurs among 
the Mazatecs, according to Starr, 13 and according to the 
same author, similar practices occur among the Mixe 14 . Par¬ 
sons, speaking of the Zapotec, states that »At Santo Domingo 
in time of drought an offering of turkeys and bread is made 
to the Earth — the turkeys are killed on the mountain, Cerro 
Pelon, for the blood to soak into the ground — four turkeys, 
two male, two female ». 15 And, »Within a few miles of the 
town of Villa Alta we found among the Zapotec plenty of 
evidence to show the survival of ancient religious rites. 
Among certain pre-Cortesian ruins on the top of a hill vene¬ 
rated as »the hill which is good», we noticed curious holes 
in the ground, in the pedestal of a cross, and in the base of 
an ancient stone wall. In these holes we found eggs, flo¬ 
wers, little circles or rings of bread, cacao beans, and other 
objects deposited as offerings. Moreover, a strong odor of 
blood and the peculiar blackness and consistency of the 
earth within the holes pointed to a sacrifice recently perfor¬ 
med. Large piles of turkney feathers which lay scattered 
around proved conclusively that turkeys had been the vic¬ 
tims ». 16 

Gillow remarks that the Mixes sacrifice in caves, 17 and 
Beals reports similar practices among the same group. Cave 
sacrifice is a feature of wide distribution and considerable 
significance. Among the Tlaxcallans there are »rain-bringers, 
Kiatlaske or Tesitlaske», who bring gifts to the caverns of 
Malintze. 18 The Aztecs went to »a cave of the Cti called 
Topico» in procession, where they left the skins of certain 
sacrificed victims as offerings. 19 The Cuicatecs also sacrifice 

18 Starr, p. 78 Decapitated turkeys or sheep are used. 

14 Starr, p. 55 Decapitated turkeys or chickens are used at Quesaltepec 
and Alotepec. While the blood is sprinkled, a formula is said. 

15 Parsons, p. 216 

16 Bevan, p. 65. 

17 Gillow, Chap. 10 

18 Starr, p. 21. 

19 Sahagun, Book II, Chap. I., p. 53. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



in caves , 20 while the Mitla farmers sacrifice to Lightning in 
his cave in the mountain region to the north of Mitla . 21 An¬ 
other custom widespread throughout Southern Mexico 
is the worship of and sacrifice to the mountain deities, known 
to the Mazatecs as the »Senor del Cerro». The »Lords of the 
Mountains* play an important role in witchcraft , 22 and indeed 
are the central figure in Cuicatec witchcraft; he lives on the 
Cerro Chere. 23 

The »IyOrds of the Mountains* are particularly important 
in the selection of witches, for not everyone can be a witch; 
special talents and gifts belong thereto, which the »Lords 
of the Mountains» giant only to their favorites. Such gifts 
are the power to work miracles, and a kind of bodily invul¬ 
nerability or resistance. So that they may prove themselves, 
the incipient witches must voluntarily, and more frequently, 
involuntarily, undergo ordeals. If people are doubtful that 
the candidate is worthy to be a witch, the candidate may be 
seized by several sturdy fellows and assaulted with machetes. 
If he lives, nothing can equal the devout worship with which 
the proven witch is honored . 24 

The belief in cave and mountain dwelling dwarfs is almost 
as widespread as the custom of cave sacrifice, and in some 
instances, is connected with it. Parsons mentions a type of 
dwarf among the Zapotec which closely resembles the de¬ 
scription of the la'a among the Mazatec. 

Divining with maize is universal in Southern Mexico, and 
innumerable variations in details exist. The number of 
kernels employed is the most variable factor, and conse¬ 
quently has a purely arbitrary significance in the several 
cases. 


20 Information from Messrs. R. J. Weitlaner and B. Bevan. In S. Andres 
Teotilalpam, aguardiente is placed in bamboo tubes and sacrificed in caves. 

21 Parsons, p. 211. Dr. Parsons mentions other cave shrines of the Zapotec. 

22 Bauer, p. 858. 

23 Information from Mr. R. J. Weitlaner. 

24 Bauer, p. 861—862. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



142 


Divination with chickens or turkeys seems to have a some¬ 
what more limited distribution. Data are available which 
show that this type of divination occurs not only among the 
Mazatec, but also among the Chinantec 25 , and among the Za- 
potec of Mitla, where the bruja kills a chicken upon a cross 
drawn upon the ground; if it dies with its head toward the 
east, the patient will recover . 26 

Parcels of various objects, such as eggs, copal, feathers, 
cacao , etc., are buried for various purposes among the Cui- 
catec 27 , the Mixe 28 , and the Zapotec. The offering generally 
has the purposes of warding off or curing illness, or of satis¬ 
fying the earth. Starr, however, states that the Mazatec 
bewitch others by taking three feathers and three cacao 
beans to a brujo, who buries them on the property of the vic¬ 
tim before sunrise . 29 Bauer records in detail two cases of 
the use of the curing parcel among the Mazatec, one from 
the Mazateco-Popoloca district around the Rio Tonto, and 
the other from Huautla. In the former case, one egg, seven 
pieces of white bark paper, seven pieces of brown bark paper 
seven colored parrot feathers, many cacao beans and pieces 
of copal were grouped around the egg with a com husk or a 
banana leaf, and tied around both ends with the inner bark 
of a tree. While the bundle is being prepared, the witch re¬ 
peats the necessary prayers — and the person then buries 
it in a convenient place, in the fields, or in the house. In 
the fields, it is frequently buried in the four comers and in 
the middle, and serves to keep drouth away, and ensure a 
good harvest. The bundle may be used for good or evil . 30 

According to the Huautla practice described by Bauer, 
the bundle must be made where the witch does his work, 


25 Information from Sr. Ismail Aguirre, Ojitlan, Oax. 

28 Parsons, p. 120. 

27 Information from Messrs. Weitlaner and Be van. 

28 Gillow, Chap. 10. For Zapotec, see Parsons, pp. 120, 121, 301. 
22 Starr, p. 78. 

80 Bauer, p. 860. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 43 


that is, at the bedside of the patient. The egg is placed on 
the floor so that the pointed end points toward the patient. 
Five cacao beans and five tiny feather bundles are grouped 
on each side of the egg. The feathers are tiny, not large, as 
those at Rio Tonto; they are wrapped in a tiny piece of the 
fibrous bark of the mulberry tree, so that only the ends of 
the feathers protrude, and tied with bark string. The ten 
cacao beans and the ten feather bundles are equally separated 
on both sides of the egg, so that the points of the feathers he 
next to the point of the egg. The witch then lights ten co¬ 
pal pieces and prays. After this, he wraps the parcel in a 
banana leaf, and buries it loosely under the bed of the pa¬ 
tient, without stamping the earth down tightly. There it 
remains until the sick person recovers, when it is dug up, 
wrapped in fresh banana leaves, and buried again near 
the house, or hung up in a nearby tree to ward off evil 
spirits. The bark paper represents clothing, the white 
type, shirts, the brown, the outer garments; the feathers 
represent decoration, the cacao , money. Bauer also noticed 
the occurence of soul-loss among the Mazatec; the soul is 
recaptured in a large jar at the place of its loss, as among 
the Zapotec . 31 

The Mazatec share with all the surrounding peoples the 
general belief in the nagual in some form or another. Accor¬ 
ding to Diaz, the territory of the Mazatec was known as the 
»I,and of the deer», because the were great numbers of tame 
deer which were venerated as gods, and could not be hunted . 32 
In former times, each cacique took for himself a sacred ani¬ 
mal which was honored as a god . 33 The general nagual belief 
extends to the Quiches of Guatemala . 34 The Mazatec also 
share the general Central American belief in the owl (Sp. 
tecolote , lechuza), as a bird of evil omen. 

31 Bauer, pp. 860—861. 

32 Diaz, p. 31. 

33 Bauer, p. 858. 

34 La Farge and Byers, p. 141. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 44 


Copal is used by the Mazatec not only in witchcraft and 
curing, but in all other religious ceremonies as well, a trait 
likewise shared with Central America generally. The Za- 
potecs, in addition to using copal in the above mentioned 
ways, also bury it, as do the Mazatec, and use it in a pecu¬ 
liar form of divination as well. The copal is burned in a bowl 
of water, and thus a significant figure is formed on its under 
side . 85 

Cacao in brujerta invariably has the connotation of wealth, 
undoubtedly because of its Pre-Conquest use as a medium of 
exchange. Among the Zapotec, cacao is offered to the earth, 
and at various shrines, while the Mazatec interr it with the 
dead . 36 

Plumes of brilliantly colored tropical birds, principally 
the quetzal and the guacamaya, were an essential part of 
every religious ceremony of the Aztecs . 37 The merchants 
and the travelers went to the greatest pains to »find out 
where the feathers (plumes), and the precious stones can be 
had. » 38 In ancient times, plumes were similarly used by the 
Zapotec, as well as by the groups further to the south. Seler 
gives interesting details concerning the connection of the 
guacamaya plume with the Aztec calendar and gods . 39 

36 Parsons, p. 120. 

33 Bauer, p. 859. 

37 Sahagun, Book I Feathers were also used in curing, p. 230. 

38 Sahagun, Book I, p. 42. 

38 Seler,'»Das Tonalamatl», p. 35 »Das Wort cue9alin oder Cuetzalin heisst 
allerdings Feuerflamme, oder Llama de fuego, wie Sahagun in seinem spani- 
schen Texte iibersetzt. Mit demselben Worte bezeichnet man aber auch 
die langen rothen Fedem des Schwanzes und des Fliigels des Vogels Alo, 
d. h. des rothen Guacamayo. (Vgl. Sahagun I cap. 2 pp 2) Es ist also diese 
Devise des Windgottes nichts anderes als der Fliigel des rothen Guacamayo. 
Der rothe Guacamayo is der Vogel der Sonne, der Xilohuela copijcha, wie 
die Zapoteken sagen, der Cuetzaltonameyotl, wie es auf Mexikanisch heisst, 
d. h., »der rothe Papagei, der Abglanz der Sonne», der Bruder des Quet- 
zaltototl. »Der Guacamayo und der Quetzalvogel sind die beiden Him- 
melsvogel, die im Wiener Codex (Blatt 17) zu sehen sind, einen Ballspiel- 
platz das Symbol der vier Bewegungen (nahui olin), d. i. das Symbol des 


Digitized by 


Google 



145 


Paper must have been a commodity desired second only 
to plumes and precious stones. Its only use among the Az¬ 
tecs was ceremonial, and it was indispensable as an article 
of adornment. It was used in penitential rites, as crowns 
for the images of gods, the god of the merchants was cove¬ 
red with paper, and paper was covered with ulli , liquid rub¬ 
ber, and used in sacrifices. The victims were frequently 
covered and clothed with paper, priests customarily wore 
undergarments of paper, it was burned with copal, and offe¬ 
red with plumes. Copal was frequently kept in paper pou¬ 
ches, and it was variously painted for different ceremonies. 
There were many grades and types of paper, known by va¬ 
rious names, (amateteuitl, tetenitl, etc.), and tremendous quan¬ 
tities were used. In certain feasts for Vitzilopuchtli, the god 
of war, pieces of paper 20 fathoms long, 1 fathom wide, and 
1 finger thick were used . 40 The paper was made from several 
plants. Maguey paper was perhaps the most common, while 
those types of paper made from the bark of trees were more 
costly. The amate tree supplied the bark for most of the true 
bark paper. 

Starr refers to modem bark paper-making among the Oto- 
mis. The bark is beaten with a stone, and is made by the 
women with some attempt at secrecy. It is used only for 
brujeria, and little figures are cut from it . 41 Today the paper 
is known as cua-dmatl in Aztec. Lopez y Fuentes descri¬ 
bes its use as follows, »— He observed that the earth in the 
patio had been recently removed, and — digging, he disen- 
terred three little figures of cua-dmatl , completely stuck 
through with spines. Moreover, he took out three eggs, 

Himmels, auf den Fittigen tragend. Mit seinem Schmuck, dem cuetzal- 
tonameyotl, wird am Tage nahui olin das Bild des Sonnengottes gesch- 
rniickt. Der rothe Guacamayofliigel charakterisirt also Quetzalcoatl als 
den Gott der vier Bewegungen (nahui olin), d. h. der vier Richtungen, oder 
des Himmels». For the place of the guacamaya in the calendar, see p. 
17, et seq. 

40 Sahagun, pp. 32, 40, 41, 46, 61, 68, 72, 73, 85, 87, 94, 95, no etc. 

41 Starr, p. 81. 

10 


Digitized by 


Google 



146 


painted black, and three cempoalxochitl , the flower of 
death. » 42 

Mr. Rodney Gallop has observed and collected similar 
figures of bark paper among the Otomi of the state of Puebla 43 
Parsons reports one occurrence of the use of the muneco 
in bewitching among the Zapotec , 44 but so far as is now known 
the bark paper is made in the rancherias , and brought to 
town to be sold in the markets. The entire tree is cut down, 
the trunk conveniently sectioned, and the bark beaten until 
it lifts away from the wood. No especial beater is used; any 
hard stick of wood will serve. 

The use of various magical plants to find lost objects is 
not restricted to the Mazatec alone; the Zapotec use a plant 
called »bador , the little children » 45 , which is administered in 
the same way as yerba Maria by the Mazatec. The leaf is 
beaten well, and a tea made thereof. It is probable that the 
Chinantec use it, since it is well known to those who live in 
the vicinity of Ojitlan . 46 The Aztecs used narcotic plants in 
a similar way . 47 

The use of a semi-divine mushroom seems to be today con¬ 
fined exclusively to the Mazatec terriotory, although in for¬ 
mer times it undoubtedly had a much wider distribution. 
The Aztecs knew these mushrooms under the Nahuatl term, 
teonanacatl , »divine mushroom». Simeon, deriving his in¬ 
formation from Sahagun, states the following, »Teonanacatl. 


42 Lopez y Fuentes, p. 120— »E 1 dia anterior, en el patio de su casa, 
observd que la tierra estaba redentemente removida y, — se puso a cavar 
en el mismo sitio, desenterrando tres munecos de cua-Amatl, papel de ma- 
dera, todos atravesados por espinas. Ademds, extrajd tres huevos de gal- 
lina, pintados de negro, y tres cempoalxdchitl, la flor de muerto.» 

42 Personal communication. 

44 Parsons, p. 141. 

45 Parsons, p. 312. 

44 Information from Sr. Ismail Aguirre, Ojitlan, Oax. 

47 Brinton, p. 14, quotes from the Confesionario of Nicolas de leon, »Hast 
thou drunk peyotl, or hast thou given it to others to drink, in order to 
find out secrets, or to discover where lost or stolen articles were? » 


Digitized by 


Google 



147 

Espece de petit champignon qui a mauvais gout, enivre et 
cause des hallucinations; il est medicinal contre les fi&vres 
et la goutte ». 48 Further data on this most interesting fea¬ 
ture of Mazatec witchcraft are scanty. Apparently the 
Zapotec do not use mushrooms, and the Cuicatec, although 
they know of their use among their neighbors, do not them¬ 
selves employ mushrooms . 49 

The wide distribution and similarity of the idea of inter¬ 
cession with the saints and souls, who are addressed by per¬ 
sons knowing the »Words of Power», in the Middle Ameri¬ 
can area is highly significant. Furthermore, it is generally be¬ 
lieved that the saints and souls may be coerced into doing 
evil as well as good. This pattern of invocatory ceremonia¬ 
lism revolves about the principle of magical coercion of the 
gods, and is perhaps one of the most fundamental Middle 
American traits. 


Conclusions 

In dealing with the non-material aspects of modern Middle 
American cultures, there are found three comparatively 
distinct strata, firstly, the European overlay, more or less 
completely acculturated to the indigenous mass, secondly, 
the great body of indigenous beliefs and practices which 
exhibit some sort of a fundamental unity throughout the 
entire area, and thirdly, variations and especial local deve¬ 
lopments of these indigenous beliefs among the individual 
groups. A fourth and minor group is formed of variations 
upon of the European overlay. 

Nowhere, naturally, does the European overlay appear so 
obviously as in the more superficial aspects of the religious 
life. In the beginnings of the process, the acculturation was 

48 Simeon, p. 436. 

49 Information from Mr. R. J. W 7 eitlaner, who also states that narcotics 
are used for divination by the Otomi of Pahuatlan, Sierra de Hidalgo, 
Puebla, and particularly in the towns of Sta. Ana Tlachichilco and S. Pab- 
lito, near Pahuatlan. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 



148 


forced, but after the first great cut into the pattern of abori¬ 
ginal theopathy, acculturation proceeded almost without 
conscious effort. Thus the Catholic saints have fallen heir 
to the attributes of their pagan predecessors, and in reli¬ 
gious tales which have been told by the aborigines for two 
or more centuries there is seen the final product of this 
process of acculturation, which strove to express unfamiliar 
action in a familiar locale and idiom. Then, too, the Huautla 
brujo's explanation of the bark paper and the feather in the 
curing apparatus seems to be an obvious and traditional 
rationalization, a reconciliation of the old to the new, which 
represents a completed line of acculturation. Yet, curi¬ 
ously enough, the other three articles of the curing parcel 
retain their aboriginal connotation. 

A few examples of fundamental aboriginal beliefs have 
already been mentioned; were the data sufficient, it would 
be possible to multiply them almost indefinitely. A basic 
fact concerning them, however, is readily perceived, namely, 
that in the relation of belief to demonstration of that belief, 
the belief is the constant, while the manifestation is the 
variable. A case in point is the ceremony preliminary to 
the well known Totonac game of Volador , as it is played in 
Papantla. Here, »an old woman, the so-called bruja (witch) 
makes offerings of copal, aguardiente , and a fowl, which are 
placed in the hole when the pole is put in position ». 50 

All the basic elements of the curing parcel as occurring 
among the Mazatec were known to most of the groups of 
Middle America, but so far as is now known, only the Maza¬ 
tec use them all in the characteristic manner previously 
described. This indicates, perhaps, not only an ancient and 
continued diffusion, but a high degree of selective accul¬ 
turation as well. The difference in the sum total of culture 
in all its aspects, from group to group in Middle America, 
was comparatively so small as to permit readily the diffu¬ 
sion and acceptance of almost any given culture trait. While 

60 Fewkes, p. 249. 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 49 


this does not hold for the calendar with all its complicated 
ramifications, or for highly technical processes, yet it is 
particularly applicable in the realm of non-material culture 
of an unsophisticated nature. 

Concerning the mechanics of this widespread and conti¬ 
nuous diffusion, Sahagun remarks that the merchants 
among the Aztecs travelled over the whole land, bartering, 
trading, buying in some place and selling in another what 
they had purchased. They also travel through towns, along 
the seashore, and in the interior. There isn’t a place they do 
not visit — they are very sly in their deals with strangers 
in learning their languages, as well as in their tactics ». 51 
A second great center of trading and of travellers» was and 
is the Zapotecan area. Thus was long range diffusion effec¬ 
ted; but of greater significance in the long run was the great 
volume of short range trading, that is, between village and 
village, and between directly adjoining localities, as is the 
custom today. 

In such a way, both material objects, and to a lesser 
extent, their non-material aspects as well, were diffused, 
but were always incorporated into the body of the recipient 
culture with great variability and a high degree of adaptive 
acculturation. For example, the Mazatec have a simplified 
agricultural calendar, shorn of the greater part of its mytholo¬ 
gical significance, while the nearby Cuicatec, and the central 
and northwestern Chinantec have none, although they know 
of its use among their neighbors. The Mazatec curing par¬ 
cel, with all its elements, then, seems to represent a very 
localized adoption and fusion of certain fundamental ele¬ 
ments of great antiquity and wide distribution in Middle 
America. 


51 Sahagun. Book I, p. 41. 


Digitized by 


Google 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ad an, ELFEGO, Los Cuicatecos Actuates. An. Mus. Nac. Epoca 4 a, Tom. 
I, Mexico, 1922. 

B ELMAR, F. Lengua Mazateca Oaxaca 1892. 

Brinton, D. G., Nagualism. Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. vol. 33—34, 1894—95. 
Bevan, Bernard, The Chinantec and their Habitat. Inst. Panamericano 
de Geo. e Hist. Mexico, 1938. 

Bauer, Wilhelm, Heidentum und Aberglaube unter den Ma$ateca-India- 
nern. Zts. fiir Eth. vol. 40, 1908. pages 857—865. 

Diaz, B. del Castillo, A True History of the Conquest of New Spain, 
The Conquest of New Spain, vol V, Ser. II, Vol XL, London, 1915 
The Hakluyt Soc. trans. A. P. Maudslay. 

Fewkes, W. J., Certain Antiquities of Eastern Mexico 25th Ann. Rep., 
B. A. E. 

G. Lopez y Fuentes, El Indio, Mexico 1935. 

Gillow, Bishop E-, Apuntes Historicos, Mexico 1889. 

Krickeberg, W., Los Totanaca trans. P. Aguirre, Sec. de Educacion Pub. 
Mexico, 1933. 

LaFarge, O. and Byers, D., The Year Bearer s People. Mid. Am. Ser. 
Pub. 3 Tulane Univ. 1931. 

Parsons, E. C., Mitla. Univ. of Chicago press 1936. 

Sahagun, Fray B. de, A History of Ancient Mexico. Trans. Fanny R. 

Bandalier Fiske, Univ., 1932 (First four books only). 

Schultes, Richard Evans, Plantae Mexicanae II. Botanical Museum 
Leaflets, vol. 7, no. 3, pp, 37—54. *939- 
SELER, Ed., Zauberei im alten Mexiko. Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 
Band II, no. 5 pages 78—86. 

- Das Tonalamatl. Ext. du Compte Rendu du Congres Int. des Ame- 

ricanistes. 7e ses. Berlin 1888. 

Simeon, R£mi, Dictionnaire de la Lengue Nauhuatl ou Mexicaine. Paris 
1885. 

Starr, F. Notes upon the Ethnography of Southern Mexico. Proc. Daven¬ 
port Acad, of Sciences, vol. VIII 1899—1900. 

University of California, Berkeley 

November, 1938. 


Digitized by LaOOQte 


