take  the  usual  bath.  With  this  bath  the  ceremonies  of  that  night 
are  finished. 

Tiie  Second  Day  of  the  Feast:  Natema  Umartinyu,  “The 

Drinking  of  the  Natema  ” 

At  about  8  o’clock  the  principal  ceremony  of  the  second  day,  the 
drinking  of  the  sacred  drink  natema ,  takes  place.  This  important 
narcotic  is  prepared  from  a  vine  specially  cultivated  by  the  Jibaros, 
the  scientific  name  of  which  is  Banisteria  caapi  (of  the  MaJpig- 
hiaceae  family).  When  the  drink  is  prepared  for  the  feast  the  slayer 
himself  has  to  assist  in  order  to  transfer  to  it  the  supernatural  power 
with  which  he  is  believed  to  be  invested. 

For  the  preparation  of  the  natema  some  pieces  of  the  stem  of  the 
vine  are  cut  off,  crushed  with  clubs,  and  parted  into  thinner  fibers, 
which,  are  boiled  in  water  for  a  couple  of  hours.  The  fibers  are  then 
taken  out  and  the  drink  is  ready.  The  natema  drink,  which  has  the 
effect  of  producing  in  the  drinker  peculiar  visions  and  hallucinations 
which  are  ascribed  by  the  Indians  to  certain  spirits,  is  generally 
mixed  with  some  tobacco  water,  through  which  its  narcotic  effects 
are  increased.  At  the  tsantsa  feast  the  second  clay  is  regularly  des- 
tined  for  the  drinking  of  the  natema ,  and  it  is  prepared  and  drunk 
with  certain  ceremonies,  which  have  now  to  be  described. 

Some  pieces  of  the  stem  of  the  natema  plant  are  laid  on  a  banana 
leaf  on  the  ground.  Upon  another  banana  leaf  a  larger  and  a  smaller 
wooden  club  are  laid,  and  with  these  the  natema  stems  are  to  be 
crushed.  There  is  besides  a  pot  in  which  the  drink  will  be  cooked. 
The  priest  as  usual  gives  the  slayer  tobacco  juice  through  the  nose. 
Then  he  grasps  him  by  the  wrist  and  makes  him  seize  a  club  with  his 
right  hand  and  a  natema  stem  with  his  left  and  crush  the  stem,  lay¬ 
ing  it  upon  the  other  tree  club.  The  slayer  divides  the  stem  into 
three  or  four  fibers  and  puts  them  down  into  the  pot,  the  priest 
holding  his  hand.  Another  Indian  without  ceremony  crushes  some 
other  pieces  of  the  natema  stem  and  arranges  them  in  a  ring  within 
the  pot.  The  slayer,  whose  hand  is  held  by  the  priest,  now  pours  some 


karsten]  BLOOD  REVENGE,  WAR,  AND  VICTORY  FEASTS  71 

water  into  the  pot  from  a  water  bottle  and  places  the  pot  on  the 
fire,  some  other  men  attending  to  the  pot  while  it  boils. 

At  another  fire  close  by  tobacco  is  simultaneously  being  boiled, 
to  be  mixed  with  the  natema.  A  small  clay  pot  is  placed  by  the 
fire,  and  some  leaves  of  tobacco  are  laid  on  a  banana  leaf  at  the  side 
of  it.  The  slayer,  whose  hand  is  held  by  the  priest,  takes  a  tobacco 
leaf  and  carefully  puts  it,  first,  on  the  edge  of  the  pot  and  then  into  it. 
The  wife  of  the  slayer  repeats  the  process  with  another  leaf,  laying 
it  at  first  on  the  edge  of  the  pot  and  then  inside  it.  Lastly,  a  third 
leaf  of  tobacco  is  in  the  same  way  put  into  the  pot  by  the  daughter 
of  the  slayer.  Thereupon  the  slayer,  assisted  by  the  priest,  pours 
some  water  into  the  pot  and  places  it  on  the  fire. 

On  the  spot  where  the  natema  is  cooked  there  is  also  placed  a 
piece  of  the  stem  of  the  manioc  plant  and  two  narrow  strips  of  the 
bark  of  a  tree  which  the  Jibaros  call  samiki.  The  slayer  takes  one 
of  the  strips,  winds  it  round  his  index  finger,  and  ties  it  into  a  ring 
of  the  same  size  as  the  finger.  By  means  of  one  end  of  the  strip, 
which  after  the  tying  of  the  ring  has  been  left  free,  he  then  attaches 
the  ring  to  the  piece  of  the  manioc  stem.  Thereupon  he  in  the 
same  way  makes  another  ring  of  the  other  strip,  giving  it  the  size  of 
his  index  finger,  and  attaches  it  to  the  manioc  stem  at  the  side  of  the 
first  ring.  With  the  aid  of  the  priest  he  ultimately  places  the  manioc 
stem,  with  the  two  rings  attached  to  it,  upon  the  tobacco  pot  boiling 
on  the  fire  in  such  a  way  that  it  rests  upon  the  edges  of  the  pot. 

The  object  of  this  ceremony  is  to  establish  a  mysterious  connection 
between  the  slayer,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  is  supposed  to  be  filled 
with  supernatural  power,  the  tobacco  water  to  be  mixed  in  the 
natema  drink,  and  the  manioc  plant  which  the  persons  drinking  of 
the  narcotic  will  see  in  the  dream.  The  two  rings  formed  of  the 
rind  of  the  samiki  tree  will  in  this  connection  serve  as  mediums  for 
the  transference  of  the  power.  The  Jibaros  ascribe  magical  virtues 
to  the  samiki  tree  itself,  and  a  little  of  its  bark  is  generally  mixed 
with  the  natema  with  a  view  to  increasing  the  efficacy  of  the  drink. 
The  hasten  strips  of  the  tree  having  been  formed  into  rings  of  the 
same  size  as  the  slayer’s  finger,  are  believed  to  catch  his  power,  and 
thus  to  transfer  it  to  the  manioc  and  the  boiling  tobacco  pot.  The 
persons  partaking  of  the  s&cred  drink  are  afterwards,  in  the  narcotic 
sleep,  supposed  to  see,  among  other  things,  the  manioc  fields  of  the 
slayer  in  a  flourishing  state  and  bearing  a  rich  crop  of  fruit. 

At  the  tsantsa  feast  the  natema  is  only  boiled  for  about  one  hour, 
whereupon  the  pot  is  taken  off  the  fire.  Similarly  the  smaller  pot  in 
which  tobacco  has  been  cooked  is  taken  away,  the  manioc  stick  with 
the  hasten  rings  having  first  been  removed.  The  latter  is  fixed  in 


72 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bull.  79 


the  wall  close  to  the  door,  where  it  is  left  until  it  is  dry  and  half 
consumed,  being  then  thrown  away. 

The  slayer,  whose  hands  are  held  by  the  priest,  seizes  the  small 
tobacco  pot  and  pours  its  contents  into  the  natema  pot.  The  drink 
is  now  ready  to  be  consumed. 

In  the  drinking  of  the  natema  at  the  tsantsa  feast  both  men  and 
women,  even  half-grown  children,  take  part,  all  “  who  want  to 
dream  ”  being  allowed  to  drink  of  the  narcotic.  Even  the  slayer,  as 
well  as  his  wife  and  daughter,  drink  natema.  The  drinking  has 
throughout  a  ceremonial  character.  A  number  of  beautifully  orna¬ 
mented  clay  dishes  are  placed  on  the  ground  in  two  rows.  The  priest 
and  two  or  three  other  old  men  fill  them  with  natema  and  give  them 
over  to  the  persons  who  are  going  to  drink.  Before  they  give  the 
dish  to  a  man  or  woman  they  each  time  sing  a  long  conjuration  over 
it,  summoning  the  natema  spirits.  The  person  who  receives  the  dish 
quickly  empties  its  contents,  which  amount  to  a  little  more  than  half 
a  liter.  Immediately  thereafter  he  or  she  goes  out  and  throws  up 
the  quantity  drunk  (for  the  natema  at  first  has  the  effect  of  an 
emetic).  Then  the  person  again  enters  the  house,  again  empties  a 
pininga  of  natema ,  which  is  given  him  by  an  old  man  with  the  same 
ceremony  as  before,  and  immediately  again  throws  it  up.  The  same 
process  is  repeated  a  third  time.  Each  person  who  drinks  natema 
at  the  tsantsa  feast  thus  has  to  empty  three  dishes  of  the  sacred  drink. 

The  persons  who  drink  natema  have  not  previously  eaten  or  drunk 
anything,  and  afterwards  also  they  have  to  fast  strictly  until  they 
have  slept  and  dreamed.  The  majority  of  those  who  have  drunk  the 
narcotic  leave  the  house  and  go  out  to  sleep  in  some  ranches  of  palm 
leaves  made  in  the  forest  at  a  short  distance  from  the  house.  Most 
of  these  are  men,  but  at  least  one  of  them  ought  to  be  a  woman,  a 
female  relative  of  the  slayer.  The  slayer  and  his  wife  and  daughter, 
who  also  have  drunk  natema ,  do  not  leave  the  house,  but  have  their 
dreams  inside.  The  dreamers  remain  in  the  forest  sleeping  until  the 
afternoon.  Then  they  take  a  bath  in  the  river  and  return  to  the 
house,  where  they  tell  the  older  Indians  what  kind  of  dreams  and 
visions  they  have  had.  Now  they  are  also  allowed  to  break  their 
fast.  Their  food  consists  only  of  a  dish  of  boiled  and  mashed  manioc 
and  boiled  ripe  bananas.  The  dreamer  has  to  receive  the  dish  con¬ 
taining  this  food  from  the  hand  of  the  same  old  man  who  in  the 
morning  had  given  him  or  her  the  natema. 

The  object  of  the  drinking  of  the  natema  at  the  tsantsa  feast  is  to 
ascertain  whether  everything  will  turn  out  favorably  for  the  slayer 
in  the  future,  whether  he  will  have  a  long  life,  attain  to  material 
prosperity,  and  be  lucky  in  his  undertakings.  The  slayer,  as  well 
as  his  nearest  relatives  who  have  drunk  natema ,  will  see  in  the  dream 


karsten] 


BLOOD  REVENGE,  WAR,  AND  VICTORY  FEASTS 


73 


his  house  surrounded  by  large  and  flourishing  plantations  of  manioc 
and  bananas;  they  will  see  his  domestic  animals,  his  swine,  and  his 
chickens,  numerous  and  fat,  etc.  But  at  the  same  time  the  persons  who 
have  drunk  the  sacred  drink  will  be  benefited  for  their  own  part 
also,  being  purified  from  impure  and  disease-bringing  matters,  and 
gaining  strength  and  ability  for  their  respective  works  and  occu¬ 
pations. 

The  drinking  of  the  natema  in  the  morning  is  as  usual  followed 
by  a  general  drinking  bout — in  which,  however,  those  persons  who 
have  drunk  natema  do  not  take  part — as  well  as  by  a  general  ban¬ 
quet,  at  which  the  flesh  of  the  swine  and  chickens  cooked  during  the 
night  is  eaten.  With  this  banquet  the  official  part  of  the  morning’s 
program  is  finished,  and  hosts  and  guests  may  pass  the  rest  of  the 
day  until  darkness  as  they  like. 

At  about  6  o’clock  in  the  evening  the  preparations  for  the  night’s 
dance  commence,  the  host  (i.  e.,  the  slayer)  again  going  rouncl  in 
the  house  and  inviting  the  guests  to  take  part  in  it.  All  having 
properly  dressed  themselves,  arranged  their  ornaments,  and  painted 
their  faces,  the  hantsemata  begins  and  is  continued  through  the  whole 
night  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  on  the  previous  night.  Even  the 
wrestling  of  the  boys  takes  place  for  a  while.  The  dance  is  continued 
until  about  half  past  5  in  the  morning,  being  as  usual  finished  off  by 
