There are a variety of requirements to assure the success of a guided
 session, but chief among them is the conspicuous presence in the session
 room of a copy of Popular Mechanics (in the case of women, a magazine
 such as Cosmopolitan should be substituted). All statues of people with
 three or more arms should be removed, as well as all dogs, goats,
 blackbirds, insects, people who are too bad, people who are too good,
 anyone in bizarre dress who isn’t smiling, anyone wearing a beard * 
 who isn’t smiling, and all other trash of similar character. The
 selection of paintings, photographs, and decorative objects in general is
 to be left to the victim, but we might encourage representations of
 Buddah, Ramakrishna in Samadhi, Tim Leary with a flower behind his ear,
 and so on, while gently discouraging pictures of Jesus Christ on the
 cross, mob scenes from the Second Bardo, Hell Worlds of Hieronymous
 Bosch, and so forth.
 A safe rule is to make the initial session as pleasant as possible, even
 at the risk of being insipid. Daytime instead of night if possible:
 outdoors rather than indoors, if possible. Nothing is gained by trying to
 blow the victim’s brains out with weird music, weird pictures, and weird
 talk—his own imagination will supply all that is necessary in that
 department. To force it, or attempt to force it, will merely create
 resistance, and encourage the victim to believe he is being
 manipulated—a not at all unreasonable assumption. On later
 excursions, particularly those intended to accomplish a specific purpose,
 when the victim has some glimmering of what is at stake, one may take the
 risk of provoking unpleasant experiences in the interest of economy, but
 I really think very few such occasions arise. Most of the weird stuff can
 be best understood as bravado or sado-masochism on the part of the
 guide. 
 For convenience, we may divide the psychedelic experience into two basic
 categories: the Ivory Experience (“spiritual”), and the Horny Experience
 (“psychological”).
 People setting out to guide other people through the labyrinthine ways of
 the personal unconscious really ought to have some kind of experience
 with non-psychedelic methods, or at least be reasonably well read in the
 field, for Christ’s sake, before taking on this kind of work. There are
 too many nitwits floating around, copies of Kahlil Gibran and Meyer Baba
 in hand, who, when confronted by a gaunt moose eating a teddy bear
 sandwich, or something of the sort in the imagery of the victim, conclude
 at once they are dealing with a hopeless psychotic, or the lone survivor
 of the Whiskey Age, and call Bellevue. Professional training is not
 essential, anyone can read Freud and Norman O. Brown; anyone can keep a
 dream book; anyone can administer and interpret H-T-P, Rorschach and
 T.A.T. tests to family and friends (an excellent adjunct to seduction,
 anyway).
 I also strongly recommend the early L. Ron Hubbard and Dianetics. In
 fact, Hubbard’s techniques are so good, so mechanical in fact, that I
 will go so far as to approve their use by even a downright ignoramus if
 he is clever and business-like about what he is doing.
 If mechanical techniques are not used, however, it is essential that the
 guide be of very superior intelligence, very well read and experienced in
 the ways of the world. The gods themselves are helpless before
 stupidity. I would personally draw the line between the sheep and the
 goats somewhere in the vicinity of the 95th percentile in verbal
 intelligence as measured by a reliable individual test or the Miller
 Analogies, so far as the selection of guides for Horny Sessions is
 concerned. Thirty is a good age to start on a full-time career with
 organizational sanction and whatnot, with exceptional exceptions, of
 course, and really, we ought to develop some sort of book list as well.
 I am not in favor of hypnotism under any circumstances. The hypnotic
 state is the psychotic state. This condition often involves expanded
 consciousness, but it is half-assed and the ego is shot. The ego has been
 stolen. We must not be a party to such rapes. The ego does not exist in
 order to be destroyed, as some fools imagine, but to be properly used.
 So my advice to anyone setting out to guide Horny Sessions is very simple:
 become a psychologist first.
 This is not to deny that some people “handle” a victim who is flying very
 high and blind better than others. What do you do in regard to bad
 behavior? How do you respond to odd talk, and particularly, how do you
 answer odd questions? The best rule is to do and say as little as
 possible, but most importantly, one should at all times put the best
 construction on everything. If the victim asks you a question, for God’s
 sake, try to 
 The problem of suffering is a respectable
 philosophic problem (in the classic meaning of the term) if, and only if,
 the externality of relations is denied. 
 answer the question instead of “treating” the questioner. Here are some
 do’s and don’ts:
 Question: “Who am I?”
 Good Answer: “You are my next door neighbor, Mrs. Klotch. But I guess you
 are going through a period where you won’t pay much attention to that and
 will see things from a more universal point of view, so to speak. It
 happens all the time. Nothing to worry about.” (This is a good answer
 only if the victim actually is Mrs. Klotch. If Vice-President Humphrey
 was the victim, it would not be a good answer.)
 Bad Answer: “Ah, that is the question. What meaneth these cards of
 identity? We are all One, are we not?”
 Bad Answer: “You are not your body.”
 Bad Answer: “There is a Self beyond the self.”
 Bad Answer: “Be still, and know that I am God.”
 Bad Answer: “The whole Universe trembles as you ask that question.”
 Bad Answer: “Try not to think about it.”
 Bad Answer: “Hey! Look at that beautiful drop of snot on baby’s nose!”
 The last two undesirable answers may require some explanation. The
 intentions, conscious and unconscious, of the guide are good, but his
 assumptions are wrong. As long as there are complaints about or fears of
 loss of ego the ego is not lost, nor is it diminished in any simple
 way. You are not, in this situation, dealing with a six year old child,
 who can easily be put off or led down the garden path. The ego at bay is
 a mobilized ego, alert to all danger, suspicious of your every move and
 word. Always assume that the victim can “see right through you,”
 no matter how bizarre his behavior. Be honest. If you honestly think
 distraction is called for, then say so. For example, “Well, if questions
 like that are bothering you, why not look at some of these pictures
 instead?” Don’t pretend a sudden interest in something you are not really
 interested in at all. As for saying, “Try not to think about it” or
 something of the sort, well, try not to think of a purple cow yourself
 and see how much luck you have. Also, by not explaining why you feel the
 victim shouldn’t think about it, you will probably encourage the victim
 to believe all of his fears are justified: if he does think
 about it he is a goner for sure.
 Question: “Are you my father?”
 Good Answer: “No, actually. I’m Mr. Klotch from next door, but I guess
 you must be seeing things from the point of view of a little kid or
 something. If you want to go through some childhood scenes, I’ll try to
 play along as best I can. Do I actually look like your father? (wait for
 answer) This LSD stuff is pretty fantastic, isn’t it?”
 Bad Answer: “Yes.” (Unless you are, of course)
 Bad Answer: “No.” (There is such a thing as being too Hal about all
 this. It is unnatural and therefore frightening, to answer a fantastic
 question as if it were commonplace. This is where the Rogerian method of
 ordinary psychotherapy falls down. Do not manipulate! )
 Bad Answer: “Why do you ask that question?” (This sort of answer is
 evasive and suggestive of the sinister.)
 Bad Answer: “How do you feel about your father?” (O.K. if the contract
 is for psychotherapy.)
 Bad Answer: “How old are you?” (O.K. if the contract is for
 psychotherapy.)
 Bad Answer: “Behold. I am thy father, mother, brother, sister, daughter,
 son, indeed, I am all things and all things are ME!!!!!” (This may be
 true, but there is no reason to get swellheaded about it.)
 Question: “Am I really dying?” 
 Good Answer: “I really don’t think you’re physically dying. Good grief,
 you’re healthier than I am. Now you might stop being conscious of your
 body, but that doesn’t mean your body is gone. Your body will take care
 of itself. After all, every night when we lie down to sleep we do the
 same thing—we just relax and let the body take care of itself.
 There is nothing to be afraid of.” There are many variants of this
 response. Adjust your language to the intellectuality of the victim, as
 you would in any ordinary conversation, but not more so . In the interest
 of avoiding panic reactions, your response to this question (or statement
 calling for a response: “I’m dying!”) is most crucial. You must be
 prepared to answer in a reasonable, relaxed, and confident manner.
 Bad Answer: “Yes.” 
 Bad Answer: “No.” 
 Bad Answer: “I don’t think so.” (Why don’t you
 know? Is there some doubt about it?)
 Bad Answer: “Life and death are mere illusions of the mind! Let the
 rotten apple fall to earth and bring forth a new and better tree! Oh,
 grave, where is thy victory? Oh death, where is thy sting? etc., etc.,
 etc., etc., etc….”
 Again, this sort of thing may all be “true,” but that is no excuse. If
 you have any sensitivity whatever, you will know when the victim is ready
 for talk of this sort and when he isn’t. But even when the victim
 initiates this sort of thing himself, even during the coming-down period,
 try to merely give your opinion instead of pronouncing dicta.
 There are, of course, an almost endless number of questions and answers
 we could consider here but the above examples give the general idea.
 (1) Don’t initiate anything. This is true even of the “tuned in” guide
 who appears, or might appear to a third party, to be initiating
 things. Natural and normal comments about this and that are perfectly
 O.K. (if the relationship is clearly teacher-student, the teacher can, in
 fact, must do and say any damn thing that comes into his head; but no
 genuine teacher needs me to tell him that.)
 (2) Abortion agents. I am in favor of having them on hand, but I am
 sensible to the arguments on the other side. Again, all bets are off if
 the guide is an enlightened teacher. On the other hand, the technical
 preferences of your teacher are no more than his technical preferences,
 his style of operation.
 If you do have thorazine or niacinamide or whatever on hand, don’t rush
 to use them, a panic reaction immediately preceding ego-loss lasting a
 minute or two is nothing to worry about, but if it becomes obvious that
 the victim can’t let go, won’t let go, and has no intentions of ever
 letting go, and is frozen in a state of sheer terror, well, why not? But
 don’t fake it! The body knows very well what it is getting: it always
 knows. † 
 (3) Guiding people who are experienced “users.” On the face of it, this
 seems an unlikely situation, but it is not at all uncommon to find people
 who have had hundreds of LSD experiences still seeking
 enlightenment. People in this situation should find a guru. If they are
 having bad trips, they should stop taking LSD.
 Regarding Ivory Sessions in general, I must make it clear that I do not
 think any training is possible, nor are any objective standards possible,
 nor can I offer any advice which will be comprehensible to anyone who
 really needs it.
 To begin with, it is impossible to “guide” anyone “towards”
 enlightenment, the presumable objective of an Ivory trip. If the victim
 regards the guide as his guru, if the relationship is magical, and is
 magical outside the context of psychedelic experience , then
 something may happen. If not, not.
 We must consider here the possibility of some kind of intermediate
 experience—to put the best construction on it, “the exploration of
 the Self,” or, to put the worst construction on it, “an occult
 experience.”
 I am not impressed. An enlightened person knows that there is nothing to
 explore. Everything is created, and since anything may be created, to
 check out the possibilities is nothing more than an insult to the Self,
 which has already made Its choice. The only exception is the (conscious)
 use by a Master of this kind of bullshit, or any other kind of bullshit
 for that matter, to suck people into a position such that the avoidance
 of certain questions becomes virtually impossible. All others should stick
 to working on the vehicle or seeking enlightenment. I am also opposed to
 occultism, even frank, flat-out, self-aggrandizing occultism, although
 someone who is trying to raise the dead in order to beat the stock market
 is certainly a more agreeable and entertaining fellow than some moron who
 thinks he can meditate Vietnam out of existence instead of doing the
 dishes. To each his own.
 Let’s come right out with it: unless you are enlightened, don’t bother
 trying to guide Ivory Sessions—sit by if requested to do so, but
 make no pretense of being anything more than a servant, “ground control”
 or whatever the hell you want to call it. The fact of the matter is that
 fakery is impossible in this situation anyway; there are no standards;
 there is no third party, no precedents, no law. It all depends, and it
 depends on nothing constructible. Circumstances, and circumstances
 only. “The motions of Grace, the hardness of the heart, the external
 circumstance.” To understand what is necessary makes what is necessary
 unnecessary.
 The development of guides, therefore, is on the one hand no more than the
 rational selection and education of psychologists, and, on the other
 hand, out of our hands.
 It is better to concentrate on externals than to mull over these
 intricate problems which we have manufactured in order to avoid the
 answers which we have possessed since the beginning. Get appropriate real
 estate and the appropriate people appear automatically. Set up a press
 staffed by the right people and the right papers will be published
 automatically.
 If, as it appears, our task is to produce a cadre of competent
 psychedelic guides, then let us proceed to do so with a minimum of
 horseshit. What we need is always directly at hand. Novice psychologists
 are a dime a dozen. Good teachers of psychology, driven from their soft
 berths by the current persecution, are a dime a dozen also.
 As for the other relationship, it will, as it always has, take care of
 itself.
 If you are bent on murder, you will find yourself surrounded by
 co-operative victims.
 If you want to save the world, your army is at hand.
 If you desire enlightenment, your guru is just around the corner.
 *
 This was written back in ’36, when beards were a sure sign of impending
 barratry. 
 † I now believe that thorazine should never be used. A couple shots of
 booze can help. Grass on the up and the down will often make for a
 smoother ride. But for flat-out screaming flight, I’m afraid there is
 nothing like a rope.
 Current text: 
 Kleps, Art. 1971. “How to Guide a Session.”
In The Boo Hoo Bible , by Art Kleps, 147-152. San Cristobal,
N.M.: Toad Books. 
 Other recensions: 
 Kleps, Art. 1967. “How to Guide a Session.” In
 The Neo-American Church Catechism and Handbook , by Art
Kleps. Millbrook, N.Y.: The Kriya Press of the Sri Ram Ashrama. 

