OF  MESCALIN,  WITH   SPECIAL  REFERENCE 

TO  THE  MECHANISM  OF  VISUAL 

HALLUCINATIONS1 


By 


Alwyn  Knauer,  M.D. 


FORMERLY  ASSISTANT  OF  PROFESSOR  KRAEPELIN,   PROFESSOR  OF  EXPERIMENTAL 

MEDICINE,   FORDHAM   UNIVERSITY,   NEW  YORK 

AND 


William  J.  M.  A.  Maloney,  M.D.,  ChB.,  F.R.S.Edin. 

FORMERLY    CRICHTON    RESEARCH    FELLOW    IN    CLINICAL    NEUROLOGY    AND    PSY- 
CHIATRY; ADJUNCT  PROFESSOR  OF  NEUROLOGY,  NEW  YORK  POST  GRADUATE 
MEDICAL    SCHOOL;    ATTENDING    NEUROLOGIST,    NEUROLOGICAL 

HOSPITAL,    NEW   YORK 

In  the  world  of  psychical  things,  our  experience  is  always 
confined  within  the  narrow  limits  of  what  we  call  our  own  mind. 
We  can  gain  knowledge  regarding  psychic  phenomena  which  we 
ourselves  have  never  consciously  experienced  only  from  that 
which  is  imparted  to  us, — only  from  that  which  is  externalized  of 
the  mental  processes  occurring  within  the  psyche  of  others. 
What  these  others  actually  experience,  we  can  but  faintly  realize, 
for  we  are  wholly  dependent  upon  that  which  they  choose  to 

1  Read  before  the  New  York  Neurological  Society,  March  6,  1913. 

425 


4*6  A.  KNAUER  AND  W.  /.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

reveal.  If  they  can  but  imperfectly  express  their  mental  ex- 
periences, either  verbally  or  emotionally,  we  can  never  attain  to 
any  but  a  vague  conception  of  the  actual  psychical  processes 
which  they  are  undergoing.  If  they  are  reluctant  to  inform  us 
of  what  is  passing  within  their  consciousness,  we  must  remain 
practically  in  ignorance  of  it.  We  can  just  as  little  decipher  their 
thoughts  as  we  can  decipher  the  thoughts  of  animals.  As  psy- 
chiatrists, therefore,  we  must  be  as  chary  of  deduction  when  deal- 
ing with  abnormal  minds*  as  we  would  be  as  psychologists,  when 
dealing  with  animals. 

Seldom  can  an  insane  person  rationally  communicate  the  es- 
sential nature  of  his  disturbed  mental  processes,  and  still  more 
seldom  are  we  in  a  position  to  compare  such  a  patient's  mental 
picture  with  analogous  pictures  from  our  own  experience. 

We  must  therefore  realize  that,  from  a  strictly  scientific 
standpoint,  the  subjective  abnormal  mental  complexes,  called 
psychoses,  are  extremely  difficult  processes  to  interpret.  We 
know  of  them  very  little.  What  we  do  know  are  usually  accom- 
panying objective  phenomena,  which  apparently  play  no  essential 
role  in  the  psychoses;  but  which  are  added  to,  or  incorporated 
with  the  subjective  phenomena. 

Obviously  we  would  soon  clarify  the  whole  symptomatology 
of  psychiatry,  if  psychiatrists  themselves  were  in  the  position  to 
live  through  all  the  different  psychoses.  As  this  experience  is 
denied  us,  only  one  way  remains,  by  which  we  can  hope  to  reach 
more  light  in  our  science ;  namely,  by  administering  to  one  another 
such  substances  as  will  produce  in  us  transitory  psychoses. 

Kraepelin  was  the  first  investigator  to  endeavor,  by  means  of 
experimentally  induced  psychoses,  to  explore  the  way  to  the 
complicated  mental  phenomena  of  the  insane.  He  and  his  pupils 
established  exact  experimental  methods,  by  which  they  investi- 
gated the  action  of  tea,  alcohol,  morphine,  trional,  bromide  and 
other  drugs  upon  mental  processes.  Their  researches  have 
yielded  valuable  advances  in  psychopathology.  Unfortunately, 
the  substances,  which  Kraepelin  and  his  pupils  employed,  produce 
mental  states  which  have  little  similarity  to  actual  insanities.  In 
Kraepelin's  clinic  we  endeavored  further  to  extend  knowledge 
of  pathological  mental  states  by  producing  mental  conditions 
nearly  allied  to  generally  recognized  types  of  insanity,  in 
order  to  study  the  mechanism  of  processes  which  bore  a  close 


PSYCHIC  ACTION  OF  MESCALIN  4*7 

likeness  to  actual  mental  disease.     For  this  purpose  we  used  the 
Mexican  drag  pelotte — the  mescal  button. 

Prentiss  and  Morgan,  Weir  Mitchell  and  Eshner  had  de- 
scribed the  phenomena  induced  by  the  mescal  button,  Anhaloniutn 
Lewinii, — a  favorite  narcotic  among  Mexican  Indians,  and  dilet- 
tante drug  habitues.  Heffter  had  shown  that  the  active  principle 
of  the  drug  was  contained  in  the  alkaloid  mescalin.  We  admin- 
istered to  a  number  of  physicians  who  volunteered,  and  several 
times  to  each  of  ourselves,  the  sulphate  of  mescalin,  the  essen- 
tial principle  of  this  delusional  Mexican  drug.  We  made  alto- 
gether twenty-three  experiments.  The  drug  was  injected  into  the 
subcutaneous  tissue  of  the  forearm.  It  caused  an  intoxication 
of  a  curious  and  unique  nature,  which  markedly  developed  in 
about  an  hour. 

Consciousness,  during  this  intoxication,  remained  practically 
unclouded.  Its  extent  was,  however,  tremendously  limited,  in  a 
fashion  somewhat  similar  to  that  which  Vogt  has  described  as 
characteristic  of  consciousness  in  hypnosis.  In  mescalin  poison- 
ing, the  partial  and  systematized  consciousness  of  hypnosis  is  not 
absolutely  reproduced:  in  mescalin  poisoning,  attention  is  not  so 
restricted  as  in  hypnotic  conditions.  Although  attention  is  di- 
rected to  one  subject  at  a  time,  it  is  not  immured  in  that  one 
subject,  as  happens  in  hypnosis,  but  successively  passes  from  one 
subject  to  another.  Yet,  during  a  poisoning,  while  any  one  sub- 
ject is  under  consideration,  that  subject  occupies  conscious  atten- 
tion in  a  much  more  intense  and  exclusive  manner  than  normal. 

Mescalin  and  Alcohol. — The  mescalin  poisoning  has  also  cer- 
tain similarities  with  alcohol  intoxication,  inasmuch  as  it  produces 
a  feeling  of  increased  mental  capacity,  of  ease  in  mental  work. 
This  increase,  however,  is  not,  as  a  rule,  objectively  substantiated 
when  the  capacity  for  mental  work  is  tested,  although  the  dis- 
parity between  the  amount  of  mental  work  done  and  the  feeling  of 
increased  capacity  is  not  so  evident  as  is  usual  in  alcohol  poison- 
ing. Indeed,  in  some  of  the  investigated  persons,  there  was  not 
merely  a  feeling  of  increased  capacity,  but  actually  a  demon- 
strable objective  increase  in  the  capacity  for  a  simple  mental 
task,  such  as  reckoning.  An  increase  in  the  person's  capacity  for 
apperception  (auffassung)  also  was  usually  demonstrable ;  but,  as 
apperception  depends  in  part  upon  visual  acuity,  and,  as  visual 
acuity  is  incontrovertibly  enhanced  by  the  action  of  the  drug, 


4*»  A.  KNAUER  AND  IV.  J.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

this  increased  apperception  may  not  have  been  due  as  much  to 
increased  rapidity  of  the  mental  processes  as  to  increase  in  the 
visual  power. 

The  integrity  of  the  associative  and  apperceptive  faculties  is 
retained  in  mescalin  poisoning.  Hence  arose  one  of  the  features 
distinguishing  mescalin  from  alcoholic  intoxication :  viz.,  that  the 
investigated  person,  as  a  rule,  seemed  outwardly  little  affected, 
and  appeared  to  the  uninformed  not  to  be  under  the  influence  of 
a  powerful  intoxicant.  The  most  remarkable  feature  of  the 
intoxication  was  hallucinations.  Exceptionally,  auditory  hallu- 
cinations were  present.  Often  the  hallucinations  in  the  muscu- 
lar sense  sphere  were  quite  astonishing.  The  following  is  a  brief 
account  of  these  hallucinations  observed  in  one  of  the  earliest  ex- 
periments. Time,  two  and  a  half  hours  after  the  injection  of 
the  drug: — 

"When  standing,  I  could  not  walk  until  I  was  pushed,  and 
then  I  unsteadily,  stiffly,  shuffled  along,  certain  I  was  going  to  fall, 
but  improving  in  confidence  and  ease  of  walking  with  every  step. 
On  reaching  the  laboratory  felt  faint ;  could  not  remember  what 
mechanism  to  employ  to  get  from  the  upright  to  the  sitting  pos- 
ture; and  was  helped  to  lie  down  on  the  floor.  Shortly  after- 
wardi:,  to  my  great  surprise,  I  realized  that  I  had  no  head,  but  in 
its  place  a  sheet  of  ground  glass,  such  as  is  used  in  cameras  as  a 
screen.  Trying  to  touch  my  nose,  I,  with  my  eyes  open,  watch- 
ing my  hand,  felt  about  my  chest,  neck  and  face,  quite  unknowing 
where  I  would  find  it,  but  I  recognized  it  at  once  when  I  did 
touch  it.  Where  my  ear  was,  was  an  insoluble  mystery ;  I  could 
not  find  it  so  long  as  with  open  eyes  I  followed  and  controlled 
the  movements  of  my  searching  hand.  But,  with  my  eyes  shut, 
if  I  did  not  attempt  consciously  to  do  the  task,  or  to  think  of 
what  I  did,  my  hand  moved  accurately  to  the  desired  locality.  I 
was  quite  unconscious  of  the  position  of  any  part  of  my  body, 
so  long  as  it  was  still,  but  if  it  were  moved  for  me,  or  if  I  moved 
it  myself,  my  power  to  judge  its  position  immediately  a./oke. 
At  rest,  I  felt  I  had  no  thighs  or  legs,  only  tiny  ankles  and  feet 
attached  to  the  groin.  Yet,  on  being  tested,  on  being  required 
to  perform  a  fairly  complicated  movement,  I  did  it  almost  fault- 
lessly, and  during  the  movement,  although  the  limbs  appeared 
numb  and  heavy,  the  real  delusion  disappeared,  t.  e.,  I  was  no 


PSYCHIC  ACTION  OF  MESCAL1N  4*9 

longer  conscious  of  the  two  little  feet  in  any  way  existing  along- 
side of,  or  combined  with  the  sensation  of  my  moving  legs. 

Visual  Hallucinations. — Subjectively,  the  yisyal  sensibility  was 
tremendously  increased.  This  hyperesthesia  we  objectively  dem- 
onstrated for  color,  by  means  of  Marbe's  color  wheel.  The 
sharpness  of  contour  which  all  objects  seemed  to  have,  while  very 
apparent  subjectively,  we  failed  to  demonstrate  objectively. 

Soon  after  the  onset  of  the  visual  hyperesthesia,  to  nearly  all 
of  the  investigated  persons,  out  of  total  darkness,  kaleidoscopic 
pictures  appeared. 

The  following  excerpts  from  the  report  of  a  poisoning  will 
perhaps  suffice  to  convey  the  general  trend  of  the  visual  hallu- 
cinations.   Time,  four  hours  after  injection. 

"Immediately  before  my  open  eyes  are  a  vast  number  of 
rings,  apparently  made  of  extremely  fine  steel  wire,  all  constantly 
rotating  in  the  direction  of  the  hands  of  a  clock;  these  circles 
are  concentrically  arranged,  the  innermost  being  infinitely  small, 
almost  point  like,  the  outermost  being  about  a  meter  and  a  half 
in  diameter.  The  spaces  between  the  wires  seem  brighter  than 
the  wires  themselves.  Now  the  wires  shine  like  dim  silver  in 
parts.  Now  a  beautiful  light  violet  tint  has  developed  in  them. 
As  I  watch,  the  center  seems  to  recede  into  the  depth  of  the  room, 
leaving  the  periphery  stationary,  till  the  whole  assumes  the  form 
of  a  deep  funnel  of  wire  rings.  The  light,  which  was  irregularly 
distributed  among  the  circles,  has  receded  with  the  center  into 
the  apex  of  the  funnel.  The  center  is  gradually  returning,  and, 
passing  the  position  when  all  the  rings  are  in  the  same  vertical 
plane,  continues  to  advance,  till  a  cone  forms  with  its  apex  toward 
me.  (These  changes  in  position  of  the  vision  were  probably  due 
to  the  same  disturbance  as  caused  the  vomiting  associated  in  this 
case  with  the  poisoning.)  The  cone  apex  recedes,  the  inner  rings 
of  the  circle  rapidly  change  color;  beautiful  crimsons,  purples, 
violets,  blues  and  greens  quickly  succeed  one  another.  The  wires 
are  moving  sinuously  in  groups  from  below  upwards,  passing, 
crossing  and  recrossing  each  other,  and  curving  intricately,  so  as 
to  produce  rarely  balanced  figures,  such  as  are  seen  in  a  kaleido- 
scope. The  background  to  this  gorgeous  color  panorama  was 
first  like  faintly  illuminated  ground  glass ;  it  is  now  a  silvery  tint, 
and  is  deepening  into  a  yellow  like  pure  gold.  The  colors  and 
their  shades  vary  in  different  parts  of  the  field.     The  illumination 


43©  A.  KNAUER  AND  IV.  J.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

proceeds  from  a  light,  or  lights  moving  suddenly  from  place  to 
place  behind  the  background,  and  producing  wonderful  effects 
of  deep  shade  and  bright  light  contrast,  of  sudden  bursts  of  light, 
and  equally  sudden  extinctions. 

"On  pressing  upon  my  eyes,  the  whole  picture  seemed  to 
materialize;  the  wires  became  thicker,  and  much  more  brightly 
colored;  they  now  seemed  very  much  nearer,  more  solid,  more 
real  and  quite  distinct  from  the  background,  which  apparently 
remained  where  I  had  seen  it  previously;  soon  they  slowly 
receded. 

"All  this  occurred  within  a  circular  area  which  had  at  first 
been  bounded  by  the  outermost  of  the  concentric  wire  rings,  which 
after  all  the  other  rings  had  disappeared,  somehow  persisted, 
without  my  consciously  noticing  it. 

"  The  wires  are  now  flattening  into  bands  or  ribbons,  with  a 
suggestion  of  transverse  striation,  and  colored  a  gorgeous  ultra- 
marine blue,  which  passes  in  places  into  an  intense  sea  green. 
These  bands  move  rhythmically,  in  a  wavy  upward  direction,  sug- 
gesting a  slow  endless  procession  of  small  mosaics,  ascending  the 
wall  in  single  files.  The  whole  picture  has  suddenly  receded,  the 
center  much  more  than  the  sides,  and  now  in  a  moment,*  high 
above  me,  is  a  dome  of  the  most  beautiful  mosaics,  a  vision  of  all 
that  is  most  gorgeous  and  harmonious  in  color.  The  prevailing 
tint  is  blue,  but  the  multitude  of  shades,  each  of  such  wonderful 
individuality,  make  me  feel  that  hitherto  I  have  been  totally 
ignorant  of  what  the  word  color  really  means.  The  color  is 
intensely  beautiful,  rich,  deep,  deep,  deep,  wonderfully  deep  blue. 
It  is  like  the  blue  of  the  mosque  of  Omar  in  Jerusalem,  but  there 
is  here  no  trace  of  Arabic  script  on  the  mosaics.  The  dome  has 
absolutely  no  discernible  pattern.  But  circles  are  now  develop- 
ing upon  it ;  the  circles  are  becoming  sharp  and  elongated  at  the 
four  points  of  the  compass,  and  are  flattening  at  the  sides ;  now 
they  are  rhomboids;  now  oblongs;  and  now  all  sorts  of  curious 
angles  are  forming;  and  mathematical  figures  are  chasing  one 
another  wildly  across  the  roof.  The  colors  are  changing  rapidly 
— from  blue  green  to  black,  to  brown — passing  successively 
through  an  infinite  variety  of  transitional  shades.  ..." 

6  hours  later :  "  A  beautiful  palace,  filled  with  rare  tapestries, 
pictures,  and  Louis  Quinze  furniture  has  been  peacefully  unfold- 
ing itself,  room  after  room,  each  a  little  different  from  all  the 


PSYCHIC  ACTION  OF  MESCALIN  43* 

rest,  all  marvelously  bright  and  beautiful,  and  all  colored  in  the 
same  scheme — violet,  cream  and  gold. 

"In  these  rooms  ladies  appeared.  They  were  all  absolutely 
without  motion,  without  the  slightest  suggestion  of  reality ;  in  fact 
they  were  as  a  series  of  portraits,  or  of  statue  groups,  which  I  was 
observing  in  a  picture  gallery." 

Twenty  hours  later:  "Long,  light  green  outlines,  suggesting 
crocodiles,  lizards  and  other  reptiles  are  appearing,  but  they  are 
all  indistinct,  remote  and  unreal;  they  arouse  absolutely  no  sen- 
sation of  fear.  Gigantic  plaster  casts,  rough  and  unfinished, 
suggesting  death  masks ;  crude  representations  of  gargoyles,  such 
as  ornament  the  Notre  Dame  in  Paris;  grotesque  dolls;  hideous 
monstrosities  of  human  birth,  preserved  in  bottles;  visions  of 
human  intestines,  of  sections  of  abdomens,  and  sections  of  the 
pregnant  uterus,  have  been  annoying  me  all  night." 

It  was  characteristic  of  practically  all  the  poisonings  that  to 
wavy  lines  succeeded  mosaics ;  carpets ;  floral  designs ;  ornaments ; 
wood-carving;  windmills;  monuments;  mausoleums;  panoramic 
landscapes ;  statuesque  men  and  animals,  frequently  of  unnatural, 
doll-like  form;  and  finally  complete  scenes  which  changed  so  as 
to  unfold  episodes  in  a  connected  manner.  The  pictures  were 
mostly  plastic  in  form,  of  very  sharp  contour,  painfully  bright, 
and  colored  as  by  chalk.  The  pictures  were  usually,  but  not 
invariably,  rich  in  imaginative  content. 

The  vividness  of  these  hallucinations  varied  remarkably  in 
the  same  person  in  the  course  of  the  same  intoxication.  Some- 
times the  visions  were  dark,  contourless,  colorless  shadows;  at 
other  times  they  had  a  remarkably  sharp  contour.  Usually  they 
were  marvelously  colored,  and  not  rarely  their  brightness  seemed 
positively  to  pain  the  eyes.     Twice  definite  delusions  arose. 

Independence  of  the  Hallucination. — The  independence  of  the 
hallucinations  towards  thought  and  will  was  not  quite  absolute. 
Upon  intently  thinking,  or  intently  willing  to  see,  a  particular 
object,  no  immediate  result  occurred ;  the  hallucination  apparently 
continued  undisturbed  and  unchanged.  Yet  after  a  longer  or 
shorter  interval,  obtruding  itself  upon  the  panorama  of  the  hal- 
lucinations, came  another  hallucination,  one  which  was  directly 
related  with  the  particular  object  which  had  been  intently  willed. 
In  addition  to  its  delay  this  self-suggested  representation  was  not 
a  precise  reproduction,  but  merely  a  distorted  effigy  of  the  vision 


432  A.  KNAUER  AND  W.  /.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

which  was  desired.  Thus,  while  watching  a  panorama  of  a  dan- 
seuse  on  a  stage,  one  of  us  attempted  to  picture  a  shoe.  He 
repeated  to  himself  all  the  separate  parts  of  a  shoe,  and  en- 
deavored by  concentration  to  bring  up  an  hallucinatory  image  of 
a  shoe.  The  danseuse  continued  to  dance  undisturbed  for  some 
time,  and  then  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  there  appeared  a  gigan- 
tic misshapen  shoe,  seemingly  moulded  in  plaster,  and  colored 
green. 

Hence  these  hallucinations,  though  mainly  of  an  objective 
character,  were  partly,  and  remotely  under  the  influence  of  the 
will. 

The  Hallucinations  and  Visual  Images. — In  spite  of  the  vivid- 
ness of  the  hallucinations,  the  poisoned  person  possessed  visual 
images  of  daily  events,  just  as  is  normal  in  reverie.  Such  visual 
images  occurred  synchronously  with  and  separate  from  the  mes- 
calin  hallucinations,  from  which  they  differed  by  seeming  to  have 
no  independent  existence;  by  seeming  to  belong  to  the  person's 
own  thought,  and  to  be  a  part  of  his  own  personality.  The  visual 
images  had  a  personal  and  intimate  relation  to  the  investigated 
person,  which  was  altogether  absent  in  the  hallucinations.  The 
visual  images  could  be  controlled,  changed  and  recalled  as  in  nor- 
mal life,  but  not  with  quite  the  same  facility. 

The  hallucinations  always  seemed  to  be  something  arising  out- 
side of  and  independent  of  the  investigated  person.  The  hallu- 
cinations could  not  be  reproduced  at  will;  they  came  unsought, 
they  were  uncontrollable,  and  they  were  only  remotely  interfered 
with  by  the  will. 

As  the  hallucinations  and  the  visual  images  can  coexist,  as 
the  hallucinations  are  not  subject  to  the  will  and  the  visual  images 
are,  and  as  the  relation  of  the  hallucinations  to  the  personality  is 
fundamentally  different  from  the  relation  of  the  visual  images 
to  the  personality — a  mescalin  hallucination  must,  therefore, 
be  something  quite  distinct  from  a  mere  visual  image;  and  in 
mescalin  poisoning  a  visual  idea,  no  matter  how  vivid,  can  never 
merge  into  an  hallucination. 

The  poisoned  person  retained  all  his  critique;  he  recognized 
practically  always  that  the  hallucinations,  although  independent 
of  his  thought,  were  yet  much  less  objective  than  any  external 
object  with  real  existence.  Although  a  mescalin  hallucination  is 
felt  to  be  much  more  objective  than  a  mere  idea  such  as  a  visual 


PSYCHIC  ACTION  OF  MESCALIN  433 

image — with  but  few  exceptions,  in  our  twenty-three  experiments 
this  objective  character  was  never  so  intense  as  to  confer  upon  the 
hallucination  any  suspicion  of  real  existence. 

Points  of  Distinction  between  Mescalin  Hallucinations  and 
Peripheral  After-images. — Peripheral  after-images  could  be  re- 
produced by  the  usual  methods  alongside  the  hallucinations. 
These  peripheral  after-images  were  easily  distinguishable  from 
the  hallucinations.  They  at  first  alternated  with,  next  coexisted 
with,  and  then  merged  with  the  mescalin  hallucination.  These 
peripheral  after-images  always  had  a  totally  objective  character, 
and  they  were  much  more  material  and  real  than  the  most  vivid 
of  the  hallucinations  produced  by  the  mescaline.  Moreover,  by 
moving  the  eyes  laterally,  the  position  of  the  peripheral  after- 
images in  relation  to  the  hallucinations  could  be  made  to  change ; 
the  hallucinations  remained  stationary  in  space,  the  peripheral 
after-images  moved  with  the  eyes.  The  distance  of  the  peripheral 
after-image  from  the  eye  was  short,  and  varied  little;  whereas 
the  hallucinations  appeared  sometimes  as  far  as  a  stage  is  from 
a  person  in  the  auditorium ;  and  constantly  varied  in  remoteness, 
advancing  almost  up  to  the  person,  and  then  retreating  far  into 
the  darkness.  All  the  hallucinations  were  enacted  within  a  visual 
field,  which  was  as  a  cone  with  its  apex  towards  the  person,  so 
that  the  size  of  the  pictures  varied  only  with  their  distance  from 
the  observer ;  whereas,  the  after-images  were  not  enclosed  within 
any  such  well-defined  area,  but  were  limited  only  by  the  extent 
of  the  visual  field. 

Hallucinations  and  Central  After-images. — A  very  curious  re- 
lationship was  observed  between  central  after-images  and  mesca- 
lin hallucinations.  One  of  the  investigated  persons,  before  his 
intoxication  became  manifest,  carefully  studied  a  map  of  a  region 
known  to  him.  Among  his  first  hallucinations  was  a  reproduc- 
tion of  this  map,  in  its  most  minute  details ;  but,  in  addition  to  all 
the  details  of  the  map,  a  town  which  was  actually  omitted  in  the 
map  appeared  in  its  proper  position  in  his  hallucinatory  represen- 
tation of  the  map.  Here  was  an  example  of  a  central  after-image 
being  converted  into  an  hallucination,  but  into  an  hallucination 
which  corrected  and  amplified  the  original  object  which  had 
given  rise  to  the  central  after-image. 

Fate  of  the  After-images. — The  after-images  merged  ulti- 
mately with  the  hallucination.     This  phenomenon  was  very  re- 


434  A.  KNAUER  AND  W.  /.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

markable,  for  no  matter  how  distinct  and  how  dissimilar  the  hal- 
lucination and  the  after-image  originally  were,  their  ultimate 
fusion  produced  an  harmonious  hallucination.  Thus,  subcon- 
sciously, these  two  dissimilar  apparitions,  competing  with  each 
other  for  notice,  were  compounded  actively,  so  that  one  appari- 
tion alone  remained,  in  which  the  elements  of  the  hallucination 
and  of  the  after-image  could  be  detected. 

Our  experiences  seem  to  indicate  that  five  levels  may  be  dis- 
tinguished in  passing  from  purely  objective  imagery  to  purely 
objective  realization: 

First  level,  the  most  subjective.  The  visual  image,  the  visual 
idea. 

Second  level.  The  mescalin  hallucination,  more  fantastic, 
more  objective,  but  still  definitely  without  suggestion  of  material 
existence,  although  largely  independent  of  the  personality. 

Third  level.  The  central  after-image.  A  mechanical  copy  of 
an  objective  impression,  emerging  out  of  darkness,  without  spon- 
taneity. This  level  seems  to  be  just  above  that  of  the  mescalin 
hallucinations.  Indeed,  the  hallucinations  very  frequently  began 
with  a  display  of  central  after-images  of  the  wires  of  an  electrical 
apparatus  which  we  had  just  used,  and  only  gradually  acquired  an 
independent  character,  a  character  without  relation  to  the  person- 
ality as  regards  content. 

Fourth  level.  The  peripheral  after-image.  Totally  objective 
but  still  not  real. 

Fifth  level.    The  true  objective  reality. 

Some  idea  of  the  relation  of  these  levels  to  one  another  is  sug- 
gested in  the  following  diagram. 

..- 1.  Visual  Idea. 


2.  Mescalin  Hallucination. 

Critique^-  3.  Central  After-image. 


-4.  Peripheral  After-image. 
-5.  True  Objective  Reality. 


Diagram  of  Levels  in  the  Visual  Sphere. 

* 

There  exists  at  present  two  schools  of  thought  with  regard  to 
the  hallucinations  of  the  insane.    One  savs  that  hallucinations 


PSYCHIC  ACTION  OF  MESCALIN  435 

are  essentially  hallucinations,  whether  they  be  of  very  weak,  or 
of  very  strong  imaginative  force ;  the  other,  that  an  hallucination 
is  merely  a  much  exaggerated  visual  idea. 

We  wish  not  to  side  with  either  school,  but  merely  to  state 
our  personal  experiences  in  the  matter  of  these  poisonings.  All 
our  hallucinations,  no  matter  how  weak,  or  how  strong  their 
imaginative  force,  no  matter  how  feeble  their  development,  re- 
mained indubitable  hallucinations,  and  never  sank  to  be  merely 
ideas,  the  outcome  of  a  vivid  imagination. 

We  feel  that  this  part  of  our  work  has  only  served  to  show 
how  complex  is  the  question  of  hallucinations.  Whether  an 
idea  may  become  intensified  till  it  merge  into  an  hallucination  or 
not,  is  only  a  part  of  the  problem,  for  hallucinations  can  involve 
at  least  any  one  of  several  of  the  levels  which  by  the  action  of 
ttiescalin  we  have  been  able  to  distinguish. 

Definite  delusions  appeared  in  several  of  the  investigated  per- 
sons; had  for  these  persons  all  the  elements  of  reality;  were 
identical  with  mescalin  hallucinations;  and  owed  their  reality 
mainly  to  the  affection  of  the  critique. 

One  of  us  imagined  he  saw  crawling  on  the  wall  an  insect,  of 
whose  material  existence  he  was  so  convinced  that  he  proceeded 
to  slay  it;  he  then  discovered  that  the  object  was  nothing  more 
than  a  stationary  nail.  Another  hearing  the  pencil  scratching  on 
the  paper  on  which  one  of  us  was  recording  his  hallucinations, 
thought  it  was  a  dog  howling,  and  insisted  upon  the  creature  being 
quieted.  Thus  the  critique  sometimes  disappeared;  but  in  each 
of  these  examples,  there  was  some  external  stimulus — in  the  one 
case  the  nail,  and  in  the  other  the  scratching  of  the  pencil  on  the 
paper — which  was  wrongly  interpreted.  Whether  or  not  the 
existence  of  this  external  stimulus  was  a  determining  factor  in 
the  temporary  obscuring  of  the  critique  we  are  not  prepared  to 
say.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  visual  hallucination  materialized 
in  a  darkened  room — that  is,  under  circumstances  in  which  our 
critique  of  visual  impressions  normally  is  somewhat  uncertain. 

As  regards  the  auditory  delusion  we  may  remark  that,  as  only 
one  sound  can  be  heard  at  a  time,  whereas  visual  hallucinations 
can  be  perceived  together  with  ordinary  external  objects,  the 
auditory  critique  is  so  much  the  more  liable  to  disturbance  than 
the  visual. 

In  one   instance,   however,   the   hallucinations   of   muscular 


436  A.  KNAUER  AND  W.  J.  M.  A.  MALONEY 

sense  and  of  vision  were  replaced  by  definite  combined  delusions. 
In  this  person  the  feeling  arose  that  the  body  was  cut  in  halves 
transversely  at  the  waist.  Presently  he  saw  the  lower  half  of  his 
body  before  him,  and  somewhat  to  the  right  side.  He  became 
very  excited  about  it,  and  found  that  when  he  moved,  the  sepa- 
rated part  of  the  body  moved  with  him.  He  danced  vigorously  in 
an  effort  to  restore  his  former  integrity.  In  this  person  also  other 
visual  delusions  occurred.  Thus,  he  saw  a  French  soldier  and 
had  to  be  forcedly  restrained  from  attacking  his  delusion. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  we  found  no  indication  of  the  funda- 
mental importance  of  sexual  experience  in  the  content  of  our 
artificial  hallucinations  and  delusions,  even  when  special  means 
were  taken  to  elicit  it. 

In  addition  to  these  actions,  mescalin  produced  a  most  re- 
markable effect  upon  the  appreciation  of  time.  Persons  under 
the  influence  of  mescalin  enormously  overestimated  time  periods. 
Seconds  seemed  minutes ;  minutes  seemed  hours.  One  of  the 
investigated  persons,  who  had  been  left  half  an  hour  in  the  dark, 
thought  he  had  lived  through  the  whole  night  in  this  time.  We 
investigated  this  phenomenon  experimentally,  and  found  that  the 
overestimation  although  largely  subjective  was  still  demonstrable 
objectively.  The  results  of  these  investigations,  together  with 
the  details  of  our  measurement  of  the  power  of  perception,  the 
power  of  reckoning,  the  power  to  distinguish,  the  memory,  the 
simple  motor  reactions,  the  weight  sense,  fixed  and  free  word  as- 
