wx 


EX   LIBRIS 


s^\jsr  CARLOS  1769 


ROBERT  ERNEST  COWAN 


5  2  f  T      -9 


CO 

en 


-71  I  ' 


^^  r  *-  *  #  *  *  *  *  •*•  *•  *  •*  ■*  •*•  ^^ 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


£^-4^3  "^^  Ru^ian  la?tguage  in  which  the  Ori~ 
*\  T  \%  g^^^^  (if  ^^^^  Jo^^o'^ifig  J^Jeets  was  written, 
Sv/  ^£  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  tcnpoliped :  other  nations 
hLc^«i*'^ji  have  with  great  care  improved  and  re- 
fined their  languages  by  giving  proper  encourage- 
ment to  ?nen  of  learning  and  genius,  but  in  that 
country  literature  has,  on  the  contrary^  been  ^till  very 
lately  rather  difcouraged* 

Great  indulgence  Jhould,  therefore^  be  allowed  the 
Author  of  this  work  :  for  though  his  ntanner  is  indi- 
gejied,  a?id  his  flile  i7ielega?it,  abou7idi7ig  in  digrejftons, 
and  fome  uni7tterefling  narrations,  which  ohfcure  a7id 
confufe  the  more  ejfe72tial  paffages  ;  yet  he  has  cojnmu- 

A  2  nicated 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

?iicat&d  many  very  t/feful  remarks^  greatly  contributing 
th  the  i'mprO'Vement  of  the  trade,  geography ^  and  na- 
tural hijlory,  of  the  country  he  defcribes. 

In  order  to  render  this  piece  more  regular  and 
perfeSly  it  "joould  have  been  necejfary  to  new  model  the 
ivhole ;  but  the  gentleman,  who  undertook  this  Tranf- 
lation  only  for  his  amu/e?nent,  was  frequently  inter" 
rupted  in  the  courfe  of  the  work  by  the  necejfary  duty 
of  his  profejfion,  and  preve7ited  from  revifng  it  before 
it  went  to  the  prefs  by  his  fudden  departure  for  Pe- 
ter sbourg.  Having  been  many  years  abfeni  from 
England,  and  accufio?fied  to  write  a?2d  fpeak  in  fever  al 
differe2it  languages,  he  of  courfe  adopted  their  idioms, 
a?id,  confequently,  corrupted  the  phrafeology  of  his 
own.  Thus  much  it  is  thought  necejfary  to  fay  in 
juflice  to  the  Tranjlator :  a?id  it  muft  be  confejfed  he 
has  great  merit  with  his  couittrymen ;  as  it  is  entirely 
owi?ig  to  his  labours,  hafly  and  ijnperfeEl  as  they  may 
feem,  that  we  have  any  knowledge  of  this  remote,  un- 
known, and  very  extraordinary  country,  fince  fo  few, 
and  it  may  be  faid,  fcarce  any  EngliOiman  is  able  to 
Yead  the  Original. 

Ibis 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

Ihis  work  is  divided  into  four  parts.  The  JirJ}, 
which  is  entirely  Geographical^  and  in  the  Original 
makes  eleven  chapters^  is  here  abridged^  and  reduced 
to  four ^  as  the  Author  had  fiiinutely  defer ibed  a  great 
7iumber  of  hills  a?td  rivers  which  did  not  ferve  to 
illuflrate  the  fubjeSi,  But  it  is  hoped  that  nothing  is 
omitted  which  may  a?ifwer  that  end^  or  which  might  in 
any  way  entertain  the  reader^  or  help  to  af certain  the 
ftuationsj  meafures^  diflances^  a?td  boundaries. 

1hefeco72d  part  contains  the  Natural  Hiflory.  7 his 
part  has  alfo  been  greatly  contrasted^  frotn  the  defgn 
of  offering  to  the  reader  nothing  but  what  was  really 
tfeful,  curious^  or  e?itertai7iing  \  and  iii  order  to  make 
it  completely  i?i/lruBive^  many  notes  have  been  adjoined^ 
to  explain  fome  articles^  or  reconcile  them  with  the 
accoimts  of  former  voyagers. 

The  third  part  of  this  work  has  been  mofl  conjl- 

derably  abridged,  as  i?t  treating  of  the  manners,  cufloms, 

and    religion  of    this  barbarous  nation,    it  was  loaded 

•with  abfurd  praSiices,  idle  ceremonies,  and  unaccountable 

fuperflitions.     Sufficient  examples  of  all  thefe  have  been 

retained 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

retained  toJJjew  the  precife  Jiate  of  an  unpoUJhed^  cre- 
dulous^ and  grojly  ignorant  people. 

'The  jourth  contains  the  jirjl  difcovery^  conquejl^  and 
planting  of  Ruflian  colonies  in  the  country  of  Kamtf- 
chatka.  This  part  is  divided  into  eight  chapters^  giving 
arelatio7t  of  fever  al  expeditions  bothbyfea  and  land  ?nade 
into  that  cownry.  It  is  alfo  interfperfed  with  a  great 
many  ufeful  remarks  relative  to  the  geography.^  natural 
hijlory^  cujlomsy  manners^  and  civil  and  military  policy^ 
of  the  country.  It  likewife  gives  a  particular  account  of 
the  forts  built  there  by  //5tf  Ruffians,  as  well  for  the  pro- 
teSiion  of  their  ftttkmtnts^  as  to  hep  the  natives  in 
awe. 


fli  jfc  A      oSa      »-  *  S 


#% 


THE 


ERR 


A. 


For  Frufticofa 

Chcereoptrylum 

Autoris. 

Caudacuta 

Self-murd 

Dood.    Append.    326,    Ray 

Linn. 
Pentaphylladis  frufticofus, 
Chamaenchododendros 
Anemonides 


Page  88,  Annot.  : 

read  Fruticofa 

89, 

Choerophyllum 

141, 

Autorum  ? 

159,  Linezg, 

Cauda  acuta 

176,          z6, 

Self-murder 

y               Anitet. 

Doodij  Raij    Syn.  II.   / 

192, 

pend.  329 

219,  Line    i. 

Pentaphylloides  fruticofa 

219,           18, 

Chamcerododendron 

220,           IS, 

Anemonoides 

Ap- 


/ 


THE 


RUSSIAN    editor's 


PREPACK 


^^)8()^^)^^  H  E  R  E  is  perhaps  hardly  any  know- 
)J(  pj^^KM  ^  ledge  more  pleafing  than  that  which 
)5(  ^^2£-  y^  arifes  from  accurate  accounts  of  the 
£3)0()^^53  variety  of  diftindlions  and  diWfions  di- 
verfifying  the  face  of  the  habitable  globe, 
were  we  only  to  regard  it  fo  far  as  it  gratifies  our 
curiofity ;  but  more  noble  purpofes  may  be  ftill  ef- 
fefted  by  fuch  informations.  All  who  are  employed 
in  the  management  and  fuperintendency  of  ftates  and 
nations  ought  certainly  to  have  an  exa<^  knowledge 

B  of 


ii        THE  RUSSIAN  EDITOR'S 

of  thofe  countries  over  which  they  prefide,  efpecially 
with  regard  to  their  foil  and  climate ;  what  parts  are 
proper  for  agriculture,   or  for  pafture,    and  what  are 
defert;   what  rivers  are  navigable,  or  may  be  rendered 
fo;   what  communication  there  is  already,   or  may  be, 
made,    between    them  ;    what    beafts,    birds,    fifhes, 
herbs,  fruit-trees,  and  fhrubs   are  found  therein,  and 
of  what  ufe  they  can  be  either  in  diet,    medicine, 
dying,   building,   or  any  other  part  of  oeconomy ;   the 
inhabited  and   uninhabited  parts,     cities,    forts,    ha- 
vens,   mines,   traffic,   and   manufadures ;    the  parti- 
cular commodities  proper  for  home  confumption,  or 
for  exportation  ;   their  imports  from  other  countries ; 
the  fituation  and  diflances  of  places ;  their  curiofities, 
whether  natural  or  artificial ;   the  condition  of  the 
public  roads :    they  fhould    likewife    be    acquainted 
with  the  cuftoms  and  manners   of  the  inhabitants, 
their  number  and  language,  religion,  antiquity,  and 
fettlement;    and  alfo  with  the  circumftances  of  the 
nations  bordering  upon  them.      All  which  knowledge 
may  not  only  be  ferviceable  to  the  people  themfelves, 
but  likewife  to  neighbouring   nations  that  are  con- 
neded    with    them,    either  by    trade   or   otherwife. 
The  natural  curiofity  of  man  is  not  even  fatisfied  with 
this :    we   frequently  give  ourfelves  a   great  deal  of 
trouble  in  fearch  of  things  that  have  no  relation  to 
us,  efpecially  if  we  have  hitherto  learned  nothing, 
or  at  leaft  nothing  circumflantial  and  certain  con- 
cerning 


PREFACE. 


Ill 


cerning  them.  For  thefe  reafons  I  hope  readers  of  every 
denomination  will  favourably  receive  this  defcription 
oi Kamtfchatka,  defigned  both  for  ufe  and  entertain- 
ment. The  author,  if  death  had  not  prevented  him, 
would  himfelf  have  explained  the  occafion  that  gave 
him  an  opportunity  of  being  informed  of  all  thefe 
particulars ;  and,  as  fuch  an  account  may  be  ex- 
peded,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  do  it  for  him  in  as  iQ\Y 
words  as  poilible. 

In  the  year  1733,  her  Imperial  Majefty  An?ie  or- 
dered an  expedition  on  foot  to  examine  the  coaft  of 
the  Northern  or  Frozen  Ocean,  likewife  that  to  the 
Eaft  about  Ka?nt/chaika^  and  from  thence  to  Afnerica 
and  yapa?t ;  and  alfo  at  the  fame  time  to  make  out 
a  defcription  of  Siberia,  and  particularly  of  Kamtf- 
chatka;  to  obferve  the  fituation  of  the  places,  their 
natural  hiftory  and  inhabitants,  and  whatever  elfe 
might  be  neceflary  to  a  full  knowledge  of  thofe  peo- 
ple. To  this  end  three  profeilbrs  of  the  Imperial 
Academy  of  Sciences  were  fent  along  with  the  fea- 
officers.  Thefe  three  gentlemen  divided  the  task 
araonft  them;  one  undertook  to  make  the  aftrono- 
mical  and  phyfical  obfervations ;  the  fecond  to  remark 
whatever  regarded  natural  hiftory ;  the  third  to  draw 
up  a  defcription  of  the  people  and  country.  To 
thefe  members  of  the  academy  feveral  other  proper 
affiftaats  were  added  :  thefe  were  fix  Riijftan  ftudents, 
who  had  an  opportunity  to  improve  themfelves  while 

B  2  they 


iv       THE    RUSSIAN   EDIfOR's 

they    were  aflifling  the   profcflors,    and   in   time  !^ 
quahfied  to  fill    up    their  vacancies.       The    author, 
Stephen  Krapeninkoff,   one   of  the  above-mentioned 
fix,  was  born  in  Mofcoii\  and  had  his  firfl:  education 
in  the  Latin  fchool  of  the  convent  of  our  Lord,  where 
he  learned  the  principles  of  rhetoric  and  philofophy, 
and  excelled  mofl  of  his  fchool- fellows,  both  in  capa- 
city and  application  to  his  ftudies.      Though  he  was 
principally  employed  in  the  ftudy  of  natural  philofo- 
phy, yet  he  fliewed  fuch   inclination  to  geography 
and  civil  hifiory,  that  in  the  Year  1735  he  was  em- 
ployed in  thefe  different  enquiries  at  fuch  places  as  the 
profeffors  themfelves  did  not  vifit.     Li  the  year  1736 
the   members  of   the   academy,    being  at   Takutskiy 
were  informed,  that  the  fea-ofiicers  had  made  but  a 
fmall   progrefs   in  their   difcoveries,    and   that   they 
would  not  be  able  to  reach    Kamtfchatka  in  feveral 
years  ;    the  profeffors  therefore  having  many  ufeful 
obfervations   to  make    '\^  Siberia^  thought  proper  to 
fend  before  them  a  perfon,   on  whom  they  could  de- 
pend,  to  prepare  for  their  reception  at  Kaj7itfchatka, 
To  this  truft  Mr.  Krajheninkoff  was  appointed,  and 
at  the  fame  time  was  furnifhed  with  proper  inflrudions 
and  diredlions.  Some  accidents  prevented  the  profeffors 
from  arriving  at  Kajntjchatha^  excepting  the  profeflbr 
of  aftronomy  ;   the  others  were  ordered  by  the  fcnate 
to  return   to  St.  Petersbourg^  and  in   their   way   to 
make  further  obfervations  in  Siberia.     Thus  all  en- 
quiries 


PREFACE.  V 

quires  into  the  Hate  of  Kamtfchatka  remained  to  be 
made  entirely  by  Mr.  Krapeninicoff.  The  profcffors 
furnidied  him  with  fuch  afTiftances  as  they  themfelves 
had,  by  order  of  the  fenate.  He  travelled  from  one 
end  of  Kamtfchatka  to  the  other,  accompanied  by  a 
guard  and  proper  interpreters,  being  allowed  to  ex- 
amine all  the  writings  in  the  different  forts  and  offices. 
The  profeffors  alfo,  in  the  frequent  accounts  received 
from  him,  found  that  his  obfervations  in  natural  hiflory 
and  phylics  were  juft;  and  in  any  difficulties  affiled 
him  with  their  advice  by  letters. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences, fenfible  of  the  importance  of  purfuing  their 
refcarches  into  the  regions  o^  Siberia^  thought  proper 
to  fend  thither,  in  the  year  1738,  one  of  their  ad- 
jundls,  George  William  Steller^  who  met  the  pro- 
feflbrs  the  following  year  in  their  return  at  Tenejeisky. 
This  learned  and  curious  gentleman  had  a  great  in- 
clination to  go  to  Kamtfchatka  by  water.  His  defire 
was  complied  with  ;  and  the  fame  inftrudions  were 
given  to  him  that  were  given  to  Mr.  Krafje?ji?2icoff. 
They  fent  likewife  along  with  him  a  painter,  to  de- 
lineate whatever  might  be  found  curious  in  natural 
hirtory.  They  continued  together  at  Katntfchatka 
'till  the  year  1 740,  at  which  time  Mr.  Steller  em- 
barked in  the  voyage  that  was  made  in  order  to  dif- 
cover  the  coaft  of  America  ;  and  Mr.  Krafljeninicoff 
was  fent  to  Takutski^  which  as  foon  as  the  profeffors 

were 


vi      THE    RUSSIAN    EDITOR'S 

were  informed  of,  they  ordered  him  to  join  them, 
and  return  with  them  to  Petersbourg  in  the  year 
1743.  Mr.  Steller^  in  his  return  from  Siberia^  died 
of  a  fever  the  i  2th  of  November,  1745,  in  the  town 
of  Toume?!. 

When  Mr.  Krajheninkoff  had  given  the  Academy  of 
Sciences  a  full  report  of  all  his  obfervations  at  Kamtf- 
chatka^  and  had  likewife  received  all  Mr.  S tellers 
papers,  it  was  thought  proper  to  join  thefe  two  works, 
and  to  commit  their  compilement  to  the  perfon  who 
had  the  greateft  fhare  in  the  merit  of  the  difcovery. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  following  defcription  of 
Kdmtfchatka  ;  a  country  never  yet  defcribed  by  any 
author  of  credit,  and  where  the  manners  and  cuftoms 
of  the  inhabitants  are  beyond  meafure  fingular  and 
uncommon.  It  is  to  be  wiflied  that  fuch  writers  as 
have  hitherto  given  us  accounts  of  ncw-difcovered 
countries  had  taken  the  fame  pains  to  inform  them- 
felves  that  this  writer  hath.  The  author  was  ad- 
vanced in  the  year  1745  to  be  an  adjunct  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  and  in  the  year  1750  was  made 
profeflor  of  botany  and  natural  hiflory.  He  died  in 
the  4  2d  year  of  his  age,  when  the  laft  fheets  of  his 
book  were  printing  off;  and  was  one  of  thofe  few 
whom  perfonal  merit  alone,  and  no  advantages  of 
birth  or  fortune,  contributed  to  raife. 

For  the  better  underftanding  of  the  geographical 
defcriptions,  it  was  thought  proper  to  add  two  maps 

of 


PREFACE.  vii 

of  Kamtfchatka  ^nd  the  neighbouring  countries,  be- 
tween which  and  other  maps  of  thofe  countries,  even 
fuch  as  the  academy  itfelf  hath  formerly  pubhfhed, 
the  curious  reader  may  obferve  a  great  difference. 
But  the  author  afferts  that  every  thing  is  laid  down 
from  the  ftrideft  inquiry,  and  had  purpofed  to 
fupport  the  authenticity  of  his  maps,  by  publifliing 
fuch  memoirs  as  would  prove  their  accuracy  beyond 
difpute. 


A  GENERAL 


,■1 


A    GEOGRAPHICAL    DESCRIPTION      OF 


KAMTSCHATKA, 


AND      OF     THE 


COASTS  and   ISLANDS    adjacent  to  it. 


«««**ift«ifr4»«*««-««««»«*«!e!»*«**)t***ife*ft***s-««****.««***«* 


PART       I. 

CHAP.     I. 
Of     KAMTSCHATKA. 

>8(H^'#'?/)^  HOUGH  the  country  called  Kamtfchatka  was  long 
^  ^    known  to  the  geographers  of  former  times,    yet  io 

w.  ^    little  were  they  acquainted  with  its  fituation,  that 

5e()i^_#  )j\)e(     they  believed  it  to  be  joined   to  Tcjfo  ;  and  this  opi- 
nion was  looked  upon  in  thofe  days  as  a  very  probable 
conjedture  :    but  it  has  been  fince  found  that  between  the  two 
countries  there  is  a  large  fea,  interfperfed  with  many  illands.     The 

C  RuJJiatis 


10         A   Geographical    Description  of 

Rujians  could  form  their  maps  of  Kamtfchatka  only  from  con- 
jedure  'till  it  was  brought  under  their  fubjedlion ;  and  then  they 
could  not  immediately  procure  any  accurate  or  fatisfadlory  know- 
ledge of  the  country,  for  want  of  perfons  properly  quahfied  to 
make  the  necefl'ary  enquiries. 

The  two  late  expeditions  have  greatly  contributed  to  complete 
the  geography  of  thefe  parts  ;  particularly  the  laft,  in  which  the 
fea-officers  delineated  exadly  all  the  eaftern  coaft  of  Kamtfchatka 
as  far  as  the  cape  of  Tchiikotfkoi^  all  the  weftern  to  the  PenJ'chinJka 
gulph,  and  from  Ochotjkoy  to  the  river  Amur  :  they  defcribed 
the  iflands  lying  between  "Japan  and  Kamtfchatka,  and  alfo  thofe 
which  are  between  Kamtfchatka  and  America.  At  the  fame 
time  the  gentlemen  of  the  Academy  undertook  to  determine  the 
lituation  of  Kamtfchatka  by  aftronomical  obfervations,  and  to 
remark  every  thing  worthy  of  notice  in  the  civil  and  natural 
hiftory  of  the  country  and  places  adjacent.  In  this  chapter  I 
fliall  only  treat  of  the  geography  of  this  country. 

That  great  peninfula,  which  makes  the  boundary  of  Afia  to 
tlie  north-eaft,  and  ftretches  itfelf  from  north  to  fouth  about 
7°  30',  is  called  Kamtfchatka.  I  place  the  beginning  of  this 
peninfula  at  the  rivers  Fuflala,  and  Anapho,  lying  in  the  latitude 
of  59°  30'.  The  firft  runs  into  the  Penfchinfka  fea,  and  the 
other  to  the  eaflward.  At  thefe  places  the  ifthmus  is  fo  narrow, 
that  1  am  credibly  informed  the  fea  may  in  fair  weather  be  iztn 
on  both  fides  from  the  hills  in  the  middle.  As  the  country  runs 
broader  towards  the  north,  I  reckon  this  place  the  ifthmus  that 
joins  the  peninfula  to  the  main  land.  The  government  of  Kamtf- 
chatka extends  no  farther  than  to  this  place  j  and  all  the  country 
north  of  this  boundary  is  called  ZenoJJe,  and  is  under  the  go- 
vernment of  Anadir. 

The  fouthern  part  of  this  peninfula,  which  is  called  Lopatka, 
lies  in  51°  3'  north  latitude.  The  difference  of  longitude  from 
Feterjlourg  \%  by  the  beft  obfervations  found  to  be  at   Ochotfkoy. 


J 


KAMTSCHATKA. 


11 


1 12°  53'  eafl  longitude,  and  thence  to  Bolfcheretjkoi  or  the  Great 
River  14"  6'  eafl:.  The  figure  of  the  peninfula  of  Kamtfcbatka  is 
fomewhat  elliptical,  being  broader  towards  the  middle,  and 
growing  narrower  towards  both  ends.  Its  broaded  place  rs 
between  the  mouth  of  the  river  Teghil  and  the  river  Kamtfcbatka, 
Towards  ihe  fource  they  are  joined  by  the  river  Elouki. 

The  Elouki  runs  in  the  fame  latitude  with  thofe  rivers  for 
415  verfts.  They  call  the  fea  which  feparates  Kamtfcbatka 
from  America  the  Eaftern  Ocean.  On  the  weflern  fide  lies  the 
Pe?ifchin/ka  fea,  which  begins  near  the  fouthern  point  of  the  cape 
of  Kamtfcbatka  and  the  Kurilfki  iflands,  and  runs  northward 
between  the  weflern  coaft  of  Kamtfcbatka  and  the  coafl  of 
Ochotfkoy  more  than  1000  verfts.  The  northern  part  is  called  the 
bay  oi Penjchinjka  from  the  river  Tenfcbina  which  falls  into  it.  The 
hills  make  one  continued  ridge  from  north  to  fouth  through  the 
peninfula,  almoft  equally  dividing  the  country.  From  this  ridge 
feveral  others  extend  towards  the  fea,  between  which  are  the 
courfes  of  the  rivers.  Thefe  ridges  fometimes  run  a  confiderable 
way  into  the  fea,  and  are  called  Nofs,  or  capes.  There  are  more 
of  thefe  upon  the  eaftern  than  the  weflern  coafl.  All  the  bays 
between  the  capes  are  called,  in  general,  feas ;  each  having  its 
particular  name,  as  the  Olutorfky  fea,  Kamtfcbatka  fea,  Gff .  We 
fliall  hereafter  give  our  reafons  for  calling  the  whole  peninfula  by 
the  name  of  Kamtfcbatka,  though  in  fadt  it  hath  in  none  of  the 
different  languages  of  the  inhabitants  any  general  appellation  j  but 
every  part  of  the  country  receives  its  name  from  its  inhabitants, 
or  fomething  remarkable  obferved  in  it :  and  even  the  Rujiajt 
Cofiacks  underfland  Kamtjcbatka  to  be  only  the  country  lying 
near  the  river  of  that  name  j  and  to  the  other  parts  of  this  penin- 
fula they  have  given  the  following  appellations  : 

Kurilfki  Country  is    the  fouthern  part,   io  named  from  the 
Kuriles  that  inhabit  it. 

C2  The 


12         A  Geographical   Description   of 

The  Coaji  extends  from  the  Bolfcheretjkoi  or  Great  River  to. 
the  Teghil. 

Awatfcha  extends  from  the  Bolfcheretjkoi  to  fort  Awatfcha. 

Bobrovoi  or  Beaver  Sea  is  the  diftridl  round  Kamtfchatka. 

Koreka,  from  the  Koreki  that  inhabit  it,  extends  from  the 
north  of  the  Kamtfchatka  to  the  Teghil. 

Ukoi  is  the  eaftern  coaft  from  the  river  Vkoi. 

Teghil  is  the  weftern  coaft  from  the  river  Teghil. 

Kamtfchatka  is  plentifully  furniflied  with  rivers ;  however  they, 
are  fo  little  that  none  of  them  are  navigable  by  the  fmalleft  vefTels, 
except  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  which  will  carry  fmall  veffels  200 
verfts  upwards  from  its  mouth.  Into  this  river  it  is  reported  that 
fome  Rif/ians  were  brought  by  fea,  long  before  its  fubjedtion  to 
Ru/Jia.  It  is  at  prefent  called  TheodotoJJAne^  from  the  chief  of 
thofe  people  thrown  a-fliore,  whofe  name  was  Theodot,  Next  to 
this,  the  mofl:  confiderable  rivers  are,  the  Boljchaia-reka,  or  Great 
River,  Awatfcha  and  Teghil ;  upon  which  the  Ruffians  have  fet- 
tlements.  Kamtfchatka  is  likewife  very  vt^ell  furnifhed  with  lakes, 
particularly  about  the  river  of  that  name,  where  they  are  fo  nu- 
merous that  there  is  no  paffage  over  land  in  the  fummer-time. 
Some  of  them  are  very  large  :  the  moft  confiderable  are,  the  lake 
of  Nerpitche,  which  is  near  tlie  mouth  of  the  Kamtfchatka ;  the 
Kronotzkoy,  out  of  which  runs  the  river  Krodakighe  ;  and  the 
Kuriljkoy,  out  of  which  runs  the  river  Oferfioi. 

The  river  Kamtfchatka  rifes  in  a  marfhy  ground,  and  firft  runs 
north-eaft ;  then  inclines  more  to  the  eaft,  and  turning  at  once 
towards  the  fouth-weft,  falls  into  the  ocean  in  56°  30'  north 
latitude.  From  its  fource  to  its  mouth,  in  a  ftrait  line,  is  49,6 
verfts ;  but  the  length  of  its  courfe,  according  to  the  exafteft 
computation,  is  about  525  verfts;  during  which  it  receives  into 
it  many  brooks  and  rivers.  About  two  verfts  from  its  mouth, 
upon  the  right  fide,  are  three  deep  bays.  There  are  feveral  forts 
built  along  the  banks  of  this  river  by  the  Rufjian  Coflacks,  to 

awe 


KAMTSCHATKA.  13 

awe  and  keep  in  fubjeftion  the  wild  inhabitants.  The  Elouki 
may  be  reckoned  the  chief  of  all  the  rivers  that  fall  into  the 
Kamtfchatka  on  the  left  fide,  and  its  head  meets  that  of  the 
"Teghil. 

The  Tegbil  rnns  almoft  in  the  fame  latitude  with  the  Katntf- 
chatka  ;  and  the  ftrait  road  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  by  the 
river  Elouki.  Some  little  forts  and  fettlements  of  the  natives  arc 
fcattered  here  and  there  upon  its  banks. 

The  Boljchaia-reka,  or  Great  River,  called  by  the  natives 
KeekJ]:a,  runs  out  of  a  lake  185  verfts  to  the  eaft  from  its  mouth, 
and  falls  into  the  Penfchinjka  fea  in  the  latitude  of  52°  45'.  Its 
mouth  is  reckoned  to  be  ^^^  verfts  to  the  fouth  diftant  from  that 
of  the  Teghil.  It  is  called  Great  upon  this  account,  that  of  all 
tlie  rivers  that  fall  into  the  Fenjchinjka  fea  this  is  the  only  one 
which  they  can  navigate  from  its  mouth  nearly  to  its  fprin^, 
and  this  not  without  feme  difficulty,  on  account  of  its  rapidity 
and  the  great  number  of  iflands.  At  the  time  of  high  water  it  is 
fo  deep  at  the  mouth  that  large  veffels  may  enter  ;  for  the  water 
has  been  obferved  to  rife  at  full  and  new  moon  very  little  lefs  than 
nine  Fans  feet  or  four  RuJJian  yards.  It  receives  a  multitude  of 
rivulets ;  the  moft  confiderable  of  which  is  the  Bifiroy  or  Rapid 
River,  fo  called  from  the  fwiftnefs  of  its  ftream,  caul'ed  by  the 
many  fhoals  and  catarads.  You  may  go  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Great  River  to  that  of  the  Bifiroy,  and  up  within  40  verfls  of  its 
head  j  and  from  thence  over  a  carrying  place  to  the  river  KamtJ- 
chatka,  that  fprings  out  of  the  fame  marfli,  and  runs  quite  to  the 
Eaflern  Ocean.  And  though  this  pafTage  muft  be  laborious  and 
tedious,  upon  account  of  the  rapidity  of  the  river,  and  the  many 
fhoals  and  cataradls,  where  every  thing  muff  be  carried  by  land, 
and  which  would  render  it  impoffible  to  advance  more  than  lo 
verfls  in  a  day  (as  I  found  in  my  way  to  Kamtfchatka  in  the 
year  1739,  when  the  boats  were  carried  over  the  marfh,  about 
two  verfls  from  the  head  of  the  Rapid,  to  Kamtjchatka)  ;  yet, 

coiifidering . 


14         ^  Geographical   Description  of 

confidering  that  all  forts  of  carriages  in  the  fummer  are  worked 
from  one  fettlement  to  another  by  men,  the  faid  pitffage  by  water 
would  be  a  great  help  to  the  people  of  this  country  who  are 
obliged  to  carry  flores  and  baggage  for  the  government :  for, 
inft<fad  of  employing  lo  or  15  men  about  a  carriage  of  20  pood, 
the  fame  would  be  performed  with  lefs  trouble  in  a  fmall  boat  by 
two ;  and  to  encreafe  the  facility  of  commerce,  there  would  at 
all  times  be  a  free  road,  which  is  the  cafe  now  only  in  winter. 

It  may  be  hoped,  however,  that  even  without  fuch  a  road  this 
difficulty  will  be  removed,  when  the  new  colony  fettled  there  fhall 
have  a  fufficient  number  of  horfes  for  drawing  thofe  carriages. 
From  the  Bolfcheretjkoi  to  the  upper  fori  you  may  travel  in  carts 
drawn  by  horfes ;  but,  in  fummer,  this  is  practicable  in  no  other 
part  of  the  country  by  reafon  of  frequent  obftrudlions  from  rivers, 
marfhes,  lakes,  and  high  mountains. 

The  Baranew  rivulet  is  particularly  remarkable  for  the  num- 
ber of  boiling  fprings  which  are  found  near  it.  It  falls  into  the 
KeekJJoa,  on  the  fouth-eaft  fide,  44  verfts  from  Bolfcheretfkoi ; 
and  upon  the  mouth  of  it  flands  the  lettlement  Kalickin,  or 
Opachin,  which  is  about  70  verfts  diflant  from  the  boiling 
Iprings. 

Th.t  x'wtK  Awatfcha  rifes  from  under  a  mountain  about  150 
verfls  from  its  mouth,  and  runs  from  weft  to  eaft  'till  it  falls 
into  the  bay  of  St.  Feter  and  St.  Paid  in  the  Eaftcrn  Ocean,  al- 
moft  in  the  fame  latitude  with  the  Kcekflm.  This  river  is  very 
near  as  large  as  the  laft,  and  of  more  utility. 

The  bay  of  St.  Teter  and  St.  Paul^  or  Aivachinlkaya  bay,  is 
14  verfts  in  length,  and  as  many  in  breadth,  of  a  circular  form, 
and  furrounded  on  all  fides  by  high  rocky  mountains.  Its  mouth, 
confidering  the  fpace  of  the  bay,  is  very  narrow,  and  fo  deep 
that  fhips  of  all  dimenfions  may  enter  it  without  any  danger. 
Upon  its  banks  are  built,  by  order  of  the  navy,  officers'  apart- 
ments, barracks,  magazines,   ^c.      On  the   north  fide  of  the 

Awachinjkaya 


KAMTSCHATKA  15 

'Aiaachhjjkaya  bay,  almoft  oppofite  the  Kareemchin  fort,  arc  two 
high  mountains,  one  of  which  fmokes  almoft  continually,  and 
fometimes  burns. 

The  breadth  of  the  cape  oi  Kamtfchatka,  between  the  mouth 
of  the  Kcekjha  and  the  Awachinjkaya  bay,  mealures  from  fea  to 
fea,  by  a  ftrait  line,  only  255  verllsj  a  diftance  much  lefs  than 
that  between  the  Teghil  and  the  Kamtfcbatka. 

There  are  a  multitude  of  rivulets  which  fall  into  the  Eaftera 
Ocean  between  the  mouth  of  the  Awatjcha  northward,  and  the 
river  Kamtfchatka,  and  from  that  again  to  the  Anadir  ;  but  being 
of  fmall  note,  we  fliall  only  remark  any  thing  that  may  be  curious 
relating  to  them ;  among  which  may  be  reckoned  the  mountain 
Shupanove/kaya,  fo  called  from  Shupanova  a  ftream  near  which  it 
ftands.  This  mountain  is  a  volcano,  and  has  fmoked  at  the  top 
in  feveral  places  for  many  years,  and  fometimes  rumbles,  but  does 
not  flame.  The  Cainel's  throat,  a  rivulet  near  this  hill,  is  re- 
markable for  the  danger  of  its  paflage  through  a  very  narrow 
valley,  between  high  and  fteep  mountains,  from  whence  the  fnow 
is  apt  to  tumble  upon  the  flightefl  accident,  even,  it  is  faid,  from 
a  ftrong  exertion  of  the  voice ;  and,  falling  down  in  vail  heaps, 
fometimes  buries  paflengers  under  it ;  for  which  reafon  the  natives 
make  it  criminal  to  fpeak  aloud  as  they  pafs  through  the  valley  : 
in  other  refpccfts  the  road  is  very  convenient.  On  the  fouth  fide 
of  the  river  Shophead,  or  Sbupanova,  near  the  fea  fliore,  are  a  great 
many  pillars  or  rocks,  which  appear  above  water,  and  make  its 
entrance  very  dangerous ;  a  little  beyond  this  to  the  fouth  is  a 
bay,  called  Nuirenol,  furrounded  by  rocky  mountains,  about  four 
verfts  in  length  and  breadth ;  and  near  it,  about  the  head  of  a 
rivulet,  called  Shcnmeek,  are  large  wells  of  boiling  water.  Out  of 
a  mountain  near  thefe  fprings,  in  many  places,  proceeds  a  fleam^ 
and  the  bubbling  of  boiling  water  is  heard,  but  no  fprings  have 
made  their  way  through  yet,  though  there. are  confiderable  fiiTures 
here  and  there,  and  the  fteam  ifilies  forth  with  the  fame  rapidity 


i6         A  Geographical    Description  cf 

as  out  of  the  Eoiipile,  and  is  fo  hot  that  the  h;ind  cannot  bear  it. 
After  paffing  through  a  very  woody  and  mountainous  country, 
we  come  to  the  remarkable  ftream  Krodakighe,  or  the  Larch- 
Tree  River,  which  ruQies  out  of  the  great  lai^e  Kronotzkoy,  in 
fuch  a  cafcade  that  one  may  walic  under  it :  this  lake  is  in  length 
about  50  verfts,  reckoned  to  be  4c  in  breadth,  and  is  near  50 
from  the  fea.  Around  it  are  high  mountains,  two  of  which 
about  the  fides  of  the  upper  mouth  of  the  rivulet  Kroda- 
kighe, rife  above  the  reft.  Multitudes  of  rivulets  empty  them- 
felves  into  the  lake  Kroiiotzkoy,  whofe  fprings  are  near  thofe  rivers 
which  run  into  the  Kamtfchatka. 

From  this  place,  nothing  worth  remarking  occurs  'till  we 
come  to  the  Kronotzkoy  Nofs  ;  and  here  begins  the  Beaver  Sea, 
which  extends  to  the  Shupinjkoy.  The  coaft  from  the  Kamtf- 
chatka to  the  Kronot-zkoy  Nofs  is  every  where  fandy ;  and  near 
the  bay,  called  Ukinjkaya,  begin  the  habitations  of  the  fettled 
Koreki ;  but  the  Kamtfchadales  inhabit  all  the  country  to  this 
place. 

The  river  Nungeen,  which  falls  into  Nutrenoi  bay,  is 
called,  by  the  ColTacks,  Pankara,  becaufe  there  was  formerly 
on  the  fouth  fide  of  the  bay  a  fmall  Koreki  fort  of  the  fame 
name ;  but  the  inhabitants  having  built  a  fmall  fort  on  a  high  hill 
on  the  northern  fide  of  the  bay,  which  they  called  Gengota^ 
abandoned  it  :  this  fort  is  furrounded  with  a  wall  of  earth  about 
a  fathom  high,  and  a  yard  thick,  having  within  it  a  double 
pallifade,  and  on  each  fide  are  two  baftions  raifed.  It  has  three 
gates  to  the  eafi:,  weft,  and  north.  The  Koreki  purpofe  to 
leave  their  old  fort,  and  to  remove  into  the  new  one,  which 
they  have  built  about  the  inward  point  of  the  above-mentioned 
bay,  and  call  it  Veackang-Atenum  :  this  was  the  firft  place  that 
I  found  fortified  by  the  natives ;  for  the  others  were  no- 
thing more  than  habitations  dug  in  the  earth,  furrounded 
with  huts,  as  with  fo  many  towers  without  any  outward  forti- 
fications ; 


K     A     M     T     S     C     II     A     T     K     A.  17 

fications ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  further  to  the  north,  there  is 
not  one  fettlemcnt  of  thcfe  people  which  has  not,  befides  its 
natural  ftrength  of  fituation,  a  wall  to  cover  it.  The  Koreki 
in  thofe  places  fay,  that  they  thus  provide  for  their  defence 
againft  the  incurfion  of  the  T'cbukotskoi :  but  as  that  people 
have  never  invaded  thefe  places,  fome  other  caufe  mud  be  fought 
for  this  precaution  of  the  Koreki ;  and  we  can  account  for  it 
only  from  their  apprehenfions  of  the  Coflacks,  who  ufually  travel 
this  way. 

Upon  the  north  point  of  a  bay  which  receives  the  Kitkitminu^ 
a  rivulet,   there  is  a  fmall  fort  built  on   a  high  rock,  and  forti- 
fied by  a  wall  of  earth  about  10  feet  in  height.     Its  gates  are 
on  the  eaft  and  fouth  fides.     The  inhabitants  of  it  are  under  the 
commander  of  the  fmall    fort    Keemgu,  whom  the    ColTacks 
call   a  Rii[]ia7iy  he  being  of  that  extradion.      From  this   fort 
there  is  a  low  cape  that  projedls  into    the  fea  j   beyond  this  cape 
there    is   a   deep    bay  of    about   eight   verfts  in    breadth,     and 
equally   as  broad  at  its  mouth  as  in   the  middle ;  but  all  the  reft 
of  the  bays  which  I  have  feen  are  narrow  at  their  mouths.     Into 
this  bay  the  nwQv Karaga  enters  by  two  mouths,  and  almoft  meets 
near  its  head  with  the  Lefnaya  river,  to  which  they  ufually  go  from 
the  Karaga.     On  the  north  fliore  of  the  bay  there  ilands,  on  a 
high  hill,  the  fmall  fort  Keetalgeen,   in  which  every  hut  is  in- 
clofed  with  a   palifade.     Befides  this  fmall  fort  on  the  river  Ka- 
r^ga,    there  are  two   other   fettlements  of   the  Koreki,     Over- 
againlt  the  mouth  of  the  Karaga,  20  verfts  from  the  ftiore,  is 
an  ifland,   called  Karaginjkoy,  the  lower  end  of  which  is  oppo- 
fite  to  Nu/?gee!i,  and  the  upper  end   to  Kute   cape.     Koreki    in- 
habit this  illand  ;  but  thofe  on  the  continent  do  not  allow  them 
to   be   of  the    flmie  race  with   themfelves  ;    and   it   muft   be 
obferved,  that  the  manners  of  the  Karagi)iJkoy  appear  as   bar- 
barous  to  the   Koreki,  as    thofe   of   the   Koreki  do    to    more 

D  civilzed 


i8         A  Geographical  Description  of 

civilized  nations.  Their  number  is  reclconed  to  be  loo  men 
or  more,  but  not  above  30  of  them  pay  any  tax,  the  reft,  at 
the  time  of  its  gathering,  hiding  themfelves  in  the  mountains. 
They  go  to  this  illand  in  the  fummer  in  their  httle  boats ;  but 
in  the  winter  they  have  no  communication  with  it. 

There  is  little  worth  notice  after  you  pafs  the  above-mentioned 
illand,  'till  you  come  to  the  Uymlen  or  Ohitora  river.  Upon  this 
river  the  Rujjians  tv/ice  built  the  Ohitorjkoy  fort.  The  firft  was 
built  by  a  native  of  JakutJId,  called  Athanajey  Petrove^  upon 
the  fouthern  fliore,  very  little  above  the  mouth  of  the  Kalkina 
rivulet  which  falls  into  the  Ohitora  from  the  fouth  ;  and  the 
fecond  a  great  deal  below  that  place  under  the  diredion  of 
Major  Paulutjkoy,  who  was  fent  there  on  account  of  the  rebel- 
lious Tchukotjkoi ;  but  both  of  them  were  forfaken  and  burnt 
down  by  the  Olutores.  The  laft  fort  is  about  two  days'  voyage 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Ohitora. 

The  Atwaleck  cape,  which  extends  80  verfts  Into  the  fea, 
begins  near  the  river  Elir,  and  points  towards  the  Govyannoy 
cape.  The  fea  between  thofe  capes  is  called  Olutorjkoy.  The 
Pockatska  rifes  in  the  fame  plain  with  the  river  Glotova^ 
which  runs  from  the  north-eaft  into  the  Olutora.  From  the 
Kalkina,  where  was  built  the  firft  Olutorjkoy  fort,  to  the 
river  Pockatska,  is  five  days'  journey  with  rein-deer,  reckoning 
for  each  day  between  30  and  40  verfts.  Between  the  Katurka 
and  the  land  oppofite  to  Anadir,  there  projeils  into  the  fea  a 
rocky  cape,  called  Kateerjkoy  in  64*^  15'  north  latitude.  The 
diftance  from  the  Petropaulaiiskaya  haven  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Anadir,  as  obferved  by  the  fea-ofiicers,  is  19°  20'  ;  and  the 
fea  coaft  from  the  Kurihkaya  Lopatka  to  the  T^chiikotskoi  cape, 
north  eaft,  which  lies  in  67°,  is  for  the  moft  part  mountainous, 
efpecially  in  thofe  places  where  the  capes  project  into  the 
fea. 

Wc 


K     A    M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  19 

We  now  come  to  confider  the  rivers  that  fall  into  the  Eafl: 
Sea  from  the  mouth  of  the  Awatfcha,  towards  the  fouth,  to  the 
Kurihkaya  Lopatka;  and  from  the  Kurihkaya  Lopatka  into 
the  Pcnfcbinska  fea  to  the  Tcghil  and  the  Puflaia  rivers. 
;  J  There  are  but  few  rivulets  that  interfedt  the  country  between 
die  mouth  of  the  Anvatjcha  and  the  Lopatka.  The  ridge  of 
mountains,  which  divides  Kamt/chatka,  extends  to  the  Eaft  Sea  : 
the  declivity  is  fleep  and  craggy ;  and  the  gulphs  and  bays, 
which  are  formed  by  thefe  mountains,  afford  a  liifc  harbour  for 
veffels  of  any  burthen  in  the  worft  weather. 

The  Kiiriljliaya  Lopatka^  which  by  the  natives  is  called  Ka~ 
poore,  is  the  fouthernmoil  point  of  the  cape  of  Kamtfchatka,  and 
divides  the  eaftern  from  the  Pen/chinska  fea :  it  takes  its  name 
from  its  refemblance  to  a  man's  fhoulder-blade.  Mr.  Steller^ 
who  has  been  upon  the  Lopatka,  fays,  that  the  place  is  not 
more  than  i  o  fathoms  above  the  furface  of  the  fea,  and  for  that 
reafon  is  fubjedt  to  great  inundations,  fo  that  for  20  verfts  from 
thence  no-body  lives,  except  thofe  who  come  there  in  the 
winter  to  catch  foxes ;  and  when  the  ice  is  carried  thither  with 
the  beavers  on  it,  then  the  Kuriles,  vs'ho  follow  this  ice  along 
the  fliore,  affemble  here  in  great  multitudes.  Within  three 
verfts  from  the  Lopatka  nothing  grows  except  mofs ;  and  there 
are  neither  rivers  nor  fprings,  only  a  few  lakes  and  pools.  The  foil 
confifts  of  two  layers,  the  lower  is  ftrong,  and  the  upper  fponsiy  ; 
and  its  furfice  is  full  of  hillocks,  and  ufelefs.  The  lirft  rivulet 
falling  into  the  Penjchmjl'a  fea,  is  called  the  Vtatimipit ;  two 
verfts  from  the  Utatumpit,  the  rivulet  T'apgutpan  runs  into  the 
fea,  upon  which  ftands  a  fmall  fort  called  Kochinshy ;  and  three 
verfts  from  thence  is  the  Pitpiiy,  or  Ozernaya,  which,  runs 
out. of  a  confiderable  lake  divided  from  the  fca  -by  a  mountain. 
The  RuJJians  call  this  river  Kambaia,  or  Flounder  River,  bc- 
caufe  great  numbers  of  flounders  are  caught  in  the  mouth  of  it. 

D  2  The 


20         y^  Geographical    Description    of 

The  lake  out  of  which  it  runs,  and  the  mountains  which  lie 
between  it, and  the  lea,  are  called  by  the  fame  name.  Near  the 
Kavibaiinjkoy  lake  is  built  KamabaUnJkoy\  a  fmall  Kttriljkoy  fort. 
From  the  Kuriljkoy  lake,  towards  the  ocean,  flrait  to  the  Awatfcha, 
is  not  above  igGennott  miles;  but  the  road  is  exceffively  dithcult; 
for  you  mufl:  pafs  over  eleven  high  mountains,  and  fome  of  them 
are  fo  fteep  that  travellers  are  obliged  to  let  themfelves  down  with 
ropes. 

About  this  lake  are  feveral  remarkable  mountains ;  particularly 
two,  one  on  each  fide  of  it,  which  emit  fmoke,  and  have  done  fo 
many  years ;  and  which  Mr.  Steller  fays  he  faw  in  his  journey 
from  the  Tavina  to  the  Ozeniaya  river. 

Though  I  went  as  far  as  the  river  Ozernaya  in  1738,  yet  I  did 
not  fee  thofe  mountains,  and  only  obferved  hot  fprings  in  two 
different  places.  Thefe  fprings  run  within  20  verfts  from  its 
mouth,  fome  of  them  into  the  river  Paujiia,  and  others 
into  the  river  Ozernaya,  both  of  them  on  the  fouth  fide 
of   it. 

The  river  Apanach  is  reckoned  the  boundary  of  the  province  of 
Kuriljkoy.  It  runs  from  under  the  mountain  called  Opaljkaya 
Sopka,  which  is  85  verfts  from  the  fea,  and  excels  all  the  reft  of 
the  mountains  about  the  Penfchinjka  fea  both  in  height  and  fame; 
particularly  on  this  account,  that  it  can  be  feen  by  feamen  from 
both  feas,  and  ferves  them  for  a  land-mark. 

The  fhore  from  the  Lopatka  almoft  to  the  KamhaUna  is  low. 
From  the  KambaUna  to  the  Ozernaya  is  fo  mountainous  and  fleep, 
that  one  cannot  go  near  the  fea. 

From  the  Ozernaya  to  the  Opala  it  is  likewife  mountainous, 
but  more  upon  a  level. 

■  '■  From  the  Opala  to  the  Great  River  is  an  extenfive  plain,  fo  that 
not  one  hill  is  to  be  obferved  near  the  fea.  After  pafling  a  great 
number  of  rivulets,  all  of  which  arife  out  of  a  range  of  mountains, 

called 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  21 

called  Stanovoy  ridge,  we  come  to  the  river  Geek,  called  by  the 
Coffacks  Vorovfkaya,  or  Rogue's  River,  becaufc  the  Kamtfchadaki 
who  live  upon  it  were  frequently  concerned  in  infurredlions,  and 
ufed  to  kill  the  tax-gatherers  treachcroufly.  From  hence  we 
meet  nothing  worth  notice  'till  we  come  to  a  Kanitfcbatkoi 
fort,  called  'Tackauta,  in  which  travellers  ulually  equip  themfelves 
for  paffing  the  ridge.  Here  the  common  road  lies  near  a  rivulet, 
from  the  head  of  which  it  pafles  the  Stanovoy  ridge,  'till  it 
defcends  to  the  heads  of  the  river  Keergena,  which  falls  into  the 
Kamtfchatka. 

From  the  Keergena  we  pafs  up  the  river  Kamtfchatka  to  the 
Kamtfchatkoi  fort.  The  country  between  the  little  fort  T'ack- 
cuta  and  the  Stanovoy  ridge  is  a  defert  of  1 1  o  vcrfts  in  extent, 
and  from  the  ridge  to  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  is  65,  the  land 
equally  barren. 

The  above  road  is  very  difficult  and  dangerous,  for  a  great  part 
of  it  lies  on  the  river,  which,  from  the  rapidity  of  its  current,  in 
many  places  never  freezes.  Travellers  are  obliged,  therefore,  in 
fome  parts  to  keep  clofe  to  the  fides  with  great  care  ;  for  if  the 
ice  breaks  nothing  can  fave  them,  the  rocks  on  the  banks  in 
feveral  places  being  fo  deep  that  it  is  impolTible  to  get  on  fhore, 
and  the  river  runs  fo  fu'iftly  that  you  are  immediately  driven 
under  the  ice.  The  ridge  is  pafTable  only  in  calm  and  fiir 
weather,  for  which  we  are  obliged  to  wait  fome  times  ten  days 
or  more ;  at  other  times  it  is  impoffible  to  find  the  way,  and  we 
muft  inevitably  fall  down  the  precipices,  and  be  loft.  The  pro- 
pereft  time  to  pafs  is  when  no  clouds  are  to  be  feen  on  the  top  of 
the  ridge,  for  even  the  leaft  cloud  is  a  fign  of  a  great  ftorm  there. 
To  crofs  over  this  ridge  takes  up  a  whole  winter's  day.  The 
greateft  danger  is  in  paffing  over  the  very  top,  which  is  called  by 
the  Coffacks,  Greben,  or  a  comb.  Its  breadth  is  30  fathoms  ;  it  is 
like  a  boat  with  the  bottom  upwards,  theafcent  on  both  fides  being 

very 


22  A  Geographical   Description    of 

very  flecp.  The  paiTige  is  troublefome  even  in  the  calmeft  weather, 
for  the  roail  falling  off  leaves  nothing  but  ice :  the  Kamtfchadales^ 
therefore,  in  order  to  pafs  it  in  fafety,  have  under  their 
fnow-fhoes,  two  nails ;  yet  thcfe  are  of  fmall  fervice  if  the 
wind  overtakes  them  there,  for  they  are  frequently  carried  from 
one  fide  to  the  other  to  the  great  hazard  of  their  lives,  or  at  leaft 
of  their  limbs.  Befides  which,  this  paffage  is  attended  with  the 
danger  of  being  fmothered  in  the  fnow,  the  narrow  path  lying 
between  high,  and  almoft  perpendicular,  mountains,  from  which 
the  fnow  falls  in  heaps  upon  the  leaft  motion.  This  is  a  danger, 
indeed,  unavoidable  in  every  place  where  the  road  lies  in  narrow 
and  deep  vallies. 

In  mounting  the  ridge  all  muft  walk,  for  the  dogs  can  hardly 
afcend  it  even  with  the  light  baggage ;  but  in  defcending  it  is 
otherwife,  for  then  they  only  leave  a  Tingle  dog  in  the  fledge  : 
the  reft  are  taken  out,  it  being  impoflible  to  manage  them  all  in 
fuch  a  road.  Although  this  paffage  of  the  ridge  be  fo  difficult, 
yet,  as  it  is  the  ufual  road  to  Ka?ntjchatka,  one  may  conclude 
that  any  other  paflage  from  fea  to  fea  muft:  be  ftill  more 
difficult  and  dangerous. 

The  coaft  from  the  mouth  of  the  Great  River  to  the  river  Puf- 
tain^  as  hx  as  the  Shahack,  h  ooze  and  foft  mud,  fo  that  many 
veftl'ls  have  been  thrown  upon  it  without  receiving  any  hurt. 
From  the  Shahack  the  fliore  begins  to  be  bolder,  though  not 
rocky  j  but  from  the  Tulahan  river  it  is  mountainous,  rocky,  and 
dangerous  to  feamen. 

The  late  defcriptions  of  the  fhore  of  the  Penfchinska  fea, 
from  the  Lefnaya  to  the  Penfchina  and  to  the  Ockotska,  are 
more  particular  than  the  former  :  for  in  the  year  174J  a  high 
road  was  eftabliffied  to  Kamtfchatka  with  poft-houfes  at  proper 
ftations  ;  yet,  with  regard  to  the  diftances  of  places,  they  are  not 
much  more  accurate  3  fince  there  were  no  aftronomical  obfer- 

vations 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  23 

vatlons  made,  nor  the  diftances  menlured  :  nor  are  there  any 
hopes  of  its  being  foon  done,  as  travelling  in  thofe  parts  is  very 
dangerous  ;  the  wild  Koreki  oppofing  the  RiiJJian  government, 
and  frequently  committing  murders  upon  fmall  parties  that  pafs 
that  way  ;  and  though  fometimes  they  appear  friendly,  yet  tra- 
vellers are  always-  obliged  to  be  fo  much  upon  their  guard  againft 
the  deceit  and  cruelty  of  fuch  a  barbarous  race,  that  they  have  no 
time  to  make  accurate  furveys.  Beyond  the  Fuflaia  is  the 
river  Talouha  j  50  verfls  from  which  is  the  river  Fenfchina,  re- 
markable for  giving  name  to  ihcPeti/chiii/ka  fea.  Thirty  verfls  from 
the  fea  is  built  a  fmall  fort,  called  AcJdanJkoy,  from  the  river 
Acldan,  which  fills  from  the  right  fide  into  the  river  Feiifchina. 
Here  fome  Riijjiait  ColTacks  live  for  the  difpatch  of  the  polt,  and 
to  bring  into  fubjedion  the  Koreki  that  refufc  to  pay  taxes. 
The  firft  houfe  was  built  there  in  the  year  1679,  fince  which 
certain  foldiers  were  fent  there  to  gather  the  taxes ;  but  after- 
wards, on  account  of  the  great  diftance  and  danger  of  the  place, 
it  was  abandoned.  This  fpot  has  been  made  remarkable  by  the 
murder  of  two  commiffu-ies,  with  a  party  of  Coflacks,  many  years 
ago,  who  conveyed  the  tribute  from  Kamtjchatka  to  the  An- 
adirjk  fort. 

From  the  river  Talouha  to  the  mouth  of  the  Penfch'ina  the  fea 
coaft  lies  north-eaft  ;  thence  it  turns  fouth-wefl  as  far  as  the 
rivulet  Gogidan  ;  after  which  the  coaft  turns  to  the  eaft,  'till  we 
approach  the  river  Ochotjka  :  the  interval  between  which  laft  and 
the  Pen/china  is  watered  with  feveral  rivulets  Uiat  run  into  the 
Penfchinfua  fea,  for  whofe  names  we  refer  to  the  map.  The 
Cuchtai  river  falls  into  the  Ochotjka  very  near  the  fea  :  between 
them  is  a  confiderable  bay,  in  which  veflels  may  anchor.  The 
river  Cuchtai  is  particularly  remarkable  for  its  port,  and  for  the 
great  quantities  of  Larch  trees,  and  other  forts  of  wood  fit  for 
building  veflels  for  navigation,  which  grow  on  its  banks,  and  which 
are  not  found  in  fo  great  plenty  along  the  river  Ochotjka,     The 

river 


24         A  Geog.raphical    Description    of 

river  Ochotjka  has  three  mouths ;   the  New    mouth,   the  Old 
inouth,  and  the  fi«/g-/;^<7y(7  out-let. 

The  New  aiouth  is  dry,  except  at  the  time  of  a  great  inunV^ 
dation;.  and  even  then  veffcls  cannot  enter  it.  The  prefent 
Ochotjkoy.ioxx.  is  built  between  the  Nev/  and  Old  mouth?,  almofl: 
upon  the  beach  ;  and  the  former,  which  is  now  called  the  old 
fort,  was  fix  verfts  from  the  fea.  This  place  is  called  Ochotfkoy 
port,  and  commonly  Zaw^j;  and  has  under  its  jurifdidion  all 
Kamtfchatka,  and.the'coaft  of  the  Penjihinska  fea  to  the  frontiers 
of  China.  For  which  reafon  the  tax-gatherers  are  all  fent  out 
from  hence  ;  and  the  tax,  when  gathered,  is  immediately  brought 
from  all  other  places  hither,  where  it  is  firft  appraifed,  and  then 
fent  anto  'Jakutzk.  Formerly  the  Ockotskoy  fort  was  poorly  in- 
habited, and  under  the  jiirifdidion  of  "yakutski,  but-  it  is  much 
increafed  dncQ  i\\6  RiiJJia?7s  have  made  this  the  port  for  their 
pallage  by  fea  to  Khntfchatka.  ' 

'  Tliisplace  is  better  built  than  any  of  the  other  forts,  the  houfes 
being -good  and  regular,  particularly  .thofe  belonging  to  the  go- 
vernment, in  v/hich  the  officers  of  the  Kamtfchatka  expeditions 
refided.  In  my  time  there  was  neither  a  church  nor  a  forti- 
fication, but  they  were  building  both.  Though  the  country 
be  as  barren  as  Kamtfchatka,  yet  its  inhabitants  are  better  fur- 
.  iii{lie<l  with  every  thing,  becaufe  goods  and  provifions  brought 
from  fakutski  are  fold  here  cheaper  by  one  half.  Though 
plenty  of  corn  is  brought  liere,  yet  no  fiefh  meat  is  to  be  got, 
except  wild  fowl  and  venifon,  and  that  feldom.  Fifh  in  this  place  is 
almoft  as  plenty  as  in  Kamtjchatka,  except  the  Chaveccha,  which 
they  bring  hither  from  thence.  The  greatefl:  want  in  this  place 
is  that  of  good  pafturage  near  them ;  therefore  the  inhabitants 
cannot  breed  cattle.  They  have  tried  many  times  to  keep  them 
upon  the  river  jivi,  but  with  great  lofs,  moll:  of  them  dying  for 
Want  of  fuftenance.  Time  will  fhew  whether  the  Jakutski 
people,  that  are  fettled  along  the  rivulets  which  fall  into  the 
■    ■  ^  Ochotska^ 


j?y/ie  r  ^/("//'/u^///'  ^'/  '  '.     >{'cter  a/u/*J.M^//  / . 


>  y//r  f///^]^///f.>/rr  c/  r^r//^f/.//xUy. 


S,','  lUyr   2.}. 


K    A     M     T    S     C     H     A    T    K    A.  25 

Ochofska,  be  more  fiiccefsful.  The  want  of  cattle,  in  feme 
meafure,  is  made  up  by  the  deer,  which  the  natives  have  in 
greater  plenty  than  in  Kamtjchatka  ;  but  thefe  arc  more  ufed  for 
carriage  than  food.  They  alfo  travel  with  dogs,  but  not  fo 
commonly  as  in  Kamtjchatka. 

There  were  four  tranfport-veffels  built  here :  namely  ;  the 
Fortune,  in  which  in  the  year  1737  I  went  to  the  Great  River, 
and  which  was  loft  foon  after ;  the  boat  Hauriel,  which  was  ufed 
alfo  in  long  fea  voyages  for  fome  time  ;  the  Galliot  Ochotska ; 
and  a  fmall  veflel,  which  was  not  then  launched.  The  paflagc 
by  fea  ufed  formerly  to  be  only  once  a  year  ;  namely,  in  the 
autumn,  when  the  tax-gathers  went  from  Ochotjky  to  Ka}ntf~ 
chatka^  and  brought  back  the  tax  the  next  year  :  but  now  they' 
go    oftener. 

The  paflage  from  the  Ochotska  to  the  Great  River  Is  diredlly 
fouth-eaft.  Between  the  fort  Ochotskoy  and  the  river  Amur,  whofe 
heads  are  in  the  RiiJJian  dominions,  the  following  rivers  run  into 
the  fea  :  the  firft  is  Urack,  24  verfts  from  the  Ochotska.  It  is  to 
beobferved,  that  in  the  timeof  the  7<'rt/;/{/^Z;^//trt  expeditions  the 
provifions  were  ufed  to  be  fent  down  this  river  upon  flat-bottomed 
boats  to  the  Ochotska  ;  for  which  reafon  they  built  a  dock  50 
verfts  from  its  mouth,  where  the  failors  and  the  Ochotjkoy  Coffacks 
ufed  to  build  veflels  for  the  above  expeditions,  and  fend  the  faid 
provifions  from  the  ludomjkoy  Kreft,  or  crofs,  to  that  place  over 
land  by  horfes  or  deer  in  fledges.  But  this  way  of  carriage  by 
water  was  attended  with  great  trouble,  lofs  of  time  and  people  ; 
for  the  river  is  very  rapid,  rocky,  and  full  of  cataradls,  and  not 
always  deep  enough,  except  in  the  fpring,  or  after  great  rains :  and 
as  thefe  additional  waters  run  foon  off,  they  are  obliged  to  watch 
every  opportunity  of  fending  down  the  loaded  vefl^els ;  which  if 
they  omit,  they  mufl:  often  wait  a  long  time. 

There  never  was  a  fleet  fo  happy  in  this  navigation  as  not  to  lofe 
fome  vefTels  either  by  rocks  or  cataradls,  many  pf  which  are  fo 

E  dangerous. 


'26         A  Geographical    Description  of 

dangerous,  that  a  Siberian  foldier,  who  ventured  to  be  a  pilot 
there,  was  made  a  ferjeant  for  it.  One  may  judge  of  its  great  ra- 
pidity by  this,  that  captain  Walton  went  down  the  river  from  the 
Z7r^f/^w  dock  to  the  mouth  in  17  hours,  notwithftanding  the 
many  ftops  he  met  with  in  paffing  the  cataradls,  and  reheving  the. 
other  veflcls  which  had  llruck  on  the  flioals. 

Thirty  verfts  from  the  Urackjkoi  dock,  up  the  river  Urack,  is 
built  afmali  cuflom-houfe  ;  at  which  all  paflengers  arefearched  for 
brandy,  china,  tobacco,  and  other  contraband  or  fmuggled  goods. 

The  river  Urack  falls  into  a  bay  called  by  iis  name,  which 
extends  along  the  fliore  two  verfts  :  its  breadth  is  200  fathoms. 
From  hence,  'till  we  come  to  the  Ude^  nothing  of  moment 
occurs  ;  on  the  nothern  bank  of  this  river  Hands  the  fort  Udejkoy, 
about  feven  days'  voyage  by  water  from  its  mouth,  and  we  may 
reckon  1  o  or  1 2  verfts  for  each  day's  journey,  as  is  generally  al- 
lowed. The  buildings  in  it  are  a  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  the 
tax-office,  and  jo  houfes  of  the  inhabitants.  This  fort  is  under 
the  jurifdidlion  of  'Jakutjki,  from  whence  the  tax-gatherers  are 
fent. 

The  T'lingiiji,  who  pay  their  taxes  in  here,  are  reckoned  fix 
nations;  and  their  taxes  amount  every  year  to  85  fables  and  12 
foxes'  fkins.  Formerly  only  people  that  were  iti  the  fervice  of 
the  government  lived  in  this  fort ;  but  in  the  year  173  5  a  colony 
of  10  families  of  boors  were  fettled  there  to  eftablifli  agriculture. 
But  it  is  faid  there  are  no  hopes  that  corn  will  grow  in  thefe 
places,  the  foil  being  quite  improper  for  cultivation. 

Near  the  Mamkinjkay  Nofs,  and  oppofite  to  a  large  bay  which 
abounds  with  whales  and  feals,  lies  Medvcjlmy,  or  the  Bear's 
ifland  :  it  is  about  lo  verfts  in  length,  and  fix  in  breadth,  at  about 
a  day's  fail  on  the  eaft.  South  of  the  Nofs  lies  the  iiland  T^heo- 
clijlove,  which  ufed  formerly  to  be  reforted  to  in  winter  by  the 
hunters.  This  ifland  abounds  with  rocks  and  woods,  in  which  are 

;fables  and  foxes, 

The 


KAMTSCHATKA.  27 

The  Shanfanskoy  ifland  is  larger  than  Theoclijlove.  Shantura  is 
three  day's  jjinncy  by  land  from  north  to  fouth  ;  and  the  boats 
are  three  days  and  a  half  in  coafting  it. 

The  former  of  thcfc  iilands  abounds  not  only  in  wood,  but  alfo 
in  different  forts  of  animals ;  particularly  foxes,  fables,  ermines, 
and  bears.  The  principal  birds  are  fwans,  ducks,  and  gce^. 
Several  forts  of  iifli  are  found  in  the  bay  ;  and  different  kinds  of 
berries  in  the  fields.  Half  a  day's  failing  fouth  from  the  Shan- 
tanskoy  is  an  ifland,  in  length  and  breadth  about  1 2  verfls,  called 
Hoodce  Sbantar  (that  is,  unprofitable)  ;  fo  named,  becaufe  there 
grows  no  fort  of  wood  upon  it,  though  it  has  not  been  long  in 
this  ftate,  for  formerly  there  was  wood  enough,  and  many  fables 
were  caught  there ;  but  being  burnt  through  the  negligence  of 
the  Gilijacks,  who  left  their  fires  unextinguiihed,  it  is  now 
nothing  but  a  bare  mountain,  and  all  the  animals  have  left  it. 
South  from  the  Hoodee  Shantai\  in  half  a  day's  time,  they  go  in 
boats  to  the  Bdochay  illand,  which  is  equal  in  fize  to  the  former. 
This  ifland  abounds  in  woods,  flocked  with  many  animals,  efpe- 
cially  fquirrels,  from  whence  it  took  its  name. 

The  reft  of  the  coaft  has  nothing  worth  remarking,  'till  we 
come  to  the  river  Amur,  or,  as  it  is  called,  Sagalin  Uia,  being  the 
lad  great  river  which  comes  within  our  notice. 

This  river  rifes  in  the  RiiJJian  territories,  and,  according 
to  the  Cbinefe  maps,  falls  into  the  fea,  at  the  point  of  a 
large  bay,  in  52°  50'  north  latitude.  This  bay  lies  between 
the  Dulangada  Nofs  and  the  Vajipunu  Nofs.  From  the 
Vafipunu  -  Nofs  is  the  nearefl:  pafilrge  to  a  great  and  in- 
habited ifland,  which  extends  from  the  north-eait  to  the 
fouth  weft  4"^  30'  :  the  channel  is  30  verfts  over.  The 
coaft  from  the  river  JJde  to  the  Amur,  excepting  the 
capes  and  promontories,  lies  almoft  diredly  n(.'rth  and 
fouth, 

E  3  Having 


a 


28         A   Geographical    Description   of 

Having  defcribed  all  the  coaft  and  principal  rivers  on  the  con- 
tinent, we  fhall  now  proceed  to  defcribe  the  principal  roads 
through  this  country. 

CHAP.      II. 

X)f   tie    ROADS    //;    KAMTSCHATKA. 

FROM  the  Bolfcberetskoi  to  the  upper   Kamtfchatkoi  fort 
are   three  principal  roads :    the    firft,  along  the     Penf- 
chinjky  fea  j  the  fecond,    by  the  Eaftern   Sea ;  and  the 
third,    by    the   Bijiroy. 

By  the  firil:  they  go  up  the  river  Ohlukomina  to  the  ridge  OhlU" 
hominjkoy,  and  over  the  ridge  to  the  river  Keerganick^  along  which 
almoft  to  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  and  from  thence  up  the  river  to 
the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort. 

By  the  fecond  they  go  from  the  Bolfcberetskoi  up  the  Great 
River  to  the  Nachikin  fort,  and  crofs  a  fmall  ridge  to  the  river 
Aivatfcha^  to  the  haven  of  Petropaulaufiay,  or  of  Peter  and 
Paul;  and  from  thence  along  the  coaft  of  the  Eaftern  Sea  north 
to  the  river  SlnipaJiova,  and  up  that  river  to  its  head  ;  from 
whence  over  the  ridge  to  the  river  Poweecha,  and  down  the 
mouth  of  that  river,  which  is  over-againft  the  upper  fort. 

The  third  road  lies  from  the  Boljcheretskoi  up  the  Great  River 
to  the  Opachin  fort  j  from  thence  through  plains  to  the  Rapid 
River,  up  to  its  head ;  and  thence,  down  the  river  Kamtfchatka^  to 
the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort. 

They  travel  the  two  firft  roads  chiefly  in  winter  j  the  third,  on 
foot  in  fummer.  The  firft  and  the  laft  roads  are  meafured,  but 
the  fecond  is  only  meafured  half  way ;  and  the  particular  diftances 
«re  here  adjoined, 

Firft 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A. 


29 


Firil;  road  from  the  Bolfcbcrctskol  fort,  by  the  Pcujlbi/ijky  fea. 

verfts     fathoms 
From  the  Boljcheretskoi  oflice  to  the  Zaecmka^  or 

the  eftate  of  Mr.  Trapeztiicojf]        —         — 
From  thence  to  the  river  Utka,  — 

From  thence  to   the  Kiechchiek,   to  the  Aka- 

heejl:evo^  • • 

From  thence  to  the  Nemtick  • 

From  thence  to  the  Ko/e         — —  — 

From  thence  to  the  Vorovfkaya  ■ 

From  thence  to  the  Ereivmka         —  . 

From  tlience  to  the  Kompucovoy  

From  tlience  to  the  Krootohorova  

From  thence  io  ihtOhhikomina,  to  the  fettlement 

of  Tarein,  ■■■  — 

From  thence  to  the  Ohlukominjkoy  ridge 
From  thence  to  the  upper  Kamtjcbatkoi  fort 


2 

100 

21 

200 

42 

250 

25 

0 

22 

0 

51 

0 

24 

0 

13 

0 

36 

0 

24 

0 

]  10 

0 

65 

0 

486 


50 


Second  road  from  the  Bolfcherefskoi  fort,  by  the  Eaftcrn  Sea. 


From  the  Boljcheretskoi  fort  to  the  fmall  fort 

Opachin  —  ■ • 

From  thence  to  Nacbikin  ■ ■  — 


From  thence  to  the  Awatfcha  and  the  Para- 
tunka  —  — 

From  the  Paratunka  to  the  Petropaidmijkaya 
haven         —  ■ —  — 

From  thence  to  the  rivulet  Calahtiirka  — 

From  thence  to  the  fort  Nalacheva  ■ 


In  all  from  Bolfcheretskoi  to  the  fmall  fort  Na- 


44 
74 

63 

16 
6 

34 


o 
o 


o 
o 
o 


242 


From 


5©         A  Geographical    Description   of 

From  the   river  Nalax:heva  they  in    fix  days   arrive  at  the 
upper  fort. 

Third  road  from  the  Bolfcheretskoi  fort,  by  the  Rapid  River. 

verfts     fluhoms 
From  the  Bol/cherefskoi  fort,  up  along  the  Great 

River,  to  the  Opachin  fmali  fort              — —       44  o 

From  thence  to  the  upper  ford          —                  33  o 

From  thence  to  the  fettlement  oi  Ahanichevo            22  o 

From  thence  to  tlie  fettlement  of  Ganaline                33  o 

From  thence  to  the  head  of  the  Kamtfchatka            4 1  o 

From  thence  to  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort             69  o 

In  all  from  the   Bolfcheretskoi   to    the    upper 

Kamtfchatkoi  fort             ■                        — —     242  o 


In  all  the  places  exprefTed  in  the  tables  the  travellers  take  up 
lodgings  at  night,  except  where  the  diftance  is  only  five  or  fix 
verfts.  Notvvithftanding  the  great  diftance  between  the  Ohhiko- 
miyifkoy  and  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  in  good  weather  they 
travel  it  in  three  days,  lying  two  nights  in  defert  places. 

There  are  other  roads  from  the  Bolfcheretskoi  to  the  upper  fort, 
both  from  the  Fenfchinfka  fea  and  from  the  Eafteri) ;  for  every 
river  there  that  falls  into  either  of  thofe  feas  has  a  paffage  to 
Kamtfchatka :  but,  as  nobody  except  the  Kamtfchadaks,  and 
fometimes  the  Coflacks,  in  great  necefiity,  travel  them,  it  was  not 
thought  material  to  defcribe  them  ;  nor  can  one  well  afcertain  the 
diftances  by  their  journeys. 

They  go  from  the  Bolfcheretskoi  to  the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi 
fort,  either  through  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  or  by  the  coaft 
of  the  Eaftern  Sea.  From  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  the  way 
is  along  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  except  where  the  river  makes  great 

windings. 


KAMTSCHATK.^, 


3^ 


Tvindinajs.     The  diftance  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  Kamtf- 
chatkoi  fort  is  laid  down  in  the  following  table. 


From  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  to  the  river 
Keergena  ■  — 

From  thence  to  the  fmall  fort  MaPmrin 
From  thence  to  the  fmall  fort  Nachikin       — 

From  thence  to  Golka  — 

From  thence  to  the  fmall  fort  Takcheva 
From  thence  to  the  Ujhky                  — 
From  thence  to  the  Krnvky                     — 
From  thence  to  the  Kreftee             ■ 
From  thence  to  the  Gorboofi              — 
From  thence  to  the  Harchin                         • 
From  thence  to  the  Camenoy  fmall  fort 
From  thence  to  the  Cavanackey                — 
From  thence  to  the  Kamack          — — 
From  thence  to  the  Hapick                     — 
From  thence  to  the  Schockey               -■ 
From  thence  to  the  Oboohoffs  fettlement 
From  thence  to  the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  to 
the  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  

In  all  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  fort  — 

And  from  the  Bolfcheretskoi  • 


verfls 

fathoms 

24 

0 

32 

0 

87 

0 

33 

0 

26 

0 

16 

0 

25 

0 

25 

0 

26 

250 

I  r 

0 

27 

0 

16 

0 

6 

0 

8 

250 

9 

0 

^7 

250 

7 

250 

397 

0 

833 

5° 

12.30 

50 

The  other  road  from  the  Bolfcheretshoi  to  the  lower  Kamtf- 
ihathi  fort  being  meafured  only  to  the  Nalacheva  fort,  it 
cannot  exadly  be  known  which  is  the  neareft  way  ;  but  one  may 
imagine  that  there  is  not  mucli  difference  between  them. 

The. 


32  A  Geographical   Description   of 

The  chief  places  on  that  road  where  they  ufually  lodge  at 
night  are  the  fmuU  forts  of  Opachin,  Nachiekiek,  and  the  Tarcin ; 
the  haven  of  Feter-&x\^  Paul,  which  was  formerly  called  the  fmall 
fort  Atijiin  ;  the  OJirovenaya  river,  Supa?iova,  and  the  Chazfna  ; 
upon  all  which  rivers  there  are  Kamtfchatkoi  habitations. 

From  the  Chazma  to  the  river  Kamtfchatka  the  ro^d  lies  over 
defolate  mountains ;  and  they  come  upon  the  river  juft  by  the 
village  Oboohoffs,  {cv^n  verfts  and  a  half  above  the  lower  Kamtf- 
chatkoi fort,  lodging  but  one  night  in  a  defert  place. 

From  the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  to  the  northern  parts  two 
roads  are  made,  the  orie  is  by  the  Elouki,  to  its  head  ;  and  from 
thence  over  a  ridge  to  the  head  of  the  river  "Teghil,  along  which 
they  go  quite  to  the  fea  ;  and  from  thence,  not  far  off  from  the 
fea,  to  the  rivers  Lefnaya  and  Podkargirnaya. 

In  a  moderate  way  of  travelling,  when  there  is  no  hindrance 
from  bad  weather,  they  go  from  the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  to 
the  lower  'Teghilfioy  fmall  fort,  called  Shipitz,  in  lo  days. 

By  the  fecond  road  they  may  travel  in  the  fame  manner  to  the 
river  Karaga  in  ten  days,  whofe  head  is  near  the  river 
Lefnaya. 

From  the  upper  Kamtfhatkoi  fort  to  the  I'eghil  the  common 
road  is  by  the  river  Elouki :  firft,  over  the  ridge  to  Ohlukominfkoy 
fort,  and  from  thence  north  by  the  Penfchimky  fea  ;  and  another 
road  is  by  the  river  Kreftovaya  to  the  Harhoofova. 

By  the  firfl  road  they  may  reach  "Teghil  in  lo  daysj  but  they 
very  often  lodge  the  tenth  night  on  the  road,  not  fo  much  on 
account  of  the  diflance  as  the  badnefs  of  the  roads,  and  the 
very  mountainous  places  over  the  JJtkolotskoy  cape.  The  fecond 
road  requires  1 1  or  12  days. 

The  pafliige  along  the  Elouki  to  the  Teghil  is  the  longefl  of  all, 
for  that  requires  above  14  days'  journey. 

From  the  Boljcheretskoi  fort  fouthward  to  the  Kurilskaya  Lo- 
patka  the  ufual  paflage  is  nine  days.     The  diflance  from  the 

Boljcheretskoi 


K     A    M    T     S     C     II     A    T    K    A.  33 

Bolfcheretskoi  iomo  thit  Kurilskay a  Lopatka  is  210  veifts  300 
fathoms,  which  fpace  may  be  eafily  travelled,  even  in  four  days ; 
but  the  Coflacks  of  thofe  places  have  a  cuftom  of  flopping  at 
any  fmall  fort,  under  pretence  of  fome  buiinefs  there,  though 
their  moft  probable  motive  is  to  refrefli  their  dogs.  At  a 
middling  rate  I  have  travelled  in  three  days  from  the  Kamtf- 
chatkoi  to  the  Bolfcheretskoi,  which  is  near  1 50  verfts. 

verfts     fathoms 

From  the  Bolfc beret shl  fort    to   the  mouth  of 

the  Great  River     —  —  —       33  o 

From  the  mouth,  along  the  fea-fl:iore,  to  the 
river  Opala  ■ 

From  thence  to  the  Koflmhochiek  — 

From  thence  to  the  Tavina  — — 

From  thence  to  the  river  Ozernaya  — 

From  thence  to  the  Kambalina  — 

From  thence  to  the  Lopafka  — 

In  all  from  the  Bol/cheretskoi  to  the  Ktirihkaya 

Lopatha  — -  — — 


CHAP.       III. 
Of     the    KURILSKI     ISLANDS. 

UNDER  the  name  of  Kiirilski  iflands  are  underflood  all 
thoie  iflands  which  extend  from  the  Kurilskaya  hopatka^ 
or  the  fouthern  end  of  Kamtfchatka^  in  a  row  fouth-wefl 
quite  to  Japan.   They  derive  their  names  from  the  inhabitants  of 
thofe  iflands  which  lie  neareft  to  Kamtfchatka,  who  are  called  by 

F  the 


S5 

0 

18 

0 

15 

0 

15 

0 

36 

300 

27 

0 

210 

300 

34  yl    Gji  OGRAPHICAL     DESCRIPTION    of 

the  natives  Kup/i,  and  by  the  Rujjiam  Kuriles.  The  exaft 
number  of  thofe  illands  cannot  be  afcertained ;  but,  according  to  the 
verbal  accounts  wliich  were  gathered  from  the  Kuriles,  and  the 
natives  of  the  fouthernaioft  iflands,  and  from  the  JiipaJtefe,  who 
were  driven  by  diftrefs  of  weather  upon  the  coaft  of  Kamtjcbatka, 
they  are  reckoned  to  be  twenty-two.  Perhaps  they  do  not  take  the 
fmall  ones  into  this  number :  for  by  the  account  of  captain 
Spanberg,  who  went  as  far  as  Japan,  there  appears  to  be  a  great 
many  more ;  but  as  the  fud  captain  found  it  difficult  to  give  them 
Ruffian  names,  all  of  them  that  had  any  relation  to  the  Ku~ 
rilskoy  names,  except  the  two  that  lay  nearefl:  to  Matma  Ku- 
natin,  were  allowed  to  keep  their  former  appellations. 

Schumtfchn  is  the  nearefl  illand  to  the  Kurilshaya  Lopatld^ 
and  extends  in  length  from  the  north-eafi:  to  the  fouth-weH: 
50  verfts,  and  in  breadth  about  30.  This  ifland  is  full  of 
mountains,  out  of  which,  as  alfo  from  the  fmall  lakes  and 
marfhes,  many  little  rivers  run  into  the  fea.  In  fome  of  them 
are  found  different  kinds  of  falmon,  and  feveral  other  fifli,  but 
not  in  fuch  plenty  as  to  furnifli  the  inhabitants  with  provifions 
for  a  winter.  Upon  the  fouth-weft  point,  near  the  flreight 
that  is  between  this  and  the  fecond  Kurilskoy  ifland,  are  three 
Kurilskoy  fettlements,  that  contain  only  44  inhabitants ;  fome 
of  whom  pay  the  taxes  in  fables  and  foxes,  but  the  majority 
pay  them  in  fea-beavers'  fkins. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  ifland,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Kurilf- 
kaya  Lopatka,  are  not  the  n^t  Kuriles,  but  are  of  the  race  of  the 
^Kamtfchadales :  for  fome  diflentions  having  arifen  between  the 
inhabitants  of  that  nation,  foon  after  the  Riijjians  entered  the 
country,  a  lai-ge  party  of  them  retired  here  and  to  the  Lopatka ; 
where  they  became  connedled,  by  mutual  inter-marriages,  with 
the  people  of  the  fecond  ifland,  whofe  particular  cufl:oms  they 
have  adopted,  and  from  thence  have  received  the  name  of 
Kiiriks. 

The 


K     A     M     T    S     C     H     A    T     K     A.  35 

The  channel  between  the  Kurihkaya  Lopatka  and  this  iiland 
is  15  verfts  in  breadth  ;  over  which  ihey  pafs  in  fmall  boats, 
when  the  weather  is  fair,  in  three  hours.  This  puflligc  requires 
not  only  fair  weather,  but  Hkewife  a  flowing  tide.  In  the  time 
of  the  ebb,  the  waves  fpread  for  fome  verAs,  are  rapid  and 
white,  and  fo  large  that  even  in  calm  weather  they  rife  two 
or  three  fathoms  high.  Both  the  Coflacks  and  Kuriks  have  a 
fuperftitious  awe  and  veneration  for  thefe  waves ;  and  when  they 
row  over  tiiem,  offer  them  a  facrifice  by  throwing  chips  made 
on  purpofe,  imploring  a  fafe  paflage ;  the  pilots  alio  ufe  conju- 
rations the  whole  way. 

The  fecond  Kurihkoy  ifland,  Paromufir,  is  twice  as  large  as 
the  firff.  It  lies  north-eaft  and  fouth-weil,  and  is  feparated 
from  the  firft  by  a  channel  tv/o  verfts  broad,  where  one  veffei 
may  lie  in  time  of  necelTity,  but  not  without  dangei',  there 
being  no  proper  place  for  anchorage :  and  if  a  veffei  parts 
from  her  anchor,  flie  will  be  in  very  great  danger ;  for  the 
fiiore  here  being  fleep  and  rocky,  and  the  channel  narrow,  it 
is  next  to  impofTible  for  her  to  efcape.  There  was  a  melancholy 
example  of  this  in  the  year  1 74 1 ,  when  one  of  our  veflels  was 
caft  away  here.  This  iiland  is  alfo  mountainous,  and  has  as 
many  lakes  and  rivulets  TkzSchumtfchii ;  and  on  both  of  them,  there 
is  no  other  timber  than  Slanetz  and  Emick  which  are  ufed  by 
the  inhabitants  for  fuel,  and  they  build  their  huts  of  different 
kinds  of  wood  which  they  find  thrown  on  the  fhore 
by  the  waves  from  America  and  Japan ;  among  thefe  are 
fometimes  found  pieces  of  ranfarn  wood,  of  which  feveral  large 
one's  were  brought  thence  to  me.  The  inhabitants  of  this 
ifland  are  ris^ht  Kuriks,  who  came  there  from  the  ifland 
Onnechoot  ;  but  upon  what  account  is  not  known.  AH 
affirm,  that  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  above-mentioned 
iilands,  and  the  mofl  remote,  commerce  was  formerly  eftablifli- 

F  2  ed 


^6         A   Geographical    Description   of 

ed  :  thofc  of  the  remote  iflands  brought  to  them  all  forts  of 
lackered  wooden  ware,  fcymitars,  filver  rings  which  they  wear  in 
their  cars,  and  cotton  fluffs ;  and  from  them  in  return,  they 
ufed  to  take  chiefly,  eagles'  feathers,  which  are  ufed  in  orna- 
menting their  arrows  :  this  feems  very  probable ;  for  I  had 
from  this  ifland  a  lackered  waiter,  a  bafon,  a  'Japanefe 
fcythe,  and  a  filver  ring;  all  which  I  have  fent  to  the  Im- 
perial Chamber  of  curiofities.  Thefe  articles  the  Kuriles  could 
have  from  no  other  place  than  from  Japan, 

The  Kuriles  of  this  ifland  have  their  habitations  near 
the  fouth-weft  point,  upon  a  lake  five  verfls  in  circumference, 
out  of  which  a  fmall  rivulet,  called  Petpii^   runs  into  the  fea. 

Both  thefe  iflands  are  fubjedt  to  frequent  and  terrible  earth- 
quakes, and  inundations:  one  of  thefe  calamities  happened  in  the 
year  1737,  about  the  time  of  my  coming  to  Kamtfcbatka  ;  and 
^noth^x  in  November,  1742.  We  fliall  relate  the  firfl  circum- 
flantially  in  its  proper  place;  but  as  for  the  fecond,  though 
it  was  great,  yet  1  have  not  been  informed  of  the  mifchief  and 
deflrudtion  it  occafioned  ;  for  it  happened  after  my  departure 
from  KatJitfchatka  ;  and  Mr.  Steller  makes  no  mention  of  it  iri 
his  account. 

The  third  Kurilskoy  ifland  is  called  Sirinh',  and  lies  fouth- 
wefi:  of  Paromi/Jir.  The  fourth  ifland  is  called  Onnecutan.  This 
ifland  is  lefs  than  Paromiifir,  and  lies  from  north-eafl  to 
fouth-weft,  as  that  does,  from  which  they  row  to  it  in  one  day. 
It  has  many  inhabitants  of  the  fame  origin  with  the  Kuriles 
of  Faromnjir  ifland,  as  was  faid  before,  out  of  which  fome  fa- 
milies go  over  to  vifit  the  inhabitants  of  Paromufir,  and  vo- 
luntarily pay  a  tribute  in  beavers  and  foxes.  The  author 
concludes  from  this,  that  the  refl  of  thefe  iflands  would 
not  refufe  to  pay  the  tribute,  if  proper  perfons  were  fent  to 
bring    them    under  fubjedion  ;  and  give  them  afl^urances,  by 

kind 


K     A    M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  37 

kind  reprefentations,  of  the  clemency  of  her  Imperial  majefty, 
with  promiles  that  llie  would  protedt  and  defend  them  from 
their  enemies. 

Neither  I  nor  Mr.  Stellcr  could  have  an  oppportunity  to  in- 
form ourfelves  particularly  of  the  reft  of  the  Kurilskl  illands ; 
therefore  we  fliall  give  the  accounts  of  them  that  were  com- 
municated to  me  by  Mr.  Midler^  which  he  had  from  the  Ja- 
fanefe,  who  were  fliipwrecked  upon  the  coafts  of  Kamtfcbatka. 

Between  Mr.  Midler's  account  and  our's,  there  is  fome  dif- 
ference ;  for  in  his,  On?iecutan  is  called  the  fixth  ifland.  How- 
ever this  might  happen  only  on  account  of  his  reckoning  the 
fmall  iilands  alfo,  which  the  Kuriles  do  not.  According  to  his 
defcription,  beyond  the  Faromufir,  or  the  fecond  Kurilskoy  ifland, 
there  are  three  more  iflands  j  Sirinki  is  reckoned  the  third  j  Uya- 
koopa,  the  fourth ;  and  the  Kukiinnta,  or  Cucumiva,  the  fifth  j 
the  Siritiki  and  Kukuniita  are  fmallcr  than  Uyakoopa,  which  ifland 
is  remarkable  for  a  high  mountain.  The  faid  iflands  are  placed 
in  a  triangle;  the  Uyakoopa  lying  moft  nortli,  and  fartheft  weft ; 
and  the  Sirinki,  with  regard  to  the  former,  fouth-eaft,  and  in 
the  fame  longitude  with  Paromiifir ;  and  the  Kukumita  a  little 
farther  fouthward  than  the  Uyakoopa.  It  feems  that  thefe  iflands 
in  the  General  Rnjjiaji  map  are  exprefled  under  the  names  of 
Diacoji,  St.  lliah,  and  Galanta,  which  are  placed  in  a  triangle, 
though  their  fituation  is  not  exactly  the  fame  as  in  the  above 
defcription.  The  fixth  Kurilskoy  ifland,  according  to  Mr.  Midler^ 
is  called  Muska  and  Onnecuta?i.  The  feventh  is  Araumaktitany 
is  uninhabited,  and  there  are  fome  burning  mountains  as  in 
Kamtfcbatka.  On  the  eighth  ifland  Siijaskiitan,  which  is  as  large 
as  the  former,  fome  few  people  inhabit  who  are  not  taxed.  From 
this  ifland  to  the  weft  lies  the  ninth  called  Emarka  j  and  thence  on 
the  fouth-weft  fide  is  the  tenth  ifland  Ma[]:>achu,  v/hich  is  fmall 
and  uninhabited  ;  and  on  the  fouth-eaft  fide  from  the  Siijaskutan 
there  is  a  fmall  ifland  Ehachu,  which  is  reckoned  the  eleventh. 

The 


ki 


3*8         A  Geographical    Description   of 

The  twelfth  iiland  Shockoeki  lies  on  the  fouth  fide,  and  fo 
diflant  from  the  Snjaskutan,  that  they  can  hardly  row  to  it  in 
half  a  day,  even  when  the  days  are  longefl:,  in  the  Hghtefl;  boat. 
It  is  faid,  that  the  °fapancfe  carry  ore  from  it  in  large  vef- 
fels ;  but  what  ore  is  not  known.  The  thirteenth  iiland,  and 
the  following  to  the  feventeenth,  are  called  Motogo,  Shatovo, 
Viitlr,  Kitiiy,  and  Shimutir.  The  Utitir  lies  fomewhat  to  the 
eaft,  and  the  reft  in  one  line  fouth.  The  channels  are  crofled  in 
light  boats,  in  lefs  than  half  a  day,  but  the  paflige  is  exceflively 
difficult,  becaufe  the  tide  runs  very  rapid  in  all  of  them ;  and, 
when  it  happens  to  be  a  fide  wind,  thefe  fmall  vell'els  are  driven  into 
the  fea^  and  lofl ;  and  for  this  reafon  the  inhabitants  of  all  thefe 
illands  pafs  and  repafs  thefe  places  early  in  the  fpring  in  calm 
weather.  The  Motogo,  Shatovo,  and  the  Utitir  iflands  have 
nothing  remarkable  in  them.  On  the  ifland  Kituy  grow  the 
reeds  of  which  they  make  their  arrows.  The  Shitnatir  is  larger 
than  the  reft,  and  has  many  people  on  ir,  who  refemble  the  Ku- 
riles  of  the  firft  three  illands  in  all  refpedts,  but  are  not  under 
the  Ruffian  government,  nor  any  other  foreign  power.  The 
navigators  who  were  fent  by  Peter  the  Great,  only  faw  this 
ifland,  beyond  which  no  KuJJians  ever  were  until  the  fecond 
Kamtfchatkoi  expedition. 

The  Cheerpuy  is  reckoned  the  eighteenth  of  the  iflands.  It  lies 
weft  at  the  mouth  of  the  channel.  On  this  is  a  very  high 
mountain,  but  no  inhabitants.  Some  people  come  there  from 
the  other  iflands  to  catch  fowls  and  dig  roots.  The  people  of 
Kituy  have  fometimes  heard  firing  of  cannon  on  this  ifland,  as 
they  relate,  but  on  what  account  they  know  not.  They  likewife 
report,  that  formerly  a  Japaneje  veflel  was  loft  upon  it,  whofe 
people  were  taken  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  next  ifland,  and 
were  fent  to  Japan  to  be  redeemed. 

Th-"  channel    which  divides   the  ifland  Shimutir  from    the 
nineteenth  ifland  Eturpu  is  fo  broad,  that  one  cannot  fee  one 

ifland 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H    A    T     K     A.  39 

idand  from  the  other ;  but  from  thence  to  the  twentieth  illand 
Urupe,  and  from  that  again  to  the  twcnty-firft  Ku7iatir,  the 
channels  are  much  narrower. 

The  twenty-fecond  and  the  lad:  ifland  near  Japan  the  Japanefe 
ufed  to  call  Matma,  but  how  broad  the  channel  is  between  that  and 
the  former  ifland  Kiinatir  is  not  mentioned  in  Mr.  Miiller"% 
account  J  but  one  may  judge  that  it  is  not  very  wide,  efpecially  to 
the  weft,  for  reafons  to  be  given  hereafter.  The  illand  Matma. 
is  larger  than  any  of  the  reft,  and  next  to  it  in  fize  is  the 
Kunatir. 

The  natives  of  the  Eturpu  and  the  TJnipe  iflands  call  themfelves 
KeeJ:-Kiiriles,   They  have  a  particular  language  of  their  own,  and 
refemble  the  natives  of  the  illand  Kunatir,  but  we  do  not  know 
whether  their  language  is  the  fame  or  not ;  neither  are  we  af- 
fured  whether  the  language  of  the  Keek-Kuriles  has  any  affinity 
with  that  of  the  Ktiriles  of  Kamtfchatka  and  the  illands  near  it. 
This  is  to  be  obferved  that  the  yapane/e  fiy  they  call  the  natives 
of  the  laft  four  iflands  by  the  common  name  of  Jejo  ;  from  which 
we  may  conclude  that  the  inhabitants  of  Matma  are  of  the  fame  race 
with  the  natives  of  the  former  iflands,  and  the  language  is  the  fame 
on  all  thefe  four  iflands.     Thus  we  may   corred:  the  errors  of 
former  geographers,  who  give  the  name  of  jc/o  to  a  large  country 
lying  north-eaft  of  Japan,  which  now  we  find  is  made  up  of  the 
above-mentioiied  iflands.     In  this  there  is  nothing  contrary  to  the 
accounts  that  we  m.eet  with  in  the  voyages  of  the  Europeans,  par- 
ticularly of  the  Dutch,  who  in  the  year  1643  were  fent  to  dif- 
cover  the  land  of  Jcfo.     Some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  iflands 
of  Eturpu    and     Urupe    (which  had   a    commerce    with    the 
natives  of  the  iflands  near  Kamtfchatka,  about  25  or  30  years 
ago)  were  taken  captives  on  the  ifland  Paromufir,    and   were 
brought  to  Kajutfchatka  ;   and  this  probably  put  an  end  to  their 
communication  and  traffick  by  fea.    However  thefe  captives  were 
ufeful ;  for  the  accounts   received  from  the  Japanefe  were  ex- 
plained 


40         A  Geographical   Description  of 

plained  and  correaed  by  them,  and  fome  new  information  ob- 
tained. According  tothemthofe  Keck-Kurilcs  on  the  i (lands  £/z^r/>« 
and  JJrupe  are  under  no  foreign  fubjeftion  )  but  Matma,  both  by 
the  account  of  European  travellers  and  of  the  Japanefe,  has  been 
for  many  years  fabjed:  to  'Japan.  They  fay  alfo,  that  upon  thefc 
illands  are  a  great  number  of  the  Kuriles  and  Kamtfchadales  in 
ilavervj  who  had  been  formerly  carried  off,  It  is  worthy  of  ob- 
fervation  throughout  all  thefe  illands,  that  fuch  as  lie  more 
wefternly  have  no  wood,  but  thofe  that  lie  to  the  eaftward  have 
it  in  abundance,  and  confequently  there  is  great  plenty  of  game. 
There  is  fafe  anchoring  in  the  mouths  of  the  rivers  for  large  fliips, 
in  the  ifland  Efiirpu  particularly.  The  Japan  filk,  cotton  ftuffs, 
and  all  forts  of  iron  houfliold  furniture  alfo,  are  brought  to  the 
iflands  Etiirpu  and  JJrupe  by  the  natives  of  Kutiatir,  who 
purchafe  them  from  the  inhabitants  of  Matma. 

The  inhabitants  of  Etiirpu  and  JJrupe  make  fluffs  of  nettles, 
which  they  fell  to  the  JapaneJ'e  :  they  likewife  fell  to  them  all 
forts  of  furrs,  which  they  have  among  themfelves,  and  which  are 
brought  to  them  from  the  iflands  near  Kamtfchatka  ;  alfo  dry  fifh 
and  whale's  fat,  which  is  ufcd  in  viduals  by  the  natives  of  the 
ifland  Matma.  By  the  accounts  of  travellers,  thefe  things  are 
carried  even  into  Japan. 

The  ifland  Matma  lies  from  tlie  fouth-welT:  to  the  north-eafl. 
The  Japanefe  have  a  flrong  guard  upon  its  fouth-weft  point, 
perhaps  with  a  view  to  defend  the  country  from  the  Chinefe  and 
Koreans.  Not  far  from  thence,  upon  the  fliore  of  the  channel, 
which  divides  the  ifland  Matma  from  Japan,  fbnds  a  Japanefe 
city  of  the  fame  name  with  the  ifland,  where  are  kept  all  forts 
of  ammunition,  mufkets,  and  guns  for  defence,  and  in  which 
where  lately  built  new  fortifications.  Mofl  of  the  Japanefe  fet- 
tlements  upon  Matma  were  made  by  people  baniflied  thither. 
The  Japanefe,  who  were  brought  to  Kamptfchatka,  give  us  the 
fame  accounts  of  the  channel  between  Matma  and  Japan^  which 

we 


K    A     M    T    S     C    H     A    T     K    A.  41. 

we   find  in  the  European  voyages ;  namely,  that  this  channel  is 
very  narrow  in  feveral  places,  and  very  dangerous,  on  account  of 
feveral  rocky  capes  projeding  into  it  from  both  fides.     At  ebb 
and  flow  the  fea  is  fo  rapid  that  if  the  leafl:  time  is  loft  the  veflcis 
will  be  either  daftied  againft  the  capes,  or  carried  into  the  fea. 
The  Dutch  relate  that   they  have  found  a  fmall  iiland  eaftward 
of  thefe,  which  they  named  the  States'  Ifland ;    and  farther  to- 
wards the  eaft,  they  faw  a  great  land,  which  they   named  the 
Company's  Land,  and  imagined  it  to  be  part  of  the  continent  of 
North-America.     We   can   give  no   fatisfaftory  information  of 
thefe  things  from  any  accounts  received  from  the  Japanefe,  but 
the  Company's  Land  feems  to  be  the  fame  with  the  land  difcovered 
by  De  Gama,  and  it  ought  to  be  conlidered  rather  as  an  ifland 
than  the  main  land  ;  becaufe  America,  by   all   the  obfervations 
made  between   'Japan  and  New  Spain,  cannot  extend  fo  far  to 
the  weft.     In  thefe  accounts  coUedled  by   profeflbr  Midler,  we 
have  only  to  corrcdl  the  general  fltuation  of  the  Kuriljki  iflands, 
which  do  not  extend  to  the  fouth,   as  he  was  informed,  but  lie 
in  a  row  to  the  fouth- weft,  as  I  have  ftiewn  above,  and  as  they 
are  laid  down  in  the  General  RuJJian  Map  :  for  it  is  well  known 
by  the  new  maps,  and  from  the  verbal  accounts  of  the  Japattefe, 
who  have  been  there,  that  the  channel   Teffoy,  Vv-hich  reaches 
along   the    Chinefe    coaft,    S.  S.  W.   is  only    1 5   verfts  broad  ; 
but,  according  to  his  account  of  the  fituation  of  the  iflands,  it 
ought  to  be  confiderably  wider  to  the  fouth.     In  fliort,  if  captain 
Spanberg\  defcription  of  the  Kuriljki  iflands  to  Japan  could   be 
reconciled  with  Mr.  Mailer's,  then  the  exadt  iituation  of  each 
of  them  would  be  known,   and  their  diftances  from  each  other 
afcertained  ;  of  which  we  can  only  now  judge  by  conjedure. 

Mr.  Spanberg  gives  only  two  of  the  iflands  which  conftitute 
Jefo  their  proper  names ;  namely,  Matma  and  Kunatir ;  but  he 
diftinguifties  the  iflands  Eturpii  and  Urupe  by  the  names  of  the 
Grem  and  the  Orange  iflands :  and  as  thofe  iflands,  except  Matma ^ 

G  are 


42  A  Geographical  Description   of 

are  defcribed,  and  both  their  fize  and  fituation  laid  down,  there 
feems  to  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  cape  Tejj'oy  is  the  nortli-weft 
point  of  the  iiland  Matma,  which  was  obferved  by  the  RiiJJians 
only  from  the  eaft  fide  of  "Japan  ;  and  though  in  the  above 
accounts  of  Mr.  Midler,  it,  being  faid  to  lie  from  fouth-weft  to 
liorth-eaft,  may  occafion  fome  doubt,  yet  we  may  reconcile  it 
in  this  manner ;  that  the  neareft  point  of  Matma  to  Japan 
extends  towards  China  from  the  S.  E.  to  the  N,  W.  and  to  the 
Ktiriljki  fide  from  the  S.  W.  to  the  N.  E.  as  it  is  exprefled  in 
the  Ch'meje  maps,  in  which  are  only  wanting  the  divifions 
between  the  iilands  of  Jefo.  The  channel  between  Japan  and 
the  iOand  Matma,  according  to  the  new  maps,  in  fome  places 
is  20  verfls,  and  in  others  much  lefs.  The  nonli  part  of  the 
ifland  Japan,  or  Niphon,  is  a  little  above  the  40th  degree  of 
latitude. 

The  accounts  of  the  great  plenty  of  wood  on  the  iflands  near- 
eft to  Japan  are  confirmed  by  Mr.  Steller,  who  fays,  that,  in 
general,  the  iflands  lying  fartheft  to  the  weft  from  America  are 
the  moft  fruitful,  and  abound  with  trees  of  various  kinds,  among 
which  are  lemons,  bamboe,  Spanifi  canes  or  reeds,  and  poifonous 
herbs,  whofe  roots  are  as  yellow  as  faffron  and  as  thick  as  rhu- 
barb, and  are  well  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  firft  Kuriljkoy 
ifland,  for  they  formerly  bought  them  from  the  natives  of  thofe 
iflands,  and  ufed  to  poifon  their  arrows  with  the  juice.  Vines 
alfo  grow  there  ;  and  I  have  tafted  fome  grapes  which  Lieutenant 
Walton  brought  from  thofe  iflands  in  his  return  from  Japan. 
Upon  the  iiland  Kiinatir,  there  are  great  numbers  of  pine, 
larch,  and  fir  trees,  but  a  fcarcity  of  good  water.  Wild 
animals  they  have  in  abundance,  particularly  bears,  whofe 
fkins  the  inhabitants  ufe  for  their  cloaths.  The  natives  of  this 
ifland,  by  his  account  alfo,  wear  long  filk  cloaths  like  the  ChineJ'e, 
have  long  beards,  pay  no  regard  to  cleanlinefs,  and  feed  on  fifh 
and  whale's  fat.     Their  bedding  is  of  wild  goats'  fkins,  of  which 

there 


K    A    M    T    S     C    11    A     T    K     A.  43 

there  are  plenty.  They  acknowledge  no  fovereign,  though  they 
live  near  Japan.  The  'Japmicfe  come  to  them  every  year  ia 
their  fmali  craft,  and  bring  all  forts  of  iron  ware,  brazen  poty, 
wooden  lackered  waiters  and  bowls,  leaf  of  tobacco,  and  filk- 
and-cotton  fluffs,  which  they  exchange  with  them  for  whales' 
fat  and  the  fkins  of  foxes ;  but  they  are  not  fo  good  as 
thofe  of  Kamtfchatka.  The  natives  of  the  ifland  of  Kiinatir 
told  the  RuJJians  to  beware  of  thofe  of  the  ifland  of  Mafvm, 
becaufe  they  had  cannon,  afls.ing  our  people  at  the  fame  time, 
whether  they  came  from  the  North,  and  if  they  were  thofe 
who  are  famous  for  their  armies,  and  able  to  wage  war  with, 
and  conquer,  every  nation.  The  language  of  the  ifland  Kiinat'rr 
is  almofl:  the  fame  with  that  fpoken  in  the  ifland  Paromiijir  : 
from  hence  we  may  conclude,  that  the  natives  of  Eturpu 
and  Urupe  differ  little  in  their  language  from  the  Kuriljki. 
The  inhabitants  of  thefe  iilands  are  faid  to  call  themfelves 
Keek-Kuriles ;  but  the  word  Kuriles  being  corruptly  ufed 
by  the  Coffach  for  the  word  KiiJJn,  (which  is  a  common 
name  for  the  natives  of  the  Kuriljki  iflands)  it  is  more  pro- 
bable, that,  if  the  natives  of  Eturpu  and  XJturpe  do  diflinguifh 
themfelves  by  the  addition  of  the  word  Keek,  they  are  called 
Keek-Kujhi,  and  not  Keek-Kuriles. 


G  i  CHAP. 


44        -d  Geographical  Description  cyj 


C  H  A  P.    IV. 

Of     AMERICA. 

A  a  "^HE  following  accounts  of  that  part  of  America  which 
E        lies  diredly  eaft  from  Kamtfchatka,   are  coUedled  from 

notes  taken  out  of  Mr.  Stellcrs  journal. 
The  main  land  of  America ,  which  is  now  known  from  52 
to  60  degrees  of  north  latitude,  extends  from  the  fouth-weft 
to  the  north-eafl  fide,  at  almoft  an  equal  diflance  from  the  coaft 
of  Kamtfchatka;  namely,  about  37*^  in  longitude:  for  the 
coaft  of  Kamtfchatka  alfo  lies  in  the  fame  diredlion,  in  a  ftrait 
line  from  the  Kurilfkaya  Lopatka  to  the  Tchukotjkoi  Nofs,  ex- 
cluding the  gulphs  and  capes ;  infomuch  that  it  may  be  reafon- 
ably  concluded,  that  thefe  lands  were  once  joined,  efpecially 
at  the  I'chukotjkoi  Nofs  j  for  between  it  and  the  land, 
which  lies  eaft  over  againft  it,  it  is  not  above  two  de- 
grees and  a  half.  Mr.  Steller  offers  four  reafons  to  prove  the 
fame.  jft.  The  appearance  of  the  coaft  which,  both  of  Kamtf- 
chatka and  America,  feems  to  be  tore  off.  2d.  Many  capes 
projedl  into  the  fea  from  30  to  60  verfts.  3d.  Many  illands  are 
in  the  fea  which  divides  Kamtfchatka  from  America.  4th.  The 
fituation  of  the  iflands,  and  the  fmall  breadth  of  that  fea.  But, 
however,  this  is  left  to  the  judgment  of  the  learned ;  it  is  enough 
for  us  to  relate  fads.  The  fea  that  divides  Kamtfchatka  from 
America  is  full  of  iflands,  which  extend  from  the  fouth-weft 
point  of  America  to  the  channel  of  Anianova,  one  following  an- 
other, as  the  Kiirilfki  iflands  are  to  fapan.  The  iflands  lie 
in  a  row  from  51^  to  54^  of  latitude,  to  the  eaft,  and 
begin  a  little  above  5°  from  Kamtfchatka.  Mr.  Steller  thinks, 
that  between  the  Kurilfki  and  Ame?'icm  iflands  is  to  be  found 

the 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H     A    T    K    A.  45 

the  company's  land,  but  feveral  doubt  this ;  for,  according  to 
his  opinion,  that  land  ought  to  be  the  bafe  of  the  triangle  of  the 
Kuriljki  and  the  American  iflands ;  this  would  be  probable,  if 
the  company's  land  fliould  be  rightly  laid  down  in  the  maps. 

America  enjoys  a  much  better  climate  than  the  coaft  of 
the  north-eall  lidc  of  Afia,  although  equally  near  the  fea,  and 
every  where  full  of  high  mountains,  which  are  continually  co- 
vered with  fnow  ;  but  they  have  greatly  the  pre-eminence  when 
we  compare  their  qualities  with  thofe  of  Afia.  The  mountains 
of  Afia  being  every  where  rocky  and  ragged,  they  lofe  their 
compadlnefs  and  internal  native  heat ;  for  which  rcafon  they 
have  no  valuable  metals,  nor  any  trees  or  herbs,  and  in 
the  vallies  there  grows  only  fmall  fhrubby  wood  and  hardy 
herbs.  The  American  mountains  are  clofe  and  their  furface  not 
covered  with  mols,  but  with  a  fruitful  earth,  for  which  reafon 
they  are  cloathed  from  the  bottom  to  their  tops  with  a  thick 
and  fine  wood.  The  herbs  that  grow  at  their  feet  are  of  that 
kind  that  grow  in  dry  places,  but  not  in  marfhes;  and  the  fame 
herbs  grow  in  the  vallies  as  on  the  very  tops  of  the  mountains, 
becaufe  there  is  every  where  an  equal  warmth  and  moifture. 
But  in  Afia  it  is  quite  different,  for  the  fame  herb  grows  twice 
as  high  in  the  plain  as  in  the  mountains. 

In  America  at  60°  the  coaft  is  covered  with  wood  ;  but  at 
Kamtjchatka,  which  is  only  5 1  ^  of  latitude,  the  fmall  willows 
and  poplars  do  not  grow  nearer  the  fea  than  20  verfts,  and  birch 
wood  not  nearer  than  30,  nor  the  pitch  wood  along  the  river 
Kamtjchatka  nearer  than  50  from  its  mouth  :  and  in  Kamtf- 
chatka,  in  62°,  not  one  tree  is  to  be  found.  In  Mr.  .S/^//^r's 
opinion  America  extends  from  the  before- mentioned  latitude  to 
jo^  and  farther,  and  is  defended  and  covered  from  the  weft  by 
the  above  wood  ;  but  on  the  coaft  of  Kamtjchatka^  efpecially 
upon  the  Penjchinjka  fea,  it  is  quite  barren,   being  open  to  the 

violent 


46  A   Geographical    Description   of 

violent  north  winds,  which  blow  here  frequently  ;  and  we  fmd 
that  places  lying  farther  north  are  more  fruitful,  as  about  the 
Tchukotjkoi  Nofs,  where  they  are  covered  from  thefe  winds. 

It  is  likewife  obferved,  that  the  fifh  enter  the  rivers  in  America 
earlier  than  in  Kamtfcbatka,  Great  plenty  of  iifli  have  been  feen 
there  on  the  20th  of  July,  at  which  time  in  Kamtfcbatka  they 
only  begin  to  appear.  There  are  a  fort  of  rafberries  of  a 
very  extraordinary  lize  and  fine  tafte  ;  befides  honeyfuckles,  cran- 
berries, blackberries,  and  bilberries  in  great  plenty  :  as  alfo 
feals,  fea-beavers,  whales,  dog-fifli,  marmotta-minor,  red  and 
black  foxes  which  are  not  fo  wild  as  in  other  places,  per- 
haps becaufe  they  are  feldom  hunted. 

Among  the  known  birds  have  been  obferved  magpies,  crows, 
fea-gulls,  water-cranes,  fwans,  ducks,  quails,  plovers,  Greenland 
pigeons,  and  fowls  called  northern  ducks ;  and  among  the  un- 
known, ten  kinds  dillinguifliable  from  any  fpecies  of  European 
fowl. 

The  natives  there,  who  are  as  wild  as  the  Korcki  and  the 
'Tcbukotskoi,  are  plump,  broad  fliouldered,  ftrong  boned,  of  a 
middle  fize,  with  flreight  and  black  hair  which  hangs  loofe. 
Their  faces  are  fwarthyand  fiat,  their  nofes  fomewhat  pointed  but 
very  broad,  with  black  eyes,  thick  lips,  fmall  beards,  and  fliort  necks. 
Their  fliirts,  which  come  lower  than  the  knee,  are  girded  about 
their  bellies  with  leather  firings;  and  their  breeches  and  trowfersare 
made  of  the  fkins  of  feals  dyed  with  alder,  and  are  like  thofc  of 
the  Kami fcb  at  dales.  To  their  girdles  they  hang  iron  knives  in 
cafes,  like  thofe  worn  by  the  RuJJian  boors.  Their  hats  are  made 
of  grafs,  as  thofe  of  the  Kamtfcbat dales,  without  tops,  in  the 
fhapes  of  umbrellos,  dyed  with  green  and  red  colours,  with 
falcons'  feathers  before,  or  with  grafs  that  is  combed  out,  which 
looks  like  the  plumage  that  the  Americans  ufe  about  Brazil. 
They  feed  on  fifti,  fea  animals,  and  the  fweet  herb,  which  they 

prepare 


K    A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  47 

prepare  as  the  Kamtfchatdaks  do  ;  befides  they  nfe  the  dry  bark 
of  the  poplar  and  pine  trees,  which  is  eaten  as  food,  not  only 
here  and  in  Kamtfchatka,  but  in  all  Siberia,  and  fome  parts  of 
RiiJJia,  even  as  far  as  the  province  of  Viatka,  efpecially  in  times 
of  fcarcity ;  they  ufe  likewife  fea-grafs  laid  up  in  heaps,  which 
looks  like,  and  is  as  tough  as,  leather  thongs.  Wine  and  tobacco 
they  know  not,  which  ferves  as  a  real  proof  of  their  having  had 
hitherto  no  communication  with  the  Europeans.  They  efteem 
it  a  particular  ornament  to  make  holes  on  their  faces  in  different 
parts,  in  which  they  place  various  ftones  and  bones ;  others 
wear  in  their  noftrils  feathers  about  two  inches  long ;  fome 
wear  bones  of  the  fame  fort  in  their  under  lips,  and  others  upon 
the  forehead.  The  people  who  live  on  the  iflands  near  the  'Tchii- 
kotjkoi  Nofs,  and  who  have  a  communication  with  the  T'fchuktJ- 
chi,  are  certainly  of  the  fame  race,  for  among  them  it  is  always 
efteemed  as  an  ornament  to  wear  bones.  The  late  major 
Paidufjkoy  having  had  once  a  fkirmifli  with  the  Tfchuktjchi^ 
found  among  the  dead  two  men  of  this  country,  under  whofe 
noles  were  placed  two  teeth  of  the  fea-horfe,  in  holes  made  for 
that  purpofe  ;  for  which  reafon  the  natives  call  thofe  illanders 
Zoobatce,  or  large  teethed ;  and,  as  the  prifoners  reported,  they 
did  not  come  there  to  affiil  them,  but  to  fee  their  manner  of 
fighting  with  the  Rujjians. 

It  may  be  concluded  from  this,  that  the  Tfchnktfchi  and  they 
have  the  fame  language,  or,  at  leaft,  that  there  is  fuch  a  near 
refemblance  between  their  languages,  as  to  enable  them  to  con- 
verfe  together  without  an  interpreter.  The  language  of  the 
'Tjchuktfchi  is  derived  from  that  of  the  Koreki,  and  differ  from  it 
in  dialed!:  only ;  the  Koreki  therefore  can  converfe  with  them 
without  difficulty.  And  Mr.  Stellers  faying,  that  not  one  of 
cur  interpreters  could  underftand  the  American  language,  might 
arife  from  the  great  difference  in  the  dialed:,  or  from  the  parti- 
cular pronunciation,  which  is  obferved,  not  only  between  the 

wild 


'48         A  Geographical   Description  of 

wild  natives  of  Kamtfchatka,  but  alfo  between  the  Europeans 
in  different  provinces.  There  is  fcarce  one  fort  in  Y^amtfcbatka 
which  does  not  differ  in  language  from  that  of  another  ;  and  thofe 
forts  of  fome  hundred  verfls'  diftance  hardly  underfland  one  an- 
other. The  Americans  and  the  Kamtfchadalcs  agree  in  the  fol- 
lowing things  :  Firfl,  their  features  are  alike.  Secondly,  the  Ame- 
ricans prepare  the  fweet  herb  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Kamtf- 
chadales  do,  which  has  never  been  obferved  any  where  elfe. 
Thirdly,  they  both  ufe  wood  in  flriking  fire.  Fourthly,  it  has 
been  obferved,  from  many  inflances,  that  their  hatchets  are 
made  of  flone  or  bone ;  and  Mr.  Steller  thinks,  not  without 
reafon,  that  the  Americans  had  formerly  a  communication  with 
the  people  of  Kamtjchatka.  Fifthly,  their  wearing  apparel  and 
hats  are  the  fame.  And,  fixthly,  they  dye  the  fkins  of  hearts 
with  alder,  as  the  Kamt J  chat  dales  do  :  from  whence  it  appears 
probable,  that  they  are  of  the  fame  race.  Thefe  particulars 
may  help  to  anfwer  the  queflion,  Whence  was  America  peo- 
pled ?  for  though  we  fhould  grant,  that  America  and  Afia  were 
never  joined,  yet  tliefe  two  parts  of  the  globe  lie  fo  near  each 
other,  that  the  impoffibility  of  the  inhabitants  of  Afia  going  over 
to  America^  (efpecially  as  the  number  of  iflands  lying  between 
them  made  the  pafTage  more  eafy)   cannot  be  maintained. 

Their  arms  are  the  bow  and  arrow  ;  but  what  fort  of  bows 
we  cannot  tell,  for  our  people  faw  none  of  them.  Their  arrows 
indeed  are  longer  than  thofe  of  the  Kamtjchadales,  but  refemble 
intirdy  thofe  ufed  by  the  T^iingujki  and  I'artars,  which  our 
people  found  were  dyed  of  a  black  colour,  and  fcraped  fmooth. 
The  Americans  ufe  boats  made  of  Ikins,  as  the  Koreki  and 
the  TfchiiktJ'chi  do.  Their  boats  are  12  feet  long  and  two  broad, 
the  head  and  flern  fharp,  and  the  bottom  flat.  The  infide  is 
made  of  poles  joined  at  both  ends,  which  are  kept  extended  by  a 
proper  piece  of  wood  ;  and  the  fkins  fewed  round  feem  to  be 
thofe  of  feals  dyed  of  a  cherry  colour :    the  feat  is  round, 

two 


K     A     M     T     S     C     II     A     T     K     A,  49 

two  yards  from  the  ftern,  and  fewed  about  with  guts,  which, 
with  the  help  of  leather  thongs  laced  round  the  edges,  can  be 
drawn  together  and  opened  like  a  purfe.  The  American  fitting 
in  this  place  flretches  out  his  legs,  and  draws  the  fkin  tight 
about  his  body.  Thcfc  boats  will  Hve  in  the  moft  ftormy  fea, 
though  they  are  fo  light  that  they  may  be  carried  with  one 
hand. 

When  the  Americans  fee  any  flrangers  they  row  towards  them, 
making  a  long  fpeech  ;  but  whether  this  be  fome  conjuration,  or 
a  ceremony  at  receiving  them,  we  cannot  certainly  fay;  for  both 
the  one  and  the  other  is  in  ufe  among  the  Kiiriles  :  but,  before 
they  approach  them,  they  paint  their  cheeks  with  a  black  pencil, 
and  ftop  their  noftrils  with  grafs.  They  feem  to  receive  ftrangers 
very  kindly,  converfe  in  a  friendly  manner,  with  their  eyes  fixed 
upon  them,  treat  them  with  great  civility,  and  make  them  prefents 
of  whales'  fat,  and  of  thofe  pencils  with  which  they  daub  their 
own  cheeks,  not  doubting  but  fuch  things  are  as  acceptable  to 
others  as  to  themfelves. 

It  is  very  lafe  failing  in  thofe  parts  in  the  fpring  and  fummer ; 
but  in  the  autumn  fo  dangerous,  that  there  is  not  a  day  on  which 
they  dare  venture  out  for  fear  of  periling ;  the  winds  and  florms 
being  fo  violent,  that  the  Ruffians,  who  have  ufed  the  fea  for  forty 
years,  declare  they  have  never  feen  any  thing  equal  to  them.  The 
following  are  looked  upon  here  as  ligns  of  the  land  being 
near  :  When  many  tiifferent  forts  of  fea-cabbage  appear  floating 
on  the  fea ;  when  they  obferve  that  fort  of  grafs  of  which  cloaks, 
carpets,  and  little  bags  are  made  at  Kamtfchatka,  for  it  grows 
only  upon  the  feafliorej  and  when  fea-gulls  and  fea  animals, 
fuch  as  feals  and  the  like,  appear  in  great  numbers ;  for  though, 
the  feals  have  an  opening  in  their  hearts,  called  the  Foramen  ova- 
le, and  a  parage  called  DiiSlus  arteriofus  hotalli,  which  are  both 
open,  and  therefore  can  keep  under  water  for  a  long  time,   and 

H  may 


50         A   Geographical    Description   of 

may  go  far  from  the  ftiore  without  danger,  as  they  can  find  pro- 
per food  at  a  great  depth;  yet,  notwithftanding  all  this,  they 
feldom  go  out  above  ten  miles  to  fea.  But  the  mod  certain  fign 
of  the  land  being  near,  is,  when  they  fee  Kamtfchatkoi  beavers, 
which  feed  only  upon  lobfters  and  crabs,  and,  by  the  formation 
of  their  hearts,  cannot  continue  under  water  above  two 
minutes. 

We  mufl  yet  mention  fome  iflands,  which  lie  near  to  Kamff- 
chatka,  though  not  in  a  ftrait  line  with  thofe  above  defcribed, 
but  north  of  them,  particularly  Bering's  ifland,  which  is  now  fo 
well  known  to  the  Kontfcbatkoi  inhabitants,  that  many  go  thi- 
ther for  the  trade  of  fea  beavers  and  other  animals.  This  illand 
extends  between  z^^°  and  60*^  of  latitude  from  the  fouth-eafl  to 
the  north-weft.  Its  north-eaft  end,  which  lies  almoft  diredlly 
oppofite  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  is  about  two 
degrees  from  the  eaftern  (hore  of  Kamtfchatka,  and  its  fouth-eafl 
point  is  about  three  degrees  from  the  Kronotjkoy  Nofs.  The 
length  of  this  ifland  is  165  verfts,  but  its  breadth  is  unequal, 
being  from  the  fouth-eaft  point  to  the  fteep  and  unpaflable  cliff, 
which  lies  fourteen  verfts  from  the  point,  between  three  and  four 
verfts  in  breadth  ;  from  this  to  the  Seepucha  bay  about  five 
verfts ;  frcHTi  the  Seepucha  bay  to  the  Beaver  cliff,  fix  vprfts  j 
and  thence  to  the  fmall  river  Kitova,  five  verfts.  Farther  on  it 
grows  broader  and  broader ;  and  its  greateft  breadth  is  oppofite 
to  the  northern  cape,  where  it  is  twenty-three  verfts.  One  may 
fay  in  genera!,  that  there  is  fo  little  proportion  between  the  length 
and  breadth  of  this  ifland,  that  our  author  doubts  whether  its 
equal  is  to  be  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  world;  at  leaft, 
he  has  neither  read  nor  heard  of  fuch ;  and  he  fays  alfo,  that 
the  iflands  which  he  faw  near  America^  and  the  whole  range 
of  them  towards  the  eaft,  have  nearly  fuch  proportions. 

This 


KAMTSCHATKA. 


5i 


This  ifland  confifls  of  one  rocky  ridge  divided  by  many  vallies 
Jying  north  and  fouth  ;  and  the  mountains  are  fo  high  that,  in 
fair  weather,  they  may  be  perceived  almofl:  in  the  middle  of  the 
paflage  between  the  ifland  and  Kamtfchatka. 

The  natives  of  Kamtfchatka  were  of  opinion  for  many  years, 
that  over-againft  the  mouth  of  the  Kamtfchatka  there  ought  to 
be  land ;  becaufe  there  was  always  the  appearance  of  a  fog  or 
mift  there,  let  the  horizon  be  ever  fo  bright.  The  highell:  moun- 
tains here  are  not  higher  than  two  verfts  perpendicular  ;  the  tops 
are  covered  for  the  thicknefs  of  half  a  foot  with  a  common  yel- 
low clay  ;  but  below  are  hard  yellow  rocks.  The  Stanovoy 
ridge  is  hard  and  entire  ;  and  the  mountains  upon  the  fides  are 
feparated  by  vallies,  through  which  run  fmall  rivers  on  both  fides 
of  the  ifland.  It  is  obfervable  in  this  ifland,  that  the  mouths  of  all 
the  rivers  lie  either  to  the  fouth  or  to  the  north,  and  from  their 
fprings  they  either  run  fouth-eafl:  or  north-weft. 

There  are  no  plains  near  the  principal  ridge,  except  the  fea- 
fliore,  and  even  there  are  little  mountains  of  half  a  verft,  or  a 
verft,  in  circumference.  Such  hills  are  obferved  near  every  rivulet, 
with  this  difference,  that  the  flatter  the  capes  are  towards  the  fea, 
the  larger  are  the  plains  behind.  The  very  fame  thing  is  alfo 
obferved  in  the  vallies :  if  they  lie  between  high  mountains,  they 
are  lefs,  and  the  rivulets  in  them  alfo  fmaller  ;  but  in  thofe  valHes 
which  are  between  low  mountains,  it  is  otherwife.  On  the  Stan- 
ovoy or  principal  ridge,  wherever  the  mountains  are  fteep  and  full 
of  cliffs,  there  are  always  found  lakes  half  a  verft,  or  a  verft, 
from  the  fea-fhore,  which  run  by  fmall  outlets  into  the  fea. 

The  mountains  confift  of  one  hard  blue  ftonc ;  but  where  they 
are  parallel  with  the  fea,  there  the  capes  are  made  up  of  a  ftrong 
greyifli  clean  ftone,  fit  for  polifhing.  This  circumftance  the 
author  efteems  worthy  of  obfervation,  becaufe  he  imagines  the 
^one  might  obtain  this  change  from  the  fea- water. 

H2  In 


52  A  Geographical   Description  of 

In  many  places  of  the  illand  the  beach  is  fo  narrow,  that  It  is 
hardly  poffible  to  pafs  it  at  high  water ;  and  in  two  places  there 
is  no  pafTage  at  all :  one  of  thefe  is  near  the  fouth-eaft,  and  the. 
other  near  the  north-weft  point  of  the  illand. 

It  is    remarkable,   that   wherever  there    is    a     bay   on    one 

iide   of  the    ifland,    on   the  other,    directly   oppofite  to  it,   is  a 

cape ;  and  where  the  fhore  on  one  fide  is  flat  and  fandy,   on  the 

other  it  is  rocky  and  torn.     Where  the   turning  is  ftiarp,  either 

to  one  fide  or  the  other,  there  the  fliore  is  cliffy  and   ftony  about 

a  verft  or  two  from   the  turning.     The   mountains   nearer  the 

Stamvoy  ridge  are  rather  the  fteepeft.  Tliere  are  many  cracks  which 

were  occafioned  at  different  times  by  earthquakes ;  and  it  has  been 

obferved,  that  in  the  highcft  mountains  fomething  fticks  out  like 

kernels,  ending  as  cones  ;   v/hich,  though  they  feem  to  be  of  the 

fame  fubftance  with  the  mountain  itfell;  yet  are  foraewhat  fofter 

and  clearer,  and  have  a  particular  figure.   Such  kernels  are  found 

on  the  mountains  of  Baykal,  and  on  the  ifiand  Olehon.  Mr.  Steller 

received  from  Anadirjk  ftones  of  a  green  colour  fomewhat  re- 

fembling  thefe  kernels,  and  was  informed  that  they  were  taken 

from  the  top  of  the  mountains ;  and  tliat  whenever  they  are  brokers 

off,  others  grow  in  their  places.    It  is  thou  ght  that  thefe  ftones  are 

formed  by  forae  internal  motion  of  the  earth,  particularly  by  its 

prefTure  towards  the  center  -,  from  whence  thefe  kei-nels  may  be 

reckoned  a  ipecies  of  chryftal,  or  the  pureft  ftony  matter,  which 

is  firft  preffed  from  the  center  In  a  liquid  fbte,  and  afterwards 

hardened  by  the  external  air. 

On  tlie  north-eaft  fide  of  the  above-mentioned  ifland  Is  no  haven, 
even  for  the  fmaileft  veffel,  except  one  place  which  is  in  breadth 
80  fathc^ns,  where  a  veflel  may  anchor  in  calm  weather.  There 
are  Ihoals  that  lie  off  as  far  as  four  or  five  verfts  from  the  ftiore,. 
which  are  laid  with  ftones  as  if  done  by  defign ,  and  on  which 
joo  may  walk  at  low  water  to  the  deep  places  without  wetting, 

jcui-  leeL 

North 


K     A,  M     T     S     C     II     A     T     K     A,  53. 

North  of   the  haven   is    a    large    bay,    in    which   are   fuch 
ftones  and   pillars    as    are  found   on   the  fliore.      The  fouth- 
wefl:  fide  of  the  ifland   is  quite  different ;   for  though  the  fliore  is 
rocky  and  more  torn,  yet  in  two  places  there  is  a  paffage  for  flat- 
bottomed  boats,  not  only  to  that,  but  even  into  the  lakes.     The 
firfl- place  is  50,  and  the  fecond  is  115,   verfts  from  the  fouth- 
eaft  point  of  the  ifland.     This  lafl:  is  eafily  known  from   the  fea, 
for  the  land  turns  there  from  north  to  wefl ;  and  in  the  very  cape 
runs  a  river,  which,  though  fmall,  is  the  largefl:  in  that  ifland,  and 
the  depth  of  it  at  high  water  is  (even  feet.     It  runs  out  of  a 
great   lake,    which  is  a  verfl:  and  a  half  from  its  mouth  ;  and 
as  the   river  is    deeper    when  they    have  pafled  the   bar,    the 
failing  to    the  lake'    in    fmall    veflels    is     very  eafy   and    fafe^ 
The  principal  mark   by  which  they  can  know  this  river  is   an 
ifland  feven  verfl:s  round,  and  it  lies  feven  verfl:s  fouth  from   the 
mouth  of  it.     The  fliore  from  thence  to  the  wefl:,  for  five  verfl:s, 
is  fandy  and   low,    and    there   are  no    rocks.     From    the  high 
mountains  of  this  ifland   are  to  be  feen  the  following  places  :    in 
the  fouth,   two  iflands  j   one  of  them  in   circumference  feven 
verfts,  as  was  faid  before  ;.  and   the  other   is  in    the  fouth- weft, 
oppoflte    to    the    very   point    of  Bcnng's  ifland,    and    at    the 
difliance  of  14  verfl^.     It  confifts  of  two  high  and  fplit  rocks, 
about   three    verfts   in    circumference.     From    the  very   north- 
weft  point  of  Bering's  ifland^  in  clear  weather,  are   feen  moun- 
tains covered  with  fnow ;    and  the  diftance  of  them  from  thence 
mav  be  reckoned  about    100  or  140  verfts.     Thefe  mountains 
were  taken  by  the  author  for  a  cape  of  the  main-land  oi  America, 
for  the  following  reafons :  firft,  becaufe   the  mountains,   as   he 
judged  by  their  diftance,  were  higher  than   thofe  of  the  ifland: 
fecondly,  becaufe  within  the  fame  diftance  on  the  eaft  from  the 
ifland  there  were  plainly  obferved  fuch  other  white   mountains; 
froOT  the  height  and  dlredion  of  which,  all  were  of  opinion  tliat 

It 


54         y/  Geographical    Description   <?/ 

it  was  the  main  land  of  America.  From  the  fouth-eafl:  point  of 
Bering's  ifland  they  faw  lying  fouth-eaft  fome  other  iflands,  but 
not  fo  plainly ;  and  their  fituation  was  thought  to  be  between 
Bering's  ifland  and  the  continent.  It  has  been  obferved,  that 
above  the  mouth  of  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  towards  the  weft  and 
fouth- weft,  in  clear  weather,  there  is  always  a  fog;  and  from 
that,  in  fome  meafure,  it  was  known  that  Bering's  ifland  was  not 
far  from  the  country  of  Kamtfchatka.  To  the  north  part  of 
Bering's  ifland  there  is  another,  in  length  from  80  to  loo 
verfts.  The  channel  betwixt  thefe  iflands,  towards  the  north- 
weft,  is  about  20  verfts,  and  towards  the  fouth-eaft,  about 
forty.  Near  the  points  of  both  are  many  rocks  and  pillars  in 
the  fea. 

The  weather  dift"ers  from  that  of  Kamtfchatka  only  in  being 
more  fevere  and  fliarp ;  for  the  ifland  has  no  cover  from  any 
point,  and  is  narrow  and  without  wood.  The  wind  is  fo  ftrong  in 
the  low  and  narrow  vallies  that  a  man  can  hardly  keep  his  feet, 
and  it  was-obferved  to  be  higheft  in  the  months  of  February  and 
April,  when  i'fblowed  from  the  fouth-eaft  and  the  north- weft; 
when  from  the  former,  the  weather  was  clear  and  tolerable,  and, 
when  from  the  latter,  it  continued  clear,  but  was  very  cold.  The 
higheft  tides  were  in  the  beginning  of  February,  when  the  wind 
was  north-weft ;  and  in  the  middle  of  May,  from  the  great  rains 
and  the  melting  of  the  fnow,  another  flood  happened ;  yet  both 
thefe  floods  were  moderate,  compared  to  thofe  which,  undoubt- 
edly, have  been  formerly  in  thofe  iflands ;  for  thirty  fathoms 
higher  than  the  fea-mark,  lie  wood  and  whole  fkeletons  of 
fea  animals,  which  have  been  left  by  the  fea ;  and  it  is 
probable  that  in  the  year  1737,  the  flood  was  as  great  here 
as  at  Kamtfchatka.  Earthquakes  happen  frequently.  The 
greateft  here,  which  laftcd  exadtly  fix  minutes,  was  felt  in 
the  beginning  of  February,   when  the  wind  was  wefternly ;   a 

great 


KAMTSCHATKA.  55 

great  nolfc,  which  preceded  the  fliock,  was  heard  under  ground, 
attended  with  a  whirling  wind,  which  went  from  fouth  to 
north. 

The  water  here  is  remarkable  for  its  lightnefs  and  purity  ;  and 
its  medicinal  virtues  have  been  experienced  by  the  fick.  Every 
valley  has  its  rivulet,  and  the  number  of  them  all  is  above 
fixty.  By  reafon  of  the  great  declivity  of  the  vallies  they  are 
very  rapid;  and,  near  the  fea,  divide  themfelves  into  many 
ftreams. 


rri  T~  T^ 


THE    NATURAL    HISTORY    OF 


KAMTSCHATK^. 


»S*«**«'«««******«***«*****>«««««««*«*«*««**«««W«**««»««***««** 


PART      ir. 

CHAP.     I. 
Of  the     SOIL. 

13((*'^)3C  P  O  N  the  banks  of  the  river  Kamtfchatka  is  found 
r  U  D  plenty  of  roots  and  berries,  which  in  Ibme  meafure 
)§(k.jH()^  fupply  the  want  of  corn.  There  is  alfo  wood  fuffi- 
cient  not  only  for  building  houfes,  but  even  for  ihip-building ; 
and  Mr.  Steller  \%  of  opinion,  that  near  the  head  of  this  river, 
both  fummer  and  winter  corn  would  grow  as  well  as  in  any 
other  places  in  the  fame  latitude,  the  foil  being  deep  and  rich  ; 
and  though  fnow  falls  in  very  great  quantities,  yet  it  thaws  early 
enough,  and  the  fpring  is  not  fo  rainy,  nor  have  they  fuch 
damps,  there  as  in  many  other  places.  Several  tryalsoffum- 
mer-corn  have  been  adually  made  both  in  the  upper  and  lower 
Oftrog  *  of  Kamtfchatka  ;  in  which  both  barley  and  oats  have 
fucceeded.     At  the  monaflery  of  our  Lord  of  Jakutfki,  they  have 

*  OA^^  is  a  little  town  fortified  with  pallifades,  where  the  RuJ/ian  Coflacks,  and 
other  inhabitants  live. 

I  feveral 


5?  7'be  Natural   History  of 

feveral  years  paO:  fown  feven  or  eight  poods  -j-  of  barley,  which 
yielded  a  crop  not  only  fufficient  for  groats  and  meal  for  their 
own  ufe,  but  even  enough  to  fupply  their  neighbours,  though 
they  are  obliged  to  plough  their  land  with  men. 

All  garden  ftuft' thrives  not  alike;  the  mofi:  fucculent  produce 
only  leaves  and  rtalks.  Cabbage  and  lettice  never  grow  to  any 
head,  and  the  peas  continue  in  flower  until  late  in  the  harveft 
without  yielding  fo  much  as  pods ;  but  garden  roots  which  are 
full  of  juice,  fuch  as  turnips  and  radillies,  grow  very  well.  Thefe 
tryals,  however,  were  only  made  upon  the  banks  of  the  Great 
River  and  Aisjatfcha.  Such  things  as  require  a  hot  foil,  grow 
very  well  every  where,  but  ftill  beil  upon  the  Kamtfchatka.  Upon 
the  Great  River  I  never  faw  any  turnips  larger  than  three  or 
four  inches  diameter ;  but  upon  the  Kamtfchatka,  I  have  ittw 
them  four  or  five  times  as  big. 

The  grafs  grows  here  fo  high,  and  is  fo  full  of  f^p  that  one  fcarcely 
fees  any  thing  like  it  in  all  the  empire  of  Rujjia  ;  near  the  river 
and  lakes,  and  in  the  opening  of  the  woods,  it  rifes  to  above 
the  height  of  a  man,  and  fo  fall  that  it  may  fometimes  be  mowed 
thrice  in  a  fiimmer  ;  fo  that  few  places  can  be  more  proper  for 
breeding  of  cattle ;  and  although  the  blades  are  thick  and 
high,  and  make  but  a  coarfe  fort  of  hay,  yet  the  cattle  are 
large  and  fat,  and  give  plenty  of  milk  both  fummer  and  winter, 
which  I  attributed  to  the  richnefs  of  the  foil  and  the  fpring  rains. 
The  grafs  continues  full  of  juice,  even  to  the  beginning  of 
winter,  which  being  condenfed  by  the  cold  prevents  the  grafs  from 
turning  hard  during  that  feafon.  As  the  grafs  is  fo  high  and  thick,  a 
great  deal  of  hay  may  be  made  upon  a  fmall  fpot ;  and  the  cattle 
can  find  food  in  the  fields  all  the  winter.  The  places  where 
the  grafs  thus  grows  are  never  fo  much  covered  with  fnow  as  the 
bogs  and  fwamps,  and  for  this  reafon  it  is  difficult  to  travel  over 
them  in  the  winter. 

t  A  pood  is  a  RuJ/Ian  weight  of  40  lb. 

In 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  59 

In  other  places  lying  upon  the  Enftcrn  Ocean,  either  to  the 
N.  or  S.  of  Knmtfchalka^  there  is  no  Lmd  fit  for  culture  ;  for 
all  that  is  near  the  ftiore  is  either  fandy,  ftony,  or  boggy,  and 
the  banks  are  fo  narrow,  that  if  the  ground  was  good,  yet  there 
is  not  enough  for  agriculture  ;  and  there  are  but  very  little  hopes 
of  the  land  about  the  Penfchinjka  fca  anfwering  better,  cfnecially 
for  winter-corn,  it  being  all  marfliy  and  boggy.  At  fome  dif- 
tance  from  the  fea  are  found  woody  places  which  are  dry  and 
high,  and  appear  not  improper  for  corn ;  but  the  fnow  which 
falls  in  the  beginning  of  the  harveft  before  the  earth  is  frozen, 
and  lies  generally  deep  upon  thefe  places  'till  the  middle  of  May, 
both  prevents  the  fowing  of  the  fummer-corn,  and  deftroys  the 
winter-corn  ;  and,  becaufe  at  the  thawing  of  the  earth  the  corn 
would  be  blafted  by  the  evening  frofts,  it  is  imponible  to  fow  any 
before  the  middle  of  'June  ;  after  which  time  to  Augujl  are  con- 
tinual rains,  fo  that  fometimes  the  fun  is  not  feen  for  fourteen  days 
together  :  this  would  caufe  the  corn  to  grow  very  high  and  full 
of  juice;  but,  for  want  of  warm  and  dry  weather,  it  would  never 
ripen.  Notwithftanding,  Mr.  Stellcr  thinks,  that  if  the  ground 
was  properly  prepared,  oats  and  barley  might  ripen  there  j  but 
this  is  much  to  be  doubted,  until,  at  leaft,  further  tryal  can  be 
made  ;  for  I  have  myfelf  feveral  times  fown  barley  upon  the 
Great  River,  and  it  grew  well  in  thicknefs,  height,  and  ftrengtli 
of  blade  'till  the  beginning  of  Augujl,  when,  jufl:  as  the  ear 
was  putting  forth,  all  of  it  was  deftroyed  by  the  froft. 

All  thefe  barren  places,  not  only  near  the  Penfchinjka  fea,  but 
even  within  the  land,  appear  to  be  compofed  of  earth  brought 
from  other  parts.  This  one  may  difcover  by  the  different  flrata, 
and  perceive  how  they  have  encreafed  yearly  on  the  banks  of  the 
rivers,  which  are  high,  and  on  the  cliffs  that  are  bare.  I  have 
feen  hanging  out  of  the  earth,  trees  which  are  not  to  be  found  in 
that  country,  more  than  fevcn  feet  deep  under  the  furface.  Hence 
it  may  be  concluded,  that  all  thefe  barren,  boggy  places,  where  at 

I  2  prefent 


6o  I'kc   Natural  HisroRV   of 

prefent  are  no  woods,  but  only  flirubs,  and  ftunted  fallows,  and 
birches,  were  formerly  covered  with  water,  which  has  decreafed 
by  degrees  here,  as  it  has  upon  the  north-eaftern  coafl:.     Below 
the  earth  hes  a  bed  of  pure  ice,  extremely  hard  ;  and  under  that 
a  foft  waterifli  clay,   with  gravel ;    this  continues  from  the   fea 
up  to  the  very  mountains,  and  will  fufBciently  account  for  the 
barrennefs  of  thefe   parts.     But,   though  the   land  is   not  every 
where  fit  for  agriculture,  yet  fome  places  upon  the  river  Kamtf- 
chatka    (which  have  been   already  mentioned)   and   along   the: 
Bijlroy  river,  are  fufBcient  to  furnifh  with  corn,  not  only  the  in- 
habitants,  but  alfo  the   neighbouring  parts.     It  is   however  to- 
be  feared,  that  the  burning  of  the  woods,  in  order  to  clear  the 
lands,  may  drive  away  the  fables,  who   have  a  particular  aver- 
fion   to  fmoke  :    this  happened  upon  the  river  Lena,  formerly 
the   befl  hunting  country,  but  now  deferted  by  thefe  animals. 
The  fcarcity  of  wood  is  a  great  inconvenience,  both  the  Ruffians' 
and  natives  being  obliged  to  fetch  it  twenty  or  thirty  verfts  with 
great  trouble  and  lofs  of  time,   for  the  neceflary  ufes  of  boiling 
their  fait  and  curing  their  filli  :  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  bring  it 
down  in  floats,  becaufe  the  current  is   rapid  and  fo  fhallow,  that 
they  can  bring  only  two  little  bundles  on  each  fide  of  a   fmall 
filliing-boat ;   otherwife  they  \Aould  obftrudl  themfelves  in   the 
management  of  their  boat,    and  thereby  run  the  rillc  of  being 
driven  upon  the  rocks,  fand-banks,  and  trunks  of  trees,  where  not 
only  their  boat  and  wood,  but  frequently  the  people  themfelves 
are  loft.     Sometimes  the  fcarcity  of  wood  is  fupplied  by  fuch  as 
is  thrown  up  by  the  fea,  which  the  inhabitants  gather  upon  the 
ihore  J  but  this  wood  that  has  been  foaked  in  the  water,  although 
they  are  at  great  pains  to  dry  it,  never  burns  clear,  but  fmothers 
away  with  a  continual  fmoke  very  hurtful  to  the  eyes. 

At  the  diftance  of  30  or  40  verfts  from  the  fea,  and  near  the 
heads  of  the  rivers,    grow  birch-trees,    alder,    and  poplar  j   of 
which  the  people  build  their  houfes  and  make  their  boats.     But- 

this 


KAMTSCFTATKA.  6i 

this  they  bring  down  with  great  ditlicuhy,  ufing  tlie  method- 
above  mentioned :  for  which  realbn  a  very  poor  houfe  will  coft 
here  loo  rubles  and  more,  and  a  fmall  fidiing-boat  five  rubles. 
In  other  places,  where  the  hills  are  nearer  the  fbore,  and  the 
water-carriage  eafier,  wood  for  firing  and  building  is  much 
cheaper. 

Upon  the  Biftroy  river,  which  falls  Into  the  Great  River  below 
the  Bolfcheretjkoi  OJlrog,  grows  the  befl:  wood  that  is  in  thefe 
parts  ;  even  the  birch-trees  are  fo  large,  that  captain  Spa?iberg 
built  a  floop  v/ith  their  wood,  in  which  he  made  feveral  diftant 
voyages  to  fea. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  when  this  vefi'el  was  launched 
flie  lay  as  deep  in  the  water  as  a  veffel  full  loaded  ;  and  it 
was  believed,  that  fhe  never  would  be  fit  to  go  to  fea,  but 
that  thefmallefl:  loading  would  fink  her.  But,  when  fhe  was 
laden,  flie  drew  very  little  more  water,  and  few  vefiels 
failed  better  or  lighter,  or  could  go  nearer  the  wind : 
the  reafon  of  which  may  be,  that  as  this  wood  has  not  fo 
much  rofin,  it  fucked  a  greater  quantity  of  water  at  firfi-, 
but  fo  foon  as  its  parts  were  once  filled,  it  then  fucked  very 
little  more. 

There  is  great  plenty  of  wood  upon  the  eafiern  co?A  of  Kamff- 
chatka  ;  from  the  hills  down  to  the  very  fhore  grow  very  fine  birch, 
and  alder  trees.  Beyond  the  river  'Jonpamba,  and  towards  its 
head,  begin  the  woods  which  continue  to  the  Kamtfchatka,  Lo~ 
patka,  and  along  the  river  Kamtfchatka  to  the  mouth  of  the- 
river  Elouki.  Up  the  river,  almofl:  to  its  head,  grow  likewife. 
pines,  but  not  large  enough  for  buildings.  About  the  neck  of 
land  which  joins  the  peninfula  of  Kamtjchatka  to  the  continent, 
the  wood  begins  again  to  fail. 

The  changes  of  the  weather  and  air  are  commonly  in  the  fol- 
lowing order :  harvefi:  and  winter  make  up  more  than  one  half 
of  the  year ;  and  the  fpring  and   fummer   cannot   be  reckoned. 

above: 


62  The  Natural  History  of 

above  four  months  :  the  trees  commonly  begin  to  bad  about  the 
end  of  Jime,  and  fome  of  them  to  lofe  their  leaves  in  the  month 
of  Aiigujl. 

The  winter  is  moderate  and  conftant,  fo  that  there  are  neither 
fuch  fevere  frofts  nor  fudden  thaws  as  in  Jakutjki.  The  mer- 
cury in  de  /'  IJles  thermometer  was  between  i6o  and  180  degrees. 
From  the  fevere  frofts  that  we  had  two  years  following  in  the 
month  of  Jajtuary,  it  fell  to  205  degrees.  The  month  of  ya- 
niiary  is  always  their  coldefl  month  \  and  at  that  time  the  mercury 
was  between  17 1  and  200  degrees. 

The  fpring  weather  is  pleafanter  than  the  fummer ;  when, 
although  it  fometimes  rains,  yet  now  and  then  there  are  fine  clear 
days.  The  fnow  lies  to  the  end  of  May^  which  with  us  is 
reckoned  the  lail:  fpring  month. 

The  fummer  is  for  the  mofl:  part  very  difagreeable  weather, 
rainy  and  cold  *  j  the  reafon  of  which  is  the  continual  damps 
from  the  neighbouring  mountains  being  covered  with  fnow  that 
never  melts.  It  frequently  happens,  that  for  a  week  or  two  the 
fun  does  not  appear  :  and  during  all  the  time  that  I  was  there  we 
had  never  one  whole  week  of  fair  weather,  never  one  day  fo  clear 
but  the  mornings  were  foggy  ;  and  there  fell,  as  it  were,  a  fmall 
drizzling  rain,  which  continued 'till  twelve  o'clock.  From  this 
moifl  air  and  the  neighbouring  hills  it  is  fo  cold,  that  one  can 
never  be  without  warm  cloathing. 

I  never  obferved  either  violent  rains  or  loud  thunder ;  for  the 
rains  are  fmall,  and  the  thunder  refembles  fome  rumbling  noife 
under  the  earth.     The  lightning  is  alfo  very  weak. 

In  the  Oftrog  upon  the  Great  River,  where  the  air  is  warmer, 
the  mercury  in  the  thermometer  changed  from  130  to  146 
degrees ;  and  by  an  extraordinary  heat,  that  happened  two  dif- 
ferent years  in  the  month  of  July,  it  rofe  1 1 8  degrees. 

*  This  is  to  be  underllood  of  the  country  about  the  Great  River  and  the  Penfchtnjka 
fea;  in  other  places  the  fummer  is  tolerable,  as  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

The 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  63 

The  inconftancy  of  the  fummer  weather  not  only  occafions  the 
unfruitfuhiefs  of  the  land,  but  is  likewife  a  great  hindrance  to 
the  people  in  preparing  their  fiHi  againft  the  winter;  fo  that, 
although  there  is  vaft  plenty  of  fifh,  they  are  not  able  to  prepare 
fo  much  as  to  prevent  a  fcarcity  before  the  winter  is  over ;  nor 
can  they  prefervc  one  fifli  out  of  ten  which  they  hang  up  to 
dry,  the  continual  wet  breeding  worms  which  confume  it;  fo 
that  the  filh  which  the  dogs  and  bears  catch  themfelves  and 
lay  up,   fells  very  dear  in  the  fpring. 

In  the  more  diftant  places  from  the  fea,  and  efpecially  about 
the  upper  Kamtfchatka  Oftrcg,  the  weather  is  very  different ;  it 
being  fine  and  clear  from  the  month  oi  April  to  the  middle  of 
'June.  The  rains  begin  after  the  fummer  folftice,  and  continue 
to  the  end  oi  Auguft.  Deep  fnows  fall  in  the  winter  ;  but  high 
winds  feldom  happen,  and,  when  they  do,  are  but  of  fliort  conti- 
nuance :  and  although  there  does  not,  perhaps,  fall  more  fnow 
than  upon  the  Great  River,  yet  it  is  deeper,  as  it  lies  lighter. 

The  harveft  weather  is  generally  agreeable  and  clear,  except  at 
the  end  oi  September,  when  ftorms  frequently  happen.  The  rivers 
are  generally  frozen  over  in  the  beginning  of  A^brfw^^f^r ;  for  their 
fwift  current  prevents  their  freezing  in  moderate  frofts.  Upon 
the  Penfcbinjka  feu  the  winds  are  generally  in  the  fpring  fouth- 
fouth-eall  and  fouth-weft  ;  in  the  fummer,  weft ;  in  the  autumn, 
jiorth  and  north-eaft  ;  in  the  winter  before  the  folftice,  uncertain  ; 
but  after  that,  to  the  month  of  March,  the  north-eaft  and  eaft 
winds  prevail.  From  thefe  winds  the  fpring  and  fummer,  before 
the  folftice,  are  generally  thick  and  heavy  ;  but  the  weather  in 
the  months  oi  September,  OBober,  February,  and  March,  is  more 
agreeable,  and  is  the  time  for  trade  and  long  journies.  In  No- 
vember, December,  and  January,  there  is  little  clear  good  weather, 
but  heavy  fnows  and  great  drifts,  which  in  Siberia  they  call 
Pourgami.  The  eaft  and  fouth-eaft  winds  blow  long  and  moft  vio- 
lently, fometimesfor  two  days  together,  and  with  fuch  vehemence, 

that 


-6.4  The  Natural    History    of 

that  a  man  cannot  ftand  upon  his  feet.  Thefe  winds,  which 
generally  rage  the  three  laft-mentioned  months,  bring  a  great 
quantity  of  ice  upon  the  fhore  of  the  Lopatka  and  Awachhifkaya 
bay,  with  a  multitude  of  fea-beavers  :  about  this  time,  therefore, 
is  their  bell:  feafon  for  catching  thefe  animals.  The  north  winds, 
either  in  fummer  or  winter,  bring  agreeable  clear  weather ;  but 
the  fouth  and  fouth-wefb  winds  in  fummer  are  attended  with 
xain,  and  in  winter  with  fnow.  And  although  the  cold  is  not  fo 
great,  yet  the  air  is  always  heavy  and  thick,  and  at  fea  generally 
attended  with  great  fogs,  as  our  people,  who  went  upon  the 
American  and  Japan  expedition,  experienced  :  therefore  failing  in 
fuch  weather  is  as  dangerous  as  living  upon  the  land  is  difa- 
greeable  ;  and  this  agreement  of  the  weather  of  Kamtfchatka 
with  \%hat  is  found  far  out  at  fea  is  to  be  attributed  not  only  to 
neighbouring  countries,  but  likewife  to  the  great  and  extenfive 
Southern  Ocean.  Hence  the  northern  parts  ol  Kamtfchatka,  that 
are  flickered  from  the  fouth  wind,  are  both  more  fertile  and  enjoy 
a  better  climate ;  and  the  nearer  one  comes  to  the  Lcpatka  the 
moifler  and  thicker  is  the  air  in  fummer,  and  the  \a  inds  more 
violent  and  of  longer  duration  in  winter.  It  frequently  happens, 
that  about  the  Great  River  the  weather  is  very  calm  and  agree- 
able, while  at  the  Lopatka  the  inhabitants  cannot  flir  out  of  their 
huts  ;  becaufe  it  is  a  narrow  point  of  land,  and  expofed  to  every 
wind,  except  in  the  bay.  All  along  the  Peiijchinjka  fea,  the  more 
northernly  any  place  lies,  the  lefs  rain  have  they  in  fummer  and 
wind  in  winter.  The  winds  and  weather  about  the  mouth  of 
the  Kamtjchatka  river,  and  near  to  the  upper  0/lrog^  are  very 
changeable.  From  the  eaft  and  fouth-eaft  they  have  as  violent 
florms  as  about  the  Penjchinjka  fea  ;  but  yet,  compared  v.'ith 
this,  the  weather  is  more  frequently  fair  than  rainy.  The  dif- 
ference between  the  eaftern  and  weftern  parts  of  Kamtjchatka  is 
plainly  to  be  feen  in  travelling  from  the  head  of  the  Bijlroy  river  : 
for  towards  the  Penjchinjka  fea  the  air  appears  always  thick  and 

hazy, 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H    A    T     K    A.  65 

hazy,  the  clouds  heavy,  and  always  dark  ;  while  Kamtfchatka 
appears  like  another  world,  where  the  land  lies  higher,  and  the 
air  is  clear  and  ferene. 

The  fnow  lies  always  deeper  upon  the  Lopatka  than  upon  the 
northern  fide  of  Kamtfchatka ;  fo  that,  if  it  be  twelve  feet  in 
depth  about  the  Lopatka^  upon  the  Aivatfcha  and  the  Great 
River  it  is  not  fo  deep  by  one  third,  and  at  the  fame  time  lies 
lighter  and  more  equal,  by  reafon  that  the  winds  are  not  fo 
high  there.  About  Teghil  and  Karaga  the  fnow  is  fcldom 
deeper  than  a  foot  and  a  half  :  hence  the  reafon  appears  why  the 
Kamtjchadales  do  not  keep  rein-deer  as  well  as  the  Koreki, 
but  depend  upon  the  fifli  for  their  nourifliment,  which  upon 
the  north-eafl:  and  north-weft  coaft  from  the  Great  River  is 
fo  fcarce,  that  unlefs  thefe  barbarous  creatures  could  digeft  every 
thing  they  can  get  down,  they  would  not  be  able  to  fupport  life; 
for,  though  throughout  the  country  of  Kamtfchatka  there  would 
be  food  enough  for  rein-deer,  yet  the  depth  of  the  fnow  renders 
it  impoflible  to  maintain  a  number  of  them  ;  and  what  rein-deers 
we  had  occafion  for  in  the  expedition  were  never  kept  here  in  the 
winter,  the  depth  of  the  fnow  making  it  hard  for  them  to  dig 
down  to  their  food. 

The  force  of  the  fun  refledled  from  the  fnow  in  the  fpring  is 
fo  great,  that  the  inhabitants  are  as  tawny  as  Indians  ;  nay,  they 
have  their  eyes  fpoiled  and  blinded  thereby  :  therefore  the  natives 
generally  wear  covers  pierced  with  fmall  holes,  or  nets  of  black 
hair,  to  leflen  the  number  of  rays  which  would  otherwife  fall 
upon  their  eyes.  This  is  occafioned  by  the  great  winds,  which 
drive  the  fnow  fo  clofe  together  that  it  is  almoft  as  hard  and  folid 
as  ice,  and  will  not  allow  the  rays  of  the  fun  to  penetrate,  but 
refledls  them  with  greater  force  upon  the  very  delicate  and  fenlible 
nerves  of  the  retina  than  they  are  able  to  bear.  Mr.  Sfeller 
fays,  that  neceility  forced  him  to  find  out  a  remedy  for  the  pain 
and  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  which  generally  gave  relief  in  fix 

K  hours' 


66  7he    Natural    History    of 

hours'  time.  It  was  the  white  of  an  egg,  with  fome  camphiret 
and  fugar,  which  he  rubbed  'till  it  foamed  upon  a  pewter  plate, 
then  tied  it  in  a  handkerchief,  and  bound  it  upon  the  forehead. 
This  he  found  to  fucceed  in  every  inflammation  of  the  eyes. 

It  hails  frequently  both  in  fummer  and  harveft ;  but  I  never 
faw  the  hail  bigger  than  peafe.  It  feldom  lightens  but  at  the 
fummer  folilice.  The  thunder  is  alfo  but  feldom  heard,  and  then 
feems  to  be  at  a  great  diftance.  We  have  no  inftance  of  any  one 
killed  by  thunder  :  the  natives  fay,  indeed,  that  before  the  arrival 
of  the  Ruffians  they  had  a  great  thunder,  and  fome  were  killed 
by  it ;  but  this  is  to  be  queftioned,  fince  for  fo  long  a  time  we 
have  had  no  inflances  of  it.  As  to  fogs,  it  is  impoffible  that 
there  fliould  be  greater  any  where  than  at  Kamtfchatka  ;  and  it  is 
to  be  queftioned  whether  deeper  fnows  fall  any  where  between 
^^  and  52  degrees  north  latitude  than  here,  from  the  melting  of 
which  the  rivers  fwell  fo  much  as  to  overflow  their  banks,  and 
the  earth  in  the  fpring  is  entirely  covered  with  water.  The  cold 
in  winter  is  moft  intenfe  about  the  Great  River  and  the  Awatfcha  j 
but  in  the  lower  Kamtfchatloi  Oftrog  it  is  much  warmer  than  in 
any  other  place  of  Siberia  in  the  fame  latitude. 

The  greateft  inconveniency  arifes  from  the  violent  winds  and 
ftorms,  concerning  which  the  following  remarks  may  not  be  im- 
proper. Before  a  great  wind,  which  generally  comes  from  the 
eaft,  the  air  is  always  thick  and  dark  ;  but,  as  I  had  not  a  ther- 
mometer, I  cannot  be  certain  if  it  is  warmer  then  than  at  other 
times.  The  eaft  winds  coming  from  the  Lopatka,  where  are 
burning  mountains  and  warm  fprings,  I  imagine  that  they 
not  only  arife  from  the  narrownefs  of  the  land,  but  alfo  from 
fubterraneous  fires  and  vapours. 

With  regard  to  other  advantages  or  difadvantages  of  this  country, 
one  may  fay  in  general,  that  its  greatefl  riches  confift  in  plenty 
of  good  furs  and  fifli,  and  its  greateft  inconveniences  in  the 
want  of  iron  and  fait.     The  firil  they  are  fupplied  with  from 

other 


KAMTSCHATKA,  67 

other  places,  and  the  fecond  by  boiling  fea  water  into  fait ;  but 
the  troublefome  diftant  carriage  of  the  iron,  and  the  boiling  of 
the  fait,  are  attended  with  fuch  expence  and  difficulty,  that  they 
are  both  fold  at  a  moft  intolerable  price.  One  cannot  buy  a 
common  ax  under  two  rubles,  and  a  pound  of  fait  cofts  four 
rubles. 


CHAP.       II. 

0/tbe  VOLCANO'S  or  BURNING  MOUNTAINS. 


THERE  are  three  burning  mountains  in  Kamtfchatka, 
the  Awachijijky,  the  Tulbatchifijky,  and  the  Kamtf- 
chatka. 
The  Awachinjky  mountain  ftands  upon  the  north  fide  of  the 
bay  of  Aivatfcha,  at  a  good  diftance  indeed,  but  its  bottom 
reaches  to  the  very  bay ;  and  all  the  high  mountains,  near  one 
half  of  their  height,  are  made  up,  as  it  were,  of  rows  of  hills  fet 
one  upon  another,  and  the  top  they  call  the  Shatfe,  or  tent, 
which  is  always  naked,  but  the  lower  parts  are  generally  covered 
with  wood. 

Thefe  mountains  for  many  years  throw  out  a  continual 
fmoke,  but  flame  only  at  times.  The  moft  terrible  fire  hap- 
pened, as  the  Kamtfchadales  fay,  in  the  fummer  of  the 
year  1737;  but  this  lafted  no  longer  than  24  hours,  and  con- 
cluded by  throwing  out  a  vaft  cloud  of  afhes,  which  covered  the 
adjacent  parts  the  depth  of  a  verflioke  *. 

,15  A  verfhoke  is  the  xV  of  the  Rufian  arfbia,  which  contains  27  inches. 

K  2  After 


6S  "The    Natural    History    cf 

After  this,  in  AwatJ'cha  and  the  illands  near  the  Kiiriljkaya 
Lopatka  they  felt  a  terrible  earthquake  and  motion  of  the  waters, 
which  was  obferved  in  the  following  manner.  The  earthquake 
began  about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  6th  of  Oc- 
tober, lyiJy  ^'^'^  continued  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  many 
of  the  KaTutJchatkoi  huts  and  tents  were  overturned.  At  the 
fame  time  the  fea  was  driven  upon  the  fliore,  and  rofe  about 
20  feet  ;  immediately  after  all  the  water  was  carried  back 
to  a  great  diftance  from  the  fhore,  and  then  it  returned 
again  higher  than  before,  and  afterwards  retired  fo  far  that  one 
could  not  fee  it  from  the  fliore.  At  that  time,  in  the  pafTage 
between  the  iirfl:  and  fecond  of  the  Kiiriljki  iflands,  they  obferved 
cluflers  of  rocks  in  the  bottom  of  the  fea  that  had  never  been  ittn 
before,  although  they  formerly  had  great  earthquakes  and  extra- 
•ordinary  agitations  of  the  fea.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  this 
the  earthquake  returned  with  moft  terrible  waves,  and  the  fea 
overflowed  the  fhore  200  feet  high,  which,  as  formerly,  imme- 
diately retired.  This  rolling  motion  continued  for  a  long  time, 
the  fea  frequently  approaching  the  fliore  and  departing  from  it. 
Before  every  earthquake  a  great,  heavy,  rumbling  noife  was  heard 
from  this  overflowing  of  the  fea.  The  inhalDitants  were  all 
ruined,  and  many  of  them  miferably  loft  their  lives.  In  feveral 
places  the  meadows,  little  hills,  and  fields,  were  turned  into  falt- 
water  lakes.  This  was  not  {o  violent  upon  the  Penfchinjka  fea 
as  upon  the  Eaftern  Ocean  j  and  the  people  about  the  Great 
River  fuflfered  very  little. 

At  this  time  we  failed  from  Ochotjka  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Great  River ;  and  when  we  came  on  fliore  the  14th  of  OBober^ 
the  earthquake  was  ftill  perceptibbj  which  was  fometimes  fo 
ftrong  that  we  could  not  ftand  upon  our  feet ;  and  this  continued 
to  the  fpring  of  the  year  1738  :  however,  it  was  more  upon  the 
Kiiriljkaya  Lopatka  and  the  coaft  of  the  Eaflern  Ocean  than  in 
thofe  places  that  were  more  remote  from  the  fea. 

The 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A'  T     K     A.  69 

The  Cofllicks  of  the  great  river,  who  were  then  upon  the 
Kuriljki  iflands,  told  me,  that  upon  the  beginning  of  the  earth- 
quake they  ran  with  the  natives  up  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains, 
and  left  all  their  goods,  which  were  deftroyed,  as  well  as  the 
habitations  of  the  Kuriles. 

The  Hulbatchinjky  mountain  ftands  upon  that  neck  of  land 
which  lies  between  the  rivers  Kamtfchatka  and  Tulbatchik : 
it  has  fmoked  for  many  years.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
year  1739,  for  the  firlf  time,  it  threw  out  a  ball  of  fire  which  fet 
the  woods  on  fire.  After  this  fire-ball  arofe  a  thick  cloud,  which 
increafing  gradually  at  lafi:  fell  down  and  covered  the  fnovv 
50  verfts  round  with  allies.  I  was  going  at  this  very  time 
from  the  upper  to  the  lower  Kamtjchatkoi  fort,  and  was  obliged 
to  wait  a  new  fall  of  fnow,  as  we  could  not  travel  upon  this  footy 
matter. 

Nothing  extraordinary  happened  upon  this  conflagration,  except 
fome  fmall  fliocks  of  an  earthquake,  which  were  felt  both  before 
and  after.  The  great  fliock  was  about  the  middle  of  December 
which  I  felt  when  I  went  to  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  from 
the  Great  River.  We  were  then  not  far  from  the  Hrepta,  or 
Ogulminfky  ridge.  When  we  flopped  about  noon,  the  difmal 
found  in  the  woods  that  we  heard  at  firfl  feemed  as  an  ap- 
proaching ftorm ;  but  our  kettles  being  thrown  from  the  fire, 
and  we  ourfelves  rocked  in  our  Hedges,  we  were  foon  convinced 
of  our  miftake.  This  earthquake  had  only  three  vibrations, 
which  fucceeded  each  other  at  about  a  minute's  diftance. 

The  mountain  of  Kamtfchatka  is  higher,  not  only  than  the  two 
lafi:  mentioned,  but  than  any  other  mountain  in  that  part.  Two 
thirds  of  its  height  are  made  up  of  rows  of  hills,  as  I  mentioned, 
of  the  Awachinjky ;  the  Shatfe^  or  top,  making  alone  one  third 
of  its  height.  The  circuit  round  the  bottom  of  the  mountain 
is  near  300  verfls.  The  Shatfe,  or  top,  is  very  fleep  on  every 
fide,  and  has  fevpral  deep  openings  lengthways  :  the  very  fummit 

turns 


70  ^'he   Natural    History    of 

turns  gradually  brcadeH;  from  the  falling  in  of  the  earth  into  the 
mouth  of  the  burning  gulph.  It  is  fo  high,  that  in  a  clear  day 
it  is  to  be  (ttn  from  the  upper  Kamtfchdtkoi  fort,  which  is  about 
300  verfts  J  and  one  cannot  fee  other  mountains,  the  T^ulbatchinjky 
for  inftance,  although  they  are  much  nearer.  Before  a  fl:orm  the 
fummit  appears  furrounded  with  three  girdles  ;  the  highefi:  feems 
in  breadth  about  the  fourth  part  of  the  height  of  the  mountain, 
from  whence  arifes  a  continual  thick  fmoke.  The  inhabitants  fay, 
that  it  throws  out  afhes  twice  or  thrice  yearly,  and  fometimes  in 
fuch  quantities,  that  for  300  verfts  around  the  earth  is  covered 
with  them  the  depth  of  a  verflioke.  From  the  year  1727 
to  1 73 1  the  inhabitants  obferved  that  it  burnt  almoft  without 
interruption,  but  they  were  not  under  fuch  appreheniions  as  in 
the  laft  conflagration  in  the  year  1737.  This  terrible  confla- 
gration begun  the  25th  of  jS^^/^wz^^r,  and  lan:ed  one  week  with 
fuch  violence,  that  to  the  people  who  were  filhing  at  fea  near 
the  mountain  it  appeared  one  red-hot  rock,  and  the  flames, 
which  burfl:  through  feveral  openings,  fometimes  fliewed  like 
rivers  of  fire  with  a  fliocking  noife.  Within  the  mountain  were 
heard  thunderings,  crackling  and  blowing  like  the  ftrongefl  bel- 
lows, which  fliook  all  the  neighbouring  country  :  the  nights  were 
the  moft  terrible.  This  conflagration  ended  as  ufual,  with 
throwing  out  a  vail  quantity  of  cinders  and  aflies,  of  which  how- 
ever little  fell  upon  the  land,  the  whole  cloud  being  almofl:  carried 
by  the  wind  to  the  fea.  It  throws  out  porous  ftones  and  glafs  of 
different  colours,  which  are  frequently  found  in  the  brook 
Boukoffe^  which  rifes  out  of  this  mountain.  The  23d  of  OSiober 
following  at  the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  happened  fuch  a  violent 
earthquake,  that  moft  of  the  houfes  and  ftoves  were  thrown 
down,  the  bells  of  the  churches  rang,  and  the  new  church, 
which  was  built  of  thick  balks  of  larch  wood,  was  fo  much 
fliaken  that  the  joinings  of  the  balks  were  all  loofened.  Some 
(liocks  were  felt  at  times  until  the  fpring  of  the  year  1738  ; 

however 


KAMTSCHATKA.  71 

however  the  agitation  of  the  waters  was  lefs  than  what  had  been 
formerly  obferved.  The  earthquakes  are  faid  to  be  more  violent 
'near  a  mountain  that  burns,  than  near  one  that  has  left  off 
burning,  or   is  not   quite  kindled. 

Bcfides  thefe  mountains,  I  heard  of  two  other  gulphs 
where  fmoke  arifes :  one  is  called  'Joiipanojky ;  the  other, 
Shevelitche  j  but  there  are  feveral  places  farther  north  than  the 
river  Kamtjcbatka :  fome  of  which  emit  fmoke,  and  fome 
fire :  and  there  are  in  the  Kuriljki  iflands,  one  upon  the  Paro- 
mujir^  and  another  upon  the  Abide;  concerning  which  Mr. 
Steller  obferves,  that  it  is  only  one  hill  which  burns,  not  a  whole 
ridge ;  all  thefe  mountains  have  outwardly  the  fame  appearance, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  probable  that  their  contents  are  much  the 
fame ;  that  from  the  external  appearance,  one  may  judge  of  their 
internal  contents,  and  of  their  aptnefs  to  take  fire  and  burn  ;  and 
that  in  all  thefe  which  have  fmoked  or  burned  formerly,  but 
have  been  extinguifhed,  lakes  are  always  found  ;  whence  he  con- 
cludes, that  as  thefe  were  burnt  down  to  the  bottom,  the  waters 
rufliing  through  the  opened  paiTages,  filled  the  empty  fpace  ;  and 
hence  an  account  may  alfo  be  given  of  the  caufe  of  the  hot 
fprings. 

There  are  two  hills  which  have  left  off  burning ;  the  Apal- 

Jky\  out   of  which  rifes  the  river  Apala ;  and  the   Biloutchitijkyy 

from  which   comes  the  river  Biloiitchik.     At  the  bottom  of  this 

hill  is  a  lake,  where  vaft  numbers  of  herrings  are  caught  in  the 

months  of  March,  April,  and  May. 


CHAP. 


72  The    Natural    History    of 

CHAP.     III. 
Of  the    HOT    SPRINGS. 

1  Found  the  following  hot  fprings :  ift.  Upon  the  river  Ofernoi, 
which  runs  out  of  the  Kuriljkoy  lake.     2d,    Upon    the   ri- 
ver Paudche,   which  falls  into  the  Ofernoi.     3d,  Upon  the 
river  Baano,   which  is  reckoned  a  branch  of  the  Great  River. 
4th,  Near  the  fort  Natchikute.     5th,  Near  the  mouth  of  the 
river  Shematchiftjki.     6th,   Near  the  head  of  the  finie. 

Thefe  waters,  which  are  upon  the  river  Ofernoi,  run  in  little 
fprings  from  the  fouth  bank  ;  fome  fall  diredlly  into  the  river  : 
ethers  keep  their  courfe  parallel  to  the  river,  and,  joining  after 
at  fome  diftance,  fall  together  into  the  Ojernoi.  Thefe  fprings  are 
not  confiderable,  nor  very  hot,  only  raifing  the  thermometer 
{Fare?iheit's)  which  in  the  open  air  was  at  45°  to  145*^. 

The  fprings  upon  the  Paudche  are  four  verfls  and  a  half  dif- 
tant  from  the  firft,  and  rife  out  of  the  ground,  upon  the  eaft 
bank  of  the  river  in  an  open  high  hill  which  has  a  plain  at  the 
liimmit  of  350  fathoms  *  in  length,  and  300  in  breadth.  This 
hill  goes  in  a  promontory  towards  the  river,  where  it  makes  a 
a  fleep  bank  ;  but  on  the  other  fide  the  deicent  is  eafy. 

Several  of  thefe  fprings  throw  out  their  waters,  like  artificial 
water-works,  about  a  foot,  or  a  foot  and  a  half,  high,  and  with  a 
great  noife.  Some  of  them  Hiand  in  large  pools  like  little  lakes, 
and  fend  out  fmall  flreams,  which,  joining  upon  the  plain,  divide 
it,  as  it  were,  into  fo  many  iflands,  and  at  lafl  fall  in  a  confiderable 
flream  into  the  Paudche.  That  little  lake  marked  by  the 
letter  (~  is  remarkable  for  having  an  opening  two  fathoms  deep. 


*  The  Ruffian  fathom  is  feven  feet. 

In 


K    A    M     T    S     C     n    A    T     K    A.  73 

In  the  ifland  are  a  great  many  openings,  fome  very  fmall,  and  others 
above  a  foot  diameter ;  but  from  thefe  large  openings  ilTues  no 
water,  though  the  fmall  ones  fend  out  fometimes  water  and 
fometimes  vapour  with  a  very  great  force. 

All  thofe  places  from  which  formerly  iflued  out  water,  may  be 
known  by  a  various  coloured  clay  which  is  found  round  them, 
for  this  clay  is  commonly  thrown  up  by  the  waters  Sulphur 
is  alfo  found  there,  efpecially  about  thofe  openings  which  emit 
vapours  only. 

Some  fprings  likewife  flow  from  that  fleep  bank  which  we 
mentioned,  two  fiithoms  or  more  higher  than  the  river.  It  is 
remarkable,  that  the  ftones  of  which  this  bank,  and  perhaps  all 
the  hill,  is  formed,  are  round,  outwardly  very  dry,  but  within 
fo  foft  that  they  may  be  rubbed  between  the  fingers  like  clay  : 
hence  it  has  been  conjedlured,  that  the  various  coloured  clay,  which 
is  found  about  the  mouths  of  the  fprings,  is  nothing  but  thefe 
flones  foftened  by  the  moifture  and  heat.  The  clay  in  tafte  is 
four  and  aftringent ;  and  if  a  piece  of  it,  or  a  ftone,  is  broken, 
there  appears  an  efflorefcence  of  alum,  like  a  mofs,  with  the  co- 
lours blue,  white,  red,  yellow,  green,  and  black,  which  are  fo 
mixed  as  to  refemble  marble ;  and  when  the  clay  is  not  quite 
dry,  the  colours  are  pretty  bright. 

Oppofite  to  the  promontory  of  the  hill  is  an  ifland  in  the  river 
Paudche,  where  there  are  likewife  fprings  of  hot  water,  but 
fmaller  than  thofe  before  mentioned. 

A  more  diltindl  idea  may  be  had  of  thefe  hot  fprings  from 
the  fubjoined  plan,  in  which  each  fpring  is  marked  with  a  parti- 
cular letter,    with  the  different  degrees  of  heat. 


':d 


74  '^^^   Natural  History  of 

A  Table  of  the  different  degrees  of  heat  which  were  found  in 
eachfprijzgy  by  De  I'llle'^  and  Farenheit'^  thermometers. 

De  I'J/le's         Fartf2heit'& 
The  lake  at  the  head  of  the  ftream  f"  80  116 

The  eye  which  is  in  the  corner  of  that  lake     65  134 

The  httle  lake  into  which  the  ftream  f~  falls  115  74 

The  fpring  out  of  which  the  ftream  i  runs     50  ija 

The  mouth  of  that  ftream  where  it  falls 

into  the  lake  °—  .  —  106  87 

The  mouth  of  the  flream  E  where  it  comes 

out  of  the  lake  — 

The  fpring  of  the  flream  2     — 

The  little  lake  at  the  head  of  the  flream   3 
In  the  fame  lake   at  the  mouth    of  the 

flream  3  ■  — 

Where  this  flream  joins  the  flream  2      — 
At  the  head  of  the  flream  N  — 

The  mouth  of  this  flream       — —         — 
The  head  of  the  flream  K      ■  — 

Where  this  flream  joins  the  flream  N 
Where  both  thefe  flreams  fall   into   the 

Pandche         — —  —  —   no  80 

De  l'IJle'5  thermometer  flood  at  this  time,  in  the  open  air,  at 
136^,  and  that  of  Faretiheifs  at  49*^. 

The  fprings  which  are  upon  the  river  Piaana  are  not  very 
different  from  thofe  of  Paudche.  They  rife  upon  both  fides  of 
the  river ;  and  as  upon  the  fouth  bank  there  is  a  high  plain,  and 
upon  the  north  a  cliff  of  rocks,  the  fprings  on  the  fouth  bank 
fall  into  the  river  in  little  flreams ;  but  thofe  upon  the  north  fide 
run  along  the  cliff,  except  one  which  rifes  about  80  fathoms 
from  the  refl,  and  where  the  cliff  is  more  diilant  from  the  river, 
which  has  a  courfe  of  40  fathoms. 

Amongfl 
\ 


95 

98 

20 

188 

60 

140 

80 

116 

93 

108 

10 

200 

SS 

146 

80 

116 

9S 

98 

K     A     IVI     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  -ji 

Amongft  the  fprings  upon  the  fouth  bank  it  is  to  be  remarked, 
that  one  place  is  full  of  openings  of  very  different  diameters,  where 
the  water  is  thrown  up  two  feet  and  a  half  with  a  great  noife. 
The  thermometer,  which  in  the  open  air  flood  at  185  degrees, 
rofe  to  1 5  degrees. 

The  fprings  of  the  Great  River  fall  into  it  in  one  confiderable 
ftream,  which  runs  between  ftony  hills  in  a  narrow  channel. 
The  banks  are  boggy,  and  the  bottom  ftony,  covered  with  mofs. 
From  its  Ipring  to  the  place  where  it  falls  into  the  Great  River  is 
261  fathoms.  At  the  fpring  the  mercury  rofe  in  De  I'  IJles 
thermometer  to  23,  and  Farenheifs  to  185,  degrees}  thence  to 
where  it  falls  into  the  River  it  grew  cooler  gradually,  fo 
that  at  the  mouth  De  I'  ljle'%  thermometer  only  rofe  to  115,  and 
Faraiheit\  to  74,  degrees  ;  in  the  open  air  the  one  ftood  at  175, 
and  the  other  at  14,  degrees. 

The  hot  brook,  that  is  near  the  river  Sihematche^  and   falls 
into  the  Eaflern  Ocean,  is  much  larger  than   any  of  the  above- 
mentioned.     At  its  mouth  it  is  three  fathoms  broad,  and  in  lome 
places  near  four  feet  deep,  and  its  length  is  three  verfls  "*  and 
88   fathoms.     It   runs  between  high   ftony  hills  with   a  ftrong 
current  :  its  bottom  is  a  hard  ftone  covered  with  green  mofs, 
which  in  ftill  places  fwims  upon  the  furface.     Near  the  banks 
at  its  mouth,  the  heat  is  like  that  of  fummer  water  ;  and  towards 
the  head  the  grafs  and  plants  upon  the  banks  were  green  and  fome 
of  them   flowered   in    March.     In  going  from  this   river  to  the 
laft  hot  fpring  that  lies  upon  the  river  Shematche  one  m.uft  pafs  a 
great  ridge  of  hills.     Upon  the  eaft  fide  of  this  ridge,  near  the 
fummit,  is  an  even  plain  covered  with  round  grey  ftones,  without 
any  plants  growing  upon  it.     Upon  this  plain  in  feveral  places  a 
vapour  afcends  with  great   force,  and    a  noife  refembling   the 

*  A  Ruffian  verft  is  500  fathoms,  or  3500  feet. 

L  2  bubbllno; 


/ 


o 


76  ^he  Natural  History  of 

bubbling  of  water  is  heard.  Here  I  dug,  expedling  to  find  water  j 
but  I  found  a  ftratum  of  fuch  hard  ftone  that  we  could  not  dig 
through  it.  It  is  probable  that  the  waters  of  the  warm  brook, 
that  falls  into  the  Eaftern  Ocean,  have  their  origin  from  this 
place,  for  it  is  diredtly  oppofite  to  the  rife  of  that  brook :  and 
the  laft  ftream  that  falls  into  the  river  Shematche  is  likewife 
thought  to  derive  its  fource  from  the  lame  place,  as  it  rifes  from 
this  ridge,  upon  the  weft  fide,  in  a  deep  hollow,  lurrounded  with 
fmoking  hills.  The  very  bottom  itfelf  is  full  of  boiling  ftrings  for 
near  a  verft  and  a  half;  all  which  join  at  laft  in  one  ftream. 

In  this  bottom  are  two  large  wells,  that  deferve  particular  notice  ; 
one  is  five,  the  other  three  fathoms'  diameter ;  the  firft  one  and  a 
half,  the  other  one  fathom  deep.  In  thefe  the  water  boils  up 
with  white  bubbles,  and  makes  fuch  a  noife,  that  one  perfou 
cannot  hear  another  in  the  common  way  of  fpeaking;  nay, 
fcarcely  when  he  cries  aloud.  The  vapour  is  fo  thick,  that  one 
cannot  fee  a  man  at  feven  fathoms'  diftance ;  and  the  boiling  of 
the  water  is  only  to  be  obferved  by  lying  down  upon  the  ground. 
The  earth  between  thefe  wells  yields  like  a  bog,  ib  that 
one  is  in  continual  fear  of  finking  in.  The  water  of 
thefe  fprings  is  diftinguiftied  from  all  others  by  a  black 
matter,  like  Chhie/e  ink,  that  fwims  upon  the  top,  which 
flicks  fo  to  the  fingers  that  one  cannot  without  difiiculty 
wafh  it  oft'.  They  have,  in  common  with  other  hot  fprings,  clay, 
lime,  alum,  and  fulphur,  of  various  colours.  In  all  the  above- 
mentioned  fprings  the  water  is  thick,  and  ftinks  like  rotten  eggs. 

The  KamtJ'chadaks  efteem  all  the  burning  mountains,  and 
places  where  hot  fprings  arife,  as  the  habitations  of  fpirits,  and 
approach  them  with  fear ;  but,  as  the  latter  are  the  moft  dan- 
gerous, they  are  under  the  greateft  awe  of  them  ;  and  therefore 
they  never  willingly  difcover  them  to  any  RuJJian,  left  they 
fhould  be  obliged  to  accompany  him  near  them.  It  was  by 
chance  that  1  heard  of  them  after  I  had  travelled  100  verfts  from 

the 


K     A     M     T    S     C     H     A     T    K     a:  77 

the  place  ;  but  this  natural  phcenomenon  appeared  fo  curious  that 
I  returned  to  examine  it.  The  people  of  Shematchin/ki  village 
were  obliged  to  declare  the  true  reafon  why  they  had  not  for- 
merly difcovered  them,  and  much  againft  their  will  were  forced 
to  fhew  me  the  place,  but  would  not  go  near  it :  and  when  they 
faw  that  we  lay  in  the  water,  drank  it,  and  eat  things  boiled  with 
it,  they  expedled  to  fee  us  perifli  immediately  ;  but  when  they 
perceived  this  did  not  happen,  they  told  it  in  the  village  as  an 
uncommon  wonder,  and  looked  uqon  us  as  very  extraordinary 
people,  fince  even  the  devils  could  not  hurt  us. 

This  is  remarkable,  that  north  from  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Kamtfchatka,  and  wefl  along  the  coaft  of  the  river  Ofernoi, 
there  are  no  hot  fprings,  although  it  abounds  in  Pyrites  fulphur, 
iron  ore,  and  ftones  that  yield  alum  and  vitriol.  Mr.  S teller 
obfervesj  that  the  appearance  of  the  country  of  Kamt/chatka, 
and  the  frequent  earthquakes  there,  give  reafon  to  think  that 
it  is  full  of  caverns  replete  with  combuftible  matter,  which 
taking  fire  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  produces  earthquakes, 
and  makes  thofe  vafl  alterations  of  which  we  fee  numerous 
inftances  in  rocky  fliores. being  torn  off  both  upon  the  Beaver 
fea,  and  in  the  iflands  which  lie  between  Afia  and  America. 
The  combuftible  matter,  he  tells  us,  is  kindled  by  the  rufliing 
of  the  fait  water  into  thofe  fubterraneous  caverns,  through  their 
apertures  towards  the  fea  ;  which  hypothefis  is  ftrcngthened  by 
his  obfervation,  that  earthquakes  are  moil  frequent  about  the 
equinoxes,  when  the  waves  of  the  fea  are  driven  by  the  great 
ftorms  with  uncommon  violence  upon  the  fhores ;  and  efpecially 
about  the  fpring  equinox,  at  which  time  the  water  always  rifes 
higher  than  at  any  other  :  and  the  inhabitants  of  Kamtfcbatka 
and  the  Kuriles  know  this  fo  well,  that  they  always  fear  the 
beginning  of  March  and  the  end  of  September. 

It  is  very  extraordinary,  that  no  iron  has  been  difcovered  here, 
although  fome  ore  is  obferved  mixed  with  clay  and  earth,   to 

which 


78  The  Natural  History  of 

which  fulphur  being  added  the  fubterraneous  fires  may  eafily  be 
accounted  for;  nor  do  we  yet  know  of  any  fait  fprings,  although 
the  narrownefs  of  the  ifthmus  of  the  peninfula  oi  Kamtjchatka, 
and  fo  many  fubterraneous  caverns  under  the  rocky  hills  which 
have  communication  with  -the  fea,  fliould  give  us  reafon  to 
conclude  that  there  muft  be  fome. 

After  the  hot  fprings  we  ought  to  take  notice  of  the  rivers 
which  never  freeze.  Thefe  are  fo  common  in  Kamtjchatka ,■ 
that  there  is  fcarcely  one  river  which  has  not  fome  very  large 
openings,  even  in  the  moft  fevere  frofts ;  and  the  plains  un- 
der the  hills  are  fo  full  of  fprings  that  one  cannot  go  dry  any 
where  in  the  fummer.  Thefe  fprings,  which  joining  make  a 
little  rivulet,  and  fall  into  the  Kleutchova  Kamffchatka^  never 
freeze,  and  yield  fifli  almoft  the  whole  u'inter,  which  gives  an 
advantage  to  the  Kleutchova^  as  it  furniflies  not  only  the  Kamtj- 
chadaks,  but  all  the  people  of  the  Oftrog  of  NiJhjiJJjantalJky^ 
with  frefli  fifh,  which  is  generally  efieemed,  on  account  of  its  fear- 
city  at  that  time,  as  a  very  great  delicacy.  This  may  alfo  ac- 
count for  the  V  holefbmenefs  of  all  thefe  waters,  which  the  in- 
habitants drink  after  eating  the  fattefl:  fifli  without  the  Icafl  harm, 
although,  in  other  places,  cold  water  drunk  upon  fat  fifh  pro- 
duces the  bloody  flux. 


CHAP. 


K    A    M    T    S     C     H     A    T    K    A.  79 

CHAP.      IV, 

Of  the  METALS   and    MINERALS. 


ALTHOUGH  the  peninfula  of  Kamtfchatka  is  hilly, 
and  the  ground  fuch  as  might  naturally  be  fuppofed  to 
produce  metals  and  minerals,  efpecially  iron  and  copper, 
with  which  Siberia  abounds ;  yet  hitherto  little  has  been  dif- 
covered.  This  is  no  proof  that  fuch  ores  are  not  in  Kamtf- 
chatka ;  for,  befides  that  the- Kamtjc  ha  dales  are  entirely  un- 
experienced, the  RuJJians  who  live  here  have  as  yet  given 
themfelves  no  trouble  in  the  fearch  after  metals  j  as  they  have  fuch 
large  quantities  of  iron  and  copper  inftruments  brought  to  them, 
that  they  have  not  only  fufficient  for  themfelves,  but  are  alfo  en- 
abled to  furniih  the  Kamtfchadales  and  Kuriles  with  them  at  a 
very  coniiderable  profit.  It  is  alfo  to  be  confidered,  that  the 
providing  for  their  fubfiftance  takes  up  fo  much  of  their  time, 
that  they  can  fpare  but  little  for  any  thing  elfe  ;  and  moreover, 
the  places  proper  for  fuch  tryals  are  very  difficult  of  accefs :  to 
which  it  may  be  added,  that  the  frequent  ftorms  and  general  incle- 
mency of  the  weather  are  great  hindrances  to  fuch  tryals  ;  efpeci- 
ally when  every  ncceffary  for  the  undertaking  mufl:  be  carried  upon 
men's  backs,  for  in  the  fummer  they  can  carry  nothing  upon  dogs. 
It  is  reafopable  to  prefume  that  ore  might  be  found  in  Kamtfchatka, 
^  if  it  was  worth  while  to  fearch  for  it.  Copper  ore  has  been 
found  about  the  Kuriljkoy  lake,  and  the  Ivovoy  bay  ;  and  a  fandy 
iron  ore  upon  the  banks  of  the  feveral  lakes  and  rivers ;  whence  it 
is  expeded  that  there  is  iron  ore  in  the  hills  from  which  thefe 
lakes  and  rivers  rife.  Native  fulphur  is  gathered  about  the  rivers 
Kambalinfkoy  and  Ofernoi,  and  the  Kronotzkoy  cape.  The  ful- 
phur 


So  '  I'k  Natural   History   of 

phur  which  they  bring  from  Olontojki,  where  it  drops  from  the 
rocks,  is  quite  fine  and  pellucid ;  and  in  the  Pyrites  upon  the 
coaft  it  is  to  be  found  every  where. 

The  following  kinds  of  earth  are  common.  Great  quantities 
of  white  chalk  are  found  dhout  xha  Kuriljky  lake;  tripoly  and 
oker  about  the  Great  River,  and  the  villages  of  Nachikin  and 
Koutchinuhiff ;  and  a  purple-coloured  earth  about  the  hot  fprings, 
and  fometimes  a  hard  ftony  oker.  Among  the  ftones  in  the 
mountains  are  found,  but  rarely,  fmall  cherry-coloured  chryf- 
tals;  and  near  the  river  Charioiis  zxt  found  pieces  of  fluffe, 
which  is  like  a  coarfe  green  glafs,  of  which  the  inhabitants  for- 
merly made  knives,  axes,  lancets,  and  darts.  It  is  called  by  the 
Hnjjian  natives  glafs,  and  by  the  Katntfchadales,  ttanagy.  This 
flufle  is  alfo  found  in  the  copper  mines  about  Rcatherinenbourg^ 
where  it  is  called  a  topaz.  There  is  likewife  here  a  fort  of  light 
flone,  white  like  chalk,  of  which  the  inhabitants  make  plates,  and 
lamps  wherein  they  burn  their  fiili  oil ;  and  every  where  upon 
the  fhore  is  found  an  iron-coloured  hard  llone,  porous  as  a  fpunge, 
and  eafily  turned  by  the  fire. 

The  inhabitants  find  pellucid  ftones  near  the  fprings  of  the  ri- 
ver, which  they  ufe  inftead  of  flints.  Some  of  thele  ftones  are 
femi-pellucid,  w  hitifli  and  milky,  and  reckoned  cornelians  by 
xht  Ruffians.  Some  fmall  pellucid  ftones  of  a  yellowidi  colour, 
like  corals,  are  found  upon  the  banks  of  feveral  rivers ;  and  plenty 
of  hyacinths  near  'Tomjkoy. 

Hitherto  they  have  difcovered  no  precious  ftones  here.  The  hills 
are  firmer  than  thofe  in  Siberia,  and  do  not  fall  away  like 
them  ;  but  when  the  earth  falls  off  they  find  much  lac  lunce  j 
and  a  foft  kind  of  bolus,  of  a  fattifli  creamy  tafte,  is  found  near 
the  Penfchinjka  fea,  Kuriljkoy  lake,  and  the  Olutorjkoy :  this  is 
ufed  as  an  excellent  remedy  in  fluxes.  I  fent  fpecimens  of 
moft  of  the  above  things  to  the  Mufeum  of  the  Imperial 
Academy  of  St.   Peterjbourg.     I  muft  not  forget  to  mention 

that 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A    T     K     A.  8[ 

that  amber  is  gathered  here,  near  the  Fenfchinjka  fea,  upon  the 
river  Teghil,  and  farther  north. 


C  H  A  P.      V. 
Of      TREES      and      PLANTS. 


TH  E  mofl  ufeful  wood  is  the  larch  *,  and  the  white 
poplar  -\-,  which  ferves  for  building  their  houfes  and 
forts  J  and  they  are  fit,  not  only  for  fuch  boats  as  the 
inhabitants  ufe,  but  even  for  the  building  of  {hips.  The  larch- 
tree,  indeed,  only  grows  upon  the  river  Kamtfchatka^  and  fuch 
other  rivers  as  fall  into  it :  in  other  places  they  make  ufe  of  the 
white  poplar.  The  pine-tree  ||  and  the  bla-ck  poplar  |  are  no 
where  to  be  found  upon  the  Katntfchatka ;  and  the  pitch-tree  ** 
only  in  one  place,  and  there  in  fmall  quantities.  Although 
there  be  many  birch-trees  -f-f-,  yet  they  make  little  ufe  of 
them,  unlefs  in  their  fledges,  having  none  near  their  houfes  but 
what  are  crooked  and  ufelefs  ;  and  it  is  very  troublefome  to  bring 
the  better  fort  from  the  diftance  at  which  it  grows. 

They  make  great  ufe  of  the  birch  bark,  which  they 
flrip  from  the  trees  while  yet  green ;  and  cutting  it  in  fmall 
pieces,  like  vermicelli,  eat  it  with  dried  caviar.  In  the  winter, 
whenever  you  enter  any  of  their  villages,  you  find  the  womea 
employed  in  hacking  this  green  bark  with  their  bone  or  flone 
axes.  They  alfo  ferment  this  bark  with  the  juice  or  fap  of 
the  birch,  which  makes  an   agreeable  drink.     The  birches  of 

*  Larix.  II  Pinus.  •*  Picea. 

t  Populus  alba.  J  Populus  nigra.  tt  Betula. 

M  Kamtjchatka 


Sz  'The    Natural    History    of 

Kamtfchatka  are  much  fuller  of  knots  and  hard  excrefcenccs 
than  thofe  of  'Europe  ;  but  of  thefe  knots  they  make  very  ufeful 
plates,  fpoons,  and  cups.  Mr,  Steller  obferved,  that  the  white 
poplar  near  the  fea  was  quite  porous  and  light,  which  he  attri- 
buted to  the  fait  water ;  that  the  afhes  of  this  wood,  laid  out 
in  the  open  air,  turned  into  a  flony  fubftance  heavy  and  hard, 
which,  the  longer  it  lies,  the  harder  and  heavier  it  grows.  This 
ftone,  when  broken,  fliews  fome  fpecks  of  iron  in  its  fubftance. 
Sallows  *  and  alders  -f-  are  the  common  fire-wood  in  Kamtf- 
chatka. The  bark  of  the  fallow  is  ufed  for  food,  and  that  of 
the  alder  in  dying  their  leather  ;  as  fliall  be  related  more  at  large 
in  another  place.  They  have  the  tree  tcheremough  ||  and  the 
hawthorn  J  of  two  fpecies,  one  yielding  a  red,  and  the  other 
a  black  fruit ;  of  thefe  they  lay  up  a  great  quantity  againft  winter  : 
they  have  likewife  the  fervice-tree  **  in  great  plenty,  whofe  fruit 
is  efleemed  amongfl  their  mofl  delicate  confeftions. 

Their  principal  nourifhment  is  from  the  nuts  of  the  flantza, 
which  grows  every  where,  both  in  hills  and  dales.  This  fl:irub, 
or  tree,  is  truly  of  the  cedar  kind,  only  it  is  much  lefs ;  and 
inflead  of  growing  flraight,  it  creeps  along  the  ground.  Its  cones 
and  nuts  are  not  half  fo  large  as  thofe  of  the  cedar :  the  Kamtf- 
chadales  eat  them  with  the  fliells.  Thefe,  as  well  as  the  tche- 
remough and  the  hawthorn  berries,  are  very  aftringent,  efpecially 
if  eaten  in  any  quantity.  The  greatefl  virtue  of  thefe  nuts  is, 
that  they  are  a  good  remedy  againfl  the  fcurvy,  as  all  our  feamen 
can  witnefs  :  for  in  the  moft  fevere  fcurvy  this  is,  as  one  may 
fay,  almoft  their  only  medicine  ;  and  from  the  tops  of  the  flantza 
and  cedar  was  their  common  drink  made,  fometimes  fermented, 
at  other  times  drunk  warm  like  tea ;  and  orders  were  given  by 


»  Salices. 

t  Alni. 

11  Padus  fcliis  annuls.    Ljnn. 


\  Oxyanthus  fruftu  rubro  et  nigra. 
*^  Sorbus. 


the 


KAMTSCIIATKA  83 

the  commanding  officer  that  tlic  kettle  with  flantza  and  cedar  tops 
fliould  never  be  taken  from  the  fire.  Red  currants,  rafberries, 
and  knefhnitza  are  very  rare  there,  or  grow  at  fuch  a  diftance 
from  tlieir  houfes  that  no  one  cares  to  go  in  fearch  of  them. 
Tile  blackberries  of  the  gimoloft  *  are  of  great  ufe,  beino-  of  an 
agreeable  tafte,  fomething  like  new-fermented  beer.  The  bark 
of  this  flirub  is  ufefiil  in  diftilling  brandy,  giving  ftrength 
and  lliarpnefs  to  the  fpirit. 

The  juniper  -f-  grows  every  where  ;  but  they  do  not  ufe  the 
berries,  as  they  lay  up  great  ftore  of  morolky  jj,  pianitza  1,  brulli- 
nitza  **,  klioukva  •^-•f,  and  vodinitza  ||||  :  and  when  they  have 
great  plenty  of  thefe  berries  they  not  only  ufe  them  as  confedts, 
but  diftil  brandy  from  them,  except  from  klioukva  and  vodinitza 
which  yield  no  fpirit.  Mr.  Steller  writes,  that  the  vodinitza  is 
no  bad  remedy  for  the  fcarvy  ;  and  the  inhabitants  dye  any  old 
cloaths  with  it  that  have  loft  their  colour,  to  which  it  gives  a 
cherry-colour.  Some  boil  it  up  with  train-oil  and  alum,  and  dye 
the  beaver  and  coarfe  fables  with  it  well  enough  to  deceive  the 
unwary  or  ignorant.  In  many  places  they  content  themfelves 
with  roots  and  herbs,  and  make  them  fupply  not  only  their 
want  of  bread,  but  of  fifii  alfo.  The  principal  of  thefe 
is  the  faranne,  which  ferves  inftead  of  groats.  It  belongs  to  the 
clafs  of  the  lillies  %%  ;  but  as  this  fort  is  never  feen  any  where  but 
in  Ochotjkoy  and  Kamtjchatka,  I  fhall  give  a  defcription  of  it.  It 
grows  about  half  a  foot  high  ;  has  a  ftalk  near  the  thicknefs  of  a 
fwan's  quill,  red  below  and  green  above.     Its  leaves  grow  in  two 


♦  Lonicera  pedunculis  biflorio,  floribus  X  Vacciniujn  Spec.  2.  Linn.  Bilberry, 

infundibuli    formis,    bacca   folitaria,     ob-  **  Vaccinium  Bilberry  Spec.  3,  Linn. 

longa,  angulofa.     Gmel.  flor.  Sib.  +t  Vaccinium  Red  Crowberry  Spec.  4. 

t  Juniperus.  ||{|  Empetrum. 

II  ChameraorusRAii  Syn.  %%  Lilliura  flore  atro  rubente. 


M 


rows 


84  'The   Natural    History    of 

rows  upon  the  ftalk  ;  the  lower  row  having  three  leaves,  and  the 
upper  four,  placed  crofsways  :  the  form  of  the  leaves  is  oval. 
Sometimes  above  the  fecond  row  one  leaf  grows  ]ni\  under  the 
fiow^er.  Upon  the  uppermoft  part  of  the  ftalk  grows  one  dark 
cherry-coloured  flower,  rarely  two,  fomething  lefs  than  that  of 
the  common  lilly  ;  and  this  is  divided  into  fix  equal  parts.  The 
pointal  in  the  center  of  the  iiower  is  triangular,  at  the  top  flat, 
and  in  three  different  cells  contains  flat  reddifli  feeds.  Round 
the  pointal  are  fix  white  ftamina  with  yellow  heads.  Its  root, 
which  is  properly  the  faranne,  is  about  the  bignefs  of  a  root  of 
garlick,  made  up  of  many  little  cloves,  whence  it  acquires 
a  round  form.  It  bloffoms  in  June,  at  which  time  one  can  fee 
no  other  flower  over  the  whole  fields. 

The  natives  oi  Kamtfchatka,  and  the  wives  of  the  Ruffian 
Coffacks,  dig  up  the  roots  in  the  harvefl;,  or  take  them  out 
of  the  nefts  of  the  field-mice,  dry  them  in  the  fun,  and 
fell  them  for  five  or  fix  rubles  the  pood.  The  faranne 
half  boiled,  and  beat  up  with  brambleberries,  cranberries, 
or  fuch  other  of  this  kind,  makes  one  of  the  mod  agree- 
able confedtions,  being  of  a  fharp  fweetnefs ;  and  if  one  had 
enough  for  every  day's  ufe,  the  want  of  bread  would  be  tolerably 
well  fupplied.  Mr.  Steller  reckons  five  fpecies  of  this  plant : 
ift.  the  kimtchiga,  which  grows  near  Teghil  and  Harioiifkovoy , 
in  appearance  like  a  large  fugar-pea,  and  if  boiled  taftes  much  the 
fame  j  but  neither  he  nor  I  ever  faw  this  plant  in  bloflbm  : 
2dly,  the  round  faranne,  which  I  have  defcribed  above : 
3dly,  ovfenka  *,  which  grows  every  where  in  Siberia,  being  roots 
of  red  lillies,  whofe  flowers  are  all  turned  up  in  curls  ;  the  bulb  is 
compofed  of  an  infinite  number  of  fmall  cloves :  4thly,  titichpa, 


*  Lilium  radice  tunkata,  foliis  fparfis,  floribus  reflexis,  corallis  rcvolutis.     Gmel. 
flor.  Sib. 


which 


KAMTSCHATKA.  85 

which  grows  upon  the  Great  River  ;  but  neither  he  nor  I  ever 
faw  this  in  the  flower  :  5thly,  matifta  fladka  trava  *,  or  the 
fweet  plant,  is  as  ufeful  in  their  oeconon^y  as  the  faranne ; 
for  the  Kamtfchadales  ufe  this  not  only  as  a  confedlion  in  tarts 
and  broths,  but  in  all  their  iuperftitious  ceremonies  this  is  abfo- 
lutely  neceflary.  The  Ruffians  were  no  fooner  fettled  there,  than 
they  found  that  brandy  was  to  be  diitilled  from  it ;  and  at 
prefent  this  is  the  only  brandy  that  is  publickly  fold.  The 
root  of  this  herb  is  without  yellowifh,  within,  white  ;  and 
of  a  bitter,  fpicy  tafte.  The  ftem  is  flefliy,  of  three  or  four 
joints,  and  about  a  man's  height.  Its  flower  is  a  reddifli  o-reen 
with  fliort  white  hairs,  longefl:  near  the  root.  The  leaves  upon 
the  fl:em  nearefl:  the  root  are  five  or  fix,  and  fometimes  even  ten  : 
they  grow  upon  thick,  round,  flefliy,  green,  rough  flalks,  marked 
with  little  red  fpots.  Upon  the  main  fl:em,  at  every  joint,  arifes 
one  fuch  leaf,  but  without  a  ftalk.  The  flowers  are  fmall 
and  white,  like  fennel,  or  other  herbs  of  that  fort ;  and 
confifl:  of  five  leaves,  of  which  the  innermofl:  are  largefl:,  and  the 
outward  final  left.  It  has  two  ovaria  upon  every  flower,  upon 
fhort  fmall  necks ;  and  round  them  are  five  white  ftamina  with 
green  points,  which  rife  higher  than  the  flower.  The  flowers 
taken  all  together,  refemble  a  plate  ;  while  the  ftalks  which 
fupport  the  umbella  are  longeft  without,  and  in  the  m.iddle 
ihorteft :  fl:alks  arife  from  every  joint,  upon  which  are 
flowers. 

This  plant  abounds  every  where  in  Kamtfchatka,  and  the  inha- 
bitants gather  and  prepare  it  in  this  manner :  they  cut  off  the 
ftalks  of  the  leaves  which  grow  neareft  the  root,  and  with  a  fhell 


*  Sphondylium  foliolis  pinnatifidis.     Linn.  Cliff. 

fcrape 


86  The    Natural    History   of 

fcrape  off  the  fkln  ;  and  then  bind  up  ten  ftalks  together. 
When  it  begins  to  fmell  a  little,  then  ihey  put  it  in  a  bag  to 
fweeten ;  where  it  yields  a  fweet  duft,  which  perhaps  fweats  out 
from  the  pith  of  the  plant.  This  herb-fugar,  as  they  call  it, 
has  fomething  the  tafte  of  liquorice,  and  is  not  very  pleafant. 
A  pood  of  the  plant  does  not  afford  above  a  quarter  of  a  pound 
of  this  duft. 

The  women,  when  they  gather  this,  muff  wear  gloves  ;  for  the 
juice  is  fo  Iharp  or  cauflic,  than  whenever  it  falls  upon  the  flefli 
it  raifes  fwellings  and  blifters.  For  this  reafon,  when  in  the 
ipring  the  Rujia?is  eat  it  frefh,  they  only  bite  it  with  their  teeth, 
taking  care  not  to  touch  it  with  their  lips.  1  have  feen  inflances 
of  feme  that  were  unacquainted  with  this,  who  railily  chewed  it 
as  they  would  do  any  other  herb  ;  upon  which,  not  only  their 
lips,  but  their  chin^  nofe,  and  cheeks,  and  alfo  wherever  the  juice 
of  this  plant  had  touched,  was  immediately  fwelled  up  and  full 
of  bliflers  ;  and  although  thefe  burft,  yet  the  fwelling  continued 
for  a  whole  week. 

The  manner  of  diflilling  fpirits  from  it  is  as  follows : — 
They  lay  feveral  bundles  of  this  plant  in  a  fmall  veffel, 
upon  which  they  pour  hot  water ;  and  to  make  it  ferment,  they 
put  in  fome  berries  of  honey-fuckle  or  cranberries,  and  binding 
the  veffel  clofe  up  fet  it  in  a  warm  place,  where  they  leave  it 
until  the  liquor  ceafes  to  make  a  noife  ;  for  during  the  time  of 
fermentation,  it  cracks  and  bounces  fo  much  as  to  make  the 
veffel  fhake.  In  the  fame  manner  they  prepare  more  wort  in 
a  large  veffel,  and  add  to  this,  which  now  generally  ferments  in 
24  hours,  as  above.  They  throw  both  the  fermented  herbs  and 
liquor  into  the  kettle,  and  cover  it  clofe  with  a  wooden  cover  ;  and 
inftead  of  a  pipe  they  take  the  barrel  of  a  gun.  The  firft 
running  is  as  ftrong  as  brandy  ;  which,  if  they  diftil  a  fecond  time, 
produces  a  Ipirit  fo  ftrong  that  it  confumes  even  iron.     But  it 

is 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H    A    T    K    A.  87 

is  only  the  richer  fort  of  people  that  ufe  this  brandy  j  and  what 
they  fell  is  only  the  firft  running,  which  makes  a  very  good 
dram. 

Two  pood  of  herbs  generally  render  one  vedro  *  of  the  firft 
running,  and  the  pood  cofts  four  rubles  or  more.  The  herbs 
that  remain  in.theftill  after  drawing  off  all  the  fpirit,  are  made 
ufe  of  as  a  yeft,  inftead  of  berries,  to  ferment  other  infufions  or 
wort ;  and  what  they  cannot  ufe  thus  the  cattle  eat  very  greedily, 
and  it  fattens  them  much.  It  is  remarkable  that  brandy  diftilled 
from  the  plants  from  which  the  Ikin  has  not  been  clean  fcraped,  it 
caufes  melancholy  and  perturbation  of  mind.  Air  Steller  made 
the  following  remarks  upon  this  brandy:  ift,  that  it  is  very 
piercing,  and  contains  a  good  deal  of  a  fliarp  acid,  which  co- 
agulates the  blood  and  makes  it  black  :  adly,  that  a  fmall  quantity 
of  it  makes  people  drunk  and  quite  fenfelefs,  and  caufes  their  faces 
to  turn  black  :  3dly,  that  if  a  perfon  drinks  a  few  drams  of  it,  he 
is  plagued  the  whole  night  with  difagreeable  dreams,  and  next  day 
is  uneafy  and  difturbed  as  if  terrified  with  the  apprehenfion  of 
the  greateft  misfortune  :  and,  what  is  very  extraordinary,  he  has 
feen  fome  people  the  day  after  they  have  been  drunk  with  this 
fpirit,  from  one  draught  of  cold  water,  become  again  fo  drunk 
that  they  could  not  ftand  upon  their  feet.  They  wet  their  hair 
with  the  juice,  which  they  fqueeze  out  of  this  herb  in  the 
fpring,  as  a  prefervative  againft  lice,  and  find  it  to  be  their  only 
relief.  Many  of  the  Katntjchadales,  who  defire  to  have  children, 
will  not  eat  this  herb,  green  or  dry,  imagining  that  it  impairs 
the    generative  faculties. 

The    herb   kipri-f-,    which   grows   in   all  Europe  and  AJia, 
has  the  third  place  in  the  food  of  the  Kamtjchadaks.     They 


*  Vedro  is  a  Ruffian  liquid  meafiire  containing  25  pints, 
t  Epilobiam.    Linn.  Succ.  Spec.  J.  French  willows. 


boU 


88  The    Natural    History    of 

boil  it  with  their  fiflj,  and  ufe  the  leaves  as  tea  ;  but  the  greateft 
ufe  is  made  of  its  pith,  which,  after  having  fplit  the  flalks,  they 
fcrape  out  with  fliells,  and,  tied  up  in  bundles,  dry  it  in  the  fun. 
It  is  then  very  pleafant,  and  in  tafte  refembles  dried  Per/ian 
cucumbers.  The  Kamtfchadales  ufe  it  in  feveral  dirties,  and 
ferve  it  up  green  as  a  defer t.  The  kipri  boiled  gives  a  thick  fweet 
wort,  that  makes  the  beft  quafle  *  imaginable  :  it  alfo  affords 
them  a  very  ftrong  vinegar,  if  to  fix  pounds  of  the  kipri  they  add 
a  pound  of  the  fweet  herb  of  fphondilium,  and  ferment  it  in  the 
ufual  way  :  they  get  a  great  deal  more  brandy,  when  they  ufe 
the  infufion  of  the  kipri,  inftead  of  water,  to  prepare  the  fweet 
herb  for  diftillation. 

They  cure  the  navels  of  their  children  with  this  herb,  chewing 
it,  and  laying  it  upon  the  part.  They  grind  the  roots  and  ilalks, 
and  ufe  them  inftead  of  green  tea,  to  which  the  flavour  has  fome 
refemblance.  The  fame  ufe  the  Kuriles  make  of  another  flirub  -|-, 
which  has  flowers  like  the  ftrawberry,  only  yellow,  and  produces, 
no  berries.  This  is  called  Kiiriljkoy  tea,  and  has  great  virtue  in 
fluxes  and  gripes. 

The  wild  garlick  ||  is  not  only  ufeful  in  the  kitchen,  but  alfo 
in  medicine.  Both  the  Rtijians  and  Kamtfchadales  gather  great 
quantities,  which  they  cut  and  dry  in  the  fun  for  their  winter 
provifion  ;  at  which  time  boiling  it  in  water  they  ferment  it 
a  little,  and  ufe  it  as  an  herb  foup,  which  they  cAXfMtni.  They 
efteem  the  wild  garlick  fo  efficacious  a  remedy  againft  the  fcurvy, 
that  they  think  themfelves  in  no  danger  fo  foon  as  it  begins  to 


*  Quafle  Is  a  ^»^3»  drink  made  of  rye-  t  Potentillacaulefruflicofa.  Linn.  Cliff, 

malt,  and  flower,  and  very  little  fermented.  ||  Allium  foliis  radicalibus  petiolatis  flo- 

Sometimes  they  add  mint  to  it,  and  it  makes  ribus  umbellatis.  Cmel.  ilor._,Sib.  tom,  i. 

no  difagreeable  drink.  p.  49. 


ftiew 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  89 

ihew  itfelf  under  the  fnow  :  and  I  have  heard  an  extraordinary 
account  of  its  virtues  from  the  Coflacks  that  were  employed  with 
captain  Spanberg  in  building  the  floop  Gabriel :  they  were  fo  ill 
with  the  fcurvy,  that  fcarce  any  were  able  to  work,  or  even  to 
walk,  fo  long  as  the  ground  was  covered  with  fnow ;  but  as 
foon  as  the  high  lands  began  to  appear  green,  and  the  wild 
garlick  to  fprout  out,  the  Coflacks  fed  upon  it  greedily.  Upon 
their  firfi:  eating  it,  they  were  covered  over  with  fcabs  in  fuch  a 
manner,  that  the  captain  believed  they  were  all  infeded  with  the 
venereal  difeafe.  In  about  a  fortnight,  thefe  fcabs  fell  off,  and 
they  were  perfe<5lly  recovered  of  the  fcurvy. 

We  muft  reckon  amongft  the  food  of  the  Kamtfchadales  the 
flielmina  *,  and  the  morkovai  -f,  which  is  the  ftalk  of  a  plant 
that  is  hollow  and  juicy,  fuch  as  the  angelica.  The  fhelmina  is 
a  fpecies  of  the  ulmaria.  Its  root  is  blackilh  without,  and  white 
within :  it  fends  out  from  one  root  two  or  three  ftalks  about 
a  man's  height  j  which,  near  the  root,  are  about  a  finger  thick,  but 
above,  fomewhat  thinner.  The  leaves  flioot  out  from  long 
branches  which  grow  all  over  the  ftalk.  Their  upper  part  is 
green  and  fmooth  ;  and  their  lower  rough,  with  high  reddifh 
veins.  Where  the  branch  fprings  from  the  root  there  are  two 
leaves  like  thofe  above  defcribed,  but  fomewhat  lefs.  The  ftalk 
IS  triangular,  reddifh,  hard,  and  rough.  At  the  top  of  the  plant 
is  a  flower  refembling  that  of  the  fervice-tree.  It .  has  four  oval 
piftils,  flattened  in  the  fides,  with  downy  edges ;  in  each  of  which 
are  contained  two  longifli  feeds.  They  are  furrounded  by  ten 
white  fl;araina,  rifing  above  the  flower;  the  anthera  being  likewife 
white.  It  flowers  about  the  middle  of  July,  and  the  feeds 
are  ripe  about  the  middle  of  Augufi.     The  root,   flalks,   and 


*  Ulmaria  fruftibus  hllpidis.    Steller.  f  Chaereoptrylum  feminibas  levibus 

nitidis,  petiolis  ramiferis  fimplicibus.    Linn.     ClitF.  p.  loi. 

N  leaves 


90  the   Natural    History    of 

leaves  of  this  plant  are  very  aftrlngent :  both  the  RuJJians  and 
Kamtfchadales  eat  it  in  the  fpring.  They  preferve  the  root  for 
winter,  which  they  fl:amp  and  boil  for  a  gruel.  It  has  fome  re- 
femblancc  in  tafte  to  the  Piftacho  nut. 

The  morkovai  poufliki,  or  carrot  bunches,  are  fo  called  be- 
caufe  they  are  like  carrots  in  their  leaf  as  well  as  in  tafte.  They 
likewife  eat  this  green  in  the  fpring,  but  they  oftener  four  it  like 
four  crout,  or  make  a  liquor  with  it. 

The  kotkonia  *  grows  upon  the  banks  of  the  rivers  of 
Kamtfchatka  in  great  plenty.  Its  root  is  about  the  thick-' 
nefs  of  one's  finger,  bitter  and  aftringent,  black  without, 
and  white  within.  Sometimes  five,  but  always  more  than  two 
ftalks  arife  from  this  root,  about  ten  inches  high,  of  the 
thicknefs  of  a  goofe-quill,  and  of  a  yellowifti-green  colour.  At 
the  top  are  thiee  oval  leaves  fpread  like  a  ftar,  from  the  middle 
of  which  rifes  a  ftalk  half  an  inch  high,  which  fupports  the 
flower.  The  cup  of  the  flower  confifts  of  three  oblong  green 
leaves,  and  the  flower  itfelf  of  as  many  white  ones.  In  the 
middle  of  the  flower  is  the  piftil,  of  fix  fides,  a  yellow  colour, 
with  a  red  top  :  it  contains  three  cells,  and  is  furrounded  with 
fix  equal  yellow-coloured  ftamina  ;  the  anthera  is  alfo  yellow. 
"When  the  piftil  is  ripe  it  is  as  big  as  a  walnut,  is  foft,  flefliy, 
and  of  an  agreeable  tafte,  like  a  pleafant  apple.  It  flowers  about 
the  middle  of  May.  The  Kamtjchadales  eat  the  root  of  this 
plant  both  frefti  and  dried,  with  caviar  ;  but  the  fruit  muft  be 
eaten  as  foon  as^  gathered,  for  it  is  fo  delicate  that  it  fpoils  if 
it  be  kept  one  night. 

The  ikoume+,  or  biftort,  grows  in  plenty  both  on  the  hills  and 
in  the   vaUies.     The  Kamtjchadales  eat  it  frefti  or  dried,  and 


»  Tradefcantia  fruftu  molli  eduli. 

X  Biftorta  foliis  ovatis  oblongis  acuminatis.    Ljnn.  Cliff". 


pounded 


KAMTSCHATKA.  91 

pounded  with  caviar.     It  is  far  from  being  fo  aftringent  as  that  in 
Europe^  is  juicy,  and  taftes  like  a  nut. 

Utchichlcy-j-  is  a  plant  that  has  leaves  like  hemp,  but  flowers 
like  the  ragwort.  When  the  leaves  are  dried,  and  boiled  with 
fifli,  they  make  the  broth  tafte  as  if  the  flefli  of  the  wild  goat 
was  boiled  in  it. 

The  root  called  here  mitoui,  and  at  Jaktitjki  fardan,  they 
fry  in  the  fat  of  fifli,  or  fcals,  and  efteem  it  a  delicate 
iliOi, 

Thefe  are  the  principal  plants  which  they  make  ufe  of  in 
their  kitchens ;  however  there  is  a  great  number  of  others,  and 
alfo  of  plants  thrown  out  by  the  fea,   which  the  Kamtfchadales 
eat  both  fre(h  and  dry  in  the  winter  :    for,  as  Mr.  Steller  obferves, 
they   refufe  nothing,   but  eat  every  thing  they  can   get  down, 
even  the  drieft  plants  and  naftieft  rotten  mufhroons,  although 
one    would  imagine  the    confequence  dangerous,     as  indeed    it 
fometimes   happens.      However,   he   tells   us   the   natives  have 
obtained  fuch  a   knowledge  of  plants,  and    of  their  ufe   both 
in  food  and  medicine,  that  he  is  furprifed  ;  and  that  one  fhall  not 
find  fo  much  knowledge  of  this  fort  among  any  barbarous  nation, 
nor  even,  perhaps,  amongft  the  mod  civilized.     They  give  a 
name  to  every  one  of  their  plants,    and   know  all   their  proper- 
ties, and  the  difi^erent  degrees  of  virtue  which  they  derive  from 
the  various  foils  and  expofitions  in  which  they  grow  ;    and   fo 
accurate   are    they  in  thefe  diftindtions,  and  alfo  in  the  proper 
time   of  gathering  the  feveral  fruits  and  other  produce,   that   it 
is  truly  wonderful.     Hence  the  Kcimtfchadales  have  this  advan- 
tage  above  other  people,  that  they  can  find  food  and  medicine 
every  where ;   and,    by  their  knowledge  and  experience,  are  in 
little  danger  from    the   noxious  plants. 

t  Jacobca  foliis  cannabis.     Steller, 

N  2  Amongft 


92  'The   Natural   History    of 

Amongft  the  medicinal  plants  we  muft  mention  the  fol- 
lowing :  ill,  Kailoun,  a  plant  which  grows  in  all  the  fwamps 
near  the  rivers.  The  inhabitants  ufe  this  as  a  cataplafm  in  all 
boils  to  make  them  flippurate  ;  and  taken  in  decodlions,  they 
imagine  it  produces  fweat,  and  drives  away  every  infedlious 
humour,  adly.  The  tchaban*,  which  grows  in  plenty  through 
all  Kamtfchatka^  they  ufe  in  decodlions  for  all  pains  and 
fwellings  of  the  legs,  3dly,  Katunatch  -f,  or  wild  rofemary,  is 
not  fo  ftrong  as  in  other  parts.  The  inhabitants  have  thought 
it  beneficial  in  the  venereal  difeafe,  but  in  this  are  deceived. 
4thly,  The  fea  oak  ||  is  thrown  out  by  the  waves ;  and  being 
boiled  with  the  fweet  herb,  a  decoftion  of  it  is  given  in  fluxes. 
5thly,  The  fea  rafberry  is  given  to  women  in  labour,  to  promote 
the  birth.  6thly,  There  is  yet  another  fea  plant,  called  yachanga  J, 
which  the  fea  throws  out  near  to  the  Kuriljkoya  Lopatka,  re- 
fembling  the  whale's  beard.  This  the  inhabitants  ufe  in  choHc 
pains,  infufing  it  in  cold  water.  7thly,  The  omeg**,  or  water 
hemlock,  grows  upon  all  the  rivers,  and  almoft  all  the  fhore  of 
Kamtfchatka.  This  plant  is  made  ufe  of  againft  pains  in  the 
back  in  the  following  manner : — They  put  the  patient  into 
a  hut  made  exceedingly  warm  j  and  when  he  begins  to  fweat 
profufely,  they  rub  his  back  with  the  cicuta,  being  careful 
not  to  touch  the  loins,  for,  what  is  very  extraordinary,  that 
would  occafion  fudden  death :  however  from  this  pradice  they 
generally  obtain  great  relief.  8thly,  The  zgate  -f-f-  muft  not 
be  omitted,  whofe  dreadful  qualities  are  but  too  well  known 
in  all  this  part  of  the  world.  They  anoint  the  points  of  their 
darts  and  arrows  with  the  juice  which  is  fqueezed  from   the 


*  Dryas.     Linn.  J  Species  fuci. 

t  Andromeda  foliis  oralis  venofis.  **  Cicuta  aquatica. 

I  Quercus  marina.    Ci.us.et  Lob.  ft  Anemonoides  et  ranunculus. 


root 


KAMTSCHATKA.  93 

root  of  this  plant,  and  the  wounds  which  they  give  are  incu- 
rable unlefs  the  poifon  be  fucked  out.  This  is  certainly  the 
only  method,  and,  if  this  be  negleded,  the  wound  immediately 
turns  blue  and  fwells,  and  in  two  days  the  patient  dies.  The 
very  largeft  whales  when  they  have  received  a  flight  wound  from 
fuch  a  poifoned  weapon,  cannot  bear  the  fea  for  any  confiderable 
time ;  but  throwing  themfelves  upon  the  ihore,  expire  moil 
miferably,  with  terrible  groans  and  bellowing. 

The  following  are  very  fcrviceable  for  cloathing,  and  other 
houfehold  purpofes. 

There  grows  upon  the  fea-fhore  a  whitifh  high  plant,  re- 
fembling  wheat.  1  have  feen  it  at  Strelinimuife,  the  palace  be- 
low St.  Peterjbourg,  upon  fandy  ground.  Of  this  they  make 
mats,  which  ferve  them  as  coverings  and  curtains  j  the  bell  of 
thefe  are  made  of  different  colours,  with  the  beards  of  the 
whales  fplit  very  fmall  and  dyed.  They  alfo  make  clokes  of  it, 
like  the  old  Ruffian  milled  clokes,  fmooth  within,  and  rough 
without,  which  makes  the  rain  run  more  eafily  off  them. 
The  prettiefl  of  this  kind  of  work  is  their  little  bags  and  bafkets, 
in  which  the  women  keep  their  trinkets.  Thefe  are  fo  neat, 
that  one  would  take  them  to  be  made  of  fplit  canes  ;  and  they 
are  ornamented  with  the  hair  of  whales'  beards  and  horfe-hair, 
dyed  of  different  colours.  When  this  plant  is  green  they  make 
large  bags  of  it  to  contain  their  fifh  or  different  herbs  and  roots 
which  they  provide  againfl  the  winter  :  befides  it  ferves  alfo  to 
thatch  their  houfes  or  huts.  They  mow  it  with  a  fcythe,  made 
out  of  the  fhoulder-blade  of  a  whale  ;  which  they  whet  fo  well 
by  grinding  it  upon  a  ftone,  that  they  bring  it  to  a  very  good 
edge. 

In  the  marfhes  there  is  found  a  plant  refembling  the  cy- 
peroides.  This  they  drefs  with  a  double-toothed  comb  of 
bone,  and  ufe  it  to  wrap  their  children  in  inftead  of  fhirts  or 
fwaddling  cloaths,  to  keep  them  clean  and  fweet.     They  alfo 

roll 


o^  The    Natural    History    of 

roll  it  about  their  legs,  and  it  ferves  for  ftockings.  The  wo- 
men wrap  it  round  their  bodies,  from  an  opinion  that  the 
warmth  promotes  fruitfulnefs.  It  ferves  to  light  their  fires, 
being  eafily  kindled.  On  great  holidays  they  bind  gai  lands  of 
it  about  the  heads  and  necks  of  their  idols ;  and  when  they 
make  any  facrifice,  or  kill  any  wild  beaft,  they  offer  fome  of 
this  plant  as  an  atonement,  that  the  relations  of  the  beaft 
which  is  killed  may  be  appeafed.  Formerly  they  did  the 
fame  by  the  heads  of  their  enemies :  after  having  adorned 
them  with  thefe  garlands,  ;  they  performed  feveral  forceries, 
and  then  ftuck  them  upon  poles.  The  Coflacks  call  this  plant 
tontchitze. 

Few  plants  are  of  more  general  ufe  than  the  nettles ;  for 
being  without  any  kind  of  hemp,  they  would  have  no 
materials  to  make  nets  of  for  fifhing,  which  is  abfolutely  ne- 
ceflary  for  the  fupport  of  life.  They  pull  them  up  in  the 
months  of  Auguft  or  September,  and  binding  them  in  bunches 
lay  them  to  dry  in  the  fhade.  When  they  drefs  them,  they 
firft  fplit  them  with  their  teeth,  then  peel  off  the  fkin,  and 
beat  them.  After  this  they  comb  them,  then  fpin  them  be- 
tween their  hands,  and  wind  them  up  upon  fpindles.  The 
thread  of  the  firft  fpinning,  they  ufe  for  fewing,  but  to  make 
their  nets  they  double  and  twift  it  j  which,  after  all,  never  laft 
above  one  fummer.  The  truth  is  they  are  very  ignorant  and 
unlkilful  in  this  manufacture  j  and  moreover  they  neither  fteep 
their  nettles,  nor  boil  their  yarn. 


CHAP. 


KA^TSCHATKA.  95 

CHAP.     VI. 
Of  the   LAND    ANIMALS. 


THE  principal  riches  of  Kamtfchatka  confifl  in  the  great 
number  of  wild  hearts  :   among  which  are  foxes,  fables, 
ftone  foxes,  hares,  marmottas,   ermins,  weafels,  wolves, 
rein-deer  wild  and  tame,  and  ftone  rams.     Their  fox  fkins  in 
the    thicknefs,   length,  and  beauty  of  their  hair  equal,  if  not 
excel,   all  the  foxes  of  Siberia  ;   befides  there  are  in   Kamtf- 
chatka  almoil:  all    the  different  fpecies   of  foxes    which  are  to 
be  found  in  other  places,   fuch  as  the  red,  fiery,  blue-breafted, 
or    marked   with  a  black   crofs,   the  chefnut,    black  chefnut, 
and  the  like ;  and  fometimes  white  foxes  are  found   there,  but 
thefe  very  feldom.     It   is  remarkable,  that  the  more  valuable 
foxes   are  the  moft  cunning ;   fuch  are  the  black  chefnut,   the 
blue-breafted,  and   the   fiery   coloured  j    fo   that  not  only    the 
Kamtfchadales,  but  even   the  Riifjians  find   it  difficult  to  catch 
them.     It  happened  while  I  was  at  Kamtfchatka^   that  the  Cof- 
facks  tried  for  two  winters  to  catch  one  black  fox  which  fre- 
quented the  Great  River,  without  being  able  to  effedl  it.  The  moft 
ufual  method  of  taking  them  is  either  by  poiion,  traps,  or  bows. 
The  poifon  is  thrown  in  lumps  in  the  frefh  tradls ;  the  traps  are 
fet  upon  the  fides  of  hills,  baited  with  a  live  animal ;   and  for  the 
greater  fecurity  two  or  three  of  the  traps  are  placed  upon  one  hil- 
lock, that  whatever  way  the  foxes  approach  they  may  fall  into 
one  of  them  ;  and  this  is  found  neceffary,  for  thofe,  which  have 
been  once  in  danger  from  the  ftroke  of  this  trap,  proceed  after- 
wards fo  cautioufly,   that  they  eat  the  bait  without  being  feifed  ; 
hot,  with  all  their  cunning,  it  is  difficult  for  them  to  efcape  the 

fcveral 


5)6  "The    Natural    History    of 

feveral  traps,  which  feize  them  fometimes  by  the  head,  and  fome- 
times  by  the  foot.  The  method  of  kilUng  them  with  the  bow 
is  thus :  the  hunters  muft  know  exadlly  how  high  to  place  it  j 
when  the  bow  is  bent,  it  is  faftened  to  a  ftake  driven  into  the 
earth  near  which  the  fox's  tradt  is  obferved,  and  then  a  cord 
drawn  from  the  bow-ftring,  is  ftretched  very  tight  over  his  or- 
dinary path ;  and  fo  foon  as  this  cord  is  touched  with  the  foot  of 
the  fox,  the  bow  is  difcharged,  and  the  arrow  pierces  the  very 
heart.  Thefe  are  the  inventions  of  the  Ruffian  Coflacks ;  for 
formerly  the  Kamtfchadales  gave  themfelves  no  trouble  about 
the  foxes,  not  valuing  their  furrs  much  more  than  dogs'  fkins. 
They  pretend  they  could  have  killed  as  many  as  they  wanted 
with  flicks,  and  that  foxes  were  formerly  fo  numerous  in  Kamtf- 
chatka,  that  when  they  fed  their  dogs,  they  were  obliged  to 
'drive  them  away  from  the  trough  :  and  though  this  may  feem 
improbable,  yet  it  is  certain,  that  even  now  they  are  in  great 
plenty  near  the  forts,  which  at  night  they  enter  without  any  feem- 
ing  apprehenlion  of  danger  from  the  dogs  of  the  country,  which 
either  cannot  catch  them,  or,  not  being  bred  to  it,  do  not  mind 
them.  It  happened  when  I  was  there,  that  one  of  the  inhabitants 
catched  feveral  of  them  in  the  pit  where  they  keep  their  fi{h. 
The  befl  time  to  hunt  foxes  is,  \\  hen  the  earth  is  hard  frozen, 
before  the  fnow  falls,  as  it  is  then  difficult  for  them  to  dig  out 
the  rats'  nefls,  which  they  do  when  the  earth  is  thawed,  the  rats 
being  their  chief  fupport.  The  Kuriks,  who  live  upon  the 
Lopatka,  catch  foxes  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  themfelves.  They 
have  a  net  made  of  the  hair  of  whales'  beards,  compofed  of  fe- 
veral rings  J  this  is  fpread  upon  the  ground,  and  to  a  ring  in  the 
middle  they  bind  a  magpye ;  round  the  net  is  drawn  a  cord, 
the  ends  of  which  are  held  by  a  perfon  concealed  in  a  pit 
near  at  hand,  who,  when  the  fox  fprings  upon  the  bird,  draws 
the  cord  and  gathers  together  the  net,  which  furrounds  the  fox 
as  the  drag  net  does  a  fill:i. 

The 


K     A     M     T     S     C     II     A     T     K     A.  ()j 

The  fables  of  Kamtfchatka  excel  all  other  fables  of  Siberia^ 
both  in  largenefs,  thicknefs  of  hair,  and  brightnefs ;  but  in  point 
of  blacknefs  they  do  not  come  up  to  thofe  of  Okkmine  and  Vi- 
t'une  :  hoAvever  their  other  properties  arc  fo  valuable,  that  the 
Kamtjchatka  fables  have  by  much  the  preference ;  and  in  China^ 
where  they  know  how  to  improve  the  colour,  fetch  {o  great  a 
price  that  few  of  them  are  brought  into  Rujjia.  The  fables  of 
leghil  zndiOukine  are  moft  efteemed,  and  are  fometimes  fold 
for  thirty  rubles  a  pair.  Mr.  Steller  fays,  that  the  worft  are 
hunted  about  the  Lopatka  and  Kuriljkoy  feas.  It  often  happens 
that  the  word  kind  of  fibles  fliall  have  their  tails  fo  black  and 
thick  haired,  that  they  will  fell  dearer  than  any  other. 

Before  the  conquefl  of  Ka7ntfchatka  there  was  fo  great  a 
plenty  of  fables  that  one  hunter  would  kill  feventy  or  eighty 
in  a  year ;  and  that  not  for  the  fake  of  the  furr,  but  the  flefh, 
which  they  efteemvery  delicious.  The  inhabitants  at  that  time 
willingly  agreed  to  pay  their  tribute  in  fables;  and  were  glad 
to  receive  a  knife  for  eight,  and  an  ax  for  eighteen.  Seme 
merchants  have  gained  in  one  year  by  furrs  only  more  than 
thirty  thoufand  rubles.  The  fables  are  flill  in  much  greater 
plenty  here  tiaan  in  any  other  country,  as  is  obferved  by 
every  one  who  has  been  upon  the  fpot,  and  compared  their 
tradls  upon  the  fnow  with  what  are  feen  either  upon  the  ri- 
vers Lena  or  Eehy,  arid,  this  even  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
forts.  And  if  the  people  of  Kamtjchatka  were  as  induflrious  in 
hunting  as  thofe  about  the  h'ena,  they  could  fell  a  great  many 
more  than  they ;  but  fuch  is  their  natural  lazinefs,  that  they 
never  kill  more  than  what  they  muft  pay  in  tribute,  and  what 
will  pay  their  debts.  They  look  upon  him  as  an  extraordinary 
good  hunter  that  kills  fix  or  feven  fables  in  a  winter;  and  feveral 
are  not  able  to  furnifh  their  tribute  furrs,  but  mufl  borrow  either 
from  tlie  RiiJJian  Collacks,  or  fome  more  induftrious  hunter  of 

O  their 


98  The  Natural  History  of 

their  own  country,  to  whom  for  payment  they  are  bound  to 
work  the  whole  enfuing  fummer.  Their  baggage  when  they  go 
to  hunt  confiils  of  a  net,  a  bow  and  arrows,  a  fire-fteel  with 
flint  and  tinder.  When  they  find  a  fable  concealed  either  in  the 
earth  or  under  the  root  of  fome  tree,  they  throw  the  net  over 
the  place,  in  which  he  entangles  himfelf  when  he  comes  out. 
With  the  bow  and  arrows  they  ihoot  them  when  they  fly  to  the 
trees  ;  and  the  fleel  and  flint  are  to  ftrike  fire,  by  which  they 
fmoke  them,  and  drive  them  out  of  their  holes.  The  beft 
hunters,  to  be  nearer  the  game,  go  out  with  their  whole  fa- 
milies to  the  hills,  where  they  build  huts  and  live  the  whole 
winter. 

Although  the  ftone  foxes,  and  hares,  abound  in  Kamtfchatka^ 
yet  hardly  any  one  thinks  it  worth  his  trouble  to  hunt  them, 
their  furrs  being  of  fmall  value  j  and  when  they  fall  into  the 
fox  traps,  they  ufe  their  fkins  as  coverings  in  their  beds.  The 
Kamtfchatka  ftone  foxes  are  little  better  than  the  hares  of 
Tourouchan,  which  are  very  bad,  the  hair  eafily  falling  off. 
Steller  relates,  that  fome  ufed  to  few  the  tails  of  the  ftone  foxes 
to  the  hare-fkins  of  Toiirouchan,  and  impofe  them  upon  the 
ignorant  as  true  ftone  fox-fkins,  the  thicknefs  of  the  ikin  and 
furr  making  it  difficult  to  difcover  the  cheat. 

Marmottas  *  abound  every  where  in  Kamtfchatka.  The 
Koreki  ufe  their  fkins  for  cloaths  ;  and,  indeed,  they  are  reckoned 
no  ordinary  drefs,  being  both  light  and  warm.  Steller  compares 
the  furrs  made  of  the  backs  of  the  marmottas  to  the  fpotted 
feathers  of  birds,  efpecially  if  feen  at  a  diftance  ;  and  he  alfo 
fays,  that  this  animal  is  found  both  upon  the  continent  and  the 


*  Martnotta  minor.      Gmel. 

iflands 


KAMTSCHATKA.  99 

iflands  of  America.  When  they  eat,  they  fit  upon  their  hind 
legs  hke  a  fquirrel,  and  hold  their  food,  which  is  roots,  berries, 
and  cedar  nuts,  with  their  fore  feet.  They  are  pretty  to  look 
at,  and  whittle  furprifingly  loud.  No  body  thinks  it  worth  his 
while  to  hunt  ermines*,  weafels-f-,  or  common  marmottas|, 
unlefs  by  chance  they  meet  with  them  j  fo  that  one  cannot 
reckon  ermines  amongft  the  furrs  of  Kamtfchatka.  But  there  is 
a  creature  of  the  weafel  kind,  called  the  glutton  ||,  whofe  furr 
is  (b  greatly  efteemed  above  all  others,  that  when  they  would 
dcfcribe  a  man  moft  richly  attired,  they  fay  that  he  is  cloathed 
with  the  furr  of  the  glutton.  The  women  of  Kamtfchatka 
drefs  their  hair  with  the  white  paws  of  this  animal,  and  reckon 
them  a  very  great  ornament.  However,  the  Kamtfchadales  kill 
fo  few  of  them,  that  they  not  only  have  not  enough  for  expor- 
tation, but  even  import  fome  from  Jakutjki  at  a  very  great 
price.  They  put  the  greater  value  upon  the  furr  of  the  glutton 
the  whiter  and  yellower  it  is,  although  every  where  elfe  this  fort  is 
defpifed  :  nay,  they  efteem  it  fo  much,  that  they  fay  the  heavenly 
beings  wear  no  other  garments  than  of  this  furr  ;  nor  can 
they  make  their  wives  or  miftrefles  a  greater  prefent  than 
of  one  of  thefe  fkins,  which  was  formerly  fold  for  thirty,  and 
even  fixty  rubles ;  and  for  the  two  paws  which  the  women  wear 
in  their  hair,  they  fometimes  give  one,  and  fometimes  two  fea 
beavers.  The  greateft  number  of  thefe  gluttons  is  found  near 
Karaga,  Andirjka,  and  Kolima.     They  have  a  furpriftng  dexte- 


•  Ermineum  majus.     Gmel.  |i  Muftella  rufo-fufca,    medio  dorfi 

t  Ermineum  minor.    Ejufdem.  nigro.    Linn. 

X  Marmotta  vulgaris.   Ejufdem. 


O  2  rity 


loo  The  Natural    History    of 

rity  in  killing  of  deer,  which  they  pradlife  in  this  manner  : — They 
climb  up  Tome  tree,  carrying  with  them  a  parcel  of  fuch  mofs  as 
the  deer  ufe  to  eat.  This  they  let  fall  from  the  tree,  and  if  the 
deer  comes  to  eat  it,  they  throw  thcmfelves  down  upon  his  back  ; 
then  faftening  themfelves  between  the  horns,  they  tear  out  his 
eyes,  and  give  him  fo  much  pain,  that  the  miferable  animal,  to 
put  an  end  to  his  torment,  or  if  poffible  to  free  himfelf  from  the 
caufe  of  it  by  deflroying  his  enemy,  flrikes  his  head  againft  the 
trees,  which  generally  kills  him.  No  fooner  is  he  brought  down 
than  the  glutton  divides  his  flefli  carefully,  and  hides  it  in  the  earth, 
to  fave  it  from  being  feized  by  any  other  creature  ;  and  never 
eats  a  bellyful  before  he  has  done  this.  In  the  fame  manner, 
upon  the  river  Lena,  they  deflroy  horfes.  They  are  eafily 
tamed,  and  are  capable  of  learning  feveral  tricks.  It  has  been 
faid,  but  we  never  heard  it  afcertained,  that  they  carry  their 
gluttony  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  be  obliged  to  relieve  themfelves 
by  fqueezing  their  over-fwoln  bodies  between  two  trees  to 
unburthen  their  bellies  of  the  infufferable  load.  Thofe  that  are 
tam.ed  are  not  fo  voracious ;  but  perhaps  thefe  animals  are 
not  alike  in  all  countries. 

Bears  and  wolves  are  fo  numerous  here,  that  they  fill  the 
woods  and  fields  like  cattle;  the  bears  in  fummer,  and  the 
wolves  in  winter.  The  bears  of  Kamtfchatka  are  neither  large 
nor  fierce,  and  never  fall  upon  people,  unlefs  they  find  them 
afleep ;  and  then  they  feldom  kill  any  one  outright,  but  moft 
commonly  tear  the  fcalp  from  the  back  part  of  the  head  j 
and,  when  fiercer \  than  ordinary,  tear  ofi*  fome  of  the  flefhy 
parts,  but  never  eat  them.  The  people  who  have  been  thus 
wounded,  are  called  Dranki,  and  are  frequently  to  be  met  with. 
It  is  remarked  here,  that  the  bears  never  hurt  women  j 
but,  in  the  fummer,  go  about   with  them   like  tame  animals, 

efpecially 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  loi 

efpecially  when  they  gather  berries.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the 
bears  eat  up  the  berries  which  the  women  have  gathered,  and 
this  is  the  only  injury  they  do  them. 

In  the  feafon,  when  the  fifli  enter  the  mouths  of  the  rivers 
in  vafl:  flioals,  great  numbers  of  bears  come  down  from  the  hills, 
and  fettle  in  proper  places  for  catching  them  ;  which  they  do 
in  fuch  plentv,  that  they  only  eat  and  fuck  the  bones  of  the 
heads,  negledting  the  bodies ;  but  when  this  plenty  is  paft,  they 
are  glad  to  gnaw  the  bones  which  they  formerly  defplfed.  They 
frequently  fteal  fifh  from  the  filhing  huts  of  the  CofTacks,  al- 
though there  is  always  a  woman  left  to  watch  them.  To  her 
indeed  they  never  do  any  hurt,  fatisfying  themfelves  with  what 
filli"  they  can  find. 

Before   the  introduction   of  fire-arms,   they   ufed  feveral    de- 
vices  for  killing  the  bears.      Cutting   feveral  billets  of  wood, 
they  flop  up  the  mouth   of  the    den  with   them,   which  the 
bear   draws  in   that  his   paiTage   may    not   be  fliut  up.     This 
they    continue    until   he    is   fo   ftraitened    in   his    den    that    he 
cannot  turn  himfelf;   then   they   dig   down   from   above,   and 
kill  him   with   their   fpears.      The   Koreki,    in   order  to   catch 
the  bears,  feek  out  feme  tree  that  is  crooked  above,  upon  which 
they  faften  a  fnare,  and  behind  it  place  fome  proper  bait ;   which 
the  bear  endeavouring  to  feize  is  held  faft  by  the  head  or  the 
paw.     They  place  heavy  logs  of  wood,  in  fuch  a  manner,   that 
they  will  fall  with  the  leafl:  touch  and  crufh  them.     Another 
method  is  to  lay  a   board  driven  full  of  iron  hooks  in  the  bear  s 
trad:,  and  near  to  that  they   place   fomething  that   eafily   falls 
down  ;   this  frightening  the  bear  by  its  fall,   he  runs  upon  the 
board  with  greater  force  ;  and  finding  firft  one  fore  paw  wounded 
and  feized  by  the  hooks,  he  endeavours  to  free  himfelf  by  beating 
the  board  with   the  other  ;    thus   both  being  fixed,   he  refts 
on  his  hinder  legs,  which  caufes  the  board  to  rife  before  his 

eyes. 


102        K    A    M    T    S     C     H    A    T    K    A. 

eyes,  and  perplexes  him  in  fuch  a  manner  that  he  falls  in  a 
fury  and  beats  himfelf  to  death.  The  people  about  the  rivers 
Lena  and  llime  have  ftill  a  more  odd  way  of  catching  them. 
They  place  a  noofe  upon  the  bear's  tradl  or  entrance  to  his 
den,  faftened  at  the  end  to  a  large  log  of  wood  j  when  the 
bear  finds  himfelf  entangled,  and  that  the  log  hinders  his  walk- 
ing eafily,  he  takes  it  up,  and  carrying  it  to  fome  precipice, 
he  throws  it  down  with  great  force,  which  dragging  him  after 
it  bruifes  him  very  much:  however,  he  continues  this  'till  in 
the  end  he  kills  himfelf  This  laft  method  is  fomewhat  like  that 
which  the  Ruffians  ufe  to  preferve  their  honey  from  the  bears. 
They  hang  fuch  a  log  at  the  end  of  a  long  firing  upon  thofe 
trees  where  the  bees  are  hived  ;  and  when  the  bear,  climbing  up 
to  get  at  the  hive,  finds  himfelf  interrupted  by  the  log,  he  flioves 
it  away}  but  returning  it  flrikes  him  again,  and  obliges  him  to 
tofs  it  with  greater  force,  which  makes  it  revert  with  flill  greater 
upon  himfelf  He  continues  this  fport  fometimes  until  he  is 
killed,  or  falls  from  the  tree. 

The  making  bears  drunk  and  killing  them,  or  hunting  them 
with  proper  dogs,  is  fo  common  that  I  have  no  occafion  to  fay 
more  about  it. 

One  method  is  yet  to  be  mentioned,  which  I  have  heard  from 
people  of  reputation  ;  namely  that  one  man  will  kill  fuch  bears 
as  a  whole  company  would  be  afraid  to  attack,  and  that  without 
any  other  inftrument  than  a  ftilletto,  fliarp  pointed  at  both  ends, 
fattened  to  a  thong.  The  thong  he  wraps  about  his  right  arm 
up  to  the  elbow ;  and  taking  the  ftilletto  in  this  hand,  and  the 
knife  in  his  left,  he  advances  upon  the  bear,  who,  as  ufual, 
ftanding  upon  his  hinder  legs,  and  opening  his  mouth,  attacks 
the  hunter  :  but  he,  with  great  refolution  and  addrefs,  thrufts 
his  hand  into  his  throat ;  and  placing  there  the  fliUetto,  not  only 
prevents  him  from  (hutting  his  mouth,  but  alfo  gives  him  fuch 

exquifite 


KAMTSCHATKA  103 

exquifite  pain  that  the  bear  can  make  no  further  refiftance,  and 
allows  the  hunter  to  lead  him  wherever  he  pleafes,  or  ftab  him 
with  his  knife,  without  any  danger. 

The  Kamtfchadales,  however,  look  upon  it  as  an  affair  of 
fuch  confequence  to  kill  a  bear,  that  whoever  has  this  honour, 
is  obliged  to  feaft  all  his  neighbours ;  at  which  entertainment 
the  bear's  flefh  is  the  principal  difh  ;  and,  as  a  trophy,  the  bones 
of  the  head  and  thighs  are  hung  round  about  their  huts. 

Of  the  bears'  fkins  they  make  their  beds  and  coverings,  caps, 
gloves,  and  collars  for  their  dogs.  The  flefli  and  fat  are  their 
moil:  delicate  food ;  and  the  fat,  when  melted,  is  thin,  and  might 
be  very  well  ufed  with  fallad.  With  the  guts  they  cover  their 
faces  in  fummer  to  keep  off  the  fun  :  fometimes  they  ufe  their 
fkins  as  {hoe-foles,  to  prevent  them  from  Aiding  upon  the  ice ; 
and  with  their  fhoulder- blade  bones,  made  fharp,  they  cut 
graft. 

From  the  month  of  June  to  the  end  of  harveft  the  bears  are 
very  fat ;  but  in  the  fpring  they  are  lean  and  dry.  In  the  fto- 
machs  of  thofe  killed  in  the  fpring  nothing  is  found  but  a  frothy 
dime  :  whence  the  inhabitants  maintain  the  general  opinion,  that 
the  bear  has  no  food  throughout  the  whole  winter,  but  fupports 
himfelf  by  fucking  his  paws. 

Although,  as  has  been  related  above,  wolves  abound  in  Kamtf- 
chatka^  and  their  furrs  are  in  great  efleem  for  cloaths,  yet  few 
are  caught  there.  They  differ  in  nothing  from  the  wolves  that 
are  found  in  other  places.  By  their  cunning  and  fiercenefs  they 
do  more  hurt  to  the  inhabitants  than  their  furrs  bring  profit ; 
for  they  kill  not  only  the  wild  deer,  but  even  herds  of  the  tame, 
notwithftanding  the  latter  have  always  a  watch.  Their  fa- 
vourite morfels  feem  to  be  the  tongues  of  the  deer,  or  even 
of  the  whales  that  are  thrown  upon  the  fhore :  they  fometimes 
fteal  the  hares  and  foxes  out  of  the  traps  and  fnares.     White 

wolves 


104  '^^^    Natural    History   of 

v/olves  are  very  feldom  feen  here,  and  therefore  they  are  much 
more  efteemed  than  the  grey.  Ahhough  the  Kamtfchadaks 
are  called  univerfal  eaters,  yet  they  never  eat  the  fleili  of  either 
wolves  or  foxes.  The  deer  and  ftone  rams  may  be  reckoned 
among  the  moft  ufeful  of  all  the  animals  in  Kamtfchatka,  becaufe 
their  Ikins  are  moft  ufed  in  cloathing.  The  inhabitants,  how- 
ever, kill  but  few  in  proportion  to  the  great  numbers  that  are  in 
this  country.  The  deer  live  in  mofTy  places,  and  the  wild  rams 
upon  the  higheft  mountains ;  fo  that  the  hunters  of  the  wild  rams 
leave  their  dwellings  in  the  beginning  of  harveff,  and  taking  all 
their  families  with  them  go  to  the  hills,  where  they  are  employed 
in  this  chafe  until  the  month  of  December.  The  wild  rams 
refemble  goats,  but  their  hair  is  like  the  deers'.  They  have  two 
horns  that  are  twifted  round  like  the  Ord'mfky  rams,  but  much 
larger.  The  horns  of  thofe  that  are  of  full  age  weigh  each  of 
them  from  25  to  30  pounds.  They  run  very  fwifcly,  throwing 
their  horns  back  upon  their  ilioulders  j  fpring  over  rocks,  and  run 
upon  the  narrow  ledges  of  the  mofl  dangerous  precipices.  Cloaths 
made  of  their  fkins  are  very  warm.  The  fat  upon  their  haunches 
is  equal  to  that  of  the  deer,  and  the  flefli  is  a  moft  delicious  food. 
Of  the  horns  they  make  ladles,  fpoons,  and  other  fmall  utenfils  ; 
and  the  horn  entire  they  carry  upon  the  road  at  their  girdles, 
and   ufe  it   for   a  bottle. 

./There  are  three  kinds  of  rats ;  the  firfl  of  which  is  of  a  brown 
colour,  as  large  as  the  greateft  houfe-rats  in  Europe :  but  their 
cry  is  very  different,  refembling  the  Iqueaking  of  pigs ;  other  wife 
they  are  very  like  our  common  rats.  Of  the  fecond  kind  there 
are  but  few,  and  thefe  in  the  houfes,  where  they  run  about 
without  fear,  and  live  upon  any  offals.  The  third  fort  have 
a  difpofition  fomewhat  like  the  drones  among  bees,  laying  up  no 
manner  of  provifion,  but  ftealing  their  food  from  the  firfl  kind, 
which  live  in  the  fields^  woods,  and  high  mountains,  in  great 

numbers. 


KAMTSCIIATKA.  105 

numbers.  The  tegulchitch,  or  firiT:  kind,  have  nefls  very- 
roomy,  neat,  and  fprcad  with  grafs,  divided  into  different 
apartments  ;  in  fome  of  which  they  lay  up  the  faranne  quite 
clean,  in  others  rough  ;  in  others,  again,  feveral  forts  of  roots, 
which  they  gather  in  fummer  with  great  labour,  and  lay  up 
againft  winter.  In  dry  funny  days  they  drag  thefe  out  of  their 
nefts,  and  dry  thehi.  During  the  fummer  they  live  upon  ber- 
ries, and  what  elfe  they  can  find  proper  for  their  food ;  never 
touching  their  winter  provifion  fo  long  as  they  can  find  any  food 
in  the  fields.  Among  the  feveral  things  found  in  their  nefts, 
I  obferved  the  faranne,  the  anacampferus,  biftort,  goats-beard, 
burnet,   and  cedar  nuts. 

Thefe  rats  change  their  habitations  like  the  wandering  tartars, 
and  fometimes  for  a  certain  number  of  years  they  all  leave 
Kamtfcbatka,  and  go  to  fome  other  place.  This  retirement  is 
very  alarming  to  the  KamtJ'chadales,  who  think  it  forebodes  a 
rainy  feafon  and  a  bad  year  for  the  chace  :  but  when  thefe  crea- 
tures return,  they  confidently  expe6l  a  fine  one  and  good  hunt- 
ing ;  fo  that,  as  foon  as  they  begin  to  re-appear,  exprefles  are 
fent  to  all  parts  to  carry  the  good  news.  They  always  take 
their  departure  in  the  fpring,  firft  gathering  together  in  vaft 
numbers.  They  diredt  their  courfe  due  weft,  crofilng  rivers, 
lakes,  and  even  arms  of  the  fea ;  and  when,  after  long  fwim- 
■ming,  they  reach  the  fliore,  they  lie  upon  the  banks,  as  if  they 
were  dead,  'till  at  length  they  recover  their  ftrength,  and  then 
fet  out  again  upon  their  march.  Their  greateft  d;''nger  in  the 
water  is  left  fome  ravenous  fifti  fliould  fwallow  them  up  :  but 
upon  the  land  they  have  nothing  to  fear  ;  and  the  Kamtfcha- 
daks,  who  are  fo  greatly  interefted  in  theicprefervation,  when 
they  find  them  weak  upon  the  banks  of  the  rivers  or  lakes,  they 
give  them  any  afilftance  in  their  power.  From  the  river  Pengin 
they  go  fouthward,  and  about  the  middle  of  Jifiy  they  generally 
reach  Ochotjka  and  Judoma.     Sometimes  their  troop  is  fo  nu- 

■    P  merous 


ic6  I'be   Natural    History    of 

merous  that  travellers  mull  wait  two  hours  before  they  pafs. 
They  return  commonly  to  Kamtfchatka  about  the  month  of 
OBober.  It  is  furprifing  that  fuch  fmall  animals,  in  one  fura- 
mer,  can  pafs  over  fuch  an  immenfe  tradt  of  land  j  and  one  can- 
not but  admire  the  order  and  regularity  which  they  obferve  in 
their  march,  as  well  as  the  foreknowledge  they  have  of  the  change 
of  weather. 

Some  of  the  inhabitants  affured  me,  that  when  they  go  out  of 
their  nefts  they  cover  their  provifions  with  poifonous  herbs,  to 
deftroy  other  rats  that  may  come  to  rob  their  ftore  ;  and  that,  if 
all  their  winter  provifion  is  taken  away,  and  nothing  left  that 
they  can  eat,  in  the  ftead  of  their  own  ftores,  they  flrangle  them- 
felves  for  vexation,  fqueezing  their  necks  between  the  forked 
branches  of  fhrubs :  for  which  reafon  the  Kamtfchadaki  never 
take  away  all  their  ftore,  and  even  pay  for  what  they  take  by 
putting  in  either  dried  caviar,  or  fomething  that  will  ferve  the 
poor  creatures  for  fuftenance.  Although  all  thefe  circumftances 
are  related  by  the  moft  ferious  of  the  Kamtfchadales,  yet  we 
muft  not  implicitly  rely,  on  their  authority,  before  the  fads 
are   better  enquired  into. 

The  dogs  of  Kamtfchatka  are  extreamly  like  the  common 
village  dogs,  and  are  white,  black,  fpotted  white  and  black,  or 
grey  like  the  wolves ;  brown  or  other  colours  being  very  rare. 
They  are  efteemed  fwifter  and  longer-lived  than  any  other  dogs  j 
and  this  may  be  attributed  to  their  light  fnnple  food,  which 
is  fifti.  In  J;he  fpring,  every  one  lets  his  dogs  run  at  liberty, 
without  taking  any  care  about  them  ;  for  they  can  be  ufed  for 
travelliiig  only  while  the  fnow  is  on  the  ground.  They  then 
feed  upon  what  they  can  get  in  the  fields,  where  they  dig  for 
the  mice ;  and  in  the  rivers  they,  as  well  as  the  bears,  catch 
fifli.  In  the  month  of  October  the  Kamtfchadales  call  them  home, 
and  tie  them  up  near  their  huts,  'till  they  lofe  a  good  deal  of 
their  fat,  that  they  may  be  lighter  for  the  road,  and  then  one 

hears 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.         107 

hears  their  continual  howling  night  and  day.     In   the  v/inter 
they  are  fed  with  op.nna  and  fiOi-boncs,    which   are    laid   up 
for  them  in  fummer.    The  opana  is  thus  prepared  :— -As   much 
water  as  they  think  their  dogs  want  they  pour  into  a  large  trough, 
and  then  throw  in   fome  ladlefuls  of  four  or  rather  rotten  filh, 
which  is  prepared  in  pits  for  this  purpofe,  adding  to   this   fome 
fifh-bones,  and  heating  the  whole  with  glowing  ftones  until  the 
fifti  and  bones  be  boiled.     This  opana  is  reckoned  the  beft  and 
moil:  agreeable  food  for  the  dogs,  and  they  feed  them  with  it 
only  at  night,  which  makes   them  fleep  well ;  but  never  give 
them  any  in  the  day   when    they  deiign   to  travel,  becaufe  it 
would  make  them  heavy  and  lazy :    though  they  be  never  fo 
hungry  they  will  not  touch  bread  ;  but  rather  than  that,  eat  their 
own  bridles,  reins,  or  harnefs,   if  they  can  get  at  tliem.     How- 
ever fond  they  may  be  of  their  mailer,  yet,   if  he  happens  to 
fldl  out  of  his  fledge,   and  lofe  his  hold   of  it,   they    run  away 
without   regarding  him  j  and  he  mufl:  walk  on  foot  until  the 
fledge   be  overturned,   or    catched    and    flopped   by    fomething 
or  other ;    and  therefore  he  ought  to  be  careful   never  to  lofe 
his    hold,    but    rather    fubmic    to    be   dragged    upon    his    belly 
until  the  dogs  tire.     Befides,  upon  any  fleep  defcent,  cfpecially 
the  banks  of  rivers,  one  half  of  them  mufl  be  unyoked,  otherwife 
they  are  not  to  be  managed  ;    for  thofe  that  appear  quite  tired 
fliew  an  uncommon  vigour  in  fuch  places,   and  the  more  dan- 
gerous the  defcent  is  the  more  flrengch  they  exert.     They  are 
in  like  manner  unruly  if  they  find  the  fcent  of  the  deer,  or  hear 
the  howling  of  other  dogs  in  the  villages  near  at  hand.     But  for 
all  this,   the  dogs  are,  and  always  will  be,   abfolutely  neceflary 
in  Kamtfchatka,  even  although  there  fliould  be  plenty  of  horfesj 
for  they  could  feldom  be  ufed  in  winter  on  account  of  the  great 
depth  of  fnow,   and   the   frequency   of  hills  and  rivers ;   and   in 
fummer,  the  bogs  are  fo  frequent,  that  fome  places  are  impaflable 
even  for  men.     Befides  dogs  have  this  advantage  over  horfes ;  that 

P  2  in 


io8  The   Natural  History  of 

in  the  greateft  florm,  when  a  man  cannot  fee  the'  path,  nor  even- 
keep  his  eyes  open,  they  very  feldom  mifs  their  way  >  and  if 
they  fliould,  they  go  from  one  fide  to  the  other,  'till  by  the 
fmell  they  find  it  again  :  and  v^7hen  it  is  abfolutely  impoffible  to 
travel  at  all,  which  often  happens,  then  the  dogs  lying  round 
their  mafler  defend  him  from  all  danger.  They  alfo  give  cer- 
tain figns  of  an  approaching  ftorm  ;  for,  when  they  flop,  if 
they  fcrape  the  fnow  with  their  feet,  it  is  advifeable,  without 
lofs  of  time,  to  look  out  for  fome  village,  or  other  place  of 
fafety.  And,  it  is  faid,  the  dogs  here  ferve  inftead  of  (heep, 
becaufe  their  fkins  are  ufed  for  cloaths ;  particularly  thofe. 
of  the  white  dogs,  with  which  all  their^  different  forts  of  gar- 
ments are  trimcd. 

The  number  of  dogs  they  put  to  a  fledge,  how  they  break 
them,  and  what  weight  they  carry,  fliall  be  mentioned  here- 
after, when  we  come  to  defcribe  the  manner  of  travelling  with 
dogs. 

Thofe  which  are  bred  up  to  hunt  the  deer  and  wild  rams,, 
fables,  foxes,  and  the  like,  are  fometimes  fed  with  jackdaws, 
which,  it  is  obferved,  make  their  fcent  the  ftronger  for  finding 
out  birds  and  wild  beafts. 

Befides  dogs,  they  have  here  cows  and  horfes,  but  no  other 
domeftic  animals.  There  is  no  fit  place  to  feed  flieep  on,  either 
upon  the  Eaftern  Ocean,  or  the.  fea  of  Pengifie ;  for  the  wet 
weather  and  the  ftrong  juicy  grafs  would  foon  rot  and  deflroy 
them.  Near  the  upper  0/lrog,  and  upon  the  river  KoJireff\  flieep 
thrive ;  the  weather  being  fairer,  and  grafs  lefs  watry  ;  but  then 
there  mufl  be  a  good  provifion  of  hay  made  for  them  againfl  the 
winter,  the  fnow  being  too  deep  for  them  to  find  their  food  in  the 
fields ;  for  which  reafon,  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  Ilga  to 
Jakiitfii,  very  few  flieep  are  kept. 


CHAP. 


K    A    M    T    S    C     H     A    T    K    A.  109 


CHAP.     VII. 

0/  //6^   V  I  T  IM  S  K  Y    SABLES,    and   the   Method  of 

hunting  them. 


ALTHOUGH  the  fable-hunting  of  Vttimjky  does  not 
properly  belong  to  the  defcription  of  Kamtfchatka,  yet 
as  in  treating  of  the  latter  we  have  had  occafion  to  men- 
tion the  fable,  I  thought  it  might  not  be  amiis  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  the  various  methods  of  this  chace  in  different  places. 
The  Kamffchadales  do  not  ftir  out  for  a  fortnight  or  more  after 
a  piece  of  ill-luck,  or  having  hunted  one  day  without  game  ; 
but  the  Vitimjky  hunters  fpend  almoft  the  whole  year  in  conti- 
nual toil,  and  are  very  happy,  if,  in  that  time,  they  catch  ten 
fables  for  each  man  in  company.  It  is  -true  indeed,  that  ten  com- 
mon Vitimjky  fables  are  equal  to  forty  of  Kamtfchatha :  but, 
notwithftanding,  if  the  inhabitants  o^  Ka?ntfchatka  would  take 
the  fame  pains  as  thofe  of  Vitimjky,  they  might  exceed  them 
in  the  profits  of  hunting  ;  for  fibles  are  as  numerous  in  Kamtf- 
chatka  as  fquirrels  are  upon  the  river  Lena.  The  Vitimjkv  hunt- 
ing is  the  more  remarkable  for  being  fubjecl  to  many  rigorous 
laws  and  fuperftitious  obfervations,  which  the  hunters  bind 
themfelves  to  obfervc. 

Before  Siberia  was  conquered  by  the  Rujjians,  it  abounded 
with  fables ;  but,  at  prefent,  wherever  the  Rujjians  are  fettled, 
none  can  be  catched  ;  for  fables  retire  at  a  diftance  from  all 
inhabited  places,  and  live  in  defolate  woods  and  mountains. 
The  fable  hunters  go  up  by  the  river  Vitime  and  the  two  rivers 
Mama,  which  fall  into  that  river,  as  far  as  to  the  lake  Oronne,, 
which  is  upon  the  right  hand,  as  high  and  higher  than  the  great 
catarad,  where  the  beft  hunting  is.     The  fineft  fables  are  caught 

upon 


J I  o  The    Natural    History    of 

upon  the  little  river  Kutomak,  which  fiills  into  the  river  Vit'ime^ 
upon  the  rightr  hand  above  the  cataradl  and  mouths  of  the  lower 
Mama  and  the  brook  Petrova.  Lower  than  thefe  places  the 
fables  are  confiderably  worfe;  and  all  the  hunters  agree  that 
nearer  the  heads  of  the  rivers  the  fables  are  better,  and  nearer  the 
mouths  ftill  worfe. 

The  fables  live  in  holes,  like  other  animals  of  their  kind  ;  fuch 
as  martins,  weafles,  and  ermines.  The  hunters  alfo  relate,  that 
they  build  themfelves  nefts  upon  the  trees  with  rods  and  grafs ; 
that  they  fometimes  lie  in  their  nefts  and  fometimes  in  their  holes  j 
that  in  flimmer  as  well  as  in  winter  they  lie  about  twelve  hours 
in  their  holes  or  nefts,  and  in  the  other  twelve  they  go  about  to 
feek  their  food.  In  the  fummer  time,  before  the  berries  are  ripe, 
they  feed  upon  weafels,  ermine?,  or  fquirrels,  but  chiefly  upon 
hares ;  and  in  the  winter  upon  birds.  When  the  berries  ripen, 
they  eat  cranberries  and  hurtleberries,  but  principally  thofe  of 
the  fer vice- tree,  which  caufes  them  to  itch  and  rub  themfelves 
againft  the  trees,  by  which  they  wear  off"  the  hair  from  their 
fides.  Hence  it  happens,  when  the  fervice-berries  are  very  plen- 
tiful,  that  the  hunters  lofe   their   labour. 

The  fables  bring  forth  tlieir  young  in  their  holes  or  nefts, 
about  the  end  of  March  or  the  beginning  of  April;  and  have 
from  three  to  five  at  a  time,  which  they  give  fuck  to  from 
four  to  fix  weeks. 

They  never  hunt  fables  but  in  winter,  for  in  the  fpring  they 
caft  their  hair ;  which  in  the  fummer  is  very  fnort,  and  even  in 
the  harveft  does  not  come  to  perfedion.  Such  fables  are  called 
nedafobili ;  that  is,  imperfect  fables ;  and  fell  at  a  low  price. 

The  fable-hunters,  both  RuJJians  and  natives,   begin  to  fet  out 

for   hunting  about    the    end    of  Augujl.      Some  Ruffians    go 

themfelves,    and   others  hire   people  to  hunt   for  them,   giving 

them  proper  cloaths  and  inftruments  for  hunting,    and  provilions 

for  the  time  of  their  being  out.     When  they  return  from  the 

chace 
© 


K     A     M    T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.        m 

chace  they  give  their  mafters  all  their  game,   and  reftorc  them 
likevvife  all  that  they  received,  except  their  provifions. 

A  company,  that  agrees  to  hunt  together,  affembles  from  fix  to 
forty  men,  though  formerly  there  were  fometimes  even  fifty. 
They  provide  a  fmall  boat  for  every  three  or  four  men,  which 
they  cover  over ;  and  take  with  them  fuch  perlbns  as  undcrftand 
the  language  of  the  people  amongft  whom  they  go  to  liunt,  and 
hkewife  the  places  propercft  for  hunting.  Thefe  perfons  they 
maintain  at  the  publick  charge,  and  give  them  befides  an  equal 
fliare  of  the  game. 

In  the  above-mentioned  boats  every  hunter  lays  30  poods  of 
rye-flower,  of  wheat-tiower  one  pood,  of  fait  one  pood,  and  of 
groats  a  quarter  of  a  pood.  Every  two  men  mufl  have  a  net, 
a  dog,  and  feven  pood  of  provifions  for  the  dog,  a  bed  and  co- 
vering, a  vcllel  for  preparing  their  bread,  and  a  vefTel  to  hold 
leaven.  They  carry  out  very  few  fire-arms,  as  they  only  ufe 
them  in  the  harveft,  while  they  live  in   their  huts. 

The  above-mentioned  boats  they  draw  againfl  the  ftream  of 
the  Vitime,  and  out  of  the  Vitime  up  the  river  Mama,  or  as  far 
up  as  the  lake  Oronne,  where  they  build  huts  for  themfelves  if 
they  find  none  ready.  Here  they  all  aflemble,  and  live  until  the 
river  be  frozen  over.  In  the  mean  time  they  chufe  for  their 
chief  leader  one  v\'ho  has  been  ofteneft  upon  thefe  expeditions ; 
and  to  his  orders  they  profefs  an  entire  obedience.  He  divides 
the  company  into  feveral  fmall  parties,  and  names  a  leader  to 
each,  except  his  own,  which  he  himfelf  diredls  :  he  alfo  appoints 
the  places  where  each  party  muft  hunt.  As  foon  as  the  feafbn 
begins,  this  divifion  into  fmall  parties  is  unalterable,  even  al- 
though the  wh«le  company  fhould  confifl  only  of  eight  or  ten, 
for  they  never  all  go  towards  the  fame  place.  When  their  leaders 
have  given  them  their  orders,  every  fmall  company  digs  pits  upon 
that  road  which  they  mufl  go.  In  thefe  pits  they  lay  up  for 
every  two  men  three  bags  of  flower  againfl  their  return,  when 

they 


XJ2  The  Natural  History  of 

they  iliall  have  confumed  all  their  other  provifions ;  and  what- 
ever theyhave  left  in  their  huts,  they  are  obliged  to  hide  alfo 
in  pits,  left  the  wild  inhabitants  (hould  fteal  it. 

As  foon  as  the  rivers  are  frozen  over,  and  the  feafon  is  proper 
for  the  fable-hunting,  the  chief  of  the  leaders  calls  all  the 
huntfmen  into  the  hut,  and,  having  prayed  to  God,  gives  orders 
to  every  chief  of  each  fmall  company,  and  difpatches  them  the 
fame  road  which  was  before  affigned  them.  Then  the  leader 
fets  out  one  day  before  the  reft  to  provide  lodging  places  for 
them. 

When  the  chief  leader  difpatches  the  under  leaders  he  gives 
them  feveral  orders ;  one  of  which  is,  that  each  fhould  build  his 
firft  lodging  to  the  honour  of  fome  church,  which  he  names,  and 
the  other  lodging  places  to  the  honour  of  fuch  faints  whofe  images 
they  have  with  them ;  and  that  the  firft  fable  they  catch  fhould 
be  laid  afide  in  the  quarter  of  the  church,  and  at  their  return  be 
prefented  to  it.  Thefe  fables  they  call  God's  fables,  or  the 
•church's.  The  firft  fable  that  is  caught  in  the  quarter  of  each 
faint  is  given  to  the  perfon  who  brought  the  image  of  that  faint 
with   him. 

On  their  march  they  fupport  themfelves  with  a  wooden  crutch 
about  four  feet  long ;  upon  the  end  of  which  they  put  a  cow's 
horn,  to  keep  it  from  being  fplit  by  the  ice,  and  a  little  above 
they  bind  it  round  with  a  with  and  thongs,  to  hinder  it  from 
running  too  deep  into  the  fnow.  The  upper  part  is  broad  like 
a  fpade,  and  ferves  to  fliovel  away  the  fnow,  or  to  take  it  up 
and  put  it  into  their  kettles ;  for  they  muft  ufe  fnow,  as  they  have 
frequently  no  water.  The  principal  chief,  having  difpatched  the 
feveral  fmall  parties,  fets  out  with  his  own.  When  they  come 
to  their  places  of  lodging  they  build  little  huts  of  trees,  and  bank 
up  the  fnow  round  them.  They  hew  feveral  trees  upon  the 
road,  that  they  may  the  more  eafily  find  their  way  in  the  win- 
ter.    Near  every  quarter  they  prepare  their  trap-pits,    each  of 

which 


KAMTSCHATKA.         113 

which  is  furrounded  with  fliarp  flakes,  about  fix  or  feven  feet 
high,  and  about  four  feet  diftant,  and  is  covered  over  with  boards 
to  prevent  the  fnow  from  fliUing  in.     The  entrance  through  the 
flakes  is  narrow,   and  over   it  a  board  is  hung  fo  nicely,  that 
by  the  leafl:  touch  of  the  fables  it  turns  and  throws  them  into 
the  trap ;  and  they  mufl  abfolutely  go  this  way  to  reach  a  piece 
of  h(h  or  flefli  with  which  the  traps  are  baited.     The  hunters 
flay  in  one  lodging  until  they  have  made  a  fufHcient  number 
of  thefe  traps,  every  hunter  being  obliged  to  make  twenty   in 
a  day  ;  and  fo  many  do  they  make  at  every  lodging  place  where 
they  expecfl  fables.     When  they  have  pafled  ten  of  thefe  quarters 
the  leader  fends  back  the  half  of  his  company  to  bring  up  the 
provifions  that  were  left  behind,  and  with  the  remainder  he  ad- 
vances to  build  more  huts  and  make  more  traps. 

The  people  fent  back  for  the  provifions  go  with  empty  fledges 
to  the  places  where  they  were  hoarded.  Every  man  is  obli'Jed 
to  draw  fix  poods  of  flower,  and  half  a  pood  of  flefli  or  fiih,  and 
to  overtake  the  other  hunters  and  their  chief.  Thefe  carriers 
mufl  flop  at  all  the  lodging  places  to  fee  that  their  traps  are  in 
order,  and  take  out  any  fables  they  may  find  in  them,  and  fkin 
them,  which  none  mufl  pretend  to  do  but  the  chief  man  of 
the   company. 

If  the  fables  are  frozen,  they  thaw  them  by  laying  them  under 
the  clo-iths  with  themfelves  in  bed.  When  the  Ikin  is  taken 
off  all  prefent  fit  down  and  are  filent,  being  careful  that  nothing- 
be  hanging  on  the  flakes.  The  fkinned  body  of  the  fable  is  laid 
upon  dry  flicks,  which  they  afterwards  Hght ;  and  carrying  them 
three  times  round  the  body,  they  fmoke  it,  and  then  bury  it  in 
the  fnow  or  earth.  And  often,  when  they  apprehend  the 
Tungiift  may  meet  with  them  and  take  away  their  booty,  they 
put  the  fkins  into  pieces  of  wood  hollowed,  covering  the  ends 
with  fnow,  which  being  wetted  will  foon  freeze,  Thefe 
they  hide  in  the  fnow  near  their  huts,   and  gather  them  up 

Q,  when 


J 1 4  T^he    Natural    History    of 

wheii  they  return  in  a  body.  "When  thefe  carriers  are  come 
back  with  the  provifions  then  the  other  half  are  fcnt  for  more  ; 
and  thus  they  are  employed  in  hunting,  the  leader  always  going 
before  to  build  traps.  When  they  find  few  fables  in  their  traps  they 
hunt  with  nets,  which  they  can  only  do  when  they  find  the  frefh 
track  of  a  fable  in  the  fnow.  This  they  follow  until  it  brings 
them  to  the  hole  where  the  fable  has  entered  j  or  if  they  lofe 
it  near  other  holes,  they  put  fmoaking  pieces  of  rotten  wood  to 
them,  which  generally  forces  him  to  leave  the  earth.  The 
hunter  at  the  fame  time  has  fpread  Jiis  net,  into  which  the  fable 
commonly  fills ;  and  for  precaution  his  dog  is  alfo  near  at  hand  : 
thus  the  hunter  fits  and  waits  fometimes  two  or  three  days. 
They  know  when  the  fable  falls  into  the  net  by  the  found  of 
two  very  fmall  bells  that  are  faftened  to  it.  Upon  this  the 
hunter  runs  himfelf,  and  puts  on  the  dog,  which  feizes  the  fable 
and  kills  it :  but  they  never  put  fmoaky  pieces  of  wood  into  thofe 
holes  that  have  only  one  opening,  becaufe  the  fable  will  fooner 
be  fmothered  than  come  towards  the  fmoke  ;  in  which  cafe 
he  is  entirely  loft. 

When  they  trace  the  fable  to  the  root  of  fome  tree,  they  fafien 
their  net  about  the  tree,  that,  if  after  digging  him  out  he  fliould 
efcape  their  hands,  he  may  be  taken  in  it.  If  the  track  goes 
towards  fome  tree  where  they  can  fee  the  fable,  they  flioot 
him  with  a  blunt  arrow  :  but  if  they  cannot  fee  the  fable  upon 
the  tree  among  the  branches,  they  cut  it  down,  and  placing  their 
net  v.'here  the  top  of  the  tree  is  to  fall,  which  they  can  judge, 
.(land  themfelves  near  the  trunk;  and  the  fable,  jumping  from 
it  as  it  falls,  drops  into  the  net.  Sometimes  this  does  not  happen, 
and  then  they  fearch  every  hollow  part  of  the  tree.  A  fable 
that  has  once  been  in  a"  net  or  trap  is  fcarcely  to  be  de- 
ceived a  fecond  time. 

When  the  chief  leader  and  all  the  hunters  are  gathered  to- 
gether, then  the  leaders  of  the  fmall  parties  report  to  the  chief 

how 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A.         ii^ 

how  many  fables  or  other  hearts  their  party  has  killed,  and  if 
any  of  their  parties  have  done  any  thing  contrary  to  his 
orders  and  the  common  laws.  Thefe  crimes  they  punidi 
differently  :  fome  they  tie  to  a  flake,  others  they  oblige  to  afk 
pardon  of  every  one  of  the  company  ;  a  thief  they  beat  feverely, 
and  allow  him  no  Iharc  of  the  booty ;  nay,  they  even  take  his 
own  baggage  from  him,  and  divide  it  among  themfelvcs.  They 
remain  in  their  head-quarters  until  the  rivers  are  free  of  ice ; 
and  after  the  hunting  they  employ  their  time  in  preparing  the 
ikins.  As  foon  as  the  ice  is  all  gone  off  the  rivers,  they  fet  out, 
in  thofe  little  boats  which  they  came  in,  on  their  return  home, 
where  they  give  the  fables  to  the  feveral  churches  to  which  they 
promifed  them  j  and  then,  having  paid  their  tax-furrs,  they  fell 
the  refl,  dividing  equally  the  money,  or  goods,  which  they 
receive  for  them. 


CHAP.      VIII. 
Of   fbe    SEA     BEASTS. 

UNDER  the  name  of  fea  beafls  are  here  underflood  fuch 
animals  as  are  called  amphibious,  which,  although  they 
live  for  the  mod  part  in  the  water,  frequently  come 
upon  the  dry  land,  and  upon,  or  near  it,  bring  forth  their  young. 
Water  beafls  may  be  divided  into  three  clafTes :  \  ft,  Thofe  which 
live  in  frefli  water  lakes,  and  rivers,  as  the  otter.  2d,  Thofe 
which  live  in  frefh  or  lalt  water,  fuch  as  feals.  3d,  Thofe  which 
are  never  found  in  frefh  water,  fuch  as  fea  beavers,  fea  cats,  and 
others. 

Although  otters  be  very  common  in  Kamf/cbatka,  yet  the 
price  is  not  low ;  a  very  indifferent  fkin  will  cofl  a  ruble.     They 

Q^  commonly 


ii6  The   Natural    tlrsToRY   of 

commonly  hunt  them  with  dogs  when  the  fnow  comes  in  drifts, 
and  they  wander  at  too  great  a  diftance  from  the  river.     They 
ufe  their  fkins  to  make    borders    round    their   garments,    but. 
principally  to  preferve  the  fable- fkins,  which  are  obfcrved  to  be 
preferved  better,  when  wrapt  in  otter-fkins  than  any  other  way. 

It  is  incredible  to  think  what  a  number  of  feals  there  are  in 
the  feas  and  lakes  of  that  country,  efpecially  when  the  fifh  come 
up  the  rivers,  which  they  follow  in  droves,  not  only  to  the 
mouth,  but  even  far  up  the  ftream.  So  numerous  are  they  that 
all  the  iflands  or  fand-banks  are  quite  covered  with  them, 
infomuch  that  fmall  boats  are  in  great  danger  near  thefe  places. 
When  the  feals  obferve  any  boat  approaching  they  throw 
themfelves  in  great  numbers  into  the  water,  which  makes  fuch 
a  motion  in  it  as  will  overfet  the  canoes  or  fmall  boats,  if 
they  go  at  once  into  it.  No  animal  has  a  more  difagreeable 
cry,  and  their  noife  is  incelTant. 

There  are  reckoned  to  be  four  forts  of  this  animal ;  the  very 
largefl  of  which  is  catched  from  56°  to  64**  of  north  latitude. 
This  fort  only  differs  from  the  others  in  its  bulk,  which  exceeds 
that  of  a  large  ox.  The  fecond  fpecies  is  about  the  fize 
of  a  yearling  bullock.  Their  flcin  is  of  different  colours, 
fomething  like  the  fkin  of  a  tyger  j  having  feveral  fpots  of 
equal  largenefs  on  the  back,  with  a  white  and  yellowifh  belly. 
Their  young  ones  are  as  white  as  fnow.  The  third  is  yet  lefs 
than  the  former.  Its  fkin  is  yellowifli,  with  large  cherry- 
coloured  circles,  which  take  up  near  the  half  of  its  furface. 
The  fourth  kind  is  feen  in  the  large  lakes  of  Baikaal  and 
Oronne.  Its  fize  is  like  thofe  that  are  found  near  Archangel-, 
and  their  colour  is  whitifh. 

They  are  very  vivacious :  I  faw  one,  that  was  taken  by  a 
hook  in  the  mouth  of  the  Great  River,  throw  itfelf  upon 
people  with  great  fiercenefs,  even  after  its  fkull  was  broken 
into  pieces.     I  obferved  that  he  was  no  fooner  brought  on  fhore 

than 


KAMTSCHATKA.         117 

than  he  began  to  try  to  run  again  into  the  river  j  and  when  he 
found  that  this  was  impoffible,  he  began  to  weep  ;  and  when 
they  beat  and  bruiied  him,  it  only  made  him  more  fierce  and 
wild. 

The  feals  never  go  farther  from  the  fliore  than  30 
leagues ;  and  are  moll  commonly  to  be  found  near  tho 
mouths  of  great  rivers  or  bays :  they  will  follov/  the  fifti 
80  verfts  up  a  river.  They  bring  forth  only  one  young 
one,  which  they  nourifli  with  two  breafts.  The  Tungufi 
give,  the  feals'  milk  to  their  children  for  a  medicine.  The  old 
feals  cry  like  one  that  ftrains  in  vomiting,  and  the  young  like 
people  groaning  through  pain.  When  the  tide  goes  out  they  lie 
upon  the  dry  rocks,  and  in  play  pufh  one  another  into  the  water  ; 
but  when  they  begin  to  be  angry  they  bite  one  another  very 
cruelly.  They  fieep  very  found :  but,  being  awakened  by  the  ap- 
proach of  any  one,  they  are  in  very  great  fear;  and  haltening 
towards  the  fea,  to  make  the  way  fmoother,  as  is  fuppofed, 
they   vomit   out  water. 

There  are  different  ways  of  killing  them:  In  the  rivers 
they  (hoot  them  with  fcrewed-barrelled  guns  ;  but  they  mufl  be 
careful  to  hit  the  head,  becaufe  a  hundred  bullets  will  not  do 
them  the  leaft  hurt  in  any  other  place,  as  they  all  lodge  in  the 
fat  that  covers  their  body.  They  fearch  for  them  upon  fliore, 
and  furprifing  them  in  their  flecp  kill  them  with  clubs :  or  when 
they  fleep,  laying  their  fnout  upon  the  ice,  they  drive  a  knife 
quite  through  the  fnout,  which  being  faftened  to  a  long  thong 
they  drag  the  animal  out. 

The  feals  are  not  fo  dear  as  one  would  imagine  the  many  ufes 
they  put  them  to  fliould  render  them  ;  for,  befides  the  ufe  of 
their  fat  and  flefli,  the  fkins  of  the  larger  fort  ferve  for  foles  of  fhoes. 
The  Koreki,  Ohtores,  and  the  Tchukotjkoi,  alfo  make  boats  or 
baidares  with  them  of  different  fizes,  fome  even  fo  large  that 
they  will  carry  thirty  men.     Thefe  boats  have  this  advantage  over 

thofe 


iiS  The  Natural  History  of 

thofe  made  of  timber,  in  that  they  are  miiGh  lighter  and  go 

fwifter.     Of  the  feals'  fit  both  RuJJians  and  Katntjchadaks  make 

candles  j  and  befides  the  natives  efteem  it  fuch  a  delicacy  that 

they  can  have  no  feafl  without  it.     The  flefli  they  boil  or  dry 

in  the  fun  ;  but  if  there  are  great  quantities,  they  fmoke  or  bake 

".  in  the  following  manner :  They  dig  a  large  pit  in  proportion 

to  the  quantity  of  flefli  or  fat,  and  pave  the  bottom  with  ftones. 

Then  they  fill  it  with  wood  and  light  it  below,  continuing  to  add 

fuel  until  it  be  as  hot  as  any  oven.    After  which  they  take  out  all 

the  aflies,  then  lay  at  the  bottom  a  layer  of  green  poplar  wQod, 

upon  this  another  of  feals'  flelh  or  fat,  each  feparately  ;  and  thus 

alternately  wood  and  flefli  until  the  pit  be  quite  full.     They  then 

cover  it  with  grafs  and  earth,  to  keep  in  the  heat ;  and  after  fome 

hours  they  uncover  it,  take  out  'the  fat  and  flefli,   and   lay  it  up 

for  the  winter.     Both  flefli  and  fat  thus  prepared  is  much  more 

delicate  than  what  is   boiled  j  befides,   it  keeps  without  fpoiling 

for  a   whole    year. 

When  they  have  picked  all  the  flefli  from  the  heads  of  the 
feals  they  fliew  them  all  the  refpedt  that  they  would  to  a 
particular  friend  that  vifits  them.  I  faw  this  ceremony  in  the 
year  1 740  at  the  little  fort  of  Krodakighe,  which  fl:ands  upon  a 
river  of  the  fame  name  that  falls  into  the  Eaftern  Ocean.  It  was 
performed  in  the  following  manner :  They  brought  in  the  fkull 
or  head  of  a  feal,  bound  round  with  the  fweet  grafs,  and  placed 
it  upon  the  floor.  Then  a  Kamtfchadak  entered  with  a  bag 
filled  with  the  fweet  herbs  and  others,  particularly  a  good  deal  of 
birch  bark,  and  placed  it  near  the  head ;  upon  which  two  other 
'Kamtfchadales  rolled  in  a  great  fl;one,  and  fet  it  oppofite  to  the 
entry  of  the  hut,  about  which  they  laid  feveral  fl:ones ;  and  two 
others  tore  the  fweet  herb,  and  made  it  into  fmall  bunches.  The 
great  fl:one  was  to  fignify  the  fea,  the  fmaller  the  waves,  and  the 
bunches  of  the  fweet  herb  the  feals.  This  being  done,  they  took 
three  diflies  of  caviar  mixed  with  kipre,  hurtleberries,  and  feals' 

fet 


KAMTSCHATKA  119 

fat.  This  they  fqueezed  into  balls,  in  the  middle  of  which  they 
prefl'ed  the  fweet  herbs  which  were  made  to  reprefent  the  feals : 
out  of  the  birch  bark  they  made  little  boats,  which  they  filled 
with  thefe  balls  made  as  above,  and  covered  them  v.ith 
herbs. 

After  fome  time  they  took  thefe  boats  and  balls  and  tolled  thcni, 
to  and  fro  over  the  ftones  as  if  over  waves,  that  the  other  Teals 
might  fee  with  what  refpedl  the  Kamtfchadaks  treated  their 
friends,  and  confequently  might  the  more  willingly  fall  into  their 
hands.  After  this  they  placed  the  feals  made  of  the  fweet  herbs 
near  to  the  great  ftone,  or  fea,  and  all  went  out  of  the  hut  j  but 
one  old  man,  after  he  had  fet  upon  the  threlLold  a  fmall  difli 
with  their  broth  which  he  had  carried  behind  them,  entered  into 
it  again,  all  the  afliffants  crying  aloud  four  times  the  word 
Ligmukghe.  They  could  not  tell  what  this  term  meant ;  nor 
could  they  give  any  other  reafon  for  their  fo  crying  out,  but  that 
their  fathers  did  fo.  After  this  they  again  rolled  the  birch  boats 
upon  the  ffones ;  and  going  again  out  of  the  hut  cried,  as  before, 
KouneouPnte  aloiilaighe  ;  that  is,  May  the  wind  blow  towards  the 
fhore.  For  while  this  wind  blows  a  great  deal  of  ice  is  driven  towards 
the  land,  which  is  favourable  for  their  killing  the  fea  animals.  Re- 
turning into  their  huts,  they  rolled  their  birch  boats  a  third  time 
over  the  ftones.  They  then  put  the  fls^ulls  of  the  feals  into  a 
bag,  and  every  firtier  prefent  put  in  alfo  a  little  of  the  fweet 
grafs,  with  his  name  and  fome  particular  fentence  ;  that  the  feals 
might  know  how  they  had  entertained  them,  and  what  valuable 
prefents  they  had  made  them. 

Having,  as  they  thought,  by  their  entertainment  and  prefents, 
fhewn  all  refpeds  to  their  guefts,  they  brought  them  out  to  the 
flair-head,  where  an  old  man  put  flill  fome  more  of  their  gruel 
into  the  bag,  defiring  them  to  carry  that  to  their  friends  that  had 
been  drowned  at  fea.  Then  two  Kamtjchadales  who  had  been 
principally  employed  in  this  entertainment,  took  the  bo^vls  that 

were 


120  I'he    Natural    History    of 

were  filled  with  gruel  and  the  feals  made  of  grafs,  and  gave  one 
to  each  fiilier.  They  then  went  all  out  of  the  hut,  and  cried 
Uenic ;  a  word  they  ufe  in  calling  to  one  another  when  they 
go  to  kill  the  feals  or  other  fea  animals.  Then  taking  out  the 
feals  made  of  grafs  they  threw  them  into  the  fire,  praying  them 
to  make  them  frequent  vifitsj  after  which,  returning  into  the 
hut,  they  put  out  the  fire,  and  eat  the  gruel  that  was  in  the 
bowls. 

The  fea  horfe  is  but  feldom  feen  about  Kamtfchatka,  and  then 
only  in  the  moft  northernly  places.  The  moil  are  caught  near 
the  cape  of  Tchukotjkoi ,  being  both  larger  and  more  numerous 
there  than  any  where  elfe.  Their  teeth  are  what  we  commonly 
call  filli-bone,  the  price  of  which  depends  upon  their  largenefs  or 
weight  :  the  deareft  are  thofe  that  are  about  twenty  pounds  j 
but  thefe  are  feldom  met  with,  or  even  fuch  as  weigh  ten  or 
twelve  pounds,  the  common  weight  being  five  or  fix  pounds. 

The  fea  lion  *  and  cat,  in  their  ufual  flrudure,  differ  very  httle 
from  the  fea  horfe  and  fea  calf,  and  are  therefore  to  be  reckoned 
of  the  fame  kind. 

Some  call  the  fea  lions  fea  horfes,  becaufe  they  have  manes. 
In  their  fliape  they  are  like  the  fea  calf  3  and  their  necks  are  bare, 
excepting  a  fmall  mane  of  hard  curled  hairs :  the  reft  of  their 
body  is  covered  with  a  chefnut-coloured  hair.  They  have 
a  middle-fized  head,  fliort  ears,  a  fnout  fliort  and  drawn  up  like 
a  pug  dog's,  great  teeth,  and  webbed  feet.  They  are  found  moft 
frequently  about  rocky  ftiores  or  rocks  in  the  fea,  upon  which 
they  climb  very  high,  in  great  numbers.  They  roar  in  a 
ftrange,  frightful  manner,  much  louder  than  the  fea  calf  j  and 
they  are  thus  far  of  ufe  to  people  at  fea,  that  in  foggy  weather, 
by  their  roaring,  they  warn  them  of  rocks  or  iilands  being  near, 
as  few  rocks  or  iilands  in  this  part  of  the  world  are  without  thefe 
animals. 

*  Leo  marinus.     Steller, 

Although 


KAMTSCHATKA. 


121 


Although  in  appearance  and  fize  this  aniinal  feems  to  be  very 
dangerous,  and  marches  with  fuch  a  fierce  mien  that  he  looks  like 
a  true  Hon,  yet  is  he  fuch  a  coward,  that  at  the  fight  of  a  man 
he  hurries  into  the  water  ;  and  when  he  is  furprifed  adeep,  and 
awakened  either  by  a  loud  cry  or  blows  with  a  club,  he  is  in 
fuch  fear  and  confufion,  that  in  running  away  he  falls  down, 
all  his  joints  quaking  with  terror  ;  but,  when  he  finds  no  pofiibi- 
lity  of  efcaping,  he  will  then  attack  his  enemy  with  the  greateft: 
fiercenefs,  fliaking  his  head  and  roaring  very  terribly ;  and  then 
the  boldefl:  muft  feek  to  fave  himfelf  from  his  rage.  For  this 
reafon  the  Kamtfchadales  feldom  kill  the  fea  lions  at  fea,  unlefs 
when  they  can  furpriie  them  fleeping  there,  but  generally  upon 
land  J  and  when  they  find  them  afleep  on  fliore  they  approach 
them  with  great  caution,  going  againft  the  wind.  But  none 
dare  undertake  this  game,  but  fuch  as  can  truft  to  their  ftrength 
or  their  heels.  Stealing  upon  them,  they  ftrike  a  knife  into  their 
breaft  under  their  fore  paw  ;  the  afliftants  in  the  mean  time 
tying  a  cord  made  of  fea  calf's  fkin,  which  is  faftened  to  the 
knife,  about  a  flake.  Then  every  one  runs  off  as  faft  as  he  can, 
and  endeavours  at  a  diftance  to  wound  him  with  arrows,  or 
knives,  which- they  dart  at  him  ;  and  at  lafl,  when  his  flrength 
is  quite  wafled,  they  difpatch  him  with  clubs. 

When  they  find  them  afleep  at  fea,  they  fhoot  poifoned  arrows 
at  them,  and  get  off  as  fafl  as  pofiible.  The  wounded  animal, 
unable  to  fuffer  the  pain  arifing  from  the  fait  water  in  the  poi- 
foned wound,  runs  himfelf  alliore,  where  they  kill  him  outright 
with  darts  or  arrows ;  or  if  the  place  is  not  flife  for  fuch  an 
attack,  they  wait  until  he  dies  of  his  firfl  wound,  which  follows 
in  24  hours.  This  game  is  fo  honourable  among  the  natives, 
that  the  man  \^ho  has  killed  mofl  of  thefe  beafts  is  efleemed  the 
greateft  hero  :  for  this  reafon  many  engage  in  this  dangerous 
hunting,  not  only  for  the  fiefli,  which  is  looked  upon  as  very 
delicate,  but  rather  for  the  honour   that   attends  it.     Two   or 

R  three 


122  The    Natural    History    of 

three  fea  lions  are  a  great  load  for  their  boats  j  and,  as  it  is 
efteemed  difhonourable  to  leave  any  game  which  they  have 
caught,  they  fometinies  fo  overload  their  boats,  that,  though 
they  are  very  expert  in  the  management  of  them,  they  and 
their  game  go  to  the  bottom  together.  In  thefe  veffels  they 
go  to  the  defert  ifland  Alaide,  which  lies  out  at  fea  about 
thirty  miles,  and  are  fometimes  carried  four,  five,  and  evea 
eight  days  without  feeing  any  land,  expofed  to  the  cold  of  thefe 
climates ;  and  without  any  compafs,  they  return  to  their  habi- 
tations by  obferving  the  fun  or  moon. 

Of  the  flcins  of  the  fea  lion  they  make  cords,  flioe-foles,  and 
flioes.  The  female  has  two,  three,  and  fometimes  four  young 
ones.  They  couple  in  the  months  of  Augujl  or  September ;  and 
are  pregnant  about  ten  months,  as  they  generally  bring  forth 
their  young  about  the  beginning  of  July.  The  male  treats  the 
female  with  great  -tendernefs,  not  like  the  fea  cat,  but  by 
fondnefs  endeavours  to  gain  her  affecflion.  Both  male  and 
female  feem  to  take  very  little  care  of  their  young,  frequently 
ftifling  them  under  their  paws  as  they  fuck ;  nor  do  they  fhew 
any  concern  at  feeing  them  killed  before  their  eyes.  The  young 
are  not  lively  nor  full  of  play,  like  moft  other  young  animals, 
but  are  almofl  continually  afleep.  Towards  the  evening  the 
male  and  female  fwim  out  to  fea  with  their  brood,  but  not  far 
from  the  fhore.  The  young  climb  upon  the  mother's  back, 
and  refl  themfelves ;  the  male  in  the  mean  time  playing  about 
toffes  the  lazy  puppies  into  the  water,  to  oblige  them  to  learn  to 
fwim.  Some  of  them  have  been  thrown  into  the  fea,  but  inftead 
of  fwimming  away  they  haflen  again  to  land.  They  are 
twice  as  large  as  the  young  of  the  fea  cat.  Although  thefe 
animals  naturally  run  from  a  man,  yet  it  has  been^obferved  that 
they  are  not  always  fo  wild  ;  particularly  when  their  young  have 
fcarcely  learned  to  fwim.  Mr.  Steller  lived  fix  days  in  a  high 
place  amongfl  whole  herds  of  them,  and  out  of  his  hut  faw 

feveral 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A.         123 

feveral  of  their  anions.     The  animals  lay  around  him,  feeming 
to  obferve  his  fire  and  what  he  was  employed  about ;  and  never 
ran  away,  although  he   even   went  amongfl:  them,  and  feized 
fome  of  their  young  for  his  diffedlions,  but  remained  quite  at  their 
eafe.     They  went  about  and  quarrelled  for  their  miftrcfs  without 
being  difturbed  by  his  prefence ;  and  one  male  fought  three  days 
for  a  female,  and  was  wounded  in  more  than  a  hundred  places. 
The  fea  cats  never  take  any  part  in  their  quarrels,  but  endeavour 
to  get  out  of  the  way  as  far  as*  tliey  can,  giving  place    to  them  ; 
nay,  they  never  hinder  the  puppies  of  the  fea  lion  from  playing 
with  them,  taking  all  care  not  to  hurt  them  in  the  leaft  :    but 
the  fea  cats  fhun  the   company  of  the   fea  lions  as  much  qs 
poflible. 

The  old  beafts  are  grey  about  the  head,  and  certainly  live  to 
a  great  age.     They  fcratch  their  head  and  ears  with  their  hinder 
paw,  as  the  fea  cats  do  ;   and  their  manner  of  ftanding,   going, 
lying,  and  fwimming,  is  the  fame.     The  great  ones  low  like  an 
ox,  and  the  young  bleat  like  fheep  :   the  old  ones   lend  forth 
a  (linking  fmeil,  but  not  fo  much  as  the  fea  cat.     In  winter  and 
fummer  they  do  not  always  live  indifferently  upon   all  places, 
but  feem  to  have  their  ftations  proper  for  the  feafon.     They  are 
never  found  further  north  than  56^,  although  in  great   plenty 
about   Kamtfchatka,  and   the   iflands  of  the    American    coaft:. 
Their  food  is  fifli,   feals,    fea  beavers,  or  other  water  or   land 
animals.     The  old  ones  eat  little  in  the  months  of  yiine  or  yiily^ 
when  they  only  lie  and  fleep,  and  thence  become  very  lean. 

The  fea  cat  is  about  half  the   fize  of  the  fea  lion  j  in  form 
refembling  the  feal  *,  but  thicker  about  the  breaft,   and  thinner 

R  2  towards 


*  Frederick  Marien,  in   his  voyage  to  '  they  have    black,    long,     and    fharp 

Greenland,    thus  defcribes   the    fea  dogs,  '  claws ;   their  tail   is   fliort  ;   they    bark 

called  Ruhbs  or  Seals  :    '  Their  teeth  are  '   like  hoarfe  dogs,   but  their  young  mew 

•  Iharp  like  dog's  teeth ;    on   their   toes  •    like  cats.     When  they  are  frightened 


by 


124 


The    Natural    History   of 


towards  the  tail.  They  have  a  fnout  longer  than  the  fea  lion's, 
and  larger  teeth  ;  with  eyes  like  cows'  eyes,  fhort  ears,  naked  and 
black  paws,  and  black  hair  mixed  with  grey,  which  is  fhort  and 
brittle.     Their  young  are  of  a  bluifli  black  colour. 

The  fea  cats  are  caught  in  the  fpring  and  in  the  month  of 
September,  about  the  river  Shiipanova  j  at  which  times  they  go 
from  the  Kuriljkoy  ifland  to  the  American  coafl : '  but  the  moll 


'  by  any  nolfe,   they  hold  up  their  nofes 

•  very  high,  and  make  a  long  neck  like 
'  our  greyhounds,  and  bark  ;   and   when 

•  thus  alarmed  we  ftrike  them  with  half 

•  pikes,  or  long  poles,  upon  their  nofes, 

•  and  knock  them  down  half  dead  ;  but 
'  for  all  that  they  will  recover  them- 
'  felves  and  rife  again.      Some  of  them 

•  will  Hand  on  their  defence,  bite  at, 
'  and  run  after  us.  Sometimes  they  run 
'  from  the  ice  to  the  water,  and  leave  a 
'  yellow  dung  behind  them,   which  they 

•  fquirt  out  at  their  hunters.  Their  fat 
'  is  about  three  or  four  fingers  thick, 
'  and  covers  the  flefh  juft  under  the  (kin. 
'  They  have  great  livers,  lungs,  and 
'  hearts.     When  they  couple  they  are  fo 

•  fierce,  that  we  are  obliged  to  kill 
'  them    from  our   boats,  no  man  daring 

•  to  go  near  them.  One  of  them  near 
'  eight  feet  long  was  not  killed,  though 
'  we  had  cut  off  moft  of  his  fat,  and 
'  notwithftandingall  our  blows  would  ftill 
'  bite  and  fnap  at  us.  I  ran  another 
'  feveral  times  through  the  body  with 
'  my  fword,  which  he  did  not  in  the 
•■  leaft  regard  ;  he  at  1  aft  got  up,  and 
'  ran  fwifter  than  I  could,  and  flung  him- 

•  felf  off  from  the  ice  into  the  fea,  and 
'  went  down  to  the  bottom.' 

From  the  fame  author  we  have  alfo  the 
following  account  of  the  fea  horfe.     '  It 


is  imagined  that  thefe  animals,  fays  he, 
feed  both  on  herbs  and  fifh  ;  that  they 
eat  herbs  we  conclude  from  the  refem- 
blance  between  their  dung  and  that  of 
the  horfes',  and  we  fuppofe  they  eat 
filh  from  this  circumftance,  when  we 
threw  the  fkin  and  fat  of  a  whale  into 
the  fea,  one  of  thefe  creatures  came  and 
drew  it  under  water  with  him.  They 
are  remarkable  for  their  courage  and 
ftrength,  and  the  refolntion  with  which 
they  defend  each  other  is  furprifing ;  for 
when  any  were  wounded  by  my  people, 
they  made  to  the  long  boat,  and  with 
'  their  great  teeth  cut  holes  in  it  under 
'  water,  whilft  others  moft  undauntedly 
'  erefted  half  their  body  out  of  the  water 

■  and  endeavoured  to  get  into  the  boat. 
'   In  one  of  thefe  engagements  a  fea  horffe 

took  hold  of  our  harpooneer  with  his 
'  long  tooth  by  the  waiftband  of  his 
'  breeches,  and  had  not  the  waiftband 
'  broke,  would  certainly  have  pulled 
'  him  over-board.     At  Muff^s  ifland  we 

killed  feveral  hundred  of  them,  and 
'  made    a    very    good    voyage.      When 

they  are  killed   the    failors   only  bring 

■  off  the  head,  as  nothing  but  the  two 
'  great  teeth  are  of  any  value ;  thefe 
'  alfo  were  formerly  in  greater  eftimatioa 
'  than  they  are  at  prefent.' 


are 


KAMTSCHATKA,        125 

arc  catched  about  the  cape  of  Kronotzkoy,  as  between  this  and 
the  cape  Shiipinjkoy  the  fea  is  generally  calm,  and  affords  them 
properer  places  to  retire  to.  Almofl  all  the  females  that  arc 
caught  in  the  fpring  are  pregnant ;  and  fuch  as  are  near  their 
time  of  bringing  forth  their  young  are  immediately  opened,  and 
the  young  taken  out,  and  fkiniied.  None  of  them  are  to  be 
feen  from  the  beginning  of  yune  to  the  end  of  Auguft^  when 
they  return  from  the  fouth  with  their  young.  -  The  natives 
were  formerly  at  a  lofs  to  conceive  where  fuch  great  herds  of 
pregnant  flit  animals  retired  in  the  fpring,  and  why  they  returned 
fo  weak  and  lean  in  the  fummer  :  they  conjed:ured,  that  as  they 
thus  regularly  fwam  from  the  fouth  in  the  fpring,  and  returned 
in  the  fummer,   their  being  fo  lean  was  owing  to  their  fatigue. 

The  females  bring  forth  their  young  there,  and  being  at  refl 
recover  their  former  ftrength  ;  they  nurfe  their  young  ones  three 
months,  'till  they  are  able  to  return  with  them  to  their 
former  habitations  in  the  fummer.  The  females  fuckle  their 
young  with  two  teats,  which  are  placed  betw^een  their  hinder 
paws  J  they  have  feldom  more  than  one ;  and  when  they  bring 
forth  they  gnaw  off  the  navel  firing  like  a  dog,  and  greedily  eat 
the  after-birth.  The  young  fee  when  they  are  whelped,  their 
eyes  being  as  large  as  the  eyes  of  an  ox ;  and  have  thirty-t\vo 
teethj  not  reckoning  their  tufks,  two  of  which  are  on  each 
fide,  and  begin  to  appear  the  fourth  day  after  their  birth. 
Their  colour  at  the  firfl  is  a  dark  blue  ;  but  in  four  or 
five  days  grey  hairs  begin  to  appear  between  their  hinder 
legs,  and  at  the  end  of  one  month  their  belly  is  black  and 
grey.  The  male  is  born  larger  and  blacker,  and  even  con- 
tinues blacker  than  the  female,  which  turns  almoft  of  a  blue 
colour  as  flie  grows  up,  having  only  grey  fpots  between  her  fore 
legs.  The  male  and  female  differ  fo  much  in  the  form  and 
ftrength  of  their  bodies,  that  one  wlio  does  not  carefully  ex- 
amine them  would  take  them  for  different  fpecies  of  ani- 
mals 


126  7i6r  Natural   History   of 

mals ;  befides  the  females  are  mild  and  fearful.     The  male  has 
from  eight  to  fifteen,  and  even  fometimes  fifty  females,  whom 
he  guards  with  fuch  jealoufy  that  he  does  not  allow  any  other  to 
come  near  his  mifiirefi'es :  and  though  many  thoufands  of  them 
lie  upon  the  fame  fliore,  yet  every  family  keeps  apart ;   that  is, 
the  male,  with  his  wives,  youi>;^  ones,   and  thofe  of  a  year  old, 
which  have  not  yet  attached   themfelves  to  any   male  ;    fo  that 
fometimes  the  family  confifts  of  120.     They  likewifc  fwim  at 
fea  in  fuch  droves.     Such  as  are  old,   or  have  no  miftreffes,  live 
apart  j   and   the  firft  that  our  people  found  upon  Bering's  ifland 
were  fuch  old  ones,    and  all   males,   extremely  fat  and  flinking. 
Thefe  fometimes   lie  afleep   a  whole  month   without  nouri(h- 
raent,     and    are   the    fiercefl   of    all,    attacking   all   that  pafs 
them  ;    and  their   pride  or  obftinacy  is   fuch    that    they  will 
rather  die  than  quit  their  place.     When  they  fee  a  man  com- 
ing  near  them,    fome  of  them  rufli    upon  him,  and  others  lie 
ready  to   fuftain   the   battle.      They  bite  the   fiones    that  are 
thrown  at  them,  and  rufli  the  more  violently  upon   him  who 
throws  them  ;  fo  that  though  you  ilrike  out  their  teeth  with 
flones,  or  put  out  their  eyes,   yet  even  blind  they  will  not  quit 
their  place :  nay,  they  dare  not  leave  it,  for  every  ftep  that  any 
one  moves  off  he  makes  a  new  enemy,  fo  that  though  he  could 
fave  himfelf  from  the  attacks  of  men,  his  own  brethren  would 
deftroy  him  ;  and  if  it  happens  that  any  one  feems  to  retire  the 
leaft,  then  others  draw  near  no  prevent  his  running  away  ;  and 
if  any  one  feems  to  fufpedl  the  courage  of  another,  or  his  defign  to 
run  away,  he  falls  upon  him.     This  fufpicion  of  one  another  is 
fometimes  carried  fo  far,   that  for  a  whole  verft  one  fees  nothing 
but  thefe  bloody  duels  ;    and  at  fuch  a  time  one  may  pafs  them 
without  any  manner  of  danger.     If  two  fall  upon  one,  then  fome 
others  come  to  fupport  the  weakeft  j  for  they   do  not  allow  of 
unequal  combat.      During  thefe   battles  the    others    that    are 
fwimming  in  the  fea  raife  their  heads,   and  look  at  the  fuccefs 

of 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H     A    T    K    A.        127 

of  the  combatants ;  at  length  becoming  likewife  fierce,  they  come 
out  and  increafe  the  number. 

Mr.  Steller  made  this  experiment :— With  his  Coflacks  he  fell 
upon  one  of  thefe  fea  cats,  and  put  out  his  eyes,  and  irritated  four 
or  five  more  by  throwing  flones  at'fliem.  When  thefe  purfued 
him  he  ran  towards  the  blind  one,  who  hearins:  the  runnine  of 
his  companions,  and  not  knowing  whom  they  purfued,  attacked 
them.  Mr,  Steller  retired  to  a  high  place,  where  he  obferved 
the  battle  for  fome  hours.  The  blind  one  attacked  without 
diftindlion  all  the  reft,  even  thofe  who  took  his  part ;  fo  that 
at  lafi:  they  all  fell  upon  him,  and  allowed  him  no  left  either 
upon  the  land  or  in  the  fea,  out  of  which  they  dragged  him  to 
the  Ihore,  and  beat  him  until  he  died. 

When  two  of  them  only  fight,  the  battle  lafts  frequently  for 
an  hour  :  fometimes  they  reft  awhile,  lying  by  one  another  ; 
then  both  rife  at  once,  and  renew  the  engagement.  They  fight 
with  their  heads  eredt,  and  turn  them  afide  from  one  another's 
flroke.  So  long  as  their  ftrength  is  equal  they  fight  with  their 
fore  paws  j  but  when  one  of  them  becomes  weak  the  other 
feizes  him  with  his  teeth,  and  throws  him  upon  the  ground. 
When  the  lookers  on  fee  this  they  come  to  the  affiftance  of  the 
vanquiflied.  The  wounds  they  make  with  their  teeth  are  as  deep 
as  thofe  made  with  a  fabre  ;  and  in  the  month  of  July  you  will 
hardly  fee  one  of  them  that  has  not  fome  wound  upon  him. 
After  the  end  of  the  battle  they  throw  themfelves  into  the  water 
to  wafli  their  bodies.  The  occafions  of  their  quarrels  are  thefe; 
— The  firft  and  moft  bloody  is  about  their  females,  when  one 
endeavours  to  carry  oiF  the  miftrefs  of  another,  or  the  young 
ones  that  are  females ;  the  females  that  are  prefent  follow  the 
conqueror.  The  fecond  is  about  their  places,  when  one  comes 
too  near  that  of  another,  which  they  don't  allow,  cither  for  want 
of  room,  or  becaufe  they  are  jealous  of  their  coming  too  near 

their 


1&8  The   Natural    History    of 

their  mlftrefles.     The  third  is  owing  to  their  endeavouring  to  do 
jufiice,  and  end  tiie  quarrels  of  others. 

The  male  is  very  fond  of  the  young  ones ;  on  the  other  hand, 
the  females  and  young  fear  him  extremely,  and  he  treats  them 
moft  tyrannically.  If  you  endeavour  to  catch  a  young  one,  the 
male  flands  upon  the  defence,  and  the  female  is  allowed  to  fave 
herfclf  and  the  young  one  by  flight ;  but  if  ilie  drops  the  young  one 
out  of  her  mouth,  the  male  leaves  his  enemy,  and  feizing  upon 
bcr  with  his  teeth  beats  her  againfl  the  flones  'till  he  leaves  her 
for  dead.  As  foon  as  fhe  recovers,  fhe  crawls  to  his  feet,  which 
flie  licks  and  waflies  with  her  tears  that  flow  in  abundance.  In 
the  mean  time,  the  male  ftalks  backwards  and  forwards,  gnafh- 
ing  his  teeth,  and  tofling  his  head  like  a  bear ;  at  laft,  when  he 
fees  they  have  carried  off  the  young  one,  he  likewife  begins  to 
weep ;  for  they  fhed  tears,  when  they  are  much  wounded  or 
injured,  and  are  not  able  to  revenge  the  injury. 

Another  reafon  of  the  fea  cats  going  in  the  fpring  eaflwards  to 
the  Defert  Iflands  mufl  be,  that  refling  and  fleeping  without  nou- 
rifhment  for  three  months,  they  free  themfelves  from  the  fat 
which  was  troublefome  to  them,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  bears 
who  live  the  whole  winter  without  nourifliment  j  for  in  the 
months  of  yune,  July,  and  Augiijl,  the  old  ones  do  nothing 
but  fleep  upon  the  fhore,  lying  in  one  place  like  a  flone,  now 
and  then  looking  at  one  another,  and  yawning  and  ftretching, 
without  meat  or  drink ;  but  the  young  ones  begin  to  walk  in  the 
beginning  of  July.  When  this  animal  lies  upon  the  fliore  and 
diverts  himfelf,  his  lowing  is  like  that  of  a  cow  ;  when  he  fights, 
he  growls  like  a  bear ;  when  he  has  conquered  his  enemy,  he 
chirps  like  a  cricket ;  but  being  vanquiflied  or  wounded,  he 
groans  or  mews  like  a  cat  -,  coming  out  of  the  water,  he  com- 
monly fliakes  himfelf,  flrokes  his  breafl  with  his  hinder  paws, 
and  fmooths  the  hair  upon  it.     The  male  lays  his  fnout  to  that 

of 


•K     A     M     T    S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  129 

of  the  females,  as  if  he  was  kiffing  her.  When  they  fleep  in  the 
fun,  they  hold  up  their  paws,  wagging  them  as  the  dogs  do  their 
tails.  They  lie  fometimes  upon  their  backs,  at  other  times  like 
a  dog  upon  their  bellies ;  fometimes  contrad:ing,  at  other  times 
extending  themfelves.  Their  fleep  is  never  fo  found  but  that 
they  awake  at  the  approach  of  any  perfon,  how  foftiy  foever  lie 
goes,  and  are  prefently  upon  their  guard  ;  bcfides  their  fmell  and 
hearing  are  furprifmgly  acute. 

They  fwim  fo  faft  that  they  can  eafily  make  ten  verfl:s  in  an 
hour ;    and  when  they  happen  to  be  wounded  at  fea  they  feize 
the  boats  of  the  fifliers  with  their  teeth,   and  drag  them  along 
with  fuch  fwiftnefs  that  they  appear   to  fly  and  not   to  fwim 
upon  the  water.     By  this  means  the  boat  is  frequently  overturned 
and  the  people  drowned,  unlefs  he  who  fteers  it  be  very  fkilful, 
and  obferves  the  courfe  of  the  animal.     As  they  have  a  foramen 
ovale,  they  can  keep  long  under  waterj    but  when   they   grow 
weak  they  come  to  the  top  to  receive  frefli  air.     They  often 
fwim  upon   their  back,  and   fo  near  the   furface  of  the  water 
that  their  hinder  paws  are  frequently  dry.     When  they  go  from 
the  fhore  into  the  v/ater,  or  when  they  dive  after  having  taken 
breath,  they  turn  themfelves  like  a  wheel,   as  many  other  large 
fea  animals  do.     They  faften  their  fore  paws  in  the  rocks,   and 
thus  draw  up  their  body,    which  they  can  move  but  flowly  in 
fuch  place?,  but  upon  a  plain,  one  is  in  danger  of  being  over- 
taken by  them.     Upon  Bering's  ifland  there  are  fuch  numbers 
of  them  that  they  cover  the  whole  fliore  ;  fo  that  travellers  are 
frequently  obliged  for  fafety  to  leave  the  fands  and  level  country, 
and  go  over  the  hills  and   rocky  places.     It  is  remarkable  that 
in  this  ifland  the  fea  cats  are  found  only  upon  the  fouth  coaft 
which  looks  towards  Kamtfchatka.     The  reafon  of  this  may  be, 
that  this  is  the  firfl:  land  they   meet  with  going  eafl:  from   the 
Kromtzkoy   Nofs. 

S  The 


J 3b  'The    Natural    History    of 

The  manner  of  catching  them  in  Bering's  ifland  was 
this  :  They  firft  ftruck  out  their  eyes  with  ftones,  and  then  killed 
them  by  beating  out  their  brains  with  clubs :  but  this  was  a 
work  of  fo  much  labour,  that  three  men  were  hardly  able  to  kill 
one  with  300  lirokes ;  and  though  fometimes  the  fkuU  was 
broken  in  pieces,  and  the  brains  came  out,  and  all  their  teeth 
beaten  out,  yet  they  would  keep  their  place,  ftanding  upon  their 
hinder  paws,  endeavouring  to  defend  themfelves.  One  of 
them  thus  miferably  treated  was  left  to  fee  how  long  it  would 
live,  which  it  did  full  two  weeks  without  quitting  its  place. 
They  feldom  come  afhore  about  Kamtfchatka  -,  fo  that  the  in-- 
habitants  chace  them  in  boats,  and  throw  darts  or  harpoons  at 
them,  which  flick  in  their  body ;  to  this  harpoon  is  fixed  one 
end  of  a  rope,  and  the  other  is  in  the  veflel  >  and  by  this  rope  they 
draw  them  towards  the  boat ;  but  here  they  are  to  be  particularly 
cautious  whenever  they  chace  one,  if  he  comes  near,  not  to  fuffer 
him  to  faften  upon  the  fide  of  the  boat  with  his  fore  paws,  and 
overturn  it ;  to  prevent  which  fome  of  the  fifhermen  fi:and  ready 
%vith  axes  to  cut  off  his  paws.  Several  of  thefe  animals  die  of 
old  age,  but  the  greatefl:  part  of  the  wounds  they  receive  in  the 
quarrels  that  happen  among  them  ;  of  which  there  are  fometimes 
fo  many,  that  the  fhore  is  covered  with  bones. 

The  fea  beavers  *  have  not  the  leaft  refemblance  of  the  other 
beavers  ;  but  the  people  formerly  gave  them  that  name  from  their 
downy  hair,  which  refembles  that  of  the  beaver.  They 
are  as  large  as  the  fea  cats  5  their  fhape  refembles  the  feal, 
and  their  head  the  bear  j  their  fore  feet  are  longer  than 
their  hind  feet ;  their  teeth  fmall ;  their  tail  fhort  and  flat,  and 
ll>arp  towards  the  point  j  their  hair  is  thick  and  black  as  pitch, 

* '  Liitra niarina, 

but 


KAMTSCHATKA.  131 

but  in   the  old  ones   it  turns   grey.      The   young  ones   have 
their  hair  long,    brownifli,  and   very  foft.      This   is   the  moft 
peaceable  of  all  the  fca  animals ;  it  never  makes  any    rcfniancej 
but  endeavours  to  fave  itfelf  by   flight.     The  females  are  very 
affedlionate   to   their  young,    and   carry   fuch   as  cannot  fwini 
upon  their  belly  between  their  fore  feet ;   for  until  the  little  ones 
can  fwim  themfelves  the  mother  fwims  upon  her  back.  When  the 
fifhermen  purfue  them,  they  never  quit  their  young'  till  the  very 
laft  extremity ;  and  if  they  fhould  happen  to  flip  them  they  prefently 
return  to  where  they  hear  them  cry  ;   fo   that   the  fifliers   en- 
deavour to  kill  or  catch  the  young,  as  the  mofl:  effedlual  method  of 
taking  their  dams.     They  have  three  different  ways  of  catching 
them:    ifl:.  By  nets  placed  among  the   fea  cabbage*,  whither 
the  beavers  retire  in  the  night  time,   or  in  ftorms.     2dly,   They 
chace  them  in  their  boats,   when  the  weather  is  calm,  and  kill 
them  in  the  fame  manner  they  do  fea  lions  or   fea  cats.     The 
third  method  is  upon  the  ice,  which  in  the  fpring  is  driven  on 
the  coaft  by  the  eafl:  wind;   and  this  lafl:  is  fo  general,  that  when 
the  ice  is  driven  fo  fl:rongly  upon  the  fliore  that  the  people  can 
pafs  upon  it  with  fnow  fhoes,  they  confider  it  as  an  acquifition  of 
great  treafure,  and  all  the  inhabitants  upon  the  coafl:  hunt   and 
kill   vaft   numbers,    as   they  ftalk   along    the    ige   feeking   an 
opening  to  get  into  the  water.     Hov/ever,   fuch  a   drift   of  ice 
upon  the  coafl:  does  not  happen  every  year,   but  when  it  does, 
they  call  it  a  good  year  ;  for  the  natives,  Cofl'acks,  and  merchants, 
find  a  great  advantage  from  this  trade.     The  Kuriles  did   not 
efteem  the  fliins  of  beavers  more  than  thofe  of  feals  or  fea  lions 
before  they  faw  the  value  that  the  Ruffians  put  upon  them;  and 
even  now  they  will  willingly  exchange  a  drefs  made  of  beavers' 

f  Fucus  marinus. 

S  2  for 


■132  T^he   Natural  History   0/ 

for  a  good  one  made  of  dogs'  flcins,  which  they  think  are  warmer j^- 
and  a  better  defence  againft  the  water. 

Befides  thofe  already  defcribcd,  there  are  feveral  other  fea 
animals  here,  the  mod  remarkable  of  which  is  the  manati,  or 
iea  cow.  This  animal  never  comes  out  upon  the  fhore,  but 
alvvays  lives  in  the  water  ;  its  Hun  is  black  and  thick,  like  the 
bark  of  an  old  oak,  and  fo  hard  that  one  can  fcarcely  cut  it  with 
an  ax  ;  its  head  in  proportion  to  its  body  is  fmall,  and  falls  off 
from  the  neck  to  the  fnout,  which  is  fo  much  bent  that  the 
mouth  feems  to  lie  below  ;  towards  the  end  the  fnout  is  white 
and  rough,  with  white  whiikers  about  nine  inches  long ;  it  has 
no  teeth,  but  only  two  flat  white  bones,  one  above,  the  other 
below ;  its  noftrils  are  near  the  end  of  its  fnout,  in  length 
and  breadth  about  an  inch  and  a  half ;  they  are  double,  and 
within  are  rough  and  hairy  ;  its  eyes  are  black,  placed  almoft 
in  the  middle,  and  near  in  one  line  with  the  noftrils,  they 
are  no  larger  than  fheep's  eyes,  which  is  certainly  remarkable 
in  fuch  a  monftrous  creature  ;  it  has  no  eyebrows  nor  eye- 
laihea ;  and  its  ears  are  only  a  fmall  opening  ;  its  neck  is 
not  eafily  difcovered,  the  head  and  body  being  fo  nearly 
joined  ;  however,  there  are  fome  vertebrae  proper  for  turning 
the  head  upon,  which  it  actually  does,  particularly  when  it 
feeds,  hanging  its  head  like  a  cow ;  its  body  is  round  like 
that  of  a  feal,  being  thickeft  about  the  navel,  and  growing 
fmaller  towards  the  head  and  tail  ;  the  tail  is  thick,  and  bent 
a  little  towards  the  end  ;  it  fomething  refembles  the  beard  of 
the  whale,  and  fomewhat  the  fins  of  a  fifh  ;  its  paws,  which 
are  under  its  neck,  are  about  21  inches  long,  with  them  he 
both  fwims  and  goes,  and  by  them  he  takes  hold  of  the 
rocks,  to  which  he  fometimes  faftens  himfelf  fo  flrongly,  that 
when  he  is  dragged  from  thence  with  hooks  he  will  leave 
the  fkin  of  his  paws  behind  :    it  is  obferved  that  thefe  paws  are 

fometimes 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  13.3 

fometimes  divided  in  two,  like  the  hoof  of  a  cow  j  but  this 
does  not  feem  to  be  common,  only  accidental.  The  females 
have  two  teats  upon  their  breads.  The  length  of  the  manati 
is  about  28  feet,  and  its  weight  about  200  pood.  Thefe  animals 
go  in  droves  in  calm  weather  near  the  mouths  of  rivers ; 
and  though  the  dams  oblige  their  young  always  to  fvvim 
before  them,  yet  the  reft  of  the  herd  cover  them  upon  all  fides, 
fo  that  they  are  conftantly  in  the  middle  of  the  drove.  In  the 
time  of  flood  they  come  fo  near  the  fliore,  that  one  may  ftrike 
them  with  a  club  or  fpear ;  nay,  the  author  relates  that  he  has 
even  ftroked  their  backs  himfelf  with  his  hand.  When  they 
are  hurt  they  fwim  off  to  fen,  but  prefently  return.  They  live 
in  families,  one  near  another  ;  and  a  funily  confifts  of  a  male, 
female,  fome  half  grown,  and  one  fmall  calf:  hence  it 
appears  that  every  male  has  one  female.  They  bring  forth 
their  young  in  the  harveft,  and  never  more  than  one  at  a 
time. 

They  appear  to  be  extremely  gluttonous,  eating  fo  continually 
without  any  regard  to  their  own  fafety,  that  they  hardly  ever 
lift  their  heads  above  the  water  ;  fo  that  any  one  may  go  among 
them  in  boats,  and  chufe  which  he  pleafes  to  carry  off.  The 
half  of  their  body,  that  is  their  back  and  fides,  is  always  above 
water,  upon  which  flocks  of  crows  fettle,  and  pick  the  lice  out 
of  their  fkins.  They  do  not  feed  upon  every  herb,  but,  firft, 
upon  fea  cabbage  *,  which  has  a  leaf  refembling  favoys ; 
fecondly,  upon  cabbage  -f-  refembling  a  club;  thirdly,  upon 
cabbage  ||  refembling  thongs ;  and,  fourthly,  upon  a  waved  kind 
of  cabbage  |  :  and  wherever  they  have  been,  though  but  for  one 
day,  heaps  of  roots  and  ftalks  are  thrown  out  upon  the  fhore. 


* 


Fucus  Coifpus  brafficje  fabaudics  folio  cancellatas.  f  Fucus  clavje  facie. 

)j  Fucus  fcutica:  antiqus  Romane  facie.         J  Fucus  longiffimus  ad  nervum  undulatus. 

When 


134  '^f^^    Natural    History    of 

When  they  have  eaten  their  fill,  they  lie  afleep  upon  their  backs. 
As  foon  as  the  ebb  begins  they  retire  to  the  fea,  fearing  to  be  left 
upon^the  fliore.  In  the  winter  time  they  are  frequently  crufhed 
by  the  ice  againfl:  the  rocks,  and  thrown  out  upon  the  beach. 
This  happens  during  a  ftorm,  when  the  wind  is  upon  the 
(liore.  At  this  feafon  they  are  fo  leari  that  one  may  count  all 
their  ribs  and  vertebra.  They  are  caught  with  great  iron  hooks, 
fomething  like  the  fluke  of  a  Imall  anchor.  This  hook  is  carried 
by  a  ftrong  man  in  a  boat  with  three  or  four  rowers,  who 
when  he  comes  among  the  herd  ftrikes  into  one  of  them. 
Thirty  men  that  are  left  upon  the  fhore,  and  hold  one 
end  of  a  rope  which  is  faftened  to  the  hook,  draw  the 
manati  tov/ards  the  land  ;  and  in  the  mean  time  thofe 
that  are  in  the  boat  ftab  and  cut  it  'till  it  dies.  I  once 
faw  fome  of  the  fifhers  cut  off  the  flefh  from  the  creature, 
while  it  was  alive,  who  all  the  while  ftruck  the  water  with  its 
paws  with  fuch  force  that  the  fkin  was  torn  off  them ;  but  at 
laft  it  expired.  It  is  eafier  to  catch  the  old  ones  than  the 
young  :  for  the  jaft  are  more  adive,  and  the  (kin  being  fofter 
the  hook  frequently  loofes  its  hold.  When  one  of  them  is 
ftruck,  and  ftruggles  to  clear  himfelf  of  the  hook,  thofe  of  the 
herd  that  are  neareft  to  him  come  to  his  affiftance:  fome 
overturn  the  boat  by  getting  under  it ;  others  lay  themfelves 
upon  the  rope,  as  if  they  could  break  it ;  and  others  endeavour 
to  ftrike  out  the  hook  with  their  tails,  which  fometimes 
fucceeds.  The  love  that  is  between  the  male  and  female  i? 
extraordinary  ;  for  after  the  male  has  ufed  all  methods  to  affift 
and  refcue  the  female^  be  follows  her  even  dead  to  the  very 
fliore,  and  has  been  obferved  fometimes  even  after  two  or 
three  days  to  remain  by  the  dead  body.  This  animal  cannot 
be  faid  to  low,  but  rather  brays  hard,  which  is  particularly  ob- 
fervable  when  it  is  wounded.     It    cannot  be  faid  how  fharp 

their 


KAMTSCHATKA 


'35 


their  fight  or  hearing  is ;  but  both  fenfes  appear  to  be  very 
weak,  perhaps  from  their  keeping  their  heads  always  under 
water. 

There  is  fuch  a  plenty  of  manati  in  Bering's  ifland,  that 
it  is  fufficient  to  maintain  all  the  people  of  Kamtfchatka. 
Their  fleft-),  though  it  takes  a  long  time  to  boil,  tafles  well, 
and  is  fomething  like  beef.  The  fat  of  the  young  refemblcs 
pork,  and  the  lean  is  like  veal.  This  flefh  is  eafily  boiled,  and 
fwells  fo  much  that  it  takes  up  double  the  fpace  when  boiled 
that  it  did  raw.  It  is  impoffible  to  boil  the  fat  about  the 
head  and  tail;  but  the  ribs  and  back  are  very  delicate.  Some 
pretend  that  the  flefli  of  this  animal  will  not  keep  in  {At ;  but 
we  found  the  contrary,  it  appearing  to  us  little  inferior  to 
ialted  beef*. 

Befides 


•  That  the  Kamtfchatka  manati  is  the 
fame  kind  of  animal  with  that  found  by 
Captain  Dampier  in  the  rivers  of  South 
America  and  at  the  Philippine  IJlands,  is 
evident  from  that  author's  defcription 
of  it: 

♦  This  creature  is  about  the  bignefs  of 
'  a  horfe,  and  lo  or  12  feet  long.     The 

•  mouth  of  it  is  much  like  the  mouth  of 
'  a  cow,  having  great  thick  lips.  The 
'  eyes  are  no  bigger  than  a  fmall  pea, 
'    the  ears  are  only  two  fmall  holes  on 

♦  each  fide  of  the  head.  The  neck  is 
'  fliort  and  thick,  bigger  than  the  head. 
'  The  biggeft  part  of  this  creature  is  at 
■  the  Ihoulders,  where  it  hath  two  large 
'  fins,  one  on  each  fide  of  its  belly. 
'  Under  each  of  thefe  fins  the  female 
'  Jiath  a  fmall  dug  to  fuckle  her  young. 
'  From  the  Ihoulders  towards  the  tail  it 
'  retains   its  bignefs    for   about   a    foot, 

*  then  it  groweth  fmaller  and  fmaller  to 
'  the  very  tail,  which  is  flat,   and  about 


■  14  inches  bread,   and   20  inches    long, 

■  and  in  the  middle    four  or  five  inches 

■  thick,  but  about  the  edges  of  it  not 

■  above  two  inches  thick.  From  the 
head  to  the  tail  it  is  round  and  fmooth, 
without  any  fin  but  thofe  two  before 
mentioned.  I  have  heard  that  fome 
have  weighed  above  i20olb.  but  I 
never  faw  any  fo  large.  The  manati 
delights  to  live  in  a  brackifh  water  ; 
and  they  are  commonly  in  creeks  or 
rivers  near  the  fea.  'Tis  for  this  rea- 
fon,  poflibly,  they  are  not  feen  in  the 
South  Seas,  (that  ever  I  could  obferve) 
where  the  coaft  is  generally  a  bold 
fliore,  that  is,  high  land  deep  water 
clofe  home  by  it,  with  a  higJi  fca  or 
great  furges  ;  except  in  the  ba/  of  Pa- 
nama, yet  even  there  is  no  manati : 
whereas  the  Weft  Indies,  being  as  it 
were  one  great  bay  compofed  of  many 
fmaller,  are  moftly  low  land  and  fhoal 
water,  and  afl^ord  proper  paflure  (as  I 

'  may 


^3^ 


^he  Natural  History  of 


Befides  tlie  above-mentioned  animals,  Mr.  Steller  faw  upon 
the  coaft  of  America  a  new  and  uncommon  fea  beaft,  which 
he  thus  defcribes :  Its  length  is  about  five  feet ;  its  head  like 
a  dog's ;  its  ears  fliarp,  and  (landing  up ;  and  its  eyes  large  j 
upon  its  upper  and  under  lips  it  has  hairs  like  a  beard;  its 
make  is  thick  and  round ;  thicker  towards  the  head,  thin  and 
fmall  towards  the  tail  j  the  whole  body  is  covered  with  thick 
hair,  grey  upon  the  back,  and  red  or  forrel  towards  the  belly ; 
the  tail  fin  divides  itfelf  into  two,  the  uppermoft  of  which  is 
longeft.  The  author  was  extremely  furprifed  that  he  could 
not  difcover  any  feet  or  paws,  as  in  other  fea  animals.  Its  appear- 
ance in  general  was  fomething  like  the  draught  of  that  creature, 
which  Gefner  gives  under  the  name  of  fea  monkey  ;  and  the  au- 
thor thinks  that  the  name  of  monkey  is  not  improperly  applied 
to  this  animal  for  its  remarkable  activity  and  many  tricks.  It 
fometimes  fwam  after  their  vefTel  for  two  hours,  looking  firft  at 


may  fay)  for  the  manati.  Sometimes 
we  find  them  in  fait  water,  fometimes 
in  frefh,  but  never  far  at  fea  5  and  thofe 
that  live  in  the  fea  at  fuch  places  where 
there  is  no  river  nor  creek  fit  for  them 
to  enter,  yet  do  commonly  come  once 
or  twice  in  24  hours  to  the  mouth  of 
any  frefh-water  river  that  is  near  their 
place  of  abode.  They  live  on  grafs 
feven  or  eight  inches  long,  and  of  a 
narrow  blade,  which  grows  in  the  fea  in 
many  places,  efpecially  among  iflands 
near  the  main.  This  grafs  groweth 
likewife  in  creeks,  or  in  great  ri- 
vers, near  the  fides  of  them,  in  fuch 
places  where  there  is  but  little  tide  or 
current.  They  never  come  afhore,  nor 
into  ftiallower  water  than  where  they 
can  fwim.  Their  flefh  is  white,  both 
the  fat  and  the  lean,  and  extraordinary 
fweet  and  wholefome  meat.  The  tail 
of   a  young   cow  is  much    cfteemed  ; 


but  if  old,  both  head  and  tall  are  very 
tough.  A  calf  that  fucks  is  the  moft 
delicate  meat  :  privateers  commonly 
roaft  them  ;  as  they  do  alfo  great  pieces 
out  of  the  bellies  of  the  old  ones. 
'  The  (kin  of  the  manati  is  of  great 
ufe  to  privateers  ;  for  they  cut  them 
into  ftraps,  which  they  make  faft  on 
the  fide  of  their  canoes,  through  which 
they  put  their  oars  in  rowing  inftead  of 
tholes  or  pegs.  The  (kin  of  the  bull, 
or  of  the  back  of  the  cow,  is  too  thic^ 
for  this  ufe  ;  but  of  it  they  make  horfe- 
whips,  cutting  them  two  or  three  feet 
long  :  at  the  handle  they  leave  the  full 
fubftance  of  the  (kin,  and  from  thence 
cut  it  away  tapering,  but  very  even, 
and  fquare  all  the  four  fides.  While 
the  thongs  are  green  they  twift  them, 
•  and  hang  them  to  dry,  which  in  a 
week's  time  become  as  hard  as  wood.* 

one 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H    A    T     K    A.        137 

one  thing  and  then  at  another  with  an  appearance  of  furprize ; 
gnd  would  come  fo  near  the  fliip,  that  he  might  be  touched 
with  a  pole  j  but  would  retire  to  a  greater  diftance  on  obferving 
any  on  board  to  ftir.  He  frequently  raifed  one  third  of  his  body 
above  the  water,  landing  eredt  like  a  man,  fometimes  for  half 
an  hour  together  ;  and  then  darting  under  the  veflel,  appeared  in 
the  fame  poflure  on  the  other  fide  ;  and  this  he  would  repeat, 
perhaps  thirty  times  together.  At  other  times  he  would  bring 
a  great  American  fea  herb,  which  is  flat  and  hollow  below  like 
the  bottom  of  a  bottle,  and  fomething  fharp  above  :  this  he 
would  tofs  about  and  catch  again  with  his  mouth,  playing  a 
thoufand  apifh  tricks  with  it.  It  has  been  obferved  of  all  fea 
hearts,  that  the  more  they  play  in  fair  weather  the  greater 
ftorm  is  to  be  expected. 


CHAP.      IX. 
Of      FISHES. 


THERE  are  great  numbers  of  whales  both  in  this 
ocean  and  in  the  Penfchin/ka  fea ;  they  frequently 
fwim  within  muflcet-lhot  of  the  (bore,  and  fometimes 
will  come  clofe  to  the  very  fhore,  perhaps  to  rub  off  the  fliell- 
fifli  that  adhere  to  their  bodies  and  give  them  no  reftj  as 
plainly  appears  from  their  lying  a  long  time  with  their  backs 
above  water,  to  allow  the  rooks  and  gulls  to  pick  them  off. 
At  fuch  time  as  the  fifli  come  out  of  the  fea  into  the  frefli 
waters,  two  or  three  whales  are  often  found  together  at  the 
time  of  flood  near  the  mouth  of  the  rivers. 

T  The 


138  The   Natural    History    of 

The  whales  here  are  from  feven  to  fifteen  fathoms  long.  We 
can  give  no  account  of  the  different  fpecies  of  whales  at  Kamtf'- 
chatka,  few  of  them  being  caught  here  except  in  the  northern 
parts  by  the  Koreki  and  Tchukofjkoi ,  who  feed  upon  their  flefli. 
In  the  year  1 740  a  whale  was  brought  by  the  flood  into  the 
mouth  of  the  BoIJkoi  river;  but  fome  Coffacks  obferving  it, 
went  out  in  boats,  and  cut  it  all  to  pieces ;  fo  that  next  day 
>when  I  came,  to  my  great  difappointment,  I  neither  found  flefli 
nor  bones ;  for  thefe  people,  who  had  cut  off  the  flefli,  being 
afraid  of  punifliment  for  doing  it  without  permiflion,  had  buried 
the  bones  to  conceal  their  crime.  Steller  obferved  that  more 
whales  were  thrown  on  the  eaflern  than  on  the  weftern  fliore, 
and  more  in  the  harvefl:  than  in  the  fpring. 

The  different  people  have  different  ways  of  catching  them  : 
the  Kiiriles  by  throwing  their  poifoned  darts  into  them  :  the 
Olutores  catch  them  in  nets,  made  of  thongs  of  the  fea  horfe 
fkin  as  broad  as  a  man's  hand,  which  they  dry  in  the  fmoke. 
Thefe  they  fet  in  the  mouths  of  the  rivers,  and  the  whale  pur- 
fuing  other  fifli  entangles  himfelf  in  them.  With  thefe  thongs 
he  is  dragged  to  the  fhore  by  the  help  of  numbers  who  aflemble 
on  thefe  occaflons,  and  always  perform  certain  ceremonies.  They 
bring  out  of  their  common  huts  a  wooden  whale  about  two 
feet  long  ;  then  building  a  new  hut  they  place  this  image 
in  it,  ufing  feveral  conjurations.  After  this  they  light  a  lamp, 
and  appointing  fome  people  to  look  after  it,  give  orders  that  it 
be  not  allowed  to  go  out  from  fpring  to  harveft,  which  is  as 
Jong  as  the  fifliing  feafon  lafts.  They  then  cut  the  whale  into 
different  portions,  which,  looking  upon  it  as  their  mofl:  delicate 
provifion,  they  prepare  in  the  following  manner:— They  dry 
the  lean  in  the  fun  ;  and  the  fl^in,  which  they  feparate  from  the 
fat,  they  beat  with  hammers,  and  of  it  make  foles  to  their 
fhoes,  which  wears  extremely  well.     They  fmoke  the  fat  parts, 

and 


.  K     A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A.         139 

and  cleaning  the  guts,  they  fill  them  with  the  oil  which 
runs  in  cutting  the  fifli,  or  which  they  melt  from  the  blubber, 
having  no  other  vefTels  to  keep  it  in. 

The  Tchiikotjkoi  kill  whales  with  a  harpoon  in  the  fame 
manner  as  the  Europeans  do,  and  they  catch  fo  many  that 
they  never  eat  thofe  whales  tiiat  are  thrown  dead  on  fhore,  as 
fome  of  the  neighbouring  people  do,  but  only  extrad:  their  fat 
for  burning.  Although  the  Tchukotjkoi  have  large  herds  of 
deer,  which  might  be  fufficient  for  their  fuftenance,  yet  they 
are  the  greateft  whale  fifliers  of  any  people  in  this  part  of  the 
globe,  and  look  upon  the  fat  of  the  whales  as  the  greateft 
delicacy  ;  befides,  having  great  fcarcity  of  wood,  they  ufe  it  for 
burning.  They  make  themfelves  fhirts  of  the  inteftines  of  the 
whales,  like  the  Americans ;  and  ufe  them  for  vefTels,  like 
the  Olutores. 

The  kafatki,   (falfely  called  the  fword-filL)   which   are   nu- 
merous in  thefe  feas,  are  very  ufeful  to  the  inhabitants,  for  thefe 
fifli  frequently  either  kill  or  drive  the  whales  on  fliore.     Steller 
had  an  opportunity  of  feeing  an  engagement  between  the  kafatki 
and  whale,    both    at    fea    and    upon    Beri?ig's  illand.      When 
the  kafatki   attacks  the  whale  he  makes  him  roar  fo  that  he 
may  be   heard  fome   miles.      If    the    whale    makes    off,     the 
kafatki  follows    him   at   fome   diftance   'till  great  numbers    of 
them  gather  together,   and  make  a   general  attack.     It  is  never 
obferved  that  fuch  whales  as  are  thrown  on  fl^ore  have   any  part 
eaten  out  of  their  bodies ;   fo  that  this   war  between  the  whales 
and   the   kafatki    muft    proceed   only  from   a  natural   enmity. 
The  fifliers  are  fo  much  afraid   of  thefe  animals  that  they  not 
only  never  throw  any  darts  at  them,  but  if  poffiblc  avoid  going 
near  them ;    nay,  they   even   make  offerings  to   them,   begging 
that  they  will  not  hurt  them :   for  if  irritated  they  fometimes 
overturn  their   boats. 

T  2  Mr. 


f4o  The  Natural  History  of 

Mr.  Steller  writes  that  he  was  certainly  informed,  that  in  the 
bodies  of  whales  thrown  upon  the  coaft  of  Kamtfchatka,  there 
have  been  found  harpoons  marked  with  Latin  letters ;  but  by 
.  what  means  he  could  be  certain  of  this,  I  know  not ;  for  the  na- 
tives have  no  idea  of  letters ;  and  before  our  arrival,  none  of  our 
CofTacks  ever  faw  a  Lat'm  letter. 

Many  are  the  advantages  which  the  Kamtjchadaki  derive  from 
this  plenty  of  whales :  of  the  fkin  they  make  flioe  foles  and  ftraps ; 
they  eat  the  flefli,  as  likewife  the  fat  which  they  alfo  burn ;  they 
few  their  boats  with  the  beard,  of  which  alfo  they  make  nets  for 
foxes  and  fifli ;  out  of  the  lower  jaw  they  form  a  fort  of  fledge, 
and  make  knife-handles,  rings,  and  feveral  fmall  things  of  it  be- 
fides ;  the  inteflines  ferve  for  barrels,  and  other  veflels ;  out  of  the 
nerves  and  blood-vefl^els  they  make  ropes ;  and  of  the  vertebrae, 
feats.  The  mofl  delicate  pieces  of  the  whale  are  the  tongue  and 
fins.  I  thought  that  the  whale's  fat  with  grout  was  not  unplea- 
fant,  but  I  can't  fay,  that  I  was  then  a  proper  judge,  for  hunger 
makes  every  thing  agreeable. 

They  never  go  a  fiftiing  for  the  kafatki,  but  if  this  fi{h  is  thrown 
on  fhore  they  ufe  its  fat  like  that  of  the  whale.  Mr.  Steller  fays, 
that,  in  the  year  1742,  eight  of  them  were  thrown  on  fliore  at 
once,  near  the  Lopatka  ;  but  the  diftance  and  the  bad  weather 
prevented  his  going  to  examine  them.  He  was  told,  that  the 
largefl  never  exceed  four  fathoms  in  length  ;  that  they  have  fmall 
eyes,  a  wide  mouth,  and  great  fharp  teeth,  with  which  they 
wound  the  whale  ;  but  that  they  tear  up  the  belly  of  the  whale 
with  a  iTiarp  fin  which  is  upon  their  backs,  is  a  falfe  report ;  for 
though  this  fin  is  about  five  feet  long,  very  fliarp,  and  in  the  fea 
flands  quite  upright,  yet  it  is  altogether  foft,  and  confifts  only  of 
fat :  nay  the  animal  itfelf  is  almofl:  all  fat  having  hardly  any 
mufcular  fleih. 

There 


KAMTSCHATKA.         141 

There  is  likewife  another  creature  in  thefe  feas  refembling  a 
whale,  but  fmaller  and  flenderer :  the  Rujjiam  call  it  a  wolf,  and 
the  Kamtfchadales,  chethak.  Its  fat  is  of  fuch  a  nature,  that, 
when  fwallowed,  it  prefently  palTes  infenfibly.  The  natives 
fometimes  ufe  it  as  a  medicine  in  cafe  of  coftivenefs,  but  oftener 
to  play  tricks  with  one  another.  They  feed  upon  the  fleih  and 
tongue,  which  have  not  the  fame  quality. 

Notvvithftanding  the  great  plenty  of  whales  upon  this  coaft,  the 
fcarcity  of  food  is  fometimes  fo  great,  that  whole  villages  die  of 
hunger.  In  the  month  of  April,  1 739, 1  faw  a  melancholy  inflance 
of  their  being  obliged,  out  of  neceffity,  to  eat  fome  poifonous 
whale's  fat,  at  a  village  upon  the  river  Berofover,  called  Alaune^ 
where  I  obferved  the  people  all  look  pale,  as  if  they  had  been 
fick  for  a  long  time ;  when  I  afked  the  reafon,  I  was  told, 
that  juft  before  my  arrival  one  of  the  natives  was  killed  by  eating 
of  whale's  fat  j  and  as  all  the  reft  had  eat  of  the  fame,  they  dreaded 
the  fame  fate.  In  about  half  an  hour,  a  young  healthy  man  be- 
gan to  groan  and  complain  that  his  throat  burnt  j  upon  which 
the  old  women,  who  are  the  phyficians  there,  faftened  liim  with 
ropes  to  a  ladder,  and  placed  themfelves  on  both  fides  of  him 
with  great  clubs  in  their  hands,  with  which  they  tofled  firebrands 
out  of  the  huts,  and  the  wife  of  the  fick  perfon  coming  behind 
him,  made  feveral  conjurations  over  his  head,  begging  death  to 
fpare  him :  however  he  died  the  next  day  j  but  the  other  inha- 
bitants, as  I  heard,  recovered  with  difficulty  after  a  long  time. 
This  accident  did  not  greatly  furprife  me ;  I  rather  wondered  that 
fuch  things  did  not  happen  oftener,  efpecially  from  thofe  whales 
which  are  killed  with  poifoned  darts.  However  the  Kamtfcha- 
daki  think  fo  little  of  the  confequences,  that  they  had  rather  rifk 
their  lives  than  be  deprived  of  the  pleafure  of  eating  whale's  flit. 

After  the  whales,  we  muft  mention  the  fifli  *  mokoe,  which 
at  Archangel  is  called  akula.     It  is  about  three  fathoms  long ; 


*  Canis  Carcharius  Autoris. 


brings 


142  ^fhs  Natural   History   of 

brings  forth  its  young  alive,  like  the  whale ;  and  when  its 
mouth  is  fliut  has  fome  refemblance  of  a  fturgeon,  but  it's 
teeth  are  very  different,  being  large  and  terrible.  The  Kamtf- 
chadales  eat  the  flefli  of  this  fifh,  and  though  it  appears  to 
be  tough  and  ftrong,  they  fay  it  is  exceedingly  well  tafted.  The 
guts,  and  particularly  the  bladder,  are  in  high  efteem ;  fo  that 
when  they  catch  this  fifli,  they  never  call  it  by  its  name,  for  fear, 
as  they  imagine,  they  fliould  provoke  it  to  burft  its  bladder,  and 
render  it  ufelefs  to  them.  The  teeth  are  fold  under  the  name 
of  lerpents'  teeth. 

Several  fifhes  which  are  common  to  other  feas  are  found  here  ; 
as  pike,  eels,  lampreys,  cod,  and  very  fine  foals  in  great  plenty ; 
but  the  inhabitants  make  no  account  of  thefe  fifli,  and  never  ufe 
them  unlefs  in  great  necefTity,  or  to  feed  their  dogs.  Mr.  Steller 
obferved  four  different  fpecies  of  flat  fifli. 

There  is  a  firti  called  *  vahnae,  which  is  a  fpecies  of 
the  cod ;  is  round  and  thick,  with  three  fins  upon  its  back ; 
and  when  taken  out  of  the  water  is  of  a  copper-colour,  but  pre- 
fently  changes  to  yellow:  its  flerti  is  white,  butfoft,  and  of  a 
difagreeable  tafte  ;  however  the  inhabitants  eat  more  of  it,  than 
of  other  fifli  which  are  much  better  tafted  ;  the  reafon  indeed  is, 
that  they  catch  this  fiHi  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  when 
they  can  catch  no  other  ;  a  great  deal  of  which  they  dry  in  the 
fun   uncleaned,  defigning  it  as  provifion  for  their  dogs; 

I  faw  the  fifh  which  they  call  -f-  terpuk,  but  it  being  dry,  I 
could  not  obferve  thofe  fine  colours  which  Mr.  S teller  defcribes. 
By  his  defcription  its  back  is  blackifli,  its  fides  are  reddifli,  and 
chequered  with  fine  filver-coloured  fpots;  fome  of  which  are 
fquare,  and  others  circular :  in  its  fliape  it  refembles  the  perch. 


*  Onos  vel  Afinus  Antiquorum, 
t  Doecogrammos  Stelleri. 


They 


KAMTSCHATKA.        143 

They  angle  for  this  fifh  near  the  Kuriljki  iflands,  and  the  haven 
of  Aivatjcha,  with  hooks  made  of  bone  or  wood. 

There  are  Hkewife  feveral  other  kinds  of  filhes  in  thefe  feas 
which  are  not  very  common  in  other  places ;  but  as  they  make 
no  part  of  their  nourifliment,  and  are  feidom  caught,  I  fliall 
take  no  notice  of  them,  my  defign  being  only  to  mention  fuch 
as  ferve  for  food  to  the  inhabitants,  in  this  country  which 
produces  no  grain.  The  chief  of  thefe  are  falmon  of  different 
kinds,  which  during  the  fummer  come  in  flioals  from  the 
fea  up  the  rivers.  Of  thefe  they  make  what  they  call  eukol, 
which  they  ufe  inftead  of  bread  ;  and  they  boil  up  the  fat, 
which  ferves  for  butter.     They  likewife  make  glue  of  them. 

Before  I  give  a  particular  defcription  of  each  fpecies  apart, 
I  would  communicate  fome  obiervations  which  regard  the 
catching  of  thefe  fifh,  and  which  indeed  are  wonderful  proofs 
of  the  Divine  Providence  and  the  goodnefs  of  the  Creator,  who 
has  bled:  a  place  with  fuch  abundance  of  fifla  where  there  is 
neither   cattle    nor  grain. 

In  Kamtjchatka  the  fifh  come  from  the  fea  in  fuch  numbers, 
that  they  flop  the  courfe  of  the  rivers,  and  caufe  them  to  overflow 
the  banks  -,  and  when  the  waters  fall  there  remains  a  furprifing 
quantity  of  dead  fifh  upon  the  fhore,  which  produces  an  in- 
tolerable flink.  At  this  time  the  bears  and  dogs  catch  more  fifli 
with  their  paws  than  people  do  at  other  places  with  their  nets. 
All  the  fifli  that  fwim  up  the  rivers  are  of  the  falmon  kind,  and 
are  commonly  called  red  fifh  ;  but  the  feveral  forts  are  fo  diftindt 
from  each  other,  that  Kamtjchatka  alone  is  thought  to  produce 
as  many  different  fpecies  as  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  world 
befides.  Not  one  fifh  remains  in  Kamtjchatka  longer  than  fix 
months  (except  gudgeons);  for  all  that  are  not  caught  before  the 
end  of  December  die,  except  in  fome  few  deep  places  where 
there  are  warm  fprings.     It  is  obferved  of  all  the  different  fpecies 

of 


144  ^^   Natural    History   of 

of  falmon  in  Kumtfchatka,  that  they  are  brought  forth  and  die 
in  the  fame  river,  come  to  their  full  growth  in  the  fea,  and 
fpawn  only  once  during  their  whole  lives  :  for  which  purpo(e  they 
iwim  up  the  rivers,  and  having  found  a  proper  place  in  fmooth 
water,  they  make  a  hole  with  the  fins  that  are  under  their 
gills,   and  there  depofit  their  roes. 

In  Siberia  the  red  fifli  live  in  clayey  rivers  ;  they  remain  there 
feveral  years,  and  generate  every  year,  having  numbers  of  infedls 
proper  for  nourishment.     They  winter  in  deep  pools,   and  in  the 
ipring  fwim  further  up  for  the  fake  of  propagating  in  the  mouths 
of  little  rivulets  that  fall  into  the  great  rivers,   where  they  are 
commonly  caught.      The  young   fry  fwim  down  to   the  fea, 
where  they  continue  'till  they  come  to  their  full  growth,  which 
Mr.  Steller  thinks   is  in  the  third  year ;  and  then  ihey  return  in 
order  to  propagate.    It  is  remarkable  that  thofe  fi{h  which  are  bred 
in  a  great  river  continue  in  the  fea  near  to  its  mouth,  feed  upon 
things  brought  down  by  the  ftream,  and  when  the  time  of  fpawning 
approaches  they  will  enter  no  river  but  that  which  produced  them. 
It  is  alfo  very  extraordinary,   that  thofe  fiili  which  come  up  the 
rivers  in  the  month  of  Auguft,    though   they  have   time  enough 
to  fpawn,  yet  as  there  remains  but  little  time  for  their  young  to 
return,  take  a  year-old  fifli  of  their  own  kind,  which  continually 
follows  the  male  and  female ;  and  when  the  old  have  covered  the 
roes  they  continue  to  afcend,   the  young  one,   which  is  no  bigger 
than  a  herring,   guarding  them  'till  the  month  of  November,   at 
which  time  it  returns  with  the  other  fillies.     It  is  very  probable 
that  the  fame  thing  happens  in  Europe,  which  may  have  given 
occafion,  through  the  difference  of  their  ages,   to  account  them 
of  diflferent  fpecies. 

Each  kind  of  fifh  always  afcends  the  rivers  at  the  fame  time. 
In  the  month  of  Auguft  fometimes  two,  three,  nay  even  four 
fpecies  come  up  at  once  j  but  each  keeps  feparate  from  the  other. 

The 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  145 

The  different  fpecies  of  thofe  firties  which  are  here  called  red  fifli 
fhall  be  mentioned  in  giving  an  account  of  the  time  when  they 
come  out  of  the  fea  into  the  rivers ;  it  being  remarked  that  they 
always  obferve  the  fame  order,  the  fame  fpecies  which  comes 
out  firfl  one  year  continuing  to  do  fo  the  following.  This  the 
Kami fcha dales  Hnd  to  be  fo  certain,  that  they  call  their  months 
by  the  name  of  the  fifli  which  are  then  caught. 

The  largeft  and  beft  of  thefe  fifh,  and  which  come  firft  out  of 
the  fea,  are  called  chavitfi.  It  refembles  the  common  falmon, 
though  it  is  a  great  deal  broader ;  is  about  three  feet  and  a  half 
long,  and  weighs  a  pood  and  a  hslf ;  its  breadth  is  about  the 
fourth  part  of  its  length  ;  its  nofe  is  fharp,  the  upper  jaw  being 
longer  than  the  lower ;  its  tail  is  equal ;  the  back  is  bluilTi,  with 
fome  fmall  black  fpots  ;  its  fides  are  of  a  filver  colour,  and  its 
belly  white  ;  its  gills  are  long  and  fmall  ;  and  its  flefh  is  red 
both    raw    and   boiled. 

They  fwim  up  the  rivers  with  fuch  force  that  the  water  feems 
to  rife  like  a  wall  before  them  ;  which  the  Kamtjchadales  obferv- 
ing  get  into  their  boats,  and  throw  out  their  nets.  This  fifli  does 
not  come  up  in  fuch  large  flioals  as  the  others,  nor  is  fuch  plenty 
caught  as  to  make  eukol  of  it,  except  upon  the  river  Kamtf- 
chatka  ;  and  even  there  it  is  fo  rare  that  it  is  only  ufed  on  feafts  or 
holydays,  and  after  all  it  is  fo  fat  that  it  prefently  turns  bitter. 
The  Coflacks,  for  the  moft  part,  fait  it,  particularly  the  belly, 
back,  and  head.  The  ribs  are  dry  and  hard,  but  the  belly  is 
truly  a  delicate  food,  at  leafl  no  fifli  there  comes  up  to  it ;  and 
what  they  dry  in  the  fun,  if  not  better  than  the  Jakutjki 
fturgeon,   is  at  leaft  not  worfe. 

Of  all  the  rivers  that  run  into  the  Eaftern  Ocean  this  fifh 
is  only  found  in  the  river  Kamtfchatka  and  the  bay  of 
Awatfcha ;  and  of  thofe  that  fall  into  the  Penfchinjka  fea,  only  in 
the  Bolfcherefjkoi  river  :  befides,  Mr.  Stelkr  fiys,  that  none  is  to  be 
found  further  north  than  54°,    and  it  is  certain  that  it  is  not 

U  to 


146  The   Natural    History   of 

to  be   found  near  Ochotjka^   where  it  is  efteemed  a  valuable 
pre  fen  t. 

The  nets  with  which  this  fifli  is  caught  are  made  of  yarn 
about  the  thicknefs  of  fugar  ropes  J  and  the  fifhing  begins  about 
the  middle  of  May,  and  lafts  fix  weeks.  The  Kamtfchadales 
efteem  this  fifli  fo  much,  that  the  firft  they  catch  they  bake  and 
eat  with  great  rejoicings.  This  cuftom  is  very  difagreeable  to 
the  RiiJ/ia?!  inhabitants  who  hire  the  natives  to  fifli  for  them  ; 
for  however  impatient  the  mafter  may  be  to  tafte  the  new  fifb, 
the  fifhermen  will  have  the  firft,  looking  upon  it  as  a  great  fin 
if  they  do  not  eat  it  themfelves,  and  with  all  due  ceremonies. 

The  fecond  kind  is  only  called  red  fifh,  in  Ochof/ka,  narka. 
It  is  about  2 1  inches  long,  and  flattifh  ;  its  flefli  is  extremely  red ; 
its  head  very  fmall ;  the  fnout  fhort  and  fharp ;  the  tongue 
bluifli,  with  whitifh  fides  j  its  back  bluifh,  with  black  fpots  ; 
its  belly  white  j  and  its  tail  forked.  Its  breadth  is  about  a  fifth 
part  of  its  length  ;  and  it  has  fcales  large  and  round,  eafily 
feparating  from  the  ikin  :  it  weighs  about  fifteen  pounds.  It  is 
found  in  every  river  that  runs  either  into  the  Penfchiiijka  or 
Eaftern  Sea,  coming  up  in  great  fhoals  ;  and  it  is  caught  about 
the  middle  of  "June.  The  eiikol  that  is  made  of  it,  though  very 
pleafant,  prefently  turns  bitter ;  fo  that  for  the  moft  part  they 
either  fait  this  fifli,  or  boil  it  for  its  fat.  There  are  two  things 
worth  notice  concerning  it :  the  firft  of  which  is,  that  part  go 
before  to  the  heads  of  the  rivers,  as  if  they  were  fent  out  to 
examine  them,  where  fome  of  them  are  caught  before  the  fhoals 
appear  at  the  mouths.  The  fecond  is,  that  this  fifh  is  more 
plenty  in  fuch  rivers  as  run  out  of  lakes  than  others :  nor  does 
it  live  long  in  the  former,  but  haftens  diredlly  into  the  latter  j 
in  the  depths  of  which  it  lies  'till  the  beginning  of  Augujl,  at 
which  time  it  comes  nearer  the  fhore,  and  tries  to  get  into  thefe 
rivers  that  communicate  with  the  lakes.  Here  the  inhabitants 
catch  them  by  nets,  dams,  or  other  methods. 

The 


KAMTSCHATKA.  147 

The  third  kind  of  this  filli  is  called  keta  or  kaeko ;  which  is 
fomewhat  larger  than  the  narka.  The  flefli  is  white ;  the  head 
fiattifh  and  longifli ;  the  fnout  is  bent  j  the  teeth,  when  it  has 
been  fome  time  in  the  river,  are  like  a  dog's  ;  its  tongue  is  fharp  j 
its  tail  a  little  forked  ;  its  back  black  and  green  ;  its  fides  and 
belly  like  other  fifli ;  and  its  fkin  is  without  fpots.  The  cukol 
that  is  made  of  this  fifli  they  call  their  houfehold  bread,  being 
much  more  plenty  than  any  other  ;  as  the  feafon  of  the  fifhery, 
which  begins  in  July  and  ends  about  the  middle  of  OSlober,  is 
drier  and  more  proper  for  preparing  it.  This  fifli  is  caught  in 
all  the  rivers  both  in  the  Penjchitijka  and  Eaftern  feas. 

The  gorbuflie,  or  crook  back,  follows  or  fometimes  accompanies 
the  keta.  This  fifli  is  more  plentiful  than  any  other  whatever  j 
it  is  about  eighteen  inches  long,  and  flattifli ;  its  flefh  is  white  ; 
its  head  fmall  j  its  fnout  fliarp,  and  confiderably  crooked  ;  its  teeth 
fmall ;  its  back  bluifh,  with  round  black  fpots ;  its  fides  and  belly 
like  the  other  forts ;  and  the  tail  forked.  Though  this  fifh  is 
not  bad,  yet  the  inhabitants  have  fuch  plenty  of  what  they  efleem 
better,  that  they  ufe  this  only  for  their  dogs. 

The  laft  of  thefe  kinds  that  come  on  fhore  is  called  white  fifli. 
This  fifli  both  in  bulk  and  appearance  is  very  like  the  keta  ;  they 
differ  in  this  indeed,  that  the  keta  has  no  fpots,  and  the  white 
fifli  has  long  black  fpots  upon  its  back.  It  excels  in  tafte  all  the 
fifties  that  have  white  flelh  ;  and  it  agrees  with  the  narka  in  this, 
that  it  moft  frequently  haunts  thofe  rivers  that  run  out  of  the 
lakes,  and  is  caught  there  in  the  fame  manner.  The  young  ones, 
which  accompany  the  old  to  take  care  of  the  roes  and  convoy  the 
young  fry  down,  are  efteemed  by  the  inhabitants  to  be  a  different 
fpecies,  and  are  called  milktchuch.  So  foon  as  the  old  ones  have 
fpawned,  they  take  all  care  to  provide  for  their  own  fafety,  re- 
tiring immediately  to  deep  places  where  there  are  warm  fprings ; 
and  they  are  chiefly  found  in  the  fprings  near  the  Bolfcheretjkoi  river 

U  2  and 


148  The    Natural    History    of 

and  the  Opal/koy  lake  :  they  are  caught  likewife  during  the  whole 
winter  in  thofe  fprings  that  run  into  the  Kamtfcbatka  from  the 
fouth  •  and  near  to  where  the  old  lower  fort  of  Kafntfchatka 
flood  they  alfo  abound,  which  is  a  great  relief  to  the  inhabitants. 
I  myfelf  was  at  this  fifliery  in  the  end  of  February  ;  however  I 
found  the  fifh  at  that  time  dryer  and  not  fo  well  tafted  as  in  the 
harveft.  This  fifn  eats  very  well,  either  faked,  dryed,  or 
fmoaked.  It  is  caught  frequently  in  the  fame  net  with  the  keta 
and  narkaj  and  thofe  which  they  ufe  for  this  fifhery  are  made 
of  yarn  about  half  as  thick  as  that  with  which  they  make  the 
nets  for  the  chavitfi,  and  the  mefhes  are  about  an  inch  and 
a  half  wide. 

All  thefe  different  fpecics  of  iifh  change  their  colours,  turn  lean 
and  ugly,  their  fnout  bends,  their  teeth  grow,  and  a  fcurf  appears 
upon  their  fkins.  The  chavitfi,  narka,  and  white  fifh,  change 
their  filver  colour  to  a  red  ;  the  keta  turns  likewife  red,  ftained 
with  black  flripes.  Their  fins  and  tails  become  reddifti  and 
blackifh  j  in  one  word,  they  would  never  be  taken  for  the  fame 
fifh  that  enter  the  rivers,  if  thefe  changes  were  not  certain. 
The  gorbufhe  alone  preferves  its  filver  colour,  and,  whenever  it 
lofes  that,  it  dies. 

It  is  incredible  with  what  eargernefs  they  go  up  the  rivers, 
particularly  the  gorbufhe.  When  they  come  to  any  place  where 
the  flream  is  flrong,  and  thofe  that  are  weak  find  it  impofhble 
by  their  own  flrength  to  get  up,  they  faflen  their  teeth  upon 
the  tail  of  fome  that  are  ftronger,  that  they  may  be  drawn  up 
by  them  ;  fo  that  feveral  of  thefe  fifh  are  found  which  have 
their  tails   bitten. 

The  true  falmon  may  always  be  reckoned  one  of  thofe  fifh 
that  come  in  fhoals  j  and  are  found  to  go  up  the  rivers  Kom- 
pakjve^  Bircumkin,  and  Etchi.  I  never  faw  thefe  fifh  indeed, 
but  have  heard  a  great  deal  of  them.     Mr,  Steller  writes,  that 

when 


KAMTSCHATKA.        149 

when  they  return  to  the  fea,  it  fometimcs  happens  that  they  are 
driven  by  a  ftorm  from  the  mouth  of  their  native  river,  fo  that 
lofing  their  way,  the  following  year  they  afcend  a  ftrange  river, 
which  is  the  occafion  of  their  being  found  in  more  plenty  in  fome 
rivers  one  year  than  another. 

There  are  other  kinds  of  red  fifh  which  come  up  the  river  with- 
out any  order,  and  live  there  the  whole  winter  before  they  re- 
turn, Mr.  Steller  fays,  they  flay  fometimes  four  or  five  years. 
The  firfl  of  this  fpecies  is  called,  at  Ochotjka,  malma,  and  at 
Kamt/chatka,  goltfa.  When  they  come  out  of  the  fea  their  co- 
lour is  clear  like  filver;  the  upper  part  of  the  fnout  is  blunt,  and 
fomewhat  bent ;  the  lower  fliarp,  and  bent  towards  the  upper. 
When  they  are  ripped  up,  and  the  roes  taken  out,  there  appear 
upon  the  fides  round  red  fpots  of  different  magnitudes,  the  belly 
and  lower  fins  become  likewife  reddifh,  except  the  bones  which 
continue  white. 

The  largefl:  fifh  of  this  fpecies,  which  lives  fometimes  five  or 
fix  years,  comes  from  the  fea  into  the  river  Kamtfchatka^  out  of 
which  it  goes  into  the  rivers  that  run  into  it,  and  by  them  to  the 
lakes,  where  it  grows  almofl  as  big  as  the  chavitfi,  though  it 
feldom  weighs  more  than  twenty  pounds.  They  are  found  like- 
wife  very  large  in  the  Bijiroy  river  ;  there  their  length  is  com- 
monly twenty-eight  inches,  and  breadth  ten  ;  they  are  of  a  dark 
colour,  have  large  teeth,  and  the  lower  jaw  is  crooked  with  a 
knob :  it  feems  indeed  of  a  different  fpecies.  Thefe  of  three  years 
old,  which  have  been  one  year  out  of  the  fea,  have  a  long  head, 
are  of  a  filver  colour,  with  fmall  fcales,  and  fmall  red  fpots  j  and 
fuch  as  have  been  two  years  out  of  the  fea  are  round  and  longifli, 
with  fmall  heads,  and  their  flefla,  which  is  of  a  reddifli  white,  is 
hard  and  well  tafled.  With  regard  to  their  fize  ;  the  firft  year 
they  are  long  and  fmall ;  the  fecond,  they  grow  more  in  breadth 
than  in  length  j  the  third,  the  head  grows  confiderably  ;  and  the 
fourth,  fifth,  and  fixth  years,  their  breadth  and  thicknefs  increafes 

greatly :. 


jjo  The   Natural    History   of 

greatly :  this  obfervation  probably  holds  in  all  kinds  of  falmon 
trouts.  In  the  fourth  year  alfo,  the  lower  part  to  the  fnout  be- 
comes hooked.  This  fpecies  of  fifh  fwims  along  with  the  gor- 
buflie,  and  is  caught  with  it  in  the  fame  net,  which  is  wove  of 
fmall  yarn,  the  meflies  being  about  an  inch  wide.  Such  as  live 
in  the  rivers  are  nourilhed  by  the  roes  of  other  fifli  j  and  in  the 
fummer  are  found  near  the  heads  of  fmall  rivers,  which  they 
leave  in  the  fpring.  Such  as  are  caught  at  the  beginning  of 
fummer  are  falted,  but  thofe  caught  later  are  frozen  for  the 
winter. 

Another  fpecies  of  fifh  is  called  muikifi,  and  is  about  the  big- 
nefs  of  the  narka ;  its  fcales  are  pretty  large ;  its  head  is  of  a 
middling  fize  ;  the  upper  part  of  its  fnout  is  like  that  of  the 
goltfa,  with  the  lower  part  hooked  ;  it  has  teeth  in  its  jaws  and 
on  the  fide  of  the  tongue  ;  its  back  is  blackifh,  marked  with 
round,  or  femicircular  black  fpots;  and  upon  each  fide  has  a 
large  red  llripe,  which  goes  quite  from  the  head  to  the  tail : 
this  diflinguifhes  it  from  all  the  other  fpecies  of  this  filh : 
it  fwallows  all  kinds  of  naftinefs,  and  often  catches  the  field 
mice  that  happen  to  fwim  upon  the  river  ;  and  is  fo  particu- 
larly fond  of  the  nortleberry,  that  if  it  fees  any  growing  upon  the 
bank,  it  throws  itfelf  out,  and  feizes  either  the  befry  or  the  leaf 
of  the  plant.  It  is  a  well  tafted  fifli,  but  is  not  caught  in  fuch 
plenty  as  others  are.  They  do  not  certainly  know  the  time  of 
its  entering  the  rivers,  but  imagine  it  is  before  the  ice  is  gone. 

There  is  a  third  kind  called  kunfha,  which  is  about  three  feet 
long  ;  the  head  makes  a  feventh  part  of  the  length  j  the  fnout 
is  fhort  and  fliarp  ;  its  jaws  are  furnifhed  with  teeth  ;  its  back 
and  fides  blackifb,  marked  with  yellow  fpots,  fome  of  which 
are  round  and  others  oblong  ;  its  belly  is  white  ;  its  lower  fins 
and  tail  blue  ;  and  the  fiefii  white  and  well  tafted.  In  Ochotjka 
it  fwims  in  Ihoals,  but  at  Kamtfchatka  it  is  more  rare,  and  con- 
fequently  more  efleemed. 

The 
2 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.        151 

The  fourth  fpecies  is  the  harius,  which  is  well  known  in 
Siberia  and  all  RuJJia ;  but  thofe  that  are  here  have  the  back 
fin  longer  than  the  others.  Mr,  Steller  writes,  that  they  come 
up  into  the  rivers  upon  the  firft  going  ofFof  the  ice ;  but  I  never 
happened  to  fee  this  fifh  in  KamtJ'chatka. 

There  is  another  fpecies  of  red  fifli  which  refembles  the  golfta, 
with  this  difference,  that  its  head  is  larger,  and  the  upper  part  of 
the  fnout  a  little  hooked  j  its  fides  are  marked  with  red  fpots, 
like  the  malma  :  it  is  feldom  longer  than  20  inches. 

Among  the  fmall  fifhes  which  the  KamtJ'chadales  feed  upon 
are  three  fpecies  of  fmelts ;  one  of  which  is  called  hagatch,  the 
fecond  innaka,  and  the  third  uiki.  The  hagatch  is  our  common 
fmelt.  The  innaka  differs  from  it  a  little,  and  is  found  in  great 
plenty  about  the  lake  Nerpech.  Uiki  is  thrown  fometimes  upon 
the  fliore  in  vaft  heaps  for  100  verfls  together.  They  are 
eafily  diftinguiflied  from  the  other  fpecies  by  a  rough  flripe  that 
goes  down  the  fide.  They  commonly  fwim  three  together, 
and  are  fo  joined  by  the  afore-mentioned  rough  ftripe,  that  when 
you  catch  one  the  others  cannot  eafily  difengage  themfelves. 
The  Kamtfchadales  dry  this  fifh  as  food  for  their  dogs  ;  but  in 
cafe  of  fcarcity  they  ufe  it  themfelves,  although  the  tafte  is  very 
difagreeable 

The  lafi:  kind  of  fifh  which  we  fhall  mention  is  the  herring : 
thefe  are  found  in  great  plenty  in  the  Eaftern  Sea,  but  very  fel- 
dom in  the  bays  which  lie  upon  the  Petifchinjka.  In  my  opinion 
they  don't  differ  in  the  leafl  from  the  herring  which  we  have  in 
Europe ;  which  Mr.  Steller  likewife  confirms.  In  the  harveft 
they  are  found  in  large  lakes,  where  they  breed  and  winter  :  in 
the  fpring  they  fwim  towards  the  fea.  The  greatefl  fifliery  of 
them  is  in  the  lake  Vilititchin,  which  is  only  about  fifty  fathom 
from  the  fea,  and  has  communication  with  it  by  a  fmall  outlet. 
When  thefe  herrings  enter  the  lake,  this  paffage  is  fluit  up  by 
the  fand  being  thrown  into  it,  and  remains  fo  'till  the  month  of 

March,, 


if2  'The   Natural    History   of 

March,  \yhen  it  is  waflied  away  again"  by.  the  high  water  arifing 
from  the  melting  of  the  fnow  j  which  happens  regularly  every  year. 
The  herrings  come  every  day  to  the  mouth  of  the  outlet,  as  if 
to  inform  themfelves  whether  the  pafTage  was  yet  open,  and  re- 
main there  from  morning  'till  evening,  when  they  return  to  |he 
deeper  part  of  the  lake.  The  Kamtfchadales  obferving  this,  break 
holes  in  the  ice  near  the  mouth  of  the  outlet,  where  they  put 
down  their  nets,  and  catch  great  quantities.  This  fifhery  conti- 
nues fo  long  as  the  ice  remains  upon  the  lake.  They  catch  them 
likewife  with  nets  in  the  fummer,  at  the  mouths  of  the  rivers  j 
when  they  boil  out  the  fat,  which  is  as  white  as  butter,  and  more 
delicate  than  that  of  any  other  lifh ;  and  fend  it  from  the  lower 
Xamtfchatkoy  fort  (where  the  greateft  quantity  is  made)  as  a  rare 
prefent,  to  the  other  forts. 


CHAP.      X. 
Of      the       BIRDS. 

-TT^  AMTSCH  AT  K  A  abounds  in  birds,  but  the  in- 
jl\-  habitants  make  lefs  ufe  of  them  than  of  roots  and  fifhes : 
the  reafon  of  this  is,  that  they  don't  well  know  how  to 
catch  them  ;  and  their  fifhery  is  fo  advantageous  to  them,  that 
to  leave  that  and  go  a  bird-catching  would  be  as  ridiculous 
as  for  the  hufbandman  to  leave  his  plough  and  go  a 
fhooting. 

I  fhall  here  divide  the  birds  into  three  clafles :  the  firft,  fea 
fowls ;  the  fecond,  the  frefh- water  fowls ;  and  thef  third,  thofe 
which  frequent  the  woods  and  fields. 

Class 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  153 

Class  I.     Of  the  SEA    FOWLS. 

The  fea  fowls  are  found  in  greater  plenty  about  the  coaft  of  the 
Eaftern  Ocean,  than  that  of  the  Penfchinjka  fea ;  for  the  coart:  ot 
the  Eaftern  Ocean  is  more  hilly  and  convenient  for  breeding. 

The  ipatka  *  is  well  known  to  all  writers  of  natural  hiliory 
by  the  name  of  anas  ardtica,  commonly  called  in  England 
puffins.  It  is  found  upon  the  coaft  of  Kamtfchatka,  and  the 
Kuriljki  illands,  and  even  upon  the  Penfchinjka  bay,  almoll:  as 
far  as  Ochotjka.  It  is  about  the  bignefs  of,  or  rather  fmaller 
than,  a  common  duck ;  its  head  and  neck  are  of  a  bluifli 
black ;  the  back  is  black ;  the  belly  and  all  below  white  ;  its 
bill  red,  and  broad  towards  the  root,  but  fomewhat  narrower 
towards  the  point ;  upon  each  fide  are  three  furrows ;  its  legs 
are  red,  its  feet  webbed,  and  its  nails  fmall,  crooked,  and 
black  ;  its  flefli  is  hard  ;  its  eggs  are  like  hen's  eggs  ;  it  builds 
its  neft  with  grafs  on  the  cliffs  of  the  rocks.  The  Katntfcha dales 
and  Kuriles  wear  the  bills  of  thefe  birds  about  their  necks  fa- 
ftened  to  ftraps ;  and,  according  to  their  fuperllition,  their  flia- 
mans,  or  priefts,  muft  put  them  on  with  proper  ceremony,  to 
procure  them  good  fortune. 

Another  fpecies  of  thefe  birds  is  called  meuchagatka  -j-,  and 
in  Ochotjka,  igilma  :  this  only  differs  from  the  former  in  being 
all  black,  and  having  two  yellowifh  white  tufts  upon  its  head, 
which  lie  all  along:  from  its  ears  to  its  neck  like  locks  of  hair. 
To  the  beft  of  my  remembrance  this  bird  has  never  yet  been 
defcribed.  Mr.  Steller  and  I  fent  fome  of  thefe  fpecies  of  birds 
to  the  Imperial  Mufeum.  Among  thofe  fent  by  Mr.  Steller 
there  was  a  third  kind  which  is  found  upon  the  ifland  Bondena, 
in  Angermamiia,  and  upon   the  Caroline  illands ;  and  is  fome- 

•  Alca  rollri  fulcis  quatuor,  oculorum  regione  temporibufque  albis.  Linn.  F. 
fuec.  V.  42. 

t  Alca  monochroa  fulcis  tribus,  cerro  duplici  utrinque  depcndente.  Anas  arctica 
cirrata.     Stell. 

X  what 


154  '^^^^   Natural    History    of 

what  lefs  than  the  other  two ;  its  colour  is  like  that  of  the 
ipatka,  except  that  its  bill  and  legs  are  black,  and  that  there 
are  two  wliite  fprigs  upon  its  forehead,  which  reach  from  the 
eye  to  the  bill. 

The  ai-u  *,  or  kara,  belongs  to  this  clafs.  It  is  larger  than 
a  dnck ;  the  head,  neck,  and  back  are  black ;  the  bill  long, 
flrait,  black,  and  fharp ;  the  legs  black  with  a  caft  of  red ;  it 
has  three  black  toes,  and  is  web-footed.  Great  numbers  of 
thefe  are  found  upon  the  rocky  iflands  ;  and  the  inhabitants  kill 
them  for  the  fake  of  their  flefli,  though  tough  and  bad  tafted ; 
but  more  i^o  for  their  fkins,  of  which,  as  well  as  thofe  of  other 
fea  fowls,  they  make  themfelves  garments.  Their  eggs  are 
reckoned  a  great  delicacy. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  tchaiki,  or  cormorants,  found  upon 
this  coaft,  which  are  hardly  obferved  any  where  elfe.  They  are 
about  the  bignefs  of  a  goofe,  have  a  flrait  reddifh  bill  about  five 
inches  long,  and  iharp  on  the  edges,  and  four  noftrils,  fuch  as 
other  cormorants  have,  two  being  near  the  forehead  as  are  found 
in  other  birds  which  are  thought  to  prognofticate  ftorms,  and  are 
thence  named  Procellaria  ;  their  heads  are  of  the  middling  lize ; 
their  eyes  black  ;  their  tails  eight  inches  long ;  and  their  legs  are 
covered  with  hair  to  the  knees,  but  below  them  are  bare ;  they 
have  three  toes  of  a  bluifh  colour,  and  are  web-footed ;  their 
wings  extend  more  than  a  fathom ;  they  are  fometimes  fpeckled  j 
they  appear  often  near  the  Ihore,  but  can't  ftand  ftrait  upon  dry 
ground,  their  feet  being  fo  near  the  tail  that  they  are  not  able  to 
balance  their  bodies  :  they  fly  flow  even  when  hungry,  but  when 
full  of  meat  they  cannot  raife  themfelves  from  the  ground ;  and, 
having  eat  too  much,  they  eafe  their  fl:omachs  by  throwing  it 
up ;  they  have  a  wide  throat,  and  fwallow  fifh  whole ;  their  flefli 
is  very  tough  and  flnewy,  therefore  the  natives  feldom  eat  it,  but 
in  great  neceffity,  killing  them  principally  for  the  fake  of  their 

*  Lomvia  Hoieri. 

bladders. 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A.         155 

bladders,  which  they  ufe  inftead  of  corks  to  their  nets.  The 
way  of  catching  them  is  iingular,  being  angled  for  as  MieSn; 
are,  in  the  following  manner :  they  faften  a  thick  iron,  or  wooden 
hook  to  a  long  rope  or  ftrap,  baiting  the  hook  with  a  whole  fifli, 
the  point  of  which  comes  out  near  the  back  fin,  and  then  throw 
it  into  the  fea  ;  this  the  cormorants  obferving  gather  about  it  iri 
flocks,  and  quarrel  among  themfelves  who  fliall  have  the  prize,  :, 
until  the  ftrongeft  obtains  it  and  fwallows  it  j  then  being  drawn 
on  Ihore,  they  take  out  the  hook  and  bait  by  putting  their  hands 
into  its  throat.  Sometimes  tliey  faftcn  a  live  cormorant,  which 
they  call  a  decoy,  to  the  rope,  and  that  it  hiay  not  fwallow  the 
bait,  tie  down  its  bill  with  a  cord  :  the  others  feeing  the  decoy 
fwim  fo  near  the  fliore,  come  with  greater  fecurity  to  the  bait. 
The  Kamtfchadaks  mal-ie  needle  cafes,  and  combs  to  comb  their 
nettles,  of  the  bones  of  their  wings. 

Befides  the  above-mentioned  tchaiki,  or  cormorants,   there  is 
another  fpecies  which  haunt  the  rivers :  thefe  are  called  robbers,-  "^ 
becaufe  they  take  the  prey  from  the  fmall  birds ;   their   tail  is  ' 
forked  like  that  of  the  fwallow. 

The  procellaria,  or  ftorm  birds,  are  about  the  bignefs  of  a'  " 
fwallow  ;  their  feathers  are  all  black,  except  the  tops  of  their 
wings,  which  are  white  ;  their  bill  and  legs  black.  They  haunt 
about  the  iflands,  and  before  a  ftorm  they  fiy  low  and  fkim  the 
fea,  and  fometimes  into  the  fhips,  which  the  failors  look  upon 
asthe  fign  &f  an  approaching  violent  gale. 

The  ftariki  *,  or  glupifha,  belong  to  this  fpecies.  The  fla- 
riki  are  about  the  bignefs  of  a  pigeon;  have  bluifh  bills,  and 
bluifh  black  feathers  about  the  noftrils,  which  look  like  briftlesj' 
the  feathers  of  the  head  are  of  the  fame  colour,  interfperfcd  here-  ' 
and  there  with  white  ones,  which  are  longer  and  thinner  than  the 
reft: ;  the  upper  part  of  the  neck  is  black,  but  the  lower  black  and 

*  Mergus  marinus  niger  ventre  albo,  plumis  anguftis  albis  auritus.     Stell. 

X  2  white 


156  1'he  Natural   History    of 

white  fpeckled.  The  belly  is  white,  the  wings  {hort,  the  large  feathers 
of  which  are  black,  and  the  reft  blue ;  the  fides  and  tail  are  black; 
the  feet  are  red  and  webbed  ;  and  the  nails  black  and  fmall :  it 
haunts  about  rocky  iflands,  where  it  likewife  builds  its  nefl :  The 
Kamtfchadales  catch  thefe  fowls  eafier  than  they  do  the  tchaiki, 
or  cormorants ;  they  put  on  a  fur  coat  of  a  particular  make,  and 
letting  their  hands  fall  down,  fit  down  in  a  proper  place,  and 
wait  for  the  evening  ;  when  the  birds  returning  from  the  fea  feek 
to  retire  into  holes  for  the  night,  and  in  the  dark  feveral  of  them 
fly  into  their  furs,   and  are  caught. 

Among  the  birds  defcribed  by  Mr.  Steller  are  the  black  lT:a- 
rikis  *,  whofe  bills  are  as  red  as  vermillion,  the  right  fide  of 
which  is  crooked ;  it  has  a  white  tuft  upon  its  head.  He  faw  a 
third  fpecies  in  America^   which  was  fpotted  black  and  white. 

,v^he  glupifha  are  about  the  largenefs  of  the  common  river  cor- 
morants J  and  are  found  upon  the  rocky  iflands,   in  high  flcep 
places  J    their  colours  are  grey,  white,  and  black  ;   and  are  per- 
haps called  glupifha,  that  is,  foolifh,  becaufe  they  frequently  fly 
into  the  boats.    Mr.  Steller  fays,  that  numbers  of  them  are  caught 
in  the  fourth  and  fifth  A'«r/^z  iflands,  which  the  inhabitants  dry  in 
the  fun  ;  they  fqueeze  the  fat  through  the  fkin,  which  pafTes  very 
cafily,  and  ufe  it  for  burning.     He  likewife  writes  that  all  the 
rocky  iflands  in  the  fea  between  Kamtfchatka  and  America  are 
covered  with  them.     He  has  feen  fome  as  large  as  a  goofe,  or  an 
eagle  ;   their  bills  are  crooked  and  yellowifh  ;  their  eyes  are  large 
like  thofe  of  an  owl;   they  are  black  intermixed  with  white  fpots 
over  the  whole  body.     He  once  faw,  200  verfls  from  land,  great 
numbers  of  them  feeding  upon  a  dead  whale,   which  ferved  them 
alfo  to  appearance  for  lodging;  and  in  his  paflage  through  the 
Ptnfchinjka  fea,  he  faw  many  of  the  glupifha,  fome  of  which 

I  soil)  fi  .5 1  T:sjiO  );: 
•  Mergulas  marinus  alter  totus  niger  criftatus,  roHro  rubfO.  ,  St-eil. 

-h 

were 


KAMTSCHATKA         i^y 

were  black,  and  others  white  ;  but  none  of  them  came  fo  near  the 
veflel  as  to  be  exadtly  obferved.  J   •- 

The  *  kaiover,  or  kaior,  a  bird  of  this  fpecies,  is  black,' 
with  its  bill  and  feet  red  ;  builds  its  neft,  which  is  very  curious, 
upon  high  rocks  in  the  fea,  and  whiftles  very  loud,  for  which 
reafon  the  CofTacks  call  it  ivofhik,  or  poft-boy.  I  never  faw  this 
bird. 

The  fowl  -f-  urile,  of  which  there  is  great  plenty  in  Kamtf- 
chatka^  called,    by  writers,  iea  ravens,  is  about  the  bignefs  of  a 
common  goofe,   with  a  long  neck  and  fmall  head ;  the  feathers 
upon  the  whole  body  are  of  a  bluifli  black,  except  upon  its  thighs, 
where  they  are  white  and  in  tufts  j  there  are  alfo  feme  long  white' 
feathers  like  hairs,  here  and  there  upon  its  neck  ;  it  has  a  red 
membrane  or  fkin  round  the  eyes,  a  ftrait   bill,  black  above  and 
reddifh  below ;  and  its  feet  are  black  and  webbed  :  when  it  fwims 
k  holds  up  its  head,  but  flying,  it  ftretches  it  out  like  a  crane  ; 
it  flies  fwift,  but  rifes  heavily ;  and  feeds  upon  fifli,   which  it " 
fwallows  whole  :  in  the  night  time,  thefe  fowls  ftand  in  rows 
upon  the  edges  of  the  cliffs,    from  which  in  their  fleep  they  fre- 
quently fall  into  the  water  ;  where  they  are  caught  by  the  ftone 
foxes,  who  watch  for  them  ;   they  breed  in  the  month  of  July ; 
their  eggs  are  green,   about  the  bignefs   of   a  hen's   egg,    and 
being   boiled  thicken  a  little,  but  are   ill  tafted  ;  however  the 
Kamtfchadaks  climb  the  higheil  rocks  in  fearch  of  them,  at  the 
hazard  of  their  lives.     They  catch  them  with  nets,  and  in  the 
evening  with  noofes  faflened  to  a  long  pole;   and  thefe  crea- f 
tures  are  lo  void  of  apprehenfion,   that,    though  they  fee   the 
next  fowl  to  themfelves  taken  away,  they  will  fit  flill  and  re- 
ceive the   noofe,    'till  they  are  all  taken    off  the   cliff;    their 
flefh   is   hard    and    finevvy  3     but    the    natives    prepare    it    in  ■ 

*  Columba  Groenlandica  Batavorum.     Stell. 

t  Corvus  aquaticus  maximus  criftatus  periophtalmiis  cinnabarlnis,  poflfea  can- 
didis.     Stell 

fuch 


358  'J'he  Natural  History  of 

fuch  a  manner  that,  as  vidluals  are  there,  it  is  not  bad ;  they 
roafl:  it  in  holes  dug  in  the  earth,  without  plucking  off  the  fea- 
thers, or  taking  out  the  entrails,  and  when  roafted,  they  Ikin 
and  eat  it. 

The  natives  fay  that  thefe  birds  have  no  tongue ;  but  this  is  not 
true,  for  they  cry  in  the  mornings  and  evenings  :  Mr.  Stelkr 
compares  their  noife  to  the  found  of  a  trumpet. 

Class  II.     Of  thofe  Birds  ivhich  haimt  for  the  mojl  part  about 

the  freJJj  Water. 

The  firft  of  this  clafs  is  the  fwan,  which  is  fo  common  in 
Katntfchatka,  both  in  fummer  and  winter,  that  the  pooreft  perfon 
can  have  no  entertainment  without  a  fwan.  When  they  are 
moulting  they  hunt  them  with  dogs,  and  kill  them  with 
clubs  :  in  the  winter  they  catch  them  in  thofe  rivers  that  do 
not  freeze. 

Here  are  feven  kinds  of  geefe,  which  are  diftinguiflied  thus : 
large  grey  geefe,  gumenniki,  fhort  necks,  grey  and  fpeckled, 
white  necks,  fmall  white  geefe,  and  foreign.  They  all  come  here 
in  the  month  of  May,  and  depart  in  the  month  of  OBoher,  as 
Mr.  Steller  fays ;  who  likewife  writes,  that  they  come  from 
America,  and  that  he  himfelf  faw  them  pafs  Bering's  ifland  in 
great  flocks,  flying  eaft  in  the  harveft  and  weft  in  the  fpring. 
In  Katntfchatka  are  principally  found  the  large  grey  geefe,  the 
gumenniki,  and  the  grey  and  fpeckled  ;  the  fmall  white  goofe  is 
hardly  ever  found  here.  Again,  in  the  North  Sea,  about  Kolimi 
and  other  rivers,  are  vafl:  numbers  of  them  ;  and  the  befl  down 
is  brought  to  fakiitfki  from  thefe  places.  They  catch  them  at 
the  time  they  cafl:  their  feathers,  in  the  following  manner  :— 
They  build  huts  with  two  doors,  near  thofe  places  where  they 
mofl  commonly  fit  at  night.  The  fowler  putting  a  white  fliirt  on, 
above  his  cloaths,  fleals  as  near  the  flock  as  he  can  ;  and  fliewing 

him  felf 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A.  159 

himfelf  he  creeps  away  upon  his  hands  and  feet  towards  the 
hut :  then  going  through  it,  and  obferving  that  the  gecfe  have 
followed  him,  he  fliuts  the  door  behind  him,  and  running  round 
he  comes  in  at  the  other  door,  which  fliutting  hkewife,  he  en- 
clofes  all  the  geefe. 

Mr.  Stcllcr  obferved  in  the  month  of  July  upon  Berings 
ifland  an  eighth  kind  of  geefe,  about  the  bignefs  of  the  white 
fpeckled  Its  back,  neck,  and  belly  were  white ;  its  wings 
black  5  its  cheeks  white,  yet  fomewhat  greenifh ;  its  eyes  black, 
with  a  yellow  ring ;  the  bill  has  a  black  ftripe  round  it,  and  is 
red,  with  a  knob  like  the  Chinefe  or  Mufcovy  geefe  :  this  knob  is 
bare  and  yellowifh,  except  that  along  it  there  is  a  fmall  ftripe  of 
bluifli  black  feathers.  The  natives  report  that  this  fort  of  geefe 
is  likewife  found  upon  the  firft  Kuriljkoy  ifland ;  however  they 
were  never  obferved  upon  the  continent. 

The  people  of  Kamtfcbatka  have  different  methods  of  catching 
geefe  when  they  caft  their  feathers  ;  lometimes  they  purfue  them- 
in  boats  -,  fometlmes  they  hunt  them  with  dogs ;  but  moft  of 
them  are  caught  in  pits,  which  they  dig  near  thofe  lakes  where 
the  gecfe  haunt,  and  cover  up  carefully  with  grafs  :  thcfc  the 
geefe  coming  upon  the  fliore  fall  into,  and  are  caught. 

There  are  eleven  different  fpecies  of  ducks  in  Kamtfcbatka ; 
namely,  the  felefni,  fliarp  tails,  tcherneti,  plutonofi,  fvafi,  kiohali, 
lutki,  gogoli,  tchirki,  turpani,  and  flone  ducks  :  of  which  the 
felefni,  tchirki,  krohali^  and  gogoli,  winter  among  the  Ipiings; 
all  the  refl  come  in  the  fpring,  and  fly  av.  ay  in  harvefl,  as  the 
geefe  do. 

The  fharp  tails  are  of  that  kind  which  writers  call  the  anas 
caudacuta.  Jive  havelda  ijlandica.  They  haunt  in  the  brys  of 
the  fea,  or  about  the  mouths  of  great  rivers:  ihey  fwini  in 
flocks,  and  with  their  cry,  which  is  extr. ordinary,  make  no 
difagreeable  mufick.  Mr.  Stclkr  writes,  that  the  larynx,  or 
lower   part   of  their  throat,  has  three  openings,  covered   with 

tliini 
2: 


i6o  I'be    Natural    History    of 

thin  membranes.     The  natives  call  this  fowl  aangitch,  from  their 
manner  of  crying. 

The  turpan  is  called  by  writers  the  black  duck*.  They  arc 
not  fo  numerous  about  Katntfchatka  as  at  Ochotjka,  where  they 
are  caught  in  great  plenty  about  the  equinox.  Fifty  or  more  of 
the  natives  here  going  out  in  boats  furround  a  whole  flock, 
which  in  time  of  the  flood  they  drive  into  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Ochotjka ;  and  fo  foon  as  it  begins  to  ebb,  and  the  water  in  the 
bay  turns  low,  all  the  inhabitants  fall  upon  them,  and  kill  them 
with  clubs  in  fuch  numbers,  that  every  one  gets  20  or  30  for  his 

ihare. 

The  ftone  ducks  -f-  have  not  hitherto  been  obferved  in  any 
other  place  ;  they  breed  in  the  fummer  time  in  the  rivers.  The 
drakes  are  particularly  beautiful,  their  head  being  like  black 
velvet,  and  having  two  white  fpots  upon  their  nofe,  which 
extend  beyond  the  eyes,  and  end  in  a  clay-coloured  ftripe  behind 
their  head  :  there  is  a  fmall  white  fpot  near  each  ear  ;  their  bills 
are  broad  and  flat,  like  thofe  of  other  ducks  j  they  are  of  a  bluifli 
colour,  and  their  necks  of  a  bluifli  black  ;  upon  their  breafts  are 
black  feathers  with  a  white  border  below  ;  the  feathers  are  fmaller 
and  broader  above  j  the  fore  part  of  the  back  and  belly  are  bluifh, 
but  more  blackifli  towards  the  tail ;  acrofs  both  wings  are  broad 
white  ftrjpes  with  black  borders  ;  their  fides,  under  the  wings, 
are  of  a  clay  colour ;  the  large  feathers  of  the  wings,  except  fix, 
bluifh  ;  thefe  are  black  and  roughifli  like  velvet ;  the  two  laft  are 
white  with  black  borders,  and  the  fecond  row  of  the  large  wing 
feathers  are  all  black,  the  third  grey,  two  only  of  thefe  feathers 
having  white  fpots  upon  their  ends :  their  tails  are  fliarp,  and 
their  feet  pale  coloured :  they  weigh  about  two  pounds.  The 
female  is  far  from  being  fo  beautiful :  her  feathers  are  black,  each 


*  Anas  niger.     Willouohby. 

t  Anas  pifta  capite  pulchre  fafcicato.     Stellek. 


being 


K    A    M    T    S     C    II    A    T    K    A.  i6i 

being  fomewhat  ycUowilh  at  the. end,  with  a  fmall  white  ftripe  ; 
the  head  is  black,  and  upon  its  temples  are  fmall  white  fpots :  it 
weighs  about  a  pound  and  a  half.  .  ;■   , , 

In  the  harveft  the  females  are  found  in  the  rivers,  but  none  of 

^  the  drakes  :  they  are  very  ftupid  and  eafily  caught  where  the  wa- 
ters are  clear  and  fliallow,  for  they  do  not  fly  away  at  the  fight  of 

'.'a  man,  but  only  dive,  and  therefore  may  be  eafily  killed  with 
poles,  as  I  myfelf  have  frequently  done.  Mr.  Steller  faw  feveral 
of  this  kind  of  ducks  in  the  American  iflands. 

They  catch  the  ducks  with  nets  in  the  following  manner  : 
in  a  wood  that  happens  to  ftand  between  two  lakes,  or  between 
a  lake  and  a  river,  they  cut  a  ftrait  pafi"age,  through  which  the 
ducks  fly  during  the  fummer ;  here  in  the  harveft,  when  the 
fifliery  is  over,  the  natives  faften  to  long  poles  feveral  nets,  which 
in  the  evenings  tliey  raife  as  high  as  the  ducks  are  ufed  to  mount : 
round  the  nets  a  firing  is  drawn,  by   which  they  can  reef  them 

"together,  as  foon  as  they  find  the  ducks  entangled;  but  they 
fometimes  fly  with  fuch  force  and  in  fuch  numbers,  that  they 
break  through.  They  likewife  catch  them  in  fmall  rivers  with 
nets  fi:retched  acrofs  the  ftream  :  but  this  is  a  method  not  peculiar 
to  Kcimtjchatka. 

To  this  clafs  belongs  likewife  the  gagari,  or  columbus,  of 
which  there  are  four  fpecies  *,   three  of  which  are  large,    and 

'^the  other  fmall  :    the  firft  of  the  largeft  has  a  tail  ;   the  fecond 

•  a  clay'coloured  fpot  upon  its  neck,  a  little  above  the  crop  :  the 
third  is  called  by  JVonniuSy  the  northern  lumme  ;  and  Mar/ilius 

•  calls  the  fourth  the  little  lumme.  The  natives  pretend  to  fore- 
tel  the  change  of  weather  by  their  crying  and  flying ;  for  they 
think  that  the  wind  mufi:  always  blow  from  that  point  towards 
which  they  fly :  however  they  are  frequently  deceived  in  their 
judgment, 

I.  Colymbus  maximus.  Gesn.  Stell.  z.  Coiymbus  ariSlicus  lumme  diflus. 
Worm,  j.  Colymbus  macula  Tub  mente  caftanea,  Stell.  4.  Colymbus  five 
pedicipes  cinere'us.     Ejn/dcm. 

Y  Here 


i6z  The   Natural  Historv  of 

Here  are  alfo  found  great  numbers  of  fmall  birds,  fuch  as 
plovers  and  fnipes  of  different  forts,  which  they  catch  with 
fnares  and  gins. 

ClassIII.     0/ ^i;^  LAN  D  F  owls. 

The  chi^  of  thefe  birds  is  the  eagle,  of  which  there  are  four 
fpecies  in  Ka?ntfchatka :  the  firft  is  the  black  eagle,  with  a  white 
head,  tail,  and  feet.  Thefe  are  rare  upon  the  main  land  of 
Kamtjbhatka  ;  but,  according  to  Mr.  Stellcr,  they  are  found  in 
plenty  on  the  iflands  between  it  and  America.  They  make  their 
nefts  (wh'ich  are  near  fix  feet  in  diameter,  and  about  a  foot  thick) 
of  flirubs  upon  high  cliffs,  and  in  the  beginning  oijiily,  lay  two 
eggs.  The  young  ones  are  as  white  as  fnow  :  thefe  he  faw  up- 
on Bering'^  ifland,  but  not  without  danger  from  the  old  ones^ 
which,  even  when  he  did  not  the  leaft  hurt  to  their  young,  attacked 
him  with  fuch  violence  that  he  could  fcarce  defend  himfelf  from 
tliem  with  his  flick.  The  fecond  is  the  white  eagle,  which  the 
Tungiifi  call  elo :  this  I  faw  near  Nertchinjki ;  however  it  is  not 
white  but  grey.  Mr.  Steller  fays,  that  this  is  bred  upon  the 
river  Harioujkovoi  which  runs  into  the  PenJ'chinJka  fea.  The 
third  is  the  black  and  white  fpotted  eagle.  The  fourth,  the 
dark  clay-coloured  eagle,  the  extremities  of  whofe  wings  and 
tail  are  fpotted :  thefe  two  laft  mentioned  abound  moft  here. 
The  natives  eat  the  eagles,   and  efteem  them  agreeable  food. 

Here  are  likewife  feveral  other  birds  of  prey,  fuch  as  vul- 
tures, hawks  of  various  kinds,  owls,  and  above  all,  ravens,  crows, 
and  magpies,  which  are  the  fame  with  thofe  in  Europe.  Be- 
fides,  here  are  great  numbers  of  cuckoos,  water  fparrows, 
grov/fe,  partridges,  thruflies,  larks,  fwallows,  and  feveral  other 
fmall  birds,  whofe  appearance  in  the  fpring  the  natives  expedl  with 
great  impatience,  and  thence  begin  their  new  year. 

Ln  the  conclufion  of  this  chapter  we  have  added  a  lift  of  fome 
plants,  beads,  fifhes,  and  birds,  with  their  names  in  the  Eng- 
liJJ},   RuJJian,   Kamtfchatka,  Koratjki,  and  Kuriljki  languages. 


KAMTSCHATKA. 


163 


A  LIST  of  fome  Plants,  Beasts,  Fiskes,  and  Birds  ;  with  their  Names  in 
/Zi^Engiifli,  Ruffian,  Kamtfchatka,  Koratflci,  on^f  Kurilfki  Languages. 


PLANT 

s. 

Englifi 

Ruffian 

Kamtfchatka 

Koratjl-i 

KiirlJfkr 

The  birch  tree 

Berefiiick 

Hehy 

Lugune 

Poplar 

Topfluckr 

Thifpiai 

Yakul 

Willow 

Vetelnicke 

Liumtche 

Tekile 

Alder 

Olchofnike 

Sikite 

Niklliou 

Affc 

Service  tree 

Rebenike 

Kaihine 

Eloene 

Koxunoni 

Juniper 

Moflievelnike 

Kahaine 

Valvakitche 

Pakajpnirumamai 

Cherry  laurel 

Tchelemafnike 

Kalhame 

Eloene 

Dog  brier 

Shipovnike 

Kavalhe 

Pitctakachatche 

Kopokone 

HoneyfucklCj 

ShimHode 

Ludiinike 

Nitchivoy 

Enumetam 

Barberries 

Boiarlflinike 

Horatenune 

Pitkitche 

Bramblcberries 

Morafhka 

Shiie 

Etiette 

Apuumcnipe 

Wortleberries 

Golubitfa 

Ningule 

Lingule 

Enumucuta 

Cranberries 

Kliukva 

Tchikume 

Emelkevina 

Afitte 

Bulberries 

Briufnitou 

Tchahauhe 

Tiunaane 

Nipopkipe 

B 

EAST 

s. 

Sea  calves 

Tiulenne 

Rolha 

Memele 

Retaflore 

Sea  beaver 

Babri 

kaiku 

Kalaga 

Rahku 

Sea  cat 

Kotti 

Tatlatche 

Tatatche 

Ounepe 

A  fox 

Lifotfa 

Tchafliiai 

Yaivne 

Kimutpe 

Sables 

Cobali 

Kemhime 

Kjtighime 

Na 

Ermines 

Goraoflai 

Doitchitche 

Imahuhake 

Tanneruroe 

A  wolf 

Volka 

Kitaia 

Eglinguue 

Orgia 

Bear 

Medved 

Kadia 

Kainga                    "^ 

Glutton 

Rafiamak 

Timmi 

Haeppi 

Thefe  beads  are  not 

Mavmotta 

Evraihka 

Ciredatche 

Gilnak                    > 

known     in    the 

Elk 

Oleni 

Eluahappe 

Lugaki 

Kurlllki  iHands 

Stone  ram 

Kammenoi  barenu 

Guadinadatche 

Kitipe 

F 

I       S       H       E 

S. 

A  Urge   kind   of? 
(almon               ^ 

Tchavitche 

Tchovnitche 

Evotche 

Tchivjra 

Red  fidi 

Krafhnoiriha 

KchivilTic 

Niovoai 

Siitchine 

The  humpback 

Gorbuflie 

Koanautchi 

Kalal 

Siakipa 

Turbot 

Kambala 

Sigifigh 

Alpa 

Tantaka 

Lampreys 

Minoghi 

KanaganiKe           ^ 

Smelts 

Korouchi 

Inn^hu                   > 

Unknown 

Unknown 

Herring 

Seldi 

Neriner                  J 

Skate 

Skata 

Kopafhu 

Kammiahacke 

Kapaffiu 

Cod  fifli 

Frefka 

Battui 

Unknown 

Unknown 

Whales 

Kili 

Dai 

Junghi 

Rika 

B 

I       R       D 

s. 

Great  fea  cormo-  7 
rant                    \ 

Bolofhoi  tchaika 

Atuma 

Attume 

Pongapiphe 

Swan 

Lebed 

Matame 

Kamtchan 

Geefe 

Gouffed 

Kfude 

Gecloaine 

Kuntape 

A  drake 

Celefna 

Baine 

Gc£lchogatche 

Bakariku 

Stone  ducks 

Kammenia  ulkl 

Nikingike 

Unknown 

Vaiout 

Widgeons 

Gargari,  Afhoai 

Yovaiva 

CelVe 

Eagles    , 

Otii 

Seiche 

Tilmiti 

Surgoar 

Hawkes 

Saholi 

Shiftii 

Tiimitil 

Partridges 

Kuropatki 

Euihtchltche 

Euette 

Niepue 

Crows 

Voronni ' 

Kaka 

5  Tchautchavao-  7 
I      la  yelle           £ 

Pafkure 

Magpies 

Saroki 

Nahitchectche 

Unkitigin 

Kakuk 

Ravens 

VoronitcheruL 

Hagulhak 

Nimetta  yelle 

Swallows 

Ladotchki 

Kaiukutche 

Kavalingek 

Kuahan 

Larks 

Javoronki 

Tchelaalai 

Geatcheiere 

Riliintcliire 

Cuckows 

Kokaflike 

Koakoutchitche 

Kaikuke 

Kahkok 

Snipes 

Kuliki 

Soakulutche 

Tcheiaa 

Etclukumama 

Y2 


Of 


164  The  Natural  History  of 


C  H  A  P.     XI. 

Of     INSECTS. 


S  Kamtfchatka  abounds  with  lakes  and  marfhes,  the  fwarms 
of  infedls  in  the  fummer  time  would  make  life  intolerable 
there,  if  it  were  not  for  the  frequent  winds  and  rains.  The 
maggots  are  fo  numerous  as  to  occafion  great  deftrudlion  to  their 
provifions,  particularly  in  the  time  of  preparing  their  fifli,  which 
are  fometimes  entirely  deftroyed  by  them.  In  the  months  of 
June,  July,  and  Augujl,  when  the  weather  happens  to  be  fine, 
the  muiTcetoes  and  fmall  gnats  are  very  troublefoine  ;  however 
the  inhabitants  do  not  fuffer  much  from  them,  as  they  are  at 
that  time,  upon  account  of  the  filliery,  out  at  fea,  where  by  reafon 
of  the  cold  and  wind  few  of  thefe  infedts  are  to  be  met  with. 

It  is  but  lately  that  bugs  appeared  upon  the  river  A-watfcha, 
which  were  brought  thither  in  chefts  and  cloaths :  they  are 
not  yet  known  in  Kamtfchatka.  Upon  account  of  the  wet 
weather  and  ftorms  few  of  the  butterfly  kind  are  found  here, 
exxept  in  fome  woods  near  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  where 
they  abound.  It  has  been  obferved  that  numbers  of  thefe  infedls 
have  fettled  upon  veffels  which  were  30  verfts  from  the  fhore  : 
it  appears,  fome  what  extraordinary  that  they  fliould  be  able  to  fly 
to  fuch  a  diftance  without  refting ;  moft  likely  the  ftorms  fo 
frequent  here  might  drive  them  out  to  fea,  and  by  their  violence 
fupport   tliem. 

There  are  few  fpiders  in  Kamtfchatka ;  fo  that  the  women 
who  are  fond  of  having  children,  and  who  have  a  notion  that 
thefe  infed:s  fwallowed  render  them  fruitful  and  their  labour 
eafy,  have  great  trouble  to  find  them.     Nothing  plagues   the 

natives 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.         165 

natives  in  their  huts  fo  much  as  the  lice  and  fleas ;  the 
women  faffer  moft  from  the  former,  by  wearing  very  long, 
and  fometimes  falfe  hair.  Mr.  S teller  was  told,  that  near  the 
fea  is  found  an  infed:  that  refembles  a  loufe,  which  working 
itfelr' through  the  Ikin  into  the  flcfli  is  never  to  be  cured,  unlefs 
by  cutting  the  creature  intirely  out ;  and  that  the  fifliers  are  very 
much  afraid  of  them. 

It  is  remarkable  that  in  Kamtfchatka  there  are  neither  frogs, 
toads,  nor  ferpents.  Lizards,  indeed,  are  numerous  enough,  which 
the  natives  look  upon  as  fpies  fent  from  the  infernal  powers  for 
information,  and  to  foretel  their  death  :  therefore  they  are  very 
careful  whenever  they  find  them  to  cut  them  into  fmall  pieces, 
that  they  may  never  carry  back  news  to  the  power  which  fent 
them  ;  and  if  it  happens  that  the  animal  efcapes  alive,  it  throws 
them  into  the  greateft  grief  and  defpair,  as  they  exped  every 
hour  to  die,  which  indeed  fometimes  happens  from  their  own  fear 
and  defpondency,  and  then  ferves  to  confirm  the  fuperflition  to 
others. 


CHAP.     XII. 
Of  the  TIDES  in  the  Penfchinfka  ^ea  and  Eajlern  Ocean. 


IT  might  perhaps  appear  fufficient  to  fay,  that  the  tides  are 
agreeable  in  thefe  feas  to  what  are  obferved  in   others ;  but 
as   I   made  fome  obfervations  which   appeared  to   me   new, 
I  think  it  proper  to  communicate  them. 

It  is  a  hiown  rule  in  general,  that  the  ebb  and  flood  h  ippcn 
twice  in  the  natural  day,  and  that  the  tides  are  higheft  about  the 
new  and  full  moon  :  however,  I  do  not  recolleit  that  it  has  been 
obferved  that  the  ebbs  and  floods  are  not  equal  here,  or  that  they 

do 
4 


i66  "The    Natura,l    History    of 

do  not  happen  aL  fixed  times,  but  according  to  the  age  of  the 
moon,  as  I  obferved  in  the  PenJ'chinJka  fea;  and  if  this  general 
opinion  be  true,  that  the  ebbs  and  floods  in  other  feas  are  equal, 
and  at  fixed  hours,  then  the  Kamtjchatkoi  fea  refembles  only  the 
White  Sea,  where  I  am  told  that  there  is  one  iiigh  fpring  and  one 
low  flood  in  the  fanie  day.  The  laft  the  natives  call  maniha ; 
therefore  I  thought  it  proper  carefully  to  relate  the  difl-'erence  of 
the  tides  here,  both  with  regard  to  the  high  water  and  the  maniha  : 
for  the  better  underflanding  of  which  in  the  original  is  fubjoined 
a  long  journal,  which  was  kept  for  three  months,  and  hkewife 
the  journal  of  Captain  Elagine,  which  was  taken  at  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Ochotjka,  the  Kitriljki  iflands,  and  the  haven  of  Petro- 
paulaujkay ;  which  we  omit,  as  it  would  only  be  a  ufelefs  burthen 
to  the  EngUfi  reader. 

Now,  in  order  to  be  the  more  intelligible,  I  mufl:  obferve,  that 
the  fea  water  which  flows  into  the  bays  does  not  always  run  in- 
tirely  back,  but  only  according  to  the  age  of  the  moon  ;  fo  that 
fometimes  in  the  time  of  ebb  nothing  remains  but  the  water  of 
the  river  which  is  within  its  own  banks,  at  other  times  thefe  banks 
are  all  overflowed  with  water.  All  the  fea  water  runs  out  about 
the  full  and  new  moon,  when  the  flood  follows  immediately  upon 
the  ebb,  and  it  rifes  near  eight  feet.  The  flood  continues  about 
eight  hours,  and  then  it  begins  to  ebb,  which  continues  fix  hours ; 
after  which  it  flows  again  for  three  hours,  the  water  not  rifing 
quite  a  foot  ;  at  lafl:  the  ebb  begins,  which  continues  feven  hours, 
and  all  the  fea  water  runs  out  In  this  manner  are  the  floods  and 
ebbs  regulated  for  three  days  after  the  full  and  new  moon  ;  at  the 
end  of  which  the  time  of  the  flowing  and  ebbing,  and  height  of 
the  flood  and  ebb,  is  lefs,  the  maniha  greater,  the  fea  water  which 
was  before  faid  to  run  all  out  now  remains  in  fome  part,  and 
as  the  moon  approaches  the  quadratures,  the  large  tides  grow 
lefs  and  the  maniha  greater ;  fo  that  after  the  ebb  of  the  maniha 
the  greater  quantity  of  water  remains  fl:ill  in  the  bays,  and  at  laft, 

at 


KAMTSCHATKA.        167 

at  the  quarter  moons,  what  were  the  high  tides  change  into  the 
maniha,  and  the  maniha  into  them.  I  reckon  the  change  of  the 
high  tide  into  the  maniha,  and  of  the  maniha  into  the  high  tide, 
from  the  time  when  one  tide  begins  at  midday  and  the  other  at 
midnight ;  or  when  it  begins  to  flow  or  ebb  at  fix  hours  in  the 
morning  and  fix  in  the  afternoon. 

I  fliall  hkewife  communicate  the  methods  that  I  followed 
in  my  obfervations :  In  the  mouth  of  a  river  I  placed  a  fiake, 
divided  into  feet  and  inches  of  the  Paris  meafiire ;  the  loweft 
mark  was  at  the  height  of  the  river  water  in  the  time  of  the  ebb 
at  the  new  and  full  moon.  This  flake  I  fixed  without  great 
trouble,  but  am  obliged  to  own  that  I  was  not  able  to  afcertain 
exadlly  the  height  of  the  water  in  the  flo(5d,  becaufe  it  always 
comes  in  furges,  which  renders  the  ftake  wet  fomewhat  higher 
than  the  true  depth  ;  nor  can  I  certainly  determine  whethej  the 
water  continues  at  the  fame  height,  or  not,  for  any  certain 
time. 


--*>.   >'*•-    -^*^.    .'*^, 


THE 


**'6^'^ 


OF       THE 


NATIVES  of  Kamtfchatka, 

AND      THEIR 

CUSTOMS    and    MANNERS. 

PART       III. 

CHAP.      I. 

Of   the   N  A  T  I V  E  S  0/  Kamtfchatka  in  general 

\fi*^^>g  H  E  natives  of  Kamtfchatka  are  as  wild  as  the  coun- 
<  'p  }>  try  itfelf.  Some  of  them  have  no  fixed  habitations, 
3eC  5§C  ^"'  wander  from  place  to  place  with  their  herds  of 
'*''^  rein-deer  J  others  have  fettled  habitations,  and  refide 
upon  the  banks  of  the  rivers  and  the  fhore  of  the  Penfchinjka  fea, 
living  upon  fifli  and  fea  animals,  and  fuch  herbs  as  grow  upon  the 
fhore  :  the  former  dwell  in  huts  covered  with  deer-fkins,  the 
latter  in  places  dug  out  of  the  earth  ;  both  in  a  very  barbarous 
manner  :  their  difpofitions  and  tempers  are  rough  ;  and  they  are 
intirely  ignorant  of  letters  or  religion, 

Z  The 

3 


ijo  Of    tbel^ATlVESof. 

The  natives  are  divided  into  three  different  people,  namely,  th^ 
Kamtfchadales,  Koreki,  and  Kuriics.  The  Kamtfchadales  live 
upon  the  fouth  fide  of  the  promontory  of  Kamtfchatka,  from  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Ukoi  to  the  Kuriljkaya  Lopatka,  and  upon  the 
firft  Kiiriljkoy  illand  Schumtfchu  :  the  Koreki  inhabit  the  northern 
parts  on  the  coaft  of  the  Fenfchhijka  fea  as  far  as  the  river 
Niiktchan,  and  round  tlie  Eaftern  Ocean  almofl  to  Anadir  :  the 
Kuriles  inhabit  the  fecond  Kuriljkoy  ifland,  and  the  other  iflands 
in  that  fea,  reaching  as  far  as  thofe  of  Japan. 

The  Kamtfchadales  may  be  divided  into  the  northern  and 
fouthern  j  the  northern  people,  who  live  along  the  river  Kamtf- 
chatka on  the  coafi:  of  the  Eaftern  Ocean  as  far  as  the  mouth  of 
the  river  JJkoi^  and  fouthward  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  Nala- 
cheva,  may  be  efleemed  the  principal  nation  ;  their  manners  being 
more  civilifed,  and  their  language  appearing  every  where  to  be 
the  fame ;  whereas  the  others  fpeak  differently  on  every  ifland. 

The  fouthern  nation  live  along  the  coaft  of  the  Eaflern  Ocean, 
from  the  Nalacheva  to  the  Kurilfkaya  Lopatka,  and  thence  along 
the  FenfcKmfka  fea  northwards  to  the  river  Harioiifkovoy. 

The  Koreki  are  commonly  divided  into  two  nations ;  one  is 
called  the  rein-deer  Koreki,  and  the  other  the  fixed  Koreki. 
The  former  wander  with  their  herds  from  place  to  place  j  the 
latter  live  near  the  rivers,  like  the  Kamtfchadales.  Their  languages 
are  fo  different  that  they  do  not  underftand  each  other,  particu- 
larly thofe  that  border  upon  the  Kamtfchadales,  from  whom  they, 
have  borrowed  much  of  their  language. 

Some  likewife  divide  the  Kuriles  into  two  different  nations  or 
tribes,  calling  one  the  diftant  and  the  other  the  nearer  Kuriles. 
By  the  diflant  they  underfland  the  inhabitants  of  the  fecond 
Kiirilfkoy  ifland  and  the  others  that  lie  near  Japan ;  by  the  nearer 
Kuriles,  the  inhabitants  of  Lopatka  and  of  the  firfl  ifland.  But 
this  divifion  is  not  proper ;  for  though  the  inhabitants  of  the  firfl 
idand  and  the  Lopatka  differ  fomewhat  from  the  Kamtfchadales 

both 


K.    A   TVI  T    S    C    U    A   T   K    A,    &c.        171 

both  in  their  language  and  ciiftom?,  yet  we  have  reafon  to  believe 
they  are  the  fame  people  ;  the  difference  only  arifing  from  their 
neighbourhood,  and  intermarriages  with  the  true  Kuriles. 

The  Kamtfchadalcs  have  this  particular  cuftom,  that  they  en- 
deavour to  give  every  thing  a  name  in  their  language  which  may 
exprefs  the  property  of  it ;  but  if  they  don't  underftand  the  thing 
quite  well  themfelves,  then  they  take  a  name  from  fomc  foreign 
language,  which  perhaps  has  no  relation  to  the  thing  itfelf: 
as,  for  example,  they  call  a  prieft  Bogbbg^  becaufe  probably  they 
hear  him  ufe  the  word  Bogbog,  God  ;  bread  they  call  Brightatin 
Aiigfi^  that  is,  Rujjian  root ;  and  thus  of  feveral  other  words  to 
which  their  language  is  a  flranger. 

The  names  which  the  Ri/JJia?is  give  thefe  different  nations  they 
did  not  take  from  the  natives,  but  rather  from  their  neighbours: 
for  example,  the  name  of  the  Kiuntfchadales  was  taken  from  the 
Koreki,  who  call  them  Kontchal.  The  derivation  of  the  name 
Koreld  is  uncertain  j  however  Stelkr  thinks  that  it  probably  came 
from  the  word  Kora^  which  in  their  language  fignifies  a  rein-deer ; 
and  that  the  Riijjian  Coffacks  frequently  hearing  the  word  Kara, 
or  obfcrving  that  their  whole  riches  confilled  in  rein-deer,  gave 
them  the  name  of  Koreki. 

The  inhabitants  of  Kamffchatka  have  three  languages,  that 
of  the  Kamtfchadales,  the  Koreki^  and  Kuriles ;  each  of  which  is 
divided  into  different  dialed'S.  The  Katntfcbatka  language  has 
three  principal  dialedls :  the  firfl  is  ufed  by  the  northern,  the 
fecond  by  the  fouthern,  which  differ  fo  much  that  one  may  look 
upon  them  as  different  languages  j  however  they  can  underftand 
one  another  without  any  interpreter  :  the  third  dialed;  is  that 
which  is  fpoken  by  thofe  who  live  upon  the  Fenfchinjka  Tea, 
between  the  x'wtxiVoro'-cJkn^ii  and  T'eghily  which  is  compofed  of 
both  the  above-mentioned  dialects  and  fome  words  taken  from 
the  Koreki. 

Z  2  The 


J72  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

The  language  of  the  Koreki  confifts  of  two  dialedts;  one  of 
which  is  fpoken  by  the  rein-deer  Koreki^  and  the  other  by  the 
fixed.  We  are  not,  indeed,  certain  what  other  dialefts  may  be 
amongft  them,  being  well  acquainted  only  with  thofe  who  are 
fubje(S  to  the  Ruffians ;  but  it  is  probable  that  thofe  who  are 
fcattered  among  the  Iflands  may  have  fome  difference  in  their  way 
of  fpeaking.  The  Kamtfchatka  language  is  fpoken  half  in  the 
throat  and  half  in  the  mouth  :  the  pronunciation  is  flow  and 
difficult,  and  feems  to  indicate  a  timorous,  flavirti,  and  deceitful 
people  ;  as  in  faft  they  are. 

-5  The  Koreki  fpeak  aloud,  and  in  a  fcreaming  tone  ;  their 
words  are  long,  but  their  fentences  fliort,  and  their  words  gene- 
rally begin  with  two  vowels,  and  end  with  one  or  two  more.: 
as  for  example,  uemkai,  a  rein-deer  which  has  not  been  driven. 

The  Kuriles  fpeak  flow,  difl:in6lly,  and  agreeably  :  their  words 
are  middling,  the  vowels  and  confonants  being  juftly  mixed  :  and 
of  all  thefe  wild  people  the  Kuriles  are  the  beft,  being  honeft,  coiv- 
ftant,  civil,  and  bofpitable. 


C  H  A  P.     II. 

Some  ConjeSiiires  concerning  the  Names  of  the  Kamtfchadales,  and^ 
the  other  Inhabitants  o/"  Kamtfchatka. 


SOME  aflert,   that  the  Kamtfchadales  were  fo  named  by 
the  Ruffians  from  the  river  Kamtfchatka^  but  it  was  called 
fo  before  the  Rufjians  had  difcovered  it,   and  had  its  name 
from  a  chieftain,  called  Konchata. 

We  cannot  find  likewife  why  the  Koreki  call  the  Kamtfcha,- 
dales,  Kontchahj  nor  can  they  give  any  reafons  for  it  them- 
felves.  The 


K    A    M   T    S    C  H    A  T   K    A,     &c.        173 

The  Kamtfchadaks,  befides  the  general  name  Itelmen,  diftin- 
guifh  themfelves  by  adding  the  name  of  the  river,  or  remarkable 
place  where  they  live,  as  Kikjha-ai,  an  inhabitant  upon  the  Great 
River }  Suatchn-aiy  an  inhabitant  upon  the  river  ylwatjcha; 
for  the  word  ai  being  added  to  any  river  or  remarkable  fituation, 
denotes  inhabitant  of  that  place,  as  the  word  Itelmen  is  the  ge- 
neral name  for  inhabitant.  Thofe  who  think  Koncbata  to  have 
been  a  great  captain,  feem  to  have  applied  to  him  only  all  the 
brave  adlions  which  ought  to  be  attributed  to  the  feveral  inha- 
bitants upon  the  river  Elouki,  who  are  called  Koatche-ai,  or,  in 
the  common  way  of  fpeaking,  Kontchat:  befides,  this  being  a  re- 
ceived opinion,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  river  Elouki  are  the 
braveft  of  all  the  Kamtfchadales,  the  Koreki,  who  are  their 
neighbours,  might  eafily  call  the  whole  nation  Kamtfchadales 
from  their  name  Koatche-ai  ;  and  it  is  nothing  extraordinary  to 
find  the  word  Koatche-ai  changed  into  Kontchala,  and  Kont- 
chala  into  Kamtfchadale,  as  we  find  feveral  fimilar  examples,  not 
only  among  thefe  barbarous  people,  but  the  politefl  nations  of 
Europe, 

With  regard  to  the  place  where  the  Kamtfchadales  came 
from,  or  at  what  time  they  firft  fettled  here,  we  can  have  no 
certain  account ;  for  all  that  can  be  obtained  from  thefe  people 
is  only  fabulous  tradition  ;  and  they  pretend  that  they  were 
created  upon  this  very  fpot,  and  fay,  their  firft  anceftor  was 
Kuthu,  who  formerly  lived  in  the  heavens :  however  by  their 
manners,  cuftoms,  language,  drefs,  and  other  circumftances,  it 
would  appear  that  the  Kamtfchadales  came  over  from  Miin' 
galia.  Of  the  antiquity  of  thefe  people  Steller  gives  the  fol- 
lowing proofs :  ^fi,  that  they  have  loft  every  tradition  of  their 
origin.  2d.  That  before  the  arrival  the  Rujians,  they  knew 
little  of  any  other  people,  except  the  Koreki  and  Tchukotfkoi  ; 
and  it  is  but  lately  that  they  came  to  any  knowledge  of  the  Ktc- 
riks  and  "Japanefe^  and  this  was  owing  to  the  arrival  of  the  latter 

among^ 


174        Of     tie      NATIVES      of 

among  them  to  trade,  from  a  fapanefe  boat  having  been  caft 
away  upon  their  coaft.  3^,  That  thefe  people  are  extremely 
numerous  notwithllanding  fo  many  are  deftroyed  every  year  by 
wild  hearts,  Gff .  4/^.  From  their  great  knowledge  of  the  vir- 
tues and  ufes  of  the  natural  produce  of  the  country,  which  can- 
not be  attained  in  a  fliort  time,  not  to  mention  that  they  have 
no  more  than  four  months  in  the  year  left  for  this  enquiry,  and 
great  part  of  thofe  too  they  muft  employ  in  fifhing  and  making 
provifions  for  winter,  c^th.  All  their  inftruments  and  houfhold 
furniture  are  different  from  thofe  of  other  nations,  and  their  ne- 
ceflities  feem  to  have  diredled  the  invention  of  moft  of  them. 
6//'.  That  their  uncultivated  ftate  of  nature  and  pafiions  feem 
to  differ  very  little  from  that  of  the  brute  beafts,  pleafures  be- 
ing their  only  purfuit,  having  no  idea  of  futurity. 

The  following  reafons  incline  us  to  think  that  they  take 
tlieir  origin  from  the  Miingals,  not  from  the  lartars  who  live 
upon  the  river  Amur^  nor  from  the  Ktiriles  or  fapanefe  ;  for  if 
they  had  fprung  from  the  Tartars  it  is  probable  they  would 
have  fettled  about  the  river  Lena,  where  the  fakutjki  and  Tun- 
giiji  live  at  prefent,  thefe  places  being  formerly  uninhabited, 
and  much  more  fruitful  than  Kamtfchatka  ;  nor  can  we  ima- 
gine that  they  were  driven  thence  by  the  Jahitjki ;  the  dif- 
ference of  their  manners,  and  make  of  their  bodies  from  the 
Kuriles  is  fuch  that  we  cannot  believe  they  fi3rung  from  them ; 
and  that  tlieir  origin  fhould  be  fapanefe  appears  improbable,  be- 
caufe  their  fettlement  mufi:  have  been  prior  to  the  feparation  of 
the  fapanefe  from  the  empire  of  China ;  and  that  they  were 
fettled  there  long  before  the  fapanefe  fixed  in  thefe  iflands  in 
the  fea  of  Kamtfchatka  appears  from  their  not  knowing  the  ufe 
of  iron,  or  iron  ore,  though  it  is  above  two  thoufand  years  iince 
the  Mungah  made  their  arms  and  other  inftruments  of  iron,  and 
the  other  Tartars  kv\\v&?,  and  daggers  of  copper.}  therefore  it  is 
probable  that  the  Kamtfchadales  were  driven  hither  by  the  ty- 
ranny 

3 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     Gff.        ly^ 

ranny  of  the  Eaftern  conquerors,  as  the  Lopari,  OJiiaks,  artd 
Samojeds  were  driven  to  the  extremities  of  the  North  by  the  en- 
croachments of  other  European  nations.  If  Kamtjchatha  had 
not  been  inhabited  before  the  Tu7igufi  had  got  a  fettlement,  it  is 
probable  they  would  have  fixed  here,  as  being  fafer  from  the 
dangers  of  any  fudden  attacks  of  their  enemies. 

Thus  it  appears  likely,  that  the  Kajntjcha dales  lived  for- 
merly in  Mungalia  beyond  the  river  Amur,  and  made  one 
people  with  the  Miwgaisy  which  is  farther  confirmed  by  the  fol- 
lowing obfervations,  fuch  as  the  Katntjchadales  having  feveral 
words  common  to  the  Mungal  Chineje  language,  as  their  termi- 
nations in  ong,  ingy  oang,  chin,  cha,  ching,  kfi,  kfu?tg  j  it 
would  be  ftill  a  greater  proof  if  we  could  fliow  feveral  words 
and  fentences  the  fame  in  both  languages  :  but  not  to  in  fid  only 
upon  the  language,  the  Kamtfchadales  and  Miingah  are  both  of 
a  fmall  ftature,  are  fwarthy,  have  black  hair,  a  broad  face,  a 
fharp  nofe,  with  the  eyes  falling  in,  eyebrows  fmall  and  thin,  a 
hanging  belly,  flender  legs  and  arms ;  they  are  both  remarkable 
for  cowardice,  boafting,  and  flaviflinefs  to  people  who  ufe  theni 
hard,  and  for  their  obftinacy  and  contempt  of  thofe  who  treat 
them  with  gentlenefs. 


CHAP.      Ill 
Of  the  ANCIENT  STATE  of  the  Natives  of  Kamtfchatka. 


BEFORE   the  Ruffian    conqueft    they    lived    in    perfe(5l 
freedom,  having  no  chief,  being  fubjedt  to  no  law,  nor 
paying  any  taxes ;  the  old  men,   or  thofe  who  were  re- 
markable for  their  bravery,    bearing  the  principal  authority  in 
their  villages,  though  none  had  any  right  to  command  or  inflidl 

punifliment.. 


276         Of     tk     -N    A    r    I    V    E    S      of 

punifhment.  Although  in  outward  appearance  they  refemble  the 
other  inhabitants  of  Siberia,  yet  the  Kamtfchadales  differ  in  this, 
that  their  faces  are  not  fo  long  as  the  other  Siberians'^  their  cheeks 
fland  more  out,  their  teeth  are  thick,  their  mouth  large,  their 
ftature  middling,  and  their  flioulders  broad,  particularly  thofe 
people  who  inhabit  the  fea  coaft. 

Their  manner  of  living  is  flovenly  to  the  laft  degree  ;  they  never 
wafti  their  hands  nor  face,  nor  cut  their  nails ;  they  eat  out  of  the 
fame  difh  with  the  dogs,  which  they  never  wafli ;  every  thing 
about  them  ftinks  of  fifli ;  they  never  comb  their  heads,  but  both 
men  and  women  plait  their  hair  in  two  locks,  binding  the  ends 
with  fmall  ropes :  when  any  hair  ftarts  out,  they  fow  it  with 
threads  to  make  it  lie  clofe ;  by  this  means  they  have  fuch  a 
quantity  of  lice  that  they  can  fcrape  them  off"  by  handfuls,  and 
they  are  nafty  enough  even  to  eat  them.  Thofe  that  have  not 
natural  hair  fufficient  wear  falfe  locks,  fometimes  as  much  as 
weigh  ten  pounds,  which  makes  their  heads  look  like  a  hay- 
cock. 

They  have  extraordinary  notions  of  God,  of  fins,  and   good 

adions.     Their  chief  happinefs  confifts  in  idlenefs  and  fatisfying 

their  natural  lufls  and  appetites ;  thefe  incline  them  to  finging, 

dancing,  and  relating  of  love  ftories      Their  greateft  unhappinefs 

or  trouble  is  the  want  of  thefe  amufements :  they  fliun  this  by  all 

methods,  even  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  for  they  think  it  more 

eligible    to    die    than    to    lead   a   life    that   is    difagreeable    to 

them }    which   opinion   frequently   leads    them  to  felf-murder. 

This  was  fo  common  after  the   conqueft,    that  the  RuJJians  had 

great  difficulty  to  put  a  ftop  to  it.    They  are  chiefly  employed 

in  providing  what  is  abfolutely  neceffary  for  the  prefent,  and  take 

no  care  for  the  future.     They  have  no  notion  of  riches,  fame,  or 

honour  ;  therefore  covetoufnefs,  ambition,  and  pride,  are  unknown 

among  them.     On  the  other  hand,  they  are  carelefs,  luftful,  and 

cruel :  thefe  vices  occafion  frequent  quarrels  and  wars  among  them 

fometimes 


K  A    M    T    S    C    H    A   T    K    A,     6?^.        177 

fomeumes  with  theli-  neighbours,  not  from  a  dcfire  of  increafing 
their  power,  but  from  feme  other  caufes ;  fuch  as  the  carrying 
off"  their  provifions,  or  rather  their  girls,  wliich  is  frequently 
pradifed  as  the  moft  fummary  method  of  procuring  a  wife. 

Their  trade  is  likewife  not  fo  much" calculated  for  the  acquifition 
of  riches  as  for  procuring  the  necelTaries  and  conveniencies  of  life. 
They  fell  the  Koreki  fkbles,  fox  and  white  dog  fkins,  dried  / 
mufliroons,  or  fuch  trifles ;  and  receive  In  exchange  cloaths  made 
of  deer-fkins  and  other  hides  :  among  themfelves  they  exchange 
what  they  abound  with  for  what  they  want,  as  dogs,  boats,  dillies, 
troughs,  nets,  hemp,  yarn,  and  provifions.  This  kind  of  barter 
is  carried  on  under  a  great  (hew  of  friendlhip ;  for  when  one 
wants  any  thing  that  another  has,  he  goes  freely  to  vilit  him,  and 
without  any  ceremony  makes  known  his  wants,  although  perhaps  he 
never  had  any  acquaintance  with  that  perlon  before  :  the  landlord  v 
is  obliged  to  behave  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  country  j 
and  bringing  whatever  his  guefl  has  occafion  for,  gives  it  him. 
He  afterwards  returns  the  vifit,  and  mufl:  be  received  in  the  fame 
manner ;  fo  that  both  parties  have  their  wants  fupplied. 

Their  manners  are  quite  rude  :  they  never  ufe  any  civil  ex- 
preffion  or  falutation  ;  never  take  off  their  caps,  nor  bow  to  one 
another  ;  and  their  difcourfe  is  flupid,  and  betrays  the  moft  con- 
fummate  ignorance  ;  and  yet  they  are  in  fome  degree  curious,  and 
inquifitive  upon  many  occafions. 

They  have  filled  almoft  every  place  in  heaven  and  eartli  with 
different  fpirits,  which  they  both  worfliip  and  fear  more  than 
God :  they  offer  them  facrifices  upon  every  occafion,  and  fome 
carry  little  idols  about  them,  or  have  them  placed  in  their 
dwellings ;  but,  with  regard  to  God,  they  not  only  negledt  to 
worfhip  him  ;  but,  in  cafe  of  troubles  and  misfortunes,  they 
curfe   and   blafpheme  him. 

They  keep  no  account  of  their  age,  though  they  can  count  as 
far  as  one  hundred  ;   but  this  is   fo  troublefome  to  them  that 

A  a  without 


178  Of      the      NATIVES      of 

without  their  fingers  they  do  not  tell  three.  It  is  very  diverting 
to  fee  them  reckon  more  than  ten  ;  for  having  reckoned  the  fingers 
of  both  hands  they  clafp  them  together,  which  fignifies  ten  j  then 
they  begin  vi'ith  their  toes,  and  count  to  twenty ;  after  which 
they  are  quite  confounded,  and  cry,  Matcha  ?  that  is,  Where  fhall 
I  take  more.  They  reckon  ten  months  in  the  year,  fome  of  which 
are  longer  and  fome  fhorter  ;  for  they  do  not  divide  them  by  the 
changes  of  the  moon,  but  by  the  order  of  particular  occurrences 
that  happen  in  thofe  regions,  as  may  be  feen  in  the  following 
table : 

lit.   Purifier  of  finsj   for  in  this  month  they  have  a  holiday 
for  the  purification  of  all  their  fins. 

2d.   Breaker  of  hatchets,  from  the  great  froft. 

3d.    Beginning  of  heat. 

4th.  Time  of  the  long  day. 

5th.   Preparing  month. 

6th.  Red  fifli  month. 

7th.   White  fifh  month. 

8th.    Kaiko  fifli  month. 

9th.  Great  white  fifh  month. 

10th.  Leaf  falling  month. 

This  laft  month  continues  to  the  month  of  Nove?nber,  or  that 
of  the  purification,  and  it  is  the  length  of  almoft  three  months  j 
however,  thefe  names  of  the  months  are  not  the  lame  every- 
where, but  are  only  proper  to  the  inhabitants  upon  the  river 
Kamtfchatka  :  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  parts  give  them 
different  names,  fuch  as, 

J  ft.   The  month  of  the  rivers'  freezing 

2d.   Hunting  month. 

3d.    Purifier  of  fins. 

4th.   Breaker  of  hatchets,  from  the  great  fi-oft. 

5th.    Time  of  the  long  day. 

6th.    Sea  beavers'  puppying  time 

7th.  Sea 


K    A   M    T    S   C    H    A    T    K    A.     £?<:.        179 

7th.   Sea  calves'  puppying  time. 

8th.   Time  when  the  tame  deer  bring  forth  their  young. 

9th.   When  the  wild  deer  bring  forth. 

icth.    Beginning  of  the  fifhery. 

Their  divifion  of  time  is  pretty  lingular  ;  they  commonly 
divide  our  year  into  two,  fo  that  winter  is  one  year,  and  fummer 
another :  the  fummer  year  begins  in  May,  and  the  winter  in 
November. 

They  do  not  diftinguifh  the  days  by  any  particular  appellation, 
nor  form  them  into  weeks  or  months,  nor  yet  know  how  many 
days  are  in  the  month  or  year.  They  mark  their  epochs  by  fome 
remarkable  thing  or  other,  f;jch  as  the  arrival  of  the  Ruffians, 
the  great  rebellion,  or  the  firll  expedition  to  Kamtfchatka.  They 
have  no  writings,  nor  hieroglyphick  figures,  to  preferve  the  me- 
mory of  any  thing ;  fo  that  all  their  knowledge  depends  upon 
tradition,  which  foon  becomes  uncertain  and  fabulous  in  regard  to 
what  is  long  paft. 

They  are  ignorant  of  the  caufes  of  eclipies,  but  when  they 
happen,  they  carry  fire  out  of  their  huts,  and  pray  the  luminary 
eclipfed  to  fhine  as  formerly.  They  know  only  three  conflel- 
lations  j  the  Great  Bear,  the  Pleiades,  and  the  three  flars  in 
Orion ;  and  give  names  only  to  the  principal  winds. 

Their  laws  in  general  tend  to  give  fatisfadion  to  the  injured 
perfon.  If  any  one  kills  another,  he  is  to  be  killed  by  the  rela- 
tions of  the  perfon  flain.  They  burn  the  hands  of  people 
who  have  been  frequently  caught  in  theft,  but  for  the  firil 
offence  the  thief  muft  reftore  what  he  hath  ftolen,  and 
live  alone  in  folitude,  without  expecfling  any  afiiftance  from 
others.  They  think  they  can  punifli  an  undifcovered  theft 
by  burning  the  finews  of  the  (lone-buck  in  a  publick  meeting 
with  great  ceremonies  of  conjuration,  believing  that  as  thefe 
finews  are  contradled   by  the  fire  fo  the  thief  will    have   all 

A  a  2  his 


i8o  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

his  limbs  contradled.  They  never  have  any  difputes  about  their 
land  or  their  huts,  every  one  having  land  and  water  more  than 
fufficient  for  his  wants. 

Although  their  manner  of  living  be  moft  nafty,  and  their 
adions  moft  flupid,  yet  they  think  themfelves  the  happieft 
people  in  the  world,  and  look  upon  the  RtiJJians  who  are  fet- 
tled among  them  with  contempt  :  however  this  notion  begins 
to  change  at  prefent ;  for  the  old  people  who  aie  confirmed  in 
their  cuftoms,  drop  off,  and  the  young  ones  being  converted  to  the 
Chriflian  religion,  adopt  the  cuftoms  of  the  Ruffians^  and  defpife 
the  barbarity  and  fuperftition  of  their  anceftors. 

In  every  Ojlrog,  or  large  village,  by  order  of  her  Imperial 
Majefty,  is  appointed  a  chief  who  is  fole  judge  in  all  caufes,  ex- 
cept thofe  of  life  and  death  ;  and  not  only  thefe  chiefs,  but  even 
the  common  people,  have  their  chapels  for  publick  worfhip. 
Schools  are  alfo  eredled  in  almoft  every  village  to  which  the 
Kamtjchadaks  fend  their  children  with  great  pleafure :  by  this 
means  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  their  barbarity  will  be  in  a  fhort . 
time  rooted  out. 


CHAP. 


K    A    M   T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     &c.        18: 


C  H  A  P.     IV. 

OftbeOSTROGS,    or    H  A  B  IT  AT  I  O  N  S,    of  tb^ 

Kamtfchadale^. 


UNDER  the  name  of  Oftrog  we  underfland  every  ha- 
bitation confilHng  of  one  or  more  huts,  which  are  all 
furrounded  by  an  earthen  wall  or  pallifadoe. 
The  huts  are  built  in  the  following  manner :  they  dig  a 
hole  in  the  earth  about  five  feet  deep,  the  breadth  and  length  of 
which  is  proportioned  to  the  number  of  people  defigned  to  live 
in  it.  In  the  middle  of  this  hole  they  plant  four  thick  wooden 
pillars  J  over  thefe  they  lay  balks,  upon  which  they  form  their 
roof  or  cieling,  leaving  in  the  middle  a  fquare  opening  which 
ferves  them  for  a  window  "and  chimney  j  this  they  cover  with 
grafs  and  earth,  fo  that  the  outward  appearance  is  like  a  rouiid 
hillock  ;  but  within  they  are  of  an  oblong  fquare,  and  the  fire- 
place is  in  one  of  the  long  fides  of  the  fquare  :  between  the 
pillars  round  the  walls  of  their  huts  they  make  benches,  upon 
which  each  family  lies  feparately  ;  but  on  that  fide  oppofite  to 
the  fire,  there  are  no  benches,  it  being  defigned  for  their  kitchen 
furniture,  in  which  they  drefs  their  vidtuals  for  thernfelves  and 
dogs.  In  thefe  huts  where  there  are  no  benches,  there  are  balks 
laid  upon  the  floor,  and  covered  with  mats.  They  adorn  the 
walls  of  their  huts  with  mats  made  of  grafs. 

They  enter  their  huts  by  ladders  commonly  placed  near  the 
fire  hearth,  fo  that  when  they  are  heating  their  huts  the  fieos 
of  the  ladder  become  fo  hot,  and  the  fmoke  fo  thick,  as  almoft 


■i$2         Of     the     'N    A    r    I    V    E    S     of 

to  fuffbcate   any  one  who  is  not  inured  to  bear   it  :   but  the 

natives  find  no  difficuhy  in  going  out  or  in;   and   though   they 

can  only  fix  their  toes  on  the  fteps  of  the  ladder,  they  mount 

like  fquirrels ;   nor  do  the  women   hefitate  to  go  through  this 

finoke  with  their  children  upon  their  fhoulders;    though  there  is 

another  opening  through  which  the  women  are  allowed  to  pafs  j 

but  if  any  man  fhould  pretend  to  do  the  fame  he  would  be 

laughed  at.     The  Kamtfchadales  live  in  thefe  huts  all  the  winter, 

si  after  which  they  go  out  into  others  which  they  call  balagans : 

thefe  ferve  them  not  only  to  live  in  during  the  fummer,  but 

alfo  for  magazines.     They  are  made  in  the  following  manner : 

Nine  pillars,  about  two  fathom  long  or  more,   are  fixed  in  the 

ground,  and  bound   together  with  balks   laid  over  them,  which 

they  cover  with  rods,  and  over  all  lay  grafs,   faftening  fpars  and 

a  round  fharp  roof  at  top,  which  they  cover  with  bramble,  and 

thatch  with  grafs.     They  faften  the  lower  ends  of  the  fpars  to 

the  balks  with  ropes  and  thongs,  and  have  a  door  on  each  fide 

one  diredtly  oppofite  to  the  other. 

They  have  fuch  balagans,   not  only  round  their  winter  habita- 

taions,  but  alfo  in  thofe  places  where  they   lay  up  their  food  in 

fummer ;  and  they  are  certainly  very  convenient  in  this  country 

on  account  of  the  frequent   rains,   which  would  furely   fpoil  all 

their  fifh  if  it  was  not  preferved  in  fuch  places ;   befides,  when 

they  return  from  fifliing  and  hunting  in   the  harveft,  they  leave 

their  dry  fifti  here,  'till  they  can  fetch  it  in  the  winter ;  and 

this  without  any  guard  only  taking  away  the  ladders.     If  thefe 

buildings  were  not  fo  high  the  wild  hearts  would  undoubtedly 

plunder  them  j  for  notwithfi:anding  all  their  precaution,  the  bears 

fometimes  climb  up  and  force  their  way  into  their  magazines, 

efpccially  in  the  harveft  when  the  fi(h  and  berries  begin  to  grow 

fcarce.     In  the  fummer,  when   they  go  a  hunting,   they  have, 

befides  their  balagans,   huts  made  of  grafs,  in  which  they  drefs 

their 


K   A    M  T    S    C    H   A    T    K    A,     &c,        183 

their  vidluals  and  clean  their  fifli  in  bad  weather ;  and  the  Cof- 
facks  boil  their  fait  from  fea  water  in  them.  The  villages,  which 
are  well  inhabited,  having  their  common  huts  furrounded  with 
thefe  balagans,  make  a  very  agreeable  appearance  at  a  diflance. 

The  fouthern  Kamtfchadalcs  commonly  build  their  villages 
in  thick  woods,  and  other  places  which  are  naturally  ftrong,  not 
lefs  than  twenty  verfts  from  the  fea  j  and  their  fummer  habita- 
tions are  near  the  mouths  of  their  rivers ;  but  thofe  who  live 
upon  the  Fe?ijckinjka  fea  and  the  Eaftern  Ocean  build  their  vil- 
lages very  near  the  fhore. 

They  look  upon  that  river  near  which  their  village  is  fituated, 
as  the  inheritance  of  their  tribe ;  and  if  one  or  two  families  at 
any  time  defire  to  live  feparate  from  their  native  village,  they 
build  themfelves  huts  upon  the  fame  river,  or  fome  branch  that 
falls  into  it ;  from  which  it  is  natural  to  imagine,  that  the  in- 
habitants of  every  village  have  originally  fprung  from  the  fame 
father  ;  and  the  Kamtjihadales  themfelves  fay,  that  Kut,  whom 
they  fometimes  call  God,  and  fometimes  their  firft  father,  lived 
two  years  upon  each  river,  and  left  the  children  that  river,  on 
which  they  were  born,  for  their  proper  inheritance ;  and  though 
formerly  the  Kamtjchadaks  ufed  only  to  hunt  and  fifli  upon  their 
own  rivers,  they  now  wander  above  200  verfts  to  kill  the , 
fea  animals  upon  the  Aissatfcha,  or  the  Kur'djkaya  hopatka^ 


CHAP. 


a84  Of      the     NATIVES      of 


CHAP.      V. 

Of  their  HOUSHOLD   FURNITURE,    and   other 

necelJary  JJtenfils. 


L  L '  the  Kamtfchatka  houfliold  farniture  confifts  in  diflies, 
bowls,  troughs,  and  cans  made  of  birch  bark.  As  thefe 
people  have  not  the  ufe  of  metals,  we  think  it  is  proper 
to  explain,  how  without  the  ufe  of  inftruments  of  iron,  they  are 
able  to  perform  their  houfliold  work,  fuch  as  building,  fawing, 
making  of  fire,  drelTing  their  vidluals ;  being  all  the  while  fo 
ignorant  that  they  can  fcarcely  count  ten.  How  powerfully 
does  neceffity  work  upon  the  mofl;  infenfible  minds ! 

Before  the  arrival  of  the  RuJJians  the  Kaintfchadales  ufed  ftones 
and  bones  inflead  of  metals,   out  of  which   they  made  hatchets, 
Ipears,  arrows,  needles,  and  lances.     Their  hatchets  were  made  of 
the  bones  of  whales  and  rein-deer,  and  fometimes  of  agate  or  flint 
flones.     They  were  fhaped  in  form  of  a  wedge,  and  faftened  to 
crooked  handles.     Wiih  thefe  they  hollowed  out  their  canoes, 
bowls,  and  troughs ;   but  with  fo  much  expence  of  trouble  and 
time,  that  a  canoe  would  be  three  years  in  making,  and  a  large 
bowl  one  year.     For  this  reafon,  a  large  canoe  or  trough  was  in 
as  great  efteem  among  them  as  a  veiTel  of  the   moft   precious 
metal  and  finefl  workmanfhip  is  with  us ;  and  the  village  which 
was  in  poiTeffion  of  fuch  valued  themfelves  extremely  upon  it, 
efpecially  if  they  were  mafters  of  a  bowl  which  would  ferve  for 
more  than  one  guefl.     Thefe  bowls  they  drefs  their  vidluals  in, 
and  heat  their  broth  by  throwing  red-hot  ftones  into  it. 

Their  knives  were  made  of  a  greenifh   mountain  chryflal, 
fliarp-pointed,  and  fliaped  like  a  lancet,  which  was  ftuck  into 

a 
S 


Pa,fi  /8s 


emoo  ^  //n?vaci/7ia  e^/^^^^ 


K  A  M  T  S  C   H  A  T  K  A,    C^c.  185 

a  wooden  handle.  Of  fuch  chryftals  were  made  likewife  their 
arrows,  fpears,  and  launcets,  with  which  they  continue  ftill  to 
let  blood.  Their  fewing  needles  they  made  of  the  bones  of  fables, 
with  which  they  not  only  fewed  their  cloatlis  together,  but  made 
alfo  very  curious  embroidery. 

In  order  to  kindle  fire  they  have  a  board  of  dry  wood  with 
round  holes  in  the  fides  of  it,  and  a  fmall  round  flick  ;  this  they 
rub  in  a  hole  'till  it  takes  fire,  and  inflead  of  tinder  they  ufe 
dry  grafs  beat  foft.  Thefe  inflruments  are  held  in  fuch  efleem 
by  the  Kamtfchadcdes  that  they  are  never  without  them,  and  they 
value  them  more  than  our  fleels  and  flints :  but  they  are  excef- 
fively  fond  of  other  iron  inflruments,  fuch  as  hatchets,  knives, 
or  needles ;  nay,  at  the  firfl  arrival  of  the  RuJJians  a  piece  of 
broken  iron  was  looked  upon  as  a  great  prefent,  and  even  yet 
they  receive  it  with  thankfulnefs,  knowing  how  to  make  ufe  of 
the  leafl  fragment  either  to  point  their  arrows  or  make  dart?, 
which  they  do  by  hammering  it  out  cold  between  two 
ftones.  All  the  favage  inhabitants  of  thefe  parts  are  par- 
ticularly fond  of  iron,  and  know  how  to  manage  it  very 
curioufly.  As  fonie  of  them  delight  in  war,  the  Rujia?i 
merchants  are  forbid  to  fell  them  any  warlike  inftruments ;  but 
they  are  ingenious  enough  to  make  fpears  and  arrows  out  of  the 
iron  pots  and  kettles  which  they  buy  j  and  they  are  fo  dextrous 
when  the  eye  of  a  needle  breaks  as  to  make  a  new  eye,  which 
they  will  repeat  until  nothing  remains  but  the  point.  Even  at  the 
time  when  I  was  there  it  was  only  tlie  better  fort  and  thofe  that 
lived  near  to  the  RuJJians  that  made  ufe  of  iron  or  copper  veflels, 
the  refl  ftill  preferring  their  wooden  difhes. 

It  is  faid,  ihzt  tht  Kamtfchadales  kntvf  the  ufe  of  iron  even 
before  the  arrival  of  the  RuJJians  ;  that  they  received  it  from  the 
Japanefe,  who  came  to  the  Kuriljki  iflands,  and  once  to  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Kamfjchatka  j  and  that  the  name  which  the 
Kamtfchadales  give  the  Japanefe  of  Shifman   comes  from  JJoiJhy 

Bb  a 


i86  Of      /y^^     N     A     T    I     V     E    S      of 

a  needle.  The  yapanefe  certainly  ufed  to  come  and  trade  to 
the  Kuriljk't  iflands,  for  I  found  there  a  Japanefe  fabre,  a 
japanned  waiter,  and  filver  ear-rings,  which  could  be  brought 
from  no  other  place. 

Of  all  the  curiofities  made  by  thefe  wild  people  with  their  ftone 
knives  and  hatchets,  nothing  furprifed  me  fo  much  as  a  chain  of 
whales'  bones,  found  in  an  empty  hut  near  the  Tchiikotjkoi  Nofs, 
made  of  different  links  as  fmooth  as  if  they  had  been  turned, 
about  a  foot  and  a  half  long,  and  formed  out  of  one  tooth.  It  is 
very  extraordinary  that  any  of  thefe  wild  people  fhould  with 
nothing  but  ftone  inftruments  have  been  capable  of  making  fo 
curious  a  piece  of  workmanfliip,  which  was  worthy  of  the  beft 
artift. 

They  have  two  methods  of  making  their  boats  ;  one  fort  of 
which  is  called  koaihtabta,  and  the  other  tahta.  The  former  do 
not  differ  from  our  fifhermens'  boats,  except  that  the  prow  and 
flern  are  higher,  and  the  fides  lower.  The  tahta  has  the  prow 
and  flern  of  an  equal  height ;  the  middle  is  not  bent  out,  but 
rather  falls  in,  which  makes  it  very  inconvenient,  efpecially  when 
there  is  any  wind,  as  being  very  foon  filled  with  water.  They 
life  the  koaihtahta  only  upon  the  river  Kamtjchatka,  but  the 
tahta  in  mofl  other  places.  When  any  planks  are  fewed  upon 
the  tahta  they  are  called  baidars,  which  are  ufed  by  the  inha- 
bitants upon  the  Bobrovoi  or  Beaver  fea  in  purfuing  the  fea 
animals.  They  fplit  thefe  baidars,  and  fewing  them  with  whales' 
beards  caulk  them  with  mofs  or  nettles  beat  foft.  The  Ktiriks  of 
the  iflands  and  thofe  that  live  upon  the  Lopatka  build  the  baidars 
with  a  keel,  to  which  they  few  planks  with  whales'  beard,  and 
caulk  them  with  mofs.  In  Kamtfchatka  they  make  their  boats 
of  poplar  wood  only;  but  the  Kuriles,  having  no  proper  wood  of 
their  own,  are  obliged  to  make  ufs  of  what  is  thrown  on  fhore  by, 
the  fea,  and  which  is  fuppofed  to  come  from  the  coafl  oi  Japan, 
America,  or  Chwa.     The  northern  inhabitants  of  Kamtfchatka, 

the 


KAMTSCHATKA,     &c.  187 

the  fettled  Koreki  and  I'chukotjkoi^  for  want  of  proper  timber  and 
plank,  make  their  baidars  of  the  llcins  of  fea  animals. 

Thefe  boats  hold  two  perfons,  one  of  which  fits  in  the  prow 
and  the  other  in  the  ftern.  They  puih  them  againft  the  flream 
with  poles,  which  is  attended  with  great  trouble  :  when  the 
current  is  ftrong  they  can  fcarcely  advance  two  feet  in  ten 
minutes ;  notwithftanding  which,  they  will  carry  thefe  boat« 
full  loaded  fometimes  20  verfts,  and,  when  the  flream  is  not 
very  ftrong,  even  30  or  40  verfts. 

In  the  larger  boats  they  can  carry  30  or  40  pood  ;  and  when 
the  goods  are  not  very  heavy,  they  lay  them  upon  a  float  or  bridge 
made  between  two  boats  joined  together.  They  ufe  this  method 
in  tranfporting  their  provifions  down  with  the  ftream,  and  alfo  to 
and  from  the  iflands. 


CHAP.      VI. 
Of  the  L  AB  O  U  R  appropriated  to  the  Different  Sexes, 

IN  the  fummer  time  the  men  are  employed  in  catching,  drying, 
and  tranfporting  fiih  to  their  habitations ;  in  preparing 
bones  and  four  firti  to  feed  their  dogs  :  the  women,  in 
cleaning  the  fifh,  and  fpreading  it  out  to  dry  ;  and  fometimes  they 
go  a  fifhing  with  their  hu{bands.  After  their  fifhing  is  over,  they 
gather  in  the  herbs,  roots,  and  berries,  both  for  food  and  me- 
dicine. 

In  the  harveft  the  men  catch  the  fifli  that  appear  at  that  time, 
and  kill  fowl,  fuch  as  geefe,  ducks,  fwans,  and  the  like ;  they 
teach  their  dogs  to  draw  carriages,  and  prepare   wood  for  their 

B  b  2  (ledges. 


laS  0/      the     NATIVES      0/ 

fledges,  and  other  ufes.  The  women  at  this  time  are  bufy  with 
their  hemp  of  nettles,  in  pulling  it  up,  watering,  breaking,  peelr 
ing,  and  laying  it  up  in  their  balagans.    oiq  srfj  Ik  ?io  aqsial  yadi 

::The  men  in  the  winter  hunt  for  fables  and  foxes,  weave  fifhing' 
nets,  make  fledges,  fetch  wood,  and  bring  their  provifions  from 
feveral  places,  which  they  had  prepared  in  the  fummer,  and  could 
not  bring  home  in  the  harveft.  The  women  are  principally  em- 
ployed in  fpinning  thread  for  nets. 

>  in  the  fpring,  when  the  rivers  begin  to  thaw,  the  fiHi  that  win- 
tered in  them  go  towards  the  fea ;  and  the  men  are  bufied  in 
catching  them  or  the  fea  animals  that  at  this  time  frequent  the 
bays,  1  he  people  upon  the  Eaftern  Ocean  catch  the  fea  beaver. 
All  the  women  go  into  the  fields,  where  they  gather  wild  garlick, 
and  other  young  tender  herbs,  which  they  ufe  not  only  in  a  fear- 
city  of  other  provifion,  which  often  happens  at  this  feafon  of  the 
year,  but  likewife  out  of  luxury ;  for  fo  fond  are  they  of  every 
thing  that  is  green,  that  during  the  whole  fpring  they  are  feldom 
without  having  fome  of  it  in  their  mouths ;  and  though  they 
always  bring  home  a  great  bundle  of  greens,  they  feldom  lafl:  them 
above  a  day. 

,  Befides  the  above-mentioned  employments  the  men  are  obliged 
to  build  their  huts  and  balagans,  to  heat  their  huts,  drefs  vidluals, 
feed  their  dogs,  flea  the  animals,  whofe  fliins  are  ufed  in  cloath- 
ing,  and  provide  all  houfhold  and  warlike  inftruments :  the  wo- 
men are  here  the  only  taylors  and  fhoemakers,  for  they  drefs 
the  fkins,  make  the  cloaths,  fhoes,  and  ftockings  :  it  is  even 
a  difgrace  for  the  men  to  do  any  thing  of  that  fort  j  fo  that  they 
looked  upon  the  Rujjiam  who  came  here  firfl  in  a  very  ridiculous 
light,  when  they  faw  them  ufe  either  their  needle  or  awl.  The 
women  are  likewife  employed  in  dying  fkins,  in  conjuration,  and- 
curing  of  the  fick.  Their  method  of  preparing  and  dying  fkins, 
fewing  and  joining  them,  is  ns  follows ;  every  fkin  which  they. 

ufe 


K  A   M  T  S   C  H  A  T  K  A,     (^c.  189 

ufe  for  cloaths,  fuch  as  dcer-fkins,  feals,  dogs,  and  beavers,  they 
prepare  one  way  :  in  the  firft  place,  wetting  and  fpreading  it  outj 
they  fcrape  off  all  the  pieces  of  fat  or  veins  that  remained  after 
fleaing  it,  with  ftones  fixed  in  pieces  of  wood  ;  then  rubbing  it 
over  with  frefh  or  four  caviar,  they  roll  it  up  and  tread  it  with 
their  feet  'till  the  hide  begins  to  ftink  ;  they  again  fcrape  and 
clean  it,  and  continue  this  'till  the  Ikin  is  foft  and  clean.  Such 
fkins  as  they  want  to  prepare  without  the  hair  they  ufe  at  firfl 
in  the  fame  manner  as  above ;  then  hang  them  in  the  fmoke  for 
a  week,  and  afterwards  foak  them  in  warm  water  to  make  the 
hair  fall  off;  at  lall  rubbing  them  v/ith  caviar,  by  frequent 
treading  and  fcraping  them  with  ftones,  they  make  them  clean 

and    foft.  .■^r.^iy'^r^^.   '    *^ 

They  dye  the  deer  and  dog  fkins,  which  they  ufe  for  cloathing, 
with  alder  bark  cut  and  rubbed  very  fmall ;  but  the  feal-fkins, 
which  they  ufe  either  for  cloathing,  fhoes,  or  ftraps  for  binding 
their  fledges,  they  dye  in  a  particular  manner  :  having  firfl:  clean- 
ed off  the  hair  they  make  a  bag  of  the  flcin,  and  turning  the  hair 
fide  outward  they  pour  into  it  a  ftrong  decodlion  of  alder  bark  ; 
after  it  has  lain  thus  fometime,  they  hang  it  upon  a  tree,  and  beat 
it  with  a  fliick.  This  operation  they  repeat  'till  the  colour  is  gone 
quite  through  the  fkin ;  then  they  rip  it  open,  and  ftretching  it  out,' 
dry  it  in  the  air  ;  at  lafl:  they  rub  it  'till  it  becomes  foft  and  fit 
for  ufe.  Such  fkins  are  not  unlike  dreffed  goat-fkins :  however, 
Stelkr  fays  that  the  Lamujhki  have  yet  a  better  way  of  preparing 
them.  Thefe  fkins  they  call  mandari,  and  they  are  worth  three 
fhillings  a-piece.  The  hair  of  the  feals,  with  which  they  orna- 
ment their  cloaths  and  flioes,  is  dyed  with  the  juice  of  the  red 
wortleberry  boiled  with  alder  bark,  alum,  and  lac  lunas ;  which 
makes  a  very  bright  colour.  They  ufed  to  few  their  cloaths  and 
flioes  with  needles  made  of  bone,  and  inflead  of  thread  they  made 
ufe  of  the  fibres  of  the  deer,  which  they  fplit  to  the  lize  or 
thicknefs  required. 

They 


-;i9o  0/"     //6^     N    A    T    I    V    E    S      0/ 

They  make  glue  of  the  dried  fkins  of  fifhes,  and  particularly 

of  the  whale-fkin.     A  piece  of  this  they  wrap  up  in  birch  bark, 

and  laying  it  for  a  little  while  in  warm  aflies  they  take  it  out  ; 

and  it  is  then  fit  for  ufe,  and  to  me  feems  as  good  as  the  befl: 

Tm'ck  glue. 


CHAP.     VII. 
Of  their  DRESS. 


THEIR  cloaths,  for  the  moft  part,  are  made  of  the  fkins 
of  deer,  dogs,  feveral  fea  and  land  animals,  and  even  of 
the  fkins  of  birds,  frequently  joining  thofe  of  different 
animals  in  the  fa-me  garment.  They  make  the  upper  gar- 
ment in  two  fafliions ;  fometimes  cutting  the  fkirts  all  of  an 
equal  length ;  and  fometimes  leaving  them  long  behind  in  form  of 
a  train.  They  are  made  of  deer-fkins,  with  wide  fleeves  of  a 
length  to  come  down  below  the  knee  :  there  is  a  hood  or  caul 
behind,  which  in  bad  weather  they  put  over  their  heads  below 
their  caps :  the  opening  above  is  only  large  enough  to  let  their 
head  pafs :  they  few  the  fkins  of  dog's  feet  round  this  opening, 
with  which  they  cover  their  faces  in  cold  ftormy  weather,  and 
round  their  fkirts  and  fleeves  they  put  a  border  of  white  dog- 
Ikin  :  upon  their  backs  they  few  the  fmall  fhreds  of  fkins  or  filk 
of  different  colours.  They  commonly  wear  two  coats ;  the  un- 
der coat  with  the  hair-fide  inwards,  the  other  fide  being  dyed 
with  alder ;  and  the  upper  with  the  hair  outwards.  For  the 
upper  garment  they  choofe  black,  white,  or  fpeckled  fkins,  the 
hair  of  which  is  mofl  efleemed  for  the  beauty  of  its  colours. 

Men  and  women,  without  diflindlion,  ufe  the  above-mentioned 
garments,  their  drefs  only  differing  in  their  under  cloathing,  and  in 

the 


K   A  M   T   S   C   H   A   T   K  A,     i<?r.  191 

the  covering  of  their  feet  and  legs.  The  women  have  an  under- 
garment which  they  commonly  wear  at  home  in  the  houfe,  con- 
fifting  of  breeches  and  waiftcoat  fewed  together.  The  breeches 
are  wide,  like  thofe  of  the  Dutch  fkippers,  and  tie  below  the  knee  ; 
the  waiftcoat  is  wide  above,  and  drawn  round  with  a  firing. 
The  fummer  habits  are  made  of  drefled  fkins  without  hair  ;  their 
winter  garment  is  made  of  deer  or  flone-ram  fkins  with  the 
hair  on.  The  undrcfs  or  houfhold  habit  of  the  men  is  a  girdle 
of  leather,  with  a  bag  before,  and  likewife  a  leathern  apron  to 
cover  them  behind  :  thefe  girdles  are  fewed  with  hair  of  different 
colours.  The  Kamtjchadales  ufed  formerly  to  go  a  hunting  and 
fifhing  during  the  fummer  in  this  drefs ;  but  now  this  fafliion  is 
changed,  and  below  their  girdles  they  wear  linen  fliirts,  which 
they  buy  from  the  Riijians. 

The  covering  of  their  feet  and  legs  is  made  of  fkins  of  different 
forts  ;  in  the  fummer  time  during  the  rains,  they  wear  the  fkins 
of  feals  with  the  hair  outwards  ;  but  their  mofl  common  covering 
is  the  fkin  of  the  legs  of  the  rein-deer,  and  fometimes  of 
the  legs  of  other  beafts,  the  fliaggiefl  they  can  find,  to  preferve 
them  againfl  the  cold.  But  the  iinefl  bufkins,  which  both  the 
Coflacks  and  Kamtjchadales  ufe  in  their  greatefl  drefs,  are  made 
in  the  following  manner  :  the  fole  is  of  white  feal-fkin,  the  upper 
part  of  line  dyed  leather,  the  hind  quarters  of  white  dog-skin  ; 
what  comes  round  the  legs  is  of  dreffed  leather  or  dyed  feal- 
skins :  the  upper  parts  are  embroidered.  Thefe  buskins  are  fo 
extraordinary,  that  if  a  batchelor  is  obferved  to  wear  them  he  is 
immediately  concluded  to  be  upon  a  fcheme  of  courtfliip. 

They  wear  the  fame  fort  of  caps  as  the  people  of  Jakut/ki. 
In  the  fummer  they  have  a  fort  of  hats  of  birch  bark  tied  about 
their  head  :  the  Kuriks  ufe  in  the  fummer  time  caps  made  of 
platted  grafs.  The  women's  head-drefs  is  the  perukes  that  we 
formerly  mentioned ;  and  thefe  were  fo  dear  to  them,  that  when 


tncy 


192         0/     //5^     N    A    T    I    V    E    S     0/ 

they  came  to  be  Chiiftians  they  were  with  difiiculty  prevailed 
upon  to  quit  this  drefs  for  one  more  decent :  however,  at  prefent 
round  the  Riifs  fettlements  all  is  intirely  changed,  the  women 
wearing  (hirts,  ruffles,  waiftcoats,  caps  and  ribbands;  v^hich 
change  nobody  now  complains  of,  except  the  very  old  people. 
The  women  do  all  their  work  in  mittins :  they  formerly  never 
wafhed  their  faces,  but  now  they  ufe  both  white  and  red  paint ; 
for  white  paint  they  make  ufe  of  a  rotten  wood,  and  for  red  a  fea 
plant  *,  which  they  boil  in  feals'  fat,  and  rubbing  their  cheeks 
with  it  make  them  very  red.  They  drefs  moft  in  the  winter 
time,  efpecially  when  they  either  receive  or  pay  vifits. 

The  common  cloaths  for  a  Kamtfcbadale  and  his  family  will 
not  coft  him  lefs  than  an  hundred  rubles,  for  the  coarfeft  worfted 
flockings,  which  coft  in  Rujia  20  kopeeks,  cannot  be  bought  here 
for  lefs  than  a  ruble  ;  and  all  other  things  are  fold  in  the  fame 
proportion.  The  Kuriles  are  more  able  to  buy  good  cloaths  than 
the  Kamtfcbadale s,  for  they  can  purchafe  for  one  fea  beaver  as 
much  as  the  Kamtfchadales  can  for  twenty  foxes,  and  one  beaver 
cofts  the  Kuriles  no  more  trouble  than  five  foxes  do  the  Kamtf- 
chadales ;  for  he  muft  be  a  good  hunter  who  catches  more  than 
ten  foxes  in  the  winter,  and  a  Kurili  thinks  himfelf  unlucky  if  he 
doth  not  catch  three  beavers  in  the  feafon ;  befides  which  great 
numbers  are  thrown  upon  the  fhore  by  florms. 

•  Fucus  marinus  abietis  forma,     Pinus  maritima,  feu  fucus  teres.     Dood.   Ap- 
pend. 326.  Ray  Linn. 


CHAP. 


KAMTSCHA    T,KvA.         193 


CHAP.     VIII. 

of  their  DIET   and  LI  Q^U  O  R  S,    together  with   their 
Method  e;^  C  O  O  K  I  N  G. 


HAVING  already  mentioned  that  the  food  of  the 
Kamtfchadales  confifts  in  roots,  fifli,  and  fea  animals, 
which  are  all  defcribed  in  the  fecond  part  of  this 
book;  we  fliall  now  relate  their  method  of  drefling  them. 
And  firft,  we  will  begin  with  the  fifh,  which  they  ufe  inftead 
of  bread.  The  principal  food,  called  yokola,  is  prepared  froni- 
every  fort  of  fifli,  and  ferves  them  for  houfhold  bread.  They 
divide  their  fifh  into  fix  parts;  the  fides  and  tail  are  hung  up  to 
dry  ;  the  back  and  thinner  part  of  the  belly  are  prepared  apart, 
and  generally  dried  over  the  fire ;  the  head  is  laid  to  four  in  pits, 
and  then  they  eat  it  like  fait  fifl>,  and  efteem  it  much,  though 
the  flink  is  fuch  that  a  ftranger  cannot  bear  it  •  the  ribs  and  the 
flefii  which  remain  upon  them  they  hang  up  and  dry,  and  after-;" 
wards  pound  them  for  ufe ;  the  larger  bones  they  Hkewife  dry 
for  food  for  their  dogs :  in  this  manner  all  thefe  different  people 
prepare  the  yokola,   and  they  eat  it  for  the  moft  part  dry. 

Their  fecond  favourite  food  is  caviar,  or  the  roes  of  fiflj, 
which  they  prepare  in  three  different  ways :  they  dry  the  roe 
whole  in  the  air,  or  take  it  out  of  the  skin  which  envelopes  it, 
and,  fpreading  it  upon  a  bed  of  grafs,  dry  it  before  the  fire ; 
or  laftly,  make  rolls  of  it  with  the  leaves  of  grafs,  which  they 
alfo  dry.  They  never  take  a  journey  or  go  a  hunting  without 
dry  caviar ;  and  if  a  Kamfjchadak  has  a  pound  of  this,  he  can 
fubfift  without  any  other  provifion  a  great  while  ;  for  every 
birch  and  alder  tree  furniflies  him  with  bark,   wJbich,  with  his 

C  c  dried 


194  Of     the      NATIVES       of 

dried  caviar,  makes  him  an  agreeable  meal ;  but  they  cannot 
cat  either  feparately,  for  the  caviar  flicks  like  glue  to  the  teeth, 
and  the  bark,  although  it  fliould  be  chewed  ever  fo  long  by  itfelf, 
they  are  hardly  ever  able  to  fwallow  down  alone.  There  is  ftill 
a  fourth  method  which  both  the  Kamtfchad  iles  and  Koreki  ufp 
in  preparing  their  caviar  j  having  covered  the  bottom  of  a  pit 
with  grafs,  they  throw  the  fre/h  caviar  into  it,  and  leave  it 
there  to  grow  four :  the  Koreki  tie  their's  in  bags  and  leave  it 
to  four  J   this  is  efteemed  their  mod  delicate  dilh. 

There  is  a  third  fort  of  diet,  called  by  the  Kamtfchadales 
tchupriki,  which  is  prepared  in  this  manner  :  in  their  huts  over 
the  fire-place  they  make  a  bridge  of  ftakes,  upon  which  they 
lay  a  heap  of  fifh,  which  remains  there  'till  the  hut  becomes 
as  warm  as  a  bagnio ;  if  there  was  no  great  thicknefs  of  fifli 
one  fire  would  ferve  to  drefs  it;  but  fometimes  they  are 
obliged  to  make  two,  three,  or  more  fires.  Fifh  drefled  in 
this  manner  is  half  roafled,  half  fmoaked,  and  has  a  very  agree- 
able taf^e,  and  may  be  reckoned  the  befl  of  all  the  Kamtjchatka 
cookery ;  for  the  whole  juice  and  fat  is  prepared  with  a  gradual 
heat,  and  kept  in  by  the  skin,  in  which  it  lies  as  in  a  bag,  and 
when  ready  may  be  eafily  feparated  from  the  fifh ;  as  foon  as 
it  is  thus  dreffed,  they  take  out  the  guts,  and  fpread  the  body 
upon  a  mat  to  dry ;  this,  they  afterwards  break  fmall  and 
put  into  bags,  carrying  it  along  with  them  for  provifion  ;  ^  and 
when  dried  eat  it  like  the  yokola. 

The  Kamtfchadales  have  a  difh,  which  they  efteem  very 
much,  called  huigid :  it  is  fifh  laid  to  grow  four  in  pits  ;  and 
though  the  fmell  of  it  is  intollerable,  yet  the  Kamtfchadales 
efleem  it  a  perfume.  This  fifli  fometimes  rots  fo  much  in 
the  pits  that  they  cannot  take  it  out  without  ladles  ;  however 
in  that  cafe  they  ufe  it  for  feeding  their  dogs. 

Mr.  Stellcr  fays,  that  the  fummer  Samojeds  likewife  four  their 
Mh ;  but    that    the    earth    being    frozen   preferves    it    much 

better ; 

3 


K    A    M   T    S    C    II    A   T    K    A,    &c.        195 

better ;  the  "Jakutjki  alfo  dig  deep  pits,  in  which  they  lay  their 
fifli,  fprinkling  it  with  wood  afties,  and  cover  it  with  leaves  at 
top,  and  over  all  put  a  layer  of  earth  :  this  method  is  better 
than  any  of  the  former.  The  Tungufi  and  Coflacks  of  Ochotjka 
preferve  their  fiili  in  the  fame  manner,  with  this  difference  only, 
that  inftead  of  wood  afhes,  they  ufe  the  aflies  of  burnt  fea  weed. 
They  boil  their  frefh  fifh  in  troughs,  take  it  out  with  boards, 
and  letting  it  cool,   eat  it  with  a  foup  made  of  the  fvveet  grafs. 

As  for  the  fledi  of  land  and  fea  animals,  they  boil  it  in  their 
troughs,  with  feveral  different  herbs  and  roots ;  the  broth  they 
drink  out  of  ladles  and  bowls,  and  the  meat  they  take  out  upon 
boards,  and  eat  in  their  hands.  The  whale  and  fea  horfe  ^at 
they  alfo  boil  with  roots.  .  i 

There  is  a  principal  difli  at  all  their  feafts  and  entertainments, 
called  felaga,  which  they  rriake  by  pounding  all  forts  of  dif- 
ferent roots  and  berries,  with  the  addition  of  caviar,  and  whale 
and  feals'  fat. 

Before  the  conqueil:  they  feldom  ufed  any  thing  for  drink 
bat  water  :  but  when  they  made  merry  they  drank  water 
which  had  ftood  fome  tim.e  upon  mufhroons  ;  but  of  this  here- 
after. At  prefent  they  drink  fpirits  as  faft  as  the  Rujjians : 
after  dinner  they  drink  water  ;  and  every  one,  when  he  goes  to 
bed  at  night,  fets  a  vefTel  of  water  by  him,  to  which  he  puts 
fnow  or  ice  to  keep  it  cold ;  and  alv/ays  drinks  it  up  before 
morning.  In  the  winter  time  they  amufe  themfelves  fre- 
quently by  throwing  handfuls  of  fnow  into  their  mouths ;  and 
the  bridegrooms  who  work  with  the  fathers  of  their  future  brides 
find  it  their  hardeft  task  to  provide  fnow  for  their  family  in  the 
fummer  time,  for  they  muft  bring  it  from  the  higheft  hills  be  the 
weather  what  it  will,  otherwife  they  would  fo  difoblige  as  never 
to  be  forgiven. 

Cc  2  CHAP. 


196         Of     /i6^     N    A    T    I    V    E    S      of^. 


C  HAP.      IX.  -^ 


"The  Method  of  TRAVELLING  with  DOGS,    and  the 
Furniture  necejfary  thereto. 


TH  E  Dogs  of  Kamtfchatka  differ  very  little  from   the 
common  houfe  dogs :  they  are  of  a  middling  fize,    of 
j-^,,       various  colours,   though  there  feem  to  be  more  white, 
black,  and  grey,   than  of  any  other.     In  travelling  they  make 
ufe  of  thofe  that  are  gelded,   and   generally  yoke   four    to   a 
lledge. 

The  alaki  is  made  of  broad  double  foft  flraps,  which  are  put 
over  the  dogs'  fhoulders,  the  near  dog  having  it  over  his  left, 
and  the  oiF  dog  over  his  right.  At  the  end  of  thefe  alaki's  is  a 
fmall  thong,  with  a  hook  at  the  end  of  it,  which  is  faftened  to 
a  ring  in  the  fore  part  of  the  fledge. 

The  pobeflinick  is  a  long  ftrap,  and  ferves  inftead  of  a  coach 
pole.;:"  It  pafles  through  a  ring,  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the 
fore  part  of  the  fledge ;  and  to  it  is  faftened  a  chain  that  keeps 
the  dogs  together,  that  they  fliould  not.  run  afunder. 

The  bridle  is  a  long  ftrap,  with  a  hook  and  chain,  which  is 
lixed  to  the  fore  dogs,  and  is  much  longer  than  the  pobefhnick, 
being  faftened  to  a  ring  in  the  fore  part  of  the  fledge.         ^"^i^^u. 

The  oftieiniki,  or  collars,  are  broad  ftraps  made  of  bear-skin, 
and  are  frequently  put  upon  dogs  merely  for  ornament. 

They  drive  and  dired:  their  dogs  with  a  crooked  ftick  about 
four  feet  long,  which  they  call  the  oftal,  and  fometimcs  adorn 
it  with  different  coloured  thongs:  this  is  looked  upon  as  a  grea£ 
piece  of  finery.     They  drive  their  fledges  fitting  upon  the  right 

fide 


K   A   M   T    S   C    H    A    T    K    A,     &c\        197 

fide  with  their  feet  hanging  down  ;  and  it  would  be  looked  upon 
as  a  difgrace  for  any  one  to  fit  in  the  fledge,  or  to  make  ufe  of 
any  perfon  to  drive  them,  no  body  doing  this  but  the  women. 

A  fet  of  four  good  dogs  will  coft  in  Kamtfcbatka  1^  rubles,/ 
and  with  their  harnefs  complete  come  to  near  20. 

From  the  make  of  their  fledges  may  be  feen  how  difficult  it 
is  to  travel  upon  them  ;  for  a  man  is  obliged  to  keep  the  exadeft 
balance,  otherwife  he  is  liable,  from  the  height  and  narrownefs 
of  them,  to  be  overturned.  In  a  rugged  road  this  would  be  very 
dangerous,  as  the  dogs  never  fiop  'till  they  come  to  fome  houfe, 
or  are  entangled  by  fomething  upon  the  road  ;  for  they  have  this 
fault,  that  in  going  down  fteep  hills  they  run  with  all  their  force, 
and  are  fcarcely  to  be  kept  in :  for  which  reafon,  in  defcending  any 
great  declivity  they  unyoke  all  the  dogs  except  one,  and  lead  them 
foftly  down  the  hill.  They  likewife  walk  up  hills  j  for  it  is  as 
much  as  the  dogs  can  do  to  drag  up  the  fledge  empty.  The 
narta  will  carry,  befides  the  provifions  for  the  dogs  and  the  driver, 
about  five  poods.  With  this  load,  upon  a  tolerable  road,  they 
can  travel  about  30  verfts  a  day ;  and  without  any  load,  in  the 
fpring  when  the  fnow  is  hardened,  and  upon  Aiders  made  of  bone 
they  can  travel  1 50  verfls.  After  a  deep  fnow  there  is  no  tra- 
velling with  dogs  'till  a  road  be  made,  which  is  effedled  by  a 
man  going  before  upon  fnow-fhoes,  whom  they  call  brodov-^ 
Jhika. 

The  fnow-lhoes  are  made  of  two  thin  boards,  feparated  in 
the  middle,  and  bound  together  at  the  ends ;  the  fore  part  is  bent 
a  httle  upwards.  They  are  bound  together  wiih  thongs,  and  a 
place  made  to  flip  in  the  foot,  which  they  likewife  tie  with 
thongs.  The  brodovfiiika  having  one  of  thefe  flioes  upon  each 
foot  leaves  the  dogs  and  fledge,  and  going  on,  clears  the  road  for 
fome  way  ;  then  returning  leads  forwards  the  dogs  and  iicdgo. 
fo  far  a&.  the  road  is  madej  a  method  which- he  mufl  continue 

'till 


Of     the      N     A     T    I     V     E    S     c/ 

'till  he  comes  to  fome  dwelling-houfe.  This  is  very  laborious, 
'but  it  happens  fo  often,  that  no  guide  ever  fets  out  v/ithout  his 
fnow-ilioes. 

The  greateft  danger  is  when  a  florm  of  driven  fnow  furprifes 
them  ;  then  they  are  obliged  v^'ith  all  hafte  to  feek  the  fhelter 
of  fome  wood,  where  they  ftay  as  long  as  the  tempeft  lafts, 
which  fometimes  is  a  whole  week.  If  a  ftorm  at  any  time  fur- 
prifes a  large  company  of  travellers,  they  dig  a  place  for  them- 
felves  under  the  fnow,  and  cover  the  entry  with  wood  or 
bramble.  The  Kamtfchadales  feldom  make  thefe  temporary  huts, 
but  hide  themfelves  commonly  in  caves  or  holes  of  the  earth, 
wrapping  themfelves  in  their  furrs ;  and  when  thus  covered,  they 
move  or  turn  themfelves  with  the  greateft  caution,  leaft  they 
fhould  throw  off  the  fnow,  for  under  that  they  lie  as  warm 
as  in  their  common  huts  :  they  muft  only  have  the  convenience 
of  a  breathing  place  ;  but  if  their  cloaths  are  tight  or  hard  girt 
about  them,  the  cold  is  unfufferable. 

If  the  ftorms  furprife  them  in  an  open  country  where  there  is 
no  wood,  they  endeavour  to  find  fome  hollow  place,  in  which 
they  fhelter  themfelves,  but  muft  be  careful  to  prevent  being 
fmothered  with  the  fnow.  The  eaft  and  fouth-eaft  winds  are 
generally  attended  with  a  moift  fnow,  which  wets  the  travellers  j 
and  being  followed  with  the  north  wind  and  fevere  colds,  feveral 
are  then  frozen  to  death. 

Another  danger  attending  the  traveller  is,  that  in  the  fevereft 
froft  feveral  rivers  are  not  quite  frozen  over ;  and  as  the  roads 
for  the  moft  part  lie  clofe  upon  the  rivers,  the  banks  being  very 
fteep,  itv/  years  pafs  in  which  many  people  are  not  drowned. 
A  difagreeable  circumftance  alfo  to  thofe  who  travel  in  thefe 
parts  is  their  fometimes  being  obliged  to  pafs  through  copfes, 
where  they  run  the  rifk  of  having  their  eyes  fcratched  out,  or 
their  limbs  broken ;  for  the  dogs  always  run  moft  violently  in 

the 


K    A   M   T    S    C    H  A    T    K    A,     ©"r.        199 

the  worft  roads,   and  to  free   themfelvcs   very  often  overturn 
their  driver. 

The  beft  travelling  is  in  the  month  of  March  or  April^  when 
the  fnow  is  turned  hard  or  frozen  a  little  at  top  ;  ho^-^ever,  there 
is  ftill  this  inconvenience  attending  it,  that  fometimcs  travellers 
are  obliged  to  lodge  two  or  three  nights  in  defert  places ;  and  it 
is  difficult  to  prevail  upon  the  Katntfchadales  to  make  fire  either 
for  warming  themfelves  or  dreffing  viduals,  as  they  and  their 
dogs  eat  dried  fifli,  and  find  themfelves  fo  warm  wrapt  in  their 
furrs  that  they  want  none  ;  nay,  it  is  furprifing  to  fee  all  the 
people  of  this  climate  bearing  the  cold  fo  well,  that  after  having 
flepta  whole  night  very  found  they  awake  next  morning  as 
refreflied  and  alert  as  if  they  had  lain  in  the  warmefl:  bed.  This 
feems  to  be  fo  natural  to  all  here,  that  I  have  feen  fome  of 
them  lie  down  with  their  backs  uncovered  againft  a  fire,  and 
notwithftanding  the  fire  has  been  burnt  out  long  before  morning, 
yet  they  continued  to  fleep  on  very  comfortably,  and  without 
any  inconvenience, 


CHAP.    X. 

Of  the   Kamtfchadales'   Method  of  making  WAR. 


ALTHOUGH  before  they  were  conquered  by  the  Ruf- 
fians^  the  Kamtjchadales  did  not  feem  to  have  had  any 
ambition  of  increafing  their  power,  or  enlarging  their  ter- 
ritories, yet  they  had  fuch  frequent  quarrels  among  themfelves 
that  feldom  a  year  pafled  without  one  village  or  other  being  en- 
tirf 'y  ruined.     The  end  of  their  wars  was  to  take  prifoners,  in 

order 


20O  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

order  to  employ  them,  if  males,  in.  their  hardefl  labour,  or,  if 
females,  either  for  wives  or  concubines ;  and  fometimes  the  neigh- 
bouring villages  went  to  war  for  quarrels  that  happened  among 
the  children;  or  for  negleding  to  invite  each  other  to  their 
entertainments. 

Their  wars  are  carried  on  more  by  ftratagem  than  bravery  j  for 
they  are  fuch  cowards  that  they  will  not  openly  attack  any  one 
unlefs  forced  by  neceflity  u  this  is  the  more  extraordinary,  be- 
caufe  no  people  feem  to  defpife  life  more  than  they  do,  felf- 
murther  being  here  very  frequent.  Their  manner  of  attacking 
is  this :  in  the  night-time  they  fteal  into  the  enemy's  village, 
and  furprife  them,  which  may  eafily  be  done  as  they  keep  no 
watch  3  thus  a  fmall  paity  may  deftroy  a  large  village,  as  they 
have  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  fecure  the  mouth  of  a 
hut,  and  fuffer  no  body  to  come  out,  which  only  one  can 
do  at  a  time  ;  therefore  whoever  jfirfl:  attempts  to  efcape  is 
knocked  down,  or  obliged  to  fubmit  to  be  bound. 

The  male  prifoncrs  which  they  take,  efpecially  if  they  are 
men  of  any  conlequence,  are  treated  with  all  manner  of  barbarity, 
fuch  as  burning,  hewing  them  to  pieces,  tearing  their  entrails 
out  when  alive,  and  hanging  them  by  the  feet.  This  has  been 
the  fate  of  feveral  Rufian  Coflacks  during  the  difturbances  of 
Kamtfchatka ;  and  thefe  barbarities  are  exercifed  with  great  fhew 
of  triumph  and   rejoicing. 

J  Thefe  private  differences  among  themfelves  were  very  ufeful 
to  the  Coflacks  in  their  conqueft  of  the  whole  nation  j  for 
when  the  natives  faw  the  latter  attacking  one  village,  fo  far  were 
they  from  aflifting  their  countrymen,  that  they  rejoiced  at  their 
deftrudion,  not  confidering  that  the  fame  was  to  be  their 
fate  next. 

In  their    wars   with  the   Coflacks,   they  deftroyed  more  by 
ftratagem  than'  by  arms  j  for  when  the  Coflacks  came  to  any 

village 


K    A    M'T    S    C   H    A   T    K    A,     &c.        2ot 

village  to  demand  their  tribute,  they  were  received  with  all 
marks  of  friendfhip,  and  not  only  the  tribute  was  paid, 
but  likewife  great  prefents  were  made  them.  Thus  the 
natives  having  lulled  them  into  a  flate  of  fecurity,  they 
either  cut  their  throats  in  the  night-time,  or  fet  fire  to 
their  huts,  and  burnt  them  with  all  the  Coflacks  which 
were  within.  By  fuch  flratagems  70  people  were  deftroyed 
in  two  places,  which,  confidcring  the  fmall  number  of  Cof- 
facks  that  were  there,  was  a  very  confiderable  lofs:  nay,  it 
has  fometimes  happened  that  when  they  had  no  opportunity 
of  deflroying  the  Coflacks  at  fir  ft,  they  have  for  two  years 
quietly  paid  the  tribute,  waiting  'till  they  could  find  an  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  it. 

By  this  cunning  the  Kamtfchadales  deftroyed  at  firft  many 
Coflacks,  but  now  the  latter  are  more  upon  their  guard, 
and  are  particularly  afraid  of  extraordinary  carefTes,  always  ex- 
pefting  fome  bad  intention  when  the  women  in  the  night- 
time retire  out  of  their  huts.  When  the  Kamtfchadales  pretend 
to  have  dreamed  of  dead  people,  or  go  to  vifit  diftant  villages, 
there  is  reafon  to  dread  a  general  infurreilion. 

When  this  happens,  they  kill  all  the  Coflacks  which  fall  in 
their  way,  and  even  the  Kamtfchadales  who  will  not  join  in 
the  rebellion.  As  foon  as  they  hear  that  troops  are  coming 
againft  them,  inftead  of  going  to  oppofe  their  enemies,  they 
retire  to  fome  high  place,  which  they  fortify  as  ftrongly  as 
they  can,  and  building  huts  there,  wait  'till  they  are  attacked,  and 
then  they  bravely  defend  themfelves  with  their  bows  and  ar- 
rows, and  every  other  method  they  can  think  of ;  but  if  they 
obferve,  that  the  enemy  is  likely  to  make  themfelves  mafters  of 
the  fortrefs,  they  firft  cut  the  throats  of  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, and  afterwards  either  throw  themfelves  down  the  preci- 
pice, or  with  their  arms  rufli  in  upon  their  enemies  that  they 

D  d  may 


2C2         -0/     fhe      N     A     r     1     V     E     S      of 

may  not  dye  unrevenged :  this  they  call  making  a  bed  for  them- 
felves.  In  the  year  1740,  a  girl  was  brought  from  IJtkolok 
whom  the  rebels'  in  their  hurry  negledled  to  kill  j  the  reft  were 
all  murthered,  and  the  rebels  threw  themfelves  from  the  hill, 
upon  which  they  were  fortified,  into  the  fea. 

From  the  time  that  Kamtjchatjka  was  fubdued,  there  have 
been  only  two  rebellions  which  could  be  properly  called  fo.  The 
firft  happened  in  the  year  1710,  in  Bolfcherefjkoi  Ojlrog;  and 
the  other  in  the  year  1713  upon  the  river  Awatfcha.  Both, 
of  them  were,  however,  unfortunate  for  the  authors.  In  the 
iirft,  great  numbers  befieged  the  Bolcheretjkoi  fort,  in  which  were 
only  70  Coflacks,  35  of  whom  making  a  fally  put  them  all  to 
flight,  and  in  endeavouring  to  reach  their  boats  which  brought 
them  thither,  in  the  hurry  fuch  numbers  were  drowned  that  the 
river  was  almoft  choaked  up  by  their  dead  bodies.  The  rebels 
upon  the  Awatfcha  thought  themfelves  fo  fure  of  deftroying  the 
Rufiam  that  they  brought  thongs  to  bind  them  j  however  the 
rebels  were  either  all  killed  or  taken  prifoners. 

Their  arms  are  bows  and  arrows,  fpears,  and  a  coat  of  mail : 
their  quivers  are  made  of  the  wood  of  the  larch-tree,  glued 
round  with  birch-bark ;  their  bow-ftrings  of  the  blood  veflels 
of  the  whale  ;  and  their  arrows  are  commonly  about  four  feet 
long,  pointed  with  flint  ftones,  or  bone ;  and  though  they  are  but 
indifferent,  yet  they  are  very  dangerous,  being  all  poifoned,  fo 
that  a  perfon  wounded  by  them  generally  dies  in  twenty-four 
hours,  unlefs  the  poifon  be  fucked  out,  which  is  the  only  re- 
medy known.  Their  fpears  are  likewife  pointed  with  flint  or 
bone  ;  and  their  coa'ts  of  mail  are  made  of  mats,  or  of  the  skins 
of  feals  and  fea  horfes,  which  they  cut  out  into  thongs,  and 
plait  together.  They  put  them  on  upon  the  left  fide,  and  tie 
them  with  thongs  upon  the  right  3  behind  is  fixed  a  high  board 
to  defend  their  head,  and  another  before  to  guard  the  breaft. 

When 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     ts?c.       203 

When  they  march  on  foot  it  is  remarkable  that  two  never 
go  a-breaft,  but  follow  one  another  in  the  fame  path,  which 
by  ufe  becomes  very  deep  and  narrow;  fo  that  it  is  almoft  im- 
poflible  for  one  that  is  not  ufed  to  it  to  walk  therein,  for  thefc 
people  always  fet  one  foot  ftrait  before  the  other  in  walking. 


CHAP.      XI. 

1  he  Opinions  of  the  Kzm.i{c\\^6A\c?,  concerning  God,  the  Formation 
of  the  IForld,  and  other  Articles  of  Religion. 


THE  Kamtfchadales^  like  other  barbarous  nations,  have 
no  notions  of  a  deity,  but  what  are  abfurd,  ridiculous, 
and  allocking  to  a  humanized  mind.  They  call  their 
god  Kiitchu,  but  they  pay  him  no  religious  worfliip,  and  the 
only  ufe  they  make  of  his  name  is  to  divert  themfelves  with  it ; 
they  relate  fuch  fcandalous  ftories  of  him  as  one  would  be 
afliamed  to  repeat.  Amongft  other  things  they  reproach  him 
with  having  made  fo  many  fteep  hills,  fo  many  fmall  and  rapid 
rivers,  fo  much  rain,  and  fo  many  ftorms ;  and  in  all  the  troubles 
that  happen  to  them  upbraid  and  blafpheme  him. 

They  place  a  pillar  upon  a  large  wide  plain,  which  they  bind 
round  with  rags.  Whenever  they  pafs  this  pillar  they  throw  a 
piece  of  fifli  or  fome  other  victuals  to  it ;  and  near  it  they  never 
gather  any  berries,  or  kill  any  beafts  or  birds.  This  offering  they 
think  preferves  their  lives,  which  otherwife  would  be  fhortened  : 
however,  they  offer  nothing  which  can  be  of  ufe  to  themfelves, 
but  only  the  fins  and  tails  of  the  fifh,  or  fuch  things  as  they 
would  be  obliged  to  throw  away.  In  this  all  thefe  people  of 
Afia  agree,  offering  only  fuch  things  as  are  ufelefs  to  themfelves. 

D  d  2  Befides 


204  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

Befides  thefe  pillars  feveral  other  places  are  reckoned  facred,  fuch 
as  burning  and  fmoaking  mountains,  hot  fprings,  and  fome  par- 
ticular woods,  which  they  imagine  are  inhabited  by  devils,  whom 
tliey  fear  and  reverence  more  than  their  gods. 

All  their  opinions  concerning  both  gods  arid  devils  are  certainly 
very  fimple  and  ridiculous  ;  however,  it  fliews  that  they  en- 
deavour to  give  an  account  for  the  exigence  of  every  thing  as 
far  as  they  are  able;  and  fome  of  them  try  to  penetrate  into 
the  thoughts  of  the  very  birds  and  fiflies  ;  but  when  once  any 
opinion  is  eftabliilied,  they  never  trouble  themfelves  with  en- 
quiring whether  the  thing  be  poffible  or  not.  Hence  their 
religion  entirely  depends  upon  ancient  tradition,  which  they 
believe  without  examination.  They  have  no  notion  of  a 
fupreme  Being  that  influences  their  happinefs  or  mifery,  but 
hold  that  every  man's  good  or  bad  fortune  depends  upon 
himfelf.  The  world  they  believe  is  eternal,  the  foul  immortal, 
and  that  it  fball  be  again  joined  to  the  body,  and  live  eternally 
fubjedt  to  the  fame  fatigues  and  troubles  as  in  this  prefent  life, 
with  this  difference  only,  that  they  fl>aU  have  greater  plenty  of 
all  the  neceffaries  of  life  :  even  the  very  fmalleft  animals  they 
imagine  will  rife  again,  and  dwell  under  the  earth.  They  think 
the  earth  is  flat,  and  that  under  it  there  is  a  firmament  like 
our's ;  and  under  that  firmament  another  earth  like  our's,  in 
which  when  we  have  fummer  they  have  winter,  and  when  wc 
have  winter  they  have  fummer.  With  regard  to  future  rewards 
and  punifhments,  they  believe  that  in  the  other  world  the  rich 
will  be  poor  and  the  poor  will  be  rich. 

Their  notions  of  vice  and  virtue  are  as  extraordinary  as  thofe 
they  entertain  of  God.  They  believe  every  thing  lawful  that 
procures  them  the  fatisfadion  of  their  wifhes  and  pafTions,  and 
think  that  only  to  be  a  fin  from  which  they  apprehend  danger  or 
ruin  ;  fo  that  they  neither  reckon  murder,  felf-murder,  adultery, 
opprefllon,   nor   the  like,    any   wickednefs :    on    the   contrary, 

they 


K    A   M  T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     Gfi-.        205 

they  look  upon  it  to  be  a  mortal  fin  to  fave  any  one  that  is 
drowning,  becaufe,  according  to  their  notions,  whoever  faves 
him  will  be  foon  drowned  liimfelf.  They  reckon  it  likewife  a 
fin  to  bathe  in,  or  to  drink,  hot  water,  or  to  go  up  to  the 
burning  mountains.  They  have  befidcs  thefe  innumerable  abfurd 
cuftoms,  fuch  as  fcraping  the  fiiow  from  their  feet  with  a  knife, 
or  whetting  their  hatchets  upon,  the  road.  This  may,  however, 
be  faid,  that  they  are  not  the  only  people  who  have  ridiculous 
fupcrftitions. 

Befides  the  above-mentioned  gods  they  pay  a  religious  regard 
to  feveral  animals,  from  which  they  apprehend  danger.  They 
offer  fire  at  the  holes  of  the  fables  and  foxes ;  when  fifhing, 
they  intreat  the  whales  or  fea  horfes  not  to  overturn  their  boats ; 
and  in  hunting,  befeech  the  bears  and  wolves  not  to  hurt  them. 
This  was  the  ftate  of  thefe  people  the  firft  years  of  my  being 
amongft  them ;  but  now,  by  the  care  of  the  Emprefs  Elizabeth, 
miffionaries  are  appointed  to  in  ft  rudl  them  in  the  Chriftian  faith. 
In  1 74 1  a  Clergyman  was  fent  by  the  fynod  with  affiftiants  and/ 
every  thing  neceflary  for  building  a  church,  and  inftrudling  this 
wild  people  ;  which  has  been  attended  with  fuch  fuccefs,  that  not 
only  many  of  them  are  baptized,  but  fchools  are  alfo  ereded  in 
feveral  places,  to  which  the  Kamtfchadales  very  readily  fend 
their  children  :  fo  that  in  a  few  years  we  may  hope  to  fee  the_ 
Chriftian  faith  planted  ip  all  thefe  northern  countries. 


CHAP. 


2o6  Of     the     NATIVES      of 

CHAP.     XII. 
Of   their  5  H  A  M  A  N  S,    or  Conjurers. 


TH  E  Kamtjchadales  have  none  who  are  profefled  Shamans, 
or  conjurers,  as  the  neighbouring  nations  have ;  but  every 
old  woman  is  Ipoked  upon  as  a  witch  and  an  interpreter 
of  dreams.     In  their  conjurations  they  whifper  upon  the  fins  of 
fiflies,  the  fweet  grafis,  and  fome  other  things ;  by  which  means 
they  cure  difeafes,  divert  misfortunes,  and  foretel  futurity. 

They  are  very  great  obfervers  of  dreams,  which  they  relate 
to  one  another  as  foon  as  they  awake  in  the  morning,  and 
judge  from  thence  of  their  future  good  or  bad  fortune  ;  and 
fome  of  thefe  dreams  have  their  inteipretation  fixed  and  fettled. 
Befides  this  conjuration  they  pretend  to  chiromancy,  and  to  foretel 
a  man's  good  or  bad  fortune  by  the  lines  of  his  hand  j  but  the 
rules  which  they  follow  are  kept  a  great  fecret. 


CHAP.     XIII. 
Of  their  CEREMONIES. 


THE  Kamtfchadales  always  celebrated  three  days  in  the 
month  of  November,   which  is  hence  called  the  month 
of  Purification.      Stellcr  imagines,  that  this  was  firfl 
inftituted  by  their  anccftors  to  return  thanks  to  God  for  all  his 
bleffings }  but  that  afterwards,  through  the  ftupidity   of  thefe 

people, 


K   A    M    T    S    C    H    A   T    K    A,     &c.        207 

people,  it  has  been  perverted  by  foolidi  and  ridiculous  ceremo- 
nies ;  and  this  appears  the  more  probable,  becaufe  that,  after 
their  fummer  or  harveft  labour  is  over,  they  look  upon  it  as  a 
fin  to  do  any  work,  or  make  any  vifits,  before  this  holiday, 
which  if  any  one  negled:s  he  is  obliged  to  expiate  it  at  that  time, 
if  not  before.  From  hence  we  may  fee  that  the  anceftors  of  this 
people  were  accuftomed  to  offer  up  the  firfl:  fruits  of  their  fum- 
mer labours  to  God,  and  to  make  merry  with  one  another.  The 
northern  and  fouthern  Kamtfchadales  have  ditferent  ceremonies  in 
the  celebration  of  their  holidays,  which  are  extremely  fiUy, 
and  confifl:  of  many  ridiculous  anticks.  I  fhall  give  a  flight 
sketch  of  one  of  thefe  affemblies  in  the  fouthern  Kamtfchatka. 

After  many  ftrange  ceremonies  they  introduce  a  little  bird  and 
a  fifli,  which  they  roaft  upon  the  coals,  and  divide  amongftthem^, 
when  every  one  throws  his  fhare  into  the  fire  as  a  facrifice,  or 
an  offering,  to  thofe  fpirits  which  come  to  their  feafts ;  then 
they  jjoil  dried  fifh,  the  broth  of  which  they  pour  out  before 
their  image,  and  eat  the  fifh  themfelves  ;  and  then  take  the 
birch-tree  out  of  the  hut,  and  carrying  it  to  their  magazines, 
lay  it  up  there  to  be  kept  for  the  whole  year.  Thus  ends  the 
feflival. 


CHAP.     XIV. 
Of  their    FEASTS   and   DIVERSIONS. 


THEY  make  feafb  when  one  village  entertains  another, 
either  upon  the  account  of  a  wedding,  or  having  had  a 
plentiful  fifhing  or  hunting.  The  landlords  entertain  their 
guefts  with  great  bowls  of  opanga,  'till  they  are  all  fet  a  vomit- 
ing 5 


:2o8  Of      the      NATIVES      of 

jng;  fometimes  they  ufe  a  liquor  made  of  a  large  mufliroon, 
with  which  the  RiiJJians  kill  Hies.  This  they  prepare  with  the 
juice  of  epilobium,  o'c  French  willow. 

The  firll  fymptom  of  a  man's  being  affedled  with  this  liquor 
is  a  trembling  in  all  his  joints,  and  in  half  an  hour  he  begins  to 
rave  as  if  in  a  fever  j  and  is  either  merry  or  melancholy  mad, 
according  to  his  peculiar  conflitution.  Some  jump,  dance,  and 
fing  ;  others  weep,  and  are  in  terrible  agonies,  a  fmall  hole  ap- 
pearing to  them  as  a  great  pit,  and  a  fpoonful  of  water  as  a 
lake  :  but  this  is  to  be  underftood  of  thofe  who  ufe  it  to  excefs ; 
for  taken  in  a  fmall  quantity  it  raifes  their  fpirits,  and  makes 
them  brifk,  courageous,  and  chearful. 

It  is  obferved,  whenever  they  have  eaten  of  this  plant,  they 
maintain  that,  whatever  foolilli  things  they  did,  they  only  obeyed 
the  commands  of  the  mufliroon  :  hov/ever,  the  ufe  of  it  is 
certainly  fo  dangerous,  that  unlefs  they  were  well  looked  after 
it  would  be  the  deftrudlion  of  numbers  of  them.  The  Kamtf- 
chadales  do  not  much  care  to  relate  thefe  drunken  frolicks,  and 
perhaps  the  continual  ufe  of  it  renders  it  lefs  dangerous  to  them. 
One  of  our  Coffacks  refolved  to  eat  of  this  mufliroon  in  order 
to  furprife  his  comrades;  and  this  he  adually  did,  but  it  was 
with  great  difficulty  they  preferved  his  life.  Another  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Kamtfchatkay  by  the  ufe  of  this  mufhroon,  ima- 
gined that  he  was  upon  the  brink  of  hell  ready  to  be  thrown 
in,  and  that  the  mufliroon  ordered  him  to  fall  upon  his  knees, 
and  make  a  full  confeflion  of  all  the  fins  he  could  remember, 
which  he  did  before  a  great  number  of  his  comrades,  to  their 
no  fmall  diverfion.  It  is  related,  that  a  foldier  of  the  gar- 
rifon  having  eaten  a  little  of  this  mufliroon,  walked  a  great 
way  without  any  fatigue,  but  at  laft,  having  taken  too  great 
a  quantity,  he  died.  My  interpreter  drank  fonie  of  this 
juice  without  knowing  of  it,  and  became  fo  mad,  that  it 
was  with    difiiculty   that  we    kept    him    from    ripping  open 

his 


K    A    M  T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     &c.        209 

his  belly,    being,   as   he   faid,   ordered   to   do  it  by  the   mufli- 
roon. 

The  Katfitfchadales  and  the  Koreki  eat  of  it  when  they  refolve 
to  murder  any  body  ;  and  it  is  in  fuch  efteem  among  the  Koreki^ 
that  they  do  not  allow  any  one  that  is  drunk  with  it  to  make 
water  upon  the  ground,  but  they  give  him  a  veffel  to  fave  his  urine 
in,  which  they  drink,  and  it  has  the  fame  efFedl  as  the  mufliroon 
itfelf.  None  of  this  mufhroon  grows  in  their  country,  fo  that 
they  are  obliged  to  purchafe  it  of  the  Kamtfchadales.  Three  or 
four  of  them  are  a  moderate  dofe,  but  when  they  want  to  get 
drunk  they  take  ten. 

t.:.The  women  never  ufe  it ;  fo  that  all  their  merriment  confifts 
in'jefting,  dancing,  and  finging.  Their  dance  is  in  this  manner: 
The  two  women  that  are  to  dance  fpread  a  mat  in  the  middle 
of  the  room,  and  kneel  down  upon  it  oppofite  to  one  another, 
having  a  little  tow  in  each  hand.  At  firft  they  begin  to  ling 
very  iow,  moving  a  little  their  hands  and  (houlders  j  by  de- 
grees they  raife  their  voice,  and  encreafe  the  motions  of  their 
bodies,  'till  they  are  quite  out  of  breath  and  fatigued.  This 
ftrange,  uncouth  entertainment,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  feemed 
greatly  to  delight  the  Kamtfchadales  :  fo  flrongly  is  every  nation 
prejudiced  in  favour  of  its  own  cufloms.  .  '   '^,  ' 

In  their  love-fongs  they  declare  their  paffion  to  their  lovers, 
their  grief,  hope,  and  other  affedlions.  The  women  generally 
compofe  them,  and  have  clear,  agreeable  voices.  Though  they 
do  not  want  an  inclination  for  mufick,  yet  they  have  no  mufical 
inftrument,  except  a  fimple  flute,  and  upon  that  they  cannot 
play  any  tune. 

Another  of  their  amufements  is  mimicking  other  people  in 
their  fpeaking,  walking,  and  all  other  a<Stions.  Whenever  a 
ftranger  comes  to  KamtJ'chatka  they  give  him  a  new  name,  and 
obferve  every  thing  about  him  very  carefully,  which  they  mimick 

E  e  for 


2IO  Of     the      n     A.    r    I    Y    E     S      of 

for  their  diverlion  in  all  their  entertainments.  They  fometimes 
ftnoke  tobacco,  and  tell  flories ;  all  which  merriments  are  gene- 
rally in  the  night  time.  They  have  alfo  profefled  buffoons  or 
jefters ;  but  their  wit  is  intolerably  indecent  and  obfcene. 


CHAP.      XV. 
Of  //6^/>  FRIENDSHIP,  and  HOSPITALITY. 


WHEN  any  one  of  this  country  feeks  the  friendfliip 
of  another  he  invites  him  to  his  hut,  and  for  his  en- 
tertainment drefles  as  much  of  his  beft  vidluals  as 
might  ferve  ten  people.  As  foon  as  the  ftranger  comes  into  the 
hut,  which  is  made  very  hot  for  his  reception,  both  he  and  the 
landlord  ftrip  themfelves  naked :  then  the  latter  fets  before  his 
guefl:  great  plenty  of  vidtuals ;  and  while  he  is  eating  it  the 
hofl  throws  water  upon  red-hot  ftones,  'till  he  makes  the  hut 
infupportably  hot.  The  llranger  endeavours  all  he  can  to  bear 
this  exceflive  heat,  and  to  eat  up  all  the  vidluals  that  were 
dreffed ;  and  the  landlord  endeavours  to  oblige  his  friend  to 
complain  of  the  heat,  and  to  beg  to  be  excufed  from  eating  all 
up.  It  is  reckoned  a  diflionour  to  the  landlord,  and  a  mark  of 
niggardlinefs,  if  he  fhould  be  able  to  accomplifh  this.  He  him- 
ielf  eats  nothing  during  the  whole  time,  and  is  allowed  to  go 
out  of  the  hut ;  but  the  flranger  is  not  fuffered  to  flir  'till  he 
acknowledges  himfelf  overcome.  At  thefe  feafts  they  over-eat 
themfelves  fo  much,  that  for  three  days  they  cannot  bear  the 
fight  of  vidtuals,  and  are  fcarce  able  to  move,  from  repletion. 

When  the  flranger  is  gorged,   and  can  no  longer   endure  the 
heat,  he  purchafes  his  difmiflion  with  prefents  of  dogs,  cloaths, 

or 


KAMTSCHATKA.    &c.        21  r 

or  whatever  is  agreeable  to  his  landlord  ;  in  return  for  which  he  re- 
ceives old  rags,  and  ufelefs  lame  curs.  This,  however,  is  reckoned 
no  injury,  but  a  proof  of  friendfhip  j  and  he  expedls,  in  turn, 
to  ufe  his  friend  in  the  fame  manner.  And  if  that  man,  who 
has  thus  plundered  his  friend,  returns  not  his  vifit  in  proper  time, 
he  does  not  thereby  fave  his  prefents,  for  the  gueft  pays  him  a 
fecond  vifit,  at  which  time  he  is  obliged  to  make  him  what 
prefents  he  is  able  ;  but  if,  either  out  of  poverty  or  avarice,  he 
makes  him  none,  it  is  looked  upon  as  the  greateft  affront,  and 
he  muft  expert  this  man  always  to  be  his  enemy  :  befides,  it  is 
fo  dilTionourable  that  no  body  elfe  will  ever  live  in  friendfhip 
with  him  afterwards. 

In  their  banquets  they  treat  their  friends  in  the  fame  manner, 

only  they  do   not  torment  them  with   heat,    nor   expedl   any 

prefents.     When  they  entertain  with  the  fat  of  feals  or  whales, 

they  cut  it  out  into  flices ;  and  the  landlord  kneeling  before  his 

company,   with  one  of  thefe  flices  in  one  hand  and  a  knife  in 

the  other,  thrufts  the  fat  into  their  mouths,  crying  in  a  furly 

tone,  T'a  na,  and  with  his  knife  he  cuts  off  all  that  hangs  oUt 

of  their  mouths,  after  they  are  crammed  as  full  as  they  can  hold. 

Whoever  wants  any  thing  from  another  may  generally  obtain  it 

upon  thefe  occafions ;  for  it  is  reckoned  difhonourable  for  the 

gueft  to  refufe  his  generous  landlord  any  thing.     An  inftance  of 

this  happened,  between  a  Kamtfchadak  and  a  newly  chriftened 

Coflack,  iuft  before  I  arrived,  and  was  then  the  common  fubjedl 

of  converfation.     The  Coffack,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  that 

country,  had  a  Kamtfchadak  to  his  friend,   who  he  heard  was 

poiTeffed  of  a  very  fine  fox-fkin,  which  he  greatly  defired,  but 

which  the  Kamtfchadak  would  by  no  means  part  with.     The 

Coflack  invited  him  to  his  hut,  where  he  entertained  him  with 

vaft  plenty  of  viduals,  and  by  throwing  water  upon  burning-hot 

ftones  made  the  heat  of  the  hut  intolerable  to  his  friend  the 

Kamtfchadak^  'till  at  laft    he  was  obliged   to  beg  for  mercy. 

E  e  2  This 


2  12  Of      the     -^    k    T    I    Y    E    ^     of 

This  the  Coflack  would  not  grant  'till  he  had  obtai/ied  a  promife 
of  the  fine  fox-fkin.  It  fhould  feem,  that  this  entertainment 
could  not  be  agreeable  to  the  Kamtfchadak :  however,  he  leemed 
to  be  pleafed  with  it,  and  to  fwear  that  he  never  thought  it 
poffible  to  make  fuch  a  heat,  or  that  the  CofTacks  could  entertain 
their  friends  with  fo  much  refpedt ;  and  declared,  that  though 
he  looked  upon  his  fox-lkin  as  an  ineftimable  rarity,  yet  he 
parted  from  it  with  pleafure  on  that  occafion,  and  {hould  always 
remember  the  noble  entertainment  of  his  friend. 


CHAP.      XVL 
Of  ibeir  COURTSHIP,   M  ARRI  AGES,  Gft:. 

WH  E  N  a  Kamtfchadak  refolves  to  marry,  he  looks 
about  for  a  bride  in  fome  of  the  neighbouring  vil- 
lages, feldom  in  his  own  ;  and  when  he  finds  one  to 
his  mind,  he  difcovers  his  inclination  to  the  parents,  defiring 
that  he  may  have  the  liberty  of  ferving  them  for  fome  time : 
this  permiffion  he  eafily  obtains,  and,  during  his  fervice,  he  fhews 
an  uncommon  zeal  in  order  to  fatisfy  them  of  what  he  can  do. 
After  having  thus  ferved,  he  defires  liberty  to  feize  his  bride ; 
and  if  he  has  happened  to  pleafe  the  parents,  his  bride,  and  her 
relations,  this  is  prefently  granted  j  but,  if  they  difapprove  of 
it,  they  give  him  fome  fmall  reward  for  his  fervices,  and  he  de- 
parts. It  fometimes  happens  that  thefe  bridegrooms,  without 
difcovering  any  thing  of  their  intention,  engage  themfelves  in 
fervice  in  fome  flrange  village ;  and  though  every  one  fufpeds 
their  defign,  yet  no  notice  is  taken  of  it,   'till  either  he  or  his 

friend  declares  it. 

When 


KAMTSCHATKA,     &c.  213 

When  a  bridegroom  obtains  the  liberty  of  feizing  his  bride,  he 
feeks  every  opportunity  of  finding  her  alone,  or  in  the  company 
of  a  few  people  ;  for  during  this  time  all  the  women  in  the  vil- 
lage are  obliged  to  proted  her ;  befides  (he  has  two  or  three  dif- 
ferent coats,  and  is  fwaddled  round  with  fiih  nets  and  ftraps,  fo 
that  {he  has  little  more  motion  that  a  flatue.  If  the  bridegroom 
happens  to  find  her  alone,  or  in  company  but  with  a  few,  he 
throws  himfelf  upon  her,  and  begins  to  tear  off  her  cloaths, 
nets,  and  ftraps ;  for  to  ftrip  the  bride  naked  conftitutes  the 
ceremony  of  marriage.  This  is  not  always  an  eafy  tafk  ; 
for  though  flie  herfelf  makes  fmall  refidance,  (and  indeed 
{he  can  make  but  little )  yet,  if  there  happen  to  be  many 
women  near,  they  all  fall  upon  the  bridegroom  without  any 
mercy,  beating  him,  dragging  him  by  the  hair,  fcratching  his 
face,  and  ufing  every  other  method  they  can  think  of  to  prevent 
him  from  accomplifhing  his  defign.  If  the  bridegroom  is  fo 
happy  as  to  obtain  his  wifli,  he  immediately  runs  from  her,  and 
the  bride  as  a  proof  of  her  being  conquered,  calls  him  back 
with  a  foft  and  tender  voice  :  thus  the  marriage  is  concluded. 
This  vifVory  is  feldom  obtained  at  once,  but  fometimes  the 
conteft  lafis  a  whole  year  ;  and  after  every  attempt  the  bride- 
groom is  obliged  to  take  fome  time  to  recover  flrength,  and  to 
cure  the  wounds  he  has  received.  There  is  an  inflance  of  one, 
who,  after  having  perfevered  for  feven  years,  inftead  of  ob- 
taining a  bride,  was  rendered  quite  a  cripple,  the  women  having 
ufed  him  fo  barbaroully. 

As  foon  as  the  above  ceremony  is  over,  he  has  liberty  next 
night  to  go  to  her  bed,  and  the  day  following,  without  any  ce- 
remony, carries  her  off  to  his  own  village.  After  fome  timx, 
the  bride  and  bridegroom  return  to  the  bride's  relations,  where 
the  marriage  feaft  is  celebrated  in  the  following  manner  -^  of 
which  I  was  an  eye-witnefs  in  1739* 

The 


^14  Of      //&<r     N     A     T    I     V     E    S      of 

The  bridegroom,  his  friends,  and  his  wife,  vifited  the  father- 
in-law  in  three  boats.  All  the  women  were  in  the  boats,  and 
the  men  being  naked  puflied  them  along  with  poles.  About  one 
hundred  paces  from  the  village  to  which  they  were  going,  they 
landed,  began  to  fing,  and  ufed  conjurations  with  tow  faftened 
upon  a  rod,  muttering  fomething  over  a  dried  fifh's  head,  which 
they  wrapped  in  the  tow,  and  gave  to  an  old  woman  to  hold. 
The  conjuration  being  over,  they  put  upon  the  bride  a  coat  of 
fheep's  fkin,  and  tied  four  images  about  her  :  thus  loaded  (be  had 
difficulty  to  move.  They  went  again  into  their  boats,  and  came 
up  to  the  village,  where  they  landed  a  fecond  time  ;  at  this 
landing-place,  a  boy  of  the  village  met  them,  and  taking  the 
bride  by  the  hand  led  her,   all  the  women  following. 

When  the  bride  came  to  the  hut,  they  tied  a  flrap  round  her, 
by  which  fhe  was  let  down  the  flairs,  the  old  woman  who  car- 
ried the  fifh's  head  going  before  her.  The  head  fhe  laid  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  flairs,  where  it  was  trodden  upon  by  the  bride 
and  bridegroom  and  all  the  people  prefent,  and  then  thrown  into 
the  fire. 

All  the  ftrangers  took  their  places,  having  firft  flripped  the 
bride  of  fuperfluous  ornaments.  The  bridegroom  heated  the  hut 
and  drefTed  the  viduals  which  they  had  brought  with  them, 
and  entertained  the  inhabitants  of  the  village.  The  next  day  the 
landlord,  entertained  the  flrangers  with  great  fuperfluity,  who 
on  the  third  day  departed  ;  the  bride  and  bridegroom  only  re- 
mained to  work  fome  time  with  their  father.  The  fuperfluous 
drefs  which  was  taken  from  the  bride  was  diftributed  among  the 
relations,  who  were  obliged  to  return  them  prefents  of  far  greater 
value. 

The  former  ceremonies  only  relate  to  a  firft  marriage  ;  for  in 
the  marriage  of  widows,  the  man  and  woman's  agreement  is 
fufficient ;  but  he  muft  not  take  her  to  himfelf  before  her  fins 

are 


K  A  M  T  S   C  H  A  T  K   A,     Gff.  215 

are  taken  away.  This  can  only  be  done  by  fome  ftranger's 
firft  lying  with  her  for  once  ;  but  as  this  taking  off  of  fin  is 
looked  upon  by  the  Kamtfchadaks  as  very  dirtionourable  for  the 
man,  it  was  formerly  difficult  to  find  one  to  undertake  it ;  fb 
that  the  poor  widows  were  at  a  great  lofs  before  our  Coffacks 
came  amongft  them  ;  fince  which  they  have  been  in  no  want 
of  Grangers  to  take  away  their  fins.  Marriage  is  forbidden  only 
between  father  and  daughter,  mother  and  fon  ;  a  fon-in-law  may 
marry  his  mother-in-law,  and  a  father-in-law  his  daughter-in- 
law  ;  and  firfi:  coufins  marry  frequently.  Their  divorce  is  very 
eafy,  confiding  only  in  a  man's  feparating  beds  from  his  wife  i 
in  fuch  cafes  the  man  immediately  marries  another  wife,  and 
the  woman  accepts  of  another  hufband,  without  any  further 
ceremony. 

A  Kamtfchadale  hath  two  or  three  wives,  with  whom  he  lies 
by  turns.  Sometimes  he  keeps  them  all  in  one  hut,  and  fome- 
times  they  live  in  different  huts.  With  every  maid  that  he  mar- 
ries he  is  obliged  to  go  through  the  above-mentioned  ceremonies. 
Though  thefe  people  are  fond  of  women,  yet  they  are  not  fo 
jealous  as  the  Koreki.  In  their  marriages  they  do  not  feem  to 
regard  the  marks  of  virginity.  Nor  are  the  women  more 
jealous ;  for  two  or  three  wives  live  with  one  hufband  in 
all  harmony  :  even  though  he  alfo  keeps  feveral  concubines. 
When  the  women  go  out  they  cover  their  faces  with  a 
fort  of  veil  ;  and  if  they  meet  any  man  upon  the  road,  and 
cannot  go  out  of  the  way,^  they  turn  their  backs  to  him, 
and  fland  'till  he  is  paffed.  In  their  huts  they  fit  behind  a  mat 
or  a  curtain  made  of  nettles  j  but  if  they  have  no  curtain,  and 
a  flranger  comes  into  the  hut,  they  turn  their  face  to  the  wall^ 
and  continue  their  work.  This  is  to  be  underflood  of  thofe  that 
retain  their  ancient  barbarity ;  for  feveral  of  them  now  begin 
to  be  civilized  to  a  certain  degree,  though  all  of  them  (till 
preferve  a  rude  harfhnefs  in  their  manner  of  fpeaking. 

CHAP. 


2i6  Of      the     NATIVES      of 

CHAP.     XVII. 
0/"  //^^   BIRTH    of    their  Children. 


IN  general  thefe  people  are  not  fruitful,  for  I  could  never  learn 
that  any  one  man  had  ten  children  by  the  fame  woman. 
Their  women,  as  they  fay,  have  commonly  very  ealy  births : 
Steller  was  prefent  at  the  delivery  of  one  of  thefe  women,  who 
went  out  of  the  hut  about  her  ordinary  bufinefs,  and  in  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  afterwards  was  carrying  her  child  in  her  arms,  without 
any  change  in  her  countenance.  He  likewife  relates,  that  he  faw 
another  woman  who  was  in  labour  three  days,  and  to  his  great 
furprife  was  at  laft  happily  delivered  of  a  child,  which  came 
double,  prefenting  the  hips  firft.  The  conjurers  attributed  the 
occafion  of  this  unnatural  pofture  to  the  father,  who  in  the  time 
that  the  child  ought  to  have  been  born  was  employed  in  making 
fledges,  and  bending  the  wood  over  his  knee.  Such  ridiculous 
caufes  do  they  aflign  for  every  uncommon  effedl.  The  women  are 
delivered  upon  their  knees,  in  prefence  of  as  many  people  as  are  in 
the  village,  without  diftindtion  of  age  or  fex.  They  wipe  the  new- 
born child  with  tow,  and  tie  the  navel-firing  with  thread  made 
of  nettles,  and  then  cut  it  with  a  knife  of  flint :  they  throw 
the  placenta  to  the  dogs.  They  put  chewed  epilobium  upon  the 
navel,  and  wrap  the  infant  in  tow  inflead  of  fwaddling  cloaths : 
then  every  one  carefles  it,  taking  it  in  their  arms,  kiffing  it,  and 
rejoicing  with  the  parents.  This  is  the  only  ceremony  which 
they  ufe.  They  can  hardly  be  faid  to  have  profefTed  midwives, 
and  for  the  moft  part  the  mother  or  neareft  relation  performs 
the  office. 

The 


K   A   M   1    S   C   H   A   T   K    A,     &c.  217 

The  women,  as  was  mentioned  above,  who  defire  to  have 
children,  for  this  purpofe  eat  fpiders.  .Some  child-bed  women, 
that  they  may  the  fooner  conceive  again,  eat  the  navel-firing  of 
the  child.  There  are  others  who  have  as  great  averfion  to  having 
children,  and  procure  abortions  by  different  poifonous  medicines, 
in  which  they  are  aflifted  by  fome  knowing  old  women ;  but  this 
can  never  be  done,  as  it  is  well  known,  but  at  the  hazard  of 
their  own  lives.  There  are  others,  who  are  fuch  unnatural 
wretches  as  to  deftroy  their  children  when  they  are  born,  or 
throw  them  alive  to  the  dogs.  They  ufe  likewife  feveral  herbs 
and  different  conjurations  to  prevent  conception.  Their  fuper- 
ftition,  aho,  is  fometimes  the  occafion  of  great  barbarity ;  for 
when  a  woman  bears  twins,  one  of  them  at  leaft  muft  be 
deftroyed,  and  fo  muft  a  child  born  in  very  ftormy  weather  ; 
though  the  laft  can  be  averted  by  fome  conjurations.  After  the 
birth,  the  women,  to  recover  their  ftrength,  make  ufe  of  fifli 
broth,  made  with  an  herb  which  they  call  hale  ;  and  then  in 
a  few  days  return  to  their  ordinary  diet. 


CHAP.      XVIII. 

Of  their  D  I  S  E  A  S  E  S  ^;7i    REMEDIES.. 


TH  E  principal  difeafes  in  Kamtfchatka  are  the  fcurvy, 
boils,  palfy,  cancer,  jaundice,  and  the  venereal  diftemper. 
Thefe  difeafes  they  think  are  inflid:ed  upon  them  by  the 
fpirits  that  inhabit  fome  particular  groves,  if  ignorantly  they 
happen  to  cut  any  of  them  down.  Their  principal  medicines 
confift  in  charms  and  conjurations,  but  at  the  fame  time  they  do 
not  negledt  the  ufe  of  herbs  and  roots.    For  the  fcurvy  they  ufe  a 

F  f  certain 


y 


218  Of      the      NATIVES      of 

certain  herb  which  they  rub  upon  their  gums,  as  alfo  the  leaves 
of  the  cranberry  *  and  blackberry  •\.  The  Coflacks  cure  them- 
felves  with  decoftions  of  the  tops  of  cedar,  and  by  eating  wild 
garlick.  The  good  efFedls  of  this  medicine  were  felt  by  all  the 
people  that  were  in  the  Kamtfchatka  expedition. 

Boils  are  a  moft  dangerous  difeafe  in  Kamtfchat'ka^  caufing 
the  death  of  numbers.  They  are  very  large,  being  often  two 
and  lometimes  three  inches  over  ;  and  when  they  break  they  open 
in  about  forty  or  fifty  little  holes.  It  is  looked  upon  to  be  a 
very  dangerous  cafe,  when  no  matter  comes  from  thefe  openings ; 
and  thofe  that  recover  are  confined  to  their  beds,  fometimes  fix 
and  fometimes  ten  weeks.  T\\t  Kamtfchadales  \x{z  raw  hare-fkins 
to  bring  the  matter  to  a  fuppuration.  The  palfy,  cancer,  and 
French  difeafe,  are  fuppofed  to  be  incurable ;  the  laft,  they  fay, 
was  not  heard  of  before  the  arrival  of  the  RnJ/ians.  There  is 
likewife  another  diflemper  which  they  call  fujhiitch,  which  is  a 
fort  of  fcab,  that  furrounds  the  whole  body  under  the  ribs  like 
a  girdle.  When  this  does  not  come  to  fuppurate  and  fall  off, 
then  it  is  mortal,  and,  they  fay,  every  one  muft  have  this  once 
in  his  lifetime,  as  we  have  the  fmall-pox.  Mr.  Steller  gives  a 
more  ample  account  of  their  difeafes  and  remedies.  He  relates, 
that  they  ufe  with  fuccefs  the  fpunge  for  drawing  out  the  matter 
in  thefe  boils.  The  Coffacks  apply  to  their  boils  the  remains  of 
the  fweet-grafs  [)  after  they  have  extraded  their  brandy,  and  this 
often  fuccefsfully  refolves  them. 

The  women  ufe  fea  rafberries  '\.  to  haften  their  delivery  ;  and 
alfo  a  fort  of  coral,  which  they  make  into  powder  like  crab-eyes, 
in  a  gonorrhea.  Againft  coftivenefs  they  ufe  the  fat  of  the  fea 
wolf;  in  gripes,  pains  of  the   bowels,   and   colds,  they  ufe  a 


*  Vaccinium  ramis  filiformibus  repentlbus,  foliis  ovatis  perennantibus, 
I  Impetrum.         ||  Spondylium  foliolis  pinnatifidij.         %  Species  fuci. 


decodion 


K   A  M   T  S   C   H   A  T  K  A,     G?r.  219 

decoftion  of  the  pentaphylladis  fruticofus,  and  that  not  without 
fuccefs.  To  wounds  they  apply  the  bark  of  the  cedar,  and  with 
this  they  pretend  they  can  even  extraft  arrows. 

In  coftivenefs  they  Hkewife  drink  the  broth  of  their  (linking 
fifli,  and  in  fluxes  they  eat  lac  lunae,  which  is  very  common  in 
this  country.  For  the  fame  difternper  they  hkewife  ufe  meadow- 
fweet  and  tormentilla  root. 

Thofe  who  have  fore  throats  ufe  a  decoftion  of  the  epilobium, 
which  is  ahb  ufcd  by  women  in  hard  labours.     When   they  are 
bit  by  a  dog,   or  wolf,  they  lay  the  bruifed  leaves  of  the  ulmaria 
upon  the  wound,  drinking  at  the  fame  time  a  decodlion  of  them : 
this  decodlion  they  alfo  admininifter  in  the  belly-ach  and  fcurvy. 
The  leaves  and  ftalks  bruifed  they  ufe  in  burns.     The  decoction 
of  this  herb  mixed  with  tifh  they  ufe  alfo  in  the  tooth-ach  ;  they 
hold  it  warm  in  their  mouths,  and  lay  a  piece  of  the  root  upon 
the  affedied  tooth.     They  ufe  a  fpecies  of  gentian  in  the  fcurvy, 
and  almofl:  again  ft  every  diforder.     In  the  French  difeafe  they 
apply  the   chamaenchododendros,  but  feldom  to  any  advantage  : 
in  fluxes  they  ufe  the  quercus  marina  :   in  fwellings  of  the  legs 
and  fcurvy,   they  drink   a   decodlion  of  the  dryas  ;   and  procure 
fleep  by  eating  the  feed  of  the  ephedra.     They  foment  their  eyes 
with  a  decodlion  of  feramus.  •>«;>. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Lopatka  ufe  clyfters,  which  probably 
they  learned  from  the  Kuriles  :  they  prepare  them  from  a  decoc- 
tion of  different  herbs,  fometimes  with  fat  and  fometimes  with- 
out :  this  they  put  into  a  feal's  bladder,  faftening  to  it  any  pipe 
which  they  can  procure,  and  apply  it  in  the  common  way  :  this 
medicine  is  in  high  efteem  among  them,  and  ufed  in  moft  dif- 
tempers. 

In  the  jaundice,  they  have  a  medicine,  which  they  look  upon 
as  infiiUible,  They  take  the  roots  of  the  iris  fylveflris,  and 
after  cleaning  them,  beat  them  in  warm  water,  and  apply  the 
juice,  which  they  fqueeze  out,  as  a  clyfter,   continuing   it  for 

F  f  2  two 


220  Of     the      U     A     T    I     Y     E     S      of 

two  days  three  times  a  day  :  this  produces  a  P'irging,  and  ge- 
nerally gives  great  relief.  After  fome  time,  if  the  cure  is  not 
completed,  they  repeat  it  again.  They  neither  ufe  lancets  nor 
cupping  glaffes,  but  with  a  pair  of  wooden  pincers  draw  up  the 
ikin,  and  pierce  it  with  an  inftrument  of  chryftal  made  on  pur- 
pofe,   letting  out  as  much  blood  as  they  want 

In  pains  of  the  back  they  rub  the  part  afFefted  before  a  fire  with 
a  root  of  the  cicuta,  being  careful  not  to  touch  the  loins,  which 
they  fay  would  produce  fpafms.  In  pains  ot  the  joints  they  place 
upon  the  part  a  little  pyramid,  made  of  a  fungus  which  grows 
upon  the  birch-trees,  and  fet  the  top  of  it  on  fire,  letting  it  burn 
'till  it  comes  to  the  fkin,  v/hich  then  cracks,  and  leaves  a  wound 
behind  that  yields  a  great  quantity  of  matter.  The  wound  they 
cure  with  afhes  of  the  fungus,  but  fome  give  themfelves  no 
trouble  about  it  at  all.  The  root  of  the  anemonides,  or  ranun- 
culus, they  ufe  to  hurt  or  poifon  their  enemies  j  and  they  Hkewifc 
poifon  their  arrows  with  it. 


CHAP.      XIX. 

Of    the    B  \J  K  I  h  h    of    the     DEAD. 


TH  E  burial  of  the  dead,  if  one  can  call  throwing  them 
to  the  dogs  a  burial,  is  different  here  from  what  it  is  in 
any  other  part  of  the  world ;  for  inflead  of  burning  or 
laying  the  dead  bodies  in  fome  hole,  the  Kamtfchadales  bind  a 
flrap  round  the  neck  of  the  corps,  draw  it  out  of  the  hut,-  and 
deliver  it  for  food  to  their  dogs  :  for  which  they  give  the  fol- 
lowing reafons;  that  thofe  who  are  eaten  by  dogs  will  drive  with- 
fine  dogs  iji  the  other  world  j   and  that  they  throw  them  round 

near 


K    A    M   T    S    C   H    A   T    K    A,     ^6-.        221 

near  the  hut,  that  evil  fpirits,  whom  dicy  imagine  to  be  the 
occafion  of  their  death,  feeing  tlie  dead  body,  may  be  fatisfied 
with  the  mifchief  they  have  done.  Piowever,  they  frequently 
remove  lo  fome  other  place,  when  any  one  has  died  in  the  hut, 
without  dragging  the  corps  along  with  them. 

They  throw  away  all  the  cloaths  of  the  deceafed,  not  becaufe 
they  imagine  they  fliall  have  occafion  for  them  in  the  other 
world,  but  becaufe  they  believe  that  whoever  wears  the  cloaths 
of  one  that  is  dead  will  certainly  come  to  an  untimely  end. 
This  fuperflition  prevails  particularly  among  the  Kurilcs  of  the 
Lopatka,  who  would  not  touch  any  thing  which  they  thought 
had  belonged  to  a  dead  perfon,  although  they  fliould  have  the 
greateft  inclination  for  it.  The  Cofiacks  make  ufe  of  this  fu- 
perflition  to  prevent  one  another  fometimes  from  felling  ready- 
made  cloaths,  by  affuring  the  buyer  that  they  belonged  to  a 
dead  perfon. 

After  the  burial  of  the  dead  they  ufe  the  following  purifi- 
cation :  Going  to  the  wood  they  cut  fome  rods,  of  which  they 
make  a  ring ;  and  creeping  through  it  twice,  they  carry  it  to 
the  wood,  and  throw  it  towards  the  weft.  Thofe  who  dragged 
out  the  body  are  obliged  to  catch  two  birds  of  one  fort  or  other  ; 
one  of  which  they  burn,  and  eat  the  other  with  the  whole  fa- 
mily. The  purification  is  performed  on  the  fime  day  ;  for  before 
that  they  dare  not  enter  any  other  hut,  nor  will  any  body  elfe 
enter  their's.  In  commemoration  of  the  dead,  the  whole  family 
dine  upon  a  fifli,  the  fins  of  which  they  burn  in  the  ^re. 


CHAP. 


222  0/     fk      IJ    A    T    I    V    E    S      of 


CHAP.     XX. 


THIS  chapter  in   the   original  contains   an   account  of 
three  different  dialeds  of  the  Kamtfchadales ;  which,  as 
they  are  very  unintelligible  to  an  Englifi  reader,   we 
thought  proper  to  omit. 


CHAP.     XXI. 
Of  the  NATION   of   the  K  O  R  E  K  I. 


AS  the  Koreki  and  Kuriles  agree  in  mofl:  of  their  cuftoms 
and  habits  with  the  Kamtfchadales,  we  fliall  only  take 
notice  of  thofe  things  wherein  they  differ  from  them  or 
from  one  another.  The  Koreki,  as  is  above  related,  are  divided 
into  the  rein-deer  or  wandering  Koreki ;  and  thofe  that  are  fixed  in 
one  place  who  live  in  huts  in  the  earth  like  the  Kamtfchadales,  and 
in  every  other  refped  indeed  refemble  them  ;  fo  that  whatever 
remarks  we  make  are  to  be  underftood  of  the  wandering  Koreki, 
unlefs  otherwife  exprefled. 

The  fixed  Koreki  live  along  the  coafl  of  the  Eaflern  Ocean, 
from  the  river  Ukoi  as  far  as  the  Anadir,  and  along  the 
coaft  of  the  fea  of  Penfchina  round  the  Penfchina  bay  to 
the  ridge  Nuktchattnnin,  out  of  which  the  river  Nuktchan 
rifes.  From  thefe  rivers  they  take  different  appellations,  by 
which  they  are  diflinguiflied  one  from  another.  The  wan- 
dering Koreki  fojourn  with    their  herds  of  deer,    and  extend 

from 


K    A   M   T   6    C    H  A    T    K    A,     Gfr.        223 

from  the  Kaftern  Ocean  weft  to  the  head  of  the  rivers  Pefif- 
china  and  Omolona^  north  to  the  Anadir^  and  fouth  to  the  rivers 
Lefnaya  and  Karaga.  Sometimes  they  come  even  over  thefe 
bounds,  approaching  very  near  to  Kafntfchatka  ;  but  this  indeed 
happens  very  feldom,  and  onlv  when  they  are  afraid  of  the  Tchu- 
kotjkoi,  who  are  their  moft  dangerous  neighbours.  The  people 
that  they  border  upon  are  the  Katntjchadales,  the  Tchukotjkoi, 
Ukageri,  and  the  Ttmgufi  or  Lamuti. 

The  Tciikotjkoi  fl:ould  be  accounted  a  race  of  the  Koreki,  which 
in  truth  they  are ;  if  fo,  then  it  may  be  faid  that  the  country  of 
the  Koreki  is  of  far  greater  extent,  for  the  Tchukotjkoi  pofiefs 
northward  from  the  river  Anadir  as  far  as  the  Tchukotjkoi  pro- 
montory. Indeed,  thofe  Tchukotjkoi  that  Uve  north  of  the  river 
Anadir  are  not  fubjedt  to  the  empire  of  RuJJia^  but  frequently 
make  incurfions  upon  thofe  that  are,  both  Koreki  and  Tchukotjkoi , 
kiUing  and  making  them  prifoners,  and  driving  off  their  herds  of 
deer.  In  the  fummer  time  they  fifli  not  only  in  the  feas  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Anadir,  but  even  come  up  the  river  a  great 
way,  when  thofe  people  who  are  fubjedls  to  Rufjia  frequently 
fall  into  their  hands. 

The  Koreki  differ  not  only  in  their  manners  from  one  another, 
but  alfo  in  the  form  of  their  bodies.  The  wandering  Koreki, 
as  far  as  I  could  obferve,  are  of  fmall  ftature,  and  very  lean  ; 
they  have  fmall  heads,  and  black  hair,  which  they  fhave  every 
day  ;  their  face  is  oval,  their  eyes  fmall,  eyebrows  hanging,  nofe 
fhort,  mouth  large,  and  their  beard  black  and  pointed,  which 
they  frequently  pluck.  The  fixed  Koreki,  though  not  of  a  very 
large  ftature,  are  however  taller  than  the  former,  and  thicker 
and  ftronger  made  ;  efpecially  thofe  that  live  towards  the  north, 
who  refemble  a  good  deal  the  Komtjchadales  and  Tchukotjkoi. 

There  is  befides  a  very  great  difference  in  their  cuftoms 
and  habits.  The  wandering  Koreki  are  extremely  jealous, 
and  fometimes  kill  their  wives  upon  fufpicion  only ;  but  when 

any 


224  ^f      '^^^      NATIVES       of 

any  are  caught  in  adultery,  both  parties  are  certainly  con- 
demnetl  to  death.  For  this  reafon  the  women  feeni  to  take 
p.iins  to  make  themfelves  dilagreeable  ;  for  they  never  wafh 
their  facew  or  hands,  nor  comb  their  hair,  and  their  upper  gar- 
ments are  dirty,  nigged,  and  torn,  the  beft  being  worn  under- 
neath. TJ)is  they  are  obliged  to  do  on  account  of  the  jealoufy 
of  their  h.fbands  ;  who  fay,  that  a  woman  has  no  occafion  to 
ado:n  herfelf  unlefs  to  gain  the  affedtions  of  a  ftranger,  for  her 
hulbund  loves  her  without  that.  On  the  contrary,  the  fixed 
Koreki,  and  I'chiikotjkoi ,  look  upon  it  as  the  trueft  mark  of 
friendfliip,  when  they  entertain  a  friend,  to  put  him  to  bed 
with  their  wife  or  daughter ;  and  a  refulal  of  this  civility 
they  confider  as  the  greateft  affront  ;  and  are  even  capable 
of  murdering  a  man  for  fuch  a  contempt.  This  happened  to 
feveral  Ruffian  Coflacks  before  they  were  acquainted  with  the 
cuftoms  of  the  people.  The  wives  of  the  fixed  Korek'i  endeavour 
to  adorn  themfelves  as  much  as  poffible,  painting  their  faces, 
wearing  fine  cloaths,  and  ufing  various  means  to  fet  off  their 
perfons.  In  their  huts  they  fit  quite  naked,  even  in  the 
comp  ny   of   ffrangers. 

The  whole  nation  is  rude,  paffionate,  revengeful,  and  cruel ; 
and  the  wandering  Koreki  are  alfo  proud  and  vain  :  they  imagine 
that  no  people  in  the  world  are  fo  happy  as  themfelves,  re- 
garding all  the  accounts  that  Grangers  give  of  the  advantages 
of  other  countries,  as  fo  many  lies  and  fables ;  for,  fay  they, 
"  If  you  could  enioy  thefe  advantages  at  home,  what  made  you 
take  fo  much  trouble  to  come  to  us  .?  You  feeni  to  want  feveral 
things  which  we  have  ;  we,  on  the  contrary,  are  fatisfied  with 
what  we  poffefs,  andiiever  come  to  you  to  feek  any  thing".  One 
great  reafon  of  their  pride  and  haughtinefs  may  be  owing  to 
the  fettled  or  fixed  Koreki^  who  fliew  the  greateft  fear  and  awe 
of  them  ;  fo  that  if  one  of  their  deer-herds  fhould  come  to  a  hut 
of  the  latter,  they  all  run  out  to  meet  him,  treat  him  with  the 

greateft , 


K   A    M    T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     &c.        225 

greateft  ceremony^  and  bear  every  affront.  It  was  never  heard 
that  the  fettled  Korekl  did  the  leafl:  injury  to  any  of  the 
wanderers;  and  this  is  io  firmly  believed,  that  our  tax-gatherers 
think  themfelves  entirely  f\fe,  \\hcn  they  converfe  with  thofe 
who  live  in  huts,  if  they  are  guarded  by  one  of  the  rein- 
deer Koreki  :  which  may  appear  very  ftrange,  confidcring  that 
the  fettled  Koreki  are  much  their  fuperiors  in  llrength ;  and 
it  can  only  be  attributed  to  th;>t  general  refpedl  v\hich  poor 
people  pay  to  the  rich  :  for  the  poverty  of  the  fettled  Ko- 
reki is  fo  great,  that  they  depend  upon  the  others  in  a  great 
meafure  for  their  cloathing.  The  rein-deer  Koreki  call  the 
others  their  flaves,  and  treat  them  accordingly  ;  but  they  behave 
very  differently  to  the  1  chukotjkoi y  v/ho  are  fo  terrible  to  them, 
that  fifty  of  the  rein-deer  Koreki  dare  not  ftand  againfl:  twenty 
of  thefe  ;  and  if  it  was  not  for  the  protedion  of  the  Coffacks 
oi  j4?iadir,  the  T'chiikotjkoi  would  have  rooted  them  out  by  this 
time.  As  every  nation  has  fomething  commendable,  fo  the  Koreki 
are  more  honeft  and  induftrious  than  the  KatutJ'chadalcs,  and  feem 
to  have  a   greater  fenfe  of  (hame. 

It  is  ditKcult  to  form  an  exacfl  account  of  the  numbers  and 
different  families  of  the  Koreki,  but  it  is  thought  that  all  together 
they  are  more  numerous  than  the  Kamtjchadales.  They  live  in 
fuch  places  as  abound  with  mofs  for  their  rein-deer,  without  re- 
garding the  fcarcity  of  wood  or  water :  in  the  winter  time  they 
can  ufe  fnow  for  water,  and  for  firing  mofs  or  grafs,  of  which 
they  have  plenty  every  where.  Their  manner  of  living,  efpe- 
cially  in  the  winter  time,  is  flill  more  difagreeable  than  that  of 
the  Kamt/chadales  :  for  being  frequently  obliged  to  change  their 
habitations,  the  huts  which  they  come  into  are  all  frozen  ;  and 
when  they  begin  to  thaw  them  by  the  fires,  which  are  ufually 
made  of  green  Ihrubs  or  grafs,  there  arifes  a  fmoke,  fb  per- 
nicious to  the  eyes,  that  it  is  enough  to  blind  a  perfon  entirely 
in  one  day. 

G  g  Their 


226  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

Their  huts  are  made  much  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  of 
other  wandering  people,  but  lefs  than  thofe  of  the  Calmucks. 
In  the  winter  they  cover  them  with  raw  deer-fkins,  and  in  the 
fummer  with  tanned.  They  have  no  flooring  or  reparation 
within  their  huts ;  in  the  middle  only  are  four  little  ftakes 
driven,  between  which  is  their  hearth.  To  thefe  ftakes  they 
commonly  tie  their  dogs,  which  frequently  drag  the  vidtuaU  out 
of  the  kettles  while  it  is  drefling  ;  and  notwithftanding  their 
mafters  beat  them  very  feverely,  they  generally  come  in  for 
a  {hare  of  every  piece.  A  man  muft  be  very  hungry  to  be  able 
to  eat  with  thefe  people,  Inftead  of  wafliing  their  kettles  or 
platters  they  give  them  to  the  dogs  to  lick,  and  the  very  flefti 
which  they  tear  from  the  mouths  of  the  dogs  they  throw  again 
into  the  kettles  without  wartiing  it. 

The  Tchiikotjkoi  winter  huts  are  much  preferable  to  thofe  of 
the  Koreki,  being  much  warmer  and  more  roomy.  Several 
families  live  in  the  fame  hut,  all  having  their  proper  benches, 
upon  which  deer-fkins  are  fpread,  whereon  they  fit  or  fleep. 
Upon  each  bench  a  lamp  burns  day  and  night,  for  which  they 
ufe  fifli-oil  and  a  wick  of  mofs.  They  have  an  opening  in  the 
top,  which  ferves  for  a  chimney  ;  however  they  are  almoft  as 
fmoaky  as  thofe  of  the  Koreki,  but  fo  warm,  that  in  the  coldeft 
places  the  women  fit  naked.  The  cloaths  which  they  wear  are 
made  of  rein-deer  fl^ins,  not  difl^ering  in  the  leaft  from  thofe 
of  the  KamtfchadaleSy  who  purchafe  them  from  the  Koreki. 
They  feed  upon  the  flefli  of  the  rein-deer,  in  which  they  very 
much  abound,  fome  of  the  rich  having  ten  or  twenty  thoufand  j 
nay,  one  of  the  chiefs  was  faid  to  have  one  hundred  thoufand  : 
but  yet  they  are  fo  penurious,  that  they  are  forry  to  kill  any 
for  their  own  ufe,  fatisfying  themfelves  with  fuch  as  die  natu- 
rally, or  are  killed  by  the  wolves.  Of  this  carrion,  indeed,  they 
have  plenty  ;  and  they  are  not  afliamed  to  excufe  themfelves 
from  entertaining  travellers  by   telling  them  that  none  of  their 

deer 


K    A    M  T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,    iiff,        227 

deer  are  killed  or  have  died  lately.  For  particular  gucfts, 
indeed,  they  will  kill  fome  of  their  ftock,  and  at  fiich  times  only 
they  have  a  hearty  meal.  They  never  milk  the  rein-deer,  nor 
know  any  ufe  of  milk.  They  eat  their  fledi  for  the  moll  part 
boiled,  and  what  they  do  not  confume  immediately  they  dry 
with  the  fmoke  in  their  huts.  One  of  their  principal  diflics  is 
csW^d  yamgaya,  which  is  made  thus  ;  they  put  the  blood  of  the 
beaft  mixed  with  fome  fat  into  its  ftomach  or  paunch,  which 
they  hang  up  and  fmoke.  Our  CofTacks  reckon  this  a  great 
delicacy.  Befides,  the  Korekl  eat  every  other  animal  except 
dogs  and  foxes.  They  ufe,  in  general,  neither  herbs,  roots,  nor 
barks  of  trees  ;  but  the  poor  feed  on  them  in  time  of  great 
fcarcity  ;  nor  will  any  catch  fifli,  except  the  deer-herds,  and 
that  very  feldom.  They  make  no  provilion  of  berries  for  the 
winter,  but  only  eat  them  frefli  in  the  fummer.  They  think 
nothing  can  be  fweeter  than  cranberries  beat  up  with  the  root 
faran  and  deer's  fat.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  feeing  one  of 
their  chieftains  exceedingly  furprifed  upon  the  firft  fight  of 
fugar,  which  he  took  for  fait  ;  but  tafting  it  was  fo  pleafed  with 
its  fweetnefs,  that  he  begged  fome  pieces  to  carry  to  his  wives : 
but,  as  he  was  not  able  to  refilt  the  temptation  of  fo  delicious 
a  rarity,  he  ate  it  all  up  on  the  road ;  and  when  he  came 
home  to  his  houfe,  although  he  fvvore  to  the  women  that  he  had 
tafted  fait  fweeter  than  any  thing  he  had  ever  tafted  before, 
yet  they  would  not  believe  him,  infiiling  that  nothing  could  be 
fweeter  than  cranberries  with  deer's  fat  and  lilly-roots. 

They  ride  only  in  the  winter  time  on  fledges  drawn  by  rein- 
deer, but  never  mount  upon  their  backs  in  the  fummer,  as  they 
^v\>^  fay  the  'Tiingufi  do.  Their  fledges  are  made  about  a  fathom  long  : 
the  fides  are  about  four  inches  thick,  but  rather  thinner  at  the 
fore  part,  where  they  are  bent  upwards :  the  two  fide-pieces 
are  joined  together  by  fmall  pieces  of  wood.     They  yoke  two 

G  g  2  deer 


228  Of     the      N     A-'  'P?  I     V     E     S      of 

deer  before  every  fledge.  The  harnefs  is  fomewhat  like  that  they 
ufe  for  reins  of  the  dogs ;  the  harnefs  of  that  deer-  which  is  on 
the  right  fide  being  faftened  to  the  left  fide  of  the  fledge,  and 
that  of  the  deer  on  the  left  fide  to  the  right  fide  of  the  fledge. 
Their  bridles  and  reins  are  fomething  like  the  collars  of  horfes. 
Upon  the  deer's  forehead  they  have  four  little  bones,  made  like  teeth, 
but  very  fharp,  wh'ch  are  ufed  as  bits  to  pull  them  in  when 
they  run  too  faft ;  for  thefe  fharp  bones  piercing  the  flcin  fl:op 
them  at  once.  The  right  hand  deer  only  has  thefe  bones ;  for 
if  that  is  /lopped,  the  deer  upon  the  left  has  not  fl^rength  to  run 
away.  The  drivers  fit  near  the  fore  part  of  the  fledge  ;  and  if 
they  want  to  turn  to  the  right  they  only  draw  the  rein,  but 
when  they  would  turn  to  the  left  they  beat  the  right  fide  of  the 
deer.  They  drive  them  with  a  goad,  which  is  about  four  feet 
long,  having  a  fharp  piece  of  bone  at  one  end,  and  at  the  other 
a  hook  :  with  the  bone  they  prick  the  deer  to  go  forwards,  and 
with  the  hook  they  lift  up  the  harnefs  when  it  happens  to 
fall  down. 

Travelling  with  rein-deer  is  much  fvvifter  tlian  with  dogs : 
good  cattle  will  go  150  verfl:s  a  day ;  but  you  muft  take  care  to 
feed  them  frequently,  and  to  flop  often  to  allow  them  to  ftale ; 
for  you  may  kill  them  in  one  day,  or  at  leafl:  make  them  good 
for  nothing.  Deer  that  are  ufed  for  draught  are  bred  to  it,  as 
hoifes.  The  male  they  geld,  which  is  done  by  piercing  the 
fpermatick  vefl'els,  and  tying  them  tight  with  thongs.  The 
rein-deer  which  the  Koreki  ufe  for  draught  feed  along  with 
the  others  ;  and  when  they  want  to  part  them,  they  drive 
them  all  home ;  then  crying  aloud  in  a  particular  manner,  the 
draught  cattle  feparate  themfelves  from  the  refl:}  and  if  any  of 
them  fliould  remain,   they  are  beat  mofl;  unmercifully. 

The  fettled  Koreki  have  likewife  fome  rein-deer,    but  very/ 
few,  and  thofe  fuch  as  they  only  ufe  for  drawing.     The  Tchii-  ^ 

kotjkoi 


K   A    M    T    S    C    H    A   T    K    A,     &c.        229 

kotjkoi  have  great  herds,  and  yet  feed  for  the  moft  part  upon  fea 
animals.  The  Koreki  y^'owXdi  be  miferable  if  they  wanted  the- 
rein-deer  :  for  they  know  no  way  of  keeping  thcmfelves  ahve, 
as  they  do  not  underftand  how  to  catch  fifh  ;  and  if  they  did, 
could  not  foon  provide  themfelves  with  boats,,  nets,  or  dogs  : 
fo  that  the  poorer  fort  are  employed  by  the  richer  in  feeding 
their  deer,  for  which  they  receive  meat  and  cloaths ;  and  if  they 
have  any  fmall  flock  of  their  own,  they  are  allowed  to  feed 
them  with  their  mafter's  cattle. 

The  rein-deer  Koreki  exchange  their  deer  and  deer-fkins  with 
the  neighbouring  people  for  the  very  finefl:  furrs,  of  which  they 
have  always  a  large  ftock  by  them. 

The  religion  of  the  Koreki  is  more  abfurd  than  that  of  the 
Kamtfchadales,  at  leaft  that  little  chief,  of  whom  I  had  my  in- 
formation, feemed  to  have  fcarce  any  idea  of  a  God ;  they  feem 
more  to  refped:  evil  fpirits,  which,  according  to  their  opinion, 
inhabit  the  rivers  and  woods:  this  refpedfeems  to  be  owing  to  their 
fear.  The  fettled  Koreki  acknowledge  for  their  God,  the  Kuta 
of  the  Kamtfchadales.  They  have  no  fixt  time  of  worfliip 
or  offering  facrifices  j  but,  whenever  they  pleafe,  they  kill  either 
a  rein-deer  or  a  dog,  which  they  f:x  upon  a  ftake,  turning  its  face 
towards  the  eafl:,  leaving  only  the  deer's  head  and  tongue  upon 
the  fiake.  They  themfelves  do  not  know  to  v,  hom  they  make 
thefe  facrifices,  and  only  ufe  thefe  words,  Vio  coing  yack  7ie  la  hi, 
ban  he  vau ;  that  is.  This  to  you,  and  may  you  lend  us  fome- 
thing  that  is  good.  The  time  of  facrificing  is  when  they  are 
going  to  pafs  any  river  or  wafte,  which  they  think  the  devils  in- 
habit ;  then  they  kill  one  of  their  deer,  and  eating  the  flefl-i 
they  faften  the  bones  of  the  head  upon  a  pole,  which  they  fix 
oppofite  to  the  habitation  of  the  fpirits.  When  the  Koreki  are 
afraid  of  any  infedtious  diflemper,  they  kill  a  dog,  and  winding 
the  guts  upon  two  poles,  they  pafs  between  them. 

During 


23<>  Of     the      N    'a    T'^I    V     E     S      o/' 

During  their  facrifices  their  /}jamans  or  forcerers  beat  a  little 
drum  like  that  ufed  by  xhtyakut/ki,  and  the  neighbouring  nations. 
Some  of  the  Shamans  are  reckoned  phyfician"?,  and  are  thought, 
by  beating  upon  the  drum,  to  drive  away  dirtempers.  In  the 
year  1739  I  had  an  opportunity  of  feeing,  at  the  lower  Kamtf- 
chatkoi  fort,  the  moft  famous  Shaman  Carimlacha,  who  was  not 
only  of  great  reputation  among  thefe  wild  people,  but  was  alfo 
refpedled  by  our  Coffacks,  for  the  many  extraordinary  feats  that 
he  performed  ;  particularly  that  of  ftabbing  his  belly  with  a 
knife,  and  letting  a  great  quantity  of  blood  run  out,  which  he 
drank  :  however  this  he  performed  in  fuch  an  awkward  manner, 
that  any  one,  who  was  not  blinded  by  fuperftition,  might  eafily 
difcover  the  trick.  At  firft,  fitting  upon  his  knees,  and  beating 
fome  time  upon  his  drum,  he  ftruck  his  knife  into  his  belly,  and 
then,  from  below  his  furred  coat,  he  drew  out  a  handful  of 
blood,  which  he  eat,  licking  his  fingers.  I  could  not  help  laugh- 
ing at  the  fimplicity  of  the  trick,  which  the  poorefl:  player  of 
legerdemain  would  have  been  alliamed  of.  One  might  fee  him 
flip  the  knife  down  below  his  furr,  and  that  he  fqueezed  the 
blood  out  of  a  bladder  which  he  had  in  his  bofoni.  After  all 
this  conjuration  he  thought  ftill  to  furprife  us  more  by  Viewing  us 
his  belly  all  bloody,  pretending  to  have  cured  the  wound  which  he 
had  not  made.  He  told  us,  that  the  evil  fpirits  appeared  to  him 
in  different  forms,  and  came  from  different  places ;  fbme  came 
from  the  fea,  others  out  of  the  burning  mountains;  fome  of 
them  were  very  large,  and  fome  very  fmall  j  fome  had  no  hands, 
and  fome  were  half  burned  j  the  fpirits  of  the  fea  were  much 
finer  drefled  than  the  others,  and  appeared  to  him  as  it  were  in 
a  dream,  and  at  fuch  a  time  they  tormented  him  fo  much,  that 
he  was  almofl  out  of  his  fenfes. 

When  the  forcerers  pretend  to  cure  any  dlflemper  by  their, 
conjurations,  fometimes  they  order  a  dog  to  be  killed,  at  other 

times 


K,A    M    T      C     H    A    T    K    A,      ^c.        231 

times  to  fet  little  rods  round  their  huts.  When  they  kill  a  dog, 
one  perfon  holds  it  by  the  head,  another  by  the  tail,  and  a  third 
flabs  it  in  the  fide ;  when  it  is  dead  they  ftick  it  upon  a  flake, 
turning  its  face  towards  the  neareft  burning  mountain. 

Their  civil  policy  is  as  rude  as  their  religious ;  they  know 
nothing  of  dividing  the  year  into  months  j  they  have  names 
indeed  for  the  four  feafons.  They  have  only  names  for  the  four 
cardinal  winds.  Of  the  conftellations  they  know  the  Great  Bear, 
which  they  call,  in  their  language,  the  wild  rein-deer ;  the 
Pleiades  they  name  the  duck's  nefl: ;  and  the  Milky  Way  the 
fcattered  river. 

The  diftance  of  places  they  reckon  by  their  day's  journey, 
which  is  between  30  and  50  verfls. 

Before  they  were  fubjed:  to  the  Empire  of  RtiJJia  they  never 
had  any  government  or  chief  magiftrate  among  them,  only 
thofe  that  were  rich  had  fome  fort  of  authority  over  the  poor  ; 
nor  before  that  did  they  know  any  thing  of  an  oath.  At  prefent, 
inftead  of  fwearing  upon  the  crofs  or  gofpel,  our  Coffacks  oblige 
them  to  hold  a  mufquet  by  the  barrel,  threatening,  that  whoever 
does  not  obferve  this  oath  will  certainly  be  (hot  by  a  ball.  ThiS; 
they  are  fo  much  afraid  of,  that  rather  than  clear  themfelves  by 
this  oath,   if  guilty,  they  will  confefs  their  crime. 

They  are  quite  ignorant  of  all  good  manners,  not  only  in  com- 
mon compliments,  but  in  receiving  ftrangers,  whom  they  treat 
with  an  air  of  fuperiority.  When  they  entertain  their  guefts  they 
don't  oblige  them  to  over-eat  themfelves,  as  the  Kavitfchadales  do, 
but  give  them  what  they  have  in  fufficient  plenty  ;  their  beft  vic- 
tuals is  fat  meat,  and  all  thefe  barbarous  nations  are  exceflively 
fond  of  fat.  The  yakutjki  would  lofe  an  eye  for  a  piece  of  fat 
horfe  flefh,  and  the  "Tchukotjkoi  for  a  fat  dog.  The  Jakutjki 
know  that  the  ftealing  of  any  cattle  is  puniflied  with  the  lofs  of 
all  their  goods ;  yet,  if  they  have  an  opportunity,  they  can't  re- 
ftrain  themfelves  from  ftealing  a  fat  horfe,  comforting  themfelves 

amidft 

3 


232         -Of      the      N     A,./r-.  I     V     E    S      o/" 

amidfl:  all  their  misfortunes,  with  the  pleafure  of  having  once  in 
their  life  made  a  delicious  meal. 

Amongft  all  thefe  barbarous  nations,  excepting  the  Kamtfchadales, 
theft  is  reputable,  provided  they  do  not  ileal  in  their  own  tribe, 
or  if  done  with  fuch  art  as  to  prevent  difcovery ;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  puniHied  very  feverely  if  difcovered,  not  for  the  theft, 
but  for  want  of  addrefs  in  the  art  of  ftealing.  A  Ichukotjkoi  girl 
cannot  be  married  before  flie  has  fliewn  her  dexterity  in  this 
way. 

iVTurder  is  not  looked  upon  as  a  great  crime  unlefs  it  be  in 
their  own  tribe,  and  then  the  relations  of  the  murdered  gene- 
rally revenge  it,   but  no  one  elfe  takes  any  notice  of  it. 

In  their  maarriages  the  rich  match  with  the  rich,  and  the  poor 
with  the  poor,  with  little  regard  either  to  beauty  or  any  other  ac- 
complilhment.  Theymarry  for  the  moft  part  into  their  own  family, 
fuch  as  with  a  firft  coufin,  an  aunt,  or  mother-in-law ;  and,  in 
Ihort,  with  any  relation  except  their  own  mother  or  daughter. 
The  ceremonies  of  courtfliip  are  the  fame  as  among  the  Kamtf- 
cbadales.  Although  the  bridegroom  fhould  be  very  rich,  yet  he 
is  obliged  to  ferve  three  or  five  years  for  his  bride ;  during  which 
time  they  allow  them  to  lleep  together,  though  the  form  of 
catching  the  bride  fliould  not  be  performed,  which  they  leave 
'till  the  marriage  be  celebrated,  and  that  is  done  without  any 
great  ceremony.  They  have  fometimes  two,  and  fometimes  three 
wives,  whom  they  keep  at  different  places,  giving  them  a  herd 
of  deer  and  a  keeper.  Their  greateft  pleafure  is  to  go  from  place 
to  place  and  examine  their  cattle ;  and  it  is  furprifing  that  the 
Koreki,  notwithftanding  their  herds  are  fo  numerous,  and  they 
are  quite  ignorant  of  arithmetick,  can  immediately  difcover  the 
leafl:  lofs,  and  even  defcribe  all  the  marks  of  the  deer  that  is 
miffing. 

They  have  a  great  fondnefs  for  their  children,  and  breed 
them  up  from  their  infancy  to  labour  and  oeconomy.     Thofe 

that 


K    A   M   T    S    C    H    A    T    K    A,     &c.        233 

that  are  rich,  as  foon  as  the  child  is  born,  fet  apart  for  him  a  certain 
number  of  rein-deer,  which  however  he  cannot  claim  'till  he  comes 
to  maturity.  The  old  women  give  names  to  the  children,  with 
the  following  ceremonies  :— They  fet  up  two  little  rods,  which 
they  tie  together  with  threads,  to  the  middle  of  which  they  hang 
a  ftone  wrapped  in  a  piece  of  ilicep-fkin  ;  then  they  afk  of  the 
ilone  in  a  muttering  voice  the  name  they  fliall  give,  and  running 
over  thofe  of  feveral  of  their  relations,  whatever  name  the  ftone 
fhakes  at  they  give  to  the  child.  The  child-bed  woman  does 
not  fliew  herfelf  nor  come  out  of  the  hut  for  ten  days  ;  if  they 
are  obliged  to  remove  their  habitations  during  that  time,  flie  is 
carried  in  a  covered  fledge.  They  give  their  children  the  hreaft 
'till  they  are  three  years  old  and  upwards  3  but  they  ufe  neither 
cradle  nor  fwaddling  cloaths. 

They  carefully  attend  thofe  who  are  fick,  and  their  Shamaris, 
or  conjurers,  treat  them  in  the  manner  above  related  ;  but  they 
know  nothing  of  the  virtues  of  drugs  or  plants. 

They  burn  their  dead  in  the  following  manner  ; — Having  firft 
drefled  them  in  their  finefl:  apparel,  they  draw  them  with  thofe  deer 
which  they  think  were  their  favourites  to  the  place  where  they 
are  to  be  burned.  Here  they  eredt  a  great  pile  of  wood,  into 
which  are  thrown  the  arms  of  the  deceafed  and  fome  houfliold 
furniture,  fuch  as  their  fpear,  quiver  and  arrows,  knives,  hatcfiets, 
kettles,  &c.  Then  they  fet  fire  to  the  pile ;  and  while  it  is 
burning,  kill  the  deer  that  drew  the  corps,  upon  which  they 
feafl,  and  throw  the  fragments  into  the  fire. 

They  celebrate  the  memory  of  the  dead  only  once,  and 
that  a  year  after  their  death.  All  the  relations  then  alTem- 
ble  ;  and  taking  two  young  rein-deers  that  have  never  been  in 
the  draught,  and  a  great  many  deers'  horns,  which  they  have 
been  coUefting  through  the  whole  year  for  that  purpofe,  they 
go  to  the  place  where  the  body  was  burned,  if  near,  or  if  at  a 
dillancc,  to  fome  other  high  place,   where  they  kill  the   deer  j 

H  h  and 


2~34  Of     the      NATIVES      of 

and  the  Shaman,  driving  the  horns  into  the  earth,  pretends  that 
he  fends  a  herd  of  deer  to  the  dead.  After  this  they  return 
home,  and  in  order  to  purify  themfelves,  they  pafs  between  two 
rods  which  are  fixed  in  the  ground  ;  the  Shaman,  at  the  fame 
time  beating  them  with  another,  conjures  the  dead  not  to  take 
them  away. 

In  all  other  cuftoms  and  ceremonies  they  agree  with  the 
Kamtfchadales ;  as  in  making  war,  which  is  generally  by  fur- 
prifing  their  enemies.  Their  arms  confift  in  bows,  arrows,  and 
Ipears,  formerly  pointed  with  bones  or  flint.  Their  women  are 
employed  in  dreffing  their  furrs,  making  cloaths  and  fhoes. 
The  Koreki  women,  indeed,  are  employed  in  cookery,  which 
thofe  of  Kamtfchatka  are  not. 


CHAP. 


K    A   M    T    S   C   H    A    T    K    A.     &c.        235 


CHAP.     XXII. 


A  CC  O  U  NT  of  the  Nation  of  the  K  U  RI  LE  S. 


THE  manners  of  the  Kuriles  refemble  thofe  of  the  Kamtf- 
chadales  fo  much,   that  we  (liould  have  taken  no  notice 
of  them  feparately  if  their  external  appearance  and  lan- 
guage were  not  very  different.     We  can  give  no  account  of  their 
origin  more  than  of  the  other  inhabitants  of  Kamtfchatka. 

Thefe  people  are  of  a  fmall  ftature,  black  haired,  round  vifaged, 
fomewhat  fwarthy,  and  withal  more  well-favoured  than  any  of 
their  neighbours.  Their  beards  are  thick,  and  their  whole  body 
is  covered  with  hair,  in  which  they  particularly  differ  from  all 
the  other  Kamt [chadales.  The  men  fhave  their  heads  as  far 
back  as  the  crown,  allowing  the  other  hair  to  grow  to  its  full 
length.  This  cuftom  they  have  probably  taken  from  the  "Ja- 
panefe,  with  whom  they  have  fome  commerce.  The  women 
only  cut  the  fore  part  of  their  hair,  that  it  may  not  fall  into  their 
eyes.  Tlie  lips  of  the  men  are  blackened  about  the  middle  ;  the 
women's  are  entirely  black,  and  flained  round ;  their  arms  are 
likewife  ftained  with"  different  figures  as  far  as  the  elbows.  This 
cuftom  they  have  in  common  with  the  Tchukotjkoi  and  T^unguji. 
Both  men  and  women  wear  filver  rings  in  their  ears,  which 
they  get  from  the  'Japanefe. 

Their  cloaths  are  made  of  the  fkins  of  fea  fowls,  foxes,  fea 
beavers,  and  other  fea  animals  j  and  are  generally  compofed  of 
the  {kins  of  very  different  creatures,  fo  that  it  is  rare  to  fee  a 
whole  fuit  made  of  the  fame  fort  of  fkins.    The  fafhion  refembles 

H  h  2  more 


236  0/      th   "■^f^A^'    T    I    V'Ef^S      of 

more  that  of  the  I'migitfi^  than  the  Kamtfcha dales.  Though 
they  are  fo  little  regardful  of  uniformity  in  their  own  ceuntry 
eloathing,  they  are  very  proud  to  acquire  fuch  as  are  made  of 
cloth,  ferge,  or  filk,  particularly  thofe  of  a  fcarlet  colour  ;  but 
fo  little  care  do  they  take  of  them  when  they  have  got  them, 
that  they  will  wear  them  when  employed  about  the  dirtieft 
work. 

*' '  Their  huts  are  much  the  fame  as  thofe  of  the  Kamtfchadales^ 
only  they  keep  them  a  little  cleaner,  covering  generally  the  floor 
and-  walls  with  mats  made  of  grafs.  They  feed  for  the  mofl  parC 
upon  fea  animals,  and  very  little  upon  filh. 

They  are  as  ignorant  of  a  deity  as  the  Kamtfchadales.  In 
their  huts  they  have  idols  made  of  chips  or  fhavings  curioufl)^ 
curled,  Thefe  idols  they  call  Ingool,  and  are  faid  to  venerate 
them  in  fome  degree,  but  whether  as  good  or  evil  fpirits  I 
never  could  learn.  They  facrifice  to  them  the  firft  animal 
which  they  catch,  eating  the  flefli  themfelves,  they  hang  up  the 
Ikin  before  the  image  ;  and  when  they  change  their  huts  they  leave 
the  ikin  and  the  idol  there.  If  they  make  any  dangerous  voyage' 
they  take  their  idol  along  with  them;  which,  in  cafe  of  imminent 
danger,  they  throw  into  the  fea,  expelling  by  this  method  ta 
pacify  the  fborm  j  and  with  this  protedtor  they  think  themfelves. 
fafe  in  all  their  excurfions.       '■    ''°'   r 

They  travel  in  the  fummer  time  in  boats,  in  the  winter  In 
fnow  fhoes.  The  men  are  employed  in  catching  of  fea  animals, 
the  women  in  fewing,  during  the  winter;  but  in  the  fummer 
they  go  out  with  their  hufbands  to  hunt. 

They  are  more  civilized  than  the  neighbouring  people, 
being  fteady  honefl:,  and  peaceable ;  their  way  of  fpeaking  is- 
foft  and  modefl: ;  they  have  a  refpedl  for  old  people,  and  an 
affcdion  for  each  other,  particularly  their  relations.  It  is  a 
pleafure  to  fee  with  what  hofpitality  they  receive  fuch  as 
come  to  vifit  them  from  other  iflands :   thofe  that   come  in 

boats. 


K  A  M  T  S   C  H   A  T  K  A,     Gff.  237 

boats,  and  thofe  that  receive  ihem  from  the  huts,  march  in 
great  ceremony,  drefled  in  all  their  warlike  accoutrements,  fliak- 
ing  their  fwords  and  fpears,  and  bending  their  bows,  as  if  they 
were  going  into  an  engagement,  and  dancing  up  to  each  other 
'till  they  meet,  fliewing  the  greateft  figns  of  delight,  embracing  and 
hugging  one  another,  and  fliedding  tears  of  joy.  The  people  of 
the  huts  then  carry  the  vifitants  into  their  habitation,  where  they 
entertain  them  in  the  beft  manner,  landing  and  hearing  them 
relate  all  the  adventures  that  have  happened  to  them  in  their 
voyage.  The  honour  of  this  relation  is  referved  for  the  oldeft, 
who  is  always  the  orator ;  he  informs  them  of  every  thing  that 
has  happened  lince  the  lafl:  meeting,  how  they  have  been  em- 
ployed, how  they  lived,  where  they  travelled,  whom  they  faw, 
what  good  fortune  or  misfortune  has  happened  to  them,  who  have 
been  fick,  or  who  are  dead.  This  relation  fometimes  continues 
for  three  hours.  When  the  ftranger  has  ended,  the  oldefl  of 
the  people  who  are  vifited  gives  him  an  equal  information  of  every 
thing  that  has  happened  to  them.  Before  this  the  reft  muft  not 
fpeak  to  one  another ;  then,  according  as  circumftances  are,  they 
either  condole  with,  or  congratulate,  each  other,  and  hniih  the 
entertainment  with  eating,  dancing,  finging,  ,  and  telling  q£ 
ftories.  :'rb  li^y    b"-:   .  ---h-:^  -^ -^*  >A"--r,^ 

In  their  courtfliips,  marriages,  and  the  education  of  children,, 
they  differ  very  little  from  the  other  Kamtjchadales.  They  have 
two  or  three  wives,  with  whom  they  never  publickly  fleep,  but 
fteal  to  them  privately  in  the  night  time.  They  have  an  extra- 
ordina'-y  way  of  punilhing  adultery  :  the  huiband  of  the  adulte- 
rers challenges  the  adulterer  to  a  combat,  which  is  performed  in 
the  following  manner:  both  the  combatants  are  Itripped  quite 
naked,  and  the  challenger  gives  the  challenged  a  club  about  three- 
feet  long,  and  near  as  thick  as  one's  arm  j  then  the  challenger  is 
obliged  to  receive  three  ftrokes  upon  his  back  from  the  challenged, 
who  then  returns  him  the  club,  and  is  treated  in  the  fame  man- 
ner; 


238  Of     the     NATIVES     of 

nei'j  'this  they  perform  three  times,  and  the  refult  is  generally 
the  death  of  both  the  combatants ;  but  it  is  reckoned  as  great 
diflionour  to  refufe  this  combat,  as  to  refufe  an  invitation  to  a 
duel  among  the  people  of  Europe.  If  any  one  prefers  his  life  or 
fafety  to  his  honour,  the  adulterer  then  is  obliged  to  pay  to  the 
hufband  of  the  adulterefs  whatever  he  demands,  either  in  fkins, 
cloaths,  provifions,  or  other  things. 

The  women  have  a  harder  time  in  child-bearing  than  the 
Kamtfchadales,  for  they  fay,  the  Kuriles  women  do  not  recover 
after  child-bearing  for  three  months.  The  midwives  give  names 
to  the  children  when  they  are  born,  which  they  always  keep.  If 
they  have  twins  they  deftroy  one. 

Such  as  die  in  the  winter  they  bury  in  the  fnow  ;  but  in  the 
fummer  they  are  buried  in  the  earth.  Self-murder  is  as  frequent 
here  as  among  the  Kamtfcbadalcs. 


:-*,    .«,    ^    >».     *,,  _,*,, 


O  F 


OF        THE 


CON  QU  E  S  T  of  Kamtfcbatka. 


«ft««««««*««*««««««««p«««>«*"«ft***««««*«»W««»«««*9**««4«fl^ 


PART       IV. 


CHAP.      I. 

(y//&?/r/?  DISCOVERIES  w^J^  of  Kamtfchatka,  and  the 
Planting  of  Ruffian  Colonies  there. 


5g(<*.i|-*>5Qj  H  O'  the  Ruffian  territories  upon  the  Frozen  Ocean, 
S>  T  t^  ^'^oxxi  the  river  Lena  eaft  to  the  river  Anadir^  were 
*(  o  w  °^  prodigious  extent,  yet  it  was  judged  proper  to 
SSi^  >*'^  gj^g  orders  to  every  commifTary  to  inform  himfelf  of 
the  countries  beyond  the  Anadir,  and  to  endeavour  to  bring  the 
inhabitants  under  lubjedion.  By  this  means  a  knowledge  of 
Kamtfchatka,  and  of  the  different  people  who  inhabit  it,  was 
long  ago  obtained  i    efpecially   fince   the  Koreki^    which    live 

upon 


.240       0/     ^/^^     C     O    N     Q^  U    E    S     T    0/ 

upon  the  Fcnfchi)ijka  and  Olutorjkoy  feas,  came  from  Anadir\  and 
had  communication  with  the  inhabitants  of  Kamtfchatka,  to 
whofe  country  they  frequently  travelled.  But  we  have  ftill  no 
authentick  account  vi'ho  was  the  firft  Ru/Jian  that  difcovered 
thefe  places :  there  is,  it  feems,  a  tradition  of  one  Theodot,  who 
for  the  fake  of  trade  went  into  Kamtfchatka  as  far  as  the  river 
Nicula,  which  river  is  now  called  after  him,  Tbeodotopitie.  They 
pretend,  that  he  went  out  of  the  river  Bona  into  the  Frozen 
Ocean  with  leven  boats ;  that,  being  feparated  from  the  reft  by 
a  ilorm,  he  was  driven  to  Kamtfchatka^  where  he  pafled  the  win- 
ter ;  that  the  next  fummer,  going  round  the  Kuriljkaya  Lopatka 
through  the  Penfchmjka  fea,  he  arrived  at  the  river  leghil^  where 
he  an4  all  his  company  were  murdered  by  the  Koreki,  which 
difafter  was  occafioned  by  their  having  feen  one  of  the  RuJJians 
kill  another  with  fire  arms ;  for  the  Koreki  upon  obferving  the  ef- 
fedl  of  thefe  weapons  at  firft  efleemed  the  Rujjians  as  fome  fuperior 
beings ;  but  perceiving  them  to  be  mortal,  they  were  glad  to  free 
themfelves  from  fuch  dangerous  neighbours.  This  tradition  is 
confirmed  by  the  account  of  one  Simeon  Dejlmef ;  who  relates, 
that  their  voyage  was  very  troublefome,  and  that  they  were 
driven  at  laft  upon  that  promontory  to  the  eaft  of  the  river 
Anadir  :  however,  all  this  feems  to  be  very  uncertain.  There 
is  likewife  an  account,  that  in  the  year  i66o  they  recovered  a 
woman  who  had  been  carried  away  from  Jakutjki  by  the  Koreki'^ 
and  who  related,  that  Theodof^  with  one  of  his  companions  died 
there  of  the  fcurvy ;  that  others  of  them  were  murdered ;  and 
that  the  remainder,  who  efcaped  in  boats,  were  never  heard  of. 
The  Kamtfchadales  acknowledge  that  fome  winter  huts  upon  the 
river  Nicula  w^ere  built  by  Rujjians. 

All  thefe  different  reports  may  eafily  be  reconciled,  if 
we  fuppofe  that  Theodot  and  his  companions  were  lofl  between 
Anadir  and  Olutorjkoy.  They  had  wintered  in  Kamtjchatka, 
upon  the  x'wcx  Teghil ;  whence  in   returning  Xo  Atiadirjk  over 

land, 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.        241 

land,  he  died  upon  the  road,  and  his  companions  were  cither 
murdered  or  loll.  However,  at  any  rate,  this  difcovery  was 
of  no  great  confequence  to  the  intereft  of  the  empire,  as 
no  information  of  the  country  was  thereby  obtained;  fo  that 
the  firft  difcovery  of  Kamtjchatka  may  be  attributed  to  thev^ 
Coflack   Atlafof. 

This  Atiafof  was  fent  from  Jaktitjki  to  the  fort  Anadirjk  in 
the  year  1697,  He  was  ordered  to  fee  if  he  could  difcover 
new  countries,  and  bring  them  in  fubjediion  to  the  empire  of 
RuJJia,  by  the  afliftance  of  the  Koreki  Tukageri^  who  lay  near  Ana- 
dirjk. In  the  year  1698  he  fent  out  one  Luke  Morojkoi,  with 
fixteen  Koreki,  in  order  to  gather  in  the  taxes  at  the  mofl:  diftant 
places ;  who  at  their  return  reported,  that  they  had  not  only  beea 
among  ^tKoreki,  but  even  within  four  days'  \o\xn-\ty  o(  Kmntfcbaf- 
ka  J  that  they  had  taken  one  of  their  little  forts,  and  had  got  a  let- 
ter written  in  a  language  which  no  body  could  underfland.  Upon 
this,  Atlajbj\  with  fixty  Coflacks  and  as  many  Tukagcri,  marched 
into  the  country  of  Kamtjchatka,  in  order  to  make  difcoveries,  and 
to  prevail  upon  them  to  pay  tribute,  which  he  by  fair  methods  ob- 
tained from  the  Acklanjki,  but  the  fort  Talojki  he  reduced  by  force. 
After  this,  as  they  relate,  he  divided  his  company  into  two  corps ; 
the  one  of  which  he  fent  to  the  Eailern  Ocean,  under  the  command 
of  Luke  Morojkoiy  and  with  the  other  he  in  perfon  went  towards  the 
Tenjchinjka  fea.  Upon  xhe  Pa  liana  his  allies,  the  Tukageri,  rebelled 
againft  him,  killed  three  of  his  ColTacks,  and  wounded  ^/A?/3/^  hi m- 
felf  and  fifteen  others ;  however  he  overcame  the  Tukageri,  and' 
killed  them  all,  Notwithftanding  this  misfortune  he  purfued  his 
journey  fouthwards.  Upon  the  river  Teghil  he  joined  the  party 
under  Morojkoi,  and  exadled  tribute  from  the  people  that  lived 
upon  the  Napan,  Kigil,  Itche,  Sintcbe,  and  Harufof,  and  refcued 
a  Japaneje  prilon^r  that  he  found  among  the  Kamtjcbadales. 

Returning  from    the    river    Itche    he    went    to     the    river 
Kamtjchatka^    where   he   built    the   upper  Kafntfchatkoi    fort,.  ^ 

I  i  and 


242         OJ     the      C    O    N    Q^  U    E    S    T      of 

and  left  in  it  Potap  Sirukof,  with  fifteen  ColTacks.  Atlafof 
returned  from  this  journey  to  yakutjki  the  2d  o^  July  1700,  and 
brought  along  with  him  the  "Japanefe  he  had  refcued,  and  the 
Kamtfchatka  tribute,  which  confifted  of  3200  fables,  ten  fea  bea- 
vers, feven  pieces  of  beavers'  fkins,  four  otter  fkins,  ten  grey  foxes, 
and  191  red  foxes ;  and  440  fables  on  his  own  account.  With 
this  tribute  he  was  difpatched  to  Mojcow,  where,  for  his  fer- 
Vices,  he  was  made  Chief  of  the  CofTacks  at  yakutjki,  and  was 
ordered  to  return  again  to  Kamtfchatka,  and  to  take  along  with 
him  from  'Toboljka,  yenifei,  and  yakutjki,  100  CofTacks,  Or- 
ders were  fentto  Toboljka  to  furnifli  them  with  fome  fmall  can- 
non, colours,  a  drummer,  arms,  and  ammunition.  However 
,Atlafof  was  prevented  from  this  expedition  before  the  year 
1706;  for  in  the  year  1701,  upon  the  river  Ttingiifi,  he  plun- 
dered a  boat  with  Chinefe  goods,  belonging  to  Logan  Dobrini, 
whofe  fervant  petitioned  againft  him,  at  the  Chancery  of  ya- 
kutjki, for  which  he  and  ten  of  the  principal  robbers  were  put 
in  prifonj  and  in  the  year  1702  Michael  Zinoveef,  who  had  been 
V'there  formerly,  was  fent  chief  of  this  expedition. 

All  this  time  the  Coffack  Potap  Sirukof  lived  quietly  in  the 
fort  of  Kamtfchatka,  and  for  three  years  received  no  injury  from 
the  inhabitants :  for  he  did  not  demand  any  tribute,  but  only  traded 
with  them  like  a  merchant.  At  laft  they  determined  to  leave  the 
fort ;  but  on  their  return  to  Anadirjk,  he  and  all  his  companions 
were  fet  upon  and  killed  by  the  Koreki.  His  fucceflbr  appears  to 
have  been  'Timothy  Cobelof,  who  is  reckoned  the  firft  governor  of 
Kamtfchatka.  In  his  time  a  fort  was  built  upon  the  river  Karakeef 
about  half  a  verft  diftant  from  the  firft.  He  built  winter  huts  upon 
the  river  Telofka,  and  gathered  voluntary  tribute  upon  the  river 
Kamtfchatka,  and  upon  the  Penfchinfka  and  Beaver"  fea  coaft  ;  with 
which  he  returned,  in  the  year  1704,  to  yakutjki.  At  the  farne 
time  a  party  of  the  Anadirjki  ColTacks,  under  the  command  of 
Andrew  Kiitin,  built  feven  winter  huts  upon  the  river  Taka,  which 

faUs 


K    A    M    T  ,S    C     H    A     T    K    A.         243 

falls  into  the  Eallern  Ocean,  and  began  to  gather  taxes  from 
the  neighbouring  Koreki. 

Michael  Zinoveef,  ient  in  place  of  Atlafof  from  Jakut/kiy 
fucceeded  Cobclof;  which  place  he  held  'till  he  was  relieved 
by  Kolefof^  in  the  year  1704.  In  his  time  he  made  books  of 
tribute,  in  which  the  names  of  the  Kamtfchadaks  were  inferted  ; 
he  tranfported  the  winter  huts  to  a  more  convenient  place,  built 
a  little  fort  upon  the  great  river,  and  having  brought  things  into 
tolerable  order,   he  returned  to  Jakutjki  with  his  tribute,     Kole- 

yij/'arrived  there  in  the  harveft  1 704,  and  continued  to  the  year 
3706  ;  for  the  Oiitori  killed  two  perfons  on  their  journey  that 
were  appointed  to  relieve  him,  viz.  Vafili  Protopopof  in  1704, 
and  Vi/ili  Shelcocojhicof  m  1705.  In  his  time  was  the  fir  ft  expe- 
dition undertaken  again  ft  the  Kuriles,  about  twenty  of  whom 
they  brought  back  with  them,  and  drove  all  the  reft  away.  He 
carried  all  his  tribute  fafe  to  yakutjki,  notwithftanding  he  was 
way-laid  at  the  fort  Kafuki-,  upon  the  river  Pingi?t,  by  the 
Korekiy  but  he  retired  to  another  little  fort  called  Aklanjki, 
where  he  lived  about  fifteen  weeks,  'till  the  winter  way  became 
pafTable.  During  this  time  the  Koreki  of  Kafiiki  tried  feveral  times 
to  furprife  him,  but  he  was  defended  by  the  inhabitants  of  Acklan- 

Jki.  Here  Kokfof  met  feven  people  that  were  fent  with  prefents 
and  ammunition  to  the  fort  oi  Kamtfchatka ;  as  he  was  in  great  want 
of  the  latter,  for  their  fecurity  he  added  to  them  thirteen  of  his  own 

^party,  and  gave  the  command  to  Simon  LomgaJ',  whom  he  ordered 
likewife  to  gather  tribute  round  the  three  Kamtfchatka  forts. 

At  the  departure  of  Vifili  KoleJbfzW  the  tributary  Kamtfchadaks 
were  tolerably  quiet ;   but  afterwards,  when  Theodore  Anqudenof 

.Was  commifTary  in  the  upper  fort,   Theodore  Yaregin  in  the  lower 

.  ^fort,  and  Demetrie  laregin  upon  the  Great  River,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Great  River  rebelled,  burned  the  fort,  and  mur- 
dered all  the  inhabitants :  at  the  hvm.  time  five  tax-gatherers 
were  killed  upon.th^  Beaver  Sea.  .  Thq  rie^fon  of  their  rebellion 

I  i  2  perhaps 


perhaps  might  be,  that  the  taxes  were  gathered  with  feverity, 
which  was  the  more  intolerable,  as  formerly  they  had  never  been 
accufjomed  to  pay  any,  and  therefore  endeavoured,  by  the  murder. 
qf  their  opprelTars,  to  recover  their  ancient  liberty  :  befideSj  they 
imagined  that  thefe  Rujjiam  might  be  themfelves  fome  runaways, 
as  they  had  never  obferved  any  new  faces  among  them  ;  they  hoped 
too,  that  the  Koreki  and  Ohitores  would  prevent  the  arrival  of  new 
recruits  from  the  Anadirjk^  as  they  heard  that  they  had  murdered 
two  commiiTaries,  with  the  CofTacks  under  their  command  -,  how- 
ever they  were  deceived  in  their  hopes,  for  a  great  many  of  them 
weie  killed  by  their  future  conquerors,  and  their  numbers  very 
much  reduced. 

All  this  while  the  Coflacks  were  obliged  to  be  very  much  upon 
their  guard,  and  keep  themfelves  clofe  in  their  forts.  In  the 
year  J705  ^/At/S/' was  freed  from  prifon,  and  fent  commiflary 
to  KamtJ'chatka,  with  full  authority,  the  fame  as  he  was  inverted 
with  in  the  year  1701.  The  abfolute  power  of  punifliing  with 
rods,  or  even  the  knout,  was  no  otherwile  circumfcribed  than  by 
a  recommendation  to  do  ftriftjuftice,  and  to  treat  thtKajnt/chadales 
in  particular  with  lenity  and  tendernefs.  He  went  from  Jakutjki 
accompanied  by  a  great  number  of  Coflacks,  furnifhed  with  war- 
hke  floras,  and  two  pieces  of  brafs  cannon;  but  fo.  far  did  he  for- 
get the  favour  of  the  pardon  he  had  obtained  for  his  former  robbery  ^- 
and  difregard  his  new  inftruftions,  that  before  he  arrived  at  A?2a~ 
dirjk  he  began  to  exercife  his  cruelty  upon  thofe  that  were 
under  his  command,  and  became  fo  intolerable  that  they  fent  a 
petition  thence  againfl:  him  to  Jakiitjki.  Notwithftanding  this 
he  arrived  fat'ely  at  Kamtjchatka  in  the  month  ot  ^uly  1707, 
and  took  the  chief  command  over  all  the  commiffaries  that  were 
there. 

In  the  month  of  Aiignjl  he  ordered  one  'John  Taretin,  with 
feventy  Coflacks,  to  march  againfl  the  rebels  who  had  killed  the 
tax-gatherers  upon  the  Beaver  Sea.     He  met  with  no  oppofition 

before 


Rv   AT  M    T    S  jX:  '^H    a  'T- -K    A.        245 

before  the  27th  of  November,  in  his  wliolc  inarch  from  the 
upper  fort  to  A-watfcha,  but  coming  near  the  bay  of  Av^achirt- 
^rty,  W'hich  is  called  at  prefent'the  haven  of  Peter  znA  Paul, 
they  were  met  in  the  evening  by  800  Kamtfchadales,  who 
thought  themfeives  fo  certain  of  overcoming  the  Coflacks,  that 
they  refolved  not  to  kill  but  take  them  all  prilbners,  every  one 
being  furnidied  with  a  rope  to  bind  them. 

The  next  day  Taretin  went  to  the  bay  of  Aimtchinjkay, 
where  he  found  all  the  boats  and  veflels  of  the  rebels ;  but  they 
had  hidden  themfeives  in  the  woods  on  each  fide  of  the  road  ; 
and  allowing  the  headmofb  to  pafs  they  rullied  out  upon  the 
middle  from  both  fides.  The  Coflacks  defended  themfeives 
fo  well,  and  fought  fo  obfiinately,  that  great  numbers  of  the 
rebels  were  killed,  and  the  reft  faved  themfeives  by  flight ;  fix  of 
the  Coflacks  were  flain,  and  feveral  wounded.  There  were  only 
three  Kamtjihadales  taken  prifoners.  After  this  adion  the  in- 
habitants continued  in  a  fi:ate  of  rebellion  'till  the  year  1731. 
From  this  expedition  the  Coflacks  returned  to  the  upper  fort 
with  what  tribute  they  had  gathered,  and  fome  hofiages.  Hi- 
therto the  government  of  Kamtfckatka  had  been  in  tolerable 
order,  and  the  Cofl'acks  preferved  a  regard  for  their  commanders  5 
but  afterwards  they  began  to  commit  great  irregularities,^  plun- 
dering the  inhabitants,  feizing  their  perfons,  and  murdering  others, 
in  defiance  of  the  governor. 


CHAP. 


246         Of    the      C    O    N    Q„    y    e    S    T       0/ 


CHAP.     II. 

Of  the^AuTi^Y  of  ibe  C0SSACK.S,  and  their  Difcovery  of  th€ 
Iflands  lying  between  Kamtfchatka  and  Japan. 


1 


AHE  Coflacks  were  diffatisfied  with  yf//rtyo/\  This  difcon- 
tent,  encieafing  by  his  continued  ill  conducftand  their  own 
licentioufnefs,  made  them  refolve  to  deprive  him  of  the 
command,  which  they  did  in  December  1707;  and  they  wrote 
to  Jakiitfki,  in  their  own  vindication,  that  he  gave  them  none 
of  thofe  provifions  which  were  gathered  from  the  Kamtfchadales^ 
for  their  fuftenance  ;  for  they  being  otherwife  employed  in  the 
fifhing  time,  than  in  catching  fifli,  muft  ftarve,  unlefs  the  go- 
vernor would  fupply  them  from  the  publick  {lores,  which  they 
charged  him  with  embezzling  for  his  own  private  advanta^Ci 
They  alfo  accufed  him  of  having  taken  bribes  to  let  the  hoftages 
go,  which  rendered  the  natives  fo  infolent,  that  the  tax-ga- 
therers upon  the  Pe?ifchi?tfka  fea  were  obliged  to  fave  them- 
felves  by  flight.  To  this  they  added  his  cruel  treatment  of  Da- 
niel Belaiof ;  and  that,  when  the  other  Coflacks  begged  of  him 
that  he  would  not  cut  and  flaili  any  of  them  in  his  paflion,  but 
punifli  them  as  his  orders  direded  in  cafe  they  were  found  guilty, 
he  replied,  that  if  he  was  to  kill  them  all  he  fhould  not  be 
puniflied  for  it :  they  befides  reprciented,  that  he  endeavoured 
even  to  irritate  the  natives  againft  the  Coflacks  j  for  having  called 
fome  of  the  principal  people  of  the  former,  he  told  them,  he 
had  wounded  that  Coffack  becaufe  he  and  others  would  have 
forced  him  to  take  the  bread  and  provifions  from  them,  their 
wives,  and  children;  upon  which  the  KamtfchadaUs  in  that 
neighbourhood  left  the  place,  and  killed  three  Coiiacks  j  that  he 

had 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A    T     K     A.         247 

had  taken  to  his  own  ufe  moO:  of  the  goods  that  were  fent  from 
Jakutjki  to  make  prefcnts  of  to  the  natives ;  and  that  he  had 
compelled  one  of  the  Kamtfchadaks  to  give  him  a  black  fox- 
flcin  for  his  own  ufe,  which  the  faid  native  had  dcfigncd  to 
pay  in  as  a   tribute. 

This  accufation  of  their's,  though  it  may  be  a  proof  of  their 
former  mutinous  difpofition,  yet  gives  us  room  to  believe  that  a 
great  deal  of  what  they  alledged  was  true,  he  being  a  man  of 
a  very  bad  charadter  and  conduft,  and  exceedingly  avaricious,  as^ 
appeared  by  the  great  riches  he  had  amafl'ed  in  fo  fliort  a  time  : 
but  it  is  fcarce  credible  that  he  fliould  endeavour  to  irritate  the 
natives  againfl:  his  own  people,  on  whofe  protedlion  the  fafety 
of  his  own  life  depended  ;  for  the  intended  murder  of  the  tax- 
gatherers  upon  the  Penjchin/ka  fea  was  more  to  be  attributed 
to  their  own  oppreflion  of  the  natives  than  to  any  mifreprefen- 
tation  of  Atlafof,  as  it  appeared  they  threatened  to  kill  fome 
Kumtfcha dales,   who  infifted  on  paying   but   one   fable   inftead 

of    two.  li    jjF.wj 

They  conferred  the  command   on  Simeon  Lomyof,  imprifoned 
Atlafof,  and  confifcated  all  his   effedts   to  the  treafury,  which 
confifted  of   1234   fables,   400   red   foxes,   14  grey    foxes,    and 
75  fea  beavers,  befides  a  great  number  of  other  furrs.   Atlafof  ti- 
caped,  and  fled  to  the  lower  fort,  of  which  he  endeavoured  to  ob- 
tain the  command,  but  was  prevented  by  the  commifTary  Theodore 
Taregin.  During  thefe  confufions,  the  petition  that  was  fentagainft 
Atlafof  reached  fakutfki.     The  governor,  fearing  that  the  dif- 
fentions  and  differences  between  Atlafof   and  the  Ccflacks  might 
occafion  the  lofs  of  Kamtfchatka,   fent  to  court  for  farther  di- 
rections ;  and  in  the  interim  difpatched  Peter  Tcherekof,  with  fifty- 
five  Coflacks,  two  pieces  of  cannon,   and  ammunition.    While 
*Tcherekof  was  upon  the   road,  advice  was  brought  i\-on\  Kamtf- 
chatka that  the  Coffacks  had  taken  the  command  from  Atlafof : 
upon  which  orders  were  fent  after  Tcherekof,  to  examine  ilridly 

into 


248         Of     the      C    O    N    Q^  U    E    S    T      of 

into  all  this  affair,  and  tranfmit  his  report  to  the  fakutfki  Chan- 
cery, by  the  commiffary  Simeon  haniyof  for  their  reiblution,  and 
that  by  the  fiitne  hand  he  fliould  likewife  fend  all  the  taxes  which 
were  gathered.  But  Tcherekof  had  left  Anadir fk  before  this 
order  arrived,  and,  as  the  road  from  thence  to  Kaintfchatka  was 
dangerous,  the  melTenger  durft  not  go  any  farther,  for  the  tra- 
velling along  the  Olotorfki  and  Penfchinjka  feas  was  fo  very  un- 
fafe  that  on  the  20th  of  fuly  1709,  notwithftanding  Tcherekof's 
force,  they  were  fallen  upon  in  the  day-time,  their  flores  and 
baggage  were  plundered,  ten  of  them  killed,  and  the  reft  fur- 
rounded  'till  the  24th,  when  they  made  a  bold  puih,  and  fought 
their  way  through  with  the  lofs  of  two  more  of  their  com- 
pany. 

During  the  government  of  Tcherekof  two  things  happened 
that  deferve  notice :  ift.  The  unfortunate  expedition  of  the 
Coffack  Lieutenant  John  Haritonof  with  forty  men  againft  the 
rebels  upon  the  North-Eaft  River,  who  fell  upon  him  in  great 
numbers,  killed  ten  of  his  people,  and  wounded  moft  of  the 
reft,  whom  they  likewife  kept  befieged  four  weeks.  2d,  A 
bark  from  Japan  being  caft  away  on  the  Beaver  fea  coaft,  Tche- 
rekof  went  with  fifty  men  and  refcued  four  of  the  Japanefe  from 
the  natives,  whom  on  that  occafion  he  reduced  to  obedience,  as 
alfo  the  inhabitants  round  the  rivers  JiifinoJ  and  Oflrova,  and 
obliged  them  to  pay  their  tribute. 

In  the  month  of  Augiift^  when  'tcherekof  returned  to  the 
upper  Kamtfchatka  fort,  he  found  the  Lieutenant  Myeronof  who 
was  fent  to  relieve  him ;  fo  that  at  this  time  there  were  three 
chiefs  at  Kamtfchatka,   namely,    Atlafof   tcherekof    and  Mie~ 

ronoj. 

When  tcherekof  had  delivered  up  to  Mieromf  the  command, 
he  left  the  upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  in  the  month  of  OBober,  and 
taking  with  him  the  tribute  he  had  gathered,  with  a  proper  convoy, 
marched  to  the  lower  fort,  where  he  refolved  to  winter,  and  in 

the 


K     A    M    T     S    C     H     A    T    K    A.  249 

the  fummer  to  fail  through  the  Penfch'wjka  fea.  Jofeph  Mie- 
ronof  came  likevvife  to  the  lower  fort  upon  the  6th  of  December 
to  give  orders  concerning  the  building  boats  for  carrying-  off 
the  tribute;  and  having  left  proper  diredlions  for  this  purpofe  v\ith 
^lexi  Alexander^  he  fet  out  with  Tcherekof  to  the  upper  fort 
on  the  23d  of  January  171 1  :  but  he  was  murdered  on  the 
road  by  the  twenty  Coflacks  who  were  his  convoy.  In  the 
mean  time  thirty-one  of  the  others  went  to  the  lower  fort 
where  they  killed  Atlafof.  The  heads  of  this  mutiny  were 
Danid  Anjiforof  and  John  Koforojki^  who  fhared  the  goods 
of  thofe  they  put  to  death  ;  and  inviting  all  the  reft  to  join 
with  them,  their  number  increafed  to  feventy-five.  All  At- 
lafof 's  furrs  and  goods  which  were  carried  to  Tegh'il  they 
brought  back,  feized  on  all  the  flores  which  were  got  ready 
for  T'chcrekof'i  voyage,  and  deftroying  the  fuls  and  cordage 
returned  to  the  upper  fort  on  the  20th  of  March.  > 

On  the  17th  of  April  in  the  fame  year,  thefe  mutineers 
fent  a  petition  to  Jakutjki,  confeffing  the  murder  of  Tche- 
rekof and  Mieronof,  without  mentioning  that  of  Atlafof.  In  this 
petition  they  endeavoured  to  excufe  their  condud:,  by  accufin<T 
thefe  commifiaries  of  tyranny  and  avarice,  and  charging  them 
with  having  embezzled  the  effeds  of  the  government,  and  pur- 
chafing  goods  upon  their  own  account,  from  which  they  received 
incredible  profits ;  and  that  they  had  treated  both  the  natives  and 
Coffacks  with  great  feverity,  to  avoid  which  they  were  obliged 
to  give  them  up  their  beft  effeds,  and  to  receive  their  falary 
in  what  goods  they  thought  fit  to  allow  them,  and  thofe  taxed 
at  what  price  they  pleafed  ;  which  opprefTion  they  exercifed  in 
confidence  that  no  petitions  againft  them  would  ever  reach  Ja- 
kutfki.  To  this  petition  they  joined  a  lift  of  the  effeds  of  Tche- 
rekof and  Mieronof^  which  they  had  found  :  Tcherekof 's  confifled 
of  500  red  foxes,  and  20  fea  beavers ;  MieronoJ's,  of  800  fables, 
400  brown  foxes,  and  30  fea  beavers. 

K  k  This 


2^50         Of     the     C    O    N    Q^  U    E    S    T      of 

This  year  in  the  fpring,  the  feventy-five  perfons  before  men- 
tioned marched  againft  the  rebels,  and  built  a  fort  upon  the  Great 
River,  thinking  to  merit  their  pardon  by  fo  eflential  a  piece  of 
fervice  as  the  reduftion  of  that  diftrift.  On  the  ift  of  April  they 
deftroyed  a  fort  of  the  Kamtfchadales,  which  lay  between  the 
rivers  Bijiroy  and  Goltfofka,  where  now  the  Rnjfian  fort  Bolf- 
cheretfkoi  ftands.  There  they  remained  without  any  difturbance 
from  the  Kamtfchadales  'till  May  ;  on  the  2  2d  the  Xamtf- 
chadaks  and  Koreki  came  in  boats  down  the  Great  River  in  fuch 
numbers  that  they  threatened  to  fmother  them  with  their  caps  with- 
out ufing  any  other  arms.  On  the  21^0^  May,  the  Coffacks,  after 
having  performed  divine  fervice,  for  they  had  a  prieft  along  with 
them,  made  a  fally  with  one  half  of  their  party,  and  firing  upon  the 
Kamtfchadales  ie.wtrz\  times,  killed  great  numbers  of  them  :  how- 
ever they  continued  the  fight  'till  the  evening,  when  at  laft  the 
Coffacks  obtained  the  viftory.  Such  numbers  of  the  rebels  were 
killed  and  drowned  in  this  engagement,  that  the  river  was  full 
of  dead  bodies ;  but  the  Ruffians  had  only  three  men  killed,  and 
fome  few  wounded.  This  fuccefs  was  followed  by  the  fub- 
jeftion  of  all  the  villages  and  forts  upon  the  Great  River,  who 
confented  to  pay  their  tribute  as  before.  They  went  into  the 
country  of  the  Ktiriks,  and  even  unto  the  firft  ifland  ;  all  the 
inhabitants  of  which  they  likewife  made  tributary.  This  was 
the  fir  ft  time  that  any  Rufian  had  been  upon  either  of  thefe 
iflands. 

In  the  year  1711,  Fa/ili  Savafiamf  was  fent  to  fucceed  Mie~ 
ronof;  for  they  had  no  account  yet  of  his  having  been  murdered, 
nor  had  they  any  knowledge  at  Jakiitjki  of  the  fate  of  the  other 
commiffaries.  Savafianof  gathered  the  taj:es  about  the  upper 
and  lower  forts :  Anfforof,  the  head  of  the  mutineers,  had  done 
the  fame  upon  the  Great  River,  and  came  to  the  lower 
fort  pretending  to  have  returned  again  to  his  duty  ;  however  he 
came  accompanied  with  fuch  a  ftrong  party  that  he  was  in  no 

danger 


K    A    M    T    S    C    H     A     T     K     A.        251 

danger  of  being  called  to  account  for  his  mutiny,  but  was  fent 
as  tax-gatherer  to  the  Great  River.  As  he  returned  towards  the 
Penfchinjka  fea,  he  reduced  to  obedience  the  rebels  upon  the  rivers 
Konpackova  and  JVorofski,  and  obliged  them  to  pay  the  tribute, 
which  they  had  refufed  for  fome  time.  He  was  furprifed  by  the 
rebels  upon  the  river  Awatfcha  in  the  month  of  February  1712  : 
When  he  with  25  Coffacks  came  among  them,  they  received  him 
in  a  large  hut,  built  on  purpofe,  with  a  private  entry  under  it. 
They  made  him  very  rich  prefents,  promifed  to  pay  the  full 
tribute,  and  gave  hoftages  as  an  earnefl:  of  their  fincerity  :  but 
the  following  night  they  fet  fire  to  the  hut,  and  burned  both 
the  RuJJians  and  their  own  hoflages  together  ;  who  were  fo  irri- 
tated againft  the  Ruffians^  that  when  the  people  called  to  them 
to  come  out  of  the  hut,  they  begged  that  tjiey  would  have  no 
regard  to  them,  but  burn  the  Coffacks  by  any  means. 

The  punifliment  of  the  murderers  of  Anfiforof  deterred  the 
natives  from  the  like  attempts,  and  procured  a  lading  fecurlty  to 
the  tax-gatherers.  A  party  was  fent  out  to  catch  the  murderers 
where  they  could  find  them  :  at  this  time  there  was  one  man 
taken,  who  being  put  to  the  torture  confeffed  not  only  the 
murder  of  the  three  commiffaries,  but  likewife  a  great  many 
other  dangerous  defigns,  as  that  they  refolved  to  deftroy  the 
upper  and  lower  forts  of  Kamtfchatka,  murder  the  governor 
Shepetkofj  plunder  the  fort  of  all  the  goods,  and  fly  to  the 
iflands  ;  but  they  were  prevented  in  this  by  the  great  number 
of  Coffacks  which  they  found. 

Shepetkof^  giving  the  command  to  ConJlcDit'me  Koferof,  left 
Kamtfchatka  on  the  8th  of  June  IJ12,  and  failed  with  the 
tribute  which  he  had  gathered  over  the  Oliitorjkoy  fea,  and  up 
the  river  of  the  fame  name  as  far  as  it  was  navigable  for  boats. 
Then  he  was  obliged  to  fortify  himfelf  againfl  the  attacks  of 
the  OlutoreSy  who  on  the  road  had  feveral  times   fallen   upon 

K  k  2  him. 


252        0/     //^^     C    O    N    Ct^U    E    S    T     of 

him.  He  continued  in  this  little  fort  'till  the  9th  of  January 
1713,  with  84  Coffacks.  In  the  mean  time  he  fent  to  Ana-^ 
dir/k  for  a  reinforcement,  and  carriages  to  tranfport'tlie  tribute. 
There  were  fent  him  60  Coffacks,  and  a  great  number  of  rein- 
deer ;  with  which  he  fet  out,  and  arrived  fafe  at  Jakiit/ki  in 
the  month  of  'January  17 14.  This  was  the  only  tribute  which 
had  arrived  fafe,  upon  account  of  the  confufions,  fince  the  year 
3707.  It  amounted  in  all  to  13,280  fables,  3282  red,  7  black, 
^  and  41  blue  foxes,  and  259  fea  beavers. 

After  the  departure  of  Shepetkof,  Kregezof,  who  was  commif- 
fary  in  the  upper  Kamtjchatkoi  fort,  went  with  feveral  under  his 
command  to  the  lower  fort,  feized  upon  Taregin  who  was  com- 
milTary  there,  put  him  to  all  kind  of  torture,  plundered  the 
fort,  and  obliging  Taregin  to  turn  monk  gave  the  command  of 
the  ^'ort  to  Bogdan  Ka?iaP)of;  who  continued  there  'till  the  ar- 
rival of  Va/ili  Kolefof,  formerly  a  lieutenant  of  the  Coffacks ;  and 
Kregezof  with  18  of  the  mutineers  returned  to  the  upper  Kamtj- 
chatkoi fort,  where  he  was  very  troublefome  to  the  lower  fort 
for   a  long  time. 

Kolefof  w&s  fent  from  Jakutjki  in  the  year  171 1,  with 
orders  to  enquire  into  the  condudl  of  the  mutineers,  and  ar- 
rived at  Kamtfchatka  on  the  loth  of  September  1712  j  where 
he  condemned  two  of  the  rebels  to  death,  and  branded  fe- 
veral others.  The  lieutenant  Koferof  who  was  head  of  the 
mutiny  after  the  death  qf  AnfforoJ,  and  feveral  others,  were 
punifhed  j  but  Kregezof,  who  was  ring-leader  in  the  lafl 
mutiny,  not  only  refufed  to  fubmit  to  his  jurifdidion,  but 
threatened  even  to  attack  him,  and  to  deflroy  the  lower  fort. 
In  cpnfequence  of  which  he  marched  againfl  him  with  cannon 
and  30  men  of  his  party,  and  was  joined  in  his  march  by  other 
Coffacks  from  the  Great  River  :  however  he  did  not  accomplifh 
his  defign,  but  was  obliged  to  return  to  the  upper  fort,  where  ia 

a 


KAMTS-CHATKA.         253 

a  very  fliort  time  his  own  people  took  the  command  from  him, 
and  put  him  in  prifon  ;  for  finding  that  the  other  Coflacks  did 
not  join  him,  they  imagined  it  would  be  impoffible  for  them  to 
pafs  the  lower  fort  in  their  way  to  the-  fea.  Whereupon  they 
divided  themfclves  into  two  parties ;  one  of  which  flood  by  Ko- 
ferof,  and  the  other  joined  Kolejof.  By  this  means  Kohj'of  made 
himfelf  mafter  of  the  upper  fort  in  the  year  1713.  Kregezof 
was  punilhed  with  death,  with  fome  others  of  the  ring-leaders, 
and  the  reft  were  fined  :  thofe  Coflacks  and  tax-gatherers,  who 
continued  in  their  duty,  were  rewarded.  Thus  an  end  was  put 
to  the  rebellion. 

After  this  Kolefof  fent  Koferojki  with  55  Cofi'acks,  1 1  Kamff- 
chadales,  and  fome  cannon,  ordering  them  to  build  fmall  vefl^els 
upon  the  Great  River,  and  to  make  difcoveries  upon  the  iflands 
that  belong  to  'Japan.  In  this  expedition  they  reduced  to  obe- 
dience feveral  of  the  Kuriles  who  dwelt  upon  the  Lopatka,  and 
the  firft  and  fecond  Kuriljki  iflands.  They  alfo  procured  fome 
account  of  the  iflands  that  were  more  difl:ant,  which  traded 
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  Matma,  and  who  brought  to 
them  iron  kettles,  varnifhed  cups  and  platters,  fables,  and  different 
forts  of  ftufFs  made  of  cotton  and  filk.  Koferojki  brought  a 
fortment  of  thefe  merchandifes  along  with  him. 


\ 


CHAR 


254        Of    the     C    O    N    Q^U    E    S    T     oj 


CHAP.     III. 


O/  the  Commissaries  'who  fucceeded  Vafili  Kolefof  witil 
the  great  Infurredlion  at  Kamtfchatka  j  with  the  Difcovery 
of  a  Fafj'age  through  the  Penfchinfka  Sea  from  Ochotfka  to 
Kamtfchatka. 


Ils  Augiift,  iyi2i  fohn  Inefifki  was  fent  to  relieve  Vafili 
Kolefof.  In  the  time  of  his  government  he  built  a  church 
at  a  place  called  the  Springs,  whither  he  defigned  to  remove 
the  lower  fort,  which  was  afterwards  executed  ;  the  former 
fituation  being  on  a  marfh,  which  was  fometimes  overflowed  by 
the  high  water.  This  fort  continued  until  the  year  1731.  In 
the  time  of  the  great  rebellion,  it  was  burned  down  by  the 
rebels.  He  likewife  marched  againfl  thofe  who  rebelled  upon  the 
vivcv  Aivatfchay  who  had  murdered  Anfforoj  with  his  25  Cof- 
facks.  His  ftrength  confifted  of  120  CofTacks  and  150  Kamtf- 
chadales.  The  rebels  had  fortified  themfelves  fo  ilrongly,  that 
they  held  out  two  weeks  ;  but  at  laft  they  fet  their  fort  on  fire, 
which  was  burned  with  all  the  people  that  were  in  it :  the  reft 
fubmitted,  and  promifed  to  pay  their  tribute.  They  likewife 
took  and  burned  the  fort  Paratoon.  After  this  time  the  Kamtf- 
chadaks  upon  Awatfcha  began  regularly  to  pay  their  tribute ; 
for  before  this  they  generally  gave  but  juft  what  they  pleafed, 
being  almoft  always  in  a  ftate  of  rebellion. 

In  1714  Tanifiofkiy  and  the  former  commiiTary  Vafli  Kolefof 
who  had  not  been  able  to  undertake  the  journey  to  Jakiitjki 
for  want  of  hands  in  the  year  1713,  pafTed  in  boats  over  the 
Olutorjkoy  fea,  and  arrived  the  latter  end  of  Augufl  upon  the 

river 


KAMTSCHATKA.         255 

river  Olutora,  where  they  found  Athanafius  Petrof;  who  being 
joined  by  a  great  many  Coflaclcs  from  Anadir,  together  with 
the  Tukagiri,  defeated  the  Olutores,  deftroyed  their  ftrongeft 
places,  and  in  place  thereof  built  a  Rujjian  fort.  Here  they  re- 
mained until  the  winter.  The  taxes  which  both  thefe  commif- 
feries  brought  along  with  them  were  5640  fables,  751  red  foxes, 
10  blue,  137  fea  beavers,  4  ounces  of  gold  in  bits,  which  were 
taken  from  the  Japanefe,  whofe  veflels  had  been  wrecked  upon 
the  coaft  of  Kamtfchatka.  Upon  the  departure  of  thefe  com- 
miflaries  a  garrifon  of  100  men,  a  lieutenant,  and  two  priefts, 
were  left  in  the  new  fort  upon  the  Olutora. 

On  the  2d  of  December  17 14,  the  Tukageri  who  were  with 
Petrof  fell  upon  him  near  to  Aeklafijkey  fort,  and  having  mur- 
dered him,  the  people  that  were  with  him  feized  upon  the  tribute. 
The  commiflaries  Kolefof  and  Yanifiojki^  with  fixteen  others,  ef- 
caped  into  the  Acklanjkey  fort,  but  were  not  able  to  fave  their 
lives ;  for  the  Tukageri  furrounding  the  fort  prevailed  upon  the 
Koreki  to  murder  thefe  people,  who  had  trufled  themfelves  to 
their  protedlion.  The  occafion  of  this  misfortune  was  owing  to 
the  tyranny  and  opprelTion  of  Petrof,  All  pains  were  taken  to 
recover  the  plundered  goods,  but  to  very  little  effeft,  as  they 
were  divided  among  fo  many  different  nations  and  people ;  fo 
that  fome  of  the  richefl  furrs  fell  into  the  hands  of  thofe  who 
knew  fo  little  of  their  value,  that  for  one  or  two  pipefuls  of 
tobacco  they  would  fell  a  fine  fable  or  fox  fkin.  This  diftur- 
bance  of  the  Tukageri  and  Koreki  continued  more  or  lefs  'till 
the  year  1720,  when  they  were  reduced  to  obedience  by  Stephen 
'Trijonof  a  gentleman  of  Jakutjki,  who  went  againfl:  them  with 
a  great  number  of  ColTacks.  So  far  had  they  carried  their  defigns, 
that  they  endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  the  'Tchukotjkoi  to  joiu 
in  their  rebellion,  and  to  deflroy  the  fort  of  Anadir. 

After  the  murder  of  the  commiflliries  the  tribute  of  Kamtf 
chatka  was  no  more  carried  through  Anadir^  but  fent  diredly  by 

fea. 


256         Of     the     C    O    N    CL  U    E    S    T     of 

fea  to  Ochotjka,  which  is  by  far  a  more  convenient  and  lefs 
dangerous  pillage ;  fo  that  now  the  road  to  Anadir  is  entirely 
negleiSed,  This  paflage  by  fea  was  difcovered  in  the  year  171 5, 
by  one  Cofmus  Socolof  who  was  under  tlae  command  of  Colonel 
Tlchin  fent  to  defcribe  the  iflands  that  lie  upon  that  fea.  At  this 
time  Alexi  Petrilojki  was  commiffary  at  Kamtfchatka,  againft 
whom  the  CofTacks  began  again  to  mutiny ;  and  by  the  confent 
of  Socolof  they  took  the  command  from  Petrilojki,  put  him 
under  arreft,  and  confifcated  his  goods.  He  was  the  occafion 
of  his  own  misfortunes,  by  extortion,  an  unbounded  avarice, 
and  tyrannically  oppreffing  to  the  laft  degree  every  man  under 
his  command.  By  thefe  means  he  had  acquired  fuch  riches  in 
a  very  Oiort  time,  that  they  far  exceeded  two  whole  year's  tribute 
of  Kamtfchatka. 

The  natives  were  tolerably  quiet  all  this  while,  'excepting 
fome  fmall  differences  between  the  Kiiriles  of  the  Lopatka  and 
another  tribe,  which  was  the  caufe  of  the  deflruction  of  feveral 
tributary  Kuriks.  The  tribe,  who  was  the  firft  beginner  of  this 
confufion,  was  fo  much  afraid  of  being  puniftied  by  the  RuJ/iam, 
that  they  would  never  come  to  any  terms  of  accommodation. 
However,  at  laft,  they  were  reduced  with  no  great  trouble.  The 
condudt  of  the  Ruffian  commiffaries  and  tax-gatherers  was  fo 
irregular,  and  fo  difagreeable  to  the  natives,  that  the  moft  fatal 
confequences  were  to  be  feared. 

To  Fetrolojki  fucceeded  as  commiffary  Cofmus  VaichelaJJdof 
to  whom  fucceeded  Gregory  Kamkin.  In  the  year  1718,  at  once 
three  commifTaries  were  fent  from  Jakutjki  -,  John  Uvarofski  to 
the  lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  John  Porotof  to  the  upper,  and 
Bafl  Kochanof  to  the  fort  upon  the  Great  River.  According 
to  cuftom,  the  Coffacks  very  foon  deprived  them  all  of  their 
authority,  and  put  them  into  prifon,  where  they  continued 
half  a  year,  and  at  laft  efcaped.  However,  the  authors  of  this 
mutiny   were  brought  to  Toboljki,   and  puniflied  with   death. 

While 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.        257 

While  the  Cofiacks  perfevered  in  this  mutiny,  feveral  of  the  tax- 
gatherers  were  murdered  by  the  natives. 

yohn  Charetonof^  who  had  been  appointed  commiiTiiry,  in  17 19 
marched  againft  the  rebellious  Koreki ;  but  being  furprifed  by  them 
he  and  feveral  of  his  company  were  killed,  which  was  done  in  this 
manner  :  The  rebels  pretending  to  fubmit,  gave  them  hoftages  and 
prefents ;  but  afterwards  fell  upon  Charetomf,  and  killed  him  and 
feveral  others.  However,  they  paid  very  dear  for  this  treachery ;  for 
fome  of  the  Coflacks,  recovering  from  their  furprife,  drove  them 
into  their  fort,  where  they  burned  or  killed  every  man  of  them. 
In  the  following  years,  until  the  great  rebellion  of  Kamffchatka, 
nothing  remarkable  happened,   if  we  except  thofe   confiderable 
expeditions  that  were  fent  out  in  the  years  1727,  1728,  1729,  to 
make  difcoveries  among  the  iflands  of  the  Kuriles.     The  firfl  was 
conduced  by  two  mariners,  John  Evn'nof  and  Theodore  Lujin,  who 
returned  in  1727.     In  172B  was  fent  out  the  firfl  great  fea  ex- 
pedition,  to  difcover   and  defcribe    all    the   coaft    towards  the 
north.    Having  proceeded  as  far  as  the  latitude  67°  17',  they  re- 
turned to  Peierjhourg  in  the  year  1730.     In    1729  a    party   ar- 
rived there  under  the  command  of  Captain  Pau/utjkoy,   and  a 
chief  of  the  Coffacks  called  Shejlocof.    They  were  ordered  to  go 
along  the  coafl  towards  the  fouth  to  make  proper  difcoveries, 
and   to  bring  all  the  inhabitants  of  thefe  places,   either  by  fair 
means  or  force,  to  pay  a  regular  tribute  ;  and  for  that  purpofe,  to 
build  forts,  and  endeavour  to  eflablifli  fome  commerce.     They 
built  fome  forts,  and  defcribed  the  coafh  as  far  as  the  river  Vdan 
upon  ih&Chinefe  frontiers.     She/locof  was  killed  in  the  year  1730 
by  the  Tchuhf/koi,  who  had  fallen  upon  the  tributary  Koreki  ; 
and  Captain  Paithitjkoy  was  ordered  to  join  Colonel  Merlin,    in 
quelling  the  rebellion   of   Kavitjchatka.     He  was  indeed  fo  far 
more  fuccefsful  than  Shejlocof,  that  he  feveral  times  defeated  the 
Tchukotjkoi,  and  for  fome  time  rendered  the  Koreki  and  Ana- 
dlrfkoi  fafe  from  their  inroads. 

L  1  In 


258         Of    the     C    O    N    Q^U    E    S    T     of 

In  the  fummer  of  the  year  1729,  zycipanefe  vefTel  was  wrecked 
upon  the  coaft  of  Kamtfchatka :  there  were  feventeen  men  oa 
board,  all  of  whom,  except  two,  were  murdered  by  Lieutenant 
Stimicofj  who  happened  to  be  there  at  that  time.  The  two 
furvivors  were  fent  to  Peterjbourg,  where  they  had  the  fatis- 
fadtion  of  feeing  the  murderer  of  their  countrymen  publickly 
executed.  In  1730  John  Novogorodof,  and  in  1731  Meyer  Shed- 
fordiriy  were  tax-gatherers  in  Kamtfchatka.  We  only  mention 
them  as  being  the  occafion  of  the  great  rebellion,  which  we  are 
now  to  defcribe. 


CHAP.      IV. 

Of  the  REBELLION  of  Kamtfchatka,   the  Burning  of 
the  Lower  Fort^  the  Subjection  of  the  Rebels^  and  their  Pu- 

nifjment. 


TH  E  natives  had  refolved  for  a  great  while  to  deftroy  all 
the  Rufians  who  were  in  Kamtfchatka  ;  but  fince  the 
difcovery  of  the  paflage  over  the  "Penfchinfka  fea,  and 
the  arrival  of  veflels  with  new  people,  it  appeared  to  them  too 
dangerous :  but  when  Captain  Bering  with  his  fleet  failed  on 
the  expedition  of  Kamtfchatka,  and  moft  of  the  Coflacks  who 
were  fettled  in  Kamtfchatka  were  ordered  to  join  Captain  Pau- 
lutskoy  at  Anadir,  to  fupprefs  the  rebellious  Tchukotskoi,  very  few 
Cofliicks  were  left  in  Kamtfchatka.  This  the  natives  looked  upon 
to  be  the  wifhed-for  opportunity ;  and  during  the  whole  winter  the 
NiJJmnJ}:altahki,  Khitchejski,  and  Tahfski  Kamtfchadales,  under 
pretence  of  vifiting  one  another,  travelled  through  all  Kamtf 
chatka,  and  inftigated  the  other  inhabitants  to  join  in  their  defigns, 

under 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.        259 

under  pain  of  being  intircly  deftroyed.  By  thefe  means  all  Kamff- 
chatka  entered  into  a  flate  of  open  rebellion  ;  and  hearing  that 
Shefticof  was  killed  by  the  Tchukotjkoi,  they  reported  that  thefe 
people  were  marching  againft  Kamtfchafka,  with  a  view  either  to 
have  a  pretence  for  coUedling  themfelves  together,  or  that  the 
Rujjian  Coffacks,  out  of  fear  of  thefe  people,  might  defire  the 
Kamtfchadales  to  guard  them.  Their  meafures  v/ere  fo  well  con- 
certed, that  it  was  a  fingular  inftance  of  Providence  that  any  of 
the  Ruffians  were  preferved  ;  for  if  they  had  once  been  driven 
intirely  out  of  the  country,  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  them 
to  have  re-eflablillied  themfelves.  The  counfels  of  the  Kamtf- 
chadales were  far  from  being  fuch  as  one  would  expedl  from 
favages ;  they  endeavoured  to  prevent  any  correfpondencc  with 
Anadir Jk^  and  kept  a  ftrong  guard  upon  the  fea-coafts,  where  they 
might  feize  upon  any  of  the  Ruffians  that  arrived.  The  chief 
authors  of  this  rebellion  were  oneTaloJski  Toyon,  or  chieftain  called 
Fetka  Harchin,  who  had  frequently  ferved  the  Ruffians  as  an  in- 
terpreter, and  a  chieftain  of  the  Klutchefski,  called  Chuo-otche. 

While  this  confpiracy  was  in  agitation,  the  commiflary  Sha- 
curdin  was  on  his  departure  from  Kamtfchatka,  with  a  confiderable 
party  to  guard  the  tribute.  They  had  failed  from  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Kamtfchatka  towards  Anadir,  but  foon  after  contrary 
winds  obliged  them  to  return.  The  Kamtfchadales,  informed 
of  their  departure,  and  ready  for  the  revolt,  gathered  together,  and 
failing  up  the  river  Kamtfchatka  killed  every  Rujjian  ColTack  they 
could  find,  burned  their  fummer  huts,  and  carried  off  their  wives 
and  children  into  flavery.  Their  chief  ftrength  was  diredled  ao-aiiift 
the  fort ;  where  arriving  in  the  night,  they  fet  fire  to  the  priefl's 
houfe,  concluding  that  the  fire  would  bring  out  all  the  inliabitants. 
In  this  they  fucceeded  too  well,  murdering  almoil;  every  perfoji 
without  fparing  either  fex  or  age.  They  burned  all  the  houfes,  ex- 
cept the  fortifications  and  church,  where  the  goods  botli  of  the  pub- 

L  1  2  lick 


26o         Of     the     C    O    N    CL  U    E    S    T     of 

lick  and  private  people  were  kept.  Thofe  who  efcaped  this  maf- 
facre  fled  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  carried  the  news  to  their 
countrymen,  who  had  not  yet  left  the  coaft.  When  the  Klut- 
chefski  chief,  Chiigotche,  heard  of  the  taking  the  lower  Kamtf- 
chatka  fort  he  marched  thither,  killing  or  taking  prifoners  all  the 
Ruffians  he  met  with ;  and  joining  Harchin,  he  informed  him 
that  the  Riifjian  veffels  were  yet  upon  the  coaft,  for  which  reafon 
he  judged  it  proper  to  ftrengthen  themfelves  in  the  fort ;  and 
fending  accounts  of  their  fuccefs  to  all  their  countrymen,  ordered 
them  to  join  him.  The  next  day  they  divided  all  the  plunder, 
and  drefled  themfelves  in  the  RuJJian  habits ;  and  fome  of  them, 
putting  on  the  prieft's  robes,  celebrated  their  own  religious  cere- 
monies and  conjurations.  Harchin  ordered  a  new-baptifed 
Kamtfchadale^  who  had  learned  to  read  Riifs^  to  fay  mafs  in  the 
Ruffian  manner,  and  drelTed  in  the  prieft's  robes ;  for  which  \xp 
made  him  a  prefent  of  30  red  fox-fkins. 

The  3d  day  after  the  taking  of  the  fort  arrived  a  RuJJian 
fkipper,  Yacob  Hetis,  with  60  Coflacks,  who  was  fent  with  a 
defign  to  recover  the  fort  from  the  rebels.  He  endea- 
voured by  all  methods  to  perfuade  them  to  return  to  their 
duty,  aftiiring  them  of  a  general  pardon  j  but  they  would  not 
give  ear  to  him  :  nay,  Harchin,  their  chief,  told  him  that 
he  had  no  bufinefs  there,  and  that  he  was  commiffary  of 
Kamtfchatka,  and  would  himfelf  gather  the  taxes,  fo  that  they 
did  not  want  any  Coffacks  among  them.  Upon  which  Hens 
fent  to  his  veflels  for  fome  cannon,  and  began  on  the  26th  of 
July  to  fire  upon  the  fort,  where  he  made  a  very  large  breach, 
which  caufed  great  confufion  amongft  the  befieged,  and  gave  an 
opportunity  for  the  women  that  were  prifoners  to  efcape. 
Harchin,  finding  it  impoflible  to  defend  the  fort,  made 
his    efcape  difguifed    in   women's  cloaths ;    and    although   he 

was 


KAMTSCHATKA.        261 

was  purfued  by  feveral,  yet  he  made  fuch  expedition  that 
they  could  not  overtake  him.  After  this  30  of  the  beficged 
who  remained  furrendered  themfelves ;  but  a  Klutchefski  chief- 
tain, Chugotche,  with  a  few  people  that  joined  him,  held  out 
to  the  laft  man.  During  their  defence  the  powder  magazine 
was  fet  on  fire,  which  reduced  the  fort  and  all  the  riches 
in  it  to  afhes.  In  this  fiege  the  Cofllicks  had  four  men  killed, 
and  a  great  many  wounded.  How  many  of  the  Kamtfchadaks 
were  killed  was  not  known,  their  bodies  being  confumed  in  the 
fire  ;  not  one  efcaped  alive,  for  thofe  who  furrendered  were  killed 
by  the  Coflacks,  in  revenge  for  the  lofs  of  their  wives  and 
children. 

The  fudden  return  of  the  RuJJtan  party  was  the  occafion  that 
this  revolt  was  fo  eafily  quelled  ;  for  it  prevented  their  affembling 
in  fuch  numbers,  as  they  otherwife  would  have  done.     However, 
it  was  not  yet  intirely  over,  for  Harchin,  with  fome  other  chief- 
tains, colledled  a  good  number  of  people  together,  and  refolved  to 
march  to  the  fea  fide,  and  attack  the  Ruffian  vefTels  which  were 
there.      But,   in  the  very  beginning  of  his  march,  he  was  met  by 
a  party  of  Ruffians,    which  obliged  him  to  fortify  himfelf  upon 
the  left  fide  of  the  river  Kluchefka  ;   the  Coflacks  encamping 
upon    the    right,    feveral    fkirmifhes    enfued    between    them. 
"When  Harchin  faw  that  he  could  not  accomplifli  his  defign,  he 
propofed  to  treat  with  the  CofTacks,  and  offered  to  come  to  their 
camp,  if  they  would  fend  one  Coffack  as  an  hoftage  for  him ; 
which  they  granted.    He  demanded.  That  they  Ihould  not  intirely 
xxxin  i\\t  Kajnt/chadales,   and  prom ifedn'h&t  for  the  future  they 
would  all  live  peaceably,  only  defiring  that  they  would  allow  him 
to  go  and  prevail  upon  his  friends  and  relations  to  confent  to  this 
agreement;   which  being  granted,  he  fent  word,  that  he  could 
not  prevail  with  them  to  make  peace;   and  that  even  his  own 
brother,  and  a  chieftain,  Javatchej  who  had  accompanied  them, 
had  refufed  to  return. 

The 

3 


262         Of     the     C    O    N    CLU    E    S    T     of 

The  next  day  Hdrchin  came  to  the  bank  of  the  river  with  fome 
other  chiefs,  and  defired,  that  the  Coffacks  would  fend  a 
boat  to  bring  him  over,  and  give  him  two  Coffacks  in  hoftage  j 
which  they  agreed  to  :  but  no  fooner  was  he  come  over 
than  they  made  him  prifoner,  and  ordered  the  hoftages  to 
throw  themfelves  into  the  river,  and  fwim  over,  while  they 
fired  upon  the  Kamtfcbadales  on  the  oppofite  bank,  who, 
when  their  chief  was  made  prifoner,  prefently  feparated  ;  but, 
being  purfued  by  different  parties,  mofl  of  them  were  deflroyed. 
The  chieftain  'J'eghil,  having  defended  himfelf  a  great  while,  at 
lafl  murdered  his  wife  and  children,  and  killed  himfelf; 
the  chieftain  Chtigotche,  in  vain  folliciting  the  inhabitants  upon  the 
river  Kojeretpa  Shapina  to  join  him,  was  in  the  end  murdered  by 
them.  After  this  rebellion,  which  appeared  at  firfl  very  dan- 
gerous, and  threatened  the  intire  deftruftion  of  the  Coffacks,  was 
quieted  by  the  arrival  of  fuccours,  things  continued  in  pretty 
good  order  at  Kamtfchatka  until  the  year  1740,  when  the  Ruf- 
fians had  feven  people  killed  by  the  natives. 

When  this  rebellion  was  over,  orders  were  fent  as  foon  as  pof- 
fible  to  Major  Merlin,  with  another  officer  and  fome  regulars, 
together  with  Major  Paiilutfkoy,  to  inquire  into  the  caufe  of  this 
rebellion,  and  the  murder  of  the  Japane/e,  and  to  fend  the  report 
thereof  to  Jahitfki ;  he  was  at  the  fame  time  to  build  a  new  fort, 
which  he  did  a  little  lower  than  the  mouth  of  the  river  Rafuga : 
this  was  called  the  lower  fort  of  Kamtfchatka.  Having  examined 
into  the  caufe  of  the  rebellion,  three  of  the  RuJJia?is  were  found 
guilty  of  death  and  executed  ;  and  wvo  of  the  chief  rebels,  with 
fome  others,  both  Coffacks  and  Kamffchadales,  were  punifhed. 
All  the  natives,  whom  they  had  either  taken  prifoners,  or  had 
made  flaves  of,  were  reflored  to  their  liberty.  Thofe  Kamtf- 
cbadales who  were  put  to  death,  feemed  to  go  to  execution 
without  the  leafl  concern,  and  under  the  torture  they  were 
fcarcely  heard  to  moan  ;   nor  could  they  force   them  to  con- 

fefs 


KAMTSCHATKA.        263 

fefs  any    thing   more   than   what   they    had   done   voluntarily 
before. 

Since  this  time  all  things  are  intirely  quiet  there ;  and  it  is 
hoped  they  will  continue  fo,  affairs  being  brought  into  fuch 
order,  that  the  natives  themfelves  could  not  wifli  for  more,  being 
only  obliged  to  pay  their  taxes,  without  the  leaft  opprefl'ion, 
which  confift  only  in  one  fkin  for  every  man  of  fuch  creatures 
as  he  is  ufed  to  hunt,  fuch  as  fables,  foxes,  or  fea  beavers. 
Juftice,  except  in  criminal  cafes,  is  adminiftered  by  their  own 
chieftains.  The  Coffacks  are  forbidden  to  demand  former  debts, 
which  they  pretended  were  due  from  the  natives.  Their  prin- 
cipal happinefs  confifts  in  the  converfion  of  feveral  of  them  to 
Chriftianity ;  to  which  end  her  Majefty  has  been  gracioufly 
pleafed  to  appoint  miffionaries  and  fchoolmaflers,  who  keep  fchools 
in  the  principal  villages  for  the  inftrudlion  of  the  youth,  both 
natives  and  Coffacks ;  and  they  begin  now  to  be  fo  much  im- 
proved, that  they  even  laugh  at  their  former  barbarity. 


CHAP.      V. 

theprefent  STATE  oftheVORTS  cw^  VILLAGES  o/Kamtf- 
chatka,  with  a  particular  Account  of  each. 


THERE  are  five  RuJJian  forts  in  Kamtfchatka :  the  ift 
called  the  Bolfcheretjkoi,  the  2d  upper  Kamtfchatka,  3d 
the  lower  Shaltolski,  4th  the  haven  of  Petropaulaujkay, 
and  5th  on  the  river  Teghil.  The  Boljcheretjkoi  fort  (lands  upon 
the  northen  bank  of  \\\c  Bolfchaia-rcka,  or  Great  River,  between 
the  mouths  of  the  rivers  Beeflra  and  Golfoftka,  33  verfts  from 
the  Penfchinjka  fea.  The  fort  is  70  feet  fquare ;  the  eaft  and 
north  fides  are  fortified  with  palifades,  the  fouth  and  weft  with 

different 


264         Of     the     CON    Q_U    E    S    T      0/ 

different  buildings  ;  the  entrance  into  the  fort  is  by  a  fmall 
gate  on  the  weft  fide.  Beyond  the  fort  was  a  chapel,  now  con- 
verted into  a  church  confecrated  to  St.  Nicholas,  with  a  belfry 
upon  pillars.  Thereareabout  30  houfes  of  inhabitants,  one  pub- 
lick  houfe  for  felling  brandy,  and  a  diftillery.  There  are  about 
45  Coflacks ;  and  though  their  children  pay  the  common  head 
tax,  yet  1 4  of  them  do  duty  with  the  other  Coffacks.  This  fort 
is  the  weakeft  of  all ;  but  they  feem  to  be  very  fecure,  as  the 
neighbouring  Kamtfchadales  were  almoft  the  firft  that  fubmitted, 
and  have  always  been  faithful,  and  lived  peaceably.  With  re- 
gard to  its  fituation  it  has  great  advantages :  firft,  all  veffels  that 
come  by  fea  can  come  into  the  Great  river,  from  which  they 
receive  their  goods  at  the  firft  hand :  fecondly,  they  receive  great 
profits  from  the  perfons  that  arrive  there,  whom  they  furnifh 
with  lodging  and  board  :  thirdly,  they  are  great  gainers  by  the 
tranfporting  goods  from  thence  to  the  other  forts :  fourthly,  they 
have  a  better  opportunity  than  the  others  of  getting  Kamtfchatka 
beavers,  which  is  now  reckoned  a  principal  commodity  :  fifthly, 
in  the  fummer  they  have  the  greateft  plenty  of  fifli,  which  they 
catch  with  little  trouble  and  expence  ;  for  this  reafon  the  com- 
mander in  chief  of  all  the  Kamtfchatka  forts  generally  lives  here, 
fending  out  deputies  to  the  others.  The  only  difadvantage  they 
have  is,  that  in  the  fummer,  during  the  time  of  fifhing,  they  are 
very  fubjedl  to  rainy  weather,  which  fpoils  a  great  many  of  their 
iifli,  and  thereby  reduces  them  to  great  difficulties  for  food.  If 
this  river  was  furniflied  with  wood  fufficient  the  difficulty  might 
be  removed,  as  inftead  of  drying  them  in  the  fun  they  might 
fmoke  them,  as  the  inhabitants  of  Ochotfa  do.  But  this  is  im- 
pradlicable  becaufe  of  the  diftance  of  the  wood,  and  the  trouble 
of  bringing  it  down.  It  is  lb  fcarce  here,  that  what  they  ab- 
folutely  muft  have  for  the  boiling  of  fait  and  train  oil,  they  are 
forced  to  provide  at  the  diftance  of  three  days'  journey,  and  can 
bring  no  more  than  will  ferve  to  make  40  pounds  of  fait. 

The 


KAMTSCHATKA.        265 

The  upper  fort  of  Kamtfchatka  was  the  firft  built,  and 
for  fome  years  reckoned  the  principal,  as  the  chief  commiflary 
hved  there.  It  ftands  upon  tiie  left  bank  of  the  Kamtfchatka, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  little  Kaly,  about  69  verfts  from  the  rife  ot 
the  Kamtfchatka,  242  verfts  in  the  ftraight  road  from  the  Bolfche- 
retfkoiiovt.  It  is  17  fathom  fquare;  the  gate  fronts  the  river,  and 
over  it  is  a  warehoufe.  Within  the  fort  is  the  office  for  receiving 
the  taxes,  a  room  for  keeping  the  hoftages,  and  two  magazines. 
Without  the  fort  is  a  church  confecrated  to  St.  Nicholas,  the  com- 
miffary's  houfe,  a  publick  houfe,  diftillery,  and  2 2  private  houfes  for 
the  accommodation  of  the  garrifon,  which  confifts  of  56  Coflacks. 
This  fort  has  the  advantage  of  the  Bolfcheretfkoi,  the  weather  being 
here  generally  pretty  good,  and  the  wood,  though  only  poplar,  can 
be  procured  with  little  trouble,  and  is  fo  large  and  fubftantial  that 
it  is  very  ufeful  for  building :  befides  the  foil  is  better  here,  being 
much  fitter  for  agriculture  than  any  of  the  other  parts.  The  firtiery 
is  indeed  very  poor,  being  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  the  fea.  The 
fifh  come  up  in  fmall  numbers,  and  fo  very  late,  that  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Nijhnafjaltalfki  fort  make  all  their  winter 
provifion  before  they  begin  to .  fifh  in  the  upper  fort ;  fo  that 
altnoft  every  fpring  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  provifions.  ,  Their  fait 
and  train  oil  they  either  buy  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  lower 
fort,  or,  notwithftanding  the  great  diftance,  they  go  themfelves 
and  boil  it  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  which  is 
400  verfts  from  the  upper  fort.  Formerly  they  ufed  to  have 
great  plenty  of  fea  beavers  in  the  Beaver  Sea,  but  at  prefent  very 
few  of'  them  are  caught ;  fo  that  the  inhabitants  have  their  only 
hope  of  fupport  from  agriculture,  to  which  if  they  apply  them- 
felves, they  may  expedt  more  profit  than  from  any  commerce 
with. the  natives  J  and,  if  they  negledt  it,  it  will  be  impoilibie 
for  them  to  live  there. 

The  lower  Kamtfchatka  fort  is  397  verfls  diftant  from  the  upper 
fort,  and  ftands  upon  the  fame  fide  of  the  river,  about  30  verfts 

Mm  frpm 


266         OJ     the      C    O    N    CLU    E    S    T      of 

from  its  mouth.  The  fort  is  a  parallelogram  made  with  pali- 
fades ;  its  breadth  is  40,  and  its  length  42  fathoms.  la 
the  fort  is  a  church  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary^  the  office 
and  magazine  for  the  taxes,  ftores,  and  the  commiflary's 
houfe.  Thefe  are  all  built  of  larch  wood,  and  much  neater 
than  in  any  other  fort.  Without  the  fort  are  39  private 
houfes,  befides  the  publick  houfe  and  diftillery.  The  male  inha- 
bitants are  92,  of  all  ranks. 

This  fort,  with  regard  to  the  neceflaries  of  life,  may  be 
reckoned  preferable  to  any  other.  Here  the  inhabitants  catch, 
plenty  of  fifli,  v/hich  they  dry  and  fait  in  fufficient  quantities 
for  provilion  through  the  whole  year  :  here  they  have  v/ood 
enough,  not  only  for  building  their  houfes,  but  alfo  for  building 
fhips,  to  which  the  river  ferves  as  an  harbour  ;  and  by  its  proxi- 
mity to  the  fea  they  boil  fo  much  train  oil  and  filt  as  to  fupply 
the  other  forts.  Game  is  here  fo  plenty,  that  the  pooreft  Coflack 
feldom  dines  without  a  fwan,  goofe,  or  duck  ;  and  through  the 
whole  winter,  in  the  fprings,  they  catch  frefli  fifli.  Wild  berries 
of  all  forts  are  here  in  great  abundance,  which  the  inhabitants 
lay  up  in  flore  for  the  winter,  and  which  next  to  filh  is  the 
greateft  part  of  their  fuftenancc  ;  and  the  beft  Kamtfchatka  fables 
are  caught  near  the  river  Teghil.  All  the  goods  which  they  get 
from  the  Koreki,  fuch  as  deer-fkins,  and  even  the  flefli  of  the 
deer  itfelf,  are  cheaper  here  than  any  where  elfe  :  befides,  this  is 
a  mod  fruitful  foil,  where  they  may  cultivate  corn  of  all  forts. 
The  only  inconvenience  that  they  have  is,  that  both  Ruffian  and 
Chineje  goods  are  dearer  here  than  at  any  other  fort,  which  is 
owing  to  their  land-carriage  from  the  Boljcheretjkoi  Ojlrog  hither, 
which  cofts  four  rubles  a  pood. 

The  fourth  fort  was  built  upon  the  bay  of  A%vatjcha,   in  the 
pear  1 740  ;  and  inhabitants  were  brought  hither  from  the  upper 
and  lower  Kamtfchatka  forts.     The  houfes  are  tolerably  good, 
particularly  thofe  which  were  built  for  the  people  of  the  Kamtf- 
chatka 


K    A    M    T    S     C     H     A    T     K     A.         267 

chatka  expedition  upon  the  haven  of  Petropaulaiijkay.  Its  great 
beauty  is  its  church,  which  is  finely  fituated,  and  very  well 
built.  This  fort  has  almoft  the  fume  advantages  and  difadvan- 
tages  as  the  Bolfcheretjkoi  fort,  with  this  difference,  that  here  the 
hunting  of  the  beaver  is  more  convenient ;  but  the  water  is  bad 
and  unwholfome,  fo  that  they  fend  frequently  from  this  bay  to 
the  river  Awatfcha  for  their  frefli  water. 

We  can  give  no  account  of  the  fifth  fort,  which  was  built 
upon  the  river  Tegh'il  after  my  departure  from   Kamtfchatha. 
It  was  garrifoned  with  37  male  inhabitants.     Mr.  ^teller  tells 
us,  that  this  fort  was  built  with  a  view  to  reftrain  the  fettled 
Koreki,  and  for  a  flage  to  thofe  who  travel  round  the  Fenfchtnjka 
fea  to  Ocbotfka ;  and,  in  cafe  of  neceflity,  to  proted:  the  rein-deer 
or  wandering  Koreki  againft  the  Tchiikotjkoi .     The  inhabitants  of 
this  fort  can  deprive  thofe  of  the  lower  Kamtjchatka  fort  of 
feveral  advantages,  becaufe  they  lie  more  convenient  for  hunting 
the  fable  upon  the  river  Teghil,  and  the  Koreki  rather  chufe  to 
bring  their  goods  to  them  than  to  the  two  other  forts,  as  being 
nearer. 


CHAP.      VI. 

Of  the  Manner  in  which  the  Coffacks  live  there ;  of  their  D  i  s- 
TiLLERY,     Provisions,     &c. 


I 


"^  H  E  Coffacks  of  Kamtfchatka  live  almoft  in  the  farrie 
manner  as  the  natives,  feeding  like  them  upon  roots  and 
fifhes  ;  and  their  occupations  are  nearly  the  fame.  In 
the  fummer  they  catch  fafli  for  their  winter  provifion,  and  gather 
nettles,  of  which  they  make  nets.     Their  difference  only  feems 

Mm  2  to 


268        Of    the     C    O    N    Q.    U    E   S    T      of 

to  confiil  in  this,  that  the  Coflacks  live  in  houfes,  and  the  natives 
in  huts  under  ground ;  the  Coflacks  ufually  eat  their  fifli  boiled, 
and  the  natives  moflly  dry ;  befides,  the  Coflacks  drefs  their's 
feverai  ways  different  from  the  natives.  As  it  is  impofiible  for 
people  to  live  there  without  the  help  of  women,  who  are  fo 
neceflary  in  many  parts  of  their  work,  fuch  as  cleaning  their 
flfli,  drying  their  roots,  fpinning  and  making  their  fliirts  and 
cloaths,  and  as  the  Coflacks  firft  fettled  in  Kamtfchatka  without 
their  wives,  whom  upon  account  of  the  difficulty  of  the  journey 
they  could  not  tranfport  thither,  I  fliall  now  relate  what  methods 
they  ufed  to  make  up  for  this  deficiency. 

One  may  eafily  imagine,  that  the  Cofllicks  did  not  reduce  thefe 
people  without  ufing  force  ;  and  in  thefe  wars  they  took  pri- 
foners  many  women  and  children  as  well  as  men,  and  obliged 
them  to  perform  all  the  labour.  The  care  of  overlooking  thefe 
fervants  was  entrufted  to  fuch  as  they  made  their  concubines, 
whom  they  frequently  married  if  they  had  any  children  by 
them ;  and  fometimes  the  natives  off'ered  them  their  daughters, 
whom  they  promifed  to  marry  as  foon  as  the  priefl:  arrived  : 
fo  that  it  fometimes  happened  that  the  Coflacks  had  a  marriage 
and  chriffening  at  the  fame  time ;  for  then  there  was  but  one 
priefl;  in  all  Kamtfchatka,  who  lived  in  the  lower  fort,  and 
once  in  a  year,  or  once  in  two  years,  vifited  the  other 
fettlements. 

The  Coflacks,  a  people  rude  enough  themfelves,  feemed  to  be 
pretty  well  pleafed  with  the  manner  of  living  here,  ufing  the 
natives  as  their  flaves,  who  furniflied  them  with  fables  and 
other  furrs  in  abundance,  and  pafling  the  greateft  part  of  their 
time  in  playing  at  cards  :  their  only  want  feemed  to  be  that  of 
brandy.  Before  there  were  any  brandy  fhops  they  ufed  to  meet 
in  the  office  where  the  tax  was  received  :  here  the  gamefters 
brought  their  furrs,  and,  when  they  had  no  furrs,  even  their  flaves  j 

and 


K     A    M    T    S    C     H     A    T    K    A.        269 

and  fometimes  they  played  'till  both  parties  had  pawned  their 
cloaths  for  brandy.  Such  way  of  living,  one  may  cafily  believe, 
was  attended  with  great  confufion  )  but  what  the  poor  flaves  fuf- 
fered  is  almoft  incredible,  being  obliged  fometimes  to  change 
their  mafters  twenty  times  a  day. 

The  invention  of  making  fpirits  happened  accidentally.  The 
ColTacks,  after  the  manner  of  the  natives,  made  a  great  provifion 
of  all  kinds  of  berries  for  the  winter.  It  happened  fometimes 
that  they  began  to  ferment  in  the  fpring,  and  could  be  ufed  no 
other  way  than  in  drink.  This  drink  was  obferved  to  caufe 
drunkennefs  when  taken  in  great  quantities;  upon  which  they 
began  to  diftil  it,  and,  to  their  great  furprife  and  pleafure, 
found  that  it  produced  a  good  ipirit.  They  have  fince  difco- 
vered  that  they  could  make  brandy  from  an  infufion  of  the 
fweet  grafs,  and  now  they  have  fpirits  in  plenty.  Their  method 
of  preparing  this  herb  for  diftillery  we  have  already  explained. 

Thofe  that  are  curious  to  know  whence  the  Coflacks  fettled 
here  obtained  their  rich'es,  mufl:  be  informed  that  they  owe  them 
to  the  following  circumftances  :  firll:,  when  they  conquered  the 
natives  they  made  all  the  plunder  they  could :  fecondly,  every 
party  of  Coflacks,  that  was  employed  in  gathering  the  taxes^ 
obliged  each  tributary  natiye,  befiHes  the  crown  tax,  to  give  thera 
four  iox-fkins  and  one  fable,  which  they  divided  among  them- 
felves  :  thirdly,  by  their  commerce  with  the  natives,  whom  they 
obliged  to  pay  a  very  high  price  for  every  trifle  they  furniflied 
them  with.  Although,  at  prefent,  the  CoflTacks  are  forbidden 
to  take  any  thing  more  than  the  crown  tax,  yet  they  are  ftiU 
allowed  to  fet  what  price  they  pleafe  upon  their  goods ;  and 
indeed  they  fell  them,  or  change  them  for  furrs,  at  very  great 
profits,  and  fometimes  for  provifions,  nets,  and  boats.  Without 
this  they  would  not  be  able  to  live  upon  their  fmall  pay,  which 
is  no  more  than  what  they  ufed  to  receive  at  Jakutjki,  and, 
both  in  money  and  provifions,   does  not  amount  to  above   1 4 

rubles 


270         Of     the      C    O    N    CLU    E    S    T      of 

rubles  a  year  ;  and  here  they  cannot  maintain  and  cloath  them- 
felves   for .  lefs  than   40. 

CHAP.      VII. 
Of    their     TRADE. 


LTHOUGH  from  the  very  beginning  fome  people 
went  along  with  the  tax-gatherers,  who  carried  little  trifles 
to  difpofe  of  among  the  natives,  thefe  people  could  not 
be  called  merchants,  becaufe  they  did  duty  in  the  fame  manner  as 
the  Collacks.  By  degrees  many  of  them  got  themfelves  en- 
rolled under  that  name,  on  paying  the  poll-tax,  and  as  fuch 
fettled  with  their  families  in  thefe  places ;  but  the  true  merchants 
began  to  bring  confiderable  quantities  of  goods  firft  to  Ochotjka, 
and  then  to  Kamtfchatka,  at  the  time  when  the  fecond  expedition 
to  Kamtfchatka  took  place.  The  number  of  the  people  in- 
creafing  made  the  demand  greater  ;  and  their  profits  were  fo 
confiderable,  that  feveral,  who  came  out  of  Rufjia  as  common 
labourers,  in  fix  or  feven  years  began,  to  trade  for  1 5000  rubles 
or  more  :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  fome  were  ruined  from  their 
extraordinary  gains,  which  led  them  into  various  forts  of  luxury 
and  extravagance  :  and  thofe  merchants  particularly  who  fent 
fadlors  thither  run  the  greatefl:  rilk  ;  however,  the  principals  had 
the  fatisfadion  to  find  that  the  government  took  care  to  fee 
jufiice   done  them. 

After  the  expedition  to  Kamtfchatka  the  trade  began  to  be 
upon  another  footing,  the  officers  and  fervants  in  this  expedition 
buying  their  goods  of  the  merchants  for  ready  money  ;  whereas 
they  were  obliged  to  give  the  inhabitants  credit  'till  they  returned 
from  their  travelling  among  the  Kamtfchadales^  when  they  were 

paid 


K    A     M     T    S     C     H     A     T    K     A.        171 

paid  in  furrs  of  different  forts.  In  fine,  the  exchange  of  goods 
with  the  Kamtfcbadales  and  Chincfe  is  fo  profitable,  that,  not- 
withftanding  all  expences  occafioned  by  the  diftance,  dearnefs  of 
tranfport,  and  other  difficuhies,  we  may  'reckon  that  a  1000 
rubles  will  produce  4000,  provided  they  remain  but  one  year  in 
Kamtfchatka  ;  but  if  they  remain  longer,  there  is  a  confiderable 
lofs.  The  reafons  of  this  are,  firfl,  that  upon  their  arrival,  being 
flattered  with  the  high  prices  of  things,  they  fell  every  thing,  even 
their  own  cloathsand  provifions,  hoping  foon  to  leave  the  country, 
in  which  if  difappointed,  they  are  obliged  to  buy  them  baclc 
again  at  double  price  :  fecondly,  that  the  furrs  by  lying,  lofe  their 
colour  and  value  :  thirdly,  that  the  place  is  exceflively  expenfive 
in  regard  to  lodging,  wareaoufe-room,  viduals,  and  feveral  other 
particulars. 

Goods  demanded  in  Kamtfchatka,  befides  the  natural  produce 
of  RuJJia,  are  European  goods,  from  Siberia,  Boharia,  and  the 
Calmuks,  From  Europe  they  receive  coarfe  cloaths  of  various 
colours,  linen,  ferges,  knives,  filk  and  cotton  handkerchiefs,, 
red  wine,  a  little  fugar,  tobacco,  and  feveral  toys.  From 
Siberia,  iron,  feveral  iron  and  copper  vefiels,  and  inflruments, 
fuch  as  knives,  hatchets,  liiws,  and  fire-fteels ;  alfo  wax,  hemp, 
yarn  for  nets,  tanned  deer-flvins,  coarfe  RuJJian  linen  and  cloth. 
From  Bobaria,  and  the  country  of  the  Calmuks,  tliey  bring  fe- 
veral different  forts  of  cotton  goods.  From  China,  feveral  filk 
and  cotton  fluffs,  tobacco,  coral,  and  needles,  which  are  much 
preferred  to  thofe  from  RuJjia.  From  the  Koreki  they  receive 
great  quantities  of  rein-deer-fkins,  both  dreffed  and  undreffed,, 
which  they  may  fell  in  what  quantities  they  pleafe  at  any 
time.  Merchants  muft  take  care  not  to  have  too  great  a  flock 
of  any  other  goods ;  for  the  inhabitants  of  this  place.  Ruffians 
as  well  as  natives,  never  buy  any  thing  before  they  are  in  abfolute 
want  of  it,  even  if  they  could  buy  it  at  half  price^ 

The 


272  Of     the      C    O   N    Q_U    E    S    T     of 

The  goods  fold  at  Kamtfchatka  at  prime-cofl:  fcarcely  exceed 
10  or  12,000  rubles,  but  the  fales amount  to  30  or  40,000  rubles; 
and  if  a  merchant  carries  thefe  Kamtjchatka  goods  to  the  fair 
upon  the  frontiers  of  China,  he  may  receive  double  the  price  he 
buys  them  at ;  fo  that  this  commerce  may  eafily  appear  to  be 
very  advantageous. 

The  goods  that  are  brought  out  of  Kamtfchatka  confifl:  of  furrs, 
fuch  as  fea  beavers',  fables',  foxes',  and  a  few  otters'  fkins.  As 
there  was  formerly  no  money  in  this  country,  the  way  of  trading 
was  in  exchange  for  furrs  ;  and  now  they  have  money,  they  fix 
the  price  by  the  fkins,  reckoning  a  good  fox-fkin  at   a  ruble. 

All  goods  brought  out  oi  Kamtfchatka  "^2:^  \o  per  cent,  duty, 
but  the  fables  12. 


CHAP.     VIII. 

The  Diferent  ROADS  between  Jakutfki  and  Kamtfchatka. 


THOUGH  it  may  at  firfl  appear  needlefs  to  mention 
all  the  different  roads  to  Kamtfchatka,  efpecially  as  fe- 
veral  of  them  are  now  no  more  ufed,  yet,  upon  due 
confideration  it  will  be  found  to  ferve  for  an  illuftration  of  the 
different  fettlements  of  the  Ruffian  colonies,  and  to  fhew  what 
people  are  fubjedl  and  pay  taxes  to  each  of  thefe  fettlements. 
It  will  alfo  explain  the  manner  of  reducing  thefe  people  and 
making  them  tributary,  and  defcribe  the  difHculties  of  this 
journey,  although  there  had  been  no  danger  from  an  enemy, 
in  which  the  tax-gatherers  were  continually  expofed  to  hunger 
and  cold  in  an  unknown  country,  whereby  many  of  them 
lofl  their  lives.     The   CofTacks   were  only  able  to   make  this 

journey 


K    A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.         273 

ionrnev  during  the  winter,  and  had  no  other  provifions  or  Oorcs 
than  what  they  drugged  after  them  upon  Tmall  fledges  :  and  as 
they  were  obliged  to  go  through  great  waftes,  where  fometimes  by 
reafon  of  the  drifts  of  fnow  they  were  forced  to  flay  feveral  days  in 
the  fame  place,  their  provifions  were  entirely  confumed  ;  fo  that 
they  were  obliged  to  eat  their  leathern  belts,  ftraps,  and  flioe-foles. 
It  is  a  thing  incredible  that  a  man  upon  the  road  could  live 
10  or  12  days  without  vidluals,  and  yet  in  Kamtfchatka  they 
pretend  that  this  has  frequently  happened  to  feveral. 

From  Jakut/ki  the  road  to  Kamtfchatka  w^as  down  the  river 
Lena  to  its  entrance  into  the  Frozen  Ocean,  and  thence  by  fea 
to  the  mouth  of  the  river  Indigirka  and  Cova,  from  whence 
they  proceed  over  land  to  the  Fenfchinjka  or  Olutorjkoy  fea, 
and  coalT:  it  round  by  the  iliore  in  boats.  However  this  road 
was  attended  with  great  inconveniences ;  for  in  the  beft  feafon, 
when  the  fea  was  free  from  ice  and  the  wind  favourable,  they 
could  not  perform  it  in  lefs  than  one  year ;  but  if  the  one  hap- 
pened to  be  contrary,  or  the  other  frozen,  their  boats  were  fre- 
quently broken  to  pieces,  and  the  voyage  coft  them  fometimes 
two,  and  fometimes  three  years.  From  Jakutjki  to  the  mouth 
of  the  river  Tatii  is  i960  verfls.  However  this  road  is  now 
entirely  difufed. 

Another  pafTage  was  all  by  land  :  from  Jakutjkl  they  went 
to  the  fbage  of  Aldanjki,  from  thence  to  upper  Tanjki ;  thence 
through  Zachiverjk,  Uyandjki,  Alafejki^  upper  and  lower  Covimjki^ 
to  the  {oxioi  Anadir  ;  thence  to  the  lower  Kamtfchatka^  and  thence 
to  the  upper  fort  upon  the  Bofcheretfkoi. 

The  Alazinfka  fiage  flands  at  a  good  diflance  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Ala[ja  river,  which  falls  into  the  Frozen  Ocean.  It  is 
about  509  verfls  diflant  from  Uyandinfka. 

The  Anadirfka  fort  lies  on  the  left  of  the  n\tr  Anadir,  about 
963  verfls  from  the  lower  Kovinfka.  From  the  fort  Anadirfka 
to    the    lower    Kamtfchatka    is     1144    verfls.      This    is    at 

N  n  prefent 


274         Of     the     C    O    N    Q_U    E    S    T      of 

prefent  the  common  road  as  far  as  Anadirjka,  but  feldom  to 
Kamtfchatka,  unlefs  it  be  neceflary  to  vifit  the  different  pofts. 

A  third  paiTage  is  moftly  by  water.  They  fail  down  the  Lena 
"from  "Jakutfki  to  the  conflux  of  the  river  Aldan,  up  the  Aldan  to 
the  mouth  of  the  river  Mai,  up  the  Mai  to  the  entrance  of  the 
river  "Jiidoma,  and  up  the  yudoma  as  far  as  the  place  called  the 
cxoisoi  J udoma  ;  from  thence  over  land  to  Ochotjka,  whence  they 
go  in  boats  to  the  Boljchaia-reka  or  Great  River,  or  by  land  along 
the  coafl:  of  the  Penfchinfka  bay  :  but  the  lad:  is  not  quite  fafe 
upon  account  of  the  Koreki,  who  are  frequently  in  rebellion. 
However,  this  paffage  up  the  rivers  to  the  crofs  of  yudoma  is  very 
tedious  ;  and  it  is  reckoned  a  piece  of  good  fortune  to  make  the 
paffage  in  one  fummer :  there  are  likewife  feveral  troublefome 
water-falls  in  this  paffage. 

The  fourth,  and  moil  convenient  road  in  the  fummer-time, 
lies  over  the  hills ;  and  as  I  travelled  this  myfelf,  I  fliall  give  my 
own  journal,  whicb  perhaps  may  be  of  fome  ufe  in  laying  down 
the  geography,  the  common  maps  wanting  moil  of  the  rivers 
in  this  part. 

From  Jakutjki  they  go  down  the  river  Lena  to  Tarmunkay 
where  they  prepare  themfelvcs  for  their  journey.  The  next  place 
to  this  is  Kiwiatki ;  we  then  paffed  fome  villages,  and  the  fol- 
lowing day  croffed  the  river  Sola.  This  river  rifes  about  loo 
verAs  from  the  ridge,  and  falls  into  the  Lena  about  fix  verfts 
below  where  we  paffed  it.  We  fed  our  horfes  by  the  lake  Kut- 
cbugna,  about  1 1  verits  beyond  the  Sola ;  and  lodged  upon  the 
lake  Orpncamiis,  13  verfts  from  the  laft  place.  The  3d  day, 
paffing  the  lake  Hatila,  we  fed  our  horfes  upon  the  lake  Are- 
laka  ;  and  lodged  that  evening  upon  the  lake  Talba.  In  about 
34  verfts  from  T^alba  we  began  to  afcend  the  ridge  j  paffing 
which,  we  went  through  the  defer ts  S>uubalag,  Keindii,  and  fed 
our  horfes  by  the  lake  Satagg,  20  verfts  diftant  from  Talba. 
We  came  next  to  the  lake  Ala-atbaga,  where  we  lay  that  night. 

In 


K    A    M    T    S     C    H    A    T    K     A.        275 

In  a  few  verfts  from  Ala-atbaga  we  came  to  the  little  river  Ko- 
cora,  which,  22  verfts  below  the  place  where  we  paffed  it,  falls 
into  the  river  lata  :   we  went  down  to  its  very  mouth.     There 
are  feveral  lakes  near  it ;    and  a  verft:  before  we  came  to  the  laft 
is  a  ftation  where  generally  the  horfcs  are  changed,   and  where 
cattle  are  bought  for  fuflenance  in  paffing  the  deferts.     Every 
traveller  buys  fome  in  his  turn,  which  are  divided  equally  among 
all  the  company.     They  endeavour  to  purchafe  them  as  fmall  as 
they  can,   that  every  one  may  only  have  fuch  a  portion  as  he 
can  confume  ;  for  even  though  roafled  or  baked  it  is  prefently 
filled  with  maggots.     This  ftation  is  kept  by  Coffacks  fent  from 
'Jakiitfki :    it  lies  i  5  verfts   from  the  place  where  we  pafTed  the 
river  Kocora,     Having  lodged  here  one  night,   we  fet  out  next 
morning,   and  pafied  the  lakes  Emiti  and  Talbachan,  about  one 
verft  and  a  half  from  the  mouth  of  the  Kocora.     Then  we  tra- 
velled through  the  deferts  of  Karakoi  and  Tefaca,  and  lodged 
that  night  by  a  little  lake.     Our  road  was  near  the  fide  of  the 
river  Tata  :    this  day  we  travelled  about  t  5  verfts.     The  places 
that  we  remarked  bevond   this   were,    the   deferts  of   Choraita 
Menay,  Koratoi,   Ta'valac,   and  Sufun,   and  the  little  river  Tula, 
which  falls  into   the   Tata  about  four  verfts  below  where  we 
pafled  it,  and  13  diftant  from  where  we  lodged  the  night  before. 
Thirteen  verfts  from  Tula  the  river  Namgare,  after  a  courfe  of 
about  60  verfts,   falls   into  the  Tata.     Between  thefe  two  rivers 
are  lake  Cungi,  and  the  deferts  Sadochta  and  Betegeti.     Beyond 
the  Namgara  lies  the  lake  Neerga,  and  the  wafte  places  Kalachku, 
Boorgimechtec,   and   Taalgeram.      Two   verfts  from   the    Tata, 
and    14  from  Navigara,    is  the    ftation   Jockfo'va?i/ka,    kept  by 
Coflacks  from  Jakutjki  :  here  we  lodged.     Travelling  about  four 
verfts  and  a  half  we  pafled  the  river  Tata,   which,   as  we  were 
told  by  the  people,  rifes  there  about  1 50  verfts  above  our  pafllige, 
and  about  as  much  b^-low   it  falls   into  the  river  Aldan.     Four 
verfts  beyond  the  T.ata  we  pafled  the  little  river  Lebagana,  which 

N  n  2  runs 


276        0/     //'^     C    O    N    Q_U    E    S    T     ef 

runs  into  the  Tata.  Between  thefe  rivers  lies  the  lake  Teleyegnok. 
Half  a  veril  from  the  river  Lebagana  we  pafled  the  river  Be- 
furac,  which  a  little  below  falls  into  the  Lebagana  upon  the 
right  hand.  Five  verfts  farther  is  the  river  Badaranac,  which  falls 
into  the  Befurac.  Faffing  a  ridge  we  came  to  the  fpring  of  the 
liver  Tuguta,  which,  after  a  courfe  of  30  verfts  falls  from  the 
left  into  the  river  Kamgal  The  paflage  over  the  ridge  is  three 
verfls.  Going  down  the  left  fide  of  the  river  Taguta  we  faw  the 
lake  Utal,  and  palled  the  river  Kirtak,  which  falls  into  the  Taguta 
five  verfls  from  its  fpring.  Two  verfts  and  a  half  from  Kirtak 
we  lodged  upon  the  lake  Befictaki  :  from  this  lake  to  the  ford 
of  the  river  Amga  is  1 8  verfls.  We  crofltd  the  river  Befurac^ 
which  falls  into  the  Taguta  upon  the  left,  and  paffed  by  the  lakes 
Mycharelac  and  Taguta,  near  which  are  other  lakes,  Taraga, 
Maralac,  and  Melca.  Half  a  verft  from  Mcka  is  the  pafiage 
over  the  river  Amga,  which  is  about  40  or  50  fathoms  broad, 
and  falls  into  the  Aldan  about  a  verft  and  a  quarter  below  the 
paflage.  Between  the  mouth  of  the  river  Amga  and  Ta?}ia  is 
about  119  verfts.  This  river  is  remarkable,  by  having  feveral 
people  fettled  here  for  agriculture  :  however  they  have  made 
very  little  progrefs;  nay,  they  have  even  forgot  their  native 
language,  and  have  acquired  the  language  and  cuftoms  of  the 
Jakutjki ;  fo  that  they  can  be  diftinguiflied  in  nothing  but 
by  their  being  Chriftians.  Here  we  were  obliged  to  wait  all 
night  for  the  ferry.  The  next  morning  we  went  up  the  other 
fide  of  the  Amga,  and  about  two  verfts  from  the  ferry  we  came 
to  the  little  river  JJlbiita,  which  lofes  itfelf  in  the  Amga.  We 
afcended  this  river  to  its  Ipring,  and  then  going  over  to  the  fpring 
of  the  ChuoptchunUy  went  down  that  rivulet  to  its  entrance  into 
tlie  river  Nocha.  The  river  Chuoptchunu  runs  through  the  lake 
Darka  ;  and  the  Nocha  falls  into  the  x'wtr  Aldan  about  120 
verfts  from  its  rife.  From  the  Nocha  we  went  1 2  verfts  over 
a  ridge  and  came  to  the  river  Voroni^  which  falls  into  the  Nocha^ 

Two 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.  277 

Two  verfls  further  is  the  Httle  river  Tilga,  which  after  a  courfe 
of  20  verfls  falls  into  the  Nocha  :    here  we  lodged.     One  verft 
beyond  our  quarters  is  the  river  Atctachhatch,  which  we  afcended 
eight  verfts  j   then  leaving  it,   four  verfts  further  we   came   to 
the  Cbipanda,  along  which  we  went  1 6  verfts   to   where  it  falls 
into   the  river  Aldan.     The   river   Cbipanda  runs   through   the 
lakes  Bileor,  Druk,  and  Chipa?7da.     The  Aldan  is   a  large  navi- 
gable river,   which  falls  into  the  river  Lena  upon  the  right  fide, 
200  verfts  below  Jakutjki.     We  pafled  this  river  in  boats  :   the 
ferry  lies  eight  verfts  above  the  mouth  of  the  Cbipanda.     From 
Talmanca  to  this  place  the  country  was  full  of  woods ;  though 
the  greater  part  was  larch  and  birch,    yet  upon  the  river  Amga 
we  now  and  then  met  with  fome  fir-trees,   but  rarely  a  poplar. 
From  the  Aldan  we  travelled  to  the  river  Bela^    which  is  20 
verfts.      Upon  tJie   road    we    faw    feveral   lakes,    and   the   river 
Keriatma,   which  fUls  into  the  river  Aldan.     Here  we  lodged. 
The  next  day  our   road  lay  up   the  river  Bela,  upon  which  we 
pafled  the  rivers  Sacil^   Viae,   and  Lebvena,  where   we  lay  :   this 
day  we  travelled  20  verfts.     The  following  day   we  pafTed   the 
river  Argadcbika  ;    and  nine  verfts   further    lies  the  hill  Telahi 
a  little  beyond  which  begins  the  black  foreft :  three  verfts  further 
we  took  up  our  quarters.     The  next  day,   upon  account  of  the 
rain,  we  did  not  move  before  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.    Five 
verfts  beyond  the  black   foreft  runs   the   river  Hagolla,  and    20 
verfts  further  the  Cbagdolla  ;  both  which  run  into  the  fame  Bela^ 
During  this  journey  we  palled   the  river  Bda  three  times.     As 
the  fummer  had  been  pretty  dry,  our  pafTage  was  very  favourable, 
being  able  to  ford  it  ;    but   in   a  wet   feafon   it  frequently  is  at- 
tended with  great  danger.     They  are   obliged    to   pafs    it    upon 
floats,   which,   by   the  ftrength   of    the  current,  are  frequently 
■xlriven  upon  rocks  or  the  trunks  of  trees.     There  is  great  plenty 
of  wood  upon  the  river  Bela.     Our  road  lay   up  the  Cbagdolla  ; 
in  the  fpace  of  1.6  verfts  we  crofted  it  feven  times.     About   i  5 

verfts 


278         Of     the     C    O    N    Q^  U    E    S    T     of 

verfls  from  the  laft  paffage  we  came  to  the  river  Vnacam,  which 
is  about  3,0  fathoms  broad,  and  falls  into  the  Aldan.  Our  road 
lay  along  this  river  to  its  very  rife.  Ten  verfls  beyond  the  place 
where  we  paffed  it  is  a  little  river  v.-hofe  name  we  could  not 
learn  ;  upon  which,  half  a  verft  from  its  mouth,  is  a  lake  which 
they  call  Bt/Jkeol,  that  is,  Icy  lake,  as  the  ice  in  it  does  not 
thaw  during  the  greateft  heats  in  fummer.  It  lies  between  high 
rocky  hills;  its  length  is  about  150  fathoms,  and  breadth  80; 
The  thicknefs  of  the  ice  is  about  two  feet,  and  it  appears  like  the 
fpring  ice,  bluifh  and  full  of  holes.  Here  it  is  alwa3's  cold  in 
the  hotteft  day.  We  now  travelled  20  verfts  over  the  hills,  and 
came  again  to  the  river  Bela,  which  we  paffed.  Next  day  we 
travelled  eight  verfts  further,  and  came  to  the  head  of  the  Akcra^ 
which  falls  into  the  Tuna  :  Our  road  lay  feven  verfts  along  this 
river.  Then  we  afcended  the  river  Tima^  and  paffed  it  about 
18  verfls  from  the  Akera  :  this  river  falls  into  the  Aldan.  Next 
day  we  paffed  the  river  Afitcher,  and  lay  this  night  by  the  T'er- 
rena,  or  the  little  ice  magazine,  about  200  fathoms  long  and  50 
broad.  Five  verfls  from  Ter7-cne  is  another  ice  magazine,  which 
is  feven  fathoms  long  and  three  broad  ;  and  ten  verlts  further,  all 
upon  the  fame  river,  is  yet  a  third ;  five  verfts  from  which  laft 
is  the  rife^of  the  river  Akachon,  which  falls  into  the  Tuna. 

From  Talmanka  we  departed  the  9th  of  fidy,  iJlJ,  and  ar- 
rived at  Ochotjka  the  19th  oi  Aiiguji.  We  refted  feven  days  upon 
the  road,  and  travelled  thirty-four„  It  may  be  fliid,  in  general, 
from  Jakutfki  to  the  ford  of  the  river  Bela  the  road  is  tolerable ; 
but  from  thence  to  Ochotjka  as  troublefome  as  one  can  eafily 
imagine,  lying  always  upon  the  fteep  banks  of  rivers,  or  through 
thick  woods :  The  banks  of  the  rivers  are  full  of  loofe  round 
ftones,  fo  difficult  to  pafs,  that  it  is  furprifjng  how  the  horfes  can 
travel  over  them.  The  higher  the  hills,  the  more  miry  they  are ; 
and  on  the  very  tops  of  them  are  fuch  bogs  and  floughs,  that  if 
a  horfe  breaks  the  furface  he  finks  without  any  poffibility  of  re- 
covering 


K     A     M     T     S     C     H     A     T     K     A.         279 

(jovering  him  :  it  is  terrible  to  fee  the  earth  bending  like  waves 
for  ten  fathoms  round  one.  Tlie  beft  time  of  travelling  from 
Jakutjki  is  from  the  beginning  of  fnmmer  until  the  month  of 
July;  for  if  they  wait  'till  Aiigiifi  they  arc  in  danger  of  being 
furprifed  by  the  fnow,  which  falls  very  early  on  the  mountains. 

We  took  our  departure  from  Ochotjka  on  the  4tii  of  05lober^ 
in  the  Fortuna  packet-boat,  which  had  fliiled  thither  from  Kami/- 
chatka.  At  night  there  was  fuch  a  leak  in  our  vefl'el,  that  the 
people  below  were  up  to  their  knees  in  water  ;  and  though  we 
worked  with  two  pumps,  and  baled  it  with  kettles  and  pans, 
and  whatever  fell  in  our  way,  yet  the  water  decreafed  very  little  : 
befides  our  vefTel  was  fo  heavily  laden  that  it  came  over  the  gun- 
nel. We  had  therefore  no  other  means  of  faving  our  lives  than 
by  lightening  the  velTel,  for  at  this  time  there  was  a  dead  calm  j 
fo  that  all  upon  deck,  or  about  the  fides  of  the  fliip,  was  imme- 
diately thrown  overboard  :  but  as  this  produced  very  little  ad- 
vantage, about  400  pood  was  caft  out  of  the  hold,  which  re- 
lieved us  J  the  water  in  the  vefl'el  began  to  decreafe,  and  at  lall 
was  intirely  cleared.  However,  the  pumps  were  ftlll  kept  going, 
and  no  body  except  the  fick  were  excufed  :  in  this  manner  we 
failed  'till  the  14th  of  OSfober,  Befides  the  continual  fatigue  of 
pumping  we  were  expofed  to  violent  cold  and  continual  fleet. 
This  day  at  nine  in  the  morning  we  arrived  at  the  mouth  of 
\hQBolJchaia-reka  ;  but,  as  if  all  our  voyage  was  to  be  unfortunate, 
our  failors,  not  knowing  whether  the  tide  was  ebbing  or  flowing, 
miflook  the  ebb  for  the  flood,  and  ran  into  the  mouth  of  the 
river.  They  were  no  fooner  come  to  the  broken  water,  which 
is  yery  great  at  the  beginning  of  the  ebb  or  flood  even  in  the 
calmefl:  weather,  and  was  at  prefent  much  increafed  by  a  ftrong 
north  wind,  than  we  loft  all  hopes  of  advancing  up  the  flream. 
It  was  therefore  the  opinion  of  feveral,  that  we  ftiould  go  out 
again  to  fea,  and  wait  the  time  of  the  flood  :  but  lucky  was  it  for 
us  that  we  did  not  purfue  this  refolution  ;   for  during  the  whole 

week 


2So       Of    the     C    O    N    Q^  U    E    S  T    oj,    &c. 

v/eek  following  there  was  fuch  a  firrong  north  wind  we  fhould  in 
that  cafe  have  been  driven  fo  far  out  to  fea  that  we  muft  all  have^ 
perifhed  :  but  the  majority  infifled  on  running  the  veffel  on  fliore, 
which  we  did  about  loo  fathoms  fouth  of  the  mouth  of  the  river. 
In  the  evening,  at  the  next  high  water,  we  took  out  the  maft,  and 
the  following  day  feveral  planks  j  the  reft  was  ftove  to  pieces,  and 
carried  away  by  the  fea.  Now  we  could  obferve  in  what  danger 
we  had  been,  for  we  found  all  the  planks  of  the  veflel  quite  black 
and  rotten. 

We  lived  upon  the  coaft  'till  the  21ft;  and  during  our  flay 
there  happened  an  earthquake,  but  fo  i  neon  fid  erable  that  we  hardly 
knew  of  it,  but  imputed  the  motion  we  obferved  to  our  having 
been  toffed  fo  long  at  fea:  however,  fome  Kuriles  who  came 
down  informed  us,  that  in  the  place  of  their  habitations  it  had  been 
very  violent,  and  that  the  water  rofe  exceeding  high.  On  the  2  ift 
of  OBobcr  we  entered  the  Bolfchaia-reka  in  boats  that  were  fent 
to  us  from  the  fort,  and  on  the  2  2d  in  the  evening  we  arrived 
at    the  fort 

Notwithflanding  that  the  journey  from  Jakutjki  to  Karntfchatka 
is  very  troublefome,  yet  the  return  is  tolerably  agreeable ;  for  the 
vefTels  that  winter  at  Kamtfcbatka  depart  early  in  the  fummer, 
when  the  weather  is  generally  fair  and  the  days  long  j  and  at  that 
time  one  can  go  by  water  even  to  the  ferry  of  the  river  Bela  or 
the  Aldan^  and  from  thence  on  horfeback  to  Jakutjki.  The  only 
trouble  that  they  have  is  before  they  come  to  the  crofs  of  Judoma. 

In  my  return  I  came  from  Ochotjka  to  Judoma  in  feven  days, 
and  from  thence  to  the  mouth  of  the  Mat  in  five  days,  and  from 
thence  to  yakutjki  in  five  days  more  ;  fo  all  together  make  1 7  : 
however,  upon  account  of  the  rapidity  of  the  ftream,  the  pafTage  up 
the  Uda,  which  I  have  made  in  five  days,  fometimes  cofls  five  or 
fix  weeks. 


Tie       END, 


»*.        /*»       r*i_.^ 


.'*^»^'*'~ 


INDEX. 


Page 


23 

204 


jfCklanJkoy  fort,    two   commiffaries 
^!\l         murdered  there 
Adultery,  not  finful 

punilhed  with   death    by    the 

Koreki  224 

how  puniftied  by  the  Kariles    237 
Amtrica,  accounts  of  that   part,    which 
lies  direftly  eaft  from  Kamtfchat- 
ka,  coUedled  from  Mr.  Steller's 
journal  44 

its  climate,  foil,  and  produce  4; 

natives  of,  their  drefs,  food,  and 
language  46.47 

American  boats,  a  defcription  of,  48 

Americans,  their  behaviour  to  ftrangers, 

and  their  figns  for  land  being  near   49 
Animals,  domeftic,    none,    except  dogs, 
cows,  and  horfes 
religious  regard  for 
Arrows,  poifoned,  dangerous  to  be  wound 

ed  with 
Aru,  a  fea  fowl,  defcribed 
'lafof,   firft  difcovery  of  Kamtfchatka 
attributed  to  241 

defeats  the  rebels,  exa£ls  tribute 
from  the  people,  and  builds  the 
upper  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  ibid, 

returns  with  the  Kamtfchatka  tribute  242 
is  made  chief  of  the  Coffacks,  returns 
to  Kamtfchatka,  plunders  a  Chi- 
nefe  boat,  and  is  imprifoned       ibid, 
is  freed  from  prifon,  and  fent  com- 

miflary  to  Kamtfchatka  244 

cruelty  of,  to  thofe  under  his  conn- 

mand  ibid, 

defeats  the  rebels  745 

is  accufed  by  the  Cofftckj  246 


108 
205 

202 
'54 


Page 
Atlafof,  again  imprifoned,  and  his  goods 

confifcated  247 

efcapes  and  Hies  ibid, 

differences  between  him  and  the  Cof- 
facks enquired  into  ibid. 
murdered  by  the  Coffacks  248 
Author,   journal  of,  in  his   paffage  from 

Jakutlki  to  Kamtfchatka  274 

is  in  danger  of  being  loft  279 


B 


•  82 
loe 


wo- 


O 


Sa/a^ttns,   \iOV/  built,   and  ufc  of 

Bears,  fiercenefs  of 

remarkable    fondnefs  of,     to 

men  10 r 

how  killed  before  the  ufe  of  fire- 
arms ibid, 
what  ufe  made  of  10 1 
Beavers,  fea,  refemblance  and  colour  of,    1 30 
care  of,  to  their  young,  and  different 
methods  of  catching  them  1 3  i 
Bering  %  ifland,  fituation  and  extent  of       50 
its  mountains  and  foil 
obfervations  made  from 
tides  in 

waters  of,  their  medicinal  virtues 
Birds,  plenty  of 

fpecies  of,  fent  to  the  Imperial  Mu- 

feum 
ftorm.     See  procellaria 
fmall,  found  at  Kamtfchatka 
Boats,  two  methods  of  making,  and  ma- 
nagement of 
Boils,  a  dangerous  difeafe,  how  cured 
Bridt,  the  difficulty  and  danger  in  ob- 
taining 213 
Brook,  hot,  fitustion  and  courfe  of  75 
o                                                          Canoe, 


5' 
S3 
54 

55 
152 

'53 
162 

186 

2I« 


r^     N"     D       E       X. 


Page 
CrtSM,  trouble  of  making,  and  the  in-  >t^ 
■^■^'       habitants  effccm  for  184 

Calf  {ea,  a  defcripdon  of  -         124 

a  conjcfture  of  the  inhabitatits  con- 
cerning 125 
fiercenefs  of,  in  combating  with  each 

other  126 

a  battle  of,  related    by  Mr.  Stel- 
:»;    ler  127 

fondnefs  of,  for  their  young  i:8 

humorous  tricks  of,  in  the  water       129 
how  catched  upon  Bering's  ifland      1 30 
Channel  between  Matma  and  Japan  de- 
fer! bed  40 
Japanefe  account  of,  the  fame  as  the 
Europeans'  41 
Charetonof,  John,  marches  aga'nft  the  re- 
bellious Koreki,  and  is  killed       257 
Chiefs,  appointed  by  her  Imperial  Majefty  1 80 
Chugotchi,  a  chieftain,   a  brave  defence 

made  by,  againft  the  CofTacks       261 
Cobelof,    reckoned   the  firll  governor  of 
Kamtfchatka,  builds  a  fort,  and 
gathers  voluntary  tribute  242 

gathers  taxes  from  the  Koreki  243 

CommiJJariis,  a  fucceffion  of,  from  Vafilj 
Kolefof  until  the  great  infurreflion 
of  Kamtfchatka  254 

murdered  by  the  Yukageri  and  the 

Koreki  295 

irregular  conduft  of  ibid. 

Cormorants,  a  defcription  of  two  kinds  of   154 
fingjlar  manner  of  catching  155 

Cojfacks,  killed  by  ftratagem  200 ' 

afraid  of  extraordinary  careffes         201 
mutiny,  and  murder  their  chiefs,  and 
feize  on  their  effefts  249 

■'■■  inarch  againft  the  rebels,  obtain  a 
viftory,  bring  the  villages  under 
fubjeftion,  and  make  the  Kuriles 
tributary  250 

their  chief  furprifed  and  burnt,  and 

the  murderers  punifhed  251 

put  Alexi  Petrolofei  under  arrefl       256 
deprive  the  commiffaries  of  their  au  - 

thority  256 

punilhed  with  death  '      ibid, 

again  mutiny  ibid, 

of  Kamtfchatka,    living  and  occu- 
pations of  267 
differ  from  the  natives  268 
make  fpirits  and  brandy                    269 


P.ge 
269 
21a 
23* 


Cojfacks,  riches  of,  liow  acquired 
Qer&rtjhip,  the,  manner  of 
of  the  Koreki  '  ■  •  - 
Ct^tv,  fea.    6'^;  manati 

D 


I)iW  bodies,  given  to  the  dogs  220 

the  ceremony  ufed  at  the  burial  of  22  c 
fuperftitious  notions  concerning  ibid, 
the  Koreki  manner  of  burning,  and 

celebrating  the  memory  of  233 

Kuriles  manner  of  burying  238 

Deer,  defcription  of  104 

Diet,  its  ffveral  names,  and  how  cooked   193 

Di/eajes,  principal,  what,  and  how  thought 

to  be  inflifted  217 

fiippoied  to  be  incurable  218 

Dogs,  colour  and  fwiftnefs  of  1 06 

mora  ufeful  than  horfes  for  travelling  107 
bred  to  hunt,  how  fed  108 

defcription  of  196 

furniture  of,  for  travelling  with,  and 

the  manner  of  driving  ibid, 

value  of  197 

Dreams,  great  regard  paid  to  206 

Ducks,  the  names  and  an  account  of  eleven 

different  fpecies  of  "       '59 

ftone,  drakes  o^  particularly  beau- 
tiful      "  "  160 


Eagle,  four  fpecies  of  162 

Earthquake,  at  Awatfcha  68 

at  the  Kamtfchatkoi  fort  70 

Expeditions,  fcnt  out  257 


F 

Tijhes,  an  account  of 

Sword.     See  Kafatki 

Mokoe,  a  defcription  of 

various  forts  of 

great  plenty  of 

Red,  different  fpecies  of 

Gorbulhe,  orCrookback,  defcribed 

particular  forts  of,  change  their  co 

lours 
fmelts,  three  fpecies  of 
herrings,  (the  fame  as  thofe  in  Eu 

rope)  how  caught  by  the  Kamtf- 

chadales 


137 

141 

142 
143 
MS 
'47 

148 
'5' 


192 
Fifi 


N 


Page 
Fijh,  the  Samojeds'  manner  of  treating, 

by  Mr.  Sceller  194 

methods  of  preferving,   by  the  dif- 
ferent people  195 
tooi,  a  melancholy  inftance  of  the  great 

fcarcity  of  141 

/cr/,Ochot(koy,rituationof,and  buildings   24 
Udefkoy,  buildings  and  foil  of  z6 

Ruffian  in  Kamtfchatka,  an  account 
of  the  prefent  ftate  of  263 — 266 

Fo'wh,  fca,  where  greateft  plenty  of        153 
frefli  water  158 

land  \(iz 

Poxes,  valuable  fliins  of  95 

difficult  to  catch,  an  inftance  of      ibid, 
great  plenty  of,  and  beft  time  to  hunt  96 
Kuriles'  manner  of  catching,  pecu- 
liar to  themfelves  ibid. 
furniture,  houlhold,  what  it  conlifts  of    184 


CarUd,  wild,    ufefulnefs  and  medicinal 

virtues  of  88 

?( .       an  efFedlual  remedy  for  the  fcurvy       89 

tjtefe,  feven  kinds  of  158 

, .        method  of  catching,  lingular  ibid. 

Glutton,  a  fort  of  weafel,  greatly  eileemed 

by  the  Kamtfchadalcs  99 

paws  of,  ufed  as  an  ornament  by 

the  women  ibid, 

dexterity  of,   in  killing  the  deer  100 
gluttony  of  ibid. 

G»</,  extraordinary  notions  of  176 

opinions  of  203 

feared  lefs  than  the  devil  204 

Goods,  what  forts  of,  demanded  in  Kamtf- 
chatka 271 
great  profits  arifing  from  272 
brought    from    Kamtfchatka     pay 
duty                                              ibid. 


H 


Uarch'm,  chief  of  the  rebels,  refolves  to 

attack  the  Ruflian  vtffels  261 

meets  the  Ruffians,  and  makes  pro- 

pofals  to  tlicm  ibid. 

is  made  prifoner  262 

Herbs,  ufeful  to  the  inhabitants  83 

kipri,  its  ufe  and  virtues  88 


D        E        X. 

Pjge 
Horfi,  fea,  where  caught  1 20 

dcfcribed  by  Frederick  Marten,  notes  124 
Haulers,  Vitimflcy,  their  toil  and  rigorous 

laws  109 

enter  into  a  company,  and  appoint  a 

chief  1 1 1 

their  trap-pits  defcribed  i  iz 

their  method  of  hunting  with  nets      1 1 3 
report  their  fuccefs  to  the  chief  1 1 4 

acting  contrary  to  orders  punifhed     1 15 
Hats,  the  manner  of  building,  and  a  de- 

fcription  of  181 

of  the  Koreki  and  Tchukotlkoi,  how 

made  226 

of  the  Kuriles  236 


Honey, 


how  preferved  from  the  bears 
the  Ruffians 


"JeJJo,  errors  of  former  geographers  cor- 

refted  in  regard  to  39 

hejijki,  John,  marches  againft,  and  brings 
to  fubmiffion,  the  Kamtfchadales 
upon  the  Awatfcha  254 

InfeBs,  fwarms  of  164 

refembling  a  loufe,  Mr.  Steller's  ac- 
count of  16; 
Jnjirumenis,  warlike,  forbid  to  be  fold      185 
JfatKa,  well  known  to  naturalifts,  a  de- 

fcription  of  i  c  3 

Iron,  want  of,  a  great  inconvenience         66 
how  fupplied  with  67 

fuppofed    to   be    long    known    at 

Kamtfchatka  185 

the  inhabitants  curious  management 
of  ibid. 

IJland,  Shantanfkoy,  produft  of  27 

Schuratfchu,  the  firft  Kurillkoy,  fitu- 
ation,  mountains,  and  inhabitants  of  34 
Schunufchu,  channel  between,  and 

the  Kurilflcaya  Lopatka,  defcribed  3  j 
Paromufir,  the  fecond  Kurillkoy, fitu- 

ation,  and  inhabitants  of  ibid. 

Sirinki,  the  third  Kurillkoy,  and  On- 

necutan  the  fourth,  fituations  cf      36 
Kurillki,  Mr.  Muller's  account  of       37 
Eturpu  and  Erupe,  Keek-Kuriles  na- 
tives of,  their  language  and  trade    39 
Matma,  fubjefl  to  japan,  fituation  of  40 
neareft  to  Japan,    Mr.  Stelkr's  ac- 
count of  their  product,  natives, 
and  trade  43 

Bering.     See  Bering 


by 


lot  ■>- 
Oo 


Kamtfchatka, 


i^  n^  na  e^  xJ 


K 


t^  Page 

XjHiilfchatka,  fituation  of  9 

rivers  of  12 

rivulets  and  remarkable  mountains  of  1 5 

piinc  pal  roads  of,  with  their  diftan- 

ces  laid  down  z8 — 33 

its  foil, produft, weather,  and  air  57 — 61 
riches  of,  what  95 

beafts  of  ibid, 

fea  hearts  of  1 1 1; — 137 

natives  of,  their  cuftoms  and  man- 
ners 169 
language  of                                       171 
conqusft  of                                          239 
V  .    inhabitants  of,  rebel  and  murder  the 

tax-gatherers  243 

trade  of,  its  firft  rife  and  profits         270 
Kamtfchadales,  divided  into  northern  and 
fouthern  people,    different  fuua- 
,    tions  of  170 

;  ;-Ji.have  a  particular  cuftom  in  giving 
jc  names  to  things  171 

the  names  of,  fome  conjeftures  con- 
cerning 172 
diHinguifli  themfelves  by  particular 

names  173 

uncertain  from  whence  they  carae, 
;,  cu     and   when  they    firft  fettled    at 

Kamtfchatka  ibid, 

antiquity  of,  by  Mr.  Steller  ibid, 

their  great  knowledge  of  the  virtues 
and  ufes  of  the  natural  produfl  of 
their  country  1 74 

$■31  why  thought  to  take  their  origin 

from  the  Mungals  ibid, 

fuppofed  to  be  driven  to  Kamtfchat- 
ka by  the  tyranny  of  the  eaftern 
conquerors  175 

^employments  of,    in   the    different 
-:    feafors  187 

drefs  of  193 

women,  ufe  paint  192 

their  method  of  travelling  with  dogs  196 
have  no  inconvenience  from  cold  199 
their  method  of  making  war  ibid, 

their   barbarous  treatment    to  their 

prifsners  zoo 

their  private  differences  ufeful  to  the 

Coffacks  ibid, 

bravely   defend    themfelves  againft 

the  Coffacks  zoi 

adefperaterefolution  of,  •rathex-than     ^ 

ikbrnit  Co  the  enemy  ■ra'Sa-  /•'■     ibid. 


Kamtfchadales,  the  arms  of,  how  made     202 
their  manner  of  marching  20j 

have  a  religious  regard  for  animals  205 
inftruaed  in  the  Chriftian  faith  ibid; 
ceremonies  of  zo6 

their  fcafts  and  diverfions  207 

their  manner  of  obtaining  a  friend  zio 
have  two  or  three  wives  215 

their   unconcern   at    being   put   to 

death  '    262 

are  converted  to  Chrillianity,  and  ri- 
dicule their  former  barbarity         263 
Kamtfchatkoi  fort  2 1 

Karaginjkoy  ifland,  inhabited  by  the  Koreki  17 
Kafaiki,  (falfely  called- the  Sword  fifh)  en- 
mity of,  to  the  whale  i  39 
feared  by  the  filhermen                    ibid, 
defcription  of,  by  Mr.  Steller  140 
Kokfof  makes  the  firll  expedition  againft 

the  Kuriles  243 

is  in  danger  from  the  Koreki  ibid, 

fent  from  Jakutfkl  to  enquire  into 

the  condufb  of  the  mutineers         252 
punilhes  the  mutineers,  and  reduces 
to  obedience  the  Kuriles  254 

Koreki,    where   their    habitations    begin, 

and  their  ferts  defcribed  16 

two  nations  of,  have  different  lan- 
guages 170 
languageof,  and  manneroffpeaking  172 
fixed  reremble  the  Kamtfchadales     222 
a  defcription  of  their  cuftoms  and 

habits  223 

think  themfelves  happy  224 

-  more  honeft  and  induftrions  than  the 
Kamtfchadales  225 

in  eating  uncleanly  226 

religion  of  229 

civil  policy  of,  and  pundlual  obfer- 

vance  of  an  oath  23 1 

courtfhips  and  marriages  of  232 

have  great  fondnefs  for  children-     ibid, 
reduced  to  obedience  255 

Kregezof,  commiffary  of  the  upper  Kamtf- 
chatkoi fort,  feizes  the  commiffary 
of  the  lower  fort,  plunders  it,  and 
gives  the  comtnand  to  Bogdan 
Kanalhof  _  2,2 

Kur'iks,  two   different  nations  of,    their 

names  and  fituation*  170 

their  manner  of  fpeaking        _  172 

^'^  manners  and  perfons  of,  defcribed    23? 

facrifice  to  idols  256 

manner  of  travelling  >hid. 

Kurilei, 


N 


Ett     X.' 


Kurilts,  how  ihcy  receive  and  entertain 

vifitants  237 

have  avcrfion  to  twins  238 

Utttthu,  their  god  fo  called,  reproached 

; ,  .       by  them  203 


hion,  fea,  a  defcription  of  1 20 

fiercenefs  of,  and  different  methods 

of  killing  121 

flcins,  ufe  of  \zz 

the  male's  great  tendernefs  for  the 
female,  and  their  care  of  their 
young  ibid. 

Liquor,    what  1 9 ; 

made  from  the  mufhroom  208 

Liji  of  fome  plants,   beafls,    fiflies,   and 
birds,   with  their  names  in    the 
Englifh,   RufTian,    Kamtfchatka, 
Koratfki,  and  Kurilfki  languages   1 63 
Lizardi,   numerous,    the  natives'  fuper- 

ftitipue  notions  of  16; 


M 


Manalt,  cr  fea  cow  i  x  2 
eyes  of,  remarkably  fmall  ibid, 
love    of,    to    each    other  extraor- 
dinary 134 

flefh  of,   its  tafte  and  rcfcmblance        I  35 

a  defcription  of,  found  in  the  rivers 
of  South- America,  and  at  the  Phi- 
lippine Iflands,  by  Captain  Dam- 
pier,  notes  ibid, 
fein  of,  of  great  ufe  to  privateers, 
notes  1 36 
Marching,  to  battle,  manner  of,  remark- 
able                                            20; 
liarmotioi,  abound  in  Kamtfchatka  98 
fkins  of,   ufed  for  cloathing  by  the 
t,.^      Koreki                                        ibid. 
-       a  defcription  of                                   99 
Marriage,  how  conftituted                          213 
feafl,  ceremonies  at  the                     2 '4 
when  forbidden                                   215 
Koreki  manner  of                               232 
Marten,  Frederick,  his  account  ofthefeal, 

fea  dog,  and  horfe,   notes      123,124 
liUdicines,  what  they  confift  of  217 

ufed  for  the  fcurvy  2 1  8 

ufed  in  various  diforders  219 

Metals  and  Minerals,  none  found  i  n  Kamtf- 
chatka, reafons  afligoed  for  it         79 


Page 
Mountain,  Awachinfky,  fituation  and  fires 

of  67 

Tulbatchinficy,  fires  of  69 

Kamtfchatka,  its  height  and  circuit  ibid. 

burning, conjedluresof,  by  Mr.Steller  71 

burning,  the  Kamtfchadales'  notions 

and  fears  of  76 

Murder,  &c.  not  thought  finful  204 

how  punifhed  by  the  Koreki  232 

felf,  frequent  among  the  Kuriles       238 

Mujhroam,  liquor  made  from,  dangerous  2cf 

in  great  eAeem  among  the  Koreki     209 

N 

Natives  of  Kamtfchatka  in  general  1 69 

three  different  peoplei  their  names, 

and  boundaries  170 

ancient  ftate  of  175 

manner  of  living  176 

their   happinefs    and    unhappinefs, 

what  ibid, 

felf -murder       formerly     frequent 

among  ibid, 

are  cruel  and  luftful  ibid, 

trade  of,  with  the  Koreki,  and  be- 
haviour of  to  each  other  177 
ignorance  of,  in  numbering  178 
their  months,  a  table  of                   ibid, 
laws  of                                               179 
fuperflitious  notions  of,  greatly  abo- 
lifhed  fmce  the    arrival    of    the 
Rufhans  180 
refolution  of,    to    deflroy    all    the 

Ruffians  258 

enter  into  open  rebellion  259 

fail  up  the  river  Kamtfchatka,  kill 
all  the  Coffacks  in  their  way,  and 
fet  fire  to  their  huts ;  take  the 
lower  Kamtfchatkoi  fort,  mafTacre 
all  the  people,  and  burn  their 
houfes  ibid. 

are  oppofed  and  thrown  into  con - 

fufion  260 

their  chief  efcapes  in  difguife  ibid. 

are  defeated  and  killed  261 

make  a  brave  defence  ibid. 

Needle,  eye  of,  dexteroufly  fupplied  i8j 

Nettles,  the  great  ufie  of         •  94 . 

Ochoijka,  paffage  by  fea  to,  difcovered 

by  Cofmus  Socolof  256 

OjS^eringSf 


N        D 


X. 


Page 

Offerings,  manner  of  making  203 

Otter,  very  common  in  Kamtfchatka        1 1 5 

how  bunted,  and  what  ufe  made  "of 


its  fkin 


116 


and 


and 


257 


faulutjhoy  fent  to  make  difcovcrlcs, 

defeats  the  Tchukotfkoi 
Fetrof,  Athanafius,    with   Coffacks 

the  Yukageri,  defeats  theOlutores, 
and  deftroys  their  ftrong  places      255 
murdered  by  the  Yukageri  ibid. 

Thyficians,  (old  women)   their  treatment 

of  the  fick  141 

Tlant,  fweet,  defcription  of  85 

brandy    diftilled    from   it    by  the 

Ruffians  ibid, 

liow  gathered  and  prepared  86 

Mr.  Steller's  remarks  on  the  brandy 

made  of  87 

ufed  for  food,  a  defcription  of   8g — 91 
Kamtfchadales'  knowledge  of,    by 

Mr.  Steller  91 

medicinal,  account  of  92 

ufed  for   cloathing,    &c.    varioufly 
prepared 
Procellaria,  or  ftorm  birds 


93 
'55 


R 


Hams,  (tone  and  wild,  a  defcription  of 
Rats,  three  kinds  of,  defcribed 
nefts  and  food  of 
retiring,   alarming  to    the 
'  chadales 

regularity  of,  in  marching 

Rebellions,  an  account  of  two 

of  Kamtfchatka 

the  caufe  of,  enquired  into 

iUbels,  number  of,  drowned 

defeated  by  Atlafof 

'' punifhed 

'  Jlein-deer  ufed  to   travel  with 

Rivers,  fhores  of,  defcribed  22 

Ochotfka  23 

Urak,  rapid  and  dangerous  for  veffels  2  5 

Ude  '  '  26 

Amur,  rife  and  fall  of 

Roads,  defcribed,  and  their  diflances  laid 

down  28 — 33 

between  Jakutfki  and  Kamtfchatka, 
defcribed,  with  their  fituations, 
diftances,    and  difficulty   in   tra- 


104 
ibid, 
ics 
Kamtf- 

ibid. 
106 
202 
259 
262 
202 

245 
262 

228 


Page 
Roots,  their  ufefulnefs  to  the  inhabitants     8j 
of  the  faranne,  hciv  ufed  84 

RuJJia,  Emprefs  of,  Appoints  chiefs  1 80 

fends  miffionaries  ?05.25; 

RiiJJians  give  names  to  the  different  na- 
tions of  Kamtfchatka  171 
means   ufed  by,  to  obtain  a  no-kw 
ledge  of  Kamtfchatka                  239 


Sables  of  Kamtfchatka,  properties  of        97 

plenty  of  before  the  conqueft,  and 

little  value  of  them  at  that  time      ibid. 

Kamtfchadales'  method  of  taking      98 

Vitimfky,  valuable  109 

fcarce  in  Siberia  ibid. 

relation  of,  by  the  hunters  1 10 

Salmon,  its  ufe  to  the  inhabitants  14; 

Salt,  want  of,  inconvenient  66 

how  fupplied  with  67 

Saramie,  five  fpecies  of,  reckoned  by  Mr, 

Steller  84 

Seals,  four  forts  of  116 

the  author's  relation  of  one  taken  in 

the  Great  River  ibid. 

milk  of,  ufed  medicinally  117 

different  ways  of  killing  them  ibid. 

flcins  of,  varioufly  ufed  117,118 

head  of,  great  refpefl  Ihewn  to  it     118 
fleOi  and  fat  of,  efteemed  delicious 

food  ibid, 

defcription  of,  by  Frederick  Marten  123 
Shatnans,  or  conjurers,  conjuration  of      2»6 
Koreki,  of  great  repute  230 

ettraordinary  feats  of  ibid. 

Sheep,  why  fcarce  108 

Shepeikof  leaves  Kamtfchatka,     fortifies 
himfelf  againft  the  Olutores,  and 
arrives  at  Jakutfki  with  tribute     252 
Shrubs,  flantza,  its  plenty,  &c.  and  the 

ufe  and  quality  of  its  nuts  82 

different  forts  of,  their  ufe  and  virtue  83 

vodinitza,  Mr.  Steller's  account  of  ibid. 

Sin,  mortal,  what  reckoned  fo  lOj 

Siriikof,  and  his  followers,  murdered  by 


the  Koreki 
27     Skins,  how  prepared 
^■^''       dying  and  fewing  of 
glue  made  or 
Sledges,  danger  of,  in  travelling  with 
Snovj,  its  bad  efFefls  upon  the  eyes 
remedy  for  it,  by  Mr.  Steller 


veiling 


272 — 280 


fhoes,  make  and  ufe  of 


242 

188 

189 

190 

«97 

'H 
66 

197 
Seieit 


N 


D 


X. 


Page 

5»«/,  notions  of  the  immortality  of  204 

ipanierg.  Captain,  his  defcription  of  the 
Kuriliki  iflaods,  not  reconcileable 
to  Mr.  Mullen's  41 

Spider,  the  women's  notions  of  the  effefts 

of  164 

Springs,  hot,  where  found  72 

rtones   and    clay  found   about  the 

mouths  of,  defcribed  73 

heat  in  each,  a  table  of  the  different 
degrees  of,  by  De  1'  Ifle's  and  Fa- 
renheit's  .thermometer  74 

of  Kamtfchatka  never  freeze,  whole- 
fomenefs  of  the  waters  of,  and 
plenty  of  flfh  in  7S 

Stanovoy  ridge,  a  defcription  of,  and  the 

danger  in  palling  zi 

Suller,  Mr.  his  obfervations  of  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  country  about 
Kamtfchatka  77 

accounts    for    the   frequent    earth- 
quakes about  Kamtfchatka  ibid, 
his  account  of  the  fea  lion  122 
his  defcription  of  an  uncommon  fea 
beaft,  which  he  faw  on  the  coaft 
of  America  136 
his  account  of  fiflies  148 
his  account  of  the  Stariki  and  Glu- 
pilha  fowls                                     1  -6 
Slortes,  &C.   different  kinds  of,   their  ufe       So 
'  SiL-a/i,  common  in  Kamtfchatka               158 


\Tax- gatherers,  murdered, paying  taxes  the 

caufe  of  it  243 

TcherekoJ,  Peter,  is  fallen  upon,  has  his 
llores,  &c.  plundered,  and  ten  of 
his  men  killed  248 

remarkable  event  during  his  govern- 
ment ibid. 
^^chuhatjkoi,  an  account  of  226 
manner  of  living  227 
travel  with  rein -deer  228 
are  defeated  257 
leghil,  a  chieftain,  after  a  long  defence, 
murders   his   wife  and  children, 
and  kills  himfelf  262 
T;?'*?/),  thought  reputable  232 
Iheoiot,  a  Ruffian,  a  tradition  of  240 
murdered  by  the  Koreki,  &c.        ibid. 
:  7ides,  in  the  Penfchinflca  fea  and  Eaftern 
Ocean,  obfervations  of,    by  the 
author  165 


Tidts,      the   moon's  c/Tefls  on  the  ebbs 

and  floods  of  :   ,,.  _  .     .16$ 

methods  followed  in  making  obfer- 
vations on  .167 
travcUen,  danger  of,  and  how  they  fc- 

cure  themfclves  from  ftorms  198 

the  beft  time  for,  to  travel  in  iqq 

Trees,  larch,  white  poplar,   k<i.  ufe  of, 

and  where  produced  gi 

birch,    bark    of,    eat    by    the    in- 
habitants, how  prepared  ibid. 

birch,  differs  from  that  of  Europe      82 

white  poplar,  Mr.  Steller's'obferva- 
tions  of  ibid. 

fallow  and  alder,  and  their  barks, 
ufe  of  ibid. 

hawthorn,  fruit  of  ibid. 

u     -  '. 

^^Jf'h  Japanefe,  wrecked,  and  the  crew 

murdered  jcS 

Vice,  extraordinary  notions  of  204 

Villages,  appearance  of  i  g  j 

Virtue,  notions  of  ^qx 
Volcano.     See  mountain. 

Vteitfils,  neccffary,  what  they  confift  of  184 

W 

War,  method  of  making  jgo 

smong  themfelves,  the  end  of         ibid. 
carried  on  by  flratagem  2ca 

jthe  Koreki  manner  of  making,  and 
their  arms  234 

Wells,  two  large,  waters  of,  &c.  76 

Whales,  number  of,  where  J37 

how  caught  by  the  different  peo- 
ple, and  their  ceremonies  ufed  on 
dragging  them  to  fhore  138 

a  delicate  provifion,  how  prepared  ibid, 
an  engagement  between  them,   and 

the  kafatki,  related  by  Mr.  Steller  139 

great  advantages  derived  from  140 

the  bad  effcds  of  eating  the  fat  of     141 

a  curious  chain  made  of  the  bones  of  186 

Wldoiju,  how  obtained  in  marriage  214 

fins  of,  firlt  taken  away  215 

Winds,  violent,  figns  of  66 

Wohes,  numerous  100 

hurtful  to  the  inhabitants  103 

Women,  fhynefs  o.*",  to  ftrangers  215 

fruitfulnefs  of,  and  their  manner  of 

delivery  2 1 6 

Wometti 


INDEX. 


Page 
Wof/tetiuk  means  to  forward  and  prevent 

their  having  children  2 1 7 

treatment  of,  to  twins  and  children 

born  in  a  ftorm  ibid, 

medicines  ufed  by,  to  haften  delivery  2 1 8 
wandering  Koreki,  make  themfelves 

difagreeable  224 

fixed  Koreki,  adorn  themfelves       ibid. 

odd  ceremonies  ufed  by,  in  naming 

their  children  233 

World,  opinions  of  the  formation  of       204 


Yocoly,  bread  fo  called 
Tukageri,  reduced  to  obedience 


Page 


193 

2S5 


Zino'veef  K  fent  chief  on  an  expedition     242 
fucceeds  Cobelof    as     commiflary, 
brings  things  into  order,  returns 
to  Jakut(ki  with  the  tribute,  and 
is  Succeeded  by  Kolefof  243 


-|J»S, 


52  6  7 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  AT  LOS  ANGELES 

THE   UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below 


StPl3  19« 


mm  m^m 

FEB261S68 


n^ 


ft 


Form  L-0 

2Ci»t-l/12(Sol9) 


mrfvyp'^ 


f  f  ALIFOWni 


•  A  i:>  V 


D    000  719  763    5 


I 


PLEASf   DO    NOT    REMOVE 
THIS    BOOK  CARD     ' 


^^MIIBRARYQ^^ 


'^(i/OdlWOJO'^ 


iversity  Research  Library 


