UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE a /

Drug Enforcement Administration

In The Matter Of
Docket No. 84-48
MDMA SCHEDULING

et ee et ee ee

OPINION AND RECOMMENDED RULING, FINDINGS OF
FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DECISION
OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE

ON ISSUES TWO THROUGH SEVEN

FRANCIS L. YOUNG, Administrative Law Judge

Appearances:

STEPHEN E. STONE, ESO
CHARLOTTE A. JOHNSON, ESQ.
Counsel for the Drug Enforcement Administration

RICHARD COTTON, ESQ.
Counsel for Lester Grinspoon, M.D., George Greer, M.D.,
James Bakalar and Thomas B. Roberts, Ph.D.

ROBERT T. ANGAROLA, ESQ.
ROBERT A. DORMER, ESQ.
Counsel for Hoffman-LaRoche Inc. and McNeilab, Inc.

LYN B. EHRNSTEIN, ESO.
Pro Se

DAVID E. JORANSON
for State of Wisconsin Department of Health
and Social Services Controlled Substances Board
Pro Se

Dated: MAY 22 1986

v/ FG


===PAGE BREAK===

II.

IIl.

V.

VI.

VIII.

IX.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction e e e e e eo e e 2 e e
Recommended Ruling . . . «2 eee
Issues e e es e e e e e Sd e e e e e

"Currently Accepted Medical Use In
Treatment In The United States". .

"Currently Accepted Medical Use"
Of MDMA e e e es e e id e e e e e

"Accepted Safety For Use" Of MDMA
Effect of Secretary's Findings .
Proper Schedule For MDMA ... .
Recommended Decision .. «ss «

Appendix oo e @® . e eo 8 ee 8 @ 8 @

23
31
36
39
67

69


===PAGE BREAK===

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Drug Enforcement Administration

In The Matter Of
Docket No. 84-48
MDMA SCHEDULING

OPINION AND RECOMMENDED RULING, FINDINGS OF
FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND DECISION
OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE
ON ISSUES TWO THROUGH SEVEN
I.

Introduction

This is a rulemaking proceeding pursuant to the Controlled Substances Act
as amended! (the Act or the CSA) to determine in which schedule, if any, of
; the five schedules established by the Act, the substance 3, 4-methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine, also known as MDMA, should be placed. The proceeding is
being conducted pursuant to Subchapter II of Chapter 5 of Title 5, United States
Code, the Administrative Procedure Act, after opportunity for a hearing.2
The Act itself placed a great many substances in one schedule or another.
It vested the Attorney General with the authority, after considering several
prescribed factors, to place other substances in appropriate schedules, to move
substances from one schedule to another, and to de-schedule them. That author-

ity has been delegated to the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement

Administration (DEA) .3

1 p.L. 91-513, 84 Stat. 1242, 21 U.S.C. §§ 801, et seq.
2 21 U.S.C. § 811(a).

3 28 C.F.R. § 0.100.


===PAGE BREAK===

At the commencement of this proceeding in July 1984 MDMA was not listed in
any schedule. At that time DEA published in the Federal Register4 a notice of
proposed rulemaking to place the substance in Schedule I. A number of persons
filed comments and objections and requested a hearing. This administrative law
judge was requested by the then-Deputy Administrator to preside and to provide
the Administrator with a certified record and recommended findings of fact, con-
clusions of law and decision.

At a preliminary prehearing conference of participants on February 1, 1985
it was suggested that one of the issues identified presented a purely’ legal
question which might be decided without the need of any evidence and in advance
of the other issues in the case. (The Deputy Administrator had specified this
issue as one on which a recommended conclusion was to be prepared for the
Administrator.) After considering memoranda submitted by the participants the
administrative law judge agreed and accepted the suggestion. The judge called
for briefs fram the parties on that issue. It was designated issue number 1,.
and was stated thus:

1. Assuming that a substance has a
‘potential for abuse and has no currently
accepted medical use in treatment in the
United States, can the substance be placed
in any schedule other than Schedule I?

After studying the briefs the judge issued a recommended decision on that
issue, dated June l, 1985. He recommended, first, that the language of the Act
was such that a substance with a potential for abuse less than a “high” poten-
tial, and having no currently accepted medical use in treatment, cannot be
placed in any of the five schedules. (Clearly, a substance with a “high” abuse
potential and no accepted medical use in treatment, must be placed in Schedule

I.) Alternatively the judge recommended, based upon court decisions inter-

preting the Act, actions of the Congress, legislative history and DEA's own past

4 49 F.R. 30210 (1984).


===PAGE BREAK===

actions, that such a substance should be placed in either Schedule III, IV or V
depending upon its degree of potential for abuse. Ina letter to the admin-
istrative law judge dated October 7, 1985 the Administrator advised that he had
decided not to issue a final agency ruling on that initial issue until he had
received the entire record at the conclusion of the case.

Meanwhile, the proceeding continued with respect to the remaining issues.
Direct examination testimony of all witnesses was submitted in written narrative
form. Exhibits were identified and submitted. Hearing sessions for
cross-examination of witnesses were held in Los Angeles, California, Kansas
City, Missouri and Washington, D.C. on June 10, July 10 and 11, October 8, 9, 10
and 11 and November 1, 1985. The participants? submitted briefs and proposed
‘£indings and conclusions, and oral argument was heard in Washington, D.C. on
February 14, 1986.6

| The administrative law judge has carefully considered all the evidence of
record and the arguments of the participants, as well as the written comments
received during the comments period early on in the proceeding. He submits
herein to the Administrator his recommended findings, conclusions and decision

‘with respect to the issues other than Issue l.

5 The participants are the Agency staff (DEA or the Agency); George Greer,
M.D., Lester Grinspoon, M.D., Thomas B. Roberts, Ph.D. and James Bakalar
(Greer-Grinspoon); McNeilab, Inc. and Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc. (McNeilab);
Lyn B. Ehrnstein, Esq., (Ehrnstein); and David E. Joranson (Joranson). See
Memorandum to Counsel dated March 22, 1985.

6 ‘There are ten volumes of transcript. The first contains the preliminary
session on February 1, 1985. The remainder contain the testimony on cross
examination and the oral argument. ‘They have been numbered 1 through 10,
and are cited herein as follows: ,

February 1, 1985 Tr il October 9, 1985 Tr 6
June 10, 1985 Tr 2 October ll, 1985 Tr 7
July 10, 1985 Tr 3 October 11, 1985 Tr 8
July 11, 1985 Tr 4 November 1, 1985 Tr 9
October 8, 1985 Tr 5 February 14, 1986 Tr 10


===PAGE BREAK===

II.
Recommended Ruling
The administrative law judge recommends that the proposed findings and
conclusions submitted by the participants be rejected by the Administrator,
except to the extent they are included in the judge's recommendations, for the
reason that they are irrelevant, unduly repetitious or not supported by sub-
stantial evidence. The judge's recommended findings and conclusions are con~

tained in the text of this opinion.


===PAGE BREAK===

III.

Issues

The issues yet to be disposed of are as follows:

2. What constitutes “currently accepted
medical use in treatment in the United States"
within the purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?

3. What constitutes “accepted safety for
use . . . under medical supervision" within the
purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?

4. Is a finding by the Secretary of Health
and Human Services that a substance has “no cur-
rently accepted medical use in treatment in the
United States" or a finding that a substance has
no “accepted safety for use . . . under medical
supervision" binding on the Attorney General
(the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, DEA) within the purview of the
provisions of 21 U.S.C. § 812?

5S. Does MDMA have a “currently accepted
medical use in treatment in the United States”
within the purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?

6. Is there a lack of "accepted safety
for use [of MDMA] under medical supervision"
within the purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?

7. If, on the basis of the resolution
of the above issues [including issue 1], MDMA
can lawfully be scheduled in a schedule other
than Schedule I, in which schedule should it
be placed?


===PAGE BREAK===

IV

"Currently Accepted Medical Use
In Treatment In The United States"

Introduction

Section 812(b) of Title 21 U.S.C. provides that, aside fram actions man-
dated by certain international agreements, which are not applicable here, and
except in the case of an immediate precursor, with which we are not concerned,
"a drug. or other substance may not be placed in any schedule unless the findings
required for such schedule are made with respect to such drug or other sub-
stance." It is the responsibility of the Administrator of DEA to make these
findings after receiving an evaluation and recommendation from the Secretary of
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)? pursuant to § 811(b).

After making his findings, the Administrator is to place the drug or substance
in question in the appropriate schedule of the five schedules established by the
Act. . ,

The findings required for placement in each schedule are set out in Section

812(b) as follows:
(1) Schedule I.-

(A) The drug or other substance has a
high potential for.abuse.

(B) The drug or other substance has no
currently accepted medical use in treat-
ment in the United States. -

(C) There is a lack of accepted safety

for use of the drug or other substance under
medical supervision.

(2) Schedule II.-

(A) The drug or other substance has a
high potential for abuse.

7 The Secretary's input into the matter comes to the Administrator from the
Assistant Secretary of Health, HHS.

-6-


===PAGE BREAK===

(B) The drug or other substance has a
currently accepted medical use in treat-
ment in the United States or a currently
accepted medical use with severe restric-
tions.

(C) Abuse of the drug or other substances
may lead to severe psychological or physical
dependence.

(3) Schedule III.-

(A) The drug or other substance has a poten-
tion for abuse less than the drugs or other
substances in schedules I ard II.

(B) The drug or other substance has a cur-
rently accepted medical use_in treatment in the
United States.

(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may
lead to moderate or low physical dependence or
high psychological dependence.

(4) Schedule IV.-

(A) The drug or other substance has a low
potential for abuse relative to the drugs or
other substances in schedule III.

(B) The drug or other substance has a cur-
rently accepted medical use in treatment _in
the United States.

(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may
lead to limited physical dependence or psycholog-
ical dependence relative to the drugs or other
substances in schedule III.

(5) Schedule V.-

(A) The drug or other substance has a low
potential for abuse relative to the drugs or
other substances in schedule IV.

(B) The drug or other substance has a cur-
rently accepted medical use in treatment in the
United States.

(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may
lead to limited physical dependence or psycholog-
ical dependence relative to the drugs or other
substances in schedule IV.

(Emphasis added).

Thus a finding must be made for each drug or other substance to be


===PAGE BREAK===

scheduled as to whether or not it has a “currently accepted medical use in
treatment in the United States”. .

What constitutes such use? What does this phrase mean? How is the
Administrator to ascertain whether or not a drug has a currently accepted
medical use in treatment in this country? This is essentially a legal issue of
statutory interpretation. No findings of fact are called for.

To the Agency staff the answer is simple. They assert that “accepted
medical use” means approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of HHS
pursuant to the procedures established by Section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act of 1938 (FDCA), 21 U.S.C. § 355. DEA need only ask FDA whether
the drug or substance in question has received FDA approval under the FDCA in
order to ascertain the existence, vel non, of “accepted medical use”.

There is no denying that such a situation would greatly simplify the
scheduling task of the DEA staff. It provides a quick solution to the problem

for DEA. It provides a certain answer. But it is wrong.

The FDCA

The FDCA was enacted in 1938. It established procedures which a person
mist follow, and approvals he must obtain, before he may “introduce or deliver |
for introduction into interstate commerce any new drug". 21 U.S.C. § 355(a). In
a word the FDCA, as amended, requires that FDA must approve a new drug as being
safe and as being effective for a stated purpose - before it may be introduced

into interstate commerce in the United States. There is nothing in that

statute authorizing FDA to approve a new drug for use in the practice of


===PAGE BREAK===

medicine by a licensed physician. The power to grant or withhold such approval

would constitute regulation of the practice of medicine. The FDCA does not
empower the FDA to do this. The FDA itself has repeatedly stated that it is not
empowered to attempt such regulation.

The question of FDA's authority in this regard has arisen when that agency
has considered the practice of physicians using marketed drugs for purposes
which the FDA has not approved .8 In 1972, FDA summed up its view on this
‘subject when, in the preamble to a proposed rule on drug labeling, it stated:

If an approved new drug is shipped
in interstate commerce with the approved
package insert and neither the shipper
nor the recipient intends it be used for
an unapproved purpose, the requirements
of section 505 of the Act are satisfied.

Once the new drug is in a local
pharmacy after interstate shipment,
the physician may, as part of the
practice of medicine, lawfully pre-
scribe a different dosage for his patient,
or may otherwise vary the conditions of
use fram those approved in the package
insert, without informing or obtaining
the approval of the Food and Drug
Administration.

This interpretation of the Act is con-
sistent with congressional intent as indi-
cated in the legislative history of the 1938
Act and the drug amendments of 1962. Throughout
the debate leading to enactment, there were
repeated statements that Congress did not
intend the Food and Drug Administration to
interfere with medical practice and refer-
ences to the understanding that the bill did
not purport to regulate the practice of
medicine as between the physician and the

patient. Congress recognized a patient's

8 under the FDCA, the labeling of any prescription drug, whether subject to
approval or not, must be adequate for the drug's intended purposes. In the
case of prescription drugs (as opposed to “over-the-counter” drugs available
without a prescription), the requirements are met by conditioning avail-
ability on a practitioner's prescription, and on there being labeling direc-.
tions for physicians and pharmacists (as opposed to laymen) as to the pre-
scribing, dispensing, and administration of the drug. 21 C.F.R. § 201.100.

-9-


===PAGE BREAK===

right to seek civil damages in the courts
if there should be evidence of malpractice,
and declined to provide any legislative
restrictions upon the medical profession.

37 Fed. Reg. 16503 (1972).

Subsequently, in 1975, five years after enactment of the Controlled

Substances Act, the Food and Drug Administration wrote as follows:

9

Quoted immediately above.

The comments recommended that the
proposed regulations be revised to re-
quire an appropriate statement in pack-
age inserts that, in addition to the
conditions of use which the manufacturer
may recommend to physicians in compliance
with the law and Food and Drug Administra-
tion regulations, there are other conditions
of use for which the drug may be regarded
as safe and effective on the basis of the
experience of critical physicians using the
drug in the practice of medicine over a
period of years.

The Commissioner stated in a separate
notice of proposed rulemaking published in
the Federal Register of August 15, 1972
(37 Fed. Reg. 16503)’, concerning the use
of a drug for conditions not included in its
labeling, that the labeling does not intend
either to preclude the physician's use of
his best judgment in the interest of the
patient or to impose liability if he does
not follow the package insert. The Commis-
sioner clearly recognizes that the labeling
of a marketed drug does not always contain
all the most current information available
to physicians relating to the proper use of
the drug in good medical practice. Advances
in medical knowledge and practice inevitably
precede the labeling revision by the manufac-
turer and formal labeling approval by the
Food and Drug Administration. Good medical
practice and patient interest thus require
that physicians be free to use drugs accord-
ing to their best knowledge and judgment. Cer-
tainly where a physician uses a drug for a use
not in the approved labeling, he has the respon-
sibility to be well informed about the drug and
to base such use on a firm scientific rationale
or on sound medical evidence, and to maintain

-10-


===PAGE BREAK===

adequate medical records of the drug's use and
effects, but such usage in the practice of
medicine is not in violation of the Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

40 Fed. Reg. 15393-94 (1975) (emphasis added).

In 1979, the Food and Drug Administration once more reiterated this view:

Good medical practice and patient welfare require
that physicians remain free to use drugs according
to their best knowledge and judgment... .

44 Fed. Reg. 37435-36 (1979).

Once again, in June 1983, the FDA repeated its view that it does not have

the authority to regulate the practice of medicine:

Although no final rule has been issued on this
subject, the Agency has continued to apply the
principle set forth in the preamble to the 1972
proposal. In FDA's Drug Bulletin of April 1982,
the Agency sought to clarify and reiterate the
position that the Act does not regulate the "prac-
tice of medicine." Once a drug product has been
‘ approved for marketing, a physician may, in treat-
ing patients, prescribe the drug for use not
included in the drug's approved labeling. The
primary legal constraints in that situation are
State laws on medical practice and products
liability law. The IND Rewrite proposal would
codify the Agency's longstanding position that
the regulations do not apply to the “practice
of medicine,” though the proposal does not pur-
port to define with specificity such practice
in terms of the Act.

48 Fed. Reg. 2673 (June 9, 1983).
Finally, the Food and Drug Administration reemphasized this position ina
filing with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia

Circuit in 1983. In the course of its argument in the 1983 case, the FDA

emphasized the

cammonly recognized exception to the Act's
broad and protective coverage: the '‘practice-of-
medicine' exemption. FDCA's legislative history
expresses a specific intent to prohibit FDA from
regulating physicians’ practice of medicine. Ac-
cording to the Canmissioner, FDCA does not regulate
physicians in their practice because physicians are
licensed by the states. Letter from the Commissioner
at 3, JA 88.

-jll-


===PAGE BREAK===

Chaney v. Heckler, 718 F.2d 1174, 1179 (D.C. Cir. 1983), rev'd,

U.S. , 84 L. Ed. 714 (1985). (Footnotes amitted).

A word of caution is called for. In the penultimate quotation above, the
phrase “approved for marketing" appears. This term is frequently used as a
substitute for the statutory language “introduced into interstate commerce".
Agency counsel slipped into this inaccuracy in oral argument on February 14,
1986. (Tr 10, p.6) It is important to keep clearly in mind what Congress was
doing when it enacted the FDCA in 1938 ~- it was regulating the interstate
commerce of substances. It was not undertaking to define the acceptable
practice of medicine. It was not attempting to provide a yardstick for
“accepted medical use".

The above-quoted statements by the FDA, which carries out the provisions of
the FDCA, provide no basis for turning to that statute fora determination of
what. does or does not constitute “accepted medical use". Indeed, the FDA's own
pronouncements are clearly to the contrary.

DEA's brief in this proceeding points to another statement by FDA, in 1982,
prompted by efforts to “legalize" marihuana. In its published proposed recom
mendations to DEA on the scheduling status of that substance and its components,
FDA said, referring to the language of § 812(b):

FDA interprets the term “accepted medical use”
to mean lawfully marketed under the “Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. 301,
et seq. . . . A drug may be marketed lawfully
under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
after approval of a new drug application (NDA)
for that drug. There are, theoretically other
ways in which a drug could be marketed legally.

The drug could satisfy either the requirements
for exemption from the definition of "new drug”

-12-


===PAGE BREAK===

in 21 U.S.C. 321(p) or the requirements for a
“grandfather clause" from the new drug approval
provision. (47 Fed. Reg. 28150)

The Commissioner of FDA continued at page 28151 by saying:

The mechanism set up by Congress for lawful
marketing of a new drug requires submission

of an NDA to FDA and FDA approval of that
application before marketing. Before FDA can
approve an NDA, however, the drug sponsor must
submit data from an extensive battery of
experimental testing on both animals and humans
to establish the drug's safety and effective-
ness for its proposed uses. In addition, the
sponsor must submit data and manufacturing con-
trols demonstrating that standards of identity,
strength, quality, and purity will be met.

He concludes by saying:

Thus, the lack of an approved NDA for a

drug substance leads FDA to find that a sub-
stance lacks "an accepted medical use in treat-
ment" for two reasons. First, if use

of the drug is unlawful whenever interstate
cammerce is involved, medical use of the

drug cannot be classified as accepted. Second,
in the absence of the data necessary for approval
of the NDA, the agency has no basis for con-
Cluding that medical use of the drug in treatment
can be considered acceptable by medical standards.

The last quotation flies directly in the face of the preceding statements
of statutory interpretation by FDA, issued over a period of eleven years. It
represents a complete reversal of position with no stated basis whatsoever. One
can only conclude that, in the context of the battle over marihuana, FDA tempo-
rarily lost sight of its long-acknowledged lack of statutory authority to regu-.
late the practice of medicine. Perhaps it failed to realize the full effect of
its statement. FDA is not charged with forming a conclusion, binding on the
medical profession, "that medical use of the drug in treatment can be considered
acceptable by medical standards." FDA is to pass on the safety and efficacy of
a drug simply and solely in connection with approving it for “introduction into

interstate commerce."

-13-


===PAGE BREAK===

FDA is acting properly if it attempts to ascertain whether or not the
medical profession has accepted use of a drug in treatment as the agency deter-
mines whether or not to allow the drug's introduction into interstate commerce.
Acceptance of use in treatment, with other factors, is certainly an appropriate
consideration. But nowhere in either statute, the FDCA or the CSA, is it pro-
vided that FDA's fiat will be binding on the medical profession with respect to
what is, or is not, accepted medical practice or accepted medical use.

There can be a very simple reason why there exists no NDA for a particular
drug and why FDA has not approved it for introduction into interstate commerce:

no one may have sought such approval from FDA. The fact no one has sought ap-

proval does not necessarily mean that no one is using the drug and that such use
is not accepted by the profession. There are very real economic factors af-

fecting whether an NDA is sought for a drug.

The Controlled Substances Act

The Controlled Substances Act (CSA) was enacted in 1970, 32 years after the
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. In 1970 the Congress was well aware of its 1938
handiwork. There are several specific references to the 1938 statute in the
1970 enactment. Thus we find in the CSA that “drug” is defined by specific
reference to a section of the FDCA; see 21 U.S.C. § 802(12). Congress excluded
' from the Attorney General's scheduling power any substance permitted by the FDCA
to be sold “over the counter and without a prescription"; see 21 U.S.C.

§ 811(g)(1). Congress specifically referred to the investigational new drug
provisions of the FDCA in the CSA; see 21 U.S.C. §§ 827(c)(2)(A), 827(£). Other
references to provisions of the FDCA are found in the CSA at 21 U.S.C. S$ 825(a),
825(b), 829(a) and 829(d). Congress could easily have linked the phrase "acm
cepted medical use in treatment" in the CSA to some provision of the FDCA, and

FDA's authority thereunder, had it desired to do so. It did not do so.

-14-


===PAGE BREAK===

The Agency's reply briefl0 refers to the "sanewhat sparse legislative
history of the Controlled Substances Act relating to ‘accepted medical use'."
No participant quotes any camment on the meaning of this phrase from a committee
report or floor manager. However, there were references to the phrase in the
testimony of several witnesses.

Dr. John Jennings, then Acting Director of the Bureau of Drugs, FDA,
testified as follows at one point:

Q: Let me ask one question: when a drug is under
investigation pursuant to investigational new
drug applications, is the drug considered to

have an accepted medical use?

Dr. Jennings: Usually not, although it might.

Q: Could you enlarge on that?

Dr. Jennings: Yes, sir. The exemption for investi-
gational use is usually granted for a
drug for which the medical use has
not been established so in most cases
that would be so, there would not be
an accepted medical use.

However, drugs that have one or maybe
several accepted medical uses might
be under investigation for additional
medical uses.
Q: But in the great majority of cases —
Dr. Jennings: It would be true that the accepted
medical use would not have been es-
tablished.
House Hearings, at 343 (emphasis added).
The subject came up also during the testimony of Michael R. Sonnenreich,
Deputy Chief Counsel of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD),
DEA's predecessor agency, of John Ingersoll, Director of BNDD, and of Dr. Roger

Egeberg, Assistant Secretary of HEW. They testified as follows:

10 Government's Response To The Findings, etc., Submitted by Drs. Greer and
Grinspoon, et al., etc., p. 13.

-15-


===PAGE BREAK===

Mr. Sonnenreich:

[Criterion] Two [no accepted medical
use] is a factual determination and
normally where we get such informa-
tion is through the AMA or WHO. You
don't have to be a doctor to find out
whether or not it has an accepted medi-
cal use in the United States or not. So
the fact that you are asking whether
it has got accepted medical use 1s
something that a lawyer can find out
as well as a doctor.

House Hearings, at 165 (emphasis added).

Mr. Rogers:

Dr. Egeberg:

Dr. Egeberg:

House Hearings, at 194 (emphasis

Mr. Ingersoll:

Under Schedule I drugs. Would HEW or
the Department of Justice be able to
determine on a drug a lack of accepted
safety for use under medical super-
vision?

I would think that HEW would expect
to have a good deal to say on that.

All right. HEW would have the compe-
tence there. I think this would be
admitted. What about no accepted
medical use in the United States?

Well, I would think that HEW would be
the primary source, through its vari-
ous agencies and its contacts, for
information on that subject.

added) .

I must also point out that this re-
view [prior to registration of research-
ers by the Department of Justice] is
only required for Schedule I sub-
stances which the medical profession
has already determined have no legiti-
mate medical use in the United States.

House Hearings, at 678 (emphasis added).

Mr. Rogers:

Mr. Sonnenreich:

So the only category of [Schedule] I
is simply for research?

Yes, sir, and that is because they
have no medical use as determined
by the medical community.

House Hearings, at 696 (emphasis added).

-16-


===PAGE BREAK===

Mr. Sonnenreich: Mainly, our feeling is that the trig-
ger on your Schedule I drugs which
are really different from your II,
III and IV drugs. It is this basic
determination that is not made by any
part of the federal government. It
is made by the medical community as
to whether or not the drug has medi-
cal use or doesn't.

Mr. Rogers: If it has medical use, Food and Drug
probably would have authorized it,
wouldn't they?
Mr. Sonnenreich: I assume so, sir.
House Hearings, at 718 (emphasis added).

From the foregoing exchanges it clearly appears that the spokesmen for BNDD
and FDA were of the view in 1970 that one should turn to “the medical community"
to ascertain the existence of accepted medical use in treatment, and that "a
lawyer can find out as well as a doctor" whether such acceptance exists, and
that "this basic determination is not made by any part of the federal govern-
ment", 11

This interpretation, provided to the Congress by Administration witnesses,
contemporaneously with enactment, is reasonable and authoritative. The Congress
has given no indication of having rejected it or of adopting another. It is in
accord with the plain meaning of the language in the statute. The Congress had
every opportunity to tie “accepted medical use" to FDA actions under the FDCA.

It did not do so. The only rational conclusion is that it did not intend to do

SO.

11 In their Reply Brief, at page 16, Agency counsel quote a sentence fram a
written statement submitted to the Congress on another occasion by Director
Ingersoll in justification of the Schedule I placement of a particular sub-
stance. This one, isolated sentence appears directly to contradict Mr.
Ingersoll's oral testimony to the Committee quoted above. To that extent it
is inconsistent also with the quoted oral statements of Mr. Sonnenreich, Mr.
Ingersoll's deputy chief counsel. In the circumstances, and being unin-
formed as to the full context of the written sentence, it would seem that
the oral statements, made when the phrase was being specifically discussed,
should be accepted as accurately expressing BNDD's opinion on the point.

The only alternative is to conclude that Mr. Ingersoll was not a reliable
witness at all and that none of his statements can be accepted.
-17-


===PAGE BREAK===

Court Decisions

Court decisions have agreed with the FDA itself, and the BNDD spokesmen in
1970, that the FDA is not empowered to decree what is or is not proper medical
practice.

Congress did not intend the Food and
Drug Administration to interfere with
medical practice as between the physi-
cian and the patient. Congress recog-
nized the patient's right to seek civil
damages in the courts if there should be
evidence of malpractice and declined to
provide any legislative restrictions
upon the medical profession. ...
Congressional intent set out in 37 Fed.
Reg. 16503 (1972) indicates the Congress
did not intend the Food and Drug Admin-
istration to interfere with medical
practice and that the bill did not pur-
port to regulate the practice of medi-
cine as between the physician and the
patient.

", . . the physician can ascertain fran
medical literature and from medical
meetings new and interesting proposed
uses for drugs marketed under package
inserts not including the new proposed
usages ... New uses for drugs are
often discovered, reported in medical
journals and at medical meetings, and
subsequently may be widely used by the
medical profession. . .. The manufac-
turer may not have sufficient commercial
interests or financial wherewithal to
warrant following the necessary proce-
dures to obtain FDA approval for the
additional use of the drug. When physi-
cians go beyond the directions given in
the package insert it does not mean they
are acting illegally or unethically and
Congress does not intend to empower the
FDA to interfere with medical practice
by limiting the ability of physicians to
prescribe according to their best judg-
ment.

United States v. Evers, 453 F. Supp. 1141, 1149, 1150 (M.D. Ala. 1978),

‘ aff'd 643 F.2d 1043 (Sth Cir. 1981). (Emphasis added.)
- 18 -


===PAGE BREAK===

In its opinion affirming the District Court in Evers, the Fifth Circuit
observed:

*k*k (T]he [FDCA] was intended to regulate
the distribution of drugs in interstate
commerce, not to restrain physicians from
public advocacy of medical opinions not
shared by the FDA.

United States v. Evers, 643 F.2d 1043, 1053, n. (1981).

Agency counsel's quote fram the Fifth Circuit opinion in Evers (Reply
Brief, p. 9) simply expresses recognition of the FDA's lack of power to regulate
medical practice with reference to the specific facts of that case which
centered on the use of a non-prescription drug for a purpose other than that
stated in the package insert. The quotation in no way detracts from the court's

recognition of the basic principle. It reinforces it.

Uniform Controlled Substances Act

The plebiscite conducted by participant Joranson of state regulatory
officials is wholly irrelevant and immaterial. He asked them to express their
interpretations, as regulators, of language in the Uniform Controlled Sub-
stances Act, not the language in the Federal statute with which we are con-
cerned. It is the medical community which is to be consulted on the Federal

statutory question, not state regulators working with different statutes.

Classification Of Alphacetylmethadol

The Agency's discussion of Congress’ treatment of alphacetylmethadol has no
relevance here. The Agency submitted a statement to the Congress about that
substance, that "since the current use of alphacetylmethadol is limited to re-
search, it has no currently accepted medical use. . . ." Whatever else was said

about that substance was surplusage with respect to its accepted medical use.

-19 -


===PAGE BREAK===

Congressional Rescheduling of Methaqualone

In 1984 Congress enacted special legislation effectively placing the sub-
stance methaqualone in Schedule 1.12 agency counsel now point to one sentence in
a House Report concerning that legislation as evidencing an understanding by the
Congress that "accepted medical use in treatment” was equated by the Cammittee
with FDA “approval”. Counsel's reliance on the quoted statement is misplaced.

To begin with, the statement is wrong. The Committee Report says: "(T]he
Drug Enforcement Administration does not have authority to impose Schedule I
controls on a drug which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
for medical use". There is no such bar in the CSA. The CSA does provide, in 21
U.S.C. § 81l(b) that “if the Secretary recammends that a drug or other substance

not be controlled, the Attorney General shall not control the drug or other

substance". But there is no language having the effect of the quoted statement
in the House Report.

The very next sentence in the House Report, not quoted in the Agency's
brief, is correct and does show the necessity for Congressional action to outlaw
methaqualone at that time. The sentence says:

The statutory findings required for agency
scheduling decisions clearly state that the
agency may not, in the absence of Congressional
action, subject drugs with a-currently accepted
medical use in the United States to Schedule I
controls.

The Report continues:

There are circumstances when public health
considerations require the Congress to exercise
its responsibility to determine whether the
adverse health effects caused by diversion of a
drug outweigh its therapeutic usefulness and
therefore warrant impositions of Schedule I con-
trols.

12 p.n. 98-329, 98 Stat 280, June 29, 1984. See Appendix.


===PAGE BREAK===

- « » Although methaqualone currently has
an accepted medical use, there is a consensus
of medical opinion that it has no unique thera-
peutic advantages over other available drugs and
has a significantly higher incidence of and
potential for abuse.

xk *

Should future research discover a new use
for methaqualone or if it can be clinically
demonstrated that methaqualone possesses thera-
peutic advantages not possessed by other
sedative-hypnotic drugs, the Controlled Sub-
stances Act specifies procedures for
administratively removing the drug fram Schedule
I and ,placing it in an appropriate schedule of the
Act.

The House cammittee was not focusing on the problem which concerns us at
the moment. But implicit in the above language is recognition that what the
medical profession is actually doing is not to be equated with an approval
action by the FDA. Indeed, the Report shows that the Committee listened to the
medical community. At least one physician is quoted in the Report, as is a
report adopted by the House of Delegates of the American Medical Association.

The Agency brief states, p. 20:

*** By ordering the Secretary to withdraw
the NDA for methaqualone, Congress ensured that
the drug then met all the criteria for control
in Schedule I, particularly that it had "no
currently accepted medical use in treatment in
the United States".

Counsel are mistaken. A careful reading of the statute enacted reveals

that the Attorney General was directed to transfer the substance from Schedule

II to Schedule I first, and thirty days thereafter the Secretary (FDA) is
directed to withdraw the NDA. See Appendix.
Clearly, Congress was exercising its prerogative, which only it possesses,

to enact legislation. DEA and FDA must operate within the procedural scheme

13 H.R. Rep. No. 98-534, 98th Cong., Ist Sess. 4(1983)
- 21-


===PAGE BREAK===

established for them by the Congress, but Congress is not so constrained.
Congress, as it has the power to do, directed DEA to outlaw methaqualone
regardless of the fact that it had an accepted medical use and regardless of

the fact that the NDA had not yet been withdrawn by FDA.

Conclusion
The administrative law judge concludes that “accepted medical use in
treatment in the United States” is not determined by NDA approvals or

dis~approvals by FDA. It is determined, rather, by what is actually going on

within the health care community.

- 22 -


===PAGE BREAK===

Vv.

"Currently Accepted Medical Use”
Of MDMA

Let us, then, in the words of Deputy Chief Counsel Sonnenreich, consult
“the medical community as to whether or not [MDMA] has medical use or doesn't."
In this instance, as in many others, it is instructive for this tribunal to look
to the courts for guidance.

Most court decisions are dealing with suits for medical malpractice. But
the basic inquiry is the same as that in which we are presently engaged. Was
the doctor's action acceptable, or is he to be considered culpable for taking
it? How large a segment of the medical community must accept a mode of treat-
ment before the courts will accept it and find no culpability in the doctor
following it?

In Hood v. Philips, 537 S.W. 2d 291 (1976) the Texas Court of Civil Appeals

found itself dealing with a claim of medical malpractice arising from a surgical
procedure claimed to have been unnecessary. The court noted that the usual
treatment for emphysema by the majority of the medical profession is non-
surgical. The defendant doctor, however, resorted to surgery. The court said:

***This is a highly controversial procedure,
but there is evidence that carotid body surgery is
performed by at least one other doctor in Texas,

a doctor in Boston, Massachusetts, and doctors in
Japan, Poland and Italy. Until his retirement in
1967, defendant was apparently the only physician
in the Houston area who enployed this procedure.

The defendant stated that eighty-five percent of
some 1,200 persons on wham he has operated derived
some benefit, but there is medical evidence in the
record that the procedure is generally recognized
as having no value in treating emphysema and in some
cases may be detrimental to the patient's health.

-23-


===PAGE BREAK===

537 S.W. 2d at 292. Noting that some courts had adopted a rule of “generally
recognized treatment", the Texas court observed that courts have also enunciated
a corollary to the rule that one should follow the better method, viz.:

where there are several possible methods of treat-

ment, a doctor will not be liable for a patient's

injuries as long as the treatment is one followed

by a respectable minority of the medical profession

and his care under that treatment conforms with the

general practice of reasonable physicians utilizing

the sane treatment.
Ibid. at 293. The Texas court quoted from an Arizona court decision, holding

that

a method of treatment, as espoused and used

by .. . a respectable minority of physicians

in the United States, cannot be said to be an

inappropriate method of treatment or to be mal-~

practice as a matter of law even though it has

not been accepted as a proper method of treat-

ment by the medical profession generally.
Ibid. at 294. Noting that the Federal District court in the Arizona case
found a "respectable minority” camposed of sixty-five physicians throughout the
United States, the Texas court adopted as “the better rule” to apply in its
case, that

a physician is not guilty of malpractice where

the method of treatment used is supported by

a respectable minority of physicians.
Ibid. The court sent the case back to the trial court for a determination
applying that rule. One judge dissented, believing that the evidence in the
particular case was insufficient to raise an issue of malpractice for the jury.

He observed:

- « « I fear the long term effect [will] dis-
courage new procedures and techniques, so
necessary to improve health care.

Ibid. at 297.

- 24 -


===PAGE BREAK===

In Chumbler v. McClure, 505 F.2d 489 (6th Cir. 1974) the Federal

courts were dealing with a medical malpractice case under their diversity
jurisdiction, applying Tennessee law. The Court of Appeals said:

- » elhe most favorable interpretation that
may be placed on the testimony adduced at
trial below is that there is a division of
opinion in the medical profession regarding
the use of Premarin in the treatment of
cerebral vascular insufficiency, and that
Dr. McClure was alone among neurosurgeons
in Nashville in using such therapy. The
test for malpractice and for community
standards is not to be determined solely
by a plebiscite. Where two or more
schools of thought exist among can-

petent members of the medical profession
concerning proper medical treatment for a
given ailment, each of which is su

ported by responsible medical authority,

it is not malpractice to be among the
minority in a given city who follow one

of the accepted schools.

505 F.2d at 492. (Emphasis added).

How do we ascertain whether there exists a school of thought supported by
responsible medical authority, and thus accepted? We listen to the physicians.

The court and jury must have a
standard measure which they are to use
in measuring the acts of a doctor to
determine whether he exercised a rea-
sonable degree of care and skill; they
are not permitted to set up and use any
arbitrary or artificial standard of
measurement that the jury may wish to
apply. The proper standard of measure-
ment is to be established by testimony
of physicians, for it is a medical
question.

Hayes v. Brown, 133 S.E. 2d. 102(Ga., 1963) at 105.

The courts and former Deputy Chief Counsel Sonnenreich are in accord.

- 25 -


===PAGE BREAK===

Findings Of Fact

There is testimony in this record fram reputable physicians, i.e., respon-
sible medical authorities who constitute a respectable minority, that the use of
MDMA is acceptable in the treatment of certain kinds of patients.

Dr. George Greer is a psychiatrist in private practice in New Mexico. He
is Board Certified. He is also a part-time consultant psychiatrist at the
penitentiary in New Mexico where he treats inmates. Prior to July 1, 1985 Dr.
Greer had been doing clinical work with MDMA for four and one-half years. He
had administered it to 76 patients. He found MDMA to be helpful as an adjunct
to psychotherapy in certain cases. He considers himself a clinician, not a
researcher. He has studied extensively in the field of using altered states of
consciousness to facilitate psychotherapy and personal development.

In January 1983 Dr. Greer learned that MDMA was being used recreationally.
He became concerned that its legitimate medical use might be challenged, so he
wrote a paper describing his work with the substance. In this paper Dr. Greer
_ intended simply to present the results of his experience using MDMA with
patients. It was not his intention there to report on a formal, controlled
testing program for MDMA to present a convincing argument definitely estab-
lishing the efficacy of MDMA. He believes that MDMA should be scheduled and

subjected to some controls by DEA. He desires to see it placed in Schedule III.

He desires to see formal research undertaken with the drug and funding made
available for such research. He has informally sought such funding from at
least two pharmaceutical companies, but they were not interested. The drug
cannot be patented. He made informal contact with officials at FDA, suggesting
that FDA provide funding for studies and promote research in the use of the

Grug. So far no one has made such funding available.

-2%-


===PAGE BREAK===

Dr. Rick J. Strassman is Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, University of
New Mexico School of Medicine, in Albuquerque. He is medical director and
principal investigator of a program in which marihuana or THC is being used to
combat cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. This project is
funded by the State of New Mexico with approval of FDA and the National
Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA). Previously he was Assistant Professor of
Psychiatry at the University of California, Davis Medical Center. He has served
as a psychiatrist at mental health centers in California and Alaska. He is
board certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology.

Dr. Strassman is a member of the peer review committee which had been
overseeing Dr. Greer's work with MDMA. Dr. Strassman testified:

As a member of [Dr. Greer's] peer review
board in New Mexico, I have reviewed his inclu-
sionary and exclusionary criteria for entrance
into the protocol, informed consent forms, proto-
col for administration of MDMA... ., the
setting in which sessions occur, his results of
follow-up, etc. In my opinion, he has included
appropriate safeguards and has not experienced
significant adverse reactions to this form of
treatment, and that all individuals have
experienced significant benefit. Therefore,
within the standards of practice set forth by
the physicians' community, MDMA has a currently
accepted medical-.use in the hands of a qualified
clinician (e.g., Dr. Greer).

Strassman Rebuttal Testimony, at 1-2.

Dr. Rodney A. Houghton was another member of Dr. Greer's peer review
committee. He is a former Chief Resident in the Department of Psychiatry at the
University of New Mexico and has conducted psychiatric clinics in four rural New
Mexico counties. In this connection among other things he provided in-service

training on various aspects of clinical psychiatry for law enforcement agencies

including policemen, jailors and local sheriffs. He has served as an expert on

-27-


===PAGE BREAK===

psychiatric care to the New Mexico State Department of Health and Environment

concerning the State Mental Health Programs. As a psychiatrist he has been
medical consultant to the Social Security Administration, HHS, reviewing
psychiatric disability cases for the Disability Determination Unit of New
Mexico. He has served as a member of the committee reporting to the State
agency responsible for funding and maintaining standards for community mental
health programs. He is a Clinical Assistant Professor of the University of New
Mexico Department of Psychiatry. He is a member of the medical staffs of two
psychiatric hospitals in Albuquerque. Dr. Houghton is in contact with and has
worked with psychiatrists and other mental health care professionals throughout
New Mexico. Dr. Houghton testified in this proceeding as follows:

In summary, during the nine years of
practicing psychiatry in New Mexico, I have
become well acquainted with the academic
comminity, rural and private practice stan-
dards of psychiatric evaluation and treatment.
I have been involved at all levels of develop-
ing and maintaining quality medical treatment
of psychiatric patients in this state — in
the political and government agency area, in
the grassroots community level, and in the
private profit and not-for-profit hospitals.

kkk

In my expert opinion, as one who is
familiar with the accepted standards of
psychiatric practice in New Mexico,
indeed, having established many of those
standards for five rural communities and
camunity programs throughout the state,
I believe Dr. Greer's use of MDMA is an
accepted and safe medical practice. I
base this opinion not only on my own
experience and what I believe to be

- 28 -


===PAGE BREAK===

acceptable, but also on my conversations
with teachers and colleagues about his
work.

Houghton Rebuttal Testimony, at 3-5.

Dr. Will L. MacHendrie was another member of Dr. Greer's peer review
committee. In his testimony in this proceeding, given in April 1985, Dr.
MacHendrie said:

I am a Board Certified psychiatrist
and for the past five years I have been
working in community mental health and
private practice in New Mexico.
For the past two and one-half
years, I have been on the Peer Review
Committee for Dr. George Greer's. use of
MDMA. In that capacity, I have exten-
Sively reviewed his methodology and his
results regarding therapeutic use of
MDMA. I feel that there is definitely
a medically accepted use of this drug in
treatment, and that there is acceptable
safety for use under medical supervision.
MacHendrie Rebuttal Testimony, at l.
Dr. MacHendrie has served as Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at the
University of California, Davis, and as Staff Psychiatrist for Sangre de Cristo
Mental Health Service in New Mexico. He is now in private practice in Santa Fe.

Neither Dr. MacHendrie nor Dr. Houghton appears to have used MDMA in his
treatment of patients. However, three California psychiatrists have done so.
Dr. Philip Wolfson and Dr. Joseph Downing are in private practice in San
Francisco. Each has used MDMA as an adjunct to therapy with certain patients.
Each of them considers it to be an accepted medical use to do so.

Dr. Robert DuBois Lynch is a psychiatrist in private practice in La Jolla,
California. He is also statewide psychiatric consultant to the Department of
Rehabilitation of the State of Califormia. He has not used MDMA in his

practice although he would like to conduct research with it. He believes that

in the area in which he lives, and in California generally, a psychiatrist using

- 29 -


===PAGE BREAK===

MDMA for particular therapeutic purposes would be considered to be doing
pioneering good medical practice by his colleagues.

This testimony, of course, as with the testimony of many of the witnesses,
was given before the temporary Schedule I placement of MDMA on July 1, 1985 and
is to be read in that context.

Four additional psychiatrists testified in these proceedings that, before
its being placed in Schedule I on July 1, 1985, MDMA had a currently accepted
medical use in psychotherapy for certain purposes and under certain conditions.
They were Dr. Morris Lipton, professor of psychiatry at the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Deputy Editor of the American Journal of Psychiatry
of the American Psychiatric Association; Dr. Norman Zinberg, clinical professor
of psychiatry, Harvard Medical School; Dr. Lance Wright, practicing psychiatrist
and Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania and
Associate Professor of Child Psychiatry, Hahnemann Medical College; and Dr.
Richard Ingrasci, a psychiatrist in private practice in Watertown,
Massachusetts.

No testimony to the contrary by any witness is brought to the attention of
the administrative law judge by the Agency or any other participant.

Conclusion

The administrative law judge finds and concludes that, prior to its being
proscribed effective July 1, 1985, MDMA did have “a currently accepted medical
use in treatment in the United States." It is not presently being used in

treatment because it has been proscribed.

- 30 -


===PAGE BREAK===

VI
"Accepted Safety For Use"
Of MDMA

Section 812(b)(1) provides that, in order to place a substance in Schedule
I, the Administrator is “required” to find that, with respect to the substance,
“[t]here is a lack of accepted safety for use . . . under medical supervision.”
Stated issues numbered 3. and 6. in this proceeding are as follows:

3. What constitutes "accepted safety for
use . . . under medical supervision" within the
purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?
6. Is there "a lack of accepted safety for
use [of MDMA] under medical supervision" within
the purview of 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)?
These issues will now be considered.

The Agency staff takes the sane position with respect to "accepted safety
for use" generally, i.e., issue 3., as it took with respect to "accepted medical
use in treatment." It asserts that "accepted safety for use" under the CSA is
to be equated with approval by FDA under a different statute, the FDCA, as safe
and effective, pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 355(d). The appeal of this position, as
providing a clear basis for a ruling with minimum effort to ascertain it, is as
readily apparent here as it was with respect to “accepted medical use in treat-
ment". This position cannot be accepted here for the same reasons that it can-
not be accepted there:

- There is no basis in the text of the
CSA for the Agency's position.
~- Had the Congress intended this interpre-

tation, it could easily have so provided in

the CSA. It specifically referred back to

-31-


===PAGE BREAK===

the previously enacted FDCA in other sections
of the CSA, but it did do so here. This can
only mean that Congress did not here intend to
refer back.

- There is nothing in the legislative
history to this effect.

- The only comment in testimony before
Congress on this issue brought to light by
the parties is the exchange between Congressman
Rogers and FDA's Dr. Egeberg, quoted above
on page 16.

It is to be noted that Dr. Egeberg did not say that the question of
"accepted safety" for CSA purposes would be bindingly determined by FDA,
utilizing the authority granted FDA 38 years earlier for FDCA purposes. The
Assistant Secretary said that he "would think that HEW would expect to have a

good deal to say on that". (Emphasis added.) Assuredly so. One would hope and

expect FDA to have an informed opinion on the question, and make it available to
DEA's Administrator for consideration together with all the other evidence _
received on the record after opportunity for a hearing. But the determinative
"findings prescribed by subsection (b) of section 812", including accepted
safety for use vel non, are to be made by the Administrator of DEA and by no one
else. The statutory language is perfectly clear. 21 U.S.C. § 811(a)

The impossible situation to which the Agency position here would bring us
is well pointed up by proposed finding number 6. on page 28 of its brief:
"There is no legitimate commercial manufacturer of MDMA in the United States".

If this is the criterion, “accepted safety" for use by physicians is reduced to

- 32 -


===PAGE BREAK===

being determined by, and therefore equated with, a businessman's or corpora-
tion's determination of the economic feasibility of mass production. Congress
has not given the slightest hint of an intention to rely here on such judgments.
That would, however, be the bottom line result of the Agency's position in many
cases. It is wholly unacceptable. It ignores the reality that commercial
pharmaceutical manufacturers base their production decisions on economic con-
siderations. If they are commercially manufacturing a product, they have, no
doubt, concluded that the pharmaceutical can be safely used. But the converse
is not necessarily true. Pharmaceutical companies do not normally manufacture a
substance just because it is safe. They manufacture it because they expect to
make a profit by so doing.

As when determining "accepted medical use," the only logical source for
relevant information on safety is the world of health care practitioners. We

turn to the evidence of record in these proceedings.

Findings Of Fact

With respect to the safety of MDMA, the following facts are established in
this record by the preponderance of the evidence.

MDMA has been utilized by same psychiatrists as an adjunct to psycho-
therapy. It is usually administered to the patient only once, or at most twice,
at the beginning of a course of psychotherapy. It is administered by, or in
the presence of, the treating psychotherapist. The psychiatrist remains with the
patient, or is immediately available, during the period after ingesting of the
substance when it might adversely affect normal functioning. All of this is in

marked contrast to the manner of administering many other controlled drugs,

- 33-


===PAGE BREAK===

which patients self-administer at hame or elsewhere with scant regard for pos-
sible immediate contact with the physician.

There are many other oral medications, controlled substances, that are not
So restricted by the treating physician, i.e., to only one or two administra-
tions and in such relatively low doses.

MDMA has been administered to animals in a number of different studies.

The injection LD 5014 has been established and the oral LD 50 has been reliably
estimated. The doses of MDMA administered therapeutically by psychiatrists to
patients have been less than one percent of the LD 50. This indicates a very
high margin of safety with MDMA when it is used in treatment.

Clinical trials with humans were reported in 1978 in a monograph, published
by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Dr. Greer has written a report on his
clinical experiences administering MDMA to patients. Others interested in using
MDMA in therapy had read copies of this report although it had not been pub- °
lished as of the time of the hearings in this proceeding. Dr. Ingrasci, a psychia-
trist in private practice, has reported on his clinical observations in admin-
istering the drug to nearly 100 individuals over 5 years, from 1980 to 1985.

No evident harm resulted to any of these persons from his use of the drug. Dr.
Downing has reported on an informal study of the physiological effects of MDMA
on some 20 human volunteers. None of them suffered apparent harm. Although
there was no verification by scientific analysis, it is reasonable to accept, in
the circumstances, that all these volunteers had ingested MDMA in the quantity
assumed for purposes of the study.

In addition, other psychiatrists have been using MDMA in their practices

over the past 10 years. Because MDMA cannot be patented, no pharmaceutical

14 see finding 27, page 45, below.

~ 34 -


===PAGE BREAK===

company has had the financial incentive to carry out the extensive animal and
clinical tests required by the FDA for approval to market the drug on an inter-
state basis. Nevertheless, the overwhelming weight of medical opinion evidence
received in this proceeding concurred that sufficient information on MDMA
existed to support a judgment by reputable physicians that MDMA was safe to use
under medical supervision. No evidence was produced of any instances where MDMA

was used in therapy with less than wholly acceptable safety.

Conclusion

The administrative law judge finds and concludes that there is no "lack of
accepted safety for use" of MDMA "under medical supervision." On the contrary,

there is accepted safety for use.

- 35 -


===PAGE BREAK===

VII
Effect Of Secretary's
Findings

Issue number 4 is stated:

4. Is a finding by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services that a substance
has "no currently accepted medical use in
treatment in the United States" or a finding
that a substance has no “accepted safety for
use . . . under medical supervision" binding
on the Attorney General (the Administrator
of the Drug Enforcement Administration, DEA)
within the purview of the provisions of 21
U.S.C. § 812(b)?

The Agency staff argues that the answer is in the affirmative, pointing to
language which it asserts is in § 812 and to one sentence found in House Report
No. 91, legislative history of the CSA.

The Agency's brief is in error where it says, on page 32:

The statutory language of 21 U.S.C.
§ 812 is clear that

The recommendation of the Secretary
to the Attorney General shall be
binding on the Attorney General as
to such scientific and medical mat-
ters e 2 es e

(Emphasis added.)

The quoted language is found in § 81l, not in § 812.

A careful reading § 81l(b) reveals that, before initiating proceedings to
schedule a drug, and after gathering data, the Attorney General (i.e., DEA) is
to request from the Secretary a scientific and medical evaluation and recon
mendations as to whether the drug should be controlled. Section 811 then

continues:

In making such evaluation and recammendations,
the Secretary shall consider the factors

- 3% -


===PAGE BREAK===

listed in paragraphs (2), (3), (6), (7),

and (8) of subsection (c) of this section
and any scientific or medical considerations
involved in paragraphs (1), (4), and (5) of
such subsection... . The recomemna-
tions of the Secretary to the Attorney
General shall be binding on the Attorney
General as to such scientific and medical
matters . . « e

It is only the scientific and medical factors specified in § 811(c)(2), (3),
(6), (7) and (8), and any such considerations as are involved in § 81l(c)(1),
(4) and (5), on which the Secretary's recommendations are binding. “Currently
accepted medical use in practice" and “accepted safety for use” are not
mentioned in § 8ll(c). They appear in § 812, as matters with respect to which
“findings” must be made by the Attorney General (DEA) when he is determining
which of the five schedules is appropriate. Thus the provision in § 811 for
certain recommendations of the Secretary to be binding has no reference at all
to "currently accepted medical use” and "accepted safety for use."

The one broad-brush, general statement quoted in the Agency's brief from
the Committee Report cannot be read so as to alter the clear language in the
statute itself.

The anomalous situation in which the Agency's argument here would put us,
i.e., according finality to the recommendation of the Secretary on any questions
classifiable as scientific or medical, was pointed up by the Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit. In its recent opinion in the
Buprenorphine scheduling case, the Court observed: ©

The intervenor's brief contends, and the
Department of Justice agreed at oral argument,
that the Administrator's conclusion that
buprenorphine is a thebaine derivative can be

upheld on an alternative ground. According to
these parties, HHS's initial communication to

- 37 -


===PAGE BREAK===

DEA stated that buprenorphine is a thebaine
derivative, and the Act makes HHS's recommenda-
tions as to "scientific and medical matters"
binding on the DEA. See 21 U.S.C. § 811(b)
(1982). If that were so, it is difficult

to see what purpose the agency's on-the-record
hearing served in this case. Certainly the
Administrator did not appear to regard his
independent findings on “scientific and medical
matters" as superfluous. While we entertain
doubts about the soundness of the Justice
Department's interpretation of the Act - Section
81l(b) could be read to indicate only that the
DEA must follow HHS's recommendations on the
specified matters in deciding whether to
initiate scheduling actions - our disposition of
this case renders it unnecessary for us to
decide the point.

Reckitt & Colman, Ltd. v. Administrator, etc. No. 85-1193, April 8, 1986,
Slip opinion, p. 9, n. (Emphasis added.)

The administrative law judge concludes that the recommendations of the
Secretary on the questions of “accepted medical use in practice” and "accepted

safety for use . . . under medical supervision,” to the extent the Secretary

addressed these issues, are not binding on the Administrator of DEA.

- 38 -


===PAGE BREAK===

VIII
Proper Schedule For MDMA

Introduction

We come to the last of the stated original issues.

' 7. If, on the basis of the resolution
of the above issues [including issue 1, the
"preliminary issue" ], MDMA can lawfully be
scheduled in a schedule other than Schedule I,
in which schedule should it be placed?

The findings and conclusions of the administrative law judge set out above
resolve all the previous issues so as to permit, indeed to require, that MDMA be
placed in a schedule other than Schedule I. In which one? We must now focus on

the "findings required for each of the Schedules" II through V found in § 812.

Having found that there is a currently accepted medical use for MDMA, and
that there is not a lack of accepted safety for use of it under medical super-
vision, the only matters still to be addressed are the extént of MDMA's poten-
tial for abuse, finding (A) for each of these schedules, and the extent of
psychological or physical dependence resulting from abuse of it, finding (C) for
- each of them. The Administrator can place a substance in a schedule only if he

"makes .. . the findings prescribed by subsection (b) of section 812... for

the schedule in which such drug is to. be placed." 21 U.S.C. § 811(a)(1)(B).

Findings of Fact

1. MDMA, or 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, belongs to a class of
compounds which can be termed phenethylamines or, narrowly defined,
phenylisopropylamines or amphetamines.

2. MDA, or 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine, amphetamine and

methamphetamine are also phenylisopropylamines.

- 39 -


===PAGE BREAK===

3. MDA, or 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine, is formed by the addition
of a methylenedioxy group to amphetamine.

4. MDMA is formed by the addition of a methylenedioxy group to
methamphetamine.

5. The addition of a methylenedioxy group to the aromatic nucleus of
amphetamines produces compounds with psychotomimetic activity.

6. Psychotomimetic is a term used to describe a large class of
compounds which change or modify a person's mood or mental state. The terms
psychotamimetic and hallucinogenic are commonly used interchangebly.

7. MDMA is the N-methyl analog of MDA. This means that MDMA differs
structurally from MDA the same way that methamphetamine differs from
amphetamine, by the addition of an N-methyl group.

8. Nemethylation of amphetamine yields methamphetamine which retains
the central nervous system activity of amphetamine.

9. The difference in structure between amphetamine and

methamphetamine is illustrated by the following diagram:

!
CH3- CH;
amphetamine methamphetarine

- 40 -


===PAGE BREAK===

10. The difference in structure between MDA and MDMA is illustrated by

the following diagram:

oy CH-NHe "eee CH-NHCH;
CH, : 2 ,
No HAY CH3 | oY Cs

MDA MDMA

11. This similarity in chemical structure, although of same signifi-
cance, does not establish that the two substances have identical, or even
similar, abuse potential. Nor does the fact that MDMA can be classified as a
phenethylamine establish similarity as to abuse potential. Of the 28
phenylethylamines recognized as such by HHS, there are eight which have neither
been scheduled in the United States nor recommended for scheduling by the World
Health Organization (WHO). Yet the Expert Committee on Drug Abuse of WHO has

reviewed the abuse potential of all 28.

- 41 -


===PAGE BREAK===

12. Research performed by Dr. Harold F. Hardman, an Agency witness,
established that mescaline and seven other substances, analogs, have very

similar structural formulas, shown below:

No. MW 5 4 3 R Name

I 247.4 OCH, OCH, OCH, CH,;,—CH:—NH; 3.4.5-Trimethoxy-f-phenyleths!-
amine HCI (mescaline HCh

No 214.4 H OCH; OCH, CH,—CH:;—NH, 3.4-Dimethoxy-f-phenvicthsI-
amine HCl
lit 200.0 4H O—CH;—O CH:—CH;--NH; 3.4-Methylenedioxy-f-phenyl-
ethylamine HCI

IV 215.5 H O-—CH;—O CH,—CH—NH, 3.4-Methylenedioxy-2z-methy|-/-

| *  phenylethylamine HC!
CH,

V 229.0 4H O—CH:—O CH,—CH—NH,; 3,4-Methylenedioxy-2-cthyl-/i-
| phenyicthylamine HCI
CH,
|
CH;

VI 231.0 H OCH, OCH, CH,—CH—NH, 3,4-Dimethoxy-a-methyl-/-
| phenylethylamine HC!
CH,

Vil 261.4 OCH; OCH, OCH, CH,—CH—NH,  3,4,5-Trimethoxy-z-methyl-A-
; ! phenylethylamine HC)
CH, .
VIL 229.4 H O—CH:—O CH;—CH—-NH—CH,; | 3,4-Mothylenedioxy-N,x-
i dimethyl-/-phenylethy!-
CH; amine

‘In the above listing, substance I is mescaline, substance IV is MDA and VIII is
MDMA. From columns "4" and "3" we see that substances III, IV (MDA), V and VIII
(MDMA) all have the methylenedioxy group added to amphetamine. Yet substances
III and V are not scheduled drugs. DEA has not found them to have significant
abuse potential, despite their close structural similarity to MDA and MDMA.

13. Chemical similarity may or may not be a good guide to the actual

effects of a compound in the human body.
14. MDMA produces pharmacological effects in common with both central

nervous system stimulants like amphetamine, and hallucinogens like MDA, in

animals.

- 42 -


===PAGE BREAK===

15. MDA and MDMA both produce central nervous system stimulation in
animals as measured by increased locomotor activity in mice.

16. Tests conducted by Braun, Shulgin and Braun show that at an oral
dose of 20mg./kg. in mice, MDA produced a significant increase in locomotor
activity. At the same dose, MDMA produced approximately three times the motor
activity of MDA during the first three hours after application. They concluded
that MDA, MDMA and N-ethyl MDA caused the greatest stimulation and that this is
consistent with results of tests in mice of amphetamine compounds with no ring
substitution (e.g. amphetamine and methamphetamine). Braun, Shulgin and Braun
further conclude that "compounds which cause a sharp increase in motor activity
in animals generally prove to have a pronounced central nervous system effect on
man."

17. A study conducted by Intox Laboratories reported significantly
reduced body weights at 7 and 14 days following initiation of MDMA dosing in
rats.

18. The Intox Laboratory study also reported that rats who had been
administered MDMA showed hyperactivity, excitability, aggressive behavior and
stereotypic behavior.

19. Studies conducted by Dr. Harris at the Medical College of Virginia
compared the locomotor activity in mice using d-amphetamine and MDMA. Dr.
Harris found that MDMA produces slightly less central nervous system stimulation
than amphetamine at. peak activity which is 1 1/2 hours after administration.
However, at 5-15 minutes and 2-3 hours after administration, the maximum
stimulating effect of MDMA is substantially greater than that produced by

d-amphetamine.

- 43-


===PAGE BREAK===

20. MDA and MDMA produce similar centrally mediated analgesic effects
in mice as determined by the hot-plate test, the tail-flick test and the stretch
test. The tail-flick test and hot plate tests showed that MDMA produces an
increased analgesic effect over that produced by MDA.

21. MDA and MDMA both produce an increase in body temperature when
administered to rabbits at similar potencies. Hyperthermia in rabbits is |
reported to be a measure of central nervous system activity. Dr. Shulgin notes
that there is a reasonably good parallel between the hyperthermia response in
rabbits and same of the effects of LSD, and that these parallel quite closely
the psychopharmacological potency in humans. He feels that it is probably the
best animal test at present for estimating psychotamimetic potency.

22. The preceeding eight findings demonstrate that it is appropriate
to classify MDMA as a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant. Although MDMA may
be so classified, there are many other substances which are CNS stimulants but
which are not currently controlled in the United States nor have been recom
mended for control by WHO. Caffeine is one such substance. Others, whose
abuse potential has been reviewed by WHO, are clobenzorex, fenbutrazate,
furfenorex, morazone, para-oxyamphetamine, and N, N-dimethylamphetamine.

23. Categorizing a substance as a CNS stimulant is of little
assistance in determining whether or not it has a potential for abuse or what
relative degree of abuse potential it may have.

24. Both MDA and MDMA are potent releasers of serotonin or
5-hydroxytryptamine, a neurotransmitter which has a widely accepted role in the
activity of hallucinogens.

25. Two substances classified by HHS as hallucinogens have not been

scheduled in the United States nor have they been recommended by WHO, after

- 44 -


===PAGE BREAK===

review, for scheduling. They are 4-bramo-2, 5-dimethoxyphenethylamine and
N-ethy1-3, 4-methylenedioxyamphetamine. Thus, categorizing a substance as a
hallucinogen is of little assistance in determining whether or not that sub-
stance has a potential for abuse or what relative degree of abuse potential it
may have.

26. In mice, dogs and monkeys, MDA and MDMA produce the same spectrum
of pharmacological effects when observed during toxicity studies. These effects
include hyperactivity, excitability, emesis, apprehension or fright, aggressive
behavior, bizarre body attitudes, apparent hallucinations, dyspnea and
hyperpnea. Motor activity effects include convulsions, muscular rigidity and
tremors and the autonomic activity includes mydriasis, piloerection, salivation
and vascular flushing. These effects are part of what is described as the
classical pharmacological response of the dog to intravenous mescaline.

27. The lethality of a compound is reported as an LD50, which is the
dose of a drug which will kill 50% of the animals receiving that dose.

28. The LDS50's for mescaline, MDA and MDMA were determined by
intravenous!> or intraperitoneal 16 administration in five species of animals.
MDMA had LDSO's between 2 and 6 times less than those of mescaline and between
1.5 and 3 times more than MDA. This means that MDMA is more lethal than
mescaline but less lethal than MDA.

29. Intraperitoneal LD50's for MDA and MDMA were determined in mice
by Davis. The LD50's of MDMA and MDA were substantially the same with the LD50
for MDA equalling 90.0 mg./kg. and the LD50 for MDMA equalling 106.5 mg./kg.
Dr. Hardman found the LD50 of MDA to be 92 mg./kg. Davis also found that both
MDA and MDMA showed the amphetamine-like property of increased lethality under

aggregated housing conditions compared to isolated housing conditions.

15 into a vein. ;
16 into the abdominal cavity.
- 45 -


===PAGE BREAK===

30. In the study conducted by Intox Laboratories the oral LD50 for
MDMA in rats was estimated to be approximately 325 mg./kg. No oral value was
reported for MDA but based on the data from Intox Laboratories, Dr. Hardman
estimated it to be approximately 150 mg./kg.

31. Every drug has an LDSO. The preceeding four findings as to LD50
have nothing to do with establishing the abuse potential of MDMA. A value that
is of interest, however, is the therapeutic index, i.e., the ratio of the LD50
to the effective dose (ED50). How close is the dose which will kill 50% of the
tested animals to the dose required for the desired effect in humans? If these
two doses are very close to each other, then there is an obvious danger in using
the drug with humans.

32. Most general anesthetics have a very low therapeutic index of two
to one, i.e., just twice the quantity commonly used in medical practice is
sufficient to kill. Yet these anesthetics are used by doctors all the time,
under carefully controlled conditions.

33. The estimated oral LDSO for MDMA in rats, as noted above, is 325
mg./kg., i.@., 325 mg. of MDMA per kilogram of weight of the rat. The effective
oral human dose is 2 mg./kg. of weight. Thus there appears to be a compara
tively large margin of safety in the use of MDMA in humans - the LDS50: is 160
times the ED50 in humans.

34. MDMA, MDA, amphetamine and methamphetamine produce effects that
are neurotoxic, i.e., nerve destructive, when administered to animals. MDMA and
MDA are neurotoxic in rats at doses which are very low compared to the
neurotoxic doses of amphetamine and methamphetamine.

35. MDMA and MDA both produce long term reduction in serotonin levels

and uptake sites in the rat brain. These neurochemical depletions are due to

- 46 -


===PAGE BREAK===

the destruction of serotonin nerve terminals as determined by visual staining
techniques.

36. In humans, serotonin nerve terminals are believed to play a major
role in mood, emotion, pain perception, sleep and affect the regulation of aggres~
sive and sexual behavior.

37. Although single injections of MDMA may be slightly less neurotoxic
than MDA, chronic use of MDMA appears to be more neurotoxic than MDA. The rele-
vance and materiality of this conclusion to the report of the study on which
this conclusion was based indicates only that the MDMA was injected into rats.
The route of injection, which will make a vast difference in the meaning of the
results noted, is not given in the report. Humans are known to take MDMA
orally, not by injection. This difference is of great importance, and renders
the test results meaningless for our purpose.

38. The neurotoxicity of amphetamine and methamphetamine has been
determined in rats, guinea pigs and monkeys.

39. MDMA and MDA are suspected of having the potential to produce the
same neurotoxic effects to serotonergic nerves in humans, but there is very
little evidence to support this suspicion.

40. On the other hand, the drug fenfluramine has been determined to
produce the biochemical effects in rats of which MDMA is suspected, but at much
lower dosage levels than in the case of MDMA. In fact, the proven dosage levels
of fenfluramine causing these effects are merely 1.25 times its ED50 when used
for anorexia in humans. Nontheless, FDA has approved the daily use of
fenfluramine in humans on a chronic basis. Fenfluramine is a controlled sub-

stance, but this proven neurotoxic substance is only in Schedule IV.

- 47 -


===PAGE BREAK===

41. Drug discrimination studies in animals allow oe to determine if
a particular dose of a test substance produces in the animal effects which are
recognized by the animal as the same as those produced by a particular dose of
another substance. It is believed that the effects recognized by the animals in
these studies are. central nervous system effects and hence this paradigm is very
useful in characterizing centrally acting compounds.

42. In drug discrimination paradigns, complete generalization indi-
cates that the test compound is similar enough for the animal to recognize it as
the training drug by responding on the appropriate drug lever at least 80% of
the time. No generalization indicates that the test compound is unlike the
training campound so that a low number of responses will be made on the drug
lever. Partial generalization indicates that there may be pharmacological ef-
fects common to both test and training drug, but that some doses of the test and
training drug are similar and at the tested doses another type of pharmacolo-
gical effect may predominate.

43. MDMA shares discriminative stimulus properties in common with
amphetamine and MDA in drug discrimination studies in rats.

44. Ina drug discrimination test described by Dr. Glennon, rats
trained to recognize amphetamine also recognized MDA and MDMA. MUOMA was
slightly more potent than MDA in being recognized as amphetamine. Other com
pounds which generalized to the amphetamine stimulus included methamphetamine,
cocaine and para-methoxyamphetamine.

45. Rats trained to recognize MDA recognized MDMA, in drug discrimina~
tion studies conducted by Dr. Glennon, as hving some properties similar to MDA.

46. MDA completely generalized (83%-correct response) in rats trained

to recognize 4-—methyl-2, 5-dimethoxyamphetamine (DOM), a substance with known

- 48 -


===PAGE BREAK===

hallucinogenic properties, but only within a very narrow dosage range.

47. MDA is unique among chemicals in being recognized by animals who
are trained to recognize hallucinogens and also by animals trained to recognize
stimulants. MDMA does not share this dual response characteristic of MDA. The
overwhelming weight of the evidence in this record is that MDMA is not properly
classified as a hallucinogen. One witness disagrees. His disagreement results
from reports he has received fram street users, who are widely regarded as an
unreliable source of information as to specifics on any matter. There are no
results of controlled scientific experiments in the record establishing MDMA to
be a hallucinogen in humans. Animals trained to recognize MDA who also respond
to MDMA are, more likely than not, responding to the CNS stimulant char-
acteristic of MDMA rather than to any hallucinogenic properties.

48. The significance of animal discrimination test findings as to
abuse potential in humans is far from certain. An Agency witness in this pro-
ceeding co-authored an article, published in 1984, which states that unless a
particular compound has been tested in humans, one cannot be certain that
structure-activity relationships will apply in the clinical situation, 1.C.,
when used in humans. He cautioned that the most common error found in animal
models is the identification of "false positives". That is, the animal models
may indicate a compound to be active, whereas actual testing in humans reveals
inactivity. The article also says that it is clear that no present animal
models correlate with the qualitative differences between hallucinogens ob-
served in humans.

49. In 1984 the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) reviewed

DEA's initial proposal for the placing of MDMA in Schedule I. NIDA reported to

~ 49 -


===PAGE BREAK===

Dr. Edward Tocus of the FDA that: "The direct evidence that MDMA has any abuse
potential in animals is not substantiated, based on the data DEA provided.”
cc 55.17 |

50. A standard abuse liability test for assessing the reinforcing
properties of a drug is the substitution procedure. It is the most common and
reliable method for determining whether a drug will be self-administered. In
this procedure new drugs are tested to determine whether or not they will main-
tain the responding of animals trained to lever press for intravenous delivery
of a known drug reinforcer.

51. As our hearings were concluding it was learned that tests were
being conducted with rhesus monkeys and baboons trained to self-administer
cocaine to see if the monkeys and baboons would continue to self-administer when
MDMA was substituted for the cocaine. Preliminary reports were obtained from
those conducting these tests. These reports were placed in evidence by the
Agency. Upon study of them, and of the Response to them dated November 4, 1985
by Drs. Grinspoon, et al., the administrative law judge finds that these
preliminary reports lack sufficient indicia of reliability to be given any
weight. They certainly fail to buttress the Agency's position that MDMA has "a
high potential for abuse" in humans. They are immaterial.

52. Drs. Shulgin and Nichols f irst reported that MDMA produces
psychotomimetic effects in man in 1976. These effects are described as
intoxication, an easily controlled altered state of consciousness and

sympathomimetic st imulation.

17/ "GG" = Drs. Grinspoon, et al., exhibit; "G* = Agency exhibit.

- 50-


===PAGE BREAK===

53. The racemic mixture of MDMA, which is a combination of both
optical isomers, is the drug which is clandestinely produced, found in the
illicit traffic and used by psychiatrists.

54. In a 1978 publication, Dr. Shulgin reported that racemic MDMA
produced a high level of intoxication in man at doses of 100-160mg. Color
enhancement as well physical symptoms of mydriasis and jaw clenching were noted.
MDMA was described as maintaining the same potency as MDA but exhibiting subtle
differences in the qualitative nature of the intoxication.

55. In a 1980 publication, Dr. Shulgin and others describe MDA and
MDMA as having both stimulant and psychotomimetic properties in humans. Racemic
MDA and MDMA were administered orally to five volunteers at doses up to 160mg.
The effective dose of MDA was 60-120mg., while that of MDMA was 100-160mg. Dr.
Shulgin and others noted a drive increasing effect, a change in expression and
an apparent increase in the acoustic, visual and tactile sensory perceptions as
well as a tension-decreasing, mood-lightening effect in the human subjects. A
slight mydriasis and sympathomimetic stimulation were noted during the entire
period. The effects of MDA and MDMA were apparent beginning 30 minutes after
ingestion and continuing for approximately four hours, except that a slight
increase in motor activity lasted several more hours. Shulgin concluded that
the “psychopharmacological profiles" of MDA and MDMA and two other compounds are
very similar. However, five years later Shulgin wrote: "There can be little
validity in an argument that the psychopharmacology of MDMA can be predicted
from that of MDA. The facts are otherwise.” GG 30, p.3.

56. There are observed differences in humans between the effects of
MDA and MDMA. Studies other than the one reported by Shulgin in 1980 have shown
MDA to have duration of action in humans of 12 to 15 hours, as compared to four
to six hours for MDMA. MDA has been found to produce a mild cognitive impair-

ment in humans at the 75mg. dosage level, while MDMA did not impair cognition

-~5l1-


===PAGE BREAK===

even at 200mg. As MDA dosages increase from 75 to 200mg., the effects in humans
become increasingly similar to the effects of LSD, including the presence of
visions. As dosages of MDMA increase from 75 to 200mg., the intensity of the
sense of wellbeing and inner flow of associations which characterize the
experience increase only moderately while the ego functions remain intact,
cognition is unimpaired and visions are notably absent. Large doses of MDA
(200mg) produce significantly greater disorientation and an up-welling of visual
images that are not characteristic of MDMA in similar dose range.

57. The dosage comparisons just referred to are those using the
levo-rotary optical isomer of MDA. There are clear indications that this isomer
of MDA is more active than either the racemic mixture or the dextro-rotary
isomer. It was the racemic mixture of MDMA that was used in the studies
referred to immediately above.

58. The uncontradicted evidence of record is that there are
qualitative differences in humans between MDA and MDMA.

59. The Agency presented testimony froma staff member of only one of
the many drug abuse ¢linics in the country, the Haight-Ashbury Free Medical
Clinic in San Francisco. This clinic treats approximately three to four clients
per month who seek help for problems arising from the use of one or more of a
group of five or six different drugs which the clinic lumps together in its
Statistics. MDMA is one of these drugs. The clinic has no reliable figures on
how many of these three to four patients per month have been reporting abuse of
MDMA specifically. Even if the three or four clients mentioned all reported
using MDMA, that would constitute less than one percent of the clinic's total of

about 450 clients per month. The clinic has no way of knowing whether any of

-52-


===PAGE BREAK===

its relatively small number of clients reporting MDMA use were actually using
MDMA -no reliable testing has been done. Many of the drugs sold on the street
to persons such as the clients of this clinic are not, in fact, what they are
represented to be by the seller. The numbers, three to four clients per month
reporting use of MDMA or any one of the other drugs lumped together with it
statistically by this clinic, has remained fairly constant for the last 15
years: In that 15 year period there has been only one instance of a client
reporting use of MDMA and producing a pill of the type he said he had been
taking which was analyzed and was reliably reported to be MDMA. Two other
pills, brought in by other clients reporting them to be samples of MDMA, turned
out to be not MDMA but, rather, MDA.

60. During the year preceeding April 24, 1985 there were no reported
incidents of abuse of MDMA, or of complications resulting from its use, in the
Philadelphia, PA, area. No such instances in New York City or in Boston during
that period were brought to the attention of a staff psychiatrist at a Veterans
Administration Hospital drug abuse clinic in Philadelphia who has talked with
colleagues in those cities.

61. In the Los Angeles area there was a noticeable increase in the
street use of MDMA shortly before its becoming illegal on July 1, 1985. This
coincided with the attention MDMA received in the news media at that time. There
was also a significant increase in the manufacture of MDMA at that time, much of
which was to permit stockpiling of supplies before the July 1, 1985 ban went
into effect. This manufacturing was done by those who supplied the street
market. It has been estimated that in all of 1976, 10,000 doses of MDMA were
distributed in the United States for street use, as opposed to 30,000 doses per
month in 1985. These estimates are based on information obtained from street
users. Street users are notoriously unreliable in matters of specific infor-

mation. No reliable conclusion as to number of users can be gleaned from these

- 53 -


===PAGE BREAK===

estimated figures. In 1985 the most common patterns of non-medical use of MDMA
found in Los Angeles were “experimental” (ten times or less in lifetime history)
or “social-recreational" (one to four times per month).

62. Cocaine poses many more, and much more serious, social problems
for this country than did MDMA before it was banned. Street drug users in Los
Angeles did not find it as appealing as cocaine. Cocaine is very rewarding and
produces pleasurable sensations in the brain that causes the brain to try to
repeat the experience. Cocaine has the potential for producing a lot of repeti-
tive drug taking. It produces tolerance and, in an effort to overcome the
tolerance, people repeat the experience again and again. Substances considered
to be similar to MDMA in their effects on humans have not been used in that way,
according to studies of drug users made over the last 20 to 30 years.

63. The circumstances and surroundings in which MDMA is taken, or in
which one who has recently ingested MDMA finds himself, has an effect on the
reactions and perceptions of the subject while the drug is still effective
within his system.

64. Low to moderate doses of MDMA have been given to individuals by
wholly legitimate and highly regarded psychiatrists as an adjunct to psycho~
therapy. Some of the MDMA so administered was made by them under the super-
vision of Dr. Shulgin in his laboratory in California.

65. MDMA has been reported, by the psychiatrists administering it to
themselves and others, and by other individuals, to produce at one time or
another some or all of the following physical effects: jaw clenching, anorexia,
insomnia, flight of ideas, increased heart and pulse rate, mydriasis, nystagmus,
blurred vision, enhanced deep tendon reflexes, fatigue after use, ataxia,

nausea, vomiting, headache and shakiness.

- 54 -


===PAGE BREAK===

66. Psychological effects reported for low to moderate doses of MDMA,
in various subjects at various times, include gentle euphoria, sense of
well-being and peacefulness, increases in physical and emotional energy, focus
on the here and now, impaired judgement, heightened sensual awareness, anxiety,
brief short term memory loss, distortion in depth perception, brief hallucin-
ation, visual illusion, nervousness, mild depression, mental fatigue, confusion
and altered state of consciousness.

67. MDMA was first identified by a DEA laboratory in 1972. Between
1972 and April 1985, DEA laboratories had identified 41 exhibits of MDMA con-
sisting of over 60,000 dosage units.

68. Since its temporary placement into Schedule I on July 1, 1985,
MDMA has been identified in at least 14 exhibits submitted to DEA laboratories
fram Texas alone. These 14 exhibits contained over 35,000 dosage units of MDMA.

69. MDMA is available in tablets, capsules and powders with recent
analyses indicating approximately 110mg. of racemic MDMA per dosage unit. MDMA
has been encountered in many sections of the United States and other countries.

70. Since 1978, nonfederal forensic laboratories have reported at
least 41 exhibits of MDMA to DEA.

71. Pharm Chem Laboratories and Toxicology Testing Service are
laboratories which provide confidential analysis of drug samples voluntarily
submitted to them. Their data provides some useful information on the avail-
ability of street drugs and trends in drug abuse patterns.

72. Between 1973 and 1983, Pharm Chem Laboratories reported MDA and
MDMA in the same category. The total number of submissions of MDA/MDMA between
1973 and 1983 was 610, ranging from 21 in 1974 to 88 in 1978. This evidence is

of little help to us since we are not told how many of the 610 total submissions

-55 -


===PAGE BREAK===

were MDA and how many were MDMA. It is worth noting that the highest number of
combined MDA/MDMA submissions to Pharm Chem was 88 in 1978. Only 22 such sub-
missions were reported in 1983.

73. Pharm Chem reported 20 submissions of MDMA between May 1983 and
May 1984 when it discontinued its testing service.

74. Toxicology Testing Service reported 15 submissions of MDMA
between April 1, 1984 and March 31, 1985.

75. In its investigation of the clandestine manufacture of controlled
substances, DEA has seized four clandestine laboratories producing, or posses-
sing the necessary chemicals to produce, MDMA during the 13 year period 1972
through 1984. A total of about 2,400 clandestine laboratories were seized
during that period. During the seven year period 1977 through 1983, 31
clandestine laboratories having the capacity to produce MDA were seized. Im-
purities found in the MDMA analyzed by forensic laboratories indicate that MDMA
is produced in clandestine laboratories.

76. <A DEA investigation conducted in June 1984, of a suspected
cocaine distributor produced information that a drug known as “Ecstasy” was
being sold in the Dallas, Texas area. Samples were obtained through undercover
buys in that area in February and March 1985. Analysis revealed each tablet to
contain 110mg. of MDMA. In April 1985 “Ecstasy” was widely available on the
street in the Dallas area. It was reported to DEA agents in March 1985 that
"Ecstasy" was being shipped to the Dallas area in cases containing 100 tablet
bottles from California. It was at that time being marketed in the Dallas area

in a manner similar to that in which structured illicit drug trafficking

- 5-


===PAGE BREAK===

organizations operate. At that time it was not illegal to manufacture, sell or
possess MDMA under the Federal CSA. The record is unclear as to whether or not
these actions were illegal under Texas State law at that time.

77. Street prices for MDMA in 1984 were listed as $70 per gram in New
York and $20 per capsule in New Hampshire in an underground flier.

78. Students at the University of Texas in Austin indicate that MDMA
is easily available on campus at about $5 to $20 a tablet.

79. Dr. Richard P. Ingrasci has interviewed over 500 individuals who
have used MDMA over the past seven to eight years. A little more than half of
these individuals had used MDMA in a non-therapeutically motivated setting, out
of curiosity or for recreation.

80. Dr. Joseph J. Downing, a practicing psychiatrist in San
Francisco, CA, conducted a pilot study in 1984 into the effects in healthy
humans of a single exposure to MDMA. The 21 subjects in Dr. Downing's MDMA
study had all used MDMA previously. One had used MDMA 15 times, one 10 times,
and one only once. The mean frequency of use of the 21 subjects was once every
2.2 months.

81. Dr. Lester Grinspoon reports that MDMA is being taken by a growing
number of people, particularly students and young professionals. The text cited
by Government counsel does not indicate to what extent this use is in a thera-
peutic setting or is in a casual or recreational manner.

‘82. Dr. George Greer, a practicing psychiatrist in Santa Fe, New
Mexico, has used MDMA as an adjunct to psychotherapy in clinical work. He re-
ported that one of his subjects, after taking the unusually high dosage of

350mg. of MDMA, reported a brief hallucination, a brief visual illusion, a mild

-57-


===PAGE BREAK===

hearing impairment, a brief memory loss and a brief distortion in depth pre-
ception.

83. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) publishes annually a
compilation of drug abuse information collected through its Drug Abuse Warning
Network (DAWN). This data collection system collects reports from selected
(currently more than 700) hospital emergency rooms in the United States. The
reports collected record all visits to those emergency roams for medical
problems associated with drug abuse. According to NIDA, the major objectives of
the DAWN system include the following:

To monitor drug abuse patterns and trends
and to detect new abuse entities and new
combinations;

To assess health hazards associated with
drug abuse.

84. The record reflects that from 1972 through September 15, 1983,
there were only eight mentions of MDMA in the DAWN system. During the period
1972 through 1983, the DAWN system was reporting approximately 175,000 drug
mentions each year. Thus, the eight mentions of MDMA occurred during a period
during which DAWN reported roughly 2 million mentions of other drugs. The few
mentions here of MDMA are far less than those of such Schedule I drugs as
: heroin, marijuana, and LSD. During the time period that MDMA was mentioned 8
times, MDA, a Schedule I drug, was mentioned 344 times — more than 40 times as
frequently. MDMA does not compare with the frequency with which Schedule II
drugs appear in the DAWN reports, nor even with the mentions of Schedule III
drugs or Schedule IV drugs found there. The FDA of the Department of HHS called
the eight DAWN mentions of MDMA “not significant except to indicate the exis-
tence of human use of MDMA.”

85. MDMA is reported to have been associated with two overdose deaths.

One death occurred in Seattle, Washington in 1979. However, the evidence in the


===PAGE BREAK===

record does not permit a finding that MDMA was, in fact, involved in that death.
A careful reading of the toxicology report shows that the involvement of MDMA
there is questionable. The second reported association, in Santa Monica,
California, is even more questionable. There is no toxicology report at all in
this record with regard to it. The evidence does not permit a finding that MDMA
‘was, in fact, associated with that death, either.

86. The record of the FDA-HHS consideration of MDMA is as follows.

87. The relevant staff member at FDA, Dr. Edward Tocus, reviewed the
DEA Control Recommendation proposing that MDMA be placed in Schedule I (G B-2).
He subsequently prepared a one~and-one-half page document which included both a
summary and an evaluation of the Recommendation.

88. Dr. Greer, practicing psychiatrist in New Mexico, had previously
written to the Assistant Secretary for Health about Dr. Greer's therapeutic work
with MDMA. Dr. Greer had also written to an FDA staff member (Mr. Contrera), a
supervising pharmacologist who worked for Dr. Tocus, about Dr. Greer's work with
MDMA, enclosing a copy of his report of his work with MDMA (GG 14).

Dr. Tocus was not aware of these prior contacts between Dr. Greer and the FDA
when Dr. Tocus wrote his MDMA control evaluation and prepared related papers for
his superiors at HHS.

89, At the time Dr. Tocus reviewed the DEA recommendation and pre-
pared the HHS documents for his superiors, he believed that the statutory phrase
"accepted medical use in treatment in the United States" meant that a drug had
to have been approved by the FDA for interstate shipment and sale pursuant to
the FDCA. Further, Dr. Tocus believed that, based on his understanding of the
law, if HHS came to the conclusion that a drug should be scheduled but it had

not been approved for interstate shipment and sale,. pursuant to the FDCA, “that

- 59 -


===PAGE BREAK===

the only alternatives were Schedule I [if it had any abuse potential] or no
schedule at all." (Tr 9, at 67)
90. Before formulating its recommendations on MDMA, the FDA and HHS

did not consult any organization of medical professionals. Dr. Tocus testified
that he did not take any action to make inquiries about medical opinion on MDMA
even though he had been told on a hearsay basis that there was same therapeutic
interest in the drug. The Department of HHS did not refer the issue of the
appropriate scheduling of MDMA to the FDA's Drug Abuse Advisory Committee. This
Committee is made up of authorities knowledgeable in the medical, behavioral and
biological sciences as they apply to drug abuse. Its Charter, signed by the
Secretary of HHS, states:-

The Committee advises the Commissioner of

Food and Drugs regarding the scientific and

medical evaluation of all information gathered

by the Department of Health and Human Services

and the Department of Justice with regard to

safety, efficacy, and abuse potential of drugs

or other substances and recommends actions to
be taken by the Department of Health and Human

Services with regard to marketing, investiga~
tions, and control of guch drugs or other sub-

stances.

GG 62 (Emphasis added). No one at FDA had the benefit of any input from this
Committee with respect to MDMA.

91. Dr. Tocus made six typographical corrections to the original DEA
recommendation for Schedule I placement of MDMA. These corrections are set out
in GG 59. Dr. Tocus then prepared his one-and-one-half page summary and
analysis or evaluation of the DEA scheduling recommendation. (G B-4)

92. The recommendation Dr. Tocus prepared for his superiors does not
mention that Dr. Tocus had been informed orally that there was therapeutic

interest in MDMA, or that Dr. Greer had previously communicated his interest in

- 60 -


===PAGE BREAK===

MDMA, and actual use of it in therapy, to the Assistant Secretary for Health and
to the FDA.

93. The recommendation prepared by Dr. Tocus for his superiors never
discusses or comments on "accepted medical use in treatment" or “accepted safety
for use under medical supervision." It includes a single sentence asserting
that: “There is no known legitimate use of MDMA in humans." (G B-4 at 2) This
key statement was inaccurate.

94. Dr. Tocus testified that he forwarded his one-and~one-half page
evaluation (G B-4) and the DEA's evaluation (GG 56) to the Acting Commissioner
of FDA and thence to the Assistant Secretary for Health.

95. Before forwarding the papers Dr. Tocus requested camments on the
DEA proposal to schedule MDMA in Schedule I fram the National Institute on Drug
Abuse (NIDA) — as he was required to do by HHS departmental procedures. The
National Institute on Drug Abuse responded in memorandum form. GG 55. The NIDA
memorandum states that: "The direct evidence that MDMA has any abuse potential
in animals is not substantiated, based on the data DEA provided." That memoran-
dum, noting that there have been some reports of MDMA use outside the medical
context, concludes that "NIDA does not have any objection to placing MDMA under
Schedule I of the CSA." But NIDA reaches no conclusion that MDMA has a "high"
potential for abuse. The NIDA memorandum gives no indication of an opinion as
to any level of potential for abuse in MDMA. |

96. The NIDA memorandum was not forwarded to the Commissioner of
the FDA and was not forwarded to the Assistant Secretary for Health. Dr.

Tocus was aware of the views of NIDA prior to receiving the NIDA memorandum. He
shared the NIDA view that the evidence did not substantiate abuse potential in

animals. But those judgments were not reflected in the materials that Dr. Tocus

-6l1-


===PAGE BREAK===

forwarded to the Acting Commissioner of Food and Drugs or to the Assistant
Secretary for Health.

97. None of the underlying documents prepared at the Department of
HHS ever reached the conclusion that MDMA had a “high” potential for abuse. The
one-and-one-half page memorandum prepared by Dr. Tocus notes on page one that

DEA has concluded that MDMA has a high potential for abuse. But the HHS

evaluation itself never so concludes.

98. Based on this record, the Acting Commissioner of Food and Drugs
forwarded the package on to the Assistant Secretary of Health. The Acting
Camissioner stated his conclusion to be only that "MDMA has a significant
potential for abuse." (GG 54) He made no mention of “a high potential for
abuse," which is what the CSA requires for Schedule I or Schedule II placement.

99, The formal response to DEA from HHS, signed by the Assistant
Secretary for Health, does state that: "We believe MDMA has a high potential
for abuse" and recommends Schedule I placement. (G B-3) This dif-
ference as to degree of abuse potential between “significant” and "high" repre-
sents a quantum increase from the memorandum of the Acting Cammissioner to the
letter of the Assistant Secretary for which there is no basis in the record of
HHS' consideration.

100. DEA was unaware of the therapeutic use to which MDMA had been put
by Dr. Greer and other doctors when it prepared its initial recommendation for

placing MDMA in Schedule I (G B-2) amd sent it to HHS.

-62-


===PAGE BREAK===

Discussion

The Agency staff has the burden here of establishing that MDMA has a "high"
potential for abuse. It has not carried that burden. A "high" potential is
required by the CSA for placement in either Schedule I or Schedule II.

The evidence as to the meaning of similarity of chemical structure between
MDMA and other substances is inconclusive. There is similarity, for example,
between MDMA and MDA, which is a CSA Schedule I substance. But there is com-
parable similarity between these two drugs and two others which have not been
found to have any abuse potential and which are not scheduled at all. See
finding 12, page 42. MDMA is classified as a phenethylamine . Some
phenethylamines are scheduled under the CSA, but others are not. WHO has re-
viewed the abuse potential of 28 phenethylamines. It has recommended only same
of those 28 for scheduling. Of those 28, there are eight which have neither
been scheduled at all in the United States nor recommended for scheduling by
WHO. See finding 11, page 4l.

The great preponderance of the evidence in this record is to the effect
that MDMA is not properly classified as a hallucinogen. There is some expres
sion of opinion to the contrary. Even if it is classified as such, that fact
would not establish a "high" potential for abuse in humans. There are at least
two known hallucinogens which have not been scheduled at all in the United
States. See finding 25, pages 44 and 45.

Animal tests have shown MDMA to be a central nervous system stimulant. MDA,
a Schedule I substance, is a central nervous stimulant. But that fact does not

establish that MDMA should also be placed in Schedule I. Many other substances

- 63-


===PAGE BREAK===

also act as central nervous stimulants which are not scheduled at all. See
finding 22, page 44.

The other animal test results in the record are equally inconclusive as to
abuse potential. See findings 37, 40, and 47, above.

There are reports of non-medical use of MDMA by humans. These reports do
establish that MDMA has a potential for abuse. But before it can be said that,
in the context of § 312, MDMA has a "high" potential for abuse, the known facts
as to MDMA must be compared with the known facts as to human abuse of other
substances. When these comparisons are made, it cannot be concluded that the
facts show MDMA to have a "high" potential for abuse. See findings 59, 62, 72,
and 84, above.

Upon close examination the material received fram HHS is of little assis~
tance to us in this case. No independent tests, studies or scientific examina
tions were made there., Relevant and material facts and opinions, within the
knowledge of some at FDA, were not brought to the attention of higher’ officials,
including the Assistant Secretary who signed the formal communication to the
Administrator of DEA. |

The staff person at FDA responsible in this matter had a misunderstanding
of the law's requirements from the outset. He was of the misapprehension that a
substance with any degree of potential for abuse had to be placed in
Schedule I if it lacked an IND, Or NDA, granted by FDA.

FDA did not see fit to consult its panel of experts created for the
purpose, the Drug Abuse Advisory Committee. That group would undoubtedly have
had helpful input for our consideration of the “acceptable medical use” issue,

and the “degree of abuse potential” issue, among others.

- 64-


===PAGE BREAK===

There are no "binding" recommendations in the HHS letter of June 6, 1984
(G B-3) and its enclosure (G B-4) such as are contemplated by 21 U.S.C.
§ 81l(b). The only recommendation stated is as to the schedule into which MDMA
should be put. This is, of course, the ultimate question to be determined and
the Secretary's recommendation on it, though entitled to consideration, is not
made “binding” by the statute. For the rest, the response from HHS contains
same factual recitals, largely repeating or summarizing the data initially sent
to it by DEA, and some expressions of opinion - interesting in that they do not
give much support to the one recommendation made. For instance, FDA observes on
page 2 0f G B-4 that the rate of MDMA mentions in the DAWN reports "is not signifi-
cant except to indicate the existence of human use of MDMA.” It is also there
observed that the difference in numbers of DAWN mentions between MDMA and MDA
"is considered to be more an indication of availability rather than degree of
toxicity." The observation that "there is no known legitimate use of MDMA in
humans" is incorrect as 4 factual statement. If it is intended to reflect an .
interpretation of the statute, it is entitled to consideration, which it has
received, supra, but it is certainly not binding.

These critical observations are, regrettably, essential if we are to put
the formal recommendation of the Assistant Secretary into proper focus and

determine the weight of which it is deserving. In the circumstances, it appea

to be deserving of very little weight.

Conclusion

The evidence of record does not establish that, in the context of § 812,

MDMA has a “high potential for abuse.” Accordingly, it cannot be placed in

-65-


===PAGE BREAK===

Schedule II. (We have already seen that it cannot be placed in Schedule I,
because it does have "a currently accepted medical use in treatment” and it does
not “lack .« « + accepted safety for use » - - under medical supervision.")

No one has argued here that the evidence establishes that MDMA “may lead to
severe psychological or physical dependence,” another requirement for Schedule
II placement. The evidence does not so establish. For this reason, also, MDMA
cannot be placed in Schedule II.

. Ehrnstein argues that MDMA cannot be scheduled at all because HHS has
not performed such a scientific and medical evaluation as the CSA calls for. He
asserts that this failure deprives DEA of "jurisdiction" to schedule the drug.
The administrative law judge rejects this argument. The statute requires DEA to
"request” an evaluation from HHS. DEA did so. HHS did send a recommendation to
DEA. DEA is considering that recommendation. The minimum statutory require-
ments have been met in this case.

Mr. Ehrnstein also argues that the evidence establishes no abuse potential
sufficient to place MDMA in any of the five schedules. The administrative law
judge agrees, and accepts this argument, as to Schedule II. The judge dis-
agrees with, and rejects, the remainder of the argument. There is ample evi-
dence of same abuse potential in the record.

Drs. Grinspoon, et al., argue that sufficient evidence of abuse
potential has been shown to warrant placing of MDMA in Schedule III. The
administrative law judge agrees, concluding that the evidence does establish
MDMA to have “potential for abuse less than the drugs or other substances in
Schedules I and II," and to establish that abuse of MDMA "may lead to moderate
or low physical dependence or high psychological dependence.” 21 U.S.C.

§ 812(b)(3)-
The administrative law judge concludes that the evidence of record requires

MDMA to be placed in Schedule III.

-~ 66 -


===PAGE BREAK===

IX

Recommended Dec ision

Drs. Grinspoon, et al-, assert that there are two courses of action
open to the Administrator at this point: Either the Administrator can review
all the evidence of record and reach a decision, based thereon, on all the
issues, or the Administrator can send the record, together with the admin-
istrative law judge's findings and conclusions, to HHS for review and camment on
the scientific and medical issues.

The administrative law judge finds neither authority nor merit for the
second alternative.

The statute clearly provides that, in a situation such as ours, where DEA
initiates a scheduling, DEA shall, "before initiating proceedings" and after
gathering necessary data, request an evaluation and recommendations from HHS.

21 U.S.C. § 811(b). That was done. After HHS responded to the request, DEA
initiated this proceeding. The statutory scheme clearly contemplates that at
that point opportunity will be provided, in open hearings pursuant to the
Administrative Procedure Act, for the presentation of further “data” or evidence
on all issues. The Administrator is then to make the final Agency decision,
which must be based on that record. The statute contemplates that the record
may contain scientific and medical information not considered by HHS at the
outset.

Referral of the matter at this point to HHS for a second time may well
result in a record that could not pass muster under the Administrative Procedure

Act.

-67-


===PAGE BREAK===

The Administrator of DEA has no authority to direct the Secretary of HHS to
take any action. The Administrator provided the Secretary with the opportunity
the statute requires.

If the Administrator of DEA carefully considers the entire record now pro-
vided in this proceeding, there is no reason why he cannot come to the informed
decision the law requires of him as the Agency head.

Needless to say, nothing in this opinion is to be taken as being in any way
critical of the Agency’s emergency scheduling of MDMA which became effective on
July 1, 1985. That action was taken pursuant to certain statutory authority
with which this proceeding is not concerned. That action was wholly unilateral,

- yeflecting a view based on evidence then available to the Agency but without
opportunity for the presentation of countervailing evidence or argument. This
proceeding, a wholly separate process, has provided that opportunity. A com
plete record, with input from different perspectives, has now been assembled
for the benefit of the Administrator, the head of the Agency.

The record now assembled contains much more material about.MDMA than the
Agency was aware of when it initiated this proceeding by publishing a notice
almost two years ago. ;

Based upon this record it is the recommended decision of the administrative
law judge that the substance 3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, also known as
MDMA, should be placed in Schedule ITI.

Dated: MAY 22 1986 | Ko | , ;
. Francis L. / )
Administrative Judge /”
- 68 -


===PAGE BREAK===

Appendix
PUBLIC LAW 98-329 [H.R. 4201]; June 29, 1984
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT; RESCHEDULING OF

METHAQUALONE
For Legislative History of Act, see p. 540 ~

An Act te provide for the rescheduling of methaqual inte schedule | ef the Centrelled
Substances Act, and fer ether purpeses. :

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, t, notwithstand-
ing the schedule requirements of section 202(a) of the Controlled
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812(a)) and the requirements of section
901 of such Act (21 U.S.C. 811) respecting the scheduling of con-
trolled substances, the Attorney General shall, by order, transfer
methaqualone from schedule II of such Act to schedule I of such Act.
The transfer shall take effect not later than the expiration of ninety
days from the date of the enactment of this Act.

ec. 2. Effective thirty days after the date methaqualone is trans-
ferred to schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act, the Secretary
of Health and Human Services shall by order withdraw the approval
under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of the
new drug application for methaqualone.

Approved June 29, 1984.

- 69 -


===PAGE BREAK===

