National Institute on Drug Abuse 



MONOGRAPH SERIES 



Hallucinogens: 
An Update 




U.S. Department of Health and Human Services • Public Health Service • National Institutes of Health 





Hallucinogens: An Update 


Editors: 

Geraline C. Lin, Ph.D. 

National Institute on Drug Abuse 


Richard A. Glennon, Ph.D. 

Virginia Commonwealth University 


NIDA Research Monograph 146 
1994 


U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
Public Health Service 
National Institutes of Health 

National Institute on Drug Abuse 
5600 Fishers Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


This monograph is based on the papers from a technical review on 
“Hallucinogens: An Update” held on July 13-14, 1992. The review meeting 
was sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. 


COPYRIGHT STATUS 

The National Institute on Drug Abuse has obtained permission from the 
copyright holders to reproduce certain previously published material as 
noted in the text. Further reproduction of this copyrighted material is 
permitted only as part of a reprinting of the entire publication or chapter. 

For any other use, the copyright holder's permission is required. All other 
material in this volume except quoted passages from copyrighted sources is 
in the public domain and may be used or reproduced without permission 
from the Institute or the authors. Citation of the source is appreciated. 

Opinions expressed in this volume are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the opinions or official policy of the National Institute on 
Drug Abuse or any other part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

The U.S. Government does not endorse or favor any specific commercial 
product or company. Trade, proprietary, or company names appealing in 
this publication are used only because they are considered essential in the 
context of the studies reported herein. 


National Institute on Drug Abuse 
NIH Publication No. 94-3872 
Printed 1994 

NIDA Research Monographs are indexed in the Index Medicus. They are 
selectively included in the coverage of American Statistics Index, Biosciences 
information Service, Chemical Abstracts, Current Contents, Psychological 
Abstracts, and Psychopharmacology Abstracts. 


ii 



Contents 


Preface 

Geraline C. Lin . 1 

Classical Hallucinogens: An Introductory Overview 

Richard A. Glennon .4 

Are Hallucinogens Psychoheuristic? 

Stephen Szdra .33 

Lysergamides Revisited 

Robert C. Pfaff, Xuemei Huang, Danuta Marona-Lewicka, Robert 
Oberlender, and David E. Nichols .52 

Structure-Activity Relationships of Classic Hallucinogens and their 
Analogs 

Peyton Jacob III and Alexander T. Shulgin .74 

Human Hallucinogenic Drug Research: Regulatory, Clinical, and 
Scientific Issues 

Rick J. Strassman .92 

Serotonin Receptor Involvement in an Animal Model of the Acute 
Effects of Hallucinogens 

Mark A. Geyer and Kirsten M. Krebs . 124 

The Stimulus Effects of Serotonergic Hallucinogens in Animals 

Jerrolcl C. Winter . 157 

Electrophysiological Studies on the Actions of Hallucinogenic 
Drugs at 5-HT 2 Receptors in Rat Brain 

George K Aghajanian . 183 

Neurochemical Evidence That Hallucinogenic Drugs Are 5-HT lc 
Receptor Agonists: What Next? 

Elaine Sanders-Bush .203 

Autoradiographic Approaches to Studying Hallucinogens or 
Other Drugs 

Nathan M. Appel .214 

iii 














Hallucinogens Acting at 5-HT Receptors: Towards a Mechanistic 
Understanding at Atomic Resolution 

Harel Weinstein, Daqun Zhang, and Juan A. Ballesteros .241 

Molecular Modeling of the Interaction of LSD and Other 
Hallucinogens with 5-HT 2 Receptors 

Richard B. Westkaemper and Richard A. Glennon .263 

Structure and Function of Serotonin 5-HT 2 Receptors 

Jean C. Shih, Kevin Chen, and Timothy K. Gallaher .284 

Summary 

Richard A. Glennon .298 


IV 







Preface 


Geraline C. Lin 

Despite a general trend of declining substance abuse by high school 
seniors and college students in the United States from 1985 to 1991, the 
most recent (1992) National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) National 
High School Senior Survey (currently known as Monitoring the Future) 
has found that annual prevalence of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) use 
has risen for a third consecutive year from 1989 to 1992 among college 
students and young adults aged 19 to 28. Moreover, from 1991 to 1992, 
an increase in LSD use by high school seniors comparable to the increase 
by college students and a trend of increasing annual prevalence of LSD 
use by 10th and 8th graders (although at a lower rate for the latter) were 
also observed. 

Prompted by these observations and other independent sources indicating 
an increase in LSD use, the fact that the last comprehensive, indepth 
review of research in this area by NIDA was conducted well over 
10 years ago, and the impressive advances made in and the tremendous 
research opportunities afforded by molecular biology and other 
neuroscience disciplines during the past decade, NIDA undertook the 
present technical review to examine current knowledge on hallucinogen 
research and to identify research priorities in this area. 

The technical review meeting entitled “Hallucinogens: An Update” was 
held July 13 and 14, 1992, in Bethesda, MD. The objectives of the 
meeting were: (1) to update current knowledge on hallucinogen research; 
(2) to identify future preclinical and clinical research needs; (3) to discuss 
problems and possible solutions associated with hallucinogen research, 
especially relating to human studies; (4) to explore the potential 
therapeutic utility, if any, of classical hallucinogens; and (5) to address 
issues related to substance abuse such as how hallucinogen research can 
contribute, directly and indirectly, to drug abuse research and help 
prevent, ameliorate, and resolve problems associated with hallucinogen 
abuse. 

The meeting covered qualitative and quantitative studies in both animals 
and humans on a wide range of classical hallucinogens, including 
investigational new drug (IND) clinical studies on N,N-dimethyl- 
tryptamine (DMT). Presentations addressed behavioral, drug 
discrimination (DD), and operant conditioning experiments performed 


1 



with whole animals as well as electrophysiological and neurochemical 
studies' exploring receptors, second messenger systems, and structure- 
function relationships of the 5-hydroxytryptamine, (5-HT 2 ) receptor at the 
molecular level. It might be noted, as an aside, that progress in serotonin 
research has been moving at a rapid pace. Since this technical review 
was held, there have been some changes in serotonin receptor 
nomenclature. The originally defined 5-HT 2 receptors mentioned in this 
monograph are now referred to as 5-HT 2A receptors, whereas 5-HT lc 
receptors are now termed 5-HT 2C receptors. Both receptors, therefore, are 
considered as members of the same subfamily. 

Applications of autoradiography, position emission tomography (PET) 
scanning, and other imaging techniques for identifying anatomic loci of 
action also were presented at the review. Other topics addressed 
structure-activity relationships (SAR) of ergolines, use of molecular 
graphic models of 5-HT 2 receptors for elucidating the action of 
hallucinogens (i.e., whether it be agonist, partial agonist, or antagonist), 
and identifying amino acid residues important in ligand binding. A 
discussion of the potential psychoheuristic value of hallucinogens also 
took place. Human studies of hallucinogens have recently resumed. A 
description of the effects of DMT in humans is provided in this 
monograph, and a Hallucinogens Rating Scale (or, more accurately, a 
DMT-like rating scale) is described (Strassman, this volume). Finally, 
the meeting concluded with a summary highlighting challenges and 
opportunities and identifying future research needs. 

This monograph represents a state-of-the-art information resource 
concerning classical hallucinogens. It is hoped that this monograph will 
serve to stimulate further research in this area. Hallucinogen research, in 
addition to its relevance to hallucinogen abuse due to the unique actions 
of hallucinogens on human perception, cognition, and behavior, also 
affords an opportunity to unveil some fundamental brain processes 
through which these functions are organized and manifested. Therefore, 
an understanding of the mechanism of the action of hallucinogens not 
only would allow for opportunities to develop strategies and/or modalities 
for combating hallucinogen abuse but also would have profound 
consequences on individual and public health. 

The monograph should be valuable to members of the scientific 
community who are involved in drug abuse research and neuroscience 
research in general; to those interested in the field of classical 
hallucinogens, including professionals in mental health, psychiatry, 


2 



public health, and education; and to Government agencies with regulatory 
responsibility, drug enforcement responsibility, or both. 

AUTHOR 

Geraline C. Lin, Ph.D. 

Biomedical Branch 
Division of Basic Research 
National Institute on Drug Abuse 
National Institutes of Health 
Parklawn Building, Room 10A-19 
5600 Fishers Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857 


3 



Classical Hallucinogens: 
An Introductory Overview 

Richard A. Glennon 


INTRODUCTION 

Classical hallucinogens may be broadly divided into two categories: 
indolylalkylamines and phenylalkylamines. The indolylalkylamines may 
be further divided into: 

• simple tryptamines (e.g., N,N-dimethyltryptamine [DMT], 

5-methoxy DMT, psilocin); 

• cc -methyltryptamines (e.g., a-MeT, 5-methoxy a-MeT); 

• ergolines (e.g., (-i-)lysergic acid diethylamide [(+)LSD]); and 

• B-carbolines (e.g., harmala alkaloids). 

Phenylalkylamines may be subdivided into: 

• phenylethylamines (e.g., mescaline) and 

• 1 phenylisopropylamines (e.g., l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4X-phenyl)-2- 
aminopropanes where X = methyl, bromo, or iodo (i.e., DOM, DOB, 
and DOI, respectively). 

For general reviews, see Nichols and Glennon (1984). 

What constitutes a hallucinogenic agent? There have been various 
attempts to define the term “hallucinogenic,” but none of the definitions 
seems to adequately, accurately, and completely describe the actions of 
these agents. Perhaps one of the better definitions-actually, a set of 
criteria-is that provided by Hollister (1968): (1) in proportion to other 
effects, changes in thought, perception, and mood should predominate; 

(2) intellectual or memory impairment should be minimal; (3) stupor, 
narcosis, or excessive stimulation should not be an integral effect; 

(4) autonomic nervous system side effects should be minimal; and 

(5) addictive craving should be absent. 

It is recognized that not all classical hallucinogens necessarily produce 
identical effects. In fact, it has been said that a dose of a given agent may 
produce different effects in the same individual upon different occasions 


4 



of administration (Naranjo 1973), and that the human subject is as much a 
contributor to the final definition of a drug's action as is the drug itself 
(Shulgin and Shulgin 1991). Clearly, there exist some differences in 
effect. How can these differences be rationalized? There are several 
likely explanations: (1) effects may be dose-dependent (and additional 
examination of more doses of more agents in more subjects may reveal 
greater similarity than difference); (2) side effects may contribute 
substantially to the observed differences; (3) the agents may not 
constitute a mechanistically homogeneous group of compounds; and/or 
(4) the classical hallucinogens may act via similar - but nonidentical 
mechanisms that share a common mechanistic component. 

Because there is some evidence for similarity of effect, the last 
explanation (the common component hypothesis) provides a framework 
for mechanistic investigations. That is, the effects produced by 
hallucinogens may be likened to response patterns formed by certain 
neurohumoral “keys” played on a piano with the resulting chords being 
manifested as differently perceived behavioral effects (Glennon 1984). 
Identification of a common key may be important to further under¬ 
standing of these agents. Agents lacking a common component are likely 
acting via a different mechanism; such agents may need to be categorized 
separately, and such categorization may influence future treatment 
modalities. 


HALLUCINOGENIC AGENTS: METHODS OF INVESTIGATION 

Hallucinogenic agents have been investigated using both human and 
nonhuman subjects. Obviously, only human subjects possess the 
faculties required to accurately assess and describe the subjective effects 
of these agents. However, relatively few hallucinogens have been 
examined in humans (however, see Shulgin and Shulgin 1991), and legal 
constraints discourage new clinical studies. Investigations involving 
nonhuman subjects are much more common, allow the examination of 
greater numbers of agents in large numbers of subjects, and are certainly 
less restrictive in terms of governmental regulation. However, there are 
obvious limitations to this approach, the most prominent being that it is 
not known if animals experience subjective effects identical to those 
experienced by humans. On the other hand, lacking the sophisticated 
behavioral repertoire of humans, animals may (?) be better able to focus 
on the common effects produced by these agents. 


5 



Animal studies tend to fall into two categories: investigative 
(i.e., observational) and interpretive. The former simply categorizes the 
effects of known hallucinogens in animal subjects (e.g., effect on 
electroencephalographic patterns, social behavior, and sleep cycles) in an 
attempt to catalog their pharmacological effects without further 
interpretation. The latter addresses possible mechanisms involved in the 
production of these effects. Mechanistic interpretation must necessarily 
be conservative, and identified mechanisms may or may not be related to 
the hallucinogenic activity of the agents under investigation. 

Another type of investigation involving animals is the development of 
animal models to identify novel hallucinogens. Such studies begin with 
examination of known hallucinogens to determine what effects are 
common to a series of agents but absent upon administration of inactive 
agents. Once such an effect has been identified, the model ideally is 
challenged with other hallucinogens and nonhallucinogens and ultimately 
with novel agents. It never can be assured that novel agents identified in 
this manner will be hallucinogenic until they have been evaluated in 
human subjects. Nevertheless, robust and reliable animal models can be 
valuable for further mechanistic investigations by allowing experi¬ 
mentation not appropriate (or allowed) in humans. Here also, greater 
numbers and doses of agents can be evaluated in relatively large subject 
populations. 

Thus, studies involving human and nonhuman subjects have their own 
peculiar limitations, advantages, and disadvantages. The ideal situation 
likely would be investigations involving both types of subjects. 


MODELS OF HALLUCINOGENIC ACTIVITY 
Animal Models 

Over the years there have been numerous reports of animal models that 
might be useful for examining hallucinogenic agents (reviewed: Glennon 
1992). Animal models are of two types: behavioral and nonbehavioral. 
The behavioral models are further divided into analog models and assay 
models (Stoff et al. 1978); others have referred to these models as 
“isomorphic models” and “parallel models,” respectively (Jacobs and 
Trulson 1978). Analog models are correlational; that is, they rely on 
some drug-induced animal behavior for which there is an intrinsic 
similarity in human effect (e.g., exploratory behavior and stereotypy). 


6 



Assay models are inferential; that is, there need not be a relationship 
between the animal and human behavior so long as the test drugs produce 
a dose-related effect that parallels human hallucinogenic potency. It has 
been whimsically suggested that if hallucinogens elicited tail-biting 
behavior in rodents in a dose-dependent manner with a potency that 
parallels human hallucinogenic potency, then tail-biting could be a useful 
assay model of hallucinogenic activity (Stoff et al. 1978). 

Nonbehavioral animal models may be of an analog or assay nature but 
simply rely on effects that are not necessarily behavioral (e.g., contraction 
of isolated muscle tissue in a muscle bath). Some common explicit or 
implicit animal models include (1) the serotonin syndrome; 

(2) ear-scratch reflex or scratch reflex stereotypy; (3) head-twitch 
response; (4) rabbit hyperthermia; (5) limb-flick behavior in cats or 
limb-jerk in monkeys; (6) startle reflex; (7) investigatory behavior; 

(8) disruption of fixed-ratio responding, the so-called hallucinogenic 
pause; and (9) drug discrimination (DD) using animals trained to standard 
hallucinogens (reviewed: Glennon 1992). Combinations of these and 
other assays have been employed as test batteries (Otis et al. 1978; Stoff 
et al. 1978) with the hope that a combination of tests might prove more 
reliable. To date, however, there is no foolproof animal model that 
allows reliable predictions of hallucinogenic activity. That is not to say 
that the use of animal models is not worthwhile; indeed, they have 
enhanced the understanding of hallucinogenic agents significantly, 
Unfortunately, each model has resulted in some false positives (i.e., has 
identified an agent known to be inactive in humans as being potentially 
hallucinogenic) and/or false negatives (i.e., has identified a known 
hallucinogen as being potentially inactive). 

Nonanimal Models 

Nonanimal techniques have been employed to investigate hallucinogenic 
agents and, in particular, the structure-activity relationships (SAR) of 
such agents. These may be classified as stochastic interaction models, 
conservative molecule models, and mechanistic models (Kier and 
Glennon 1978). Stochastic interaction models are simulations of 
drug-receptor interactions in the absence of any understanding of the 
receptor involved (i.e., the model features interactions between an active 
drug molecule and some hypothetical receptor feature). The conservative 
molecule approach is an investigation of the structural influence 
(e.g., physicochemical or quantum chemical properties) of active agents 
on hallucinogenic activity. This approach is amechanistic and is simply 


7 



an attempt to correlate hallucinogenic activity/potency with chemical 
structure. The mechanistic model is similar - to the conservative molecule 
approach except that it allows development of quantitative relationships 
between properties of drugs and pharmacological activities with potential 
mechanistic relevance (e.g., the influence of lipophilicity on receptor 
affinity for a series of active agents). 

Although all three of these models may be of some predictive or 
mechanistic value, each requires animal or human data for initial input 
and, as such, cannot be considered a substitute for animal models. One of 
the more exciting techniques explored recently is the modeling of 
drug-receptor interactions using graphics models of neurotransmitter 
receptors. Because the precise three-dimensional structures of 
neurotransmitter receptors are unknown at this time, different models, 
and indeed different hypothetical modes of drug-receptor interaction, are 
possible (reviewed: Westkaemper and Glennon 1991). Thus, these 
models will require buttressing and validation by empirical methods such 
as site-directed mutagenesis, ligand binding utilizing chimeric receptors, 
or both. Nevertheless, such investigations have propelled the study of 
hallucinogens to the submolecular level. 


ENIGMATIC AGENTS 

Certain agents are continually identified by various animal models as 
being “active,” when in fact there are little or no supporting human data. 
These agents fall into three broad categories. First, there are agents 
known to lack hallucinogenic activity in humans when administered in a 
single dose. Amphetamine, an example of such an agent, is active in 
several animal models (e.g., rabbit hyperthermia). Second, there are 
agents that generally are regarded as lacking hallucinogenic properties 
and that may even be widely used therapeutically, but for which there are 
scattered accounts of hallucinogenic episodes in humans. Lisuride is 
typical of this type of enigmatic agent. Third, there are those agents for 
which human data are very limited. Quipazine, for example, is active in 
many, if not most, animal models. It is this last category of agents that is 
most troublesome. Until additional clinical studies are conducted, it can 
never be known with certainty if these types of agents truly are without 
hallucinogenic effects. Nevertheless, these agents should continue to be 
used in future studies with animals in order to challenge new models as 
well as to gain additional insight about the agents themselves. 



THE DRUG DISCRIMINATION PARADIGM 


The DD paradigm was listed above along with other animal models of 
hallucinogenic activity. In fact, it has never been claimed that the 
paradigm is a model of hallucinogenic activity; however, it has been quite 
successful in qualitatively and quantitatively identifying hallucinogenic 
agents. The author has used this method extensively. Because some of 
the results described below require an understanding of this method, a 
brief description will be provided here (see Glennon et al. 1991a for a 
review and additional detail). 

In the DD paradigm, animals are trained to elicit a particular - response 
when administered a specific dose of a hallucinogenic agent and to elicit 
a different response when administered vehicle. Thus, animals can be 
trained to discriminate a drug from nondrug condition by, for example, 
responding on one of two levers in a two-lever operant procedure. Once 
animals have been trained to discriminate a specific hallucinogen from 
saline, various pharmacological investigations can be conducted 
(e.g., determination of median effective dose [ED,] values, time of onset, 
and duration of action). 

Of particular interest are tests of stimulus generalization and tests of 
stimulus antagonism. In the former, also referred to as challenge tests or 
substitution tests, doses of different agents are administered to animals 
trained to discriminate a specific hallucinogen from saline. Such studies 
allow the identification of other agents that produce stimulus effects 
similar to those of a common training drug. That is, the animals are in 
effect identifying novel agents that presumably are perceived to possess 
similar properties. The results of these studies also allow for interagent 
potency comparisons for those agents identified as being active. 

Tests of stimulus antagonism are quite similar and are based on the 
presumption that administration of the appropriate neurotransmitter 
antagonist in combination with the training drug will result in nondrug 
(i.e., vehicle-appropriate) responding. Such studies are useful for the 
identification of potential antagonists or, given the appropriate 
neurotransmitter antagonist, may be useful in identifying mechanisms of 
action. The DD paradigm has proven to be quite effective for the 
investigation of hallucinogenic agents as well as other drugs of abuse, 
including amphetamine, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), opioids, 
barbiturates, and ethanol (Glennon et al. 1991a). 


9 



Examples of each major category of classical hallucinogens (with the 
exception of the 6-carbolines) have been used as a training drug in DD 
studies. Mescaline, (+)LSD, 5-methoxy-DMT (5-OMe-DMT), and 
DOM, representative of the four major subclasses of classical 
hallucinogens, have seen the most extensive application. Stimulus 
generalization occurs among all four of these agents regardless of which 
is used as the training drug. This is one reason why such agents have 
been classified under the common heading of classical hallucinogens and 
has some hearing on the above mentioned suggestion that classical 
hallucinogens (although perhaps capable of producing slightly different 
effects) seem able to produce a common effect. This hypothesis has been 
further tested using rats trained to discriminate DOM from vehicle. A 
large number of agents, including simple tryptamine hallucinogens (for 
example, see figure 1 for 5-OMe-DMT, 4-methoxy-DMT (4-OMe-DMT) 
and DMT), a-methyltryptamines (figure 2), ergolines (see figure 1 for 
(+)LSD), phenylethylamines, phenylisopropylamines (see figure 3 for 
some examples), and B-earbolines (see figure 4 for harmaline and 
6-methoxyharmalan) have now been examined. To date, there have been 
no reports of false negatives. Furthermore, structure-activity 
relationships (SAR) have been formulated, mechanistic studies have been 
conducted, and, for a series of agents for which human data are available, 
there is a significant correlation (r > 0.9) between discrimination-derived 
ED, values and human hallucinogenic potencies (reviewed: Glennon 
1991). 

MECHANISM OF ACTION OF CLASSICAL HALLUCINOGENS 
The 5-HT 2 Hypothesis 

Classical hallucinogens are structurally similar to several major 
neurotransmitter substances, including serotonin (5-HT), norepinephrine 
(NE), epinephrine, and dopamine (DA). Over the years, it has been 
variously proposed that each of these substances (and other neuro¬ 
transmitters or putative neurotransmitters such as histamine and 
tryptamine) may be involved in the mechanism of action of hallu¬ 
cinogenic agents. Indeed, there is some evidence that certain 
hallucinogens, most notably (+)LSD, interact at each of these types of 
receptors. Historically, however, there is little support for involvement of 
most of these neurotransmitters in the common actions of the classical 
hallucinogens. In contrast, 5-HT has been implicated consistently in the 
actions of hallucinogens ever since its discovery. 


10 




DOSE (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 1. DOM-stimulus generalization to examples of 
indolylalkylamines including (+)-LSD; 
N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT); 5-OMe-DMT; and 
4-OMe-DMT as well as lack of DOM- stimulus 
generalization to 6-OMe-DMT. The close-response 
curve for the training drug (i. e., DOM) is shown for 
the purpose of comparison. 


Controversy arose during the 1950s with the discovery of two distinct 
populations of peripheral 5-HT receptors (D receptors and M receptors). 
Do hallucinogens act at 5-HT receptors? If so, do they act as 5-HT 
agonists or antagonists? During the 1980s, identification of multiple 
populations of central 5-HT receptors (5-HT, A , 5-HT 1B , 5-HT lc , 5-HT 1D , 
5-HT 1E , 5-HT 2 , 5-HT 3 , and 5-HT 4 ) only served to complicate the issue 
further. Most of the 5-HT! (and probably 5-HT 4 ) receptors belong to a 
G-protein coupled superfamily of receptors involving an adenylate 
cyclase second messenger system; 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors (now 
referred to as 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C receptors, respectively) also belong to 
this family but are linked to a phosphoinositol (PI) second messenger 
system. 5-HT 3 receptors are distinct in being ligand-gated ion channel 
receptors. 




100 



DOSE (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 2. DOM-stimulus generalization to (+)5-methoxy- a- 
methyltryptamine (5-OMe-CC--MT; A), (±)5-OMe- 
a-MT(B), (-)5-OMe- a-MT (C), (+)a-MT (D), 

(±) a-MT (E), and racemic a-ethyltryptamine (F). 


The issue now becomes even more complicated: which population(s) of 
5-HT receptors are involved in the actions of classical hallucinogens? On 
the basis that the discriminative stimulus effects of DOM and 
DOM-stimulus generalization to (+)LSD, 5-methoxy DMT, and 
mescaline could be potently antagonized by 5-HT 2 antagonists, it was 
proposed that the classical hallucinogens act as agonists at 5-HT 2 
receptors (Glennon et al. 1983). To support this hypothesis, the binding 
of various hallucinogens at the different populations of 5-HT receptors 
was examined using radioligand binding techniques. Indolylakylamine 
hallucinogens are fairly nonselective and bind with high affinity at 
multiple populations of 5-HT receptors. In contrast, the phenyl- 
isopropylamine hallucinogens such as DOM, DOB, and DOI bind rather 
selectively at 5-HT 2 receptors. Furthermore, there is a significant 
correlation (r > 0.9) between 5-HT 2 receptor affinity and both 
discrimination-derived ED, values and human hallucinogenic potencies 
(Glennon 1990). For the first time, there was now evidence for the 5-HT 2 
hypothesis of hallucinogenic activity. 


12 





DOSE (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 3. DOM-stimulus generalization to R(-)DOM; (±)DOM; 
S(+)DOM; R(-)2,5-DMA; (±)2,5-DMA; and 

2.3.5- TMA; and lack of stimulus generalization to 

2.5- DMA 4-carboxylic acid (“4-COOH”), a metabolite 
of DOM 


DOB and its demethylated counterpart, a -desmethyl-DOB, produce 
similar yet distinguishable effects in humans. Consistent with the 
common component hypothesis, these agents produce similar stimulus 
effects in animals and bind with similar potencies at 5-HT 2 receptors; 
however, a--desmethyl-DOB binds in a less selective manner than DOB 
(Glennon et al. 1988). Thus, it could be the less selective nature of 
a-desmethyl-DOB that accounts for its distinguishability from DOB. 

5-HT 2 -Related Problems 

Several problems have arisen regarding the 5-HT 2 hypothesis: 

Do hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or antagonists? 

Are there subpopulations of 5-HT 2 receptors? 

May some other population of 5-HT receptors (instead of 5-HT 2 be 
involved in the actions of hallucinogens? 


13 




100 


Harmaline HCI 6-Methoxyharmalan 



5.0 8.0 9.0 4.0 5.0 6.5 7 


DOSE (mg/kg) n _ g.g ra ts/dose 

FIGURE 4. DOM-stimulus generalization to two hallucinogenic fi-carbolines, 
harmaline and 6-methoxyharmalan, in studies using rats trained to 
discriminate 1 mg/kg of DOM from saline. 






On the basis of previous DD studies, it was originally suggested that 
classical hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists. However, Pierce and 
Peroutka (1988) recently challenged this concept and have suggested that 
hallucinogens, particularly (+)LSD, act as 5-HT 2 antagonists. This 
agonist-versus-antagonist controversy was reexamined, and it was 
concluded that hallucinogens are not 5-HT 2 antagonists; classical 
hallucinogens are agonists, or at least partial agonists, at 5-HT 2 receptors 
(Glennon 1990). Certain hallucinogens, including LSD, may possess a 
low intrinsic activity; thus, given in combination with a full agonist, such 
agents might occasionally appear to behave as antagonists in some 
pharmacological assays. 

Lyon and colleagues (1987) have proposed that 5-HT 2 receptors exist in a 
low-affinity state and an agonist high-affinity state (i.e., the two-state 
hypothesis). [ HJKetanserin, a 5-HT 2 antagonist, labels both states of the 
receptors, whereas the agonist radioligands [ H]DOB and [ I]DOI 
apparently label the agonist high-affinity state. Pierce and Peroutka 
(1989) later conducted related investigations using [ BrJDOB and 
proposed an alternative explanation: there exist two different populations 
(i.e., subpopulations) of 5-HT 2 receptors (the two-site hypothesis). The 
results of recent cloning studies favor the two-state concept in that a 
single 5-HT 2 receptor is expressed that behaves in a manner reminiscent 
of a two-state receptor population (reviewed: Weinshank et al. 1992). It 
might be noted, however, that the possibility of two different 
(overlapping) binding domains has not yet been excluded; that is, 
agonists and antagonists may bind in a slightly different manner at the 
same population (or state) of 5-HT 2 receptors. 

Finally, there is the issue of involvement of other (or additional) 
populations of 5-HT receptors in the actions of hallucinogens. This is 
discussed below. 

Involvement of 5-HT 1c Receptors 

Shortly after the 5-HT 2 hypothesis was proposed (Glennon et al. 1983, 
1984), Pazos and coworkers (1984) described their discovery of 5-HT lc 
receptors. The binding of hallucinogens at these receptors was 
subsequently examined, and little difference between their 5-HT 2 and 
5-HT, c affinities was found (Titeler et al. 1988); indeed, later studies 
have shown less than a tenfold difference in receptor affinity for a large 
series of phenylalkylamine derivatives (Glennon et al. 1992). As with 
5-HT 2 receptor affinities, 5-HT lc affinities also are correlated both with 


15 



discrimination-derived ED, values and human hallucinogenic potencies. 
In addition, Burris and Sanders-Bush (1988) reported that DOM acts as a 
5-HT lc agonist. Furthermore the 5-HT 2 hypothesis was based, in part, 
on the finding that 5-HT 2 antagonists (such as ketanserin and 
pirenperone) antagonize the stimulus effects of hallucinogens. It is now 
recognized that these 5-HT 2 antagonists are described more accurately as 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc antagonists. Thus, the likelihood exists that 5-HT 2 
and/or 5-HT, c receptors are involved in the actions of hallucinogenic 
agents. It may be this interaction that constitutes the common “key” 
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, and it may be this common 
interaction that allows animals to reliably discriminate classical 
hallucinogens from the vehicle. 

It is quite difficult to ascribe a specific role for 5-HT lc versus 5-HT 2 
receptors in the mechanism of action of hallucinogens due to the lack of 
agents that display selectivity for one of these populations of receptors 
over the other. Nearly all agents that bind at 5-HT 2 receptors bind at 
5-HT, c receptors. However, there are a few agents that might offer some 
hope in resolving this problem. The DA 5-HT 1A antagonist spiperone 
binds with approximately 500-fold selectivity for 5-HT 2 versus 5-HT lc 
receptors. An attempt was made to antagonize the stimulus effects of 
DOM using various doses of spiperone with the intention that it might be 
more difficult to antagonize the DOM stimulus if the stimulus was 
5-HT, c mediated. Unfortunately, the results of these studies were 
inconclusive due to the severe disruptive effects of low doses of 
spiperone in combination with DOM (Glennon 1991). 

Another agent of interest is l-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine 
(TFMPP). Although TFMPP binds at multiple populations of 5-HT 
receptors, evidence suggests that TFMPP is a 5-HT lc agonist but a 5-HT 2 
antagonist (or, at best, a 5-HT 2 partial agonist). Administration of 
TFMPP to animals trained to discriminate DOM from saline failed to 
result in stimulus generalization. In a parallel study, administration of 
DOM (or DOI) to animals trained to discriminate TFMPP from vehicle 
resulted in only partial generalization followed at slightly higher DOM 
(or DOI) doses by disruption of behavior. Thus, the results were again 
inconclusive. In a third series of studies, rats trained to discriminate 
0.5 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) of TFMPP from the vehicle were 
administered doses of DOM in combination with 0.2 mg/kg of TFMPP 
(ED, dose = 0.17 mg/kg). The rationale for this investigation was that 
lower (i.e., nondisruptive) doses of DOM should potentiate the effect of 
the near-ED, dose of TFMPP if both agents act via a common 


16 



mechanism. The results (shown in figure 5) were somewhat surprising in 
that low doses of DOM, rather than potentiating the effect, actually 
antagonized the effect of TFMPP. For all practical purposes, the results 
of this study also were inconclusive; however, they suggest that DOM 
and TFMPP are likely producing their stimulus effects via different 
mechanisms. 

There is one additional piece of information that perhaps has some 
bearing on the 5-HT 2 versus 5-HT lc controversy. Several years ago, 
Glennon and Hauck (1985) reported that the DOM stimulus generalizes 
to lisuride. This was a rather unexpected finding. Subsequently, the 
author and coworkers reevaluated lisuride as a potential DOM antagonist 
and found that it attenuates the DOM stimulus by 50 percent at very low 
doses (i.e., at one-sixtieth of the dose that results in stimulus 
generalization). This led to speculation that lisuride may be acting as a 
partial agonist (Glennon 1991). Sanders-Bush has recently demonstrated 
(this volume) that, whereas lisuride is a pure 5-HT 1C antagonist, it 
behaves as a partial agonist at 5-HT 2 receptors. These results are 
consistent with the present DD studies. Thus, although hallucinogens 
unquestionably bind at both populations of receptors and whereas a 
mechanistic role for 5-HT lc receptors cannot yet be eliminated, it would 
appear on the basis of all the above mentioned studies that the DOM 
stimulus involves primarily a 5-HT 2 mechanism. 

Before leaving the topic of 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors, it might be 
mentioned that certain of the animal models described earlier appear to 
involve actions mediated by these receptors. For example, the 
head-twitch response has been proposed to involve such a mechanism 
(Glennon 1992). In retrospect, some of these models may be less 
farfetched and more mechanistically relevant than once suspected. 

Involvement of Other 5-HT Receptors 

It was recently reported that there may be functional interactions between 
different populations of 5-HT receptors such that action at one may 
modulate activation of another (reviewed: Glennon et al. 1991 b). Thus, 
interaction of an agonist at one population of 5-HT receptors may 
modulate the effect of the interaction of a second agonist at a different 
population of receptors. This could have far-reaching consequences. For 
example, what is the effect of a nonselective agonist that interacts at more 
than one population of receptors at the same time? What about a 
nonselective agent that is an agonist at one population and an antagonist 


17 



PERCENT TFMPP-APPR0PR1ATE RES! 



OOM DOSE (mg/kg) 
PSII «■ S + IS min 


FIGURE 5. The effect of DOM in 

combination with a near-ED 50 
dose of TFMPP in rats trained 
to discriminate TFMPP (0.5 
mgAg) from saline. TFMPP 
elicits > 90 percent TFMPP- 
appropriate responding (ED, 

= 0.17 mg/kg); 0.2 mg/kg of 
TFMPP [T(0.2)J elicits 57 
percent TFMPP-appropriate 
responding. Administration of 
various doses of DOM 5 min 
prior to administration of 0.2 
mgAg of TFMPP results in 
attenuation of TFMPP- 
appropriate responding. 
Administration of 0.25 and 0.5 
nig/kg of DOM in combination 
with 0.2 mg/kg of TFMPP 
resulted in disruption of 
behavior (i.e., no responding). 


18 





at another? Experiments necessary to sort out these types of interactions 
could be rather labor intensive and their interpretation quite complicated. 
Worse yet are cases where such types of interactions are possible but 
unrecognized. 

It was previously shown that the DOM stimulus does not generalize to 
the 5 -HT ia agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin 
(8-OH-DPAT), and that an 8-OH-DPAT stimulus does not generalize to 
DOM. Furthermore, DOM does not bind at 5-HT 1A receptors, nor does 
8-OH-DPAT bind with significant affinity at 5-HT 2 receptors. More 
recently, it was demonstrated that very low doses of 8-OH-DPAT amplify 
the stimulus effects of DOM in DOM-trained rats. For example, animals 
given 0.05 mg/kg of 8-OH-DPAT in combination with the ED, dose of 
DOM behave as if they have received the training dose of DOM 
(i.e., stimulus generalization occurs upon administration of the ED, dose 
of DOM) (see inset, figure 6). Furthermore, pretreatment of animals with 
0.05 mg/kg of 8-OH-DPAT results in a leftward shift of the DOM 
dose-response curve (figure 6). These results would seem to suggest that 
low doses of the 5-HT, A -selective agonist influence the stimulus effects 
of DOM. Additional studies are required to further understand the details 
of this interaction. 

Similar studies were conducted with 5-HT 3 agents. For example, very 
low doses of the 5-HT, antagonist zacopride attenuate the stimulus effects 
of DOM even though zacopride does not bind at 5-HT 2 receptors, and 
DOM does not bind at 5-HT 3 receptors. A dose of 0.001 mg/kg of 
zacopride in combination with the training dose of DOM results in about 
30 percent DOM-appropriate responding. Higher doses appeal - to have 
less of an attenuating effect (figure 7). The 5-HT 3 (partial) agonist 
meta-chlorophenylbiguanide (mCPBG) also has an unusual effect on the 
DOM stimulus (figure 8). A dose of 0.5 mg/kg of mCPBG seems to 
attenuate the stimulus effects of 1 mg/kg of DOM; higher doses have less 
of an effect. However, administered alone, mCPBG seems to result in 
partial generalization. Doses higher than those shown resulted in 
disruption of behavior. 

Parallel studies were conducted using rats trained to discriminate the 
structurally related agent N-methyl-l-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2- 
aminopropane (MDMA) from saline. Zacopride and FY 278584, at 
doses of between 0.0003 and 0.001 mg/kg, decrease MDMA-appropriate 
responding to about 20 percent (figure 9). The effect of mCPBG (figure 
10) is not unlike that seen with DOM. The results suggest a possible 


19 




DOSE DOM (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 6. Effect of the 5-HT IA agonist 8-OH-DPAT in 

combination with DOM in rats trained to discriminate 
DOM from saline. Dose-response curve for DOM 
(right) and for DOM in animals pretreated with 0.05 
mg/kg of 8-OH-DPAT (left). Inset shows effect of 
different doses of 8-OH-DPAT administered in 
combination with the ED, dose (0.45 mg/kg) of DOM. 
Data previously reported (Glennon 1991). 


modulatory effect by 5-HT 3 receptors on the DOM and MDMA stimulus. 
It might be noted, for puipose of comparison, that zacopride had 
essentially no effect on amphetamine-appropriate responding in rats 
trained to discriminate (-i-)amphetamine from vehicle. These types of 
unexpected interactions open up entirely new lines of investigation 
regarding classical hallucinogens and may (?) hint at a possible role for 
5-HT 3 antagonists in the treatment of drug abuse involving hallucinogens. 


SAR AND STRUCTURALLY RELATED AGENTS 

SAR have been formulated for hallucinogenic activity, DOM-stimulus 
generalization, and 5-HT 2 /5-HT, c binding. The best investigated agents 
are the phenylalkylamines and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the simple 
tryptamines. 6-Carbolines and ergolines have received much less 
attention. Abuse of 6-carbolines does not seem to be a significant 


20 





FIGURE 7. Effect of the 5-HT 3 antagonist zacopricle administered 
in combination with the training dose of DOM to rats 
trained to discriminate 1 mg/kg of DOM from saline. 


problem, and it is perhaps this reason that accounts for the lack of interest 
or urgency to study these agents. Ergolines, on the other hand, can offer, 
a significant synthetic challenge and relatively few agents are readily 
available. The SAR of classical hallucinogens has been reviewed 
(Nichols and Glennon 1984). 

Many investigations of classical hallucinogens are limited to a small 
handful of standard agents (e.g., LSD, mescaline, DOM). Far fewer 
studies have examined some of the more novel or structurally distinct 
agents, or have examined series of agents. It would seem prudent to 
examine additional agents and structurally related analogs in order to 
define exactly what structural features contribute to activity. A classic 
example is the phenylisopropylamine amphetamine. The amphetamine 
structural backbone is contained in, for example, the hallucinogen DOM 
and the designer drug MDMA; and yet each of these three agents 
produces effects in animals and humans that are clearly distinguishable 
from one another (Shulgin and Shulgin 1991). As the structure of one of 
these agents is gradually modified to one of the others, at what point does 


21 





FIGURE 8. Effect of the 5-HT 3 partial agonist meta-chloro- 

phenylbiguanide (mCPBG), administered either alone 
(broken line) or in combination with the training dose 
of DOM (solid line) in rats trained to discriminate 
DOM (1 mg/kg) from vehicle. 


an amphetamine-like agent become, for example, a hallucinogenic agent? 
Is there some structure that possesses both properties? 

This would seem to be the case. It has been demonstrated in tests of 
stimulus generalization that l-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2- 
aminopropane (MDA) produces both amphetamine-like and DOM-like 
effects as well as MDMA-like stimulus effects. The amphetamine-like 
effect rests primarily with the S(+)isomer, whereas the R(-)isomer is the 
more DOM-like. Furthermore, it was recently demonstrated that rats can 
be trained to discriminate 1.25 mg/kg of S(+)MDA from 1.25 mg/kg of 
R(-)MDA using a three-lever operant paradigm (Glennon and Young, 
unpublished findings). The stimulus effects of the isomers of MDA are 
thus clearly distinguishable from one another. 

Agents were also examined using rats trained to discriminate either 
DOM, (-i-)amphetamine, or MDA from vehicle. Some of these results are 
shown in figure 11. It can be seen that agents such as (+)LSD produce 
DOM-like effects, and cocaine produces (+)amphetamine-like effects, but 


22 






FIGURE 9. Effect of the 5-HT 3 antagonists zacopricle and LY 

278584 administered in combination with the training 
dose of MDMA in rats trained to discriminate MDMA 
(1.5 mg/kg) from saline. 


both agents result in stimulus generalization in rats trained to discriminate 
racemic MDA from vehicle. Furthermore, agents such as 
l-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane (3,4-DMA), which produces 
neither amphetamine-like nor DOM-like stimulus effects, produces 
MDA-like stimulus effects (figure 11). Clearly, minor structural changes 
have a profound influence on the stimulus effects of these agents. 

Agents such as a-ethyltryptamine (ET), which is currently popular on the 
clandestine market, produce DOM-like effects (figure 2) but also result at 
least in partial generalization in rats trained to discriminate either 
(-i-)amphetamine or MDMA from vehicle (figures 12 and 13). Perhaps 
certain tryptamine derivatives will eventually be discovered to bridge 
several pharmacological categories in a manner similar to that of MDA, 
and the results of studies with ET (figures 12 and 13) certainly suggest 
that its individual optical isomers be examined. 


23 





DOSE mCPBG (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 10. Effect of the 5-HT 3 partial agonist mCPBG 
administered either alone (broken line) or in 
combination with the training dose of MDMA (solid 
line) in rats trained to discriminate MDMA (1.5 mg/kg) 
from saline. 


Thus, there is a need to continue examination of new structural analogs 
not only with the intent of formulating and challenging SARs, but also 
for the puipose of elucidating mechanisms of action and classifying what 
agents produce what effects. 


FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

The present technical review focused entirely on classical hallucinogens. 
Figure 14 shows the extensive nature of the investigations addressed at 
this meeting. With the above discussion as background, there are several 
problems that need to be addressed: 

• An exacting definition is still required for the effects produced by 
hallucinogenic agents. Furthermore, addtional work needs to be done 
on what agents fall into this category on the basis of whether or not 
they produce a common effect. 


24 




AMPH 


MDA 


DOM 



llllilli 

!■« 









llililltlf! 








nnm 








WMWk 









3,4-DMA D0M 


FIGURE 11. Stimulus-generalization profiles of various agents 
in rats trained to discriminate either 
(+)amphetamine sulfate (AMPH), MDA HCl, or 
DOM HCl from saline. Once animals were 
trained to discriminate one of the training drugs 
(AMPH, MDA, or DOM), tests of stimulus 
generalization were conducted with the agents 
listed on the right. A darkened bar represents the 
group)s) of animals in which stimulus 
generalization (i.e., > 80 percent drug-appropriate 
responding) occurred. For example, both the 
AMPH stimulus and the MDA stimulus, but not the 
DOM stimulus, generalized to cocaine. 


• Additional clinical data are required to validate previously published 
animal data. Animal models are now realized to possess 
shortcomings, but there is a significant amount of animal data 
available that could assist the understanding of hallucinogens. 


25 




PERCENT AMPH-APPROPRIATE RESPONDING 



FIGURE 12. Stimulus-generalization studies with racemicd -ethyltryptamine 
acetate in male Sprague-Dawley rats (n =four to five animals per 
dose) trained to discriminate (+)amphetamine sulfate from saline. 
At doses 2 7.5 mg/kg, the animals' response rates were depressed 
by about 50 percent; disruption of behavior occurred at 16 mg/kg. 






PERCENT MDMA-APPROPRIATE RESPONDING 



FIGURE 13. Stimulus-generalization studies with racemic CC- -ethyltryptamine acetate 
in male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = three to four animals per dose) 
trained to discriminate MDMA hydrochloride from saline. At 13.5 
mg/kg, only two of four animals responded; response rates were 
comparable to control response rates except where disruption of 
behavior occurred (i.e., at 14 mg/kg; n = 1/3). 






CLASSICAL HALLUCINOGENS 



FIGURE 14. An outline of various studies conducted with classical 
hallucinogens (described at the NIDA Technical Review 
on Advances in Data Analysis for Prevention 
Intervention Research). 


• Some SARs have been formulated, but more work needs to be done. 
Minor structural variation has a profound and intriguing effect on 
pharmacological activity. Minimal data are available on quantitative 
structure-activity relationships (QSAR). 

• The mechanism of action of classical hallucinogens is not fully 
understood. Although 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors have been 
implicated as playing a major role and are currently the primary 
mechanistic focus of many investigations, the role of other 
neurotransmitters requires examination. 

• Functional interactions between receptor populations, with 
consequent modulation of agonist effects, may represent an entirely 
new method for treating drug abuse. Such functional interactions 
deserve further investigation. 

• The locus of hallucinogen action in brain requires additional study. 
New scanning and autoradiographic techniques may aid in this 
regard. Second messenger systems, as well as differential regulation 
of receptor number versus second messenger systems, should be 
pursued. 


28 








• Is there a prototypic classical hallucinogen? Many investigations 
with hallucinogens involve the same small number of agents, in 
particular LSD. Should LSD be considered a prototype agent? Or is 
it possible that investigation of one or two agents in great depth may 
lead researchers astray by providing information that is unique to a 
specific agent, rather than information that may be more germane to 
classical hallucinogens as a group? The same may be said for animal 
models. Perhaps future studies should not rely solely on 
investigating the same small number of standard agents nor rely only 
on a few pharmacological test procedures. 


NOTE 

Since the original submission of this manuscript, the terms “5-HT 2 and 
5-HT lc receptors” have been replaced by “5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C receptors,” 
respectively. 


REFERENCES 

Burris, K.D., and Sanders-Bush, E. Hallucinogens directly activate 
serotonin 5-HT 1C receptors in choroid plexus. Soc Neurosci Abstr 
14:553,1988. 

Glennon, R.A. Hallucinogenic phenylisopropylamines: Stereochemical 
aspects. In: Smith, D.F., ed. Handbook of Stereoisomers: Drugs in 
Psychopharmacology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1984. pp. 
327-368. 

Glennon, R.A. Do hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or antagonists? 

Neuropsychopharmacology 56:509-517, 1990. 

Glennon, R.A. Discriminative stimulus properties of hallucinogens and 
related designer drugs. In: Glennon, R.A.; Jar he, T.; and Frankenheim, 
J., eds. Drug Discrimination: Applications to Drug Abuse Research. 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 116. 
DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)92-1878. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., 
U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1991. pp. 25-44. 

Glennon, R.A. Animal models for assessing hallucinogenic agents. In: 
Boulton, A.A.; Baker, G.B.; and Wu, P., ed. Animal Models of Drug 
Addiction. Clifton, NJ: Humana Press, 1992. pp. 345-386. 

Glennon, R.A., and Hauck, A.E. Mechanistic studies on DOM as a 
discriminative stimulus. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 23:937-941, 

1985. 


29 



Glennon, R.A.; Young, R.; and Rosecrans, J.A. Antagonism of the 

stimulus effects of the hallucinogen DOM and the purported serotonin 
agonist quipazine by 5-HT 2 antagonists. Eur J Pharmacol 91: 

189-192, 1983. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; and Me Kenney, J.D. Evidence for the 
involvement of 5-HT 2 receptors in the mechanism of action of 
hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci 35:2505-2511, 1984. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; and Lyon, R.A. A preliminary investigation 
of the psychoactive agent 4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenylethylamine: 

A potential drug of abuse. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 30:597-601, 
1988. 

Glennon, R.A.; Jarbe, T.; and Frankenheim, J., eds. Drug Discrimination: 
Applications to Drug Abuse Research. National Institute on Drug 
Abuse Research Monograph No. 116. DHHS Pub. No. 

(ADM)92-1878. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. 
Off., 1991a. 

Glennon, R.A.; Darmani, N.A.; and Martin, B.R. Multiple populations of 
serotonin receptors may modulate the behavioral effects of 
serotonergic agents. Life Sci 48:2493-2498, 1991b. 

Glennon, R.A.; Raghupathi, R.; Bartyzel, P.; Teitler, M.; and Leonhardt, 
S. Binding of phenylalkylamine derivatives at 5-HT, c and 5-HT 2 
serotonin receptors: Evidence for a lack of selectivity. J Med Chem 
35:734-740, 1992. 

Hollister, L.E. Chemical Psychoses. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
1968. pp. 17-18. 

Jacobs, B.L., and Trulson, M.E. An animal behavioral model for studying 
the actions of LSD and related hallucinogens. In: Stillman, R.C., and 
Willette, R.E., eds. The Psychopharmacology of Hallucinogens. New 
York: Pergamon Press, 1978. pp. 301-314. 

Kier, L.B., and Glennon, R.A. Progress with several models for the study 
of SAR of hallucinogenic agents. In: Barnett, G.; Trsic, M.; and 
Willette, R.E., eds. QuaSAR: Quantitative Structure Activity 
Relationships of Analgesics, Narcotic Antagonists, and Hallucinogens. 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 22. 

DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)78-729. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., 

U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1978. pp 159-185^ 

Lyon, R.A.; Davis, K.H.; and Titeler, M. [3H]DOB 

(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenylisopropyl-amine) labels a guanyl 
nucleotide-sensitive state of cortical 5-HT 2 receptors. Mol Pharmacol 
31:194-199, 1987. 

Naranjo, C. The Healing Journey. New York: Pantheon Books, 1973. 


30 



Nichols, D.E., and Glennon, R.A. Medicinal chemistry and 

structure-activity relationships of hallucinogens. In: Jacobs, B.L., ed. 
Hallucinogens: Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical 
Perspectives. New York: Raven Press, 1984. pp. 95-142. 

Otis, L.S.; Pryor, G.T.; Marquis, W.J.; Jensen, R.; and Petersen, K. 
Preclinical identification of hallucinogenic compounds. In: Stillman, 
R.C., and Willette, R.E., eds. The Psychopharmacology of 
Hallucinogens. New York: Pergamon Press, 1978. pp. 126-149. 

Pazos, A.; Hoyer, D.; and Palacios, J.M. Binding of serotonergic ligands 
to the porcine choroid plexus. Characterization of a new type of 5-HT 
recognition site. Eur J Pharmacol 106:539-546, 1984. 

Pierce, P.A., and Peroutka, S.J. Antagonism of 5-hydroxytryptamine-2 
receptor-mediated phosphatidylinositol turnover by d-lysergic acid 
diethylamide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 247:918-925, 1988. 

Pierce, P.A., and Peroutka, S.J. Evidence for distinct 

5-hydroxytryptamine-2 receptor binding site subtypes in cortical 
membrane preparations. J Neurochem 52:656-658, 1989. 

Shulgin, A.T., and Shulgin, A. PIHKAL: A Chemical Love Story. 
Berkeley, CA: Transform Press, 1991. p. xxi. 

Stoff, D.M.; Gillin, J.C.; and Wyatt, RJ. Animal models of drug-induced 
hallucinations. In: Stillman, R.C., and Willette, R.E., eds. The 
Psychopharmacology of Hallucinogens. New York: Pergamon Press, 
1978. pp. 259-267. 

Titeler, M.; Lyon, R.A.; and Glennon, R.A. Radioligand binding 
evidence implicates the brain 5-HT 2 receptors as a site of action for 
LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens. Psychopharmacology 
94:213-216, 1988. 

Weinshank, R.L.; Adham, N.; Zgombick, J.; Bal'd, J.; Branchek, T., and 
Hai'tig, P.R. Molecular analysis of serotonin receptor subtypes. In: 
Langer, S.Z.; Brunello, N.; Racagni, G.; and Mendlewicz, J., eds. 
Serotonin Receptor Subtypes: Pharmacological Significance and 
Clinical Implications. Basel: Karger, 1992. pp. 1-12. 

Westkaemper, R.B., and Glennon, R.A. Approaches to molecular 
modeling studies and specific application to serotonin ligands and 
receptors. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 40:1019-1030, 1991. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The author’s laboratory work was supported in part by PHS grant 
DA 01642. The contribution of Rodney Higgs, responsible for some of 
the drug discrimination studies reported here, is gratefully acknowledged. 


31 



AUTHOR 


Richard A. Glennon, Ph.D. 

Professor of Medicinal Chemistry 
Department of Medicinal Chemistry 
School of Pharmacy, Box 980540 
Medical College of Virginia 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Richmond, VA 23298-0540 


32 



Are Hallucinogens 
Psychoheuristic? 

Stephen Szara 


“When I use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, “it 
means just what I chose it to mean—neither more nor less.” 

“The question is,” said Alice, “whether you can make words mean so 
many different things.” 

“The question is,” said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master—that’s 
all.” (Carroll 1946, p. 229) 


INTRODUCTION 

One of the hallmarks of hallucinogenic drugs such as lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD), N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT), and mescaline is 
the extreme variability of the effects produced in human subjects that are 
not only dose dependent but also heavily influenced by the mental set, or 
expectation, of subjects and the environmental setting that surrounds 
them (Faillace and Szara 1968; Freedman 1968; Osmond 1957). This 
variability is also reflected in the names that have been suggested for 
hallucinogens in the past, for example, psychotomimetic, psycholytic, 
psychedelic, mysticomimetic, cultogenic, and entheogenic (Freedman 
1968; Osmond 1957; Rucket al. 1979; Szara 1961). 

Is another name for hallucinogens really needed? This chapter argues 
that the names used in the past have largely lost their usefulness and may 
be even misleading, and that recent advances in the neurosciences and 
cognitive sciences have created opportunities for using hallucinogens as 
tools in attacking the supreme mystery: How does the brain work? In 
this quest, the author starts with a brief review of the past 35 to 40 years 
of use of these drugs in which several distinct trends, referred to as eras, 
can be distinguished. Although the eras are overlapping, some with clear 
beginnings and fading trails, others survive today to some extent in 
different contexts. 


33 



HALLUCINOGEN ERA 


The term “hallucinogen” is widely used and understood in both 
professional and lay circles, in spite of the fact that hallucinations in the 
strict psychiatric sense of the word are a relatively rare effect of these 
drugs (Hollister 1962). What is probably the first reference to 
hallucinations as produced by peyote appeal's in Louis Lewin’s book 
published in 1924 in German and later translated into English with the 
nearly identical title Phantastica (Lewin 1924, 1964). In this book by the 
noted German toxicologist, the term “hallucinatoria” appears as a 
synonym for phantastica to designate the class of drugs that can produce 
transitory visionary states “without any physical inconvenience for a 
certain time in persons of perfectly noimal mentality who are partly or 
fully conscious of the action of the drug” (Lewin 1964, p. 92). Lewin 
lists peyotl (also spelled “peyote”) (Anhalonium lewinii), Indian hemp 
(Cannabis indica), fly agaric (Agaricus muscarius), thomapple (Datura 
stramonium), and the South American yahe (also spelled “yage”) 
(Banisteria caapi) as representatives of this class. 

As Lewin explains: “Are not ‘internal visions,’ subjectively considered, 
real happenings which he who experiences such inward perceptions may 
regal'd as true? That is my own view.” (Lewin 1964, p. 89) Today’s 
psychiatry makes sharp distinction between illusions (internal visions) 
and hallucinations. Hallucination is defined as “sense perception to 
which there is no external stimulus” (Campbell 1989, p. 314). Illusion, 
on the other hand, is “erroneous perception, a false response, to a sense 
stimulation” (Campbell 1989, p. 354). The administration of a 
hallucinogenic drug can be regarded as an external stimulus to which a 
false response (geometric visual imagery) is made by the human 
organism. For this reason, “illusion” is a more appropriate term for this 
effect as long as the subject is aware of the reality of having taken a drug. 
“Hallucination” indicates a psychotic disturbance only when associated 
with impairment in reality testing (Kaplan and Sadock 1989). 

The term “hallucinogen” was first used by Hoffer and colleagues (1954) 
and has remained popular ever since, in spite of numerous well-controlled 
clinical studies with drugs such as LSD, mescaline, DMT, psilocybin, 
2,5-dimethyoxy-4-methylamphethmine, or methylenedioxy-amphetamine 
that found bona fide hallucinations, to which the subjects reacted as real, 
were a minor consequence of the drug (Cohen 1985; Fischman 1983; 
Freedman 1968; Hollister 1962). 


34 



The report by Hoffer and colleagues (1954) is considered by many as the 
start of a new era in psychiatric research, taking the suggestion seriously 
that these drugs reproduce, in normal subjects, some symptoms of 
schizophrenia or similar psychoses. The drugs, therefore, are 
psychotomimetic; the terms “psychosomimetic” and “psychotogenic” are 
also used in this sense. During the mid-1950s, chlorpromazine was made 
available to treat psychotic patients. Serotonin, norepinephrine (NE), and 
gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) were found in synapses in the brain. 
Reports started to appeal - implicating the action of these drugs on 
synapses as the most likely mechanism of psychoactivity (for a review, 
see Cooper et al. 1974). Psychopharmacology as a discipline was bom. 
There was much excitement, and expectations, among psychiatrists that 
their profession might finally become scientifically based, and that the 
knowledge gained would help to develop more effective treatment for 
their patients. 


PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC ERA 

The psychotomimetic era for hallucinogens gradually gave way to a 
seemingly perverse movement that claimed that hallucinogens could 
actually help certain psychiatric patients and advocated a 
psychotherapeutic use of these drugs. The justification was provided by 
some of the unique and peculiar effects seen and/or experienced in certain 
situations, such as the loss of ego boundaries and regression to a more 
primitive, childlike functioning of the ego that seems to facilitate the 
recall of early childhood memories that have been forgotten or repressed. 
These effects are utilized by the psycholytic approach to the treatment of 
chronic alcoholism. It was rationalized that abolishing the distinction 
between subject and object (ego boundary) and conscious and 
unconscious self (regression) would cause a lessening of alienation from 
the world, a rediscovery of the self, and a learning of a new set of values; 
thus a new beginning could be achieved (Savage et al. 1962). Combining 
this approach with hypnosis gave rise to the hypnodelic strategy for the 
same puipose. The therapeutic results, however, only lasted for a few 
months at best, and longterm followup indicated relapse of drinking 
behavior to essentially pretreatment levels (Faillace 1966; Faillace et al. 
1970; Fevine and Fudwig 1965). 


35 



PSYCHEDELIC ERA 


Another peculiar effect of these drugs is a dramatic change in perception: 
it appears to the person as if the eyes (the “doors of perception”) have 
been cleansed and the person could see the world as new in all respects— 
“as Adam may have seen it on the day of creation” as Aldous Huxley 
(1954, p. 17) pointed out in his popular and influential book. This new 
reality is perceived and interpreted by some individuals as manifestation 
of the true nature of their mind; hence, the term “psychedelic” was 
suggested by Osmond (1957). This interpretation has been embraced not 
only by professional therapists but also by some segments of the public, 
and gave rise to the “Summer of Love” in San Francisco in 1967 with 
free distribution of LSD. This perception resulted in the formation of 
numerous cults, communes, and drug-oriented religious groups 
(Freedman 1968), permeated the lyrics and style of popular music (acid 
rock), and was viewed by some as one of the contributing sources of the 
occasional resurgence of popularity of illegal drug use (Cohen 1966, 
Szara 1968). 


BEHAVIORISTIC ERA 

In a review of the clinical use of psychotomimetic drugs, Faillace referred 
to a group of investigators as “behaviorists...for lack of a better term” 
(1966, p. 15). This group, he said, “is not principally interested in 
treatment but is trying objectively to determine the actions of these drugs. 
A great many investigators from many divergent disciplines are included 
in this group” (Faillace 1966, p. 16). He then cited four groups as 
examples. 

1. Hoch and coworkers in New York explored the effects of LSD, 
mescaline, and other similar drugs on psychotic patients and 
concluded that these drugs aggravate schizophrenic symptoms. The 
group showed that the drugs brought forth the same type of 
psychodynamic material in their patients and there was nothing 
particularly specific for any of these drugs. 

2. Isbell and coworkers at the Addiction Research Center, then in 
Lexington, KY, conducted a series of investigations on former 
narcotic addicts. They observed rapid development of tolerance to 
the effects of LSD and also showed the development of cross¬ 
tolerance between LSD and psilocybin. This group demonstrated the 


36 



feasibility of obtaining good dose-response relationships utilizing an 
array of physiological tests (e.g., pupil size, blood pressure). The 
group developed a standardized questionnaire, the Addiction 
Research Center Inventory (ARCI), that became widely accepted and 
is used for assessing the subjective effects of psychoactive drugs in a 
quantitative fashion. 

3. Delay and coworkers in Paris carried out an intensive study of 
psilocybin and showed that the phosphoryl group does not contribute 
to its psychoactive effects because the dephosphorylated derivative, 
psilocin, has equal potency in humans. They observed an 
intensification of psychotic and psychoneurotic symptoms in 90 
mental patients and 47 so-called normals, and suggested that 
psilocybin may offer diagnostic possibilities in difficult clinical cases. 

4. Faillace referred to the work of the author and colleagues at Saint 
Elizabeth’s Hospital in Washington, DC, as the last example of 
nontherapeutically oriented clinical research with hallucinogenic 
drugs. This work focused primarily on tryptamine derivatives such 
as DMT. In the course of investigation of the metabolism of these 
compounds that included the N,N-diethyl- and N,N-dipropyl- 
derivatives of tryptamine (DET and DPT, respectively), the 
conclusion was reached that 6-hydroxylation of the indole ring might 
be an important biological mechanism for the psychoactivity of these 
compounds. To provide further evidence, the Saint Elizabeth's 
Hospital laboratories synthesized a number of derivatives of these 
compounds that were blocked by substitution at the 6-position so as 
to prevent hydroxylation at this position (Kalir and Szara 1963). One 
of these, the 6-fluoro derivative of DET, was shown in clinical tests 
to produce autonomic symptoms and mood changes without the 
characteristic perceptual and thinking disturbances usually observed 
with psychotomimetic agents. Although there are some doubts 
whether 6-hydroxylation is responsible for psychoactive metabolites 
(Rosenberg et al. 1963), this fluorinated derivative of DET might be 
useful as an active placebo in clinical studies with hallucinogens 
(Faillace 1966). 


ERA OF LEGAL LIMBO 

All these studies were done before 1966, the year that was a turning point 
in research with these drugs. In response to public anxiety about drug 


37 



abuse. Congress passed the Drug Abuse Control Amendment (Public 
Law 89-74) that went into effect in May 1966. This amended law banned 
public use and sale of peyote, mescaline, LSD, DMT, and several other 
similar drugs. Pharmaceutical companies were forced to stop 
manufacturing LSD and turn over their supplies of the drug to the 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 

That same month the author was invited to give a paper at the 122nd 
Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association held in Atlantic 
City. The original stated, in part: 

This publicity pressure threatens serious scientific research not only 
with LSD but with the entire class of hallucinogenic drugs. We 
cannot put blame on the drugs; we can only put blame on the manner 
and the ways they are being used. It is my belief that it would be 
most unfortunate if we were to permit undue hysteria to destroy a 
valuable tool of science and evaporate an eventual hope for the many 
hopeless (Szara 1967, p. 1517). 

Many other investigators voiced similar concerns (Cohen 1966; Dahlberg 
1966; Freedman 1966; Klee 1966) before congressional committees and 
other appropriate forums (Szara and Hollister 1973), but the situation 
remains the same today. Clinical research with these drugs essentially 
stopped, with the exception of Strassman's work on DMT (Strassman, 
this volume) and some treatment-oriented work with LSD such as that on 
dying cancer patients (Yensen 1985). Some figures on human studies 
with LSD during the period of 1953-73 are shown in table 1. 


THE PSYCHOHEURISTIC ERA 

After more than 20 years of deliberate legal neglect and constraints, it is 
time, especially in view of the current focus on the “Decade of the 
Brain,” 1 to recognize and emphasize the potentially immense heuristic 
value of these drugs in helping to explore the neurobiological bases of 
some fundamental dimensions of psychic functions. With this in mind, 
the author suggests changing the point of view or attitude of professionals 
and of the public by calling these drugs by a name other than 
hallucinogens, psychotomimetics, or psychedelics. These names all 
suggest that, when these drugs are consumed, they will do something: 
produce hallucinations (rarely), mimic psychoses (questionably), or 
“manifest the mind” (whatever that means). In other words, these names 


38 



TABLE 1 . Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 
(ADAMHA) studies of LSD in human subjects, 1953-73 


Type of Projects 

No. of 
projects 

Estimated no. 
of subjects 

Estimated funding 
(in millions) 

Intramural projects 




Clinical Center 

20 

150 

$0.5 

Addiction Research 




Center 

66 

300 

0.8 

Extramural projects 

30 

1,300 

2J_ 

Total ADAMHA 

116 

1,750 

$4.0 


NOTE: This table appeared in an internal ADAMHA document, 

“Report on ADAMHA Involvement in LSD Research,'’ 
prepared by the staff about 1975, based on records available 
in the agency and on telephone interviews with extramural 
investigators and former staff members. It contains this 
statement: “At the present time, ADAMHA does not fund 
any research involving administration of LSD to humans. 
This is not a policy, but rather the result of accumulated 
findings in the field.” 


suggest that the drugs are in control. In contrast, the psychotherapeutic 
labels have a different focus and connotation: The drugs are used as tools 
to achieve some medically desirable effect (either alone or in combination 
with analytic therapy or hypnosis), that is, the physician is in control in 
producing some beneficial effects for the patient. It is for this reason (i.e., 
implying that it is not that drugs are in control, as it is usually assumed in 
a drug abuse context, but that the physicians and researchers are using 
them as tools) that the use of the term “psychoheuristic” is proposed. 

“Heuristic” is derived from the Greek word “heuriskein,” to invent or 
disover, and is defined in Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary 
(McKechnie 1983) as follows: “helping to discover or learn; specifically, 
designating a method of education or of computer programming in which 


39 





the pupil or machine proceeds along empirical lines, using rules of 
thumb, to find solutions or answers.” 

The Random House College Dictionary (Stein 1980) gives the following 
definitions for heuristic: (1) “Serving to indicate or point out; stimulating 
interest as a means of furthering investigation; (2) (of a teaching method) 
encouraging the student to discover for himself.” 

It is in the first, general sense of the dictionaries’ definitions that the word 
psychoheuristic is meant to be used: “helping to discover” and 
“stimulating interest as a means of furthering investigation” into the 
mechanism(s) by which some of the unique psychological effects are 
produced by these drugs and, beyond that, to serve as keys to unlock the 
mysteries of the brain/mind relationship. 


UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF PSYCHOHEURISTIC 
AGENTS 

What are the unique characteristics of the effects of these drugs that point 
to their potential as psychoheuristic agents? The vivid, mostly geometric 
visual illusions are one of the hallmarks of LSD, DMT, and other major 
psychedelics. These illusions are sometimes so intense that they are seen 
as superimposed on any outside surface, be it a plain white wall or 
people’s faces. As pointed out earlier in this chapter, these visual patterns 
are seldom perceived as having real outside existence; so they are, strictly 
speaking, illusions rather than hallucinations. Nevertheless, they are 
sufficiently striking and sometimes spectacular, so that they have been of 
some interest to psychologists (Klirver 1967; Oster 1970; Siegel 1977), to 
physiologists (Evarts 1957; Purpura 1957), and even to mathematicians 
(Cowan 1988). Some other unique characteristics might be the alteration 
of time perception, synesthesia, dehabituation, the extreme individual 
variability of many of their actions, the religious or mysticomimetic 
properties, and the so-called cultogenic effects. The reader can probably 
name a number of others. 

However, most of these effects are interpretations and/or secondary 
consequences of the drugs’ disturbances of some fundamental 
physiological or psychological processes that underlie humans’ capacity 
to attend, to be aware of, and to regulate their relationships with the 
physical and social environment. Thus, the author’s recommendation is 
to use these drugs in a heuristic mode to explore the biological correlates 


40 



and perhaps the mechanism(s) of the fundamental process that is 
frequently referred to by the psychoanalytic term of disturbance of “ego 
boundaries” or “oceanic feeling.” This aspect has been emphasized 
especially by psychiatrists, among others (Fischman 1983). Freedman, in 
his much-quoted landmark paper On the Use and Abuse of LSD, puts it 
this way: 

It is my impression that one basic dimension of behavior latently 
operative at any level of function and compellingly revealed in 
LSD states is “portentousness”—the capacity of the mind to see 
more than it can tell, to experience more than it can explicate, to 
believe in and be impressed with more than it can rationally 
justify, to experience boundlessness and “boundaryless” events, 
from the banal to the profound. (Freedman 1968, p. 331) 

Grof, who has perhaps more clinical research experience than anyone else 
in the world with LSD and other hallucinogens such as DPT, has 
concluded that the major psychedelics do not produce specific 
pharmacologic states (i.e., toxic psychosis) but are unspecific amplifiers 
of mental processes (Grof 1980). In other words, rather than producing 
effects that are specific for the drug, they activate mostly unconscious 
mental processes from various deep levels. These mental processes are 
specific for the personality of the individual. The major focus of Grof s 
therapeutically oriented work was to interpret unconscious memories for 
the perinatal experience of pain and trauma as an example of what he 
called “temporal expansion of consciousness,” and to deal with the 
so-called transpersonal experiences as a result of spatial expansion of 
consciousness. The common denominator, he said, “in this rich and 
ramified group of phenomena is the feeling of the individual that his 
consciousness expanded beyond the usual ego boundaries and limitations 
of time and space” (Grof 1980, p. 94). 


BOUNDARIES IN THE MIND AND THE BRAIN 

The subjective phenomenon of loss of ego boundaries is not restricted to 
psychedelic experiences. In the twilight states of falling asleep and 
waking, people go through such experiences every day, although not 
everyone is fully aware of them. LSD and similar drugs have the unique 
property of producing similar twilight states while a person is fully awake 
and aware of them. This characteristic makes these drugs specially suited 


41 



to exploring the full extent of these general phenomena, including their 
postulated biological bases. 

The generality of these phenomena is underscored by a broad 
psychological theory of boundaries proposed recently by Hartmann, a 
well-known sleep researcher. He put forward this suggestion in his book 
Boundaries in the Mind and claims that these boundaries represent a 
major dimension of personality that had largely been neglected 
(Hartmann 1991). In the course of studies on people with nightmares, 
Hartmann was struck by the observation that such people have a group of 
common characteristics that could be described as open, unguarded, 
sensitive, fluid, artistic, and vulnerable. The description that seemed best 
to encompass all these people was that they had “thin boundaries” in 
many different senses. In contrast, among the control subjects, Hartmann 
found a significant group of people who could be characterized as having 
“thick boundaries” in the sense that they have a very solid, separate sense 
of self; they keep emotionally distant from most others; and they do not 
become overinvolved, sometimes appearing inflexible, even rigid. This 
distinction seems to hold in many areas of interpersonal relations in these 
extreme groups, but there were people who were in between. 

The initial evaluation was based on Rorschach tests (popularly known as 
inkblot tests) of individuals participating in Hartmann’s sleep electro¬ 
encephalogram (EEG) studies. Watson (1985) has found EEG correlates 
of this dimension: thin boundary individuals producing significantly 
larger numbers of phasic integrated potentials (PIP), also known as 
ponto-geniculo-occipital (PGO) spikes, on the boundaries of rapid eye 
movement (REM) and non-REM sleep stages. 

Hartmann (1991) also has developed a 145-item questionnaire that could 
be used to quantify the thick and thin dimensions. The questionnaire 
covers 12 categories of psychological phenomena such as childhood 
experiences, interpersonal relations, habits, opinions, and sleep-wake and 
dream-recall patterns. Most people do not score in the extreme in each 
category but thick in some areas and thin in others. Among 300 subjects, 
there was some statistically significant correlation of this dimension to 
some of the scales of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI), but a closer analysis indicated that the boundary scale is 
definitely not measuring sickness or psychopathology. 

The concept of boundaries, Hartmann (1991) claims, should be helpful in 
understanding and preventing the potential consequences of some 


42 



psychologically crippling problems and could be useful in counseling for 
marital problems and career choices. Hartmann did not point it out 
explicitly, but this concept may also be useful in rehabilitation of addicts, 
because thin-type personalities may be more vulnerable to peer pressure. 
Hartmann does mention that among the various psychoactive drugs, the 
psychedelic types are the only ones that produce a temporary thinning of 
inner boundaries. None of Hartmann's thick boundaiy subjects has 
reported ever taking LSD; only some of the mixed types did. However, 
one of his thin boundaiy subject said: "I can see why some people might 
like this sort of loosening or merging and the vivid images, but it’s not 
for me. I'm too much like that anyway, without drugs.” (Hartmann 1991, 
p. 239). One wonders whether this questionnaire would be useful in drug 
abuse prevention and counseling, but it would definitely be a good 
research tool in quantifying the boundaiy dimension in any clinical 
experimental study of this trait. 


EXPLORING INNER BOUNDARIES 

So much for the potential significance of the boundaiy concept. The 
question arises: How should one go about exploring the biology of this 
dimension of personality with the help of psychoheuristic drugs as tools? 

Besides the tools that can be considered to be heuristic in the general 
sense, investigators need new concepts, new guidelines, and new models 
to serve as positive heuristics in the sense used by Lakatos, the noted 
philosopher of science, who focused on conceptual and strategic 
problems in the 1960s and 1970s in defining new research programs 
(Lakatos and Musgrave 1970). Lakatos’ use of heuristics is in the 
second, specific dictionary sense: Defining some concrete rules that 
should guide the research. His striking example was from the historical 
development of quantum mechanics based on the positive heuristic model 
of the atom by Bohr. Bohr's model is now known to be only 
approximately true; nevertheless, it resulted in spectacular progress in 
research that resolved the structure of the atom. In the same spirit, one 
might use a version of the hierarchic models for the brain that may not be 
perfect but that might provide better conceptual guidance than the 
currently used information-processing paradigm. 

The source for such a paradigm might be found in hierarchy theory as it 
is being developed primarily by evolutionary biologists and ecologists 
(Allen and Starr 1988; O'Neill et al. 1986; Salthe 1985) to come to grips 


43 



with the complexities of the thoroughly interconnected ecosystem. These 
researchers do not look at hierarchy in the sense of rigid organization or 
classification but as a dynamic control system that can be comprehended 
only as functioning on three levels simultaneously as a whole (also called 
a holon): the focal level that is the immediate object of scrutiny, the level 
above that serves as a boundary of constraints, and the level below that 
consists of the processes and semiautonomous entities under direct 
control of the focal level (figure 1) (Grene 1987; Salthe 1985). These 
scientists prefer to call these models holarchies rather than hierarchies, 
following Koestler (Koestler and Smythies 1969). 

It is generally accepted that the brain is largely hierarchically organized. 

In the visual sensory system, for example, among the 305 pathways 
interconnecting 32 cortical visual areas, it is possible to identify 10 
hierarchic levels of cortical processing of visual information (Van Essen 
et al. 1992). However, the application of information-processing 
concepts is limited to two levels at a time in identifying the anatomical 
areas where the pathways originate and terminate. The three-level control 
hierarchy concepts in Salthe’s sense have not been applied to central 
control processes of the brain such as attention and memory or to 
sensations such as pleasure and pain. 

Another discipline that could be tapped for conceptual guidance and for 
mathematical bookkeeping tools is Game Theory (Dyke 1988; Von 
Neumann and Morgenstein 1944). Concepts such as competition and 
cooperation have been widely used in enzymology, in receptor studies, 
and in neural network models, but Game Theory offers much more than 
these everyday concepts: mathematical rigor and heuristic techniques 
that could be applied to behavioral and brain processes for better payoffs 
(Maynard Smith 1984). Time and space do not allow for an elaboration 
on these suggestions at this time, but it may be important to stress a few 
points. 

In terms of practical approaches to this level of complexity, researchers 
should take advantage of the availability of increasingly powerful (and 
relatively inexpensive) computers and test the concepts and hypotheses 
first in so-called neural network models. Such models could sharpen the 
conceptual frameworks and generate hypotheses that, in turn, could be 
tested on real brains and, to some extent, on real people (figure 2). 

Among the other tools that have been refined to high sophistication in 
recent years is positron emission tomography (PET) scanning, which can 


44 




relationships among the components of the 
proposed game-holarchy paradigm for guiding 
research into subjective psychobiological 
phenomena such as boundaries. 

NOTE: In the center of figure 1, L+l, L, and L-l designate 

three levels of a holon and refer to both the left and the 
right side of the diagram. On the left side, in line with L 
is the focal level of a currently active holon, above 
which and in line with L+l are the boundary conditions 
(rules and regulations) for awareness and action. L-l 
represents a pattern of components that is perceived as 
being under the control (ownership) of the focal level L. 
When a holon is engaged in a game with other holons, 
its choice of action is always constrained (regulated) by 
the rules of the boundary conditions (L+l). 

Cooperation and competition involve lower level 
components (residing in L-l) that can be lost or new 
components gained as payoffs. When the focal level 
shifts, say to level L-l, then the previous level L 
becomes the boundary condition that regulates the 
action of the new holon. Similarly, when the focus 
shifts to level L+l, the boundary conditions shift one 
level above, as suggested by the top arrows, and the 
previous level L becomes a pattern of components that 
is owned by the new focal level. The right side of the 
diagram symbolically represents the relative temporal 
dynamic relationships among the variables in the three 
levels of a holon. 


45 









TIME (log seconds) 


FIGURE 2. Schematic illustration of the ranges of spatial and temporal 
resolution of various experimental techniques for studying 
the functions of the brain. 


KEY: MEG = magnetoencephalography, ERP = evoked response 
potentials, PET = positron emission tomography, 

MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. 

SOURCE: Churchland, P.S., and Sejnowski, T.J. Perspectives on 
cognitive neuroscience. Science 242:741-745, 1988. 
Copyright ©1988 by the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, Washington, DC. 


be used for exploring spatial dimensions and localization of some 
biochemical (enzymes, receptors) or physiological (blood flow) processes 
relevant to hierarchic boundaries. Recently, a modification of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), the so-called fast MRI, was shown to be 
capable of following regional blood flow in the brain that occurs within 
seconds after perceptual or cognitive stimulation, in contrast to the 
several minutes time scale needed for PET scan. A further advantage of 
MRI is its noninvasive nature; this technology uses intrinsic signals of 
venous blood oxygenation for imaging (Ogawa et al. 1992). Another 
technique, evoked response potentials (ERP), might also be useful to 
resolve temporal dimensions of the same boundaries. These are just a 


46 





few examples; many other methods could be profitably employed as 
required by the questions at hand (Churchland and Sejnowski 1988). 

Last, but not least, there are some useful placebos that should sharpen any 
research design. Bromo-LSD could serve as a nonpsychoactive analog 
for LSD in a certain dosage range, and 6-fluoro DET can be used as an 
active placebo for the shorter acting psychoheuristic drug DET as 
demonstrated more than 25 years ago by Faillace and colleagues (1967). 


SUMMARY 

The author argues in this chapter for a reconsideration of the perception 
of hallucinogens as being only toxic, damaging, and therefore strictly 
condemnable for being abused. The author advocates that hallucinogens 
be viewed as powerful psychoheuristic tools that, in combination with 
other necessary conceptual (such as holarchic theory) and laboratory tools 
(such as PET scan or MRI), may help solve a major mystery of nature: 
the workings of human brains and minds. 


NOTE 

The National Institute on Drug Abuse is among the many Federal 
departments and agencies participating in programs and activities to 
observe the “Decade of the Brain” beginning January 1, 1990. 
Additional information about this effort can be found in the bill (H.J. 
Res. 174, March 8, 1989), which became Public Law 101-58 on 
July 25, 1989. 


REFERENCES 

Allen, T.F.H., and Starr, T.B. Hierarchy: Perspectives for Ecological 
Complexity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988. 
Campbell, R.J. Psychiatric Dictionary. 6th ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1989. 

Carroll, L. Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass. 

Kingsport, TN: Grosset & Dunlap, 1946. 

Churchland, P.S., and Sejnowski, T.J. Perspectives on cognitive 
neuroscience. Science 242:741-745, 1988. 


47 



Cohen, S. Statement to the Senate Subcommittee on Executive 

Reorganization Healing on Organization of Government Programs 
Relating to LSD. Washington, DC, May 24-26, 1966. 

Cohen, S. The varieties of psychotic experience. J Psychoactive Drugs 
17(4):291-296, 1985. 

Cooper, J.R.; Bloom, F.E.; and Roth, R.H. The Biochemical Basis of 
Neuropharmacalogy. 2d ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1974. 

Cowan, J.D. Brain mechanisms underlying visual hallucinations. In: 

Pines, D., ed. Emerging Syntheses in Science. Redwood City, CA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1988. pp. 123-131. 

Dahlberg, C.C. Statement to the Senate Subcommittee on Executive 
Reorganization Hearing on Organization of Government Programs 
Relating to LSD, Washington, DC, May 24-26, 1966. 

Dyke, C. The Evolutionary Dynamics of Complex Systems: A Study in 
Biosocial Complexity. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1988. 

Evarts, A.V. A review of the neurophysiological effects of lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD) and other psychotomimetic agents. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 66(3):479-495, 1957. 

Faillace, L. Clinical use of psychotomimetic drugs. Compr Psychiatry 
7(1): 13-20, 1966. 

Faillace, L.A., and Szara, S. Hallucinogenic drugs: Influence of mental 
set and setting. Dis Nerv System 29:124-126, 1968. 

Faillace, L.A.; Vourlekis, A.; and Szara, S. Clinical evaluation of some 
hallucinogenic tryptamine derivatives. J Nerv Merit Dis 145(4):306- 
313,1967. 

Faillace, L.A.; Vourlekis, A.; and Szara, S. Hallucinogenic drugs in the 
treatment of alcoholism: A two-year follow-up. Compr Psychiatry 
11(1):51-56, 1970. 

Fischman, L.G. Dreams, hallucinogenic drug states, and schizophrenia: A 
psychological and biological comparison. Scliizophr Bull 9(l):73-94, 
1983. 

Freedman, D.X. Statement to the Senate Subcommittee on Executive 
Reorganization Healing on Organization of Government Programs 
Relating to LSD. Washington, DC, May 24-26, 1966. 

Freedman, D.X. On the use and abuse of LSD. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
18:330-347, 1968. 

Grene, M. Hierarchies in biology. Am Sci 75:504-510, 1987. 

Grof, S. Realms of the human unconscious: Observations from LSD 
research. In: Walsh, R.N., and Vaughan, F., eds. Beyond Ego: 
Transpersonal Dimensions in Psychology. Los Angeles: Jeremy P. 
Tardier, Inc., 1980. pp. 87-99. 


48 



Hartmann, E. Boundaries in the Mind: A New Psychology of Personality. 
New York: Basic Books, 1991. 

Hoffer, A.; Osmond, H.; and Smythies, J. Schizophrenia: A new 

approach. II. Results of a year’s research. JMent Sci 100:29-45, 1954. 

Hollister, L.E. Drug-induced psychoses and schizophrenic reactions, a 
critical comparison. Ann N Y Acad Sci 96:80-88, 1962. 

Huxley, A. The Doors of Perception. New York: Harper & Row, 1954. 

Kalir, A., and Szara, S. Synthesis and pharmacological activity of 
fluorinated tryptamine derivatives. J Med Chew 6:716-719, 1963. 

Kaplan, H.I., and Sadock, B .J. Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry/V. 
5th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1989. 

Klee, G.D. Statement to the Senate Subcommittee on Executive 
Reorganization Hearing on Organization of Government Programs 
Relating to LSD. Washington, DC, May 24-26, 1966. 

Kliiver, H. Mescal and Mechanisms of Hallucination. Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press, 1967. 

Koestler, A., and Smythies, J.R. Beyond Reductionism: New Perspective 
in the Life Sciences. Boston: Beacon Press, 1969. 

Lakatos, I., and Musgrave, A., eds. Criticism and the Growth of 
Knowledge. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1970. 

Levine, J., and Ludwig, A.M. Alterations in consciousness produced by 
combinations of LSD, hypnosis, and psychotherapy, 
Psychopharmacologia (Berlin) 7:123-137, 1965. 

Lewin, L. Phantastika: Die Beteubenclen und Erregenclen Genussmittel 
(Narcotic and Stimulating Substances). Berlin: Verlag G. Stilke, 1924. 

Lewin, L. Phantastica: Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs, Their Use and 
Abuse. Wirth, P.H.A., trans. New York: E.P. Dutton & Co., 1964. 

Maynard Smith, J. Game theory and the evolution of behaviour. Behav 
Brain Sci 7:95-125, 1984. 

McKechnie, J.L., ed. New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English 
Language. Unabridged. 2d ed. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983. 

Ogawa, S.; Tank, D.W.; Menon, R.; Ellerman, J.M.; Kim, S.-G.; Merkle, 
H.; and Ugubril, K. Intrinsic signal changes accompanying sensory 
stimulation: Lunctional brain mapping with magnetic resonance 
imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:5951-5992, 1992. 

O'Neill, R.V.; DeAngelis, D.L.; Waide, J.B.; and Allen, T.L.H. A 
Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1986. 

Osmond, H. A review of the clinical effects of psychotomimetic agents. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 66(3):418-434, 1957. 

Oster, G. Phosphenes. Sci Am 222(2):83-87, 1970. 


49 



Purpura, D.P. Experimental analysis of the inhibitory action of lysergic 
acid diethylamide on cortical dendritic activity. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
66(3):515-536, 1957. 

Rosenberg, D.E.; Isbell, H.; and Miner, E.J. Comparison of a placebo, 
N-dimethyltryptamine and 6-hydroxy-N-dimethyltryptamine in man. 
Psychopharmacologia (Berlin) 4:39-42, 1963. 

Ruck, C.A.P.; Bigwood, J.; Staples, D.; Ott, J.; and Wasson, G. 
Entheogens . J Psychedelic Drugs 11(1-2): 145-146, 1979. 

Salthe, S.N. Evolving Hierarchical Systems. New York Columbia 
University Press, 1985. 

Savage, C.; Terril, J.; and Jackson, D.O. LSD transcendence and the new 
beginning. JNerv Ment Dis 135:425-439, 1962. 

Siegel, R.K. Hallucinations. Sci Am 237(4):132-140, 1977. 

Stein, J., ed. The Random House College Dictionary. Rev. ed. New York: 
Random House, 1980. 

Szara, S. “Psychosomimetic or Mysticomimetic?” Paper presented at 
National Institute of Mental Health Seminal - , Bethesda, MD, 
November 14, 1961. 

Szara, S. The hallucinogenic drugs—curse or blessing? Am J Psychiatry 
123:1513-1518, 1967. 

Szara, S. “A Scientist Looks at the Hippies.” Report prepared for the 
National Institute of Mental Health, 1968. 

Szara, S., and Hollister, L. “NIMH and Legal Drug Control.” Report 
prepared for the National Institute of Mental Health, 1973. 

Van Essen, D.C.; Anderson, C.H.; and Felleman, D.J. Information 
processing in the primate visual system: An integrated systems 
perspective. Science 255:419-423, 1992. 

Von Neumann, J., and Morgenstein, O. Theory of Games and Economic 
Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944. 

Watson, R. “Phasic Integrated Potentials and Ego Boundary Deficit.” 
Paper presented at a joint meeting of the Sleep Research Society and 
the Association of Sleep Disorders Centers, Seattle, WA, July 6-8, 
1985. 

Yensen, R. LSD and psychotherapy. J Psychoactive Drugs 17(4):267- 
277,1985. 


50 



AUTHOR 


Stephen Szara, M.D., D.Sc. 

Chief 

Biomedical Research Branch (Ret.) 
National Institute on Drug Abuse 
10901 Jolly Way 
Kensington, MD 20895 


51 



Lysergamides Revisited 

Robert C. Pfaff, Xuemei Huang, Danuta Marona-Lewicka, 
Robert Oberlender, and David E. Nichols 


INTRODUCTION 

In discussions of hallucinogens in past years, most of the focus has been 
on phenethylamines and phenylisopropylamines, with a modest amount 
on tryptamines. A large gap always has been the lack of discussion of 
lysergamides. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is one’ of the classic 
hallucinogenic agents, but substituted lysergamides always have seemed 
to be largely ignored. The lysergamides have been investigated on 
several historical occasions, but the late 1950s witnessed most of the 
recent work (Abrahamson 1959; Cerletti and Doepfner 1958; Gogerty 
and Dille 1957; Isbell et al. 1959). Within the past 8 years, there has 
been an attempt to fill in some obvious gaps that exist in the 
understanding of lysergamide-type hallucinogens. 

The lysergamides are derived from the ergot fungus, well known 
throughout history as a source of various types of medications. Extracts 
of ergot have been recognized as legitimate pharmaceutical preparations 
since at least the Middle Ages. Lysergic acid is derived from hydrolysis 
of the ergot alkaloids. Although present-day methods of ergot production 
utilize submerged culture fermentation rather than cultivation on rye or 
other cereal grains, Claviceps is the ultimate alkaloid source. 

It is also known that lysergamides have been employed as psychoactive 
preparations, with some of these uses stretching back to antiquity. For 
example, arguments have been made that the Greek mysteries at Eleusis 
were related to the ingestion of a preparation that contained lysergamides 
derived from an ergot fungus that infested the grass in that region. 
Another example is ololiuqui, a South American Indian and Mexican 
psychoactive preparation that was prepared from the seeds of certain 
morning glories, Rivea corymbosa. Ergine, or lysergic acid amide 
(figure 1), is the primary psychoactive component of morning glory 
seeds. In 1943, Hofmann discovered the unusual properties of LSD, the 
diethyl amide or lysergic acid. 


52 




FIGURE 1. Structural representations of ergine and LSD 


OVERVIEW OF THE ERGOLINES 

All ergolines have a tetracyclic framework based on the aromatic 
two-ring indole nucleus. Lysergic acid has a carboxy function at the 
8-position. Because of their structural complexity, lysergamides have 
several locations that can be modified for structure-activity studies of 
these hallucinogens. These are shown in figure 2. 

Substitution at the N(l) position generally attenuates or abolishes 
hallucinogenic activity (Brimblecombe and Pinder 1975). Substitution at 
the C(2) position, particularly with a halogen such as bromine (e.g., 

BOL) or iodine, leads to compounds that not only are inactive as 
hallucinogens but also can antagonize the effect of a subsequently 
administered dose of LSD (Brimblecombe and Pinder 1975). 

The stereochemistry is critical for the lysergic acid molecule. The R 
stereochemistries at both the C(5) and C(8) positions are essential. 
Inversion of either stereocenter abolishes hallucinogenic activity 
(Brimblecombe and Pinder 1975). C(5) inversion gives /-lysergic acid 
derivatives, as compared with the natural d-lysergic acid. Epimerization 
at the C(8) position gives the isolysergic acid or iso-LSD derivatives. 

Reduction of the 9, 10-double bond also abolishes hallucinogenic activity 
(Brimblecombe and Pinder 1975). Ring substitution at the C(12) or 


53 





FIGURE 2. Locations and types of structural modifications studied 
for lysergamides 


C(13) positions is fairly difficult. Because entire doctoral theses have 
been written about the total synthesis of lysergic acid, it is apparent that 
the synthesis of derivatives modified at the 12-, 13-, or 14-position would 
be quite a formidable task. Nevertheless, the 12-hydroxy compound was 
prepared years ago. The authors obtained a sample of this and performed 
drug discrimination (DD) studies in LSD-trained rats. It had 
unremarkable properties, with only about 20 percent of the potency of 
LSD (Pffaf et ah, unpublished observations). 

It also has been postulated that hydroxylation in vivo occurs at the 
13-position. This occurrence would correspond to the 6-hydroxy- 
tryptamines that Szara (this volume) discusses. There is evidence in the 
literature that hydroxylation at this position confers high dopaminergic 
potency on ergolines, but it is not clear whether this could be related to 
the hallucinogenic properties of LSD. 

These ring modifications are generally the only ones that have been 
studied, primarily because of the difficulty in carrying out chemistry on a 
complex molecule like an ergoline. 


54 




EFFECTS OF N(6) SUBSTITUTION 


One major gap in the literature that the authors looked at some years ago 
was substitution on the basic N(6) nitrogen atom. Recently, the authors 
have examined substitutions on the amide nitrogen. Dopaminergic 
compounds had been studied for many years, and it was known that if the 
alkyl group on the N(6) nitrogen was extended from methyl to ethyl to 
propyl, the dopaminergic effects of the ergolines were maximal. About 
10 years ago, the authors envisioned that a propyl group placed on the 
N(6) nitrogen of LSD might optimize its dopaminergic effects. 
Consequently, it might be possible to determine, in some way, the 
importance of that pharmacological component to the overall action of 
the drug. It was decided to make a series of N(6)-alkyl substituted 
compounds. At about the same time, Niwaguchi and colleagues 
(Nakahara and Niwaguchi 1971; Niwaguchi et al. 1976) also prepared a 
small series of N(6)-alkyl substituted lysergamides and examined them in 
smooth muscle preparations; they reported high activity. Therefore, the 
authors synthesized several N(6)-alkyl derivatives in the laboratory. 
Testing data for these are summarized in table 1 (Hoffman 1987). 


TABLE 1. Drug discrimination ED 50 values and receptor affinities of 
N(6)-alkyl-nor-LSD derivatives 


DD* K[(nM) 

Compound (p mol/kg) 


N(6)-alkyl 

E D 5 o 

[ 3 H]-5-HT 

[ H]-ketanserin 

[ 125 I]-R-DOI 

Allyl 

0.013 

15.5 

8.1 

3.4 

Ethyl 

0.020 

3.8 

5.1 

5.1 

Propyl 

0.037 

4.9 

5.6 


Methyl (LSD) 

0.046 

5.9 

5.2 

5.1 

CH 2 -c-C 3 H 5 

0.067 

10.9 

7.7 


i -Propyl 

0.10 

21.4 

14.1 


n -Butyl 

0.36 

45.7 

5.2 


Propargyl 

2-Phenethyl 

0.62 

NSf 

91.2 

100.0 


H (nor-LSD) 

NSf 

30.2 

158.0 



* Rats (n = 8) were trained to discriminate 0.08 mg/kg (+) LSD from 
vehicle. 


t No substitution occurred with these analogs. 

KEY: DD = drug discrimination; nM = nanonrolar; 

[ 1 \ J-R-DOI = [ 125 I]-R-l-(2,5 dinrethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2- 
aminopropane 


55 




In the first column are DD data. Glennon (this volume) describes the DD 
paradigm, so it will be noted simply that LSD was used as the training 
drug at a dosage of 0.08 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) of the tartrate 
salt. The DD data are median effective dose (ED,) values for 
compounds that fully substituted. The ED, values are in micromolars 
(pmol)/kg, so direct potency comparisons can be made that take into 
account differences in molecular weight. 

Displacement of tritiated serotonin in rat brain homogenate was 
investigated several years ago as a measure of affinity for serotonin 
receptors. This work was done prior to some of the differentiation of 
receptor subtypes; the data in column 2 probably closely represent 
inhibition constant (K t ) values at the 5-HT m receptor subtype (Pazos and 
Palacios 1985). Displacement of tritiated ketanserin from the serotonin 
5-HT 2 receptor also has been investigated, and on a few compounds there 
exist data for displacement of [ I]-/?-DOI from the agonist state of the 

5-HT 2 receptor. 

The DD data indicate that the //-propyl is slightly more active than LSD, 
although not significantly so, but the ethyl and allyl compounds were 
significantly more potent than LSD. From the serotonin displacement 
data alone, there is no obvious basis for these results, although perhaps 
the ethyl and propyl compounds have slightly higher affinity. The 
cyclopropylmethyl compound is somewhat less active, but the isopropyl 
is even less so, indicating that branching adjacent to the nitrogen atom is 
not well tolerated. The data for the isopropyl derivative can be compared 
with those for the //-propyl derivative. The //-butyl compound drops off 
about tenfold in potency. There is a medicinal chemist’s adage that says 
something like “ethyl, propyl, butyl, futile.” However, it more properly 
should be stated as “ethyl, propyl, butyl is futile,” because in most cases 
when //-alkylated amines are extended beyond propyl, a marked drop in 
activity is seen. 

The allyl compound, which was the most potent, differs from the 
propargyl in that the allyl has two sp carbon atoms and a double bond, 
whereas the propargyl has two sp carbon atoms and a triple bond. There 
is a dramatic difference in the activity of the allyl versus the propargyl. 

In general, a decrease in receptor affinity is seen with the less active 
compounds. For example, the propargyl has about one-twentieth the 
affinity of most of the more active analogs at ketanserin sites. 


56 



The 2-phenethyl derivative was included because, in the opiates, this 
substituent often gives high activity. This compound did not substitute in 
LSD-trained animals, so there was no followup with binding studies. 
NorLSD did not substitute either, although it has modest affinity for 
5-HT, sites. 

This was an area of the structure-activity relationships (SAR) that had 
been unfilled, and there is now some knowledge of the effect of the N(6) 
alkyl group on activity of lysergamide hallucinogens. If the animal data 
are used as a criterion, it is known that LSD is, in fact, not the most 
potent LSD-like agent; the ethyl and allyl compounds are more potent. 
Clinical data presented by Jacob and Shulgin (this volume) seem to 
corroborate this observation. 

Figure 3 shows wire-frame stereo-pair representations of the 
energy-minimized structures of the N(6)-allyl, -ethyl, and -propargyl 
compounds viewed from the top, or B, face. The authors attempted to 
determine whether there was any basis for the fact that the propargyl is 
not very active, whereas the allyl is potent. The N(6)-ethyl has a fair 
amount of flexibility; it tends to lie with the terminal methyl below the 
ring plane as shown in the figure. The allyl adopts a si mi lar orientation 
but with the terminal CH 2 of the double bond projected further toward the 
back face of the molecule. The N(6)-propargyl also is projected in a 
similar - orientation. Looking at these molecules from the edge (figure 4) 
shows that the CH 2 of the allyl group is projected toward the lower face. 

The terminal alkyne of the propargyl is rigid and has a linear geometry; it 
may be that it is not flexible enough and is unable to get out of the way, 
preventing the molecule from interacting favorably with the receptor. 
Otherwise, there seenrs no obvious reason the allyl compound should be 
so potent whereas the propargyl has such low activity. 


EFFECTS OF AMIDE SUBSTITUTION 

The other major area now being examined is substitution on the anride 
function. Most lyserganrides that have been subjected to clinical studies 
were reported in the mid- to late-1950s. Table 2 lists relative potency in 
humans for most of the amides that were studied. Tire amides were not 
studied systematically, and their characterization in clinical studies was 
rudimentary. The data for the compounds that were studied do not give 
any insight as to why the diethyl substitution of LSD should be so potent. 


57 



FIGURE 3. Facial stereo views of the N(6)-alkyl LSD derivatives. 
Top: ethyl: center: allyl; bottom: propargyl 


It should be noted in table 2 that none of the compounds has more than 
about 30 percent of the activity of LSD. This is something that has 
always peiplexed researchers in this field: What is it about the diethyl 
group that may be unique in this molecule? Even a substitution with the 
same number of carbon atoms, such as the /V-methyl- /V-propyl derivative, 
shows only about one-thirtieth the potency of LSD. The IV-methyl- 
iV-propyl presumably would have similar pharmacokinetics, with 


58 




FIGURE 4. Eclge-on stereo views of the N(6)-alkyl LSD 

derivatives. Top: ethyl; center: allyl; bottom: 
propargyl 


comparable amounts of the drug expected to enter the brain, and yet this 
compound is only weakly active. Even the A'-mcthyl-A'-cthyl has low 
activity compared with LSD. With the /V,/V-clicthyI (LSD) one sees 
optimum activity, but the AAethyl-W-propyl is back to about one-third the 
potency of LSD, and AW-dipropyl is down to one-tenth. 

Compounds are being designed that might allow one to probe the dialkyl 
amide function and to try to understand what role it plays. If, in fact, the 
N, A / -diethyl does have unique properties, why is this so? The authors’ 
first attempt to address this problem was to “tie together” the two ethyl 
groups of LSD as a three-menrbered dimethylaziridine ring. 

The target compounds are shown in figure 5. It was envisioned that the 
dimethylaziridines might resemble three possible conformations of the 
more flexible diethyl amide. There are three dimethylaziridines: a trans- 


59 




TABLE 2. Relative human potency of lysergic acid amides* 


Relative Potency 


H 

H (lysergamide, ergine) 

3 

H 

ch 2 ch 3 

10 

H 

CH(CH 2 OH)CH 3 (ergonovine) 

3 

ch 3 

CH, 

10 

ch 3 

C H 2 C H 3 

3 

CH, 

CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 

3 

ch 2 ch 3 

CH 2 CH 3 (LSD) 

100 

ch 2 ch 3 

CH 2 CH 2 CH, 

32 

ch 2 ch 9 ch 3 

ch 2 ch 2 ch, 

10 

C 4 H 8 

(Cyclic pyrrolidide) 

32 

c 4 h 8 o 

(Cyclic morpholide) 

32 


* Derivatives of ergine (figure 1) where the terminal amide -NH, has 
been replaced by -NR[R 2 


SOURCE: Data from Shulgin 1981 


isomer with R,R stereochemistry, a transisomer with S,S stereochemistry, 
and a cis-meso compound in which both methyls are on the same side of 
the aziridine ring. These three molecules are isomeric probes that are 
similar in molecular - weight to LSD. However, the methyls of what 
would be the corresponding ethyl groups in LSD are in different 
orientations. It was anticipated that evaluation of these compounds might 
offer insight into the role of the ethyl groups of LSD. Unfortunately, this 
was not to be. Acyl aziridines under acidic conditions are chemically 
labile. After condensation of the dimethylaziridines with lysergic 
acid—the amide protonates—the chloride then attacks the aziridine ring, 
which then opens to yield the chlorobutyl derivatives (Oberlender 1989) 
as shown in figure 6. 

In the case of the trans-R,R enantiomer, chloride attack at either carbon 2 
or 3 gives the same isomer, which has the \R,2S configuration. 

Similarly, chloride attack at either of these positions in the trans-S, S. 
isomer gives the same diastereomer, the IS,2R chlorobutyl. Depending 
on which center is attacked with the cis-meso compound, either the R,R 
or S,S diastereomer is obtained. When these four compounds (figure 7) 
were obtained, the authors carried out model reactions acylating the 


60 






FIGURE 5. The dimethylaziridinyl amides of lysergic acid. Left: R.R-dimethylaziridinyl; 
center: S,S-dimethylaziridinyl; right: cis-meso-dimethylaziridinyl 





FIGURE 6. Proposed mechanism of attack of chloride on the 
dimethylaziridinyl lysergamides 


dimethylaziridines with benzoyl chloride to prove that this occurred, and 
then chemically established that these were the products of the 
condensations between the dimethylaziridines and lysergic acid. 

The four diastereomers were separated, purified, and tested in DD studies, 
and the data are summarized in table 3. It was found that one of the 
diastereomers was about 50 percent more potent than LSD. This was the 
first indication that something other than the diethyl amide might give 
high activity. Because this is a DD assay, it can give false positives, but 
it rarely, if ever, gives false negatives. So it seems probable that these 
compounds might have LSD-like activity. Yet, they are monoalkyl 
amides, not dialkyl amides. There is no precedent for a monoalkyl amide 
to have an activity approaching that of LSD. It should be noted that 
diastereomers 1 and 2 are obtained from racemic trans-dimethylaziridine, 
and diastereomers 3 and 4 are obtained from cis-dimethylaziridine. 
Diastereomers 1 and 3 are most potent, one derived from trans- and the 
other from cis-dime thylaziridine. Diastereomers 2 and 4 are much less 
potent. The pyrrolidide was included for comparison because it is known 
that in humans the pyrrolidide has about 10 to 15 percent of the potency 


62 





rs,2's 






TABLE 3. Potency of chlorobutyl andpyrrolidyl lysergamides in rats 
trained to discriminate 0.08 mg/kg of (+)LSD from vehicle 

Compound ED 50 (pmol/kg) Relative Potency 


Diastereomer 1 

0.027 

155 

LSD 

0.042 

100 

Diastereomer 3 

0.156 

27 

Pyrrolidide 

0.168 

25 

Diastereomer 4 

0.387 

11 

Diastereomer 2 

0.605 

7 


TABLE 4. Radioligand- 

■binding 

data for 2-butyl 

lysergamides 


Lysergic Acid 


K, (nM) 

IC 50 (nM) 


Amide substituent 

5-HT ; 

>* 5-HT,/ 

Da 

d 2 § 

N, /V-dicthyl (LSD) 

6.31 

5.05 

60 

13 

R -2-butyl 

2.63 

2.01 

44 

15 

S -2-butyl 

7.76 

4.61 

70 

37 


KEY: Data are for the displacement of *[ 125 I]-7?-DOI in rat frontal cortex 

1 * 3 

homogenate, [ HJ-8-OH-DPAT in rat frontal cortex homogenate 
(Obeidender et al. 1992), *[ 3 H]-SCH23390 in rat striatal 
homogenate, and § [ 3 H]-spiperone in rat striatal homogenate 
(unpublished results). 


of LSD (Nichols et al. 1991). In DD trials, pyrrolidide shows 
considerably lower potency than LSD. 

To simplify things, it was decided to prepare lysergamides from the 
enantiomers of 2-aminobutane, shown in figure 8. These were 
commercially available with either the R or S stereochemistry at the 
a-carbon (C-a). 

The 2-aminobutane amide derivatives of lysergic acid were viewed as 
analogous to the chlorobutyl compounds but dechlorinated to remove the 
second stereocenter. Table 4 shows binding affinity data using 


64 









FIGURE 8. The secbutyl lysergamides. Left: the diastereomer 
from the R-isomer; right: the diastereomer from the 
S-isomer 


[* I l-A’-DOI as a label for the 5-HT 2 receptor; [ 3 H]-8-hydroxy-2- 
dipropylaminotetralin (8-OH-DPAT) as a label for the 5-HT, A receptor; 
and [ HJ-SCH23390 and [ H]-spiperone in rat caudate as labels for the 
dopamine (DA) type 1 (D,) and type 2 (D 2 ) receptors, respectively. Some 
of the data were recently published (Oberlender et al. 1992). 

As is already known, LSD has high affinity for the 5-HT 2 and the 5-HT 1A 
receptors (Nichols et al. 1991). Interestingly, 60 nM is a respectable 
affinity for the D, receptor, and 13 nM is certainly a high affinity for the 
D 2 receptor. It should be noted that the dopaminergic component of LSD 
has not been examined in any detail. Therefore, it can be seen that LSD 
has high affinity at these four possible recognition sites, and it is known 
also to have high affinity for other sites. Note that of the two secbutyl 
diastereomers, with R and S stereochemistry in the side chain, the R 
isomer has significantly higher affinity than LSD at both serotonin 
recognition sites and comparable affinity at the D, and D 2 sites. This 
compound, at least from the receptor-binding profile, looks more potent 
than LSD. Even the diastereomer from the S isomer has affinities similar 
to LSD. 

One interesting aspect that has not been studied is the significance of 
these high affinities for the D, receptor. This may be the first report of 


65 




the D, receptor affinity for LSD. Presently, there is great interest in the 
D, receptor, in part related to its functional interactions with D 2 receptors 
and in part because of the possibility that D[ receptor activation is 
necessary for expressing the biological activity of compounds that have a 
D 2 dopaminergic effect. With affinities of this magnitude, the D 2 effect 
of LSD must be considerable, and it could be anticipated that the Dj 
receptor also might play a role in the overall action of lysergamides. It 
never before has been recognized that these compounds have such high 
affinity for the D, receptor. 

Functional measures seem to parallel the serotonin receptor-binding data. 
Sanders-Bush (personal communication. 1992) has examined the ability 
of the 2-butyl lysergamides to stimulate phosphoinositide turnover in a 
cloned cell line transfected with 5-HT 2 receptor carrier deoxyribonucleic 
acid (cDNA). Both diastereomers were partial agonists, giving 75 to 80 
percent of the response produced by 1 pM 5-HT. The diastereomer from 
the R -2-butyl enantiomer had approximately twice the potency of that 
from the S enantiomer. However, these diastereomers had only about 
5 to 10 percent of the potency of LSD despite their comparable receptor 
affinity. Similarly, at the rat choroid plexus 5-HT 1C receptor, both 
diastereomers were partial agonists, with the diastereomer from the R 
enantiomer of 2-butylamine again having approximately twice the 
potency of that from the S enantiomer. 

Mayaani (personal communication. 1992) also has examined these 
diastereomers for their ability to inhibit forskolin-stimulated adenylate 
cyclase in rat hippocampal homogenate. Both diastereomers were full 
agonists, comparable to 8-OH-DPAT. Again, the diastereomer from the 
R enantiomer of 2-butylamine was more potent than that from the S 
enantiomer. 

Figures 9 and 10 illustrate edge-on and top views of the fully energy- 
minimized structures of LSD (top), the diastereomeric lysergamides of 
77-2-ami nobutane (center), and S-2-aminobutane (bottom) as wire-frame 
stereo-pairs. Nothing is readily obvious from the structures, but it is 
possible to make an empirical observation that in the low-energy 
conformation of the diastereomer of the R enantiomer, the amide group 
“looks” a bit more like LSD. The amide of the diastereomer from the S 
enantiomer looks quite different in that all the bulk of the 2-butyl alkyl 
group is projected to the left of the molecule. 


66 




FIGURE 9. Edge -on stereo views of LSD and the secbutyl 
lysergamides: Top: LSD: center: R-secbutyl 
lysergamide; bottom: S-secbutyl lysergamide 


These are flexible molecules, so no firm conclusions can be drawn. 
However, looking at the low-energy conformations, perhaps it can be said 
that the R isomer looks more like LSD than the S isomer. That begs the 
question and does not explain why LSD is active, but it is an interesting 
observation. 


DISCUSSION 

Much more work is needed on these amides. A series of compounds with 
a range of biological potencies is required to develop SARs. The authors 
now are trying to develop systematic series of amide-substituted 
compounds. Combining conformational analysis with biological activity 
data, some appreciation may be gained of the role of the amide in the 
lysergamides. 


67 




FIGURE 10. Facial stereo views of LSD and the secbutyl 
lysergamides: Top: LSD; center: R-secbutyl 
lysergamide; bottom: S-secbutyl lysergamide 


Another compound to be studied is the methylisopropyl amide of lysergic 
acid (figure 11). This is an isomer of LSD where a methyl has been 
“removed” from one ethyl group and placed onto the os-position of the 
other. Receptor-binding data for that compound are compared with LSD 
in table 5. The affinity profile looks virtually identical to LSD for these 
four receptor types. 

DD studies also have shown that this compound fully substitutes in 
animals trained to discriminate saline from LSD. Thus, it can be 
anticipated from the receptor-binding and behavioral data that this 
compound might be LSD-like. 

The authors have been collaborating with Dr. Wilfred Dimpfel of the 
ProScience Private Research Institute in Germany, who employs a 


68 




H 3 C^ CH(CH 3 ) 2 

N 

1 

\ 

N—CH 3 

V 

A 

\ 

r> 


\ 

H 


FIGURE 11. The isopropyl amide of lysergic 


acid 


TABLE 5. Radioligand-binding data for N-methyl-N-isopropyl 
lysergamide 

Lysergic Acid K t (nM) IC 50 (nM) 

Amide substituent_ 5-HT 2 5 -HT , A f p [ $_p 9 



* 125 

KEY: Data are for the displacement of [ I]-/?-DOI in rat frontal cortex 

homogenate, [ HJ-8-OH-DPAT in rat frontal cortex homogenate 
(Oberlender et al. 1992), [ 3 H]-SCH23390 in rat striatal 
homogenate, S [ 3 H]-spiperone in rat striatal homogenate 
(unpublished results). 


69 






technique known as Tele-Stereo-EEG. Four bipolar stainless steel 
electrodes are chronically implanted into rat frontal cortex, caudate, 
hippocampus, and reticular formation. Field potentials in freely moving 
rats are recorded, processed by fast-Fourier transform, and filtered to 
generate dose- and time-dependent power spectra that give “EEG 
fingerprints” characteristic of the particular type of drug administered. 
FSD tartrate (0.01 to 0.05 mg/kg) has been compared by Dimpfel 
(personal communication 1992) with the A-methyl-A-isopropylamide 
tartrate (0.025 to 0.1 mg/kg) in this paradigm. In spite of the biochemical 
and DD data, the rat EEG studies give a surprising result. Although 
doses can be selected for the two drugs that have some similarities, the 
EEG fingerprint of the A-methyl-A-isopropylamide gives a best fit to the 
EEG fingerprint for dopamine D, agonists. This was totally unexpected 
and seems inexplicable. Perhaps when clinical trials are carried out with 
dopamine D, agonists, the result may be more understandable, but at the 
present time and in the absence of human data it is peiplexing. 

The series of isopropyl amides has recently been completed with the 
synthesis of the A-isopropyl, in addition to the A-methyl-A-isopropyl, 
A-ethyl-A-isopropyl, and the A,A-diisopropyl, as shown in figure 12. 

With the exception of the A,A-diisopropylamide, all compounds 
completely substitute in the DD paradigm in rats trained to discriminate 
LSD from saline. In table 6, the receptor-binding data for displacement 
of [ H]-ketanserin from rat cortical homogenate are shown. Although all 
A-isopropyl homologs have only 25 to 30 percent affinity of LSD for this 
site, it is interesting to note that the N-methyl-N-isopropyl compound 
discussed earlier has nearly equal affinity to LSD for the 5-HT 2 site 
labeled with the agonist ligand [ 125 I]-7?-DOI. This illustrates the 
importance of determining the relative efficacy of these compounds rather 
than just receptor affinity. 

The authors are continuing these studies with the A-alkyl-A- 
isopropylamides and also are expanding the studies with chiral alkyl 
groups in the amide function. Through a systematic approach utilizing 
modification of the amide alkyl combined with conformational and 
pharmacological analysis, the authors hope to identify correlations 
between activity and structure. Success in this endeavor might finally, 
after so many years, explain why LSD is such a potent compound and 
what actions at which monoamine receptors are the essential ones for 
expression of hallucinogenic effects. 


70 



R^CH(CH 3 ) 2 


V" 

n-ch 3 


A 




\ 

H 


FIGURE 12. The alkyl-isopropyl amides of 
lysergic acid 


TABLE 6. Radioligand binding data for N-methyl-N-isopropyl 

lysergamides: [ 3 H]-ketanserin displacement (unpublished 
results) 


Compound 

K, (nM) 

Hill Coefficient 

N 

LSD 

4.8+0.5 

0.94 

3 

A / -isopropyl 

26.2+2.2 

0.89 

4 

A^-methyl-A^-isopropyl 

28.1+4.5 

0.89 

4 

W-ethyl-A^-isopropyl 

19.8+2.4 

0.94 

4 

M A+diisopropyl 

20.2+2.4 

0.90 

3 


71 






REFERENCES 


Abrahamson, H.A. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25): XXIX. The 
response index as a measure of threshold activity of psychotropic 
drugs in man. J Psych 48:65-78, 1959. 

Brimblecombe, R.W., and Pinder, R.M. Hallucinogenic Agents. Bristol, 
UK: Wright-Scientechnica, 1975. 

Cerletti, A., and Doepfner, W. Comparative study on the serotonin 
antagonism of amide derivatives of lysergic acid and of ergot 
alkaloids. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 122:124-136, 1958. 

Gogerty, J.H., and Dille, J.M. Pharmacology of d-lysergic acid 
morpholide (LSM). J Pharmacol Exp Ther 120:340-348, 1957. 

Hoffman, A.J. “Synthesis and Pharmacological Evaluation of N(6)-Alkyl 
Norlysergic Acid AA-Diethylamide Derivatives.” Doctoral thesis. 
West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, 1987. 

Isbell, H.; Miner, E.J.; and Logan, C.R. Relationships of 

psychotomimetic to antiserotonin potencies of congeners of lysergic 
acid diethylamide. Psychopharmacologia 1:20-28, 1959. 

Nakahara, Y., and Niwaguchi, T. Studies on lysergic acid diethylamide 
and related compounds. I. Synthesis of c/-N ft -dcmcthyl-lysergic acid 
diethylamide. Chem Pharm Bull 19:2337-2341, 1971. 

Nichols, D.E.; Oberlender, R.; and McKenna, D.J. Stereochemical 
aspects of hallucinogenesis. In: Watson, R.R., ed. Biochemistry and 
Physiology of Substance Abuse. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1991. 
pp. 1-39. 

Niwaguchi, T.; Nakahara, Y.; and Ishii, H. Studies on lysergic acid 
diethylamide and related compounds. IV. Syntheses of various amide 
derivatives of norlysergic acid and related compounds. Yakugaku 
Zasshi 96:673-678, 1976. 

Oberlender, R.A. “Stereoselective Aspects of Hallucinogenic Drug 
Action and Drug Discrimination Studies of Entactogens.” Doctoral 
thesis. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, 1989. 

Oberlender, R.; Pfaff, R.C.; Johnson, M.P.; Huang, X.; and Nichols, D.E. 
Stereoselective LSD-like activity in d-lysergic acid amides of(R)- and 
(S)-2-aminobutane. J Med Chem 35:203-211, 1992. 

Pazos, A., and Palacios, M. Quantitative autoradiographic mapping of 
serotonin receptors in rat brain. I. Serotonin-1 receptors. Brain Res 
346:205-230, 1985. 

Shulgin, A.T. Hallucinogens. In: Wolff, M.E., ed. Burger’s Medicinal 
Chemistry, Part III. 4th ed. New York: Wiley, 1981. pp. 1109-1137. 


72 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


This research was supported by U.S. Public Health Service grant DA- 
02189 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The synthetic work of 
Stewart Frescas and radioligand binding studies by Art hi Kanthasamy 
also are acknowledged. 


AUTHORS 

Robert C. Pfaff, Ph.D. 

Associate Professor of Chemistry 
Department of Chemistry 
St. Joseph’s College 
Rensselaer, IN 47978 

Xuemei Huang 
Graduate Assistant 

Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology 

Danuta Marona-Lewicka 

Visiting Assistant Professor of Pharmacology 

Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy 

David E. Nichols, Ph.D. 

Professor of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology 
Departments of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy and 
Pharmacology and Toxicology 

Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47907 

Robert Oberlender, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor of Medicinal Chemistry 
Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry 
University of the Pacific 
Stockton, CA 95211 


73 



Structure-Activity Relationships 
of the Classic Hallucinogens and 
Their Analogs 

Peyton Jacob III and Alexander T. Shulgin 


The path that leads to the appearance of a new psychotropic drug in the 
practice of medicine usually consists of four stages: discovery of activity, 
the development of animal behavioral models that can be correlated to 
this activity, the study of mechanisms of action and nature of toxicity, 
and the demonstration of effectiveness and benefit. The final studies of 
effectiveness for drugs intended for human use must be done in human 
subjects. This is the essence of the Phases 1 through 4 studies found in 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations associated with the 
investigatory new drug (IND) application. With many drug families, the 
results of the animal model studies (steps 2 and 3) can allow prediction of 
new drug structures (step 1). However, with research in the hallucino¬ 
genic drugs (where the desired pharmacological activity can be demon¬ 
strated only in humans), the confirmation of activity must occur of 
necessity in humans. Therefore, it is of potential value for future research 
in this area to bring together in a single review the known human 
potencies of the classic hallucinogens and their analogs. 

Two words in the title of this chapter must be defined: hallucinogen and 
classic. A hallucinogen is a drug that changes a person’s state of 
awareness by modifying sensory inputs, loosening cognitive and creative 
restraints, and providing access to material normally hidden in memory or 
material of an unconscious nature. The changes thus gained are not 
masked by amnesia, although they will last only a finite period of time, 
and they are demonstrable only in humans. A generation ago these drugs 
were inaccurately called psychotomimetics, things that imitate psychosis. 
Today the term “hallucinogen” is allowed as a euphemism, although that 
term is also inaccurate because hallucinations are not pail of the usual 
syndrome. In another generation, the synonym psychedelics may become 
acceptable in the medical and scientific literature. 

Several chemical families that include drugs which have been clinically 
associated with the term “hallucinogen” have been excluded by design 
from this review, These substances have been the topics of other 


74 



conferences or monographs sponsored, by the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse (NIDA). Among these exclusions are marijuana, tetrahydro¬ 
cannabinol (THC), ketamine, and related parasympatholytics such as the 
Datura alkaloids and the JB compounds, opiates, and agents related to 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). 

The term “classic” depends on the views of the person who defines it. A 
compound achieves a classic status when it has served as the focus of a 
considerable amount of research attention. With compounds such as 
mescaline, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 2,5-dimethylthio- 
phenethylamine (DOM), dimethyltryptamine (DMT), and psilocybin, the 
status as classic hallucinogens might be due to the extensive animal and 
clinical research that has appeared in the literature. But with other 
compounds such as thiomescaline, 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphen- 
ethylamine (2C-D), 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylthiophenethylamine (2C-T), 
and 3,4,5-trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA), the bulk of the published 
literature has been focused at a structural and chemical level. The 
analogs of these nine prototypic classic hallucinogens are reviewed here, 
and nine tables list structurally related variants that have been explored in 
humans. 

The oldest classic hallucinogen known to Western science is mescaline, 
the major alkaloid of the dumpling cactus peyote. Mescaline was isolated 
from the peyote cactus, the pharmacology was defined in 1896, and the 
structure of mescaline verified by synthesis in 1919. It is used as the 
potency standard against which all other phenethylamine bases have been 
compared. Table 1 shows the relative potency of mescaline along with 
the several alkyl homologs that have been studied with the oxygen atoms 
maintained in the vicinal 3,4,5-orientation. 

A generalization is that there is an increase in potency with increasing the 
length of the alkyl group on the 4-position oxygen atom but not with such 
changes with the meta-oriented groups. The naming of these synthetic 
compounds has exploited the coincidence that mescaline carries the 
methoxy group at the 4-position and both words begin with the same 
syllable. The names “escaline,” “proscaline,” and “buscaline” follow 
easily as the groups become ethoxy, propoxy, and butoxy. The names for 
the diethoxy homologs (here and in table 2) incorporate the nomenclature 
prefix from being symmetrical (sym) or asymmetrical (asym) and having 
two (bis) ethoxy groups (bescaline). 


75 



TABLE 1. Mescaline analogs 


Name 

Code 

Potency 

(ms) 

Potency 
x mescaline 

(4-Modified) 




Mescaline (4-methoxy) 

M 

200-400 

i 

Escaline (4-ethoxy) 

E 

40-60 

6 

Proscaline [4-(n)-propoxy] 

P 

30-60 

7 

Isoproscaline (4-isopropoxy) 

IP 

40-80 

5 

Buscaline [4-(n)-butoxy] 

B 

>150 

<1 

Cyclopropylmethyl- 

CPM 

60-80 

5 

Allyloxy- 

AL 

20-35 

10 

Methallyloxy- 

MAL 

40-65 

6 

Propynyloxy- 

PROPYNYL 

>80 

<2 

4-Desoxy me sealine (4-methyl) 

DESOXY 

40-120 

4 

Phenescaline (4-phenethyloxy) 

PE 

>150 

<1 

(Other modified; substituent and location defined) 




Metaescaline (3,4-dimethoxy-5-ethoxy) 

ME 

200-350 

I 

Metaproscalme (3,4-dimethoxy-5-propoxy) 

MP 

>240 

1 

Asymbescaline (3,4-diethoxy-5-methoxy) 

ASB 

200-280 

1 

Symbescaline (3,5-diethoxy-4-methoxy) 

SB 

>240 

<1 

Trescaline (3,4,5-triethoxy) 

TRIS 

>240 

<1 

(Chain relocation) 




Isomescaline (2,3,4-trimethoxy) 

IM 

>400 

<1 

(Deuterium substitution) 




4-Trideuteromescaline 

4-D 

200-400 

1 

6-Dideuteromescaline 

6-D 

200-400 

1 



A comment is appropriate for the use of the symbols “>” and “<” in these 
tables. When a dosage weight is given as >250 milligrams (mg), the 
implicit statement is that no activity had been found at 250 mg. It is not 
known whether the compound is active at any dose, but, if it is, it will be 
at a dose greater than 250 mg. Thus, the potency relative to mescaline 
shown as < 1 means that if activity is found, it will be less than that of 
mescaline. There is no implication that the compound is or is not active. 

There have been reports of mescaline analogs with a methoxy group 
removed. The analog 3,4-dimethoxyphenethylamine (DMPEA) has 
achieved some notoriety with the report of the observation of a pink spot 
in the thin-layer chromatographic analysis of the extracts of the urine of 
schizophrenic patients. The association of the spot with the diagnosis of 
schizophrenia has remained controversial, but the chemical identity has 
been shown to be DMPEA. Efforts to evoke some central nervous 
system (CNS) disturbance with this compound (orally, to > 1.5 grams (g); 
intravenously [IV], to > 10 mg) have produced no effects. Because of its 
close structural resemblance to the neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) 
(3,4-dihydroxyphenethylamine), this result has been disappointing. The 
4-ethoxy homolog, 3-methoxy-4-ethoxyphenethylamine (2,3,4-tri- 
methoxyphenethylamine) (MEPEA) has been assayed to 300 mg but has 
little if any activity. 

An additional compound is isomescaline (2,3,4-trimethoxyphenethyl- 
amine). There is a fascinating report in the literature concerning its 
activity. It has been stated to be inactive in normal subjects but to 
promote a distinct intoxication in schizophrenic patients. If this effect 
were confirmed, it might play an interesting role as a marker or a 
biochemical probe of schizophrenia. 

The two last compounds in table 1 are the only known deuterium analogs 
that have been explored in humans, and neither can be distinguished from 
mescaline. Other uniquely deuterated isotopomers that may be of interest 
are 3,5-(bis-trideuteromethoxy)-4-methoxyphenethylamine (3,5-D); 
2,6-dideuteromescaline (2,6-D), and a,a-dideuteromescaline (a-D). The 
last compound, being deuterated at the most probable primary site for 
metabolic attack, might be of a different potency due to the kinetics of 
a-proton removal, and a study of the (R)-a -monodeuteroisotopomers 
[(R)a -D] and (S)-a-monodeuteroisotopomers [(S)a-D] might be 
informative. None of these latter compounds has as yet been studied. 


77 



The substitution of a sulfur atom for the 4-oxygen atom of mescaline 
yields the remarkably potent analog thiomescaline. Although this 
compound has not been widely studied in clinical trials, it has been the 
starting point of extensive synthetic studies that have further emphasized 
the importance of the 4-position of the aromatic ring of the 
phenethylamines (see table 2). 

Homologation at the 4-position again increases or maintains potency until 
the chain reaches a length of three carbon atoms (4-thioproscaline), and 
then activity begins to disappear. None of the unsaturated (allylthio, 
methallylthio) or related electron-rich alkylthio counterparts (cyclo- 
propylmethylthio) has been studied for comparison to the relatively 
potent oxygen counterparts (table 1). They should be reasonably simple 
to synthesize and might be exceptionally potent. 

One additional degree of structural variation is introduced with the sulfur 
atom replacement for the oxygen. It may occupy either of two positions, 
para or meta, to the ethylamine side chain. The meta-sulfur positional 
isomers still emphasize the importance of the nature of the alkyl 
substituent on the para-heteroatom. The three possible thioanalogs of 
isomescaline were without activity. 

The two remaining prototypes for structure-activity analysis are close 
relatives to well-known amphetamine counterparts. The well-studied 
drug DOM has a 2-carbon homolog, 4-methyl-2,5-dimethoxyphen- 
ethylamine (2C-D). The bromo counterpart 2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromo- 
amphetamine (DOB) has a 2-carbon homolog, 2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromo- 
phenethylamine (2C-B). Both phenethylamines have engendered large 
families of analogs, and both amphetamines are presented in table 6. 

The simplest 4-alkyl-substituted hallucinogenic compound is 2C-D. This 
base has been widely explored in the United States as a prototype for the 
exploration of new compound. In Germany 2C-D has been used as a 
psychotherapeutic agent in its own right, at larger dosages, usually under 
the code name of LE-25. The base without this para-alkyl group is 

2.5- dimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-H), but if this group is homologated 
to an ethyl, the extraordinarily powerful and effective compound 

2.5- dimethoxy-4-ethylphenethylamine (2C-E) is found. Potency 
continues to increase with further chain lengthening, but the positive 
nature of the observed psychopharmacological effects is lessened. 


78 



TABLE 2. Thiomescaline analogs 


Name Code 


(Sulfur para) 

4-Thiomescaline (3-Me-4-MeS-5-MeO) 4-TM 

4-Thioescaline (3-MeO-4-EtS-5-MeO) 4-TE 

4-Thioproscaline [3-MeO-4-(n)-PrS-5-MeO] 4-TP 

4-Thiobuscaline [3-MeO-4-(n)BuS-5-MeO] 4-TB 

4-Thioasymbescaline (3-EtO-4-EtS-5-MeO) 4-TASB 

4-Thiosymbescaline (3-EtO-4-MeS-5-EtO) 4-TSB 

4- Thiotrescaline (3-EtO-4-EtS-5-EtO) 4-T-Tris 

(Sulfur meta) 

3-Thiomescaline (3-MeS-4-MeO-5-MeO) 3-TM 

3-Thioescaline (3-MeS-4-MeO-5-MeO) 3-TE 

3-Thiometaescaline (3-EtS-4-MeO-S-MeO) 3-TME 

5- Thiometaescaline (3-EtO-4-MeO-5-MeS) 5-MTE 

3-Thiosymbescaline (3-EtS-4-MeO-5-EtO) 3-TSB 

3-Thioasymbescaline (3-EtS-4-EtO-5-MeO) 3-TASB 

5-Thioasymbescalien (3-EtO-4-EtO-5-MeS) 5-TASB 

3-Thiotrescaline (3-EtS-4-EtO-5-EtO) 3-T-Tris 


(Chain relocation) 

2- Thioisomescaline (2-MeS-3-MeO-4-MeO) 

3- Thioisomescaline (2-MeO-3-MeS-4-MeO) 

4- Thioisomescaline (2-MeO-3-MeO-4-MeS) 


2- TIM 

3- TIM 

4- TIM 


Potency 

(mg) 


Potency 
x mescaline 


20-40 10 

20-30 10 

20-25 10 

60-120 4 

60-100 4 

>240 <1 

>200 <1 


60-100 4 

60-80 5 

60-100 4 

>200 <1 

>200 <1 

-160 <1 

-160 <1 

>160 <1 


>240 <1 
>240 <1 
>240 <1 



TABLE 3. 2C-D analogs 


Name 

Code 

Potency 

Potency 



(mg) 

x mescaline 


(4-Alkyl groups) 


4-Proteo-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-H 

? 


4-Methyl-2,5DMPEA 

2C-D(LE-25) a 

20-60 

8 

4-Ethyl-2,5 -DMPE A 

2C-E 

10-15 

24 

4-(n)-Propyl-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-P 

6-10 

40 

(3,4-Dialkyl groups) 

Dimethyl-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-G 

20-35 

10 

Trimethylene-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-G-3 

16-25 

14 

T etramethylene-2,5 -DMPE A 

2C-G-4 

? 


Norbornyl-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-G-5 

10-16 

24 

Naphthyl” 

2C-G-N 

20-40 

10 

(Other groups) 

l-Fluoro-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-F 

>250 

<1 

4-Chloro-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-C 

20-40 

10 

4-Bromo-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-B 

12-24 

16 

4-Iodo-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-1 

14-22 

16 

4-Nitro-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-N 

100-150 

2 

4-Isopropoxy-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-0-4 

>60 

? 

4-Methylthio-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-T c 

60-100 

4 

4-Methylseleno-2,5-DMPEA 

2C-SE 

ca. 100 

ca. 3 


“Higher levels have been used in psychotherapeutic research. 
b l,4-Dimethoxy-2-(2-aminoethyl)naphthalene 
Extensively studied via homologation, see separate table. 


As discussed with the 3-carbon amphetamine analogs below, it had been 
observed that the addition of a second alkyl group at the ring 3-position 
led to compounds that were of reduced potency but still maintained 
hallucinogenic activity (table 6). The 2-carbon counterparts are shown in 
table 3. They form an unusual group with unique properties. Of all the 


80 





phenethylamine/amphetamine pairs explored so far, the phenethylamine 
is of a lower potency than the amphetamine homolog, and the potency of 
each increases yet further with the increasing of the molecular weight of 
the 4-alkyl group. However, with these 3,4-dialkyl analogs, as the two 
alkyl groups become increasingly large and complex, not only do the 
phenethylamines become more potent than the amphetamine homologs, 
but the absolute potency also tends to increase with increased mass and 
bulk of these alkyl groups. The most potent compound yet found in this 
structural family is the illustrated norbornyl material 3,6-dimethoxy-4- 
(2-aminoethyl)-benzobornane (2C-G-5), with a total of 5 aliphatic 
carbons arranged between the 3- and 4-positions. 

Many directions can be pursued here, both synthetically and pharmaco¬ 
logically. So far, all the compounds that have been prepared-those that 
have been evaluated psychophaimacologically and those whose 
evaluation has not yet been completed-are symmetrically substituted 
about the 3,4-axis. The use of a Diels-Alder reaction with benzoquinone 
as the dieneophyle ensures an almost unlimited degree of variation in the 
3,4-dialkyl-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamines. With the increase in mass 
suggesting greater potency, there may be some remarkable compounds 
here. Two further avenues of promising exploration are obvious. An 
asymmetric substitution is possible in which the 3- and 4-position groups 
are different from one another. Also, one must investigate the optical 
isomers of the racemates produced (as with 2C-G-5). 

Two additional centrally active structural variations of the prototype 
2C-D have been observed and explored to a small degree. The 
p-oxygenated analogs are known as the B-methoxy-B-arylethylamine 
(BOX) series, and the materials with ethoxy groups in place of either of 
the methoxy groups are called the tweetios. Neither family is entered in 
table 3, but both are logical extensions of it. 

The BOX compounds are B-oxy analogs of phenethylamines, masked as 
the methyl ether. The X then is the initial or identifier of the 2C analog 
that has been oxygenated. This manipulation introduces an oxygen 
heteroatom at a position identical to that found in the neurotransmitters 
norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine. But it also introduces a new chiral 
center, and in the corresponding amphetamine derivatives a threo-erythro 
system of diastereoisomers that resembles that of ephedrine and 
pseudoephedrine would be produced. The B-methoxy analogs of 2C-B, 
B,2,5-trimethoxy-4-bromophenethylamine (BOB), and 2C-D (B,2,5- 
trimethoxy-4-methylphenethylamine [BOD]) are a little more potent than 


81 



their oxygen-free counterparts but not as interesting subjectively. There 
has been no research done on the pure enantiomers. 

The two tweetio analogs (2-ethoxy and 5-ethoxy) of both 2C-D and 2C-B 
have been explored and have dramatically reduced activity. The 

5- tweetio (5-ethoxy) compounds are of twofold lessened potency, and the 
2-tweetio (2-ethoxy) materials are down by another factor of five. The 
bis-etios (2,5-diethoxy homologs of 2C-D and 2C-B) are not known to be 
active at all. 

Near the bottom of table 3 is a sulfur compound, 2C-T. Although only 
modest in activity, its homologs show a wide and varied psycho¬ 
pharmacology and constitute yet another family of hallucinogenics. 

These 2C-T analogs are listed and compared in table 4. 

The optimum alkyl substitution is two to three carbons, with 2C-T-2, 
2C-T-4, and 2C-T-7 (the S-ethyl, S-isopropyl, and S-propyl) being both 
potent and LSD-like. The placement of a methoxy on the S-ethyl group 
of 2C-T-2 yields the active methoxyethylthio derivative 2C-T-13, and the 
replacement of this methoxy group with a fluorine gives the potent 

6- fluoroethylthio-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-T-21). This 
structure is interesting because it is the first hallucinogenic drug with six 
separate elements in its formula (C, H, N, O, S, and F) and is potentially 
valuable as a vehicle for 18 F studies of brain kinetics with positron 
emission tomography (PET). In this case the fluorine atom is intrinsic to 
the expressed central activity. 

There are two classic amphetamine hallucinogens that have provided the 
starting point for extensive structure-activity investigations. The first, 
based on the well-known 3-carbon homolog of mescaline 3,4,5-tri- 
methoxyamphetamine (TMA), is shown in table 5. Here all compounds 
are characterized by the presence of an oxygen atom on the 4-position of 
the benzene ring, where the 1-position is always defined as the point of 
attachment of the aminoalkyl side chain. All six possible positional 
isomers of TMA have been prepared and compared. Two isomers that 
stand out from the others are the 2,4,5- and the 2,4,6-isomers, TMA-2 
and TMA-6. Both are active in the 20 to 50 mg range orally. The first of 
these has been broadly modified, with the most productive area of change 
being the nature of the alkoxy group in the 4-position to give 2,5- 
dimethoxy-4-ethoxyamphetamine (MEM) or the cycling of it into the 
5-membered dioxole ring to give 2-methoxy-4,5-methylenedioxy- 
amphetamine (MMDA-2). This latter methylenedioxy base also has been 


82 



TABLE 4. 2C-T analogs 


Name 

Code 

Potency 

(mg) 

Potency 
x mescaline 

(4-Alkylthio-2,5 -DMPE A) 

Methyl- 

2C-T 

60-100 

4 

Ethyl- 

2C-T-2 

12-25 

16 

Propyl- 

2C-T-7 

10-30 

15 

Isopropyl- 

2C-T-4 

8-20 

20 

Sec-butyl- 

2C-T-17 

60-100 

4 

Tert-butyl- 

2C-T-9 

60-100 

4 

Cyclopropyl- 

2C-T-15 

>30 

? 

Cyclopropylmethyl- 

2C-T-8 

30-50 

8 

(4-Heteroalkylthio-2,5-DMPEA) 

2-Methoxyethyl- 

2C-T-24 

25-40 

10 

2-Fluoroethyl- 

2C-T-21 

8-12 

30 


subjected to positional isomerization. Dropping of the methoxyl group 
from MMDA-2 (or MMDA) provides one of the few known 
phenethylamine hallucinogens with only two ring substituents. This 
base, 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), is also remarkable 
because the N-methyl homolog 3,4 (MDMA) has biological activity, 
although the nature of its action places it outside of this review. No other 
phenethylamine hallucinogen retains central activity on N-methylation. 
The mono-substituted analog 4-methoxyamphetamine (4-MA) is an 
active compound, but it is largely a cardiovascular stimulant. 

A similar group of compounds is known that has the 4-alkoxy group 
replaced with something without an oxygen atom. These are gathered in 
table 6. Among the more potent of these are the halogen-containing 

IOC 

analogs. DOM, DOB, and especially l(2,5-dimethoxy-4-[ “I] iodo- 
phenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI), have recently received much research 
attention as ligands in the study of serotonin receptors. 

Two families related to DOM are mentioned here but are not included in 
table 6. A few 4-alkylthio analogs called the Aleph compounds are 


83 





TABLE 5. TMA analogs 


Name 

Code 

Potency 

(mg) 

Potency 
x mescaline 

(Alkoxyamphetamine) 

4-Methoxy 

4-MA 

50-80 

5 

2,4-Dimethoxy 

2,4-DMA 

>60 

? 

2,5-Dimethoxy 

2,5-DMA 

80-160 

2.5 

3,4-Dime thoxy 

3,4-DMA 

in the 100s 

<1 

3,4,5-Trimethoxy 

TMA 

100-250 

1.7 

2,4,5-Trimethoxy 

TMA-2 

20-40 

10 

2,5-Dimethoxy-4-Ethoxy 

MEM 

20-50 

10 

2,5 -Dimethoxy-4-Propoxy 

MPM 

>30 

? 

2,3,4-Trimethoxy 

TMA-3 

>100 

? 

2,3,5-Trimethoxy 

TMA-4 

>80 

? 

2,3,6-Trimethoxy 

TMA-5 

ca. 30 

ca. 10 

2,4,6-Trimethoxy 

TMA-6 

25-50 

8 

2,3,4,5-Tetramethoxy 

TA 

>50 

? 

(Methylenedioxyamphetamine) 

3,4-Methy lenedioxy 

MDA a 

80-160 

2.5 

3-Methoxy-4,5-Methylenedioxy 

MMDA 

100-250 

1.7 

2-Methoxy-4,5-Methylenedioxy 

MMDA-2 

25-50 

8 

2-Methoxy-3,4-Methylenedioxy 

MMDA-3a 

20-80 

6 

4-Methoxy-2,3-Methylenedioxy 

MMDA-3b 

>80 

? 


a The N-methyl homolog of MDA (MDMA) is not appropriate to this 
review of hallucinogens. 


known. These correspond exactly to the 2C-T bases listed in table 4. 
Aleph, Aleph 2, Aleph 4, and Aleph 7 are the 4-methylthio-, 4-ethylthio-, 
4-isopropylthio-, and 4-propylthio-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine isomers, 
respectively. They are consistently more potent than their 2-carbon 
phenethylamine counterparts. 


84 





TABLE 6. DOM analogs 
Name 


Code 


Potency 

(ms) 


Potency 
x mescaline 


(4-Alkyl-2,5dimethoxyamphetamine) 


Methyl 

DOM (STP) 

3-10 

50 

Ethyl 

DOET 

2.0-6.0 

80 

Propyl 

DOPR 

2.5-5.0 

80 

Butyl 

DOBU 

>3 

? 

Iso-Butyl 

DOIB 

>10 

? 

Set-Butyl 

DOSB 

>25 

? 

Tert-Butyl 

DOTB 

>10 

? 


(4-Substituted-2,5dimethoxyamphetamine) 


Chloro 

DOC 

1.5-3.0 

150 

Bromo 

DOB 

1.0-3.0 

150 

Iodo 

DOI 

1.5-3.0 

150 

Nitro 

DON 

3.0-4.5 

80 

2-Fluoroethyl 

DOEF 

2.0-3.5 

100 

(3,4-Disubstituted-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine) 

Dimethyl 

G 

20-32 

10 

Trimethylene 

G-3 

12-18 

20 

Norhomvl 

G-5 

14-20 

18 



The second group has a 2,4,6-substitution pattern. The majority of the 
compounds listed in the last few tables has carried the 3,4,5- or the 
2,4,5-substitution pattern. The similarity of potency between TMA-2 and 
TMA-6 (the latter with the 2,4,6 substitution pattern, see table 5) has 
opened up a new family of hallucinogenic amphetamines, one of the 
authors’ current areas of research. With this group also, the 4-position 
appears to dictate the potency and nature of response. It seems that each 
of the 2,4,5-substituted materials may have an active 2,4,6-counterpart. 
The isomer that corresponds to DOM (2,6-dimethoxy-4-methylam- 
phetamine [pseudo-DOM]) is active at 15 to 25 mg orally. Synthetic 
procedures are now in hand to prepare the pseudo analogs of the 2C-T 
family with various alkylthio groups at the 4-position. 

The first six tables have been devoted to the phenethylamine 
hallucinogens; the remaining three list the second “kingdom” of 
pharmacologically related compounds, the tryptamine hallucinogens. 
Table 7 lists the known active tryptamines other than the psilocybe group. 
The N, N - d i a I k y 11 ry p t a m i n e s are the oldest and most thoroughly studied. 
Those with low molecular weight groups, DMT and N,N-diethyltryp- 
tamine [DET], are presumably inactivated through metabolic deamination 
and hence must be administered parenterally or with some amine oxidase 
inhibitor. The presence of groups with increased bulk, such as isopropyl 
groups, on the nitrogen atom allows these compounds to be active orally. 

The indole ring can carry a single oxygen substituent in the aromatic ring, 
and activity can be retained. The 4-substituted indoles are discussed 
below. The 5-hydroxylation of DMT (the substitution position of the 
neurotransmitter serotonin, 5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) yields 
bufotenine, which is probably not a hallucinogen. Converting this to its 
methyl ether yields a group of N,N-dialkyl tryptamines whose 
parenteral/oral availabilities closely parallel the DMT counterparts, 
except that there is generally an appreciable increase in potency. The 
masking of the two vulnerable locales of serotonin, the O-methylation to 
allow entry into the CNS and the a-methylation to avert enzymatic 
deamination, provide a,, O-dimethylserotonin. This is an orally active 
hallucinogen of uniquely high potency. Any other substitution on the 
indole ring (6-, 7-, or multisubstitution) gives inactive compounds. 

Almost nothing is known about the oral versus parenteral requirements, 
potency, or nature of action of tryptamines (5-proteo and 5-methoxy) 
with mixed alkyl groups on the basic nitrogen atom. This is the second 
area of the authors’ current research. 


86 



00 

-J 


TABLE 7. DMT analogs 
Name 


(N,N-dialkyltryptamine) 

H 

Dimethyl 

Diethyl 

Dipropyl 

Methylisopropyl 

Diisopropyl 

Diallyl 

(Ar-substituted — alky ltryptamine) 


H 

4-Me 

4- OH 

5- OH 
5 -OCH 3 
5 -OCH 3 
5 -OCH 3 

5 - OCH 3 

5.6- OCH, 

5.6- OCPLO 

6 - OH 
6 -F 

6 - OCH 3 

7- OCIT 


a-Methyl 

a-Methyl 

N,N-Dimethyl 

N,N-Dimethyl 

N,N-Dimethyl 

N,N-Disopropyl 

N-Methyl-n-isopropyl 

a-Methyl 

N-Methyl-n-isopropyl 

N-Methyl-n-isopropyl 

N,N-Dimethyl 

N,N-Diethyl 

N-Methyl-N-Isopropyl 

N-Methvl-N-Isopropyl 


IV = intravenous 



Tryptamine 

DMT 

DET 

DPT 

MIPT 

DIPT 


>100 <1 

60-100 (4-30IV) 1 

60-150 1 

20-100 ( 100 s po) 1 

10-25 4 

40-100 2 

80 1 


IT-290 

20-40 

3 

(psilocin, see separate table) 
(bufotenine, not CNS active?) 

>60 

<1 

5-MeO-DMT 

6-10 

10 

5-MeO-DIPT 

8-12 

7 

5-MeO-MIPT 

4-6 

15 

a„0-DMS 

3-5 

20 

5,6-OMe-MIPT 

>60 

<1 

>60 

<1 

6 -OH-DMT 

>80 

<1 

6 -F-DET 

>80 

<1 

6 -MeO-DIPT 

>50 

<1 

7-MeO-DIPT 

>70 

<1 



TABLE 8. Psilocybin analogs 


Name 

Code 

Potency 

(mg) 

Potency 
x mescaline 

(4-Oxy,N,N-dialkyltryptamine) 




Dimethyl (phosphate ester) 

CY-39 (PSOP) 

10-15 

6 

Dimethyl (free OH) 

CX-59 (PSOH) 

7-10 

8 

Methylpropyl (free OH) 

4-OH-MPT 

10-15 

6 

Methylisopropyl (methyl ether) 

4-MeO-MIPT 

20-30 

3 

Diethyl (phosphate ester) 

CEY-19 

20-30 

3 

Diethyl (free OH) 

CZ-74 

15-20 

4 

Diisopropyl (free OH) 

4-OH-DIPT 

15-20 

4 


An additional family of compounds should be mentioned here, the 
6 -carbolines. Their use has been well documented in the ethno- 
pharmacological literature as enzyme inhibitors that allow the 
tryptamines normally only active parenterally to be orally active, 
presumably by inhibiting first-pass metabolism in the liver. Also, they 
can be generated by the cyclization of 6-methoxytryptamine with a 
2-carbon unit such as acetaldehyde. In nature, they usually are found in 
one of three degrees of hydrogenation: harmine, harmaline, and 
tetrahydroharmine. The isomers more closely related to serotonin are 
similarly formed, synthetically, from 5-methoxytryptamine. Only 
harmaline, one of the principal components of Ayahuasca, has a 
reputation for being intrinsically an active hallucinogen. The aromatic 
analog, harmine, has little if any psychotropic activity. No reports have 
been published concerning the three cyclization products of 
5 -methoxy tryptamine. 

The family of tryptamines with an oxygen function at the 4-position is 
based on the active alkaloids of the mushroom genus Psilocybe (table 8). 
The phosphate ester alkaloid is psilocybin, and the free phenolic 
counterpart is the less stable compound psilocin. The dephosphorylation 
of psilocybin to psilocin appeal's to occur in the body, as both are 
molecularly equipotent. The N,N-diethyl homologs have been 
synthesized and explored in connection with psychotherapy. They appear 
to be a little less potent than the methyl counterparts. Another study has 
looked at other groupings on the nitrogen atom, and all materials 





investigated are potent and orally active. Both the monomethylated and 
nonmethylated homologs, baeocystin and norbaeocystin, occur as 
congeners of psilocin in some species of the mushrooms. They have not 
been assayed in humans. 

The last and by far most potent family of the tryptamine hallucinogens is 
found in the ergolines related to LSD. These are listed in table 9. 
Classically, the diethylamide has been considered the most potent of all 
and the prototype for comparison. The earliest work done in this area 
usually gave human potencies as an explicit fraction of the potency of 
LSD itself, and some of these values have been derived from a single 
dosage administration. The microgram (pg) ranges offered have been 
obtained by back calculations from these fractions. The N-l acetyl 
derivative is equipotent, probably due to an easy loss of the acetyl group 
by hydrolysis in the body. All variations studied on the amide nitrogen 
have led to compounds of diminished activity. 

However, variations of the N-6 substitution have maintained the potency 
of LSD and in some cases enhanced it. No studies have been made of the 
more potent N-6 homologs with amide nitrogen substituents other than 
the diethyl group found in LSD. 


CONCLUSION 

This chapter presents a brief picture of the present state of knowledge of 
the analogs of the classic hallucinogens. Relating these to the logical 
neurotransmitters, no structural theme is apparent that would allow a 
working theory of their mode of action. Many attractive research 
directions are obvious from the omissions in these tables. Two have been 
mentioned as being in progress. If the 2,4,6-substitution pattern proves to 
provide consistently active compounds, hypotheses suggesting some 
involvement of a hydroquinone intermediate explaining the activity of the 
2,4,5-substituted compounds will have to be reconsidered. Analysis of 
the geometry surrounding the basic nitrogen in the DMT homologs might 
accurately define the geometry requirements of the active site involving 
that location. These studies are also in progress. 

Other provocative questions remain. Might the remarkable activity of the 
N-methyl N-isopropyl substitution patterns of the tryptamines apply to 
the phenethylamines? Why are the active phenethylamines so active 


89 



TABLE 9. LSD analogs 
Name 


so 

o 


(Amide variations) 

Diethyl 

(1 -Ac, 2-H) 

(1-Me, 2-H) 

(1-H, 2-Br) 

(1-Me, 2-Br) 

Ethyl 

(1-Ac, 2-H) 

(1-Me, 2-H) 

Methyl 

Dimethyl 

Methylpropyl 

i-Hydroxy-2-Propyl 

l-Hydroxy-2-Butyf 

(1-Me, 2-H) 

-(CH-,) 5 -( pyrrolidinyl) 

(1-Me, 2-H) 

-CH 2 CH 2 OCH 2 CH 2 -(morpholmyl) 
(N-6 variations) 


H 



Ally! 

Butyl 

Phenethyl _ 

“Relative potency is based on intensity 


Code 



LSD-25 

50-200 

1 

ALD-52 

100-200 

1 

MLD-41 

200-300 

0.3 a 

BOL-148 

>1,000 

<0.1 

MBL-61 

>10,000 

<0.01 

LAE-32 

500-1,400 

0,1 a 

ALA-10 

1,200 

0.1 

MLA-74 

2,000 

0.05 a . 


ca. 500 

ca. 0.2‘ 

DAM-57 

500-1,200 

0.1 

LMP 

>100 

<1 

Ergonovine 

10,000 

0 .01 a 

Methylergonovine 
UML-491 (Sansert) 

2,000 

0.05 a 

4,000-8,000 

0.02 

LPD-824 

800 

o.r 

MPD-75 

>1,600 

<Q.Q5 

LSM-775 

300-600 

0.3 


Nor-LSD 

>500 

<0.3 

LSD 

50-200 

1 

EHLAD 

40-80 

2 

PROLAD 

80-175 


ALLYLAD 

50-150 

1 

BULAD 

>400 

<0.3 

PHENETHYLAD 

>350 

<0.3 


described effects, In some cases only a single dosage level was employed. 



whereas common wisdom would predict that they should be deaminated 
and thus inactive? Also, with these compounds and their amphetamine 
homologs, why is it only the 4-position that allows such extensive 
structural manipulation without much attenuation in activity? In the 
tryptamine world, might there not be a host of active compounds to be 
found pursuing the amphetamine-like structure of a ,0-DMS, and perhaps 
further homologs with one or two alkyl groups on the basic nitrogen? 

The answers to these and other related questions might provide valuable 
information to help explain the remarkable activity of this class of 
psychotropic agents. 


NOTE 

Some of the data presented here have not been published previously. A 
comprehensive bibliography documenting the known data reviewed in 
this article would contain hundreds of citations. For leading reviews that 
provide these references, the following should be consulted. 

Shulgin, A.T. Psychotomimetic drugs: Structure activity relationships. 
Iversen, L.L., Iversen, S.D.; and Snyder, S. H., eds. Handbook of 
Psychopharmacology. Vol. 11. New York: Plenum Press, 1978. 
pp. 243-333. 

Shulgin, A.T. Hallucinogens. In: Wolff, M.E., ed. Burger’s Medicinal 
Chemistry, 4th ed. New York: Wiley and Co., 1981a. pp. 1109-1137. 
Shulgin, A.T. Chemistry of Psychotomimetics. In: Hoffmeister, F., and 
Stille, G., eds. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, Vol. 55/3. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1981b. pp. 3-29. 

Shulgin, A.T., and Shulgin, A. PIHKAL: A Chemical Love Story. 
Berkeley, CA: Transform Press, 1991. 


AUTHORS 

Peyton Jacob III, Ph.D. 
Research Chemist 
3787 Highland Road 
Lafayette, CA 94549 

Alexander T. Shulgin, Ph.D. 
1483 Shulgin Road 
Lafayette, CA 94549 


91 



Human Hallucinogenic Drug 
Research: Regulatory, Clinical, 
and Scientific Issues 

Rick J. Strassman 


INTRODUCTION 

It is likely that no other group of drugs has been subject to such intensive 
clinical study and to then nearly complete neglect in such a short a period 
of time as the hallucinogens. Mescaline, the most well-known 
psychoactive alkaloid of the peyote cactus, was studied in a limited 
fashion (Kluver 1928) before the discovery of lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD). However, Sandoz Laboratories’ description of the microgram 
potency of LSD to induce psychotomimetic effects (Stoll 1947) generated 
tremendous excitement in psychiatry and may be seen as an equally 
important precursor to the modern era of biological psychiatry, as was the 
contemporaneous discovery of chlorpromazine’s antipsychotic properties. 

Thousands of subjects, both normal volunteers and psychiatric patients, 
received LSD and similar drugs in research in the United States and 
Europe. Szara (this volume) has summarized the research done and 
monetary effort expended toward understanding LSD’s effects during the 
early 1950s through the early 1970s. Important insights into human 
cognitive, emotional, electroencephalographic, and perceptual functions 
in normal individuals and in persons with a broad range of psychiatric 
disorders were detailed, based on early psyehopharmaeologic 
investigations of LSD’s effects (Hoffer and Osmond 1967). Drug- 
assisted psychotherapy, although not clearly proven efficacious before 
research with these drugs was stopped, had shown some promising results 
(Pahnke et al. 1970). Neither optimal patient selection nor psycho¬ 
therapeutic approaches had been decided upon, nor had a firm theoretical 
basis for this type of work been developed (Grinspoon and Bakalar 
1979). 

There are several recently published popular histories of the psychedelic 
era: its beginnings, flourishing, and eventual decline within the scientific, 
legislative, and media communities (Lee and Shlain 1985; Stevens 1987). 
Unsupervised use of these drugs by millions of young adults and the 


92 



domestic instability caused by the Vietnam War combined to make use 
and abuse of hallucinogens a significant public health concern. In order 
to restrict their use by the public, hallucinogens were placed into 
Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Drugs in this 
schedule have no known medical use, cannot be used safely even under 
medical supervision, and are highly abusable. However, the regulatory 
process involved in working with Schedule I compounds discouraged all 
but a few investigators from human research with these compounds. 
Recently, however, mescaline’s psychological and electroencepha- 
lographic effects have been studied by a German group (Oepen et al. 

1989). In addition, a group of Swiss clinical psychiatrists has been 
administering 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) and LSD 
to psychiatric patients since 1985, but no data have been forthcoming 
from purely clinical use (Widmer 1992). 

The confusing and often contradictory nature of the approaches taken in 
understanding and studying these compounds is reflected in the many 
names they have received. These names include but are not limited to: 
“hallucinogenic,” “psychedelic,” “psychotomimetic,” “mysticomimetic,” 
“entheogenic” (generating the divine), “psychodysleptic,” “illusogenic,” 
“phanerothyme” (“soul-feeling”), “psycholytic,” “phantasticant,” and 
“psychotogenic” (Stafford 1982). “Hallucinogenic,” probably the most 
widely used term in the medical literature, is used in this chapter. 

However, it should be remembered that frank hallucinations with these 
drugs are rare, and hallucinogen is as much a term of convenience as of 
accuracy (Shulgin, this volume). 

A tremendous amount of publicity and scientific discourse took place 
regarding the adverse effects of hallucinogenic drugs. As early as 1960, 
Cohen had published data on nearly 5,000 individuals exposed to LSD 
either as research subjects or in drug-assisted psychotherapy. These cases 
were obtained from his and others' research caseloads. He concluded that 
the incidence of psychotic reactions lasting longer than 48 hours was 
0.08 percent in controls and 0.18 percent in patients; the incidence of 
suicide attempts was 0 percent in controls and 0.12 percent in patients 
(Cohen 1960). Thousands of cases subsequently were reported of 
individuals presenting to emergency rooms and psychiatric clinics for 
treatment of adverse reactions. These included acute panic reactions, the 
bad trip, and “flashbacks,” or spontaneous eruptions into awareness of 
one or more features of a previous drug experience. 


93 



These reports have been reviewed carefully, and it was concluded that 
nearly all of these contained serious methodological flaws (Strassman 
1984). These unavoidable limitations to these descriptions of adverse 
effects included lack of knowledge of the actual identity or dose of drug, 
confounding combinations of other drugs or alcohol, sparse premorbid 
data on the subjects’ psychiatric history, and selection bias. Furthermore, 
it appeared that in carefully screened, prepared, supervised, and followed- 
up subjects, both experimental and psychotherapeutic, the incidence of 
prolonged or delayed adverse reactions was extremely low (Strassman 
1984). 

The necessary interfacing between human psychopharmacology and basic 
neuropharmacology has proceeded for the psychotherapeutic drugs such 
as minor tranquilizers, antidepressants, neuroleptics, and lithium. These 
parallel courses of investigation have provided clinicians with new 
families of drugs based upon data generated in lower animal models. 
Examples include the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT 1A ) partial agonist and 
anxiolytic agent buspirone and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
fluoxetine and sertraline. Such interfacing work, however, has not been 
possible with the hallucinogens because of the difficulty associated with 
human research with them. 

In spite of restrictions on human use of hallucinogens, basic research has 
proceeded at a rapid rate. For example, the original work describing the 
5-HT, and 5-HT 2 subtypes used LSD (Peroutka and Snyder 1979); the 
later discovery of the 5-HT lc subtype was made with LSD (Yagaloff and 
Hartig 1985); and phenethylamine hallucinogens are now the standard 
radioligands for localization of 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc subtypes in mammalian 
brain (Appel et al. 1990). 

Several converging factors now provide a suitable backdrop for the 
resumption of human research with hallucinogens (Freedman 1984). The 
aforementioned advances in serotonin neuropharmacology have 
generated one of the major thrusts in current neuroscience research; that 
is, the role of serotonin in normal and aberrant brain function. Much 
human psychopharmacologic data are being generated on the effects of 
5-HT agonists and antagonists, including L-tryptophan, L-5-hydroxy- 
tryptophan, fenfluramine, chlorimipramine, buspirone, b-chloro- 
(1 -piperazinyljpyrazine (MK-212), meta-chlorophenylpiperazine 
(MCPP), ritanserin, metergoline, methysergide, and cyproheptadine (e.g., 
Murphy et al. 1991). No 5-HT active compounds generate more 
profound or unusual effects on mental function than the hallucinogens, 


94 



and a firmer theoretical foundation is now available to begin assessing the 
relative contributions of specific 5-HT subtypes in their mechanism of 
action. In addition, the use of hallucinogenic drugs by young adults is 
growing, unlike the use of other illicit psychoactive drugs (NIDA 1991). 
Therefore, public health issues are addressed by resumption of careful 
study of the hallucinogens with the possibility of developing safe, 
effective, and rapid antidotes to drug-induced acute adverse reactions. 
Finally, the approaches taken by proponents of the psychedelic revolution 
may have faded sufficiently into the background of the American psyche 
to allow the resumption of systematic, hypotheses-based research into the 
effects and mechanisms of action, and perhaps therapeutic utility, of these 
most interesting drugs. 


EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PUBLIC HEALTH SIGNIFICANCE 

Hallucinogen use in this country had remained relatively constant over 
the last 20 years but now appears to be increasing. The 1990 high school 
drug use survey (Johnson et al. 1991 a) found that approximately 
10 percent of high school seniors polled had used hallucinogens at least 
once, an increase of 0.4 percent since 1989. These lifetime prevalence 
rates are about the same as those for cocaine, seven to eight times higher 
than for heroin, almost twice as high as for sedatives, and three times 
higher than for steroids. LSD ranks first in the categories “most intense” 
and “longest” high among respondents. The comparable population 
estimates for young adults and college students indicate a 0.8 percent rise 
in lifetime prevalence rates for LSD use (0.6 percent increase in annual 
prevalence rates) in 1990 compared to 1989; females’ use had been 
converging on males, but “in 1990, an important increase in LSD use 
among males widened the difference again” (Johnson et al. 1991 b, p. 92). 
Lifetime prevalence rates in young adults for LSD are three times those 
for phencyclidine (PCP) and more than half those for cocaine. The 1990 
National Household Survey of Drug Abuse (NIDA 1991) reports that 
lifetime prevalence of hallucinogen use is 7.6 percent, compared with 
11.3 percent for cocaine. The number of individuals in this country, 
therefore, who have used an hallucinogen at least once is estimated at 
between 13 and 17 million. Whites use hallucinogens more (8.7 percent 
lifetime prevalence) than either African Americans (3.0 percent) or 
Hispanics (5.2 percent), with a consistent male-to-female ratio of 
2-3:1 across all ethnic groups. 


95 



The compound used in the study described below, N,N-dimethyl- 
tryptamine (DMT), is used by a seemingly small proportion of 
hallucinogen abusers. However, DMT is a prototypical tryptamine 
hallucinogen. Variations on its structure have generated other short- 
duration parenterally active drugs such as N,N-diethyltryptamine (Szara 
et al. 1966) and N,N-dipropyltryptamine (Soskin et al. 1973). 

Furthermore, designer drugs developed to circumvent existing scheduling 
laws and/or produce specific qualitative effects derive from this 
compound (Repke et al. 1985). Other recent developments also are 
important. Ayahuasca, an Amazonian plant extract (McKenna et al. 
1984o), has become popular in some circles on the coasts, being imported 
from Peru and Brazil. It contains DMT, found in one of the plants 
(Psychotria viridis), and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibiting 
6-carboline harmala alkaloids in another plant (Banisteriopsis caapi), 
allowing the DMT to become orally active (McKenna et al. 19848). 

Space limitations prevent a detailed discussion of the relationship 
between hallucinogen use and other psychiatric disorders. However, the 
greater incidence of use of hallucinogens by individuals with 
schizophrenia than by a normal population (Mueser et al. 1990), the 
possible role of hallucinogens in the development of borderline 
psychopathology (Dulit et al. 1990), the higher incidence of hallucinogen 
use in nondrinkers who are first- and second-degree relatives of 
alcoholics compared to controls (Schuckit and Sweeney 1987), and the 
role of hallucinogens in precipitating schizophrenic and other psychoses 
(Vardy and Kay 1983) all bespeak the importance these drugs have for 
issues of public psychiatric health. 


REGULATORY ISSUES 

A detailed account of the process by which an investigational new drug 
(IND) permit was acquired for DMT has been published (Strassman 
1991). This chapter summarizes the salient points. 

There were several reasons DMT, rather than longer-acting, more popular 
hallucinogens, was chosen for a research proposal. First, it is a very 
short-acting hallucinogen, with peak effects obtained within 2 to 
5 minutes after intramuscular (IM) injection (Sai-Halasz et al. 1958). 

This attribute is an advantage in the potentially anxiety-provoking 
environment provided by a modem clinical research center, where a 
renewal of human studies with hallucinogens must take place. That is, no 


96 



matter how troubled a subject’s experience on DMT might be, it would 
be short-lived and relatively manageable. 

Second, DMT is an endogenous hallucinogen whose existence in the 
human nervous system has never been adequately explicated (Gillin et al. 
1976). Thus, an investigation into the mechanisms of action and effects 
of DMT might shed some light on endogenous hallucinatory states. 

Along this line of reasoning, antidotes to DMT might show efficacy as 
treatments of disorders with hallucinations such as schizophrenia. The 
importance of the 5-HT 2 receptor subtype in the mechanism of action of 
the novel antipsychotic drugs clozapine (Meltzer and Nash 1991) and 
ritanserin (Gelders et al. 1986) bespeaks the relevance of this approach. 
Finally, DMT abuse is not a widespread phenomenon. Thus, beginning 
human hallucinogen research with DMT would not cause the intense 
public scrutiny that might result from knowledge that LSD once again 
was being used in humans. 

In order to use a drug in humans for either nonindicated purposes or a 
purpose with no currently established use, it is necessary to apply to the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for an IND permit. However, for a 
Schedule I hallucinogen, none of which has been used in humans for 
many years, there is the additional problem of locating an acceptable 
source of the compound. A Drug Master File for the compound must be 
established for the FDA to determine basic safety and manufacturing data 
concerning any drug for human use. This file contains manufacturing 
and quality control data for the drug to which FDA may refer. FDA also 
is charged with concurrently establishing whether the proposed course of 
study will yield worthwhile data. 

The proposed study was to establish normative dose-response data for 
DMT in a group of experienced hallucinogen users in a double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled study design. 

Experienced hallucinogen users were chosen for three reasons: 
experienced subjects would be less likely to panic than naive subjects in 
response to the sudden onset and intensely hallucinogenic effects of a 
short-acting drug such as DMT; experienced subjects would be more 
capable of carefully describing the effects of DMT than would subjects 
with no experience with these compounds; and liability for the 
subsequent development of substance abuse and/or other psychiatric 
pathology would be less sustainable in subjects with a prior history of use 
of these drugs. 


97 



The literature on the biological and psychological effects on humans and 
animals of hallucinogens in general and DMT in particular was reviewed, 
primarily from the perspective of recent advances in 5-HT neuropharm¬ 
acology and psychopharmacology. Several hypotheses were then 
generated regarding what variables would be affected by DMT, what the 
interpretation of these effects would be, and subsequent experiments that 
would help prove or disprove these interpretations. The variables of 
interest were easily observable and verifiable. They included several 
neuroendocrine functions, cardiovascular effects, autonomic effects 
(pupil diameter and core temperature), and rating scale scores. 

The first step in the application process for use of DMT was to submit a 
protocol to the Human Research Review Committee of the University of 
New Mexico School of Medicine's Institutional Review Board (IRB). 

The IRB is responsible for the protection of human subjects involved in 
any clinical research. Although the IRB is concerned primarily with risk- 
to-benefit ratios, it also may offer suggestions regarding the scientific 
quality of the proposed study. This latter function usually is subsumed 
by the Scientific Advisory Committee of the General Clinical Research 
Center (GCRC) of the University of New Mexico Medical School, where 
the actual study was to take place. 

The IRB places great emphasis on the nature of the informed consent 
document and, at first, was inclined to have this document state that DMT 
“had no known medical use,” one of the criteria for placement into 
Schedule I. However, the suggestion was made that, if FDA approval 
were subsequently obtained, this would not be the case, as DMT would 
have been approved as a medically useful compound (i.e., as a probe of 
human serotonergic psychopharmacology and neuroendocrinology). The 
IRB accepted this reasoning and did not insist on including this phrase, 
which would have unnecessarily alarmed the subjects who were already 
approaching the study with some trepidation. The IRB also wanted a 
statement in the informed consent document regarding what effects 
subjects might experience while under the influence of DMT. 

Interviews had previously been conducted with 19 experienced DMT 
free-base smokers in order to draft a new rating scale for this study (see 
below). Thus, a relatively balanced account of the subjective effects of 
DMT could be provided without going into too much detail. The 
subjects interviewed spoke most frequently of positively charged effects, 
so these predominated in the infoimed consent. However, panic, fear, 
confusion, and other unpleasant experiences also were listed as possible 


98 



outcomes. Prolonged ( > 24 hour) reactions to hallucinogenic drugs do 
occur in carefully controlled settings, although such reactions never have 
been reported for DMT. However, their overall incidence is quite low. 
The informed consent document, then, included a statement concerning 
the fact that subjects might experience prolonged adverse responses to the 
drug and that psychiatric hospitalization was available. 

Finally, the IRB was told that local approval was necessary before 
applying for Federal permission to begin this study. Once Federal 
permission was acquired, the principal investigator (PI) would notify the 
IRB and begin, and not before. 

The issues of confidentiality and anonymity also were of concern, since 
admitting to the use of Schedule I drugs is a crime, and a relatively high- 
functioning group was expected to volunteer for the study based on the 
socioeconomic status of the initial interviewees. Meetings with the 
university hospital counsel, directors of medical records and hospital 
admissions, GCRC head nurse, and administrative assistants led to a 
coding scheme by which subjects’ confidentiality and anonymity were 
maintained, with only the PI having the key to the code. 

The next step was presenting the protocol to the GCRC Scientific 
Advisory Committee for a thorough scientific critique. Issues of 
informed consent and ethical review were not taken up, except in a 
general way, as these concerns were the purview of the IRB. 

After approval from both university committees charged with scientific 
and ethical issues. State Pharmacy Board approval was necessary to 
obtain and use a Schedule I drug. The protocol and the appropriate 
approvals had previously been submitted to the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) in Washington, DC, but approval had not yet been 
received. However, the State Pharmacy Board approved the protocol 
after it was explained that Federal DEA approval could not be received 
until State approval was obtained and that the project could not begin 
until all the requisite Federal permits were in hand. 

The Federal approval process required simultaneous interaction with the 
FDA and the DEA. The applications for a Schedule I permit for DMT 
were sent to DEA, and the IND application was sent to FDA at the same 
time. Nearly 2 years were required to keep both of these processes on 
track until they were finally approved. 


99 



The application process to the DEA was complicated by requests for 
DMT for two separate reasons, possibly from two different sources, and 
of two different grades. DMT was required for the development of a 
laboratory assay for DMT in human blood and could be purchased from 
one of several chemical supply houses. However, laboratory grade DMT 
could not be used for human studies, even if it were purified to FDA 
standards. Thus, an additional source of pharmaceutical quality DMT 
was necessary for human administration. DEA was reluctant to approve 
the Schedule I application to possess laboratory grade DMT until the IND 
was received from the FDA. FDA could not decide whether to approve 
the IND request until pharmaceutical quality DMT was on hand and its 
appropriateness for human use could be confirmed. FDA finally wrote a 
brief letter to DEA saying that the science of the study was reasonable 
and that human studies of DMT would not begin until the FDA had 
deemed it safe to begin, but that DEA could approve the Schedule I 
permit to obtain laboratory grade DMT (so assay development could 
begin) and pharmaceutical grade DMT (to which the appropriate quality 
control procedures could be applied). 

The next major effort involved finding a source of DMT approved by the 
FDA. The FDA required a pedigree of the DMT if it were to be 
administered parenterally, the only way DMT alone is active. The 
pedigree is a description of all precursors, intermediates, and impurities in 
these compounds, en route to the final synthesis of the DMT. A detailed 
chemical analysis of the final product also is required. Additionally, the 
manufacturer must provide FDA with details concerning the 
manufacturing and cleanup procedures to assure FDA that “good 
manufacturing procedures (GMP)” were followed. The National Institute 
on Drug Abuse (NIDA) had some DMT “on the shelf,” as did Sigma 
Chemical (from which the laboratory grade DMT was purchased). Either 
sample could be purified to > 99 percent purity, but FDA would not 
accept DMT without a pedigree. Neither NIDA nor Sigma had the 
pedigree information. Several other possible sources also proved to be 
either legally or economically unfeasible. 

Finally, the DEA determined that regulations allow the synthesis of small 
batches of Schedule I drugs by previously licensed research laboratories 
if the drug was for research rather than fiduciary puiposes. The 
“coincidental activities” clause frees synthesizers of small batches of 
scheduled drugs from the much more rigorous and costly security 
arrangements required for manufacturers with primarily commercial 
interests. A colleague with a Schedule I permit for DMT then agreed to 


100 



make a small batch of DMT for this study and to provide the requisite 
documentation, a collaboration with which FDA was satisfied in 
principle. 

The DMT was formulated for intravenous (IV) administration by the 
inpatient pharmacy of the University of New Mexico Hospital. The 
DMT then had to be put through the quality control steps required by 
FDA. Since pharmaceutical companies work with much larger lots of 
drugs than this small batch, it took some creative problem solving to 
determine the number of vials of injectable DMT that needed to be tested 
for pyrogenicity, sterility, and content uniformity. The last issue 
concerns both the concentration of representative samples of the product 
being within 5 to 10 percent of the hypothetical value (in this case 
40 milligrams per milliliter [mg/ml]) and the maintenance of this 
concentration over time. 

Satisfied with the quality of the DMT for human use and the scientific 
rigor of the study, FDA gave approval to begin. DEA was notified at this 
time. Amendments to this protocol, if not substantive, were discussed 
and approved by telephone. More substantial amendments, such as 
combining DMT with another drug, required both written and telephone 
consultation as well as formally requesting the manufacturer of the 
additional drug to provide written authorization for FDA to access its 
Drug Master File and IND information. DEA was sent copies of all 
changes to the original DMT protocol. 


CLINICAL ISSUES 

Recruitment, Screening, and Orientation of Subjects 

Experienced hallucinogen users were recruited for this study by word of 
mouth, except for the last subject who responded to an announcement 
sent through the psychology department graduate student training office 
of a local university. Although this particular issue has not yet arisen, it 
was decided to take no more than two subjects from any particular 
department or division to prevent the development of cliques, an 
unfortunate occurrence in previous human hallucinogen studies using 
graduate students. Subjects initially called the PI to discuss the protocol. 
They were asked about current medication use or drug abuse and whether 
they had experience with hallucinogens. Those who were taking 
medication chronically, had an intercurrent medical illness, or were 


101 



currently abusing cocaine or alcohol were not accepted for further 
screening. Occasional marijuana use was accepted. The subjects were 
then interviewed in person to screen more carefully for current medical 
and psychiatric conditions and to assess the level of experience with 
hallucinogenic drugs. This interview assessed adaptive and maladaptive 
responses to dysphoric experiences with these drugs. That is, the 
investigators were interested in knowing how subjects managed bad trips 
and whether they repressed and denied, or acknowledged, the relevance 
of these experiences to their personal lives. Examples of this type of 
adaptive response to an acute adverse reaction are being more careful 
with whom the person takes hallucinogens and deciding not to take these 
drugs in a busy metropolitan setting. 

Subjects would have been withdrawn if they currently suffered from a 
severe Axis I disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, major affective disorder, 
substance abuse, or anxiety disorder) or had a history of psychosis not 
due to either drugs or fever. One subject with an adjustment disorder 
related to divorce proceedings was included, as he appeared to be 
managing these stresses adaptively. A past history of major depression or 
substance abuse was not necessarily cause for exclusion from the study if 
subjects were in good remission for at least 1 year, understood the nature 
of their episode(s), and were not in life circumstances that could 
precipitate a recurrence during the study. 

Subjects also were required to have relatively good object relations, as 
determined by stability of work, school, and interpersonal functions. In 
this study, the subject with the most chaotic life circumstances was the 
person who developed an intercurrent depression midway through the 
protocol and had to be withdrawn from further participation. Such 
individuals are not believed suitable for this type of project until their 
personal and/or work lives are more stable. 

Subjects were interested in why this work was being done, the expected 
results, and the hypotheses. Honesty and tact are very important when 
orienting and preparing subjects for hallucinogenic drug studies. Such 
subjects, during the intoxication, may be exquisitely sensitive to 
interpersonal nuances, attempts to obscure or he, and personal discomfort 
with particular - issues. Any approach with these subjects that hints of 
deviousness, dishonesty, manipulation, or callousness is multiplied 
several times over when the actual drug intoxication is underway. Thus, 
starting off on the right foot is not only desirable but will prevent 
paranoid, panic, and dysphoric reactions later during the actual study. 


102 



At that time, the nature of the study was described, and subjects received 
a copy of the informed consent to review. The subjects were asked to 
think over their participation and were told to call the PI with their 
decision or any further questions. Prospective subjects were instructed to 
discuss their participation with their spouse or significant other. The 
handful of subjects with fearful and reluctant spouses needed more time 
to decide to participate; some required a meeting between the spouse and 
study staff to prevent study participation from generating unnecessary 
friction within a couple. Such friction could not help but carry over into 
the drug sessions and affect the quality of drug effects. 

The informed consent document stated that the primary effects of DMT 
were psychological, although high doses can cause a transient moderately 
elevated blood pressure. Auditory and/or visual hallucinations might 
occur, and other unusual effects were likely. Sense of time might be 
altered; very powerful emotions, both pleasurable or unpleasant, might be 
experienced, including opposite feelings or thoughts at the same time. 
Extreme sensitivity to the environment and people, including frank 
paranoia, could occur; on the other hand, subjects might not notice 
anything at all in the environment. Separation of mental processes from 
all physical sensations could occur. Extreme changes of mood are not 
uncommon. The incidence of prolonged ( > 24 hr) adverse reactions to 
hallucinogenic drugs in well-screened, prepared, and followed-up 
subjects was described as quite low. If prolonged adverse reactions to 
DMT did develop, 24-hour emergency psychiatric consultation was 
available. Psychiatric hospitalization could also be arranged. 

Only 3 of the original 12 subjects had previous experience with DMT, 
and all were extremely interested in knowing as much about it as 
possible. Each subject received a copy of a chapter on the history, 
botany, chemistry, and effects of short-acting tryptamines written for an 
educated lay audience (Stafford 1982, pp. 308-331). 

Prospective subjects then received a structured clinical interview (SCID) 
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Ill-Revised 
(DSM-III-R), Outpatient Version (Spitzer et al. 1987), by a trained 
psychiatric research nurse. First-degree relatives' psychiatric histories 
were obtained during the SCID. Diagnoses were confirmed by 
discussion with two research psychiatrists. A medical history, a physical 
examination, and laboratory screening tests then were performed by the 
PI. Laboratory tests included a complete blood count with differential, 
24-item chemistry panel, thyroid functions (including thyroid stimulating 


103 



hormone), routine urinalysis, and electrocardiogram (EKG). Subjects 
were withdrawn who demonstrated any significant abnormalities in this 
screening, including thyroid disorder, high blood pressure (diastolic over 
90 mm Hg), heart disease/abnormal EKG, hepatitis, peptic ulcer disease, 
diabetes, or other serious medical problems. 

The PI administered the medical work-up personally to establish a hands- 
on relationship with subjects that would facilitate their ability to more 
comfortably regress under the effects of DMT under supervision in a 
clinical research setting, and because the personal relationship might 
prove helpful. This was also the first opportunity for subjects to meet the 
research nurse who was to assist in the drug sessions. She introduced 
herself, drew the requisite screening blood samples, performed the EKG, 
and gave subjects a brief tour of the inpatient unit. This allowed subjects 
to initiate a relationship with the nurse and become accustomed to her 
manner of performing potentially painful, uncomfortable, and 
embarrassing procedures (even more so in the midst of the DMT 
intoxication). Subsequently, the PI and nurse discussed initial 
impressions of the subjects. 

Nature of the Research Team 

The importance of one clinical nurse being involved with subjects from 
start to finish of the protocol cannot be overemphasized. The nurse's 
presence is important to the development of subjects’ trust and ability to 
attend completely to the effects of the drug, just as the subjects’ trust and 
confidence in the PI as the only one ever to administer the drug is 
important. On the rare occasion when the nurse was unavailable for 
inpatient studies, things never went as smoothly, subjects were not as 
relaxed, and verbal and nonverbal signals between the substituting nurse 
and PI were not as clear and unimpeded as with the regular nurse. All of 
these issues are significant when subjects are in an extremely regressed, 
suggestible, and, at times, disoriented state. 

In addition, the nurse preferably should be of the opposite gender to that 
of the PI. The regressed state induced by hallucinogens greatly enhances 
the subjects’ tendency to project and overly identify with the 
experimental team. The presence of two authority figures of opposite 
genders may help provide a soothing transference template for subjects 
who may be experiencing helpless infantile feelings. 


104 



The PI for human hallucinogen studies should be a psychiatrist with 
experience in the interviewing, diagnosis, and treatment of psychotic 
(drug-induced or otherwise) states. The PI should have extensive 
psychotherapeutic expertise, as the transference and countertransference 
issues involved in dealing with childlike and regressed conditions 
requires great tact and sensitivity. If at all possible, the PI should also 
have had a successful course of psychotherapy/psychoanalysis in order to 
learn about his/her interpersonal style, nuances, idiosyncracies, and their 
effect on others. 

DMT Sessions and Their Supervision 

Before entering into the double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized 
arm of the study, all subjects received nonblind administrations of 
0.04 and 0.4 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) IV DMT, usually on 
consecutive days. The DMT solution (40 mg/ml) was drawn into a sterile 
tuberculin syringe at a dose range of 0.04 to 0.4 mg/kg, and diluted with 
sterile saline to 1.0 ml before administration. Tolerance was not a 
concern, as previous work demonstrated no tolerance to twice daily IM 
administration of fully hallucinogenic doses of DMT for 5 consecutive 
days. The drug was administered IV rather than IM as had been reported 
previously (Szara 1957) because of the results of the initial dose-finding 
studies using a subject with experience smoking DMT free base, the usual 
form and route of administration by recreational users (Stafford 1982). 

The onset and intensity of effect of 1.0 mg/kg IM DMT fumarate were 
described by this subject as significantly less intense and hallucinogenic 
than a previous experience with the smoked drug. Further dose-finding 
studies with this subject and another experienced DMT smoker 
established that 0.4 mg/kg IV DMT fumarate produced a rush and 
hallucinogenic effects comparable to or slightly greater than those seen 
with a full dose of smoked DMT free base. 

Subjects were admitted to a dimly lit (about 100 lux) room by 9:00 a.m. 
after having fasted since midnight. A butterfly style small gauge metal 
needle was inserted into a forearm vein and kept patent with heparinized 
saline. Subjects were allowed to relax for 30 minutes before the drug was 
given. DMT was infused over 30 seconds and flushed with 5 ml of 
sterile saline over the next 15 seconds. Blood pressure and heart rate 
were taken with an automatic cuff several times before and frequently 
during the 30 minutes following drug administration. IV diphen¬ 
hydramine and diazepam and sublingual nitroglycerin were available for 
severe allergic, emotional, and hypertensive reactions, respectively. The 


105 



research team (a nurse and psychiatrist) sat quietly on either side of the 
subject, attentive to verbal and nonverbal cues, but did not offer any 
direction or advice unless absolutely necessary during the first several 
minutes, the time of peak effects of the drug. Verbal and emotional 
support were provided as necessary, but drug sessions were not 
exploratory or therapeutic in intent nor nature. The experienced nature of 
the subjects, their relatively stable object relations, and the consistent 
emphasis on objective data collection was helpful in focusing subjects’ 
expectations toward these goals. As drug effects resolved, discussion 
focused on the nature of the subject’s experiences, The butterfly catheter 
was removed at 30 minutes postinjection, and the Hallucinogen Rating 
Scale (HRS, see below) was administered. After the subjects ate a snack 
or meal, they were discharged. 

Subjects felt the onset of effects before the 45-second infusion was 
completed. Peak hallucinogenic effects of 0.4 mg/kg doses occurred 
usually before the first vital sign check at 2 minutes postinjection, a 
useful temporal reference point for subjects. Peak effects began resolving 
at 90 to 120 seconds postinjection. Subjects remained moderately 
intoxicated by the 0.4 mg/kg dose for another 5 to 15 minutes and felt 
relatively normal by 25 to 30 minutes postinjection. 

The nonblind days served several purposes. They allowed assessment of 
the cardiovascular and subjective effects of both subclinical and fully 
hallucinogenic doses of DMT in a novel and potentially anxiety- 
provoking setting. These days also provided the research team and 
subjects an opportunity to become acquainted and familiar with each 
others’ styles without the extensive blood drawing and use of the rectal 
thermistor that could exaggerate any potentially paranoid reactions. 
Subjects were also able to calibrate themselves to what to expect 
regarding minimal and maximal effects of the drug, one of the puiposes 
of the double-blind study being to determine whether subjects could 
distinguish among incremental doses of DMT. Finally, these nonblind 
days provided subjects with the opportunity to drop out of the study 
before extensive data had been collected. None withdrew, although one 
subject was dropped because his diastolic blood pressure rose to >100 
mm Hg after a low dose. 

Double-blind study days were quite similar to the nonblind days. Two IV 
lines were inserted, the second for frequent blood drawing, as was a 
flexible reusable rectal thermistor for core temperature measurement. 

Pupil diameter was measured against a standard card with black circles of 


106 



1 millimeter gradations near - the subject’s face. DMT and sterile saline 
placebo dosages of 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 mg/kg were administered. 
Dosages of 0.4 mg/kg were assumed to be fully hallucinogenic, 0.05 mg 
would be barely distinguishable from placebo, and the intermediate doses 
were equally spaced on a log scale. Blood samples were drawn and later 
assayed for beta-endorphin, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
cortisol, prolactin, growth hormone, and melatonin. Pupil diameter and 
vital signs (VS) (i.e., heart rate and blood pressure) were measured 2, 5, 
10, 15, 30, and 60 minutes after drug administration. Since the last blood 
sample was at 60 minutes postinjection, the HRS was administered 
30 minutes later than for the nonblind sessions. This second 30-minute 
period was usually taken up by more relaxed conversation, although 
when possible, attention was repeatedly turned back toward the subjects’ 
drug experience. 

Study sessions occurred at an interval of at least 2 weeks from January to 
September, 1991. The one female subject was studied during the early 
follicular phase of her cycle. A negative result to a pregnancy test drawn 
the night before her study days was always ensured before drug 
administration. 


SCIENTIFIC ISSUES 

Serotonergic Mediation of Biologic and Behavioral Effects 

Hallucinogenic drugs have multiple effects on central neurotransmission. 
The area currently of greatest interest is serotonin and its receptors, 
specifically the 5-HT 2 , 5-HT IA and 5-HT lc , subtypes (Heym and Jacobs 
1987). Noradrenergic (Horita and Hamilton 1969) and dopaminergic 
(Ahn and Makman 1979) effects of hallucinogens have been described 
but are not now receiving comparable attention. 

Hallucinogenic drugs, as primarily serotonergic agonists or partial 
agonists, have diffuse and relatively well documented physiological 
effects. Growth hormone, prolactin, beta-endorphin, ACTH, and cortisol 
are all affected by serotonergic stimuli (Van de Kar 1991). Many of these 
hormones rise with the administration of hallucinogens in lower animals 
(Koenig et al. 1987) and humans (Demsich and Neubauer 1979) and are 
believed modulated by 5-HT 1A , 5-HT lc , and/or 5-HT 2 receptor subtypes. 
Cardiovascular variables (McCall and Humphrey 1982), core temperature 
(Horita and Dillie 1954), and pupillary diameter (Greiner et al. 1958) also 


107 



are affected by serotonergic hallucinogens, with the majority of data 
suggesting 5-HT 2 mechanisms of action. 

Studies in Animals. Animal behavioral studies use several models of 
hallucinogenicity to pharmacologically characterize known hallucinogens 
and to assess whether novel compounds have hallucinogenic properties. 
These models include drug discrimination (DD) (Appel et al. 1982) 
(consistent with 5-HT 1A [Spencer et al. 1987] and 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc 
[Glennon, this volume] effects); the serotonin syndrome (mediated by the 
5 -HT, a subtype [Smith and Peroutka 1986]) and one of its components, 
head shakes (mediated by the 5-HT 2 subtype [Peroutka et al. 1981]); the 
abortive limb flick in cats (Jacobs et al. 1976); and the characteristic 
exploratory behavior patterns of rodents placed in a novel environment 
(Geyer, this volume). All these models, although generating much 
relevant data, lack requisite specificity. For example, apomorphine 
(Geyer et al. 1979) and quipazine (Kuhn et al. 1978) appear 
hallucinogenic in some of these models, and psilocybin (Koemer and 
Appel 1983) is sometimes not found to be so. 

The 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc subtype is now of most interest regarding mediation of 
hallucinogenic drug effects. For example, ritanserin, a potent and 
selective 5-HT 2 /5-HT, c antagonist (Sahin-Erdemeli et al. 1991), blocks 
the discriminable effects of LSD in lower animals (Colpaert et al. 1985). 

It also blocks certain neuroendocrine (Lee et al. 1991) and subjective 
(Seibyl et al. 1991) effects of serotonergic agonists in humans, effects that 
may be mediated by 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc receptors. Linally, anecdotal reports 
indicate that ritanserin pretreatment blocks the hallucinogenic effects of 
LSD in humans. However, the 5-HT 1A receptor subtype also is important. 
DMT (Deliganis et al. 1991) and LSD (Pierce and Peroutka 1989) have 
almost equal affinities for the two subtypes. 

An endogenous human hallucinogen, 5-MeO-DMT (Smythies et al. 

1979), used in many animal studies of hallucinogenic drug effects, has 
greater affinity for the 5-HT, A receptor than for the 5-HT 2 receptor 
(McKenna et al. 1990). Additionally, the discriminative effects of 
5-MeO-DMT, which generalize to LSD (Young et al. 1982) and the 
selective 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc agonist l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)-2- 
aminopropane (DOM) (Glennon et al. 1979; Glennon et al. 1986), are 
blocked by the 5-HT, A antagonist pindolol (Spencer et al. 1987), which is 
essentially devoid of 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc effects (Hoyer 1988). The 5-HT, A 
receptor may therefore contribute necessary effects that produce the 
characteristic hallucinogenic drug syndrome. Although DMT's 


108 



neuroendocrine and behavioral effects were inconsistently blocked by 
cyproheptadine (Meltzer et al. 1980), the lack of specificity of this 
antagonist makes assessment of relative contributions of the 5-HT 2 and 
5-HT, subtypes difficult. 

Experimental Results of DMT Administration. Full details of the 
effects of DMT administration on multiple biological variables have been 
presented (Strassman and Qualls 1994). Generally, DMT was physically 
well tolerated by the subjects participating in this study. There were no 
episodes of nausea or vomiting with the dose range used, something that 
cannot be always said for longer-acting drugs (Denber 1956). One 
subject’s diastolic blood pressure rose to >100 mm Hg after a screening, 
nonblind dose of 0.04 mg/kg; that subject was withdrawn from further 
participation. As one other subsequent subject had to be dropped from 
further study after a similar rise in response to 0.05 mg/kg DMT, this test 
dose of drug is necessary if higher doses are to be used. 

As expected, based upon lower animal and clinical data, there were dose- 
dependent elevations in several neuroendocrine variables in response to 
DMT. Beta-endorphin, ACTH, cortisol, and prolactin were stimulated. 
The rise in POMC peptides was nearly 4 to 5 times baseline, with peak 
effects occurring within 5 minutes of DMT administration. Growth 
hormone rose relative to placebo, but the effects of the 0.05 mg/kg dose 
were no different than those of the 0.4 mg/kg dose. Melatonin levels in 
six subjects whose 0.4 mg/kg dose blood samples were analyzed 
demonstrated no daytime stimulation of this pineal hormone. The 
negative melatonin data are inconsistent with DMT's biological effects 
being mediated by nonspecific stress rather than by selective serotonin 
receptor subtype activation. The rise in beta-endorphin seen in this study 
is more than twice that seen after a 28.5 mile mountain race in which 
daytime melatonin levels doubled (Strassman et al. 1989). The earlier 
study proposed that massive sympathetic drive (i.e., catacholamine 
release) was responsible for the observed rise in melatonin. In the present 
study, a greater rise in beta-endorphin was seen in circumstances eliciting 
no effect on melatonin levels. These two sets of data make it unlikely 
that a stress effect (i.e., purely sympathetic activation) drove the 
neuroendocrine variables; if that were the case, melatonin levels would 
have risen, which they did not. 

Additionally, there were dose-dependent elevations in mean arterial blood 
pressure, heart rate, rectal temperature, and pupil diameter. For nearly all 
of these biological dependent variables, the dose at which statistically 


109 



significant differences could be seen between DMT and placebo was 
0.2 mg/kg, the threshold dose for hallucinogenic effects. 

Although sublingual nitroglycerin and IV diphenhydramine were 
available at the bedside for every session, there was never an occasion to 
use them for hypertensive or allergic reactions. However, the author 
believes these drugs and IV diazepam should be readily available during 
all hallucinogenic drug sessions. 

Subjective Effects 

The study protocol was designed to generate normative dose-response 
data for DMT in nonpsychiatrically ill volunteers. The data were to 
include biological and psychological variables. There was little difficulty 
deciding upon which biological variables to study, based on human and 
basic data regarding 5-HT regulation of multiple physiological processes. 

Rating Scale. The author decided to develop a new rating scale to 
carefully assess the subjective effects induced by the powerful, short¬ 
acting hallucinogen DMT rather than using previously developed 
instruments. The goal was to devise a scale developed from a population 
different than that used to develop normative data for the standard drug 
effect questionnaire, the Addiction Research Center Inventory (ARCI) 
(Haertzen and Hickey 1987). The ARCI subjects were former narcotic 
addicts serving prison sentences for violations of narcotics laws, and they 
were not informed what drugs were administered or what effects were 
expected. The subjects were not necessarily experienced with, or prone 
to use hallucinogens. 

Other LSD rating scales' development also suffered from both a lack of 
truly informed consent and subjects’ lack of previous experience with 
hallucinogens (Linton and Langs 1962; Abramson et al. 1955). The 
author believed it important to develop a questionnaire based on what 
respondents got out of using DMT (and other hallucinogens). The LSD 
scale on the ARCI is also known as the dysphoria scale, and although 
users of hallucinogens usually experience some dysphoria while 
intoxicated, they do not take these drugs for their dysphoric effects. 

Thus, a less pathological approach to scale development was also thought 
useful. 

Nineteen experienced DMT free base smokers, who were also 
experienced with a wide variety of other hallucinogens, were interviewed 


110 



to provide a detailed description of the physical, perceptual, emotional, 
and cognitive effects of smoked DMT. A draft of the new scale, the 
HRS, was developed. It was administered to subjects in 13 nonblind low 
dose (0.04 mg/kg) and 12 high dose (0.4 mg/kg) DMT sessions. One low 
dose subject did not receive a high dose because of his blood pressure 
response to 0.04 mg/kg DMT. The HRS was modified based on the 
experiences reported during these sessions and upon suggestions of the 
subjects, all but two of whom had college degrees. The final 
questionnaire contained 126 questions. It generally took 15 to 
20 minutes to fill out. The HRS was administered to subjects after all 
drug effects had resolved; subjects usually would fill out the 
questionnaire while eating or relaxing in bed. The brief duration of drug 
effect and incapacitating nature of the higher doses precluded subjects 
answering the questionnaire during the acute intoxication. 

Two methods were used to create a more manageable number of groups 
of questions. The first method for developing factors was the clinical 
method. Based upon initial interviews with DMT smokers, the subjects’ 
narrative accounts of their experiences, and a mental status descriptive 
approach to mental functions, six clusters of conceptually coherent 
questions were created. These clusters were: (1) affect, 

(2) somatesthesia/interoception, (3) intensity, (4) perception, 

(5) cognition, and (6) volition. 

The second method of developing clusters was based on principal 
component factor analysis with varimax rotation, allowing the computer 
to create relevant factors equal in number to the clinical clusters. A 
detailed description of the development of the HRS and the derivation of 
factors/clusters has been published previously (Strassman et al. 1994). 

Results. These data were described in more detail by Strassman and 
colleagues (1994). Behaviorally, DMT caused no troublesome effects in 
the dose range 0.04 to 0.4 mg/kg. No subject dropped out after the 
nonblind screening administration of the low (0.04 mg/kg) and high 
(0.4 mg/kg) doses. Only one subject was withdrawn halfway through the 
study because of the development of a major depressive episode. 
However, he had a history of recurrent major depression, acute episodes 
being triggered by stressful personal circumstances similar to those he 
was experiencing while in the study. Followup of 11 of the 12 subjects 
has not revealed any delayed negative effects of participation. The one 
subject lost to followup had gone through the protocol with no 
difficulties. 


Ill 



A brief summary of each dose’s effects follows. 

0.4 mg/kg: All subjects described an intense, rapidly developing rush 
that was both pleasurable and transiently anxiety-provoking, felt 
throughout the body and mind. Visual effects, noted by all subjects, 
ranged from intensely colored, rapidly moving, concrete, formed, more or 
less recognizable images with eyes open or closed, to abstract geometric 
patterns that were not obviously representational. With eyes open, the 
visual field was overlaid by geometric patterns, with undulating 
movement and intensification of colors of objects. Auditory 
hallucinations were noted in more than half the subjects but were not 
clearly familiar (i.e., music or voices). Subjects described usually high- 
pitched, whining, chattering, crinkling/crunching, or at times comical 
noises, such as “boing” and “sproing” sounds heard in cartoons. 
Somatesthetic effects were of a highly stimulatory fear-response nature, 
although all subjects distinguished between their physical reaction to the 
drug and the less emotional subjective response to this reaction. 

As effects resolved, the physical sensations became pleasant and relaxing. 
Some subjects (N=2) described a sexual effect of the highest dose, a 
sensation of heat developing in the genital area; no one experienced 
orgasm or ejaculated. After the initial anxiety associated with the onset 
of high dose effects, all but one subject (11/12) described exciting, 
euphoric, and highly positively charged feelings, often related to the 
visual hallucinatory display. One-third to one-half of the subjects also 
described the emotional valence as bland, impersonal, and journalistic in 
nature, the experience developing and resolving so quickly that there did 
not seem to be time for subjects to react or modify it in any way. 

Subjects described their thoughts and evaluative capacities as relatively 
unimpaired and likened the experience to a dream in which, although 
awareness of the outside world was abolished, they were alert and 
attentive to the hallucinatory effects, remembering them quite well and in 
detail. 

The first nonblind high dose was more anxiety-ridden (particularly for the 
first 30 seconds postinjection) than was the subsequent high dose. 

Subjects were better prepared to lose control after having been in that 
state once before. Their understanding that the drug experience was 
physically safe and that they would not lose their minds was strengthened 
by having had the high dose before. Finally, their confidence in the 
research team to unobtrusively support their relatively helpless state grew 
as their participation in the study progressed. 


112 



0.2 mg/kg: This generally was the threshold dose for hallucinogenic 
effects. The majority of subjects had some visual hallucinations, but 
auditory hallucinations were rare. Some found this to be their dose of 
choice, being less disorienting and anxiety provoking in onset than the 
0.4 mg/kg dose, but generating enough perceptual and affective effects to 
be interesting and pleasurable. 

0.1 mg/kg: This dose was not enjoyed by about half of the subjects. 

They felt the somatesthetic sensations of excitation and a tense, dysphoric 
“drive to discharge” more striking than the perceptual or affective 
changes. 

0.05 mg/kg: One-third of the subjects mistook this dose for placebo. 
Those who were able to distinguish the dose from saline remarked on its 
uniformly relaxing, comfortable, and warn physical effects. One former 
heroin user likened it to the “soft cotton batting” of heroin. There were 
no perceptual (auditory or visual) effects at this dose. 

Either method of grouping questions, the clinical clustering or the 
principal components factor analysis, provided better statistical separation 
of doses than did the biological factors described above. Two factors, 
intensity and cognition, separated all five treatments. Two of the 
principal component factors also could distinguish among the five 
treatments. The clinical clusters were more capable of separating placebo 
from 0.05 mg/kg effects; the principal component factors were more 
sensitive in distinguishing between hallucinogenic doses (0.2 mg/kg) and 
nonhallucinogenic (0.1 mg/kg) doses. 


SUMMARY AND AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 

This study demonstrated that if experienced hallucinogen users are 
carefully screened, prepared, supervised, and followed up, the naturally 
occurring short-acting hallucinogen DMT can be safely administered 
repeatedly in a clinical research setting. Normative dose-response data 
for multiple biological variables were generated, including 
neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and autonomic (temperature and pupil 
diameter) variables. Data generated from a new rating scale, the HRS, 
provide a detailed account of subjective effects using several 
factors/clusters that demonstrate better resolution of dose effects than did 
the biological variables. Statistically significant effects of DMT on 
biological variables relative to placebo were almost always associated 


113 



with hallucinogenic effects. These biological and psychological data will 
provide the bases for further pharmacologic characterization of 
hallucinogenic drugs’ properties. 

Selective Blockade 

A logical series of followup studies involve selective blockade of 5-HT 
receptor subtypes before DMT administration. Ritanserin or a similar 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 antagonist could be used in this manner, and effects on 
DMT's biological and psychological perturbations could be assessed. If 
ritanserin does block DMT's neuroendocrine and/or behavioral effects, 
basic neuropharmacologic data will be confirmed in humans regarding 
the primacy of the 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc receptor(s) in mediating hallucinogenic 
drug effects. Second, a selective and safe antagonist might be available 
for hallucinogenic drug crises (Sadzot et al. 1989). Third, if ritanserin 
pretreatment enhances any effects of DMT, as might be hypothesized 
based on the enhancement of neuroendocrine responses to L-tryptophan 
by ritanserin in humans (Charig et al. 1986), an understanding of the 
functional interactions between 5-HT 2 /5-HT, c and 5-HT 1A receptors in 
humans will be advanced. Fourth, less related to drug abuse but also of 
clinical import, would be justification for the previously mentioned use of 
ritanserin in endogenous hallucinatory states. 

Pindolol, a beta-blocker with potent 5-HT 1A antagonistic effects, has been 
used in humans to block presumptive 5-HT, A agonists’ neuroendocrine 
and other biological effects (Anderson and Cowen 1992; Lesch et al. 

1990). No data exist on whether pindolol blocks serotonergic agonists’ 
psychological effects in humans. Modulation of DMT's biological or 
psychological effects would also provide data validating or refuting the 
role of the 5-HT IA receptor in the mechanism of action of hallucinogens. 

Tolerance 

Repeated or chronic administration of behaviorally active drugs often 
results in decreased responsiveness to their acute effects. Tolerance to 
LSD’s behavioral effects was established in the rat (Freedman et al. 1958) 
and behaviorally and physiologically in humans (Isbell et al. 1956). 
Current emphasis is on receptor downregulation, particularly with respect 
to the 5-HT 2 subtype, which can occur within 2 to 3 days (Buckholtz et 
al. 1990). 


114 



DMT is unique in human hallucinogenic drug research in that tolerance to 
its effects has never been demonstrated (Gillin et al. 1976). These 
investigators administered a fully hallucinogenic IM dose of DMT twice 
a day for 5 days and found no tolerance to psychological, cardiovascular, 
or pupillary effects. Additionally, DMT’s relatively undiminished effects 
in subjects tolerant to LSD (Rosenberg et al. 1964) is puzzling and may 
be associated with differential 5-HT 1A versus 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc effects. Illicit 
users describe variable tolerance depending on frequency of smoked 
administration. In animals, heroic regimes may be necessary to induce 
tolerance (Kovacic and Domino 1976). DMT's electroencephalographic 
(EEG) effects, in fact, may be potentiated by repeated administration 
(Gillin et al. 1973). In addition, 5-MeO-DMT's prolactin-raising effects 
are enhanced with repeated administration (Simonovic and Meltzer 
1979), in contrast to LSD’s effect on rat corticosterone showing tolerance 
(Halaris et al. 1976). Clearly the situation is complex and requires human 
studies with special attention to dose and interval. 

Gender Differences 

Animal data suggest a role for sex steroids in modulating several facets of 
serotonergic neurotransmission. Female rats are more sensitive than 
males to 5-HT 2 -mediated hyperthermia (Bigeon et al. 1979) and show’ a 
more robust prolactin response to the hallucinogen 5-MeO-DMT 
(McBride et al. 1990) 

Human data also suggest sex differences in several parameters of 5-HT 
function. However, many studies demonstrating effects of gender on 
serotonergic variables do not control for menstrual state; for example, 
womens’ less robust cortisol response to 5-hydroxy-tryptophan (Maes et 
al. 1989). Recent data do suggest menstrual phase effects of responsivity 
to 5-HT agonists (O’Keene et al. 1991). Prevalence of hallucinogen use 
in males in all ethnic groups is two to three times that in females (see 
above). Is this due to unpredictable effects of hallucinogens in women 
because of differential sensitivity across the menstrual cycle? A study of 
hallucinogenic drugs’ effects across the cycle will provide additional data 
relating human and animal psychopharmacology and neuroendocrin¬ 
ology. More importantly, it will also establish norms by which data on 
human male and female hallucinogenic drug responses can be compared. 


115 



Other Hallucinogens 


Now that systematic dose-response data for the biological and 
psychological effects of DMT in experienced hallucinogen users have 
been generated, a similar approach may be taken with other drugs. These 
could include psilocybin, the primary hallucinogen in “magic” 
mushrooms (Beug and Bigwood 1982); LSD; and phenylethlyamines 
such’ as DOM, DOB, and DOI. These latter compounds are generally 
included with the classical hallucinogens, but little or no systematically 
acquired human data have been published to support or refute this 
classification. The biological and psychological data obtained with DMT 
could be compared and contrasted to that generated by similar dose- 
response studies with other similar compounds. 


REFERENCES 

Abramson, H.A.; Jarvik, M.E.; Kaufman, M.R.; Kornetsky, C.; Levine, 

A.; and Wagner, M. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25): I. 
Physiological and perceptual responses. J Psychol 39:3-60,1955. 

Ahn, H., and Makman, M. Interaction of LSD and other hallucinogens 
with dopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase in primate brain: Regional 
differences. Brain Res 162:77-88, 1979. 

Anderson, L, and Cowen, P.J. Effect of pindolol on endocrine and 
temperature responses to buspirone in healthy volunteers. 
Psychopharmacology 106:428-432, 1992. 

Appel, J.; White, F.; and Holohean, A. Analyzing mechanism(s) of 
hallucinogenic drug action with drug discrimination procedures. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 6:529-536, 1982, 

Appel, N.M.; Mitchell, W.M.; Garlick, R.K.; Glennon, R.A.; Teitler, M.; 
and De Souza, E.B. Autoradiographic characterization of (±)-l-(2,5- 
dimethoxy-4-[ I]iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane ([ I]DOI) binding to 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors in rat brain. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
255:843-857, 1990. 

Beug, M., and Bigwood, J. Psilocybin and psilocin levels in twenty 
species from seven genera of wild mushrooms in the Pacific 
Northwest, U.S.A. J Ethnopharmacol 5:271-285, 1982. 

Bigeon, A.; Segal, M.; and Samuel, D. Sex differences in behavioral and 
thermal responses to pargyline and tryptophan. Psychopharmacology 
61:77-80, 1979. 


116 



Buckholtz, N.; Zhou, D.: Freedman, D.X.; and Potter, W. Lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD) administration selectively downregulates 
serotonin, receptors in rat brain. Neuropsychopharmacology 3:137- 
148, 1990. 

Charig, E.; Anderson, I.; Robinson, J.; Nutt, D.; and Cowen P.J. 

L-tryptophan and prolactin release: Evidence for interaction between 
5-HT, and 5-HT 2 receptors. Human Psychopharmacol 1:93-97, 1986. 

Cohen, S. Lysergic acid diethylamide: Side effects and complications. 

JNerv Merit Dis 130:30-40, 1960. 

Colpaert, F.; Meert, T.; Niemegeers, C.; and Janssen, P. Behavioral and 
5-HT antagonist effects of ritanserin: A pure and selective antagonist 
of LSD discrimination in rat. Psychopharmacology 86:45-54, 1985. 

Deliganis, A.; Pierce, P.; Peroutka, S.J. Differential interactions of 
dimethyltryptamine (DMT) with 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2 receptors. 
Biochem Pharmacol 41:1739-1744, 1991. 

Demisch, L., and Neubauer, R. Stimulation of human prolactin secretion 
by mescaline. Psychopharmacology 64:361-363, 1979. 

Denber, H. Studies on mescaline: VII. The role of anxiety in the 
mescaline-induced state and its influence on the therapeutic result. 

J Nerv Merit Dis 124:74-77, 1956. 

Dulit, R.; Fyer, M.; Haas, G.; Sullivan, T.; and Frances, A. Substance use 
in borderline personality disorder. Am J Psychiatry 147:1002-1007, 
1990. 

Freedman, D.X.; Aghajanian, G.K.; Ornitz, E.; and Rosner, B. Patterns of 
tolerance to lysergic acid diethylamide and mescaline in rats. Science 
121 All Mill A. 1958. 

Freedman, D.X. FSD: The bridge from animal to human. In: Jacobs, B., 
ed. Hallucinogens: Neurochemical, Behavioral and Clinical 
Perspectives. New York: Raven Press, 1984. pp. 203-226. 

Gelders, Y.; Vanden Bussche, G.; Reyntjens, A.; and Janssen, P. 
Serotonin-S 2 receptor blockers in the treatment of chronic 
schizophrenia. Supplement. Clin Neuropharmacol 94:325-327, 1986. 

Geyer, M. A.; Light, R.; Rose, G.; Petersen, L.; Horwitt, D.; Adams, L.; 
and Hawkins, R. A characteristic effect of hallucinogens on 
investigatory responding in rats. Psychopharmacology 65:35-40, 

1979. ' 

Gillin, J.C.; Cannon, E.; Magyar, R.; Schwartz, M.; Wyatt, R.J. Failure of 
N,N-dimethyltryptamine to evoke tolerance in cats. Biol Psychiatry 
7:213-220, 1973. 

Gillin, J.C.; Kaplan, J.; Stillman, R.; and Wyatt, R.J. The psychedelic 
model of schizophrenia: The case of N,N-dimethyltryptamine. Am J 
Psychiatry 133:203-208, 1976. 


117 



Glennon, R.A.; Rosecrans, J.; Young, R.; and Gaines, J. Hallucinogens as 
discriminative stimuli: Generalization of DOM to a 5-methoxy-N,N- 
dimethyltryptamine stimulus. Life Sci 24:993-998, 1979. 

Glennon, R.A.; McKenney, J.; Lyon, R.; and Titeler, M. 5-HT[ and 
5-HT 2 binding characteristics of l-(2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2- 
aminopropane analogues. J Med Chem 29:194-199, 1986. 

Greiner, T.; Burch, N.; and Edelberg, R. Psychopathology and 

psychophysiology of minimal LSD-25 dosage. A preliminary dosage- 
response study. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 79:208-210, 1958. 

Grinspoon, L., and Bakalar, J.B. Psychedelic Drugs Reconsidered. New 
York: Basic Books, 1979. 

Haertzen, C.A., and Hickey, J.E. Addiction Research Center Inventory 
(ARCI): Measurement of euphoria and other drug effects. In: Bozarth, 
M.A., ed. Methods of Assessing the Reinforcing Properties of Abused 
Drugs. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987. pp. 489-524. 

Halaris, A.; Freedman, D.X.; and Fang, V. Plasma corticoids and brain 
tryptophan after acute and tolerance dosage of LSD. Life Sci 17: 1467- 
1472,1976. 

Heym, J., and Jacobs, B. Serotonergic mechanisms of hallucinogenic 
drug effects. Monogr Neural Sci 13:55-81, 1987. 

Hoffer, A., and Osmond, H. The Hallucinogens. New York: Academic 
Press, 1967. 

Horita, A., and Dillie, J. The pyretogenic effect of lysergic acid 
diethylamide. Science 120:1110-1111, 1954. 

Horita, A., and Hamilton, A. Lysergic acid diethylamide: Dissociation of 
its behavioral and hyperthermic effects by D,L-alpha-methyl-p- 
tyrosine. Science 164:78-79, 1969. 

Hoyer, D. Functional correlates of serotonin 5-HT[ recognition sites. 

J Recept Res 8159-81, 1988. 

Isbell, H.; Belleville, R.; Fraser, H.; Wikler, A.; and Logan, C. Studies on 
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25): I. Effects in former morphine 
addicts and development of tolerance during chronic intoxication. 

Arch Gen Psychiatry 76:468-478, 1956. 

Jacobs, B.; Tmlson, M.; and Stem, W. An animal behavior model for 
studying the actions of LSD and related hallucinogens. Science 
194:741-743, 1976 . 

Johnson, L.; O’Malley, P.; and Bachman, J. Drug Use Among American 
High School Seniors, College Students and Young Adults, 1975-1990. 
Vol I, High School Seniors. DHHS Pub. No.(ADM)91-1813. 
Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1991 a. 


118 



Johnson, L.; O'Malley, P.; and Bachman, J. Drug Use Among American 
High School Seniors, College Students and Young Adults, 1975-1990. 
Vol II, College Students and Young Adults. DHHS Pub. 
No.(ADM)91-1835. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., US. Govt. 

Print. Off., 1991b. 

Kluver, H. Mescal. London: Kegan Paul, 1928. 

Koenig, J.; Gudelsky, G.; and Meltzer, H.Y. Stimulation of corticosterone 
and beta-endorphin secretion in the rat by selective 5-HT receptor 
subtype activation. Eur J Pharmacol 137:1-8, 1987. 

Koemer, J., and Appel, J. Psilocybin as a discriminative stimulus: Lack 
of specificity in an animal behavior model for “hallucinogens.” 
Psychopharmacology 76:130-135, 1983. 

Kovacic, B., and Domino, E. Tolerance and limited cross-tolerance to the 
effects of N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and lysergic acid 
diethylamide-25 (LSD) on food-rewarded bar pressing in the rat. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 197:495-502, 1976. 

Kuhn, D.; White, F.; and Appel, J. The discriminative stimulus properties 
of LSD: Mechanisms of action. Neuropharmacology 17:257-263, 
1978. 

Lee, M.A., and Shlain, B. Acid Dreams. New York: Grove Press, 1985. 

Lee, M.-Y.; Nash, J.F.; Barnes, M.; and Meltzer, H.Y. Inhibitory effect of 
ritanserin on the 5-hydroxytryptophan-mediated cortisol, ACTH and 
prolactin secretion in humans. Psychopharmacology 103:258-264, 
1991. 

Lesch, K.-P.; Sohnle, K.; Poten, B.; Schoellnhammer, G.; Rupprecht, R.; 
and Schulte, H. Corticotropin and cortisol secretion after central 
5-hydroxytryptamine-lA (5-HT 1A ) receptor activation: Effects of 
5-HT receptor and 6-adrenoceptor antagonists. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 70:670-674, 1990. 

Linton, H.B., and Langs, R.J. Subjective reactions to lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD-25) measured by a questionnaire. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 6:352-368, 1962. 

Maes, M.; Vandewoude, M.; Schotte, C.; Maes, L.; Martin, M., and 
Block, P. Sex-linked differences in cortisol, ACTH and prolactin 
responses to 5-hydroxy-tryptophan in healthy controls and minor and 
major depressed patients. Acta Psychiatr Scand 80:584-590, 1989. 

McBride, A.; Tierney, H.; DeMeo, M.; Chen, J.; and Mann, J. Effects of 
age and gender on CNS serotonergic responsivity in normal adults. 
Biol Psychiatry 27:1143-1155, 1990. 

McCall, R., and Humphrey, S. Involvement of serotonin in the central 
regulation of blood pressure: Evidence for a facilitating effect on 
sympathetic nerve activity. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 222:94-102, 1982. 


119 



McKenna, D.J.; Repke, D.; Lo, L.; and Peroutka, S.J. Differential 

interactions of indolealkylamines with 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 
subtypes. Neuropharmacology 29:193-198, 1990. 

McKenna, D.J.; Towers, G.; and Abbott, F. Monoamine oxidase 

inhibitors in South American hallucinogenic plants: Tryptamine and 
6-carboline constituents of ayahuasca. J Ethnopharmacol 10:195-223, 
1984u. 

McKenna, D.J.; Towers, G.; and Abbott, F. Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors in South American hallucinogenic plants: Part 2: 

Constituents of orally-active myristicaceous hallucinogens. 

J Ethnopharmacol 12:179-211, 1984b. 

Meltzer, H.Y.; Wiita, B.; Tricou, B.; Simonovic, M.; and Fang, V. Effects 
of serotonin precursors and serotonin agonists on plasma hormone 
levels. In: Ho, B.; Schoolar, J.; and Usdin, E., eds. Serotonin in 
Biological Psychiatry. New York: Raven Press, 1980. pp. 117-139. 

Meltzer, H.Y., and Nash, J.F. Effects of antipsychotic drugs on serotonin 
receptors. Pharmacol Rev 43:587-604, 1991. 

Mueser, K.; Yarnold, P.; Levinson, D.; Singh, H.; Bellack, A.; Kee, K.; 
Morrison, R.; and Yadalam, K. Prevalence of substance abuse in 
schizophrenia: Demographic and clinical correlates. Schizophrenia 
Bull 16:31-56, 1990. 

Murphy, D.L.; Lesch, K.-P.; Aulakh, C.S.; and Pigott, T.A. Serotonin- 
selective arylpiperazines with neuroendocrine, behavioral, 
temperature, and cardiovascular effects in humans. Pharmacol Rev 
43:527-552, 1991. 

National Institute on Drug Abuse, Division of Epidemiology and 
Prevention Research. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: 
Population Estimates 1990. DHHS Pub. No.(ADM)91-1732. 
Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1991. 

Oepen, G.; Fuenfgeld, M.; Harrington, A.; Hermie, L.; and Botsch, H. 
Right hemisphere involvement in mescaline-induced psychosis. 

Psychiatry Res 29:335-336, 1989. 

O'Keene, V.; O'Hanlon, M.; Webb, M.; and Dinan, T. 

d-Fenfluramine/prolactin response throughout the menstrual cycle: 
Evidence for an oestrogen-induced alteration. Clin Endocrinol 34:289- 
292, 1991. 

Pahnke, W.N.; Kurland, A.A.; Unger, S.; Savage, C.; and Grof, S. The 
experimental use of psychedelic (LSD) psychotherapy. JAMA 
212:1856-1863, 1970. 

Peroutka, S.J.; Lebovitz, R.; and Snyder, S.H. Two distinct serotonin 
receptors with distinct physiological functions. Science 212:827-829, 
1981. 


120 



Peroutka, S J., and Snyder, S.H. Multiple serotonin receptors: Differential 
binding of [ H]5-hydroxytryptamine, [ H] lysergic acid diethylamide 
and [ 3 H]spiroperidol. Mol Pharmacol 16:687-690, 1979. 

Pierce, P., and Peroutka, S.J. Hallucinogenic drug interactions with 
neurotransmitter receptor binding sites in human cortex. 
Psychopharmacology 97:118-122, 1989. 

Repke, D.; Grotjahn, D.; and Shulgin, A.T. Psychotomimetic N-methyl- 
N-isopropyltryptamines: Effects of variation of aromatic oxygen 
substituents. J Med Chem 28:89-2896, 1985. 

Rosenberg, D.; Isbell, H.; Miner, E.; and Logan, C. The effect of N,N- 
dimethyltryptamine in human subjects tolerant to lysergic acid 
diethylamide. Psychopharmacologia 5:217-227, 1964. 

Sadzot, B.; Baraban, J.; Glennon, R.A.; Lyon, R.; Leonhardt, S.; Jan, 
C.-R.; and Titeler, M. Hallucinogenic drug interactions at the human 
brain 5-HT 2 receptors: Implications for treating LSD-induced 
hallucinogenesis. Psychopharmacology 98:495-499, 1989. 

Sahin-Erdemeli, I.; Schoeffter, P.; and Hoyer, D. Competitive antagonism 
by recognized 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists at 5-HT, c receptors in pig 
choroid plexus. Naunyn Sclimiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 344:137- 
142, 1991. 

Sai-Halasz, A.; Brunecker, G.; and Szara, S.I. Dimcthyltryptamine: Ein 
neues Psychoticum. Psychiat Neurol (Basel) 135:285-301, 1958. 

Schuckit, M., and Sweeney, S. Substance use and mental health problems 
among sons of alcoholics and controls. J Stud Alcohol 48:528-534, 
1987T 

Seibyl, J.; Krystal, J.; Price, L.; Woods, S.; D'Amico, C.; Heninger, G.; 
and Charney, D. Effects of ritanserin on the behavioral, 
neuroendocrine, and cardiovascular responses to meta- 
chlorophenylpiperazine in healthy human subjects. Psychiatry Res 
38:227-236, 1991. 

Simonovic, M., and Meltzer, H.Y. Repeated administration of 
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine to male rats potentiates 
stimulation of prolactin secretion by serotonin agonists. Eur J 
Pharmacol 58:399-405, 1979. 

Smith, L., and Peroutka, S.J. Differential effects of 5-hydroxy- 
tryptamine 1A selective drugs on the 5-HT behavioral syndrome. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 24:1513-1519, 1986. 

Smythies, J.; Morin, R.; and Brown, G. Identification of 

dimethyltryptamine and O-methylbufotenin in human cerebrospinal 
fluid by combined gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Biol 
Psychiatry 14:549-556, 1979. 


121 



Soskin, R.; Grof, S.; and Richards, W. Low doses of dipropyltryptamine 
in psychotherapy. Arch Gen Psychiatry 28:817-821, 1973. 

Spencer, D., Jr.; Glaser, T.; and Traber, J. Serotonin receptor subtype 
mediation of the interoceptive discriminative stimuli induced by 
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine. Psychopharmacology 93:158- 
166, 1987. 

Spitzer, R.; Williams, J.; and Gibbon, M. Structured Clinical Interview of 
DSM-III-R: Outpatient Version. New York: Biometric Research 
Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 1987. 

Stafford, P. Psychedelics Encyclopedia. Rev. ed. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1982. 

Stevens, J. Storming Heaven. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1987. 

Stoll, W.A. Lysergsaure-diathylamid, ein Phantaskum aus der 

Mutterkorngruppe. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psych 60:279-323, 1947. 

Strassman, R.J. Adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs. A review of the 
literature. J Nerv Ment Dis 172:577-595, 1984. 

Strassman, R.J.; Appenzeller, O.; Lewy, A.J.; Qualls, C.R.; and Peake, 
G.T. Increase in plasma melatonin, beta-endorphin, and cortisol after a 
28.5-mile mountain race: Relationship to performance and lack of 
effect of naltrexone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 69:540-545, 1989. 

Strassman, R.J. Human hallucinogenic drug research in the United States: 
A present-day case history and review of the process. J Psychoactive 
Drug 23:29-38, 1991. 

Strassman, R.J., and Qualls, C.R. Dose response study of N,N- 

dimethyltryptamine in humans: I. Neuroendocrine, autonomic and 
cardiovascular effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry 51:85-97, 1994. 

Strassman, R.J.; Qualls, C.R.; Uhlenhuth, E.H.; and Kellner, R. Dose- 
response study of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in humans. II. Subjective 
effects measured by a new rating scale. Arch Gen Psychiatry 51:98- 
108, 1994. 

Szara, S.I. The comparison of the psychotic effect of tryptamine 
derivatives with the effects of mescaline and LSD-25 in self¬ 
experiments. In: Garattini, S., and Ghetti, V., eds. Psychotropic Drugs. 
New York: Elsevier, 1957. pp. 460-466. 

Szara, S.I.; Rockland, L.; Rosenthal, D.; and Handlon, J. Psychological 
effects and metabolism of N,N-diethyltryptamine in man. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 15:320-329, 1966. 

Van de Kar, L. Neuroendocrine pharmacology of serotonergic (5-HT) 
neurons. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 31:289-320, 1991. 

Vardy, M., and Kay, S. LSD psychosis or LSD-induced schizophrenia. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 40:877-883, 1983. 


122 



Widmer, S. Clinical work using MDMA in Switzerland since 1985. 
Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies Newsletter 
(Charlotte, NC) 3:13, 1992. 

125 

Yagaloff, K., and Hartig, P. - [-Lysergic acid diethylamide binds to a 
novel serotonergic site on rat choroid plexus epithelial cells. 

J Neurosci 5:3178-3183, 1985. 

Young, R.; Rosecrans, J.; and Glennon, R.A. Comparative discriminative 
stimulus effects of 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine and LSD. Life 
Sci 30:2057-2062, 1982. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This investigation was supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse 
grant RO3-DA06524; the Scottish Rite Foundation for Schizophrenia 
Research, NMJ; University of New Mexico General Clinical Research 
Center grant RR00997-13; the Scott Rogers Fund of the University of 
New Mexico; and University of New Mexico Department of Psychiatry 
research funds. The authors would like to thank Cynthia Geist, R.N., and 
the nursing staff of the General Clinical Research Center, 5E, University 
of New Mexico Hospital; Clifford Qualls, Ph.D., for statistical support; 
Robert Kellner, M.D., Ph.D., and Eberhardt Uhlenhuth, M.D., for HRS 
development consultation; David Schade, M.D., and Joy McLeod for 
laboratory support; Curtis Wright, M.D., M.P.H, of the Pilot Drug 
Evaluation Staff at FDA; Margaret Brophy of the ODRR at DEA; and 
Paul Salkovskis, Ph.D., Oxford University for helpful discussions 
regarding HRS statistical analyses. 


AUTHOR 

Rick J. Strassman, M.D. 
Associate Professor 
Department of Psychiatry 
University of New Mexico 
2400 Tucker Avenue, NE. 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 


123 



Serotonin Receptor Involvement 
in an Animal Model of the Acute 
Effects of Hallucinogens 

Mark A. Geyer and Kirsten M. Krebs 


INTRODUCTION 

To facilitate the study of hallucinogenic drugs in the whole animal, 
investigators have explored a variety of animal behavioral measures that 
potentially could parallel hallucinogenic activity in humans (see Glennon, 
this volume), In the development of such models, d-lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD), the most well-known and potent of the 
hallucinogens, has been used most frequently as the prototype drug. 
Structurally an ergot alkaloid compound, LSD acts on the serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) system as a partial agonist at both 5-HT iA 
and 5-HT 1c/2 receptors (Peroutka and Snyder 1979; Sanders-Bush et al. 
1988). In attempting to model the behavioral effects of hallucinogens in 
humans, considerable research has focused on examining the 
responsiveness of animals to discrete phasic stimuli. Such studies have 
revealed that LSD reduces the rate of habituation of reflex responding 
(Geyer et al. 1978; Izquierdo 1975; Miliaressis and St. Laurent 1974) and 
produces alterations in both conditioned and unconditioned responding 
consistent with enhanced reactivity to irrelevant stimuli without direct 
alterations of sensory thresholds (Key 1964u,h; Key and Bradley 1960). 
Unfortunately, none of these effects has been demonstrated to be both 
common to a variety of hallucinogens and uncharacteristic of 
nonhallucinogens (Geyer et al. 1978; Stoff et al. 1978), criteria that are 
vital to an animal model of hallucinogenic activity. 

More recently, researchers have attempted to use the elicitation by 
hallucinogens of animal behaviors that are not typically observed in 
noimal animals as indicators of hallucinogenic action. While problems of 
nonselectivity still apply to most such behaviors, including increased 
initial startle responses, flat body posture, forepaw treading, and lower lip 
retraction (Arnt and Hyttel 1989; Berendsen and Broekkamp 1991; Braff 
and Geyer 1980; Johansson et al. 1990), other behaviors may be more 
specifically associated with hallucinogens. For example, behaviors such 
as head twitches and shakes have been elicited by hallucinogenic 


124 



compounds but not by nonhallucinogenic 5-HT agonists of the 5-HT, A 
receptor such as 8-hydroxy-2-dipropylaminotetralin (8-OH-DPAT) 
(Berendsen and Broekkamp 1991; Darmani et al. 1990 a,b). However, 
most of these responses are elicited only by relatively high doses of 
hallucinogenic drugs and are difficult to quantitate by automated 
procedures. Further, such measures provide no information about the 
psychological processes influenced by the hallucinogens and are difficult 
to relate directly to the subjective effects of hallucinogens in humans. 

Among the most widely used and successful approaches to assessing the 
hallucinogenic activity of drugs is the drug discrimination (DD) 
procedure discussed in more detail elsewhere in this volume (Glennon; 
Winter). While this procedure has demonstrated considerable predictive 
validity, the psychological nature of the effect(s) being detected is 
difficult to define. Furthermore, the procedure requires that the animals 
be treated repeatedly with the hallucinogen being studied. Such repeated 
administrations prevent the application of the procedure to the study of 
the acute effects of hallucinogens, which is important because of the 
rapidity with which tolerance occurs to the effects of hallucinogens in 
humans. 


HALLUCINOGEN EFFECTS ON EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR 

Recent studies of the effects of acute administrations of hallucinogens on 
spontaneous behaviors of experimental animals have revealed consistent 
and specific effects on the normal behavioral repertoire of the animals 
that can be studied efficiently with automated procedures. The initial 
evaluations of the effects of LSD on locomotor activity yielded 
seemingly inconsistent results. Depending on the specific parameters 
used in each particular study, hallucinogens were found to increase, 
decrease, or produce no change in the amount of locomotor or 
investigatory behavior. 

This apparent inconsistency is now understood as being a reflection of the 
fact that the effects of hallucinogens on spontaneous activity are 
demonstrably dependent on the size of the experimental chamber 
(Hughes 1973), the nature and degree of stimulation from the test 
environment (Cunha and Masur 1978), the animal’s degree of familiarity 
with the test environment (Adams and Geyer 1985a; Tilson et al. 1975), 
and the manner in which the animals are handled prior to testing (Geyer 
and Light 1979). Thus, the changes in locomotor or investigatory 


125 



behavior produced by hallucinogenic drugs are critically dependent on 
the precise nature of the environmental context in which the animals are 
tested. Furthermore, this variability in the effects of hallucinogens on 
measures of locomotion suggests that locomotion per se is not directly 
affected by these drugs. Rather, the changes in locomotion appear to be 
secondary to the effects of hallucinogens on the animal's sensitivity to 
environmental stimuli. As in humans, hallucinogens do not lead to 
consistent effects on the level of arousal as reflected in measures of motor 
activity; rather, hallucinogens alter the manner in which the organism’s 
behavior is influenced by the environment. 

To examine this hypothesis more directly, several researchers have 
studied the effects of hallucinogens on the exploratory behavior of 
animals. One of the most common tests of exploration uses a holeboard, 
which is simply a chamber with holes placed in the floor and/or walls. 
These holes serve as specific stimuli that burrowing animals such as rats 
readily investigate. Hence, measures of the frequency or duration of 
“holepokes” are viewed as indices of the animal's investigatory 
tendencies (File and Wardill 1975). In an extensive series of studies, 

LSD and several other hallucinogens were found to produce 
dose-dependent alterations in the temporal distribution of holepokes, 
consisting of an initial reduction and subsequent increase during a 
24-minute test (Geyer et al. 1979). This temporal distribution of 
responding was found to be unaltered by variations in preinjection time, 
suggesting that it was related to drug-induced alterations in 
responsiveness to the environment rather than to the time-course of drug 
action. Additional studies using the holeboard confirmed that the initial 
decrease in exploration was attributable to an interaction between the 
effects of the drug, the animal's exposure to the stimuli associated with 
handling, and the introduction of the rat to the novel chamber (Geyer and 
Light 1979). These effects were therefore interpreted as an LSD-induced 
enhancement of the animal's responsiveness to the test environment. 


A BEHAVIORAL PROFILE OF HALLUCINOGEN EFFECTS 

Subsequent studies have more thoroughly characterized the effects of 
hallucinogenic drugs on the responsiveness of rats to environmental 
stimuli by simultaneously monitoring both locomotor and investigatory 
responses in the behavioral pattern monitor (BPM) system. The BPM is a 
combination of an open-field activity monitor and a holeboard. By 
tracking the movements of the animals within a Cartesian coordinate 


126 



system of infrared photobeams, the BPM enables analyses of quantitative 
and qualitative changes in patterns of locomotor and investigatory 
activity (Geyer 1990). The BPM is a 30.5 x 61.0 centimeter (cm) black 
Plexiglas™ chamber illustrated schematically in figure 1. Ten 2.5 cm 
holes are placed in the chamber (three in each long wall, one in one short 
wall, and three in the floor). Photocells in each hole detect investigatory 
holepokes. A touchplate 15.2 cm above the floor allows detection of 
rearings when contact is made by the animal between the metal floor and 
the metal touchplate. A 4 x 8 grid of infrared photobeams detects the 
animal's position in an X-Y plane. Every 200 milliseconds (ms) the 
computer sampled the status of all the beams in each chamber, enabling 
reconstruction of the path taken by the animal and calculation of a variety 
of descriptive statistics that reflect changes in the amount or pattern of the 
activity. 

When rats were tested by placing them directly into a novel BPM 
chamber (forced exploration), a consistent effect of LSD was a 
dose-dependent reduction of exploration in the first half of an hour-long 
test session (Adams and Geyer 1982). In order to ensure that the 
behaviors being studied were as natural as possible in a laboratory setting, 
all studies were conducted in the dark phase of the animal's day-night 
cycle when nocturnal animals such as rats are typically most active. To 
maximize the exploratory behavior of the control animals and minimize 
the influences of extraneous factors, the animals were tested in dark 
chambers that were kept scrupulously clean. In addition, it has proven 
essential that the animals be handled as gently and consistently as 
possible as exemplified by the demonstrated influence of handling on the 
behavioral effects of LSD (Geyer and Light 1979). During the week 
before testing, animals were also acclimated to the handling associated 
with transport to the laboratory and injections. 

Under these controlled conditions the number of photobeam interruptions 
(movements) was decreased very consistently by reasonably low doses of 
LSD as illustrated in figure 2a (Adams and Geyer 1982, 1985a). At the 
same time both holepokes and rearings, two measures of investigatory 
behavior, were also decreased by LSD (figure 3). These results 
confirmed the findings of Geyer and Light (1979) and extended those 
findings to include activity and rearings as well as holepokes. These 
decreases were limited to the initial 30 minutes of the test session, 
although a variety of other drugs decreased activity throughout the 
hour-long test session (Mittman and Geyer 1989). Lurther, these 
decreases in locomotor and investigatory behavior were specifically 


127 



(a) (b) 

FIGURE 1. Diagrammatic representation of the BPM chamber 
(30.5 x 61 cm), (a) shows black lines indicating 
regions, unequal areas used to define transitions from 
one region to another for assessment of locomotor 
patterns. (b) Infrared photobeams are represented 
here by thin black lines and are used to define 
movements, a measure of locomotor activity. Sectors, 
equal 15 cm squares, are indicated by thick black lines 
and are used to define crossings, a measure of 
horizontal locomotionWall and floor holes are 
portrayed by open circles and are used to define 
investigatory holepokes. 


related to the animal’s initial exploration of the novel chamber rather than 
the time-course of the drug's action. Hence, the effect of LSD is not 
limited to the investigation of discrete stimuli and cannot be described as 
generalized sedation, but appeal’s to reflect a more pervasive influence of 
the drug on responsiveness to a wide range of environmental stimuli. 


128 




EFFECTS OF LSD ON LOCOMOTOR ACTIVITY 
& SPATIAL PATTERN OF EXPLORATION 



10 Minute Blocks 10 Minute Blocks 

(°) (b) 

FIGURE 2. Disruption of spatial pattern and amount of locomotor 
activity by LSD. Six groups of 10 male rats each were 
tested in the BPM chambers 10 min following 
injections (SC) of 0, 2, 10, 30, 80, or 160 ug/kg LSD. 
LSD dose-dependently decreased both (a) movements 
(total photobeam breaks in the BPM) and (b) the time 
the animals spent in the center of the chamber (refer to 
figure 1 for center region representation) in tenths of a 
second. (Values are group means per 10-min block of 
time, p<0.05). Redrawn from data presented in Adams 
and Geyer 1985a. 


One of the most robust and sensitive measures of the effect of LSD is the 
decrease in the amount of time that the animal spends in the center of the 
chamber, as illustrated in figure 2b. Because the tendency of rats to 
explore a novel environment is generally believed to compete for 
expression with the opposite tendency to avoid novel and open spaces 
(Berlyne 1966; Montgomery 1955), the pattern of effects produced by 
LSD suggests that the drug enhances the latter tendency. Analyses of the 
spatial patterns of locomotion reveal that LSD’s initial suppression of 
activity and holepokes were best correlated with a reduction in entries 
into, and time spent in, the central region of the chamber (Adams and 
Geyer 1982, 1985a). As illustrated by computer-generated displays of 
locomotor patterns (figure 4), the effects of LSD on exploration of novel 
and central areas are profound (Adams and Geyer 1985a). It has long 
been recognized that noimal rats tend to avoid large, open spaces (Barnett 


129 



EFFECTS OF LSD ON 
INVESTIGATORY BEHAVIOR 


• SALINE 



(°) (b) 

FIGURE 3. Disruption of exploratory behavior by LSD. Six groups 
of male rats (n = 10) were tested in the BPM 10 min 
after receiving injections (sc) ofO, 2, 10, 30, 80, or 
160 p/kg LSD. LSD produced significant close- 
dependent decreases in both (a) the number of holepokes 
made during testing and (b) the number ofrearings 
against the wails. (Values are group means per 10-min 
block, p<0.05). Redrawn from data presented in Adams 
and Geyer 1985a. 


1963). As with the exaggerated response of hallucinogen-treated rats to 
the aversive aspects of the exposed central region of the chamber, there is 
also an increased tendency of hallucinogen-treated rats to avoid novel 
chambers altogether. 

To further clarify the nature of this effect, animals were tested in a free 
exploration paradigm (Welker 1957) in which a familial' home cage is 
connected to the open field. When rats were allowed to enter and leave 
the novel chamber at will, LSD produced dose-dependent reductions in 
the amount of time spent in the novel chamber without an alteration in the 
overall rate of locomotor or investigatory responses while they were in 
the chamber (Adams and Geyer 1982) (figure 5). Hence, the effect is 
not attributable to sedation; rather it reflects an alteration in the 
responsiveness of the animal to the nature of the test chamber itself. In 


130 





(a) (b) 

FIGURE 4. Computer-generated display of the locomotor path 
produced during the initial 30 min of testing in the 
BPM by two different representative rats treated with 
(a) saline or (b) 60 p/kg LSD. In contrast to the varied 
path the saline-treated rat takes, the LSD-treated 
animal makes few center entries, prefers one corner of 
the chamber, and circles the periphery of the BPM 
chamber. 


further studies, it was found that the initial suppression of activity 
induced by LSD was absent when animals were tested in a familiar 
environment (figure 6a). The fact that familiarizing an animal with the 
test environment attenuates the suppression of locomotor activity induced 
by hallucinogens suggests that LSD potentiates the normal neophobia 
exhibited by rats when confronted with a novel environment (Adams and 
Geyer 1985a). 


131 







NOVEL FAMILIAR NOVEL FAMILIAR 



(a) (b) 


FIGURE 5. Disruption of locomotor activity by LSD. Five groups of 
male rats (n = 8-10) were tested in a modified BPM 
chamber that allowed animals to move freely between the 
BPM and a home cage environment (free exploration). Ten 
min prior to testing, injections (SC) ofO, 2, 10, 30, or 80 
pAg LSD were given. LSD significantly decreased the 
number of crossovers (movements between 15 cm square 
sectors) but had no effect on the rate of locomotor activity 
(crossovers/min). (Values are means from total counts or 
transforms performed on 60 min totals, p<0.001). Redrawn 
from data presented in Adams and Geyer 1982. 


By contrast, the decrease in time spent in the center of the chamber was 
still evident in the familiar environment (figure 6b), indicating that LSD 
potentiates the normal animal's response to aversive or threatening 
environmental stimuli, in this case the center of the chamber, even in a 
familiar environment. This effect has been characterized as an increase in 
agoraphobia. Thus, in the typical novel environment paradigm, LSD 
potentiates both neophobia and agoraphobia (Adams and Geyer 1985a). 

One of the most stringent tests of the specificity of any behavioral model 
of the effects of LSD involves comparison of the effects of LSD in the 
model to the effects of lisuride in the model. Lisuride is a behaviorally 
potent derivative of isolysergic acid that closely resembles LSD in both 
chemical structure and neurochemical effects. Nevertheless, in normal 
humans, lisuride appears to produce none of the perceptual changes or 


132 




EFFECT OF LSD ON LOCOMOTION 


2000 
1800 
1600 
CO 1400 
u 1200 
8 iooo 

to 

O 800 

(H 

O 600 
400 
! 200 
0 



Dose of LSD 


O CROSSOVERS/MINUTE 


FIGURE 6. Impact of familiarization with test chamber on 

LSD’s effects on the spatial pattern and amount of 
locomotor activity. Four groups of male rats 
(n = 10-16) were tested in the BPM 10 min after 
receiving injections of either saline or 30 p/kg LSD 
(SC). The novel groups were tested only once, while 
the familiar groups were tested after two previous 
exposures (without injections) to the BPM. In a 
novel environment, 30 p/kg LSD significantly 
decreased (a) crossovers (movements between 15 
cm square sectors) and (b) the time spent in the 
center of the chamber.However, in a familiar 
environment, the effects of LSD were attenuated on 
(a) crossovers, but not on (b) the time spent in the 
center of the chamber. (Values are group means 
for the first 30 min of testing, p<0.05). Redrawn 
from data presented in Adams and Geyer 1985a. 


intensifications of responsiveness that are characteristic of hallucinogens 
(Herrmann et al. 1977). In rats, low doses of lisuride produced sedation 
with no evidence of an enhanced avoidance of open or novel spaces, 
while higher doses produced stereotyped patterns of locomotor 
hyperactivity that were quite different from the effects of high doses of 
LSD (Adams and Geyer 1985 c). 


133 




A further distinction between the behavioral effects of lisuride and LSD 
was revealed by the drugs’ interactions with the neuroleptic haloperidol. 
Haloperidol blocked the hyperactivity produced by high doses of lisuride 
but failed to alter the effects of LSD on enhanced responsiveness to the 
environment (Adams 1983). Thus, this animal model of hallucinogenic 
activity was sensitive enough to discriminate easily between lisuride and 
LSD, two compounds that differ primarily with respect to their 
hallucinogenic effects. 

One of the hallmarks of the effects of hallucinogens in humans is the 
rapidity with which tolerance occurs to their acute effects (Freedman 
1981; Freedman et al. 1964; Isbell et al. 1956; Mandell and Geyer 1976). 
Hence, any behavioral effect in an animal model purporting to reflect the 
physiology underlying the defining effects of hallucinogens in humans is 
expected to exhibit rapid tolerance. As shown in figure 7, LSD’s effects 
on locomotor activity in rats showed partial tolerance 24 hours after a 
single dose and complete tolerance following five daily injections. 
Tolerance was also observed to the effects of LSD on investigatory 
holepokes and rearing after five consecutive injections of LSD (Adams 
and Geyer 1985n). Thus, this profile of behavioral effects is especially 
sensitive only to the acute effects of LSD, which are presumed to be those 
most relevant to the subjective effects reported by humans. 

While all the hallucinogens tested in this paradigm produced a behavioral 
profile similar to that of LSD, other psychoactive drugs do not. Table 1 
lists the psychoactive drugs that have been examined in full dose- 
response studies using this paradigm. In addition to the ergot derivative 
LSD, similar effects have been observed with both phenylalkylamine 
hallucinogens such as mescaline and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphet- 
amine (DOM) and indoleamine hallucinogens such as psilocin 
and N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) (Adams and Geyer 19856; Geyer 
et al. 1979). 

By contrast, nonhallucinogenic congeners of both LSD and DOM fail to 
produce this behavioral profile. Furthermore, drugs from a variety of 
other categories produce no effects or different effects in this model. 
Among the common false positives that frequently occur in establishing 
the specificity of animal models of hallucinogens, lisuride and 
apomorphine are notable in that they are readily discriminated from the 
hallucinogens in this model (Adams and Geyer 1985c; Geyer et al. 1986). 
Quipazine is one drug that shares 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc agonist properties with 


134 



CROSSOVERS 


LSD TOLERANCE 



LSD LSD 


SALINE 
LSD 30 


FIGURE 7. Tolerance to the effects of LSD on locomotor activity. 

Six groups of male rats (n =6) were pretreated 
chronically with either saline or LSD (30 p/kg SC) 
daily. Two groups received five daily injections of 
saline and were tested 24 hrs later in the BPM 10 min 
after injections of either saline or 30 p/kg LSD 
[ACUTE], Two groups received four daily injections of 
saline and an injection of 30 p/kg LSD on the fifth day, 
and then were tested on the sixth day after injections of 
either saline or LSD (30 p/kg SC) [1 DAY LSD], Two 
groups received five daily injections of LSD (30 pAg 
SC) and were tested the next day 10 min after injections 
of saline or 30 p/kg LSD (n = 14) [5 DAYS LSD]. The 
acute effects of LSD, e.g. decreasing crossovers 
(movements between 15 cm square sectors), were 
partially blocked by a single injection of LSD and 
completely blocked by five days of chronic LSD 
treatment. (Values are group means for the first 30 
min of testing, p<0.05). Redrawn from data presented 
in Adams and Geyer 1985a. 


135 



TABLE 1. This table summarizes data presented in: Adams and Geyer 
1985a, b, c; Callaway et al. 1991; Geyer and Frampton 1988; 
Geyer et al. 1979, 1986; Gold et al. 1988; Lehmann-Masten 
and Geyer 1991; Mittman and Geyer 1989; Rempel et al., in 
press; and Wing et al. 1990. 


HALLUCINOGENS 

EXHIBITING 

PROFILE 

DRUGS EXHIBITING 

DIFFERENT PROFILES 

LSD 

8-OH-DPAT 

AMPHETAMINE 

DOM 

BUSPIRONE 

APOMORPHINE 

DOET 

GEPIRONE 

COCAINE 

DOPR 

IPSAPIRONE 

SCOPOLAMINE 

MESCALINE 

TFMPP, mCPP 

NICOTINE 

PSILOCIN 

RU-24969 

CAFFEINE 

DMT 

DMA, DOAM 

CLENBUTEROL 

5-MeO-DMT 

MDMA, MDA 

CLONIDINE 

(QUIPAZINE) 

MBDB, PCA 

NADOLOL 


LISURIDE 

MORPHINE 


METHYSERGIDE 

PCPA 


CYPROHEPTADINE 

FLUOXETINE 


HALOPERIDOL 

CHLORIMIPRAMINE 


PROPRANOLOL 

PHENCYCLIDINE 


RITANSERIN 

PINDOLOL 

DIZOCILPINE 


the classical hallucinogens but that is not clearly established as being 
hallucinogenic in humans. As it produces a comparable behavioral 
profile, quipazine appears to be similar to the hallucinogens (Wing et al. 
1990). Whether this drug represents a false positive cannot be easily 
determined without more adequate studies of its effects in humans. 

In table 1, indirect serotonin agonists such as MDMA and MDA are listed 
as being different from the classical hallucinogens, despite the fact that 
they have been classified in legal terms together with hallucinogens and 
have been described as having related effects. As reviewed in detail 
elsewhere (Geyer and Callaway 1994), these compounds differ markedly 
from both typical psychostimulants and classical hallucinogens in terms 
of their behavioral effects and mechanisms of action and should be 
considered as a distinct class of drugs. In summary, the increased 


136 









avoidance of novel and open spaces induced by LSD in rats appears to 
satisfy several requirements for an animal model of hallucinogenic 
activity. First, the effect is common to all the hallucinogens tested at 
doses that generally correspond to the potencies of these drugs in 
humans. Second, this profile of effects has not been reproduced by any 
of the nonhallucinogenic drugs tested, including inactive congeners of 
hallucinogens. Third, tolerance to this increased avoidance effect of LSD 
develops at a rate is comparable to that observed in humans. 


SEROTONERGIC MECHANISMS OF HALLUCINOGEN 
EFFECTS 

In order to investigate the mechanisms of action of hallucinogens, a 
number of studies have examined the 5-HT receptor subtypes that 
contribute to the hallucinogen-induced behavioral profile of an increased 
avoidance of novel and open spaces. In the authors’ laboratory, three 
approaches to this investigation have been used. First, selective 5-HT 
agonists have been tested. Second, 5-HT receptor antagonists, such as 
they are, have been tested for their ability to block the effects of the 
respective agonists. Third, due to the limited set of 5-HT antagonists, 
cross-tolerance paradigms have been used to examine the involvement of 
particular receptor subtypes in the behavioral effects of the agonists. 

Serotonin Agonists 

Of the phenalkylamine hallucinogens which are more selective for the 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptor sites, mescaline and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodo- 
amphetamine (DOI) as well as other 5 -HTi C / 5-HT 2 agonists produced 
dose-related decreases in the initial levels of exploratory activity in the 
same BPM paradigm used to characterize the effects of LSD (Wing et al. 
1990). In each case, these decreases were accompanied by preferential 
decreases in entries into and time spent in the center of the chamber. As 
with LSD, this suppression of exploratory behavior was attenuated 
significantly when rats were familiarized with the testing chamber prior 
to the administration of DOI (Wing et al. 1990). Similarly, as shown in 
figure 8, acute administration of the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist DOM 
suppressed locomotion and both entries into and time spent in the center 
of the BPM chamber (Adams and Geyer 1985/?). Familiarization with the 
chamber diminished the effect of DOM on exploratory locomotion but 
not on the rats’ tendency to enter the center of the chamber (figure 8). 


137 



NOVEL FAMILIAR 


NOVEL 


FAMILIAR 



(a) (b) 

FIGURE 8. Impact of familiarization with test chamber on DOM’s 
effects on the spatial pattern and amount of locomotor 
activity. Four groups of 10 male rats each were tested in 
the BPM 10 min after receiving injections of either 
saline or 1.0 mg/kg DOM (SC). The novel groups were 
tested only once, while the familiar groups were tested 
after two previous exposures (without injections) to the 
BPM. In a novel environment, 1.0 mg/kg DOM 
significantly decreased both (a) crossovers (movements 
between 15 cm square sectors) and (b) the time spent in 
the center of the chamber. However, in a familiar 
environment, the effects of DOM were attenuated on 
(a) crossovers, but not on (b) the time spent in the center 
of the chamber. (Values are group means for the first 
30 min of testing, p<0.05). Redrawn from data 
presented in Adams and Geyer 1985b. 


Thus, as with LSD, phenalkylaniine hallucinogens such as mescaline, 
DOI, and DOM suppress exploratory locomotion and time spent in the 
center. As with LSD, the effects of DOI and DOM on locomotion are 
diminished when a familiar test chamber is used, although familiarization 
does not suppress the potentiation of agoraphobia as operationally 
measured by the time spent in the center of the chamber. Similarly, the 
indoleamine hallucinogen N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) also 
preferentially suppressed both entries into the center and investigatory 
holepokes when rats were tested in a novel BPM chamber (Adams and 
Geyer 1985b). Thus, LSD and more selective 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonists 
exaggerate the animal's normal responses to aversive sensory stimuli. In 


138 



the novel environment, this potentiation of sensory responsiveness is 
expressed as initial decreases in exploratory behavior. In a familiar 
environment, the effect is expressed in a more specific decrease in visits 
to the open area in the center of the chamber. 

The 5-HT 1A agonists, which are not generally considered hallucinogenic, 
have also been tested in this behavioral paradigm. Buspirone, 
8-OH-DPAT, gepirone, and ipsapirone all produced decreases in 
locomotor activity in a novel environment. The decreases were 
superficially similar to those produced by the 5 -HTi C / 5-HT 2 agonists 
(Mittman and Geyer 1989). Unlike the mixed 5-HT 1A and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
agonist LSD, the more selective 5-HT 1A compounds produced decreases 
in center entries that were strictly proportional to the decreases in other 
measures of activity and were typically maintained throughout the test 
session. Furthermore, in contrast to the effects of LSD or phenalkyl- 
amine hallucinogens, the effects of the 5-HT, A agonists were not 
attenuated when the animals were tested in a familiar environment 
(figure 9). These decreases were more indicative of a general suppression 
of motor behavior rather than of a specific potentiation of the animals' 
neophobic and agoraphobic responses to threatening stimuli (Mittman 
and Geyer 1989). Thus, hallucinogenic 5-HT agonists such as the 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonists DMT, DOI, and mescaline were found to produce 
behavior similar to that produced by LSD, while 5-HT, A agonists that 
were not hallucinogenic produced behavior more akin to a generalized 
sedation rather than the behavioral profile elicited by LSD administration. 

Serotonin Antagonists 

The effects of the 5-HT, c /5-HT 2 and 5-HT, A agonists in this paradigm can 
be distinguished pharmacologically as well as behaviorally. Mittman and 
Geyer (1991) showed that the effects of the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist DOI on 
exploratory locomotion and time spent in the center were blocked 
effectively by the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 antagonist ritanserin as shown in 
figure 10. Similar effects were obtained with the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
antagonist ketanserin using a variety of 5-HT, c /5-HT 2 hallucinogens 
(Wing et al. 1990). By contrast, the effects of the 5-HT 1A agonist 
8-OH-DPAT were completely insensitive to ketanserin (Wing et al. 

1990). 

However, administration of the 5-HT, antagonist (and beta-adrenergic 
antagonist) propranolol did not yield receptor-specific effects (figure 11). 
When propranolol was used as an antagonist to the 5-HT, A agonist 


139 



NOVEL FAMILIAR 


1600 


NOVEL FAMILIAR 



1400 

1200 

1000 

800 

600 

400 

200 

0 



(a) 00 

FIGURE 9. Effect of familiarization with test chamber on 5-HT 1A 
agonists’ effects on locomotor activity. Rats were tested 
in the BPM 10 min after receiving injections of either 
saline or dr/j. The novel groups were tested only once, 
while the familiar groups were tested after two previous 
exposures (without injections) to the BPM. (a) Four 
groups of 10 male rats each were tested 10 min after 
injections of either saline or 8-OH-DPAT (0.1 mg/kg SC). 
In a novel environment, 8-OH-DPAT significantly 
decreased crossovers (movements between 15 cm 
square sectors). In a familiar environment 8-OH-DPAT 
also significantly decreased crossovers, (b) Four groups 
of male rats (n = 11) were tested in the BPM 10 min 
after receiving SC injections of either saline or 
1.25 mg/kg ipsapirone (IPS). In a novel environment, 
ipsapirone significantly decreased crossovers. In a 
familiar environment, ipsapirone also significantly 
decreased crossovers. Redrawn from data presented in 
Mittman and Geyer 1989. 


8-OH-DPAT and the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist DOI, the hypoactivity 
induced by both 8-OH-DPAT and DOI was attenuated by administration 
in the first 10 minutes of testing in the BPM (figure 11). Thus, the effects 
of the 5-HT 1A agonists are blocked by 5-HT, antagonists but not by 
5 -HTi C / 5-HT 2 antagonists, arguing for receptor-specific antagonism. 
However, the 5-HT, c /5-HT 2 agonist DOI is blocked either by the 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 antagonist or the 5-HT[ antagonist, which indicates either a 


140 



RITANSERIN ANTAGONISM OF 


THE EFFECTS OF DOI 

1600 r 



PRETREAT: SAL SAL RIT RIT 


TREAT: SAL DOI SAL DOI 

FIGURE 10. Antagonism of 5HT-1C/2 agonist effects by a 

5HT-1C/2 antagonist. Four groups of male rats 
(n = 9) were tested in the BPM 30 min after receiving 
pretreatment SC injections of either saline or 2.0 mg/kg 
ritanserin (RIT) and 10 min after receiving treatment 
injections of either saline or 0.27 mg/kg DOI (SC). 

DOI alone significantly decreased crossovers 
(movements between 15 cm square sectors); but the 
effects of DOI were antagonized when rats were 
pretreated with ritanserin. (Values are group means 
for the first 30 min, p<0.005). Redrawn from data 
presented in Mittman and Cl ever 1991. 


141 



PROPRANOLOL ANTAGONISM 


OF DOI & DPAT 


260 



200 

if) 


o 


Z. 

150 

if) 


00 


o 

100 

(H 


o 

50 


0 1 - 

PRETREATMENT: 

TREATMENT: 



SAL PROP 
SAL SAL 


** 



SAL PROP SAL PROP 

DOI DOI DPAT DPAT 


FIGURE 11. Antagonism of 5-HT 1A agonist and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
agonist effects by a 5-HT) antagonist. Six groups 
(n = 10-11) of male rats were tested in the BPM 30 
min after receiving pretreatment injections of either 
saline or 10.0 mg/kg propranolol (SC) and 10 min 
after receiving treatment injections of either saline, 
DOI (1.0 mg/kg SC), or 8-OH-DPAT (DPAT) 

(0.5 mg/kg SC). Both DOI and 8-OH-DPAT 
significantly decreased crossings (movements between 
15 cm square sectors) for the initial 10 min of testing; 
these effects were antagonized by pretreatment with 
propranolol. (Values are group means for the first 
10 min of testing; F(2,57) = 8.07, p<0.01). 


nonspecific antagonism or an interaction between the 5-HT 1A and 
5-HTj c /5-HT 2 receptors. 

Similar studies using ritanserin and propranolol as pretreatments prior to 
the administration of LSD yielded interesting results. Recent speculation 
about the differential functions of the 5-HT 1A and the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
receptors in LSD action has led to the hypothesis that the hallucinogenic 
action of LSD is due to its binding to the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptor 
complex. The prevailing view currently holds that hallucinogenic action 


142 



is due to actions mediated via the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptor complex. As 
evidence for this hypothesis, some studies have correlated the 5-HT 2 
binding affinity of a drug with its hallucinogenic potency (Glennon et al. 
1984; Titeler et al. 1988). 

However, because of the paucity of dose-finding studies in humans, these 
studies have been unable to thoroughly examine the indoleamine and 
ergot alkaloid hallucinogens, although LSD and some indoleamines have 
been examined. These studies have focused instead primarily on the 
phenalkylamine hallucinogens such as mescaline, DOI, and DOM. LSD 
appeal's to be more closely related to the indoleamines, which include 
DMT and psilocybin (Mandell and Geyer 1976). Correlations between 
5 -HT, c / 5-HT 2 function and hallucinogenic potency have yet to be studied 
for the indoleamines or the ergots as groups. Therefore, the relative 
contributions of 5-HT 1A and 5-HT, c /5-HT 2 receptors in hallucinogenic 
action have not been established definitively, especially for the 
indoleamine and ergot alkaloid hallucinogens. 

Because the prevailing view is that classical hallucinogens act primarily 
via agonist actions at 5 -HT ic / 5-HT 2 receptors, it was predicted that the 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 antagonist ritanserin would block the effects of LSD, 
whereas the 5-HT, antagonist propranolol would not. Instead, ritanserin 
only partially blocked the effects of LSD, as did propranolol. Only the 
combination of ritanserin and propranolol completely blocked the effects 
of LSD (Mittman and Geyer 1991). These results suggest a role for the 
5 -HT, a receptor as a contributor to the behavioral effects of LSD. 

Perhaps, as suggested by the antagonist studies, there is an interaction 
between the 5-HT, A and 5 -HT ic / 5-HT 2 receptors. To explore further the 
contributions of the receptors to the effects of LSD, an approach based on 
the apparent tolerance associated with 5-HT agonists was used. 


TOLERANCE AND CROSS-TOLERANCE TESTS 

The previous attempts to use antagonists to block specific receptor sites 
when testing LSD, a mixed 5-HT, A and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist, were 
problematic primarily because of the lack of selective 5-HT 1A antagonists. 
Unfortunately the common 5-HT, antagonist propranolol is an antagonist 
at both 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 1B sites and is a 6-adrenergic blocker as well. 
Without selective antagonists, it was difficult to assess the respective 
contributions of the receptor subtypes to the effects of LSD on locomotor 
and investigatory behavior. 


143 



Alternatively, another approach is that of tolerance. Chronic admini¬ 
stration of a selective 5-HT 1A agonist such as 8-OH-DPAT produces 
tolerance to the acute effects of 8-OH-DPAT (Berendsen and Broekkamp 
1991; Johansson et al. 1990; Larsson et al. 1990; Pranzatelli and Pluchino 
1991). Similarly, tolerance has also been reported to the acute effects of 
DOI, a 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist, after repeated administration (Berendsen 
and Broekkamp 1991; Darmani et al. 1990a; Pranzatelli and Pluchino 
1991). In the serotonin system, it appeal's that receptor regulation is not 
an adequate explanation for tolerance, as behavioral tolerance is seen in 
the absence of receptor change (Trulson 1985). Nevertheless, binding 
studies have demonstrated that chronic administration of both 
8-OH-DPAT and DOI result in decreased numbers of 5-HT, A and 
5 -HTi C / 5-HT 2 receptor sites, respectively (Buckholtz et al. 1988; Larsson 
et al. 1990; McKenna et al. 1989; Pranzatelli 1991). 

It is well established that tolerance to LSD in humans is striking for the 
rapidity with which it occurs (Freedman et al. 1964; Isbell et al. 1956; 
Mandell and Geyer 1976). In animals, tolerance or partial tolerance to 
the acute effects of LSD administration has also been demonstrated for 
most behaviors (Adams and Geyer 1985a; Appel and Freedman 1968; 
Bridger 1975; Carter and Appel 1978; Geyer and Light 1979; Murray et 
al. 1977; Rech et al. 1975; Trulson 1985; Winter 1971), although some 
behavioral paradigms may be resistant to tolerance induction (Braff and 
Geyer 1980; Bridger 1975; Murray et al. 1977). 

Cross-tolerance regimens were used to elucidate the contribution of 
5 -HT, a receptor action to the effects of LSD on locomotor activity. 

These experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that the effects of 
LSD in the BPM model are influenced by 5-HT, A function and by 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 function, thus supporting a combination of 5-HT 1A and 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptor action. 

Tolerance to 8-OH-DPAT and DOI 

First, it was determined whether tolerance to the selective agonists would 
exhibit cross-tolerance to a different selective agonist. The hypothesis, 
based on earlier research (Berendsen and Broekkamp 1991; Darmani et 
al. 1990a; Johansson et al. 1990; Nash et al. 1989; Pranzatelli and 
Pluchino 1991), was that the 5-HT 1A and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonists 
8-OH-DPAT and DOI, respectively, would both show tolerance but that 
cross-tolerance between the two drugs would not occur. 


144 



The most robust acute effect of 8-OH-DPAT administration, that of 
decreasing the number of movements made by the rat in the BPM in the 
first 10 minutes of an hour-long test session, was attenuated when 
8-OH-DPAT was administered repeatedly every 12 hours for 5 days 
(figure 12). That is, tolerance was observed to the effects of 8-OH-DPAT 
when it was given chronically. 

A similar pattern of tolerance was observed with DOI (figure 12). A 
diminished effect of the challenge dose of DOI occurred in animals 
pretreated chronically with DOI. As predicted, the repeated admini¬ 
stration of DOI produced no significant cross-tolerance to the effects of 
an acute dose of 8-OH-DPAT (figure 12). However, the chronic 
administration of 8-OH-DPAT produced some cross-tolerance to the 
effects of a challenge dose of DOI (figure 12). Thus, the expected 
tolerance to the effects of 8-OH-DPAT and DOI occurred. Although 
DOI produced no cross-tolerance to 8-OH-DPAT, some cross-tolerance 
was found when DOI was tested in rats pretreated with 8-OH-DPAT 
(Krebs and Geyer 1994). Thus, the tolerance regimens were sufficient to 
produce significant tolerance, but this tolerance was not completely 
specific pharmacologically to each receptor subtype. 

These effects are similar to what was observed when the 5-HT[ antagonist 
propranolol was able to block some of the effects of the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
agonist DOI (figure 11). The partial cross-tolerance to DOI after chronic 
8-OH-DPAT administration may reflect an interaction between 5-HT 1A 
and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptors. Such an interaction has been suggested 
previously (Amt and Hyttel 1989; Darmani et al. 1990b; Krebs and Geyer 
1994) and will require further studies to elucidate. 

Tolerance to LSD and 8-OH-DPAT 

A parallel study examined cross-tolerance between the effects of 
8-OH-DPAT and LSD. Based on previous studies (Adams and Geyer 
1985n), tolerance for the effects of LSD was expected. Based on its 
affinity to 5-HT 1A receptors, chronic LSD pretreatment was expected to 
produce cross-tolerance to the effects of 8-OH-DPAT treatment. The 
most important hypothesis was that 8-OH-DPAT pretreatment would 
produce cross-tolerance to the effects of LSD, suggesting either that 
5-HT, A receptors contribute to the effects of LSD or that 5-HT 1A and 
5 -HT, c / 5-HT 2 receptors interact functionally. In either case, reciprocal 
cross-tolerance between 8-OH-DPAT and LSD was hypothesized. As 
before, tolerance to the effects of 8-OH-DPAT was evident (figure 13). 


145 



% OF CONTROL 


DOI & 8-OH-DPAT TOLERANCE 


& CROSS TOLERANCE 



SAL DPAT SAL DOI DPAT DOI CHRONIC 

DPATDPAT DOI DOI DOI DPAT ACUTE 


FIGURE 12. Asymmetrical cross-tolerance between 5-HT 1A and 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonists. Nine groups of male rats 
(n = 7-8) were pretreated chronically every 12 hrsfor 
5 days with either saline, DOI (1.0 mg/kg SC), or 
8-OH-DPAT (0.5 mg/kg SC). Thirty-six hrs after the 
last pretreatment, rats were tested in the BPM 10 min 
after receiving treatment injections of either saline, 

1.0 mg/kg DOI, or 0.5 mg/kg 8-OH-DPAT (DPAT). 
Both DOI and 8-OH-DPAT significantly decreased 
movements, a measure of global motor activity; these 
effects were significantly attenuated when the 
corresponding pretreatmeqts of DOI and 8-OH-DPAT 
were given, respectively. Also, cross-tolerance 
occurred to the effects of DOI when 8-OH-DPAT was 
the pretreatment, but no attenuation of 8-OH-DPAT’s 
effects occurred when DOI was the pretreatment. 
(Values are percentages of group means of 
movements for corresponding control groups, for the 
first 10 min of testing, p<0.05). An * represents a 
significant difference from control, while a + 
represents a significant difference from the acute drp 
group. Each symbol indicates significant tolerance or 
cross-tolerance, while both symbols together indicate 
partial tolerance or cross-tolerance. Redrawn from 
data presented in Krebs and Geyer 1994. 


146 




% OF CONTROL 


LSD & 8-OH-DPAT TOLERANCE 
& CROSS TOLERANCE 



SAL DPAT SAL LSD DPAT LSD CHRONIC 
DPAT DPAT LSD LSD LSD DPAT ACUTE 


FIGURE 13. Asymmetrical cross-tolerance between LSD and 
5-HT 1A agonist. Nine groups of male rats (n = 8) 
were pretreated chronically every 12 hrs for five days 
with either saline, 8-OH-DPAT (DPAT) (0.5 mg/kg 
SC), or LSD (60 p/kg SC). Thirty-six hrs after the last 
pretreatment, rats were tested in the BPM 10 min 
after receiving treatment injections of either saline, 
0.5 mg/kg 8-OH-DPAT, or 60 p/kg LSD. Both LSD 
and 8-OH-DPAT significantly decreased movements, 
a measure of global motor activity; these effects were 
significantly attenuated when the corresponding 
pretreatments of LSD and 8-OH-DPAT were given, 
respectively, Also, cross-tolerance occurred to the 
effects of LSD when 8-OH-DPAT was the 
pretreatment, but no attenuation of 8-OH-DPAT’s 
effects occurred when LSD was the pretreatment. 

(See figure 12 for explanation of values and symbols). 
Redrawn from data presented in Krebs and Geyer 
1994. 


147 




Also, the effects of LSD on movements showed tolerance after the 
chronic regimen was performed (figure 13). In animals chronically 
pretreated with 8-OH-DPAT every 12 hours for 5 days, the effects of 
LSD were significantly diminished. Thus, cross-tolerance to LSD was 
observed after the chronic administration of 8-OH-DPAT. 

This result was consistent with the previous observation that propranolol 
partially blocks this effect of LSD, and further suggests that 
5-HT, A -related systems participate in these behavioral effects of LSD. 
However, even after chronic 8-OH-DPAT pretreatment a significant 
effect of LSD was still evident, indicating that the cross-tolerance was 
only partial. The reciprocal comparison did not evidence cross-tolerance. 
As seen in figure 13, animals pretreated chronically with LSD did not 
exhibit cross-tolerance to the effects of 8-OH-DPAT (Krebs and Geyer 
1994). This nonreciprocal cross-tolerance is hypothesized to have 
occurred because the dose of LSD used did not occupy 5-HT, A receptor 
sites as effectively as did the dose of 8-OH-DPAT, although the doses 
were equated in terms of the acute behavioral effects of the two drugs. 
The major finding of asymmetrical partial cross-tolerance between 
8-OH-DPAT and LSD indicates that the effects of LSD on locomotor 
behavior, as defined by movements, are influenced by 5-HT 1A receptor 
function. 

Tolerance to LSD and DOI 

A parallel cross-tolerance study was performed with DOI and LSD. 
Because the previous study indicated that DOI tolerance was marginal 
when animals were treated every 12 hours for 5 days (figure 12), the 
chronic regimen was increased to injections every 12 hours for 8 days. 

As shown in figure 14, tolerance to the effects of both DOI and LSD was 
replicated. The effects of LSD were diminished somewhat in animals 
chronically pretreated with DOI, indicating that partial cross-tolerance to 
the effects of LSD occurred (figure 14). However, there was no 
reciprocal cross-tolerance when animals were chronically pretreated with 
LSD and challenged with DOI (Krebs and Geyer 1994). Therefore, the 
major finding of partial cross-tolerance to LSD after chronic DOI 
administration indicates that the effects of LSD on locomotion are 
influenced by the action of the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 system. 

Taken together, evidence of partial cross-tolerance between 8-OH-DPAT 
and LSD and between DOI and LSD indicates that the behavioral effects 
of LSD are influenced by a combination of 5-HT 1A and 5 -HTi C /5-HT 2 


148 



LSD & DOI TOLERANCE 


& CROSS 


TOLERANCE 



100 


90 - 

_l 

o 

80 - 

C£ 

70 - 

1 — 

z 

60 • 

o 

o 

60 - 

Li_ 

40 - 

O 

30 - 

bS 

20 - 


10 - 


0 


+ 



SAL DOI 
DOI DOI 



I I ACUTE DRUG 
V77A TOLERANCE 
gggg CROSS 

TOLERANCE 



SAL LSD DOI LSD CHRONIC 
LSD LSD LSD DOI ACUTE 


FIGURE 14. Asymmetrical cross-tolerance between LSD and 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist. Nine groups of male rats 
(n = 7-8) were pretreated chronically every 12 hrsfor 
eight days with either saline, DOI (1.0 mg/kg SC), or 
LSD (60 p/kg SC). Thirty-six hrs after the last 
pretreatment, rats were tested in the BPM 10 min 
after receiving treatment injections of either saline, 

1.0 mg/kg DOI, or 60 p/kg LSD.Both LSD and DOI 
significantly decreased movements, a measure of 
global motor activity; these effects were significantly 
attenuated when the corresponding pretreatments of 
LSD and DOI were given, respectively. Also, 
cross-tolerance occurred to the effects of LSD when 
DOI was the pretreatment, but no attenuation of 
DOI’s effects occurred when LSD was the 
pretreatment. (See figure 12 for explanation of values 
and symbols). Redrawn from data presented in Krebs 
and Geyer 1994. 


149 







receptor action or that 5-HT, A and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptors interact in the 
modulation of this behavior. Accordingly, the prevailing view that the 
action of the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptor is primarily responsible for 
hallucinogenic activity may be true for the phenalkylamine hallucin¬ 
ogens, but this interpretation cannot completely explain the action of the 
less selective 5-HT 1A /5-HT lc /5-HT 2 ergot alkaloid LSD. 

There is some evidence of an interaction between the 5-HT 1A and 
5-HT lc /5-HT 2 receptors. In one study it was found that the effect of the 
5-HT 1A agonist 8-OH-DPAT was significantly increased when rats were 
treated simultaneously with DOI, a 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist. Interestingly, 
the effect of DOI on head twitches was inhibited by simultaneous 
treatment with 8-OH-DPAT (Amt and Hyttel 1989). Moreover, the 
increased forepaw treading induced by cotreatment with 8-OH-DPAT 
and DOI was partially inhibited by high doses of either the 5-HT 2 
antagonists, ritanserin and ketanserin, or the 5-HT, and 6-adrenoceptor 
antagonist (-)-alprenolol. Furthermore, the effects of the 5-HT 2 
antagonists were synergistic with those of (-)-alprenolol in their ability to 
block the forepaw treading induced by the agonist combination (Amt and 
Hyttel 1989). This synergistic relationship was interpreted as an 
asymmetrical interaction between the 5-HT IA and 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 
receptors. 

Another study has replicated some of these findings by demonstrating 
that the head twitch response induced by the 5-HT lc /5-HT 2 agonist DOI 
was significantly inhibited by simultaneous administration of the 5-HT 1A 
agonist 8-OH-DPAT, but not by the 5-HT m /5-HT c agonist 
l-(3-trifhrromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP) (Darmani et al. 1990b). 
These researchers argue for a pharmacological interaction between the 
5 -HT, a and 5-HT 2 receptors that manifests itself in a 5-HT 1A inhibitory 
action on 5-HT 2 receptor-modulated behavior (Darmani et al. 1990b). 

These results, taken together with the asymmetrical cross-tolerance results 
(Krebs and Geyer 1994) and the propranolol antagonism of DOI 
discussed earlier, suggest that there may indeed be interactions between 
the 5 -HT, a and 5-HT, c /5-HT 2 receptors. With further investigation, the 
BPM system may be able to shed light on the nature of this interaction by 
more thoroughly characterizing the effects of 5-HT 1A agonists and 
hallucinogens. With more detailed analyses of phenalkylamine, 
indoleamine, and ergot alkaloid hallucinogens, clarification of the 
mechanisms of action of these drugs should be possible. 


150 



REFERENCES 


Adams, L.M. “LSD-Induced Alterations in Spatial and Temporal Patterns 
of Exploratory Activity: Possible Method of Its Effects on Mood and 
Perception.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of California at San Diego, 
1983. 

Adams, L.M., and Geyer, M.A. LSD-induced alterations of locomotor 
patterns and exploration in rats. Psychopharmacology 77:179-185, 
1982. 

Adams L.M., and Geyer, M.A. A proposed animal model for 

hallucinogens based on LSD’s effects on patterns of exploration in 
rats. Behav Neuroscience 99:881-900, 1985a. 

Adams, L.M., and Geyer, M.A. Effects of DOM and DMT in a proposed 
animal model of hallucinogenic activity. Prog Neuro- 
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 91121-132, 1985b. 

Adams, L.M., and Geyer, M.A. Patterns of exploration in rats distinguish 
lisuride from lysergic acid diethylamide. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
23:461-468, 1985c. 

Appel, J.B., and Freedman, D.X. Tolerance and crosstolerance among 
psychotomimetic drugs. Psychopharmacologia (Berl) 13:267-274, 
1968. 

Amt, J., and Hyttel, J. Facilitation of 8-OH-DPAT-induced forepaw 
treading of rats by the 5-HT ? agonist DOI. Eur J Pharmacol 
161:45-51, 1989. 

Barnett, S.A. The Rat: A Study in Behavior. Chicago: Aldine, 1963. 

Berendsen, H.H.B., and Broekkamp, C.L.E. Attenuation of 5-HT, A and 
5-HT 2 but not 5-HT, c receptor mediated behaviour in rats following 
chronic treatment with 5-HT receptor agonists, antagonists or 
anti-depressants. Psychopharmacology 105:219-224, 1991. 

Berlyne, D.E. Curiosity and exploration. Science 153:25-33, 1966. 

Braff, D.L., and Geyer, M.A. Acute and chronic LSD effects on rat 
startle: Data supporting an LSD-rat model of schizophrenia. Biol 
Psychiatry 15:909-916, 1980. 

Bridger, W.H. Good trip or bad trip: The roles of tolerance and stress in 
hallucinogenic drug action. In: Mandell, A.J., ed. Advances in 
Biochemical Psychopharmacology. Vol. 13. New York: Raven Press, 
1975. pp. 1-25/ 

Buckholtz, N.S.; Zhou, D.; and Freedman, D.X. Serotonin, agonist 
administration down-regulates rat brain serotonin, receptors. Life Sci 
42:2439-2445, 1988. 


151 



Callaway, C.W.; Johnson, M.P.; Gold, L.H.; Nichols, D.E.: and Geyer, 
M.A. Amphetamine derivatives induce locomotor hyperactivity by 
acting as indirect serotonin agonists. Psychopharmacology 
104:293-301, 1991. 

Carter, R.B., and Appel, J.B. LSD and 5-HTP: Tolerance and 

crosstolerance relationships. Eur J Pharmacol 50:145-148, 1978. 

Cunha, J.M., and Masur, J. Evaluation of psychotropic drugs with a 
modified open field test. Pharmacology 16:259-267, 1978. 

Darmani, N.A.; Martin, B.R.; and Glennon, R.A. Withdrawal from 
chronic treatment with (+)-DOI causes super-sensitivity to 5-HT 2 
receptor-induced head-twitch behaviour in mice. Eur J Pharmacol 
186:115-118, 1990a. 

Darmani, N.A.; Martin, B.R.; Pandey, U.; and Glennon, R.A. Do 
functional relationships exist between 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2 receptors? 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 36:901-906, 19906. 

File, S.E., and Wardill, A.G. Validity of head-dipping as a measure of 
exploration in a modified holeboard. Psychopharmacology 44:53-59, 
1975. 

Freedman, D.X. Mode of action of hallucinogenic drugs. In: Van Praag, 
H.M., ed. Handbook of Biological Psychiatry. Vol. 4. New York: 
Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1981. pp. 859-884. 

Freedman, D.X.; Appel, J.B.; Hartman, F.R.; and Molliver, M.E. 
Tolerance to behavioral effects of LSD-25 in rat. J Pharm Exp Ther 
143:309-313, 1964. 

Geyer, M.A. Approaches to the characterization of drug effects on 
locomotor activity in rodents. In: Adler, M.W., and Cowan, A., eds. 
Testing and Evaluation of Drugs of Abuse. New York: Wiley-Liss, 
1990. pp. 81-99. 

Geyer, M.A., and Callaway, C.W. Behavioral pharmacology of ring- 
substituted amphetamine analogs. In: Cho, A.K., and Segal, D.S., eds. 
Amphetamine and its Analogs: Neuropsychopharmacology, 
Toxicology and Abuse. New York: Academic Press, 1994. pp. 177- 
208. 

Geyer, M.A., and Light, R.K. LSD-induced alterations of investigatory 
responding in rats. Psychopharmacology 65:41-47, 1979. 

Geyer, M.A.; Petersen L.R.; Rose G.J.; Horwitt, D.D.; Light, R.K.; 
Adams, L.M.; Zook, J.A.; Hawkins, R.L.; and Mandell, A.J. The 
effects of lysergic acid diethylamide and mescaline-derived 
hallucinogens on sensory-integrative function: Tactile startle. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 207:837-847, 1978. 


152 



Geyer, M.A.; Light, R.K.; Rose, G.J.; Petersen, L.R.; Horwitt, D.D.; 
Adams, L.M.; and Hawkins, R.L. A characteristic effect of 
hallucinogens on investigatory responding in rats. 
Psychopharmacology 65:35-40, 1979. 

Geyer, M.A.; Russo, P.V.; and Masten, V.L. Multivariate assessment of 
locomotor behavior: Pharmacological and behavioral analyses. 
Pharmacol Biochem Beliav 25:277-288, 1986. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; and McKenney, J.D. Evidence for 5-HT 2 
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life 
Sci 35:2505-2511, 1984. 

Herrmann, W.M.; Horowski, R.; Dannehl, K.; Kramer, U.; and Lurati, K. 
Clinical effectiveness of lisuride hydrogen maleate: A double-blind 
trial versus methysergide. Headache 17:54-60, 1977. 

Hughes, R.N. Effects of LSD on exploratory behavior and locomotion in 
rats. Behav Biol 9:357-365, 1973. 

Isbell, H.; Belleville, R.E.; Fraser, H.F.; Wikler, A.; and Logan, C.R. 
Studies on lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25): I. Effects in former 
morphine addicts and development of tolerance during chronic 
intoxication. AMA Arch Neurol Psychiatry 76:468-478, 1956. 

Izquierdo, I. Relations between orienting, pseudoconditioned and 

conditioned responses in the shuttle-box: A pharmacological analysis 
by means of LSD and dibenamine. Behav Biol 15:193-205, 1975. 

Johansson, C.E.; Meyerson, B.J.; and Hoglund, A.U. The long-term 
effects of 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propyl-amino)tetralin (8-OH-DPAT) on 
copulatory and exploratory behavior in male rats. Eur J Pharmacol 
178:1-9, 1990. 

Key, B.J. Alteration in the generalization of visual stimuli induced by 
lysergic acid diethylamide in cats. Psychopharmacology 6:327-337, 
1964m 

Key, B.J. The effects of LSD-25 on the interaction between conditional 
and nonconditional stimuli in a simple avoidance situation. 
Psycliopharmacology 6:319-326, 19646. 

Key, B.J., and Bradley, P.B. The effects of drugs on conditioning and 
habituation to arousal stimuli in animals. Psycliopharmacology 
1:450-462, 1960. 

Krebs, K.M., and Geyer, M.A. Crosstolerance studies of serotonin 

receptors involved in behavioral effects of LSD. Psycliopharmacology 
113:429-437, 1994. 


153 



Larsson, L.G.; Renyi, L.; Ross, S.B.; Svensson, B.; and Angeby-Moller, 
K. Different effects on the responses of functional pre- and 
postsynaptic 5-HT, A receptors by repeated treatment of rats with the 
5 -HT, a receptor agonist 8-OH-DPAT. Neuropharmacology 29:85-91, 
1990. 

Mandell, A.J., and Geyer, M.A. Hallucinations: Chemical and 
physiological. In: Grenell, R.G., and Gabay, S., eds. Biological 
Foundations of Psychiatry. New York: Raven Press, 1976. 
pp. 729-753. 

McKenna, D.J.; Nazarali, A.J.; Himeno, A.; and Saavedra, J.M. Chronic 
treatment with (+)DOI, a psychotomimetic 5-HT 2 agonist, 
downregulates 5-HT 2 receptors in rat brain. 

Neuropsychopharmacology 2:81-87, 1989. 

Miliaressis, T.E., and St. Laurent, J. Effets de l'amide de l'acide 
lysergique-25 sur la reaction de sursaut chez le rat. Can J Physiol 
Pharmacol 52:126-129, 1974. 

Mittman, S.M., and Geyer, M.A. Effects of 5-HT, A agonists on locomotor 
and investigatory behaviors in rats differ from those of hallucinogens. 
Psychopliarmacology 98:321-329, 1989. 

Mittman, S.M., and Geyer, M.A. Dissociation of multiple effects of acute 
LSD on exploratory behavior in rats by ritanserin and propranolol. 
Psychopliarmacology 105:69-76, 1991. 

Montgomery, K.C. The relation between fear - induced by novel 
stimulation and exploratory behavior. J Comp Physiol Psychol 
48:254-260, 1955. 

Murray, T.F.; Craigmill, A.L.; and Fischer, G.J. Pharmacological and 
behavioral components of tolerance to LSD and mescaline in rats. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 7:239-244, 1977. 

Nash, J.F.; Meltzer, H.Y.; and Gudelsky, G.A. Selective crosstolerance to 
5 -HT, a and 5-HT 2 receptor-mediated temperature and corticosterone 
responses. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 33:781-785, 1989. 

Peroutka, S.J., and Snyder S.H. Multiple serotonin receptors: Differential 

3 3 

binding of [ H]5-hydroxytryptamine, [ H] lysergic acid diethylamide 
and [ 3 H]spiroperidol. Mol Pharmacol 16:687-699, 1979. 

Pranzatelli, M.R. Regulation of 5-HT 2 receptors in rat cortex: Studies 
with a putative selective agonist and an antagonist. Biochem 
Pharmacol 42:1099-1105, 1991. 

Pranzatelli, M.R., and Pluchino, R.S. The relation of central 5-HT 1A and 
5-HT 2 receptors: Low dose agonist-induced selective tolerance in the 
rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 39:407-413, 1991. 


154 



Rech, R.H.; Tilson, H.A.; and Marquis, W.J. Adaptive changes in 

behavior after repeated administration of various psychoactive drugs. 
In: Mandell, A.J., ed. Neurobiological Mechanisms of Adaptation and 
Behavior. New York: Raven Press, 1975. pp. 263-286. 

Rempel, N.L.; Callaway, C.W.; and Geyer, M.A. Serotonin,, receptor 
activation mimics behavioral effects of presynaptic serotonin release. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 8:201-212, 1993. 

Sanders-Bush E.; Burris K.D.; and Knoth K. Lysergic acid diethylamide 
and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine are partial agonists at 
serotonin receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246:924-928, 1988. 

Stoff, D.M.; Gillin, J.C.; and Wyatt, R.J. Animal models of drug-induced 
hallucinations. In: Stillman, R.C., and Willette, R.E., eds. The 
Psychopharmocology of Hallucinogens. New York: Pergamon Press, 
1978. pp. 259-267. 

Tilson, H.A.; Baker, T.G.; Chamberlain, J.H.; Marquis, W.J.; and Rech, 
R.H. Behavioral and neuropharmacological analysis of amphetamine 
and 2,5-dimethoxy-methlamphetamine in rats. Psychopharmacologia 
44:229-239, 1975. 

Titeler, M.; Lyon, R.A.; and Glennon, R.A. Radioligand binding 
evidence implicates the brain 5-HT 2 receptor as a site of action for 
LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens. Psychopharmacology 
94:213-216, 1988. 

Tmlson, M.E. Separation of tolerance to the behavioral effects of LSD 
from changes in serotonin receptor binding in cats. Eur J Pharmacol 
111:385-388, 1985. 

Welker, W.I. Lree vs. forced exploration of a novel situation by rats. 
Psychol Rep 3:95-108, 1957. 

Wing, L.L.; Tapson, G.S.; and Geyer, M.A. Mediation of acute 
behavioral effects of hallucinogens in rats. Psychopharmacology 
100:417-425, 1990. 

Winter, J.C. Tolerance to a behavioral effect of lysergic acid diethylamide 
and crosstolerance to mescaline in the rat: Absence of a metabolic 
component. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 178:625-630, 1971. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This chapter was prepared with support from National Institute on Drug 
Abuse grant DA02925. Mark A. Geyer was supported by a Research 
Scientist Development Award (MH00188) from the National Institute of 
Mental Health. 


155 



AUTHORS 


Mark A. Geyer, Ph.D. 

Professor of Psychiatry 

Kirsten M. Krebs, M.A. 

Department of Psychology 

School of Medicine 

University of California at San Diego 

La Jolla, CA 92093-0804 


156 



The Stimulus Effects of 
Serotonergic Hallucinogens 
in Animals 

Jerrold C. Winter 


INTRODUCTION 

Mankind has known of naturally occurring hallucinogens for thousands 
of years (Schultes and Hofmann 1980), but less than one-tenth of one 
millennium has passed since it could be said with confidence that a pure 
chemical of known structure is hallucinogenic (Heffter 1897; Spath 
1919). That chemical was mescaline, a representative of the 
phenethylamine subclass of the serotonergic hallucinogens. The other 
subclass, the indoleamines, is perhaps best represented by lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD), a drug whose hallucinogenic properties were 
discovered by Albert Hofmann on April 16, 1943 (Hofmann 1959). That 
both the indoleamines and the phenethylamines are properly classified 
together as serotonergic hallucinogens has become apparent only in the 
last 2 decades. 

The remarkable alterations in thought and perception produced by 
hallucinogens have been described by many. In some instances, carefully 
selected human volunteers have received these drugs in rigidly controlled 
studies (Isbell et al. 1959; Martin and Sloan 1977; Strassman, this 
volume). In others, investigators have told of the effects of hallucinogens 
following self-administration. These reporters have ranged from persons 
without scientific training (DeCurtis 1987) to distinguished scientists 
such as Hofmann (1959), Szara (1957), and Shulgin (this volume; 

Shulgin et al. 1986). But to seek out the most intimate mechanisms by 
which hallucinogens work their magic, and in the process to make 
discoveries of ultimate benefit to humanity, researchers are obliged to use 
other species. 

In turning to animals to aid in understanding of hallucinogens, major 
ethical problems are avoided, but, concomitantly, there arise questions of 
relevance. Is there a suitable animal model of hallucination, a 
phenomenon thought by many to be a uniquely human experience? Most 
of those who work with animals find comfort in the knowledge that the 


157 



fundamental biochemical and physiological aspects of neuronal function 
are remarkably similar across species. On the other hand, hallucinations 
are primarily expressed in behavioral terms, and, in the absence of verbal 
communication, one is hard pressed to demonstrate the validity of animal 
models of complex human behavior. This chapter describes how the 
study of serotonergic hallucinogens as discriminative stimuli has already 
enlarged the knowledge of these drugs and how these studies in animals 
have led to hypotheses testable in humans. 


STIMULUS CONTROL 

A discriminative stimulus is any feature of an animal's environment that 
is correlated with a schedule of reinforcement (Kelleher and Morse 1968). 
Operant behavior that is reinforced only in the presence of a specified 
stimulus soon occurs with greater frequency in the presence of the 
stimulus than in its absence. The behavior is then said to be under the 
control of the stimulus. Discriminative stimuli may act on one or more of 
a variety of receptors, both external and internal. 

In classic studies of visual discrimination, pigeons were trained to emit a 
particular response in the presence of light of a specified frequency. 

When an organism has been conditioned to respond to a particular 
stimulus, other similar stimuli also increase the probability of elicited 
response. This ability of stimuli other than the training stimulus to evoke 
a conditioned response is known as stimulus generalization. However, as 
the character of the tested stimuli becomes less and less like the training 
stimulus, the degree of generalization declines in a regular fashion; a 
generalization gradient is observed. Thus, for example, a pigeon that has 
been reinforced after pecking a key only when it is illuminated with 
yellow light will emit progressively fewer responses as the illuminating 
color is gradually shifted toward the red and violet ends of the spectrum. 

It is obvious that stimulus control offers an investigator the opportunity to 
ask questions about the perception of light by a nonverbal species in both 
normal and pathological states (Stebbins 1970). 

If the correlation of a schedule of reinforcement with the falling of 
photons upon eye receptors can induce stimulus control, then might a 
similar correlation of reinforcement between drug interaction and its 
receptors likeu ise come to control behavior? The answer is yes. 
Beginning with the studies reported by Conger (1951), many hundreds of 
investigations have shown that a variety of drugs can induce stimulus 


158 



control. (For a recent review, see Colpaert and Balster 1988). By 
analogy with visual discriminations, drug-induced stimulus control offers 
the opportunity to ask questions, and occasionally to receive answers, 
regarding the effects of psychoactive drugs in nonverbal species. 

Because these stimuli are engendered, not in some totally mysterious 
fashion but by drug-receptor interactions, researchers may hope to learn 
not only about the nature of the stimuli but also about the biochemical 
and molecular - processes from which they arise. 


HALLUCINOGEN-INDUCED STIMULUS CONTROL 

Hirschhorn and Winter (1971) reported that the prototypic serotonergic 
hallucinogens mescaline and LSD are able to induce stimulus control in 
rats (figures 1 and 2). Furthermore, it was found that the stimulus effects 
of mescaline and LSD differ not only from those of drugs from distinct 
pharmacological classes such as stimulants (Winter 1975n) and 
depressants (Hirschhorn and Winter 1975) but also from nonindoleanrine, 
nonphenethylamine hallucinogens (Shannon 1981; Silveiman and Ho 
1978; Swedberg and Jarbe 1986). 

In the United States and elsewhere, hallucinogens have traditionally been 
classified as drugs of abuse together with stimulants, depressants, and 
opiates. However, unlike the latter categories of drugs, hallucinogens do 
not function as reinforcers in animals (Deneau et al. 1969). For this 
reason hallucinogens are not amenable to study in animals using the very 
powerful operant techniques for self-administration. Against this 
background, the ‘potential value of drug-induced stimulus control for the 
identification, characterization, and scheduling of potential hallucinogens 
prior to their use in human subjects is readily apparent (Winter 1974). 


SEROTONERGIC HALLUCINOGENS 

Soon after the discovery of LSD by Hofmann, it was recognized that the 
clinical syndromes produced by the phenethylamine hallucinogens, 
mescaline and l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane 
(DOM), are quite similar to those following indoleamine hallucinogens 
such as LSD and N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) (Hoch et al. 1952; 
Hollister et al. 1969). That the phenethylamines and the indoieamines 
might be acting via a common mechanism and that the mechanism might 
be serotonergic in nature was suggested by a number of observations. In 


159 



90 


O Salina 

A M**calin« 30/i.moJ/kg 
A M**egline 40/Amol/'kq 


I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 

Session Block 

A 

FIGURE 1. Discriminated responding following the 

injection of mescaline or saline. Each point is 
the mean of 2 determinations in each of 4 
animals. Circles represent experiments in 
which saline was injected 5 minutes before the 
session. Triangles represent identical 
experiments in which either 7.4 mg/kg (open 
triangles) or 9.9 mg/kg (closed triangles) of 
mescaline was given. Ordinate: number of 
responses on the mescaline-correct lever in the 
first 5 minutes of the session, expressed as a 
percentage of total responses. Abscissa: 
successive blocks of 4 sessions. From 
Hirschhorn and Winter 1971, by permission 

human subjects (Balistrieri and Fontanari 1959; Wolbach et al. 1962) as 
well as in animals (Appel and Freedman 1968; Winter 1971), cross¬ 
tolerance develops between LSD and mescaline. In addition, both groups 
of hallucinogens produce similar effects on the firing rate of serotonergic 
neurons (Aghajanian et al. 1970) and on the level and rate of turnover of 
serotonin in the brain (Tonge and Leonard 1969). Finally, it was known 
that serotonergic antagonists block some of the nonbehavioral effects of 
phenethylamine hallucinogens in animals (Cheng et al. 1973; Horita and 
Hamilton 1972; Huang and Ho 1972). 

Antagonism of mescaline-induced stimulus control in rats by cinanserin, a 
serotonergic antagonist, was reported independently by Browne and Ho 
(1975) and by Winter (19753). This observation was then extended to 




160 




O Sollnt 

• LSD 0,2 mol / kg 


© o 
o >•» 

l 


too - 

90 - 
80 - 
70 “ 

60 - 
50 + ' 
40 - 
30 - 
20 - 

10 - 


I-1-1-1-I-1-1-1-1 

I 23456789 


Saision Block 

A 

FIGURE 2. Discriminated responding 
following the injection of 
LSD or saline. Closed 
circles: LSD [0.12 mg/kg]. 
Open circles: saline. All 
other details are as in 
figure 1. 




include other antagonists of serotonin and other hallucinogens including 
LSD, DOM, and DMT (Glennon et al. 1982; Kuhn et al. 1977; Winter 
1978n). The phenomenon is illustrated in figure 3 for LSD and in figure 
4 for DOM. Based upon data such as those shown, it appears appropriate 
to apply the term “serotonergic hallucinogens” to both the indoleamines 
and the phenethylamines. 


PARTIAL AGONISTS 

Because of the crucial role played by antagonists in the characterization of 
a variety of drugs including hallucinogens, it is important to examine 
certain assumptions regarding the antagonists to be used. This is 
especially important when drugs shown to be antagonists in one or 
another in vitro, isolated tissue, or biochemical assay systems are used in 
intact animals in behavioral experiments. 


161 




LSD-appropriate Responses 


o 


100 

80 


60 

40 

20 

0 


Dose of LSD (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 3. The effects of LSD alone (open circles) 
and in the presence of either pizotyline 
(closed circles; 10 mg/kg) or 
pirenperone (closed squares: 0.16 
mg/kg) in rats trained with LSD (0.1 
mg/kg) as a discriminative stimulus. 
LSD and the antagonists were injected 
15 min and 60 min, respectively, before 
testing. The values given at the zero 
dose level are the effects of saline, 
pizotyline, and pirenperone when given 
alone. Each is the mean of 2 
determinations in each of 10 subjects. 
All other points represent the mean of 
1 determination in each of 10 annuals. 
Ordinate: Mean percentage of 
responses on the LSD-appropriate 
lever. Abscissa: dose plotted on a log 
scale. Statistical comparisons are with 
the value for LSD alone; *:p less than 
0.05; **; p less than 0.01. From 
Winter and Rabin 1988 by permission 



162 



100 


o 



0 0.1 0.3 1.0 

Dose of DOM (mg/kg) 


FIGURE 4. The effects of DOM alone 
(open circles) and in the 
presence of either 
pizotyline (closed circles) 
orpirenperone (closed 
squares) in rats trained 
with LSD as a 
discriminative stimulus. 

DOM was injected 15 min 
before testing. All other 
details are as in figure 3. 

As has been noted above, blockade of the stimulus effects of indoleamine 
and phenethylamine hallucinogens by serotonergic antagonists has 
provided powerful evidence of an underlying mechanism mediated by 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). However, stimulus control also permits the 
identification not only of full agonists and pure antagonists but also those 
drugs with mixed properties, the partial agonists. Data published by 
Colpaert and colleagues (1982) provide excellent examples. 

Figures 5 through 7 show the agonistic effects (upper panels) and the 
antagonistic effects (lower panels) of a series of serotonergic antagonists 
in rats trained with LSD as a discriminative stimulus. It is obvious that a 
full spectrum of activity is represented. Methysergide, cyproheptadine, 
and mianserin are significantly LSD-like (figure 5, upper panel) and are, 
as would be expected from their agonistic effects, only marginally 
effective as antagonists (lower panel). Pizotifen (also known as BC-105 


163 




FIGURE 5. Agonist and antagonist effects of methysergide, 

cyproheptadine, and minaserin in rats trained with LSD 
[0.16 mg/kg] and saline. Upper panel: agonistic 
effects [thick line] and suppression of response rate 
[thin line] by the test drug when given alone. Lower 
panel: antagonistic effects [thick line] and suppression 
of response rate [thin line] by the test drug when given 
prior to the training dose of LSD. Ordinate: 
percentage of rats choosing the LSD-appropriate lever 
[thick line] and response rate [thin line] expressed as a 
percentage of saline-control rate. Abscissa: dose of 
test drugs. From Colpaert et al, 1982, by permission 


164 







0.01 0.04 0.16 0.63 2.5 10 40 0.01 0.04 016 063 25 10 40 0.01 004 016 

dose (mg/kg ) 

FIGURE 6. Agonist and antagonist effects of pizotifen, cinanserin, and 
metitepine in rats trained with LSD [0.16 mg/kg] and saline. 
All other details are as in figure 5. 


165 






PIRENPERONE 



upper panel; agonist 
effects 

lower panels : anta¬ 
gonist effects 

lef t : subcutaneous 
right : oral 



* 

I-1-1-1-! 1-1-1-I 

0.0025 00 ! 004 0,16 0.63 0.0025 0.01 0.04 0,16 

dose (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 7. Agonist and antagonist effects 
of pirenperone in rats trained 
with LSD [0.16 mg/kg] and 
saline. All other details are as 
in figure 5. 


166 







and as pizotyline), cinanserin, and metitepine (figure 6) are clearly less 
agonistic, but only pizotifen approaches being a complete antagonist. 
Finally, figure 7 provides convincing evidence that pirenperone is devoid 
of LSD-like stimulus effects and is a complete antagonist of LSD at doses 
that have only modest effects upon rate of responding. 

Of the three purported antagonists showing the highest degree of 
LSD-like stimulus effects in the rat, two-methysergide and 
cyproheptadine-are claimed to be sometimes associated with 
hallucinations in humans. It is clear that drug-induced stimulus control 
provides the means to assess full agonists, pure antagonists, and those 
drugs that exhibit intermediate degrees of activity. It is likely that 
extrapolation from animals to humans is most problematic for the 
last-named group of drugs. 


INTERMEDIATE RESULTS AND THE BERRY-ATOR 
HYPOTHESIS 

One of the most remarkable features of drug-induced stimulus control is 
that animals trained with a drug of one pharmacological class do not 
always exhibit drug-appropriate responses when tested with a drug of 
another class even at doses known to have stimulus properties. For 
example, rats trained with morphine sulfate (6 milligrams per kilogram 
[mg/kg]) versus saline emit primarily saline-appropriate responses when 
tested with ethanol at a dose of 630 mg/kg, despite the fact that stimulus 
control is readily established in rats trained with a 630 mg/kg dose of 
ethanol versus saline (Winter 1975 c). However, observations such as 
these should not diminish the appreciation of what have been called 
“intermediate results” (Winter 1978b). 

In the larger context of stimulus control, it was noted above that a 
generalization gradient is observed. As the tested stimulus becomes less 
and less like the conditioned stimulus, the probability of response 
emission becomes less and less. With respect to drug-induced stimulus 
control, a clear example of a stimulus gradient is seen when subjects 
trained with saline versus a specified dose of a drug are tested with a 
range of lesser doses of that drug. As expected, intermediate degrees of 
drug-appropriate responding occur. 


167 



Despite the ready acceptance of intermediate results in the context of 
dose-response relationships, there has been some reluctance to accept 
similar intermediate degrees of generalization when subjects trained with 
one drug are tested with other drugs. That such intermediate results may 
be informative is illustrated by an examination of the comparative 
stimulus properties of p-methoxyamphetamine (PMA) and LSD. 

In studies that employed an animal model of hallucination based on 
patterns of conditioned avoidance responses, PMA was characterized as 
having a typical hallucinogenic profile similar to that of LSD (Smythies et 
al. 1967; 1970). However, rats trained with PMA as a discriminative 
stimulus and tested with LSD gave a maximum of only about 50 percent 
PMA-appropriate responses (Winter 1984). When rats were trained with 
LSD and tested with PMA, the results were as shown in table 1. At a 
dose of PMA of 1 mg/kg, 48 percent of the responses were 
LSD-appropriate. At 3 mg/kg the percentage rose to 75 percent, but only 
half of the tested animals responded. 

As shown in figure 3, LSD-induced stimulus control is completely 
antagonized by the serotonergic antagonist pizotyline. As seen in table 2, 
the intermediate degree of generalization of LSD to a dose of 1 mg/kg 
PMA is likewise blocked by pizotyline. Is the conclusion to be that 
PMA-induced stimulus control is partially mediated by a serotonergic 
mechanism? As attractive as that conclusion may be, the data in table 2 
argue against ‘it. The table shows that PMA-induced stimulus control is 
not significantly antagonized by a dose of pizotyline that completely 
blocks the partial substitution of PMA for LSD. 


TABLE 1. Effects of PMA in rats trained with LSD (0.1 mg/kg) 


Dose of PMA 

N 

Percent LSD 

(mg/kg) 


choice 

0.3 

10 

11 

1 

10 

48 

3 

5 

75 


NOTE: Ten animals were tested at each dose. N = the number which 
completed the test session. Redrawn from Winter (1984). 


168 







TABLE 2. Effects of PM A alone and in combination with pizotyline in 
rats trained with either PMA or LSD 


Training drug 
(mg/kg) 

Dose of PMA 

(mg/kg) 

Dose of pizotyline 
(mg/kg) 

N 

Cross test 

PMA 

3 

0 

6 

98 

(3) 

3 

3 

6 

96 


3 

10 

6 

90 

LSD 

1 

0 

6 

52 

(0.1) 

1 

3 

6 

16 


NOTE: Six animals were tested at each dose. N = the number which 
completed the test session. Redrawn from Winter (1984). 


An explanation for this apparent paradox is provided by what has come to 
be known as the Berry-Ator hypothesis. Specifically, asymmetrical 
generalizations are explained in terms of differential salience of certain 
elements of a compound discriminative stimulus depending on the 
training drag (Ator and Griffiths 1989). Although originally proposed to 
account for the observation that baboons trained with pentobarbital 
generalize to lorazepam, but lorazepam-trained subjects do not reliably 
generalize to pentobarbital, the Berry-Ator hypothesis is also applicable to 
the data for LSD and PMA shown in tables 1 and 2. Specifically, the 
intermediate results obtained with PMA in rats trained with LSD indicate 
a stimulus component common to both drugs. Blockade by pizotyline of 
both LSD and the intermediate effects of PMA in rats trained with LSD 
suggest that the shared component is serotonergic in nature. Nonetheless, 
the failure of pizotyline to antagonize PMA-induced stimulus control in 
rats trained with the drag indicates that the serotonergic component of the 
action of PMA is not essential for the induction of stimulus control. 
Furthermore, the serotonergic effect of PMA is manifest only when PMA 
is tested in subjects trained with a drug such as LSD whose major 
stimulus effects are mediated by 5-HT. 


169 







CORRELATIONS BETWEEN HUMANS AND ANIMALS 


How much can a rat or other nonverbal species tell us about the human 
experience with hallucinogens? In the present context, what can 
drug-induced stimulus control by serotonergic hallucinogens tell us about 
their mechanisms of action in humans? Can drug-induced stimulus 
control provide the means to reliably predict whether a drug fresh from 
the synthetic chemist will produce hallucinations in human subjects? One 
approach to answering these questions is to examine the ability of animals 
to classify drugs correctly as being either hallucinogenic or nonhall- 
ucinogenic on the basis of their stimulus properties. A convenient way to 
pursue this approach is in terms of false negatives and false positives. 


FALSE NEGATIVES 

A false negative is a drug known to be hallucinogenic in man, yet fails to 
mimic other known hallucinogens of the same class trained as 
discriminative stimuli in animals. “Of the same class” is emphasized 
because of the well-established fact, noted above, that drugs such as LSD, 
phencyclidine, tetrahydrocannabinol, and atropine are all properly called 
hallucinogens, yet each is pharmacologically distinct. Thus, the false 
negatives to be considered at this time are those within the class 
designated as serotonergic hallucinogens. 

In theory, false negatives have a finite probability of occurrence. For 
example, imagine two drugs, A and B, that share a common 
hallucinogen-inducing effect in humans. Further imagine that the shared 
effect of drugs A and B is reflected in a distinctive discriminative 
stimulus in animals. However, drug A does not generalize to drug B, 
because drug B suppresses behavior in a chosen animal species at doses 
lower than those required to elicit the hallucinogen-specific stimulus. The 
principle is clear: an animal in which all behavior has been obliterated 
cannot answer questions about discriminative stimuli. 

In practice, the clearest example of a false negative among the 
serotonergic hallucinogens was provided by Koemer and Appel(1982). 
Rats trained to discriminate between 4-phosphoryloxy-DMT (psilocybin) 
and saline generalized to 4-hydroxy-DMT (psilocin) and LSD but failed 
to generalize to mescaline. 


170 



Koemer and Appel (1982) regarded their data as evidence of “the 
inability of existing drug discrimination procedures to detect 
‘hallucinogenicity’ in drugs (p. 134).” This assessment may be too harsh 
in view of the numerous demonstrations of the similarities between the 
stimulus effects of various indoleamine and phenethylamine 
hallucinogens and, more specifically, the blockade of the stimulus effects 
of both psilocybin and mescaline by the serotonergic antagonist, 
cinanserin (Silveiman and Ho 1978). A gentler interpretation is that, 
despite their similarities, each member of the class of serotonergic 
hallucinogens is a distinct pharmacological entity, and as such each would 
be expected to have distinctive features in its stimulus complex. 

Ironically, the more thorough the research, the more likely it is that such 
distinctive features will be detected. As a practical matter, one might 
wish to characterize an unknown drug against several serotonergic 
hallucinogens. It should be noted as well that in a subsequent study by 
Appel and Callahan (1989), mescaline-trained rats generalized fully to 
psilocybin. 


FALSE POSITIVES 

False positives are of greater concern than false negatives with respect to 
the discriminative power of drug-induced stimulus control, but at the 
same time they are of perhaps greater heuristic value. A false positive is a 
drug known to be devoid of hallucinogenic activity in humans but which 
nonetheless fully mimics known serotonergic hallucinogens in animals. 

Before discussing false positives, it must be noted that interpretation of 
animal data is sometimes hampered by the inadequacy of available 
clinical data. For example, 2, 3, 4-trimethoxyphenethylamine 
(2,3,4-TMPEA) is a structural isomer of mescaline that was reported to 
have no psychotropic effects (Shulgin 1964; Shulgin and Shulgin 1991). 
On that basis it was used to test the hypothesis that the different 
pharmacologic properties of hallucinogens and nonhallucinogens in man 
are reflected in distinctive stimuli in rats. Only after it was found that rats 
appeared unable to distinguish between the effects of mescaline and 
2,3,4-TMPEA (Winter 1973) was the author’s attention drawn to a 
citation of 2,3,4-TMPEA hallucinogenic activity in schizophrenic patients 
(Slotta and Muller 1936). The proper interpretation of this set of 
observations or their implications for schizophrenia remains uncertain. 


171 



One may argue on theoretical grounds, as argued above for false 
negatives, that true false positives should occasionally arise. If one 
imagines two drugs, C and D, to possess a shared hallucination-inducing 
property and drug D to also be a very potent emetic agent, one may 
remain unaware of D’s hallucinogenic activity for the simple reason that 
hallucinogenic doses are never reached in vomiting human subjects. On 
the other hand, if the emetic effect is species-specific, C and D would be 
expected to generalize to one another in an emesis-resistant species and 
thus yield a false positive. 

Despite the foregoing caveats, false positives have been identified. 
Understanding them is essential to a valid judgment of the efficacy of 
drug-induced stimulus control as a practical tool for the study of 
serotonergic hallucinogens. Although a number of candidates present 
themselves, only lisuride and 2-(l-piperazinyl) quinoline maleate 
(quipazine) are discussed in detail in this chapter. 

Lisuride is an ergot that is usually classified as a dopaminergic agonist. 

As such, it has a therapeutic role in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. 
Lisuride is generally regarded as being nonhallucinogenic and quite 
different from LSD in its actions. Despite their distinctive effects in 
humans, complete symmetrical generalization of LSD and lisuride has 
been reported (Holohean et al. 1982; White and Appel 1982a, b). 

The observation that the stimulus effects of LSD and lisuride are 
differentially antagonized by serotonergic and dopaminergic antagonists 
(Cunningham and Appel 1987; White and Appel 1982c) is of obvious 
pharmacologic interest. However, it does not resolve the question of 
lisuride as a false positive. What is required is a demonstration that 
animals can behaviorally differentiate the two drugs. A series of 
experiments by Callahan and Appel (1990) provided just such a 
demonstration. 

Rats were presented with three levers simultaneously. Each lever was 
associated with one of three conditions: saline, LSD, or lisuride. The 
doses of LSD and lisuride were chosen to be comparable in their stimulus 
effects when tested in animals trained with lisuride and LSD, respectively, 
versus saline. As shown in figure 8, the rats learned to discriminate 
between the three training conditions. Furthermore, when dose-response 
tests were done with a range of doses of LSD and lisuride, there was a 
graded distribution of responses between the saline-appropriate lever and 
the LSD- and lisuride-appropriate levers, respectively. Thus, in the 


172 



PER CENT RESPONDING ON EACH LEVER 


LSD 


LISURIDE 




DOSE (mg/kg) 

FIGURE 8. Dose-response 

relationships for LSD [left 
panel] and lisuride [right 
panel] in rats trained to 
discriminate LSD [0.08 
mg/kg] from lisuride [0.04 
mg/kg] from saline. 
Responding on the LSD- 
appropriate lever is 
indicated by triangles, on 
the lisuride-appropriate 
lever by squares, and on 
the saline-appropriate 
lever by circles. Ordinate: 
percent responding on the 
indicated lever. Abscissa: 
dose of test drugs. From 
Callahan and Appel 1990, 
by permission 


three-lever choice trial, no evidence of cross-generalization between LSD 
and lisuride was seen; the issue of lisuride as a false positive is resolved. 

The second false positive to be discussed is quipazine, a drug thought to 
act as an agonist at both central and peripheral serotonergic receptors. 
Stimulus control induced by quipazine was first reported by White and 


173 



colleagues (1977). They also observed complete generalization of 
quipazine to LSD. Furthermore, the generalization is symmetrical in that 
quipazine completely mimics LSD in rats trained with the latter drug 
(Winter 1979). A recent example of LSD generalization to quipazine is 
shown in figure 9. There it is obvious that quipazine’s mimickry of LSD 
is not due to lisuride-like effects. Indeed, in keeping with a serotoner- 
gically mediated event, quipazine-induced stimulus control and 
substitution of quipazine for LSD are blocked by a variety of serotonergic 
antagonists (White et al. 1977; Winter 1979). It should be noted that in 
mescaline-trained subjects, only an intermediate level of generalization to 
quipazine was observed (Winter 1979). 

When normal human volunteers were given 25 mg of quipazine by mouth 
in a double-blind cross-over study and tested using the Addiction 
Research Center Inventory (ARCI) (Hill et al. 1963), no LSD-like 
subjective effects were observed (Villarreal, personal communication, 

Dec. 12, 1977). However, at this dose there was a high incidence of 
nausea, flatulence, gastrointestinal discomfort, and diarrhea. Similarly, an 
anecdotal report of effects of quipazine in a single subject suggests “low 
dose mescaline-like effects followed by the onset of dysphoric effects 
including nausea!’ (Daumier, personal communication, July 27, 1976). 
Interestingly, three of four monkeys given quipazine by intramuscular 
(IM) injection developed projectile vomiting while exhibiting behavioral 
signs similar to those induced by LSD (Schlemmer, Jr., personal 
communication, Jan. 14, 1977). 

When the admittedly fragmentary data for quipazine in man, monkey, and 
rat are taken as a whole, there is some similarity to the hypothetical false 
positive described earlier in this section; that is, a drug which would 
induce hallucinations in man were it not for a limiting side effect that is 
present to a lesser degree in nonhuman primates and absent in the rat. 
Given the high affinity of quipazine for 5-HT 3 receptors and the known 
antiemetic effects of certain 5-HT 3 antagonists, the present hypothesis 
might be tested by determining the hallucinogenic activity of quipazine in 
humans pretreated with a drug such as ondansetron. (For a review of 
5-HT 3 receptors and ligands, see Kilpatrick et al. 1990.) 


174 



APOMORPHINE 


QUIPAZINE 


PENTYLENETETRAZOL 




DOSE (mg/Kg) 

FIGURE 9. Dose-response relationships for 
apomorphine, quipazine, and 
pentylenetetrazole in rats trained to 
discriminate LSD [0.08 mg/kg] from 
lisuride [0.04 mg/kg] from saline. All 
other details are as in figure 8. 


SEROTONERGIC RECEPTOR SUBTYPES 

Behavioral pharmacology has elsewhere been referred to as a marriage of 
convenience between psychology and pharmacology (Winter 1978 b). 
Nowhere are the difficulties of that marriage more evident than in the 
application of stimulus control to serotonergic hallucinogens. While 
behavioral techniques have been slowly maturing, there has been an 
exponential growth in the knowledge of the pharmacology, molecular 
biology, and functional significance of serotonergic receptors. The light 
cast by the discovery of each new receptor subtype permits—nay, 
requires—constant reexamination and reinterpretation of behavioral data. 
The serotonergic receptors designated 5-HT 2 and 5-HT, c illustrate this 
point. 

The role of the 5-HT 2 receptor in the actions of serotonergic 
hallucinogens appears well established (Glennon et al. 1985; Glennon, 
this volume). However, the discovery of the 5-HT, c receptor subtype 
(Pazos et al. 1984) and the realization that there is often a close 
correlation between affinities for the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc sites (Glennon 
1990; Sanders-Bush and Breeding 1988; Titeler et al. 1988) have led to 
speculation that the 5-HT 1C receptor may play an independent or 
complementary role in-hallucinogenic activity (Sanders-Bush and 


175 



Breeding 1991; Titeler et al. 1988). This hypothesis is supported by the 
observation that LSD, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is an 
agonist at 5-HT lc receptors as indicated by stimulation of 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis (Burris et al. 199 1; Sanders-Bush, this 
volume.) It is obvious that each of these biochemical advances calls for 
the investigation of possible behavioral correlates. The investigation of 
the discriminative stimulus properties of drugs reputed to have selectivity 
for the 5-HT IC receptor should prove informative. One such agent 
presently under study is m-chlorophenylpiperazine (MCPP) (Winter and 
Rabin 1992). 


CONCLUSION 

Although much has been learned regarding the stimulus effects of 
serotonergic hallucinogens, this area of investigation remains exciting in 
its promise. The observation that atypical antipsychotic drugs such as 
clozapine have high affinity for serotonergic receptors has given new life 
to the old idea that there may be a connection between exogenous 
hallucinogens and endogenous hallucinogenic processes. Increasing 
awareness of interactions between chemically distinct neurotransmitters 
encourages a broader mechanistic view. On an experimental level, 
researchers have perhaps become too set in their ways. For example, 
recent work in the author’s laboratory (Fiorella et al., in press; Palumbo et 
al., in press) indicates that so simple a design feature as pretreatment time 
may have a significant influence upon the stability of DOM-induced 
stimulus control and, by inference, upon the nature of the cue which is 
trained. A continued effort is needed to identify those pharmacological 
features of hallucinogen-induced stimulus control in animals and their 
correlates in humans. 

Twenty years ago. Winter (1972) stated, “It remains to be established 
whether study of the stimulus properties of drugs will permit the early 
identification of hallucinogens or will contribute in any significant way to 
our understanding of hallucinogens.” (Winter 1974, p. 831). Evidence 
gathered during the intervening two decades, some of which is reviewed 
here and elsewhere in this volume, has answered both questions in the 
affirmative. Others appear to be encouraged as well: “Drug 
discrimination has proven to be a reliable, sensitive, and specific 
procedure that provides a powerful tool in the analysis of neuropharm- 
acological mechanisms underlying the behavioral effects of diverse 
classes of drugs.” (Koek et al. 1992, pp. 97-98). With the long-awaited 


176 



resumption of tests in human subjects (Strassman, this volume) and the 
guidance provided by ever more sophisticated chemical, biochemical, and 
molecular techniques, the continued investigation of the stimulus 
properties of serotonergic hallucinogens promises to enhance the 
understanding not only of these agents as drugs of abuse, but also to 
elucidate the normal, pathological, and perhaps even supranormal 
functioning of the brain. 


REFERENCES 

Aghajanian, G.K.; Foote, W.E.; and Sheard, M.H. Action of 

gsychotogenic drugs on single midbrain raphe neurons. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 171:178-187, 1970. 

Appel, J.B., and Callahan, P.M. Involvement of 5-HT receptor subtypes 
in the discriminative stimulus properties of mescaline. Eur J 
Pharmacol 159:41-46, 1989. 

Appel, J.B., and Freedman, D.X. Tolerance and cross-tolerance among 
psychotomimetic drugs. Psychopharmacologia 13:267-274, 1968. 

Ator, N.A., and Griffiths, R.R., Asymmetrical cross-generalization in drug 
discrimination with loraxepam and pentobarbital training conditions. 
Drug Devel Res 16:355-364, 1989. 

Balistrieri, A., and Fontanari, D. Acquired and crossed tolerance to 
mescaline, LSD-25, and BOL-148. Arch Gen Psychiat 1:279-282, 
1959. 

Browne, R.G., and Ho, B.T. Role of serotonin in the discriminative 
stimulus properties of mescaline. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
3:429-435, 1975. 

Burris, K.D.; Breeding, M.; and Sanders-Bush, E. (-i-)Lysergic acid 
diethylamide, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is a potent 
serotonin 5HT, r receptor agonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 258: 

891-895, 1991. 

Callahan, P.M., and Appel, J.B. Differentiation between the stimulus 
effects of (-i-)-lysergic acid diethylamide and lisuride using a 
three-choice, drug discrimination procedure. Psychopharmacology 
100:13-18, 1990. 

Cheng, H.C.; Long, J.P.; Barfknecht, C.F.; and Nichols, D.E. 
Cardiovascular effects of 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 186:345-354. 1973. 

Colpaert, F.C., and Balster, R.L. Transduction Mechanisms of Drug 
Stimuli. Berlin: Springer, 1988. 513 pp. 


177 



Colpaert, F.C.; Niemegeers, J.E.; and Janssen, P.A.J. A drug 

discrimination analysis of lysergic acid diethylamide: In vivo agonist 
and antagonist effects of purported 5-hydroxytryptamine antagonists 
and of pirenperone, an LSD-antagonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
221:206-214, 1982. 

Conger, J.J. The effects of alcohol on conflict behavior in the albino rat. 
Quart J Studies Ale 12:1-29, 1951. 

Cunningham, K.A., and Appel, J.B. Neuropharmacological reassessment 
of the discriminative stimulus properties of r/-lysergic acid 
diethylamide. Psychopharmacology 91:67-73, 1987. 

DeCurtis, A. Interview with George Harrison. Rolling Stone November. 

5, 1987, pp. 47-50. 

Deneau, G.; Yanagita, T.; Seevers, M.H. Self-administration of 
psychoactive substances by the monkey. Psychopharmacologia 
16:30-48, 1969. 

Fiorella, D.; Rabin, R.A.; and Winter, J.C. The time-dependent stimulus 
effects of l-[2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl]-2-aminopropane [DOM]: 
Implications for drug-induced stimulus control as a method for the 
study of hallucinogenic agents. Psychopharmacology, in press. 

Glennon, R.A. Do classical hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or 
antagonists? Neuropsychopharmacol 3:509-517, 1990. 

Glennon, R.A.; Rosecrans, J.A.; Young, R. The use of the drug 
discrimination paradigm for studying hallucinogenic agents. In: 
Colpaert, F.C., and Slangen, J.F., eds. Drug Discrimination: 
Applications in CNS Pharmacology. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1982. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; McKenney, J.D. Evidence for 5-HT 2 
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogens. Life Sci 
35:2505-2511, 1985. 

Heffter, A. Ueber Pellote. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch Exp Pharmakol 
40:418-425, 1897. 

Hill, H.E.; Haertzen, C.A.; Wolbach, A.B., Jr.; and Miner, E.J. The 
Addiction Research Center Inventory: Standardization of scales which 
evaluate subjective effects of morphine, amphetamine, pentobarbital, 
alcohol, LSD-25, pyrahexyl, and chlorpromazine. 
Psychopharmacologia 4:167-205, 1963. 

Hirschhorn, I.D., and Winter, J.C. Mescaline and lysergic acid 

diethylamide (LSD) as discriminative stimuli. Psychopharmacologia 
22:64-71, 1971. 

Hirschhorn, I.D., and Winter, J.C. Differences in the stimulus properties 
of barbital and hallucinogens. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 3:343-347, 
1975. 


178 



Hoch, P.J.; Cattell, J.P.; and Pennes, H.H. Effects of mescaline and 
lysergic acid [d-LSD-25]. Amer J Psychiat 108:579-584, 1952. 

Hofmann, A. Psychotomimetic drugs, chemical and pharmacological 
aspects. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Neerl 8:240-258, 1959. 

Hollister, LE.; MacNicol, M.F.; and Gillespie, H.K. An hallucinogenic 
amphetamine analog [DOM] in man. Psychopharmacologia 14:62-73, 
1969. 

Holohean, A.M.; White, F.J.; and Appel, J.B. Dopaminergic and 

serotonergic mediation of the discriminable effects of ergot alkaloids. 
Eur J Pharmacol 81:595-602, 1982. 

Horita, A., and Hamilton, A.E. On the hyperthermic action of 

2.5- dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine. Proc West Pharmacol Soc 
15:104-105, 1972. 

Huang, J.-T., and Ho, B.T. The pressor action of 

2.5- dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine in rats. J Pharm Pharmacol 
24:656-657, 1972. 

Isbell, H.; Miner, E.J.; and Logan, C.R. Cross tolerance between 
D-2-brom-lysergic acid diethylamide (BOL- 148) and the 
D-diethylamide of lysergic acid (LSD-25). Psychopharmacologia 
1:109-116, 1959. 

Kelleher, R.T., and Morse, L.H. Determinants of the specificity of 
behavioral effects of drugs. In: Reviews of Physiology, Biochemistry, 
and Behavior. Vol. 60. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1968. pp. 2-56. 

Kilpatrick, G.J.; Bunce, K.T.; and Tyers, M.B. 5-HT 3 receptors. Med Res 
Rev 10:441-475, 1990. 

Koek, W.; Jackson, A.; and Colpaert, F.C. Behavioral pharmacology of 
antagonists at 5-HT 2 /5-HT, c receptors. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
16:95-105, 1992. 

Koemer, J., and Appel, J.B. Psilocybin as a discriminative stimulus: Lack 
of specificity in an animal behavior model of hallucinogens 
Psychopharmacology 76:130-135, 1982. 

Kuhn, D.M.; White, F.J.; and Appel, J.B. Discriminative stimulus 
properties of hallucinogens: Behavioral assay of drug action. In: Lai, 
H., ed. Discriminative Stimulus Properties of Drugs. New York: 
Plenum, 1977. 

Martin, W.R., and Sloan, J.W. Pharmacology and classification of 
LSD-like hallucinogens. In: Martin, W.R., ed. Handbook of 
Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 45. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1977, 
pp. 306-368. 

Pazos, A.; Hoyer; D.; and Palacios, J.M. The binding of serotonergic 
ligands to the porcine choroid plexus: Characterization of a new type 
of serotonin recognition site. Eur J Pharmacol 106:539-546, 1984. 


179 



Palumbo, P.A.; Fiorella, D.; Rabin, R.A.; and Winter, J.C. Comparative 
stability of stimulus control induced by LSD and DOM. Pharmacol 
Biochem Behav, in press. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M.: Putative selective 5-HT 2 antagonists 
block serotonin 5-HT lc receptors in choroid plexus. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther 247:169-173, 1988. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M. Choroid plexus epithelial cells in 
primary culture: A model of 5-HT 1C receptor activation by 
hallucinogenic drugs. Psycliopliarmacology 108:340-346, 1991. 

Schultes, R.E., and Hofmann, A. The Botany and Chemistry of 
Hallucinogens. 2d ed. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980. 

Shannon, H.E. Evaluation of phencyclidine analogs on the basis of their 
discriminative stimulus properties in the rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
216:543-551, 1981. 

Shulgin, A.T. Psychotomimietic amphetamines: 

Methoxy-3,4,-dialkoxyamphetamines. Experientia 20:366-367, 1964. 

Shulgin, A.T., and Shulgin, A. PIHKAL: A Chemical Love Story. 
Berkeley, CA: Transform Press, 1991. pp. 690-692. 

Shulgin, A.T.; Shulgin, L.A.; and Jacob, P. A protocol for the evaluation 
of new psychoactive drugs in man. Meth Find Expt Clin Pharmacol 
8:313-320, 1986. 

Silverman, P.B., and Ho, B.T. Stimulus properties of DOM: 

Commonality with other hallucinogens. In: Colpaert, F.C., and 
Rosecrans, J.A., eds. Stimulus Properties of Drugs: Ten Years of 
Progress. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland, 1978. pp. 189-198. 

Slotta, K.H., and Muller, J. Ueber den Abbau des Mescalins und 

Mescalin-ahnlicher Stoffe in Organismus. Hoppe-Seyler’s Z. Physiol 
Chem 238:14-22, 1936. 

Smythies, J.R.; Beaton, J.; Benington, F.; and Morin, R. Behavioral 
effects of some derivatives of amphetamine and LSD and their 
significance. Nature 226:644-645, 1970. 

Smythies, J.R.; Johnson, U.S.; Bradley, R.J.; Benington, R.; Morin, D.; 
and Clark, L.C. Some new behavior-disrupting amphetamines and 
their significance. Nature 216:128-129, 1967. 

Spath, E. Ueber die Anhalonium- Alkaloide. I. Anhalin und Mezcalin. 
Monatsh Chem 40:129-152, 1919. 

Stebbins, W.C. Animal Psychophysics: The Design and Conduct of 
Sensory Experiments. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970. 

Swedberg, M.D.B., and Jar be, T.U.C. Drug discrimination procedures: 
Differential characteristics of the drug A vs drug B and the drug A vs 
drug B vs no drug cases. Psycliopliarmacology 90:341-346, 1986. 


180 



Szara, S. The comparison of the psychotic effect of tryptamine derivatives 
with the effects of mescaline and LSD in self-experiments. In: 

Garattini, S., and Ghetti, V., eds. Psychotropic Drugs. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, 1957, pp. 460-467. 

Titeler, M.; Lyon, R.A.; and Glennon, R.A. Radioligand binding evidence 
implicates the brain 5-HT 2 receptor as a site of action for LSD and 
phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens. Psychopharmacology 94: 
213-216, 1988. 

Tonge, Sk, and Leonard. B.E. The effects of some hallucinogenic drugs 
upon the metabolism of 5-hydroxytryptamine in the brain. Life Sci 
8:805-814, 1969. 

White, F.J. and Appel, J.B. Training dose as a factor in LSD-saline 
discrimination. Psychopharmacology 76:20-25, 1982c/. 

White, F.J., and Appel, J.B. Lysergic acid diethylamide and lisuride: 
Differentiation of their neuropharmacological actions. Science 
216:535-537, 1982b. 

White, F.J., and Appel, J.B. The role of dopamine and serotonin in the 
discriminative stimulus effects of lisuride. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
221:421-427, 1982c. 

White, F.J.; Kuhn, D.M.; and Appel, J.B. Discriminative stimulus 
properties of quipazine. Neuropharmacology 16:827-832, 1977. 

Winter, J.C. Tolerance to a behavioral effect of lysergic acid diethylamide 
and cross-tolerance to mescaline in the rat: Absence of a metabolic 
component. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 178:625-630, 1971. 

Winter, J.C. “Discriminable Properties of Drugs and State-Dependent 
Learning.” Paper presented at the 56th Annual Meeting of the 
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB), 
Atlantic City, April 14, 1972. 

Winter, J.C. A comparison of the stimulus properties of mescaline and 
2,3,4-trimethoxyphenylethylamine. J Pharmacol Expt Ther 
185:101-107, 1973. 

Winter, J.C. Hallucinogens as discriminative stimuli. Federation Proc 
33:1825-1832, 1974. 

Winter, J.C. The effects of DOM, DOET, d-amphetamine, and cocaine in 
rats trained with mescaline as a discriminative stimulus. 
Psychopharmacologia 44:29-32, 1975a. 

Winter, J.C. Blockade of the stimulus properties of mescaline by a 
serotonin antagonist. Arch Int Pharmacodyn 214:250-253, 1975b. 

Winter, J.C. The stimulus properties of morphine and ethanol. 
Psychopharmacologia 44:209-214, 1975c. 


181 



Winter, J.C. Stimulus properties of phenethylamine hallucinogens and 
lysergic acid diethylamide: The role of 5-hydroxytryptamine. 

J Pharmacol Exp Tlier 204:416-423, 1978a. 

Winter, J.C. Drug-induced stimulus control. In: Blackman, D.E., and 
Sanger, D.J., eds. Contemporary Research in Behavioral 
Pharmacology. New York: Plenum, 19786. pp. 209-237. 

Winter, J.C. Quipazine-induced stimulus control in the rat. 
Psychopharmacology 60:265-269, 1979. 

Winter, J.C. The stimulus properties ofp-methoxyamphetamine: A 
nonessential serotonergic component. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
20:201-203, 1984. 

Winter, J.C., and Rabin, R.A. Interactions between serotonergic agonists 
and antagonists in rats trained with LSD as a discriminative stimulus. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 30:617-624, 1988. 

Winter, J.C. and R.A. Rabin: The discriminative stimulus properties of 
m-chlorophenylpiperazine (MCPP). Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
45:221-223, 1993. 

Wolbach, A.B.; Isbell, H.; and Miner, E.J. Cross tolerance between 
mescaline and LSD-25 with a comparison of the mescaline and LSD 
reactions. Psychopharmacologia 3:1-14, 1962. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by National Institute 
on Drug Abuse grant DA-03385. 


AUTHOR 

Jerrold C. Winter, Ph.D. 

Professor of Pharmacology and Toxicology 
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics 
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences 
State University of New York at Buffalo 
Buffalo, NY 14214-3000 


182 



Electrophysiological Studies on 
the Actions of Hallucinogenic 
Drugs at 5=HT 2 Receptors in Rat 
Brain 

George K. Aghajaniun 


INTRODUCTION 

There has been a longstanding interest in the role of the brain serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) system in the electrophysiological actions 
of psychedelic hallucinogenic drugs such as d-lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD) and mescaline. Early studies focused on the actions of LSD on 
serotonin-containing (serotonergic) neurons in the raphe nuclei of the 
brain stem. LSD and other indoleamine hallucinogens were found to 
have potent direct inhibitory effects upon serotonergic raphe neurons 
(Aghajanian et al. 1972). However, it was soon discovered that 
mescaline and other phenethylamine hallucinogens failed to share this 
action (Haigler and Aghajanian 1973). Later, it was shown that the direct 
inhibitory effect of LSD and other indoleamine hallucinogens on 
serotonergic neurons is mediated by 5-HT 1A receptors, and that this action 
is shared by a number of selective 5-HT 1A agonists that are not 
hallucinogenic (Sprouse and Aghajanian 1987, 1988). Thus, there 
appeal's to be no correlation between the activity of various drugs at 
5 -HT, a receptors in the raphe nuclei and the presence or absence of 
hallucinogenic properties. 

In contrast, a good correlation exists between the affinity of both 
indoleamine and phenethylamine hallucinogens for 5-HT 2 receptors and 
the potency of these drugs as hallucinogens in humans (Glennon et al. 
1984; Titeler et al. 1988) As described below, electrophysiological 
studies in a number of brain regions show that indoleamine and 
phenethylamine hallucinogens have common electrophysiological action 
at 5-HT 2 receptors. There has, however, been some debate on whether 
the hallucinogens act as agonists, partial agonists (Glennon 1990; 
Sanders-Bush et al. 1988; Sheldon and Aghajanian 1990) or antagonists 
(Pierce and Peroutka 1990) at 5-HT 2 receptors. Recent electrophysio¬ 
logical studies bearing on this issue are described in this chapter. 


183 



The discovery of the structural and functional si mi larities between the 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT, c receptors (Hartig 1989) has also led to studies 
examining the effect of the hallucinogens at 5-HT lc sites. Recent data 
from studies in the choroid plexus showed that the hallucinogens act as 
partial agonists at 5-HT lc receptors that mediate an activation of 
phosphoinositide turnover (Burris et al 1991; Sanders-Bush and Breeding 
1991). The electrophysiological studies are reviewed from the standpoint 
of how they may distinguish between actions at 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc 
receptors. 

Quantitative autoradiographic studies show high concentrations of 5-HT 2 
sites in the forebrain including the neocortex (layers IV/V), piriform 
cortex, claustrum, nucleus accumbens (NACC), and olfactory tubercle 
(OT) (Pazos et al. 1985). In contrast, with the exception of a few areas 
(e.g., facial nucleus and the n. tractus solitarius), relatively low 
concentrations of 5-HT 2 receptors are found in the brain stem. Single-cell 
studies on the physiological properties of 5-HT 2 receptors in several 
representative brain regions are described in the following sections. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF HALLUCINOGENS 
Locus Coeruleus 

The systemic administration of indoleamine and phenethylamine 
hallucinogens (e.g., LSD and mescaline) results in decreased spontaneous 
activity of noradrenergic cells in the locus coeruleus (LC) of anesthetized 
rats but, paradoxically, a facilitation of the activation of these cells by 
sensory stimuli (Aghajanian 1980; Rasmussen and Aghajanian 1986). 
These effects in the LC are of theoretical interest since, in contrast to the 
raphe nuclei (see introduction), they are shared by the two major classes 
of psychedelic hallucinogens. Mediation by 5-HT 2 receptors is suggested 
by the fact that effects of the hallucinogens on LC neurons can be 
reversed by low intravenous (IV) doses of selective 5-HT 2 antagonists 
such as ritanserin, LY-53857 (figure 1) (Rasmussen and Aghajanian 
1986), and ketanserin (Gorea and Adrien 1988). Antipsychotic drugs 
with affinity for 5-HT 2 binding sites are also able to reverse the actions of 
hallucinogens in the LC independently of their actions at dopamine (DA) 
and adrenergic receptors (Rasmussen and Aghajanian 1988). The relative 
potencies of antipsychotic drugs in blocking the actions of hallucinogens 
in LC neurons correlates highly with their affinity for 5-HT 2 receptors 
(Rasmussen and Aghajanian 1988). Of particular note is the fact that at 


184 




FIGURE 1. Poststimulus time histograms during locus coeruleus 
cell recordings in vivo before and after administration 
of A, mescaline (MESC); B, DOM; C, LSD; or D, (+)- 
amphetamine (D-AMPH); and again after the 
administration of LY 53857 (LY). 

Each histogram was generated from 10 sweeps initiated 
by electrical stimulation of the sciatic ner\’e (arrows). 
Evoked spikes occurred during the first 250 
milliseconds of each histogram (bars). The total 
number of evoked spikes occurring during this period is 
given above the bars. Note both the increased number 
of spikes evoked by sciatic nerve stimulation (initial 1.50 
milliseconds of histogram) and the decrease in 
spontaneous activity (remainder of histogram) after 
LSD, DOM, and mescaline administration. In addition, 
following hallucinogen ddministration, the increased 
number of spikes evoked by sciatic nerve stimulation, 
combined with the decrease in spontaneous activity, 
leads to a prolonged period of postactivation inhibition. 
Also, note the reversal of these effects after LY 53857 
administration. After (+)-amphefamine administration, 
both the spontaneous activity and the number of evoked 
spikes are decreased; however, the subsequent 
administration ofLY 53857 does not reverse either of 
these effects. From Rasmussen and Aghajanian 1986. 


185 




extremely low doses spiperone, which has almost a thousandfold greater 
affinity for 5-HT 2 than 5-HT lc receptors, completely blocks the effects of 
the hallucinogens. Thus, the effects of hallucinogens on the LC appear to 
be mediated by 5-HT 2 rather than 5-HT lc receptors. 

It should be noted that the effects of hallucinogens in the LC are not 
direct since they are not mimicked by local iontophoretic application of 
the drugs onto LC cell bodies (Aghajanian, unpublished observations). 
Moreover, the systemic administration of mescaline or LSD does not 
enhance the excitation of LC neurons evoked by microiontophoretically 
applied acetylcholine, glutamate, or substance P (Aghajanian 1980). 

These results imply that the hallucinogens are acting indirectly, perhaps 
via afferents to the LC. Thus, the LC is not useful as a model for 
studying the direct cellular actions of hallucinogens. Nevertheless, the 
effects of the hallucinogens upon the LC are of interest because of the 
unique role of this nucleus as a nodal point in processing a convergence 
of sensory information, both somatosensory and visceral, and relaying 
this information to virtually all parts of the central nervous system (CNS). 

Facial Nucleus 

In contrast to LC neurons, facial motoneurons have a high density of 
5-HT 2 receptor binding sites, and they also express a high level of 5-HT 2 
receptor messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) (Mengod et al. 1990b ). 

The microiontophoretic application of 5-HT or norepinephrine (NE), 
while not by itself inducing firing in quiescent facial motoneurons, 
facilities the excitatory effects of iontdphoretically applied glutamate 
(McCall and Aghajanian 1979). Intracellular recordings in vivo 
(VanderMaelen and Aghajanian 1980, 1982) and in brain slices 
(Aghajanian and Rasmussen 1989; Larkman et al. 1989) reveal that 5-HT 
induces a slow depolarization in facial motoneurons by decreasing a 
resting potassium conductance. Similar effects of 5-HT on potassium 
conductance have been described in spinal motoneurons (White and Fung 
1989) and in the NACC (North and Uchimura 1989). 

The action of iontophoretically applied 5-HT in the facial nucleus can be 
blocked by the classical 5-HT antagonists metergoline, methysergide, 
cyproheptadine, and cinanserin (McCall and Aghajanian 1980b), which 
have varying degrees of selectivity for the 5-HT 2 receptor. More recent 
studies show that the selective 5-HT 2 antagonist ritanserin blocks the 
excitatory effects of 5-HT in facial motoneurons (Rasmussen and 


186 



Aghajanian 1990). The selective 5-HT IA agonist 8-hydroxy-2- 
dipropylaminotetralin (8-OH-DPAT) increases facial motoneuron 
excitability when given in vivo by the systemic route (Rasmussen and 
Aghajanian 1990). However, this effect is presumably due to an indirect 
action, since 8-OH-DPAT has no effect when applied locally either by 
microiontophoresis or bath application in brain slices (Garratt et al. 1993; 
Rasmussen and Aghajanian 1990). These results suggest that 5-HT IA 
receptors are probably not directly involved in the excitatory actions of 
5-HT on facial motoneurons. 

Since behavioral as well as binding techniques have shown that both 
indoleamine and phenethylamine hallucinogens interact with 5-HT 2 
receptors (Glennon et al. 1983, 1984; Heym et al. 1984; Mokler et al. 
1985), it is not surprising that members of both classes of hallucinogens 
have direct effects in the facial motor nucleus. The iontophoretic 
administration of LSD, mescaline, or psilocin, although at low doses 
having relatively little effect by themselves, enhance the facilitiation of 
facial motoneuron excitation produced by ionophoretically applied 5-HT 
and NE (McCall and Aghajanian 1980n). Curiously, the enhancement 
can persist for several hours after only a single brief application. 
Intracellular studies in brain slices show that LSD produces an increase in 
the electrical excitability of facial motoneurons; however, even at 
maximal concentrations, this is associated with only a small depolari¬ 
zation of facial motoneurons compared to that produced by 5-HT itself 
(figure 2) (Garratt et al. 1993). 

The phenethylamine hallucinogen l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2- 
aminopropane (DOI) produces effects similar to those of LSD, but with a 
slightly greater maximal depolarization. Since the depolarizing effect of 
5-HT is mainly due to a decrease in potassium conductance, LSD and 
DOI would appear to have low intrinsic activity relative to 5-HT in this 
transduction pathway. This observation parallels studies of the effects of 
hallucinogens on phosphoinositide hydrolysis (Sanders-Bush et al. 1988; 
Barker et al. 1991). In those studies, 5-HT caused the greatest increase in 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis, whereas l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromophenyl)- 
2-aminopropane (DOB), 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM), 
and LSD acted as partial agonists with LSD having the least intrinsic 
activity. 

Recently, it was found that in addition to producing a decrease in resting 
potassium conductance, 5-HT produces an enhancement of the non- 


187 



FIGURE 2 


A. Effects of bath application of 5-HT and LSD on input 
resistance (upper trace), membrane potential (middle trace) 
and electrical excitability (lower trace) recorded 
simultaneously in a rat facial motoneuron from an in vitro 
brain slice preparation. 

Bath application of 5-HT (100/tM) produces an increase in 
apparent input resistance, a depolarization (14 mV), and an 
increase in electrical excitability of the cell (i.e., an increase 
in spikes induced by a constant current pulse); note that the 
ratemeter trace goes off scale at the peak of the response. 
Application of LSD (10 nM) produces little change in 
apparent input resistance or membrane potential; however, 
there is a clear increase in electrical excitability, which has a 
slow onset of action. Interestingly, LSD at this dose slightly 
suppressed the response of the cell to 5-HT. 


188 




































FIGURE 2. A. Effects of bath application of 5-HT and LSD on input 
(cont.) resistance (upper trace), membrane potential (middle trace) 
and electrical excitability (lower trace) recorded 
simultaneously in a rat facial motoneuron from an in vitro 
brain slice preparation. 

A higher concentration of LSD (100 nM) again produces 
little change in apparent input resistance or membrane 
potential. There is, however, a further increase in the 
electrical excitability which also has a slow onset of action 
and very long duration (>2 hrs., not shown). At this dose 
there is further suppression of the response of the cell to 
5-HT. Electrical excitability is measured by injecting the 
cell with a depolarizing pulse ( + 1.5 nA, 400 ms duration) 
which elicits one or two spikes under control conditions. 
Periods of drug application are indicated by horizontal 
bars. 

B . Oscilloscope traces showing the effect of 5-HT on the 
electrical excitability of the facial motoneuron shown in A. 

The spikes were evoked by a depolarizing pulse ( + 1.5 nA); 
the cell is otherwise silent (restingpotential, -72 mV). The 
left hand panel shows that under control conditions two 
spikes are elicited by the depolarizing pulse. Single asterisk 
denotes time point that sweep was taken in (A). In the 
presence of 5-HT (100/iM) (in the right hand panel), the 
same pulse elicits 16 spikes (double asterisk in A), thus 
indicating that 5-HT increases the electrical excitability of 
the cell. Also, note the increase in input resistance 
(i.e., greater voltage deflection in response to the 
hyperpolarizing pulse) following 5-HT.Prom Garratt et al. 
1993 


specific hyperpolarizing activated cationic current (I h ) which also 
increases the excitability of facial motoneurons (Garratt et al. 1993). 

Surprisingly, both LSD (figure 3) and DOI produce a greater maximal 
enhancement of ^ than does 5-HT (LSD > DOI > 5-HT). Moreover, in 
contrast to 5-HT, DOI and LSD have a slow onset and very long duration 


189 



FIGURE 3 


Effects of bath application of 5-HT and LSD on the 
hyperpolarization-activated cation current (I h ) in facial 
motoneurons. 

A, B, C are oscilloscope traces showing intracellular 
voltage-clamp recordings from facial motoneuron. 

(A) shows a progressing increase in the size of the 
hyperpolarization-activated cation current (I h ) in 
response to increased hyperpolarizing steps from 
-70 mV to -120 mV. (B) shows the enhancement of I h in 
the presence of 5-HT (100 pM).(C) shows that LSD 
(100 nM) produces a greater increase in I h than 5-HT. 
(D) is a current-voltage plot obtained from A, B, and C 
showing the difference between steady state and 
instantaneous currents in response to voltage clamp 
commands in 10 mV steps from a holding potential of 
-70 mV to -120 mV. Note that LSD produces a greater 
increase than 5-HT in I h at all voltage steps. From 
Garratt el al. 1993. 


190 





of action (> 2 hours). The enhancement of 4 by LSD and DOI is 
reversed by application of both the 5-HT 2 /5-HT 1A /5-HT 1A antagonist 
spiperone and the 5-HT 2 /5 -HTi C antagonist ritanserin, suggesting that the 
increase in 4 is mediated by receptors. This appears to be the first 
example of a direct 5-HT 2 -mediated electrophysiological response in the 
brain in which hallucinogens have greater efficacy than 5-HT (Pierce and 
Peroutka 1990). 

The finding that LSD has high efficacy in increasing I h and low efficacy 
in decreasing resting potassium conductance could be explained most 
simply by supposing that the 5-HT 2 receptor couples to the two different 
channels via two different guanosine triphosphate binding proteins 
(G proteins). Thus, the same type of 5-HT 2 receptor could couple to 
potassium channels via one type of G protein and to 4 channels via 
another type of G protein, yielding two different receptor/G-protein 
complexes that would have differential intrinsic activity with respect to 
the different agonists. A second possibility is that there are two or more 
different 5-HT 2 receptor subtypes that independently confer differential 
intrinsic activity to 5-HT and the hallucinogens. 

Regardless of the mechanism, the high efficacy of LSD relative to, 5-HT 
on the 4 current in rat facial motoneurons raises the interesting possibility 
that such an action elsewhere in the brain could be involved in mediating 
hallucinogenic processes. Neurons in several brain regions have been 
shown to have an I h current that is enhanced by 5-HT (Bobker and 
Williams 1989; McCoimick and Pape 1990; Nedergaard et al. 1991; 
Takahashi and Berger 1990). It would be interesting to see if LSD 
produces a greater enhancement of I h relative to 5-HT in these or other 
brain regions, especially in cases when the effect on I h may be mediated 
by a 5-HT 2 receptor. 

Cerebral Cortex 

The electrophysiological effects of 5-HT at 5-HT 2 receptors have been 
studied in several cortical regions. In vivo, the 5-HT 2 agonist DOI has 
been reported to have an overall inhibitory effect on the firing of 
unidentified neurons in the prefrontal cortex (Ashby et al. 1989). 
Curiously, the inhibitions produced by DOI but not by 5-HT itself are 
blocked by 5-HT 2 antagonists (Lakoski and Aghajanian 1985). In brain 
slices, pyramidal cells in various regions of the cerebral cortex have been 
found to respond to 5-HT by a small hyperpolatization, depolarization, or 
no change in potential (Davies et al. 1987). It was suggested that the 


191 



depolarizations are mediated by 5-HT 2 receptors since they can be 
blocked by 5-HT 2 antagonists. 


Recently, the author and coworkers have observed a novel effect of 5-HT 
in pyramidal cells of the piriform cortex: the enhancement of 
spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) (Sheldon and 
Aghajanian 1990). The IPSPs are blocked by the gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) antagonist bicuculline, suggesting that GABAergic 
intemeurons are excited by 5-HT, giving rise to the increase in IPSPs in 
the pyramidal cells. In accord with this expectation, a subpopulation of 
interneurons at the border of layers II and III were found that are excited 
by 5-HT. The 5-HT 2 /5-HT lc antagonist ritanserin blocks both the 5-HT- 
induced activation of interneurons and the associated IPSPs in pyramidal 
cells (Sheldon and Aghajanian 1990). Interestingly, the hallucinogens 
LSD and DOM behave as partial agonists in this system, producing a 
modest activation by themselves but occluding the full effect of 5-HT 
(figure 4). 

Another effect of 5-HT in the piriform cortex is a direct depolarization of 
pyramidal cells that is also blocked by ritanserin. However, blockade of 
the 5-HT-induced activation of intemeurons by ritanserin occurs much 
more readily than the blockade of pyramidal cell depolarization (Sheldon 
and Aghajanian 1990). Since ritanserin has a nearly tenfold higher 
affinity for the 5-HT 2 receptor than for the 5-HT lc receptor (Hoyer 1988), 
it is possible that the action of 5-HT on these intemeurons might be 
through 5-HT 2 receptors, and that the action of 5-HT on the pyramidal 
cells might be through 5-HT lc receptors. This hypothesis is consistent 
with recent in situ hybridization studies that show that mRNA for the 
5-HT 2 receptor is expressed in cortical interneurons (Mengod et al. 

1990 b), while that for the 5-HT, c receptor is expressed in pyramidal cells 
(Mengod et al. 1990a). 

To test this hypothesis further, the author and coworkers studied the 
effects of the 5-HT antagonist spiperone on the actions of 5-HT in both 
intemeurons and pyramidal cells (Sheldon and Aghajanian 1991). The 
activating effect of 5-HT on intemeurons is blocked by bath application 
of low concentrations of spiperone (100 nanomolars [nM]), while in 
pyramidal cells the direct excitatory effects of 5-HT are unaffected by 
100 nM to 1 micromolar (pM) spiperone but are blocked by 10 pM 
ritanserin. These findings support the hypothesis that in the piriform 
cortex the excitatory action of 5-HT on interneurons is mediated by 
5-HT 2 receptors while the excitatory action of 5-HT on pyramidal cells is 


192 



5-HT a-Me-5-HT 



5-HT 



1 min 

FIGURE 4. Note the prolonged action of DOM following the 
second application. Concentrations in mM. 

Agonist actions of 5-HT, a~Me-5-HT, and DOM on 
putative interneurons in piriform cortex. (A) The 
5-HT 2 agonist a-Me-5-HT mimics the action of 
5-HT in a dose-dependent manner. (B) The 5-HT 2 
agonist DOM acts as a partial agonist, having a 
small activating effect of its own and blunting the 
efect of 5-HT. From Sheldon and Aghajanian 
1990 


mediated by 5-HT lc receptors. Thus, the effects of 5-HT and 
hallucinogens in the cerebral cortex are likely to be complex, involving 
actions at multiple 5-HT receptors differentially expressed by 
intemeurons and pyramidal cells. 


5-HT RECEPTORS: SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION MECHANISMS 

The role of G proteins in mediating the 5-HT 2 -induced slow inward 
current in facial motoneurons was evaluated by using the hydrolysis- 
resistant guanine nucleotide analogs GTPyS and GDPBS (Aghajanian 
1990). Due to a persistent activation of G protein, the 5-HT-induced 
i award current becomes largely irreversible in the presence of 
intracellular GTPyS. The inward current is reduced by intracellular 
GDPBS, suggesting mediation by G proteins since the binding of GDPBS 
to the G protein renders it resistant to activation by agonist. These 
electrophysiological results are consistent with binding studies which 
show that guanosine triphosphate (GTP) analogs induced a downward 
shift in the affinity of a radiolabeled 5-HT 2 , agonist for brain membranes 
(Lyon et al. 1986). This GTP dependency is consistent with the structural 
analysis of a cloned 5-HT 2 receptor from a rat brain carrier deoxyribo¬ 
nucleic acid (cDNA) library, demonstrating seven transmembrane regions 


193 







typical of G protein coupled receptors (Pritchett et al. 1988). The identity 
of the G proteins that couple to the 5-HT 2 receptor remains to be 
determined. 

Serotonin stimulates phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis in the brain through 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors (Conn and Sanders-Bush 1986). LSD and 
DOM act as partial agonists of this effect (Sanders-Bush et al. 1988). 
Phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis yields at least two major second 
messengers: inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol. The latter 
activates protein kinase C (PKC), thereby potentially affecting many 
long-term cellular responses through protein phosphorylation. The 
author and coworkers have tested the effect of protein kinase inhibitors 
on the response of facial motoneurons to serotonin (Aghajanian 1990). In 
concentrations that have no effect of their own (100 and lOpM, re¬ 
spectively), two protein kinase inhibitors with different mechanisms of 
action, l-(5-isoquinolylsulfonyl)-2-methylpiperazine (H7), a nonselective 
protein kinase inhibitor, and sphingosine, a selective PKC inhibitor, both 
markedly enhance and prolong the excitation of facial motoneurons 
induced by 5-HT. Conversely, phorbol esters that are known to activate 
PKC reduce the excitatory effect of serotonin. These results suggest that 
activation of phosphatidylinositol turnover, perhaps through PKC- 
induced receptor phosphorylation, has a negative feedback effect on 
5-HT-induced excitations in the facial nucleus. These observations are 
consistent with studies on 5-HT 2 receptor-mediated responses in rat aorta, 
which indicate that the activation of PKC desensitizes 5-HT 2 receptors 
(Roth et al. 1986). 

An interesting implication of the negative feedback model is the 
possibility that the partial agonist (Sanders-Bush et al. 1988) or even 
antagonist (Pierce and Peroutka 1988) properties of hallucinogens with 
respect to 5-HT-stimulated phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis may 
contribute to, rather than interfere with, their electrophysiological actions. 
Thus, the greater enhancement of I h in facial motoneurons by 
hallucinogens relative to 5-HT could be explained by a combination of 
two factors: LSD has high efficacy in this transduction system, and by 
not markedly activating phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis, LSD does not 
provoke a large negative feedback reduction in response. 


194 



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 


Receptor Specificity 

This review has considered the electrophysiological effects of 
hallucinogens in three different brain regions: the LC, the facial motor 
nucleus, and the cerebral cortex. The results of those studies, together 
with findings from earlier studies in the raphe nuclei, make it clear that 
the indoleamine and phenethylamine hallucinogens have common 
electrophysiological actions on 5-HT 2 but not 5-HT, A , receptors. 
Furthermore, in each of these three regions, the effects of the 
hallucinogens are blocked by spiperone, which has almost a thousandfold 
higher affinity for 5-HT 2 than 5-HT lc receptors. Thus, it may be 
concluded that the electrophysiological effects of hallucinogens, at least 
those examined to date, are likely to be mediated primarily by 5-HT 2 
rather than 5-HT 1C receptors, although the latter may have a contributory 
role. 


Signal Transduction Mechanisms 

The net effect of 5-HT 2 receptor stimulation is to produce an increase in 
neuronal excitability through a G protein-coupled mechanism. The ionic 
mechanism underlying increased excitability involves a reduction in 
resting potassium conductance and/or enhancement of the hyper- 
polarizing-activated cationic current I,. In addition, biochemical studies 
show that both 5-HT 2 and 5-HT, c receptors are coupled to PKC and IP 3 
mechanisms through the phosphoinositide signal transduction pathway. 
Altogether it would appear that 5-HT 2 receptors are coupled to at least 
three different transduction systems: potassium channels, cationic I h 
channels, and phosphoinositide hydrolysis. The coupling could be 
through a single G protein or through multiple G proteins and multiple 
5-HT 2 receptor subtypes, one for each transduction pathway. Several 
hypothetical models for 5-HT 2 -receptor/G protein coupling mechanisms 
are presented in figure 5. 

It might be supposed that the electrophysiological effects of 5-HT and 
hallucinogens acting upon 5-HT 2 receptors are mediated through the 
phosphoinositide pathway. However, it has been found, mainly from 
studies in the facial motor nucleus, that activators of PKC suppress, while 
inhibitors of PKC enhance, 5-HT 2 -induced increases in neuronal 
excitability. Thus, the phosphoinositide second messenger system may 


195 



serve as a negative feedback system with respect to the electro- 
physiological effects produced by 5-HT 2 receptor activation. The fact 
that hallucinogens are only partial agonists at stimulating phospho- 
inositide turnover may enhance rather than diminish their 
electrophysiological effects. 

Behavioral Correlations 

As yet, the interrelationships between electrophysiological and behavioral 
actions of hallucinogenic drugs have not been examined in detail. 
Nevertheless, certain intriguing links are emerging. For example, the 
enhancement of sensory responsivity in LC neurons may contribute to the 
characteristic intensification of certain kinds of sensory experience 
produced by hallucinogens in humans. The increase in motoneuronal 
excitability producted by hallucinogens could explain the hyperreflexia 
induced by these drugs. Finally, the persistent activation of a sub¬ 
population of 5-HT 2 -expressing intemeurons in the cerebral cortex may 
underlie the various cognitive and perceptual distortions produced by the 
hallucinogenic drugs. 


FIGURE 5. (facing page) Hypothetical models for the coupling of 5-HT 2 
receptors to three different effector mechanisms: decreased 
K + conduc-tance, increased phosphoinositide (PI) turnover, 
and increased I h . (A) A single class of 5-HT 2 receptors 
couples via one type of G protein to the three different 
effectors. (B) A single class of 5-HT 2 receptors couples to 
three different G proteins (G, G\ and G”), one for each 
effector system. (C) Three 5-HT 2 receptor variants (5-HT 2 , 
5-HT 2 ’, 5-HT 2 ”) couple separately to the three effectors, 
each via a different G protein. 


196 



5-HT 2 


5-HT 2 



5-HT 2 
















ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This chapter was prepared with support from National Institute of Mental 
Health grant MH-17871, the State of Connecticut, and a gift from Bristol- 
Myers Squibb. 


REFERENCES 

Aghajanian, G.K. Mescaline and LSD facilitate the activation of locus 
coeruleus neurons by peripheral stimuli. Brain Res 186:492-498, 

1980. 

Aghajanian, G.K. Serotonin-induced inward current in rat facial 

motoneurons: Evidence for mediation by G proteins but not protein 
kinase C. Brain Res 524:171-174, 1990. 

Aghajanian, G.K.; Haigler, H.J.; and Bloom, F.E. Lysergic acid 

diethylamide and serotonin: Direct actions on serotonin-containing 
neurons. Life Sci 1:615-622, 1972. 

Aghajanian, G.K., and Rasmussen, K. Intracellular studies in the facial 
nucleus illustrating a simple new method for obtaining viable 
motoneurons in adult rat brain slices. Synapse 3:331-338, 1989. 

Ashby, C.R., Jr.; Jiang, L.H.; Kasser, R.J.; and Wang, R.Y. 

Electrophysiological characterization of 5-hydroxytryptamine-2 
receptors in rat medial prefrontal cortex. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
252:171-178, 1989. 

Barker, E.L.; Burris, K.D.; and Sanders-Bush, E. Phosphoinositide 
hydrolysis linked 5-HT 2 receptors in fibroblasts from choroid plexus. 
Brain Res 552:330-332, 1991. 

Bobker, D.H., and Williams, J.T. Serotonin augments the cationic current 
I h in central neurons. Neuron 2:1535-1540, 1989. 

Burris, K.D.; Breeding, M.; and Sanders-Bush, E. (+) Lysergic acid 
diethylamide, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is a potent 
serotonin 5-HT lc receptor agonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 258:891- 
896, 1991. 

Conn, P. J., and Sanders-Bush, E. Regulation of serotonin-stimulated 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis: Relation to the serotonin 5-HT 2 binding 
site. JNeurosci 6:3669-3675, 1986. 

Davies, M.G.; Deisz, R.A.; Prince, D.A.; and Peroutka, S.J. Two distinct 
effects of 5-hydroxytryptamine on single cortical neurons. Brain Res 
423:347-352, 1987. 

Garratt, J.C.; Alreja, M.; and Aghajanian, G.K. LSD has high efficacy 
relative to serotonin in enhancing the cationic current I h : Intracellular 
studies in rat facial motoneurons. Synapse 13:123-134, 1993. 


198 



Glennon, R.A. Do classical hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or 
antagonists 1 Neuropsychopharmacology 3:509-517, 1990. 

Glennon, R.A.; Young, R.; and Rosecrans, J.A. Antagonism of the effects 
of the hallucinogen DOM and the purported 5-HT agonist quipazine 
by 5-HT 2 antagonists. Eur J Pharmacol 91:189-196, 1983. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; and McKennay, J.D. Evidence for 5-HT 2 
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life 
Sci 35:2505-2511, 1984. 

Gorea, E., and Adrien, J. Serotonergic regulation of noradrenergic 

coerulean neurons: Electrophysiological evidence for the involvement 
of 5-HT 2 receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 154:285-291, 1988. 

Haigler, H.J., and Aghajanian, G.K. Mescaline and LSD: Direct and 
indirect effects on serotonin-containing neurons in brain. Eur J 
Pharmacol 21:53-60, 1973. 

Hartig, P.R. Molecular biology of 5-HT receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
10:64-69, 1989. 

Heym, J.; Rasmussen, K.; and Jacobs, B.L. Some behavioral effects of 
hallucinogens are mediated by a postsynaptic serotonergic action: 
Evidence from single unit studies in freely moving cats. Eur J 
Pharmacol 101:57-68, 1984. 

Hoyer, D. Functional correlates of serotonin 5-HTj recognition sites. 

J Receptor Res 8:59-81, 1988. 

Lakoski, J.M., and Aghajanian, G.K. Effects of ketanserin on neuronal 
responses to serotonin in the prefrontal cortex, lateral geniculate and 
dorsal raphe nucleus. Neuropharmacology 24:265-273, 1985. 

Lark man, P.M.; Penington, N.J.; and Kelly, J.S. Electrophysiology of 
adult rat facial motoneurones: The effects of serotonin (5-HT) in a 
novel in vitro brainstem slice. J Neuro sci Meth 28:133-146, 1989. 

Lyon, R.A,; Davis, K.H.; and Titeler, M. H-DOB (4-bromo-2,5- 

dimethoxyphenylisopropylamine) labels a guanyl nucleotide-sensitive 
state of cortical 5-HT 2 receptors. Mol Pharmacol 31:194-199, 1986. 

McCall, R.B., and Aghajanian, G.K. Serotonergic facilitation of facial 
motoneuron excitation. Brain Res 169:11-27, 1979. 

McCall, R.B., and Aghajanian, G.K. Hallucinogens potentiate responses 
to serotonin and norepinephrine in the facial motor nucleus. Life Sci 
26:1149-1156, 1980a. 

McCall, R.B., and Aghajanian, G.K. Pharmacological characterization of 
serotonin receptors in the facial motor nucleus: A microiontophoretic 
study. Eur J Pharmacol 65:175-183, 19806. 

McCormick, D.A., and Pape, H.-C. Noradrenergic and serotonergic 
modulation of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current in thalamic 
relay neurones. J Physiol 431:319-342, 1990. 


199 



Mengod, G.: Nguyen, H.; Lee, H.; Waeber, C.; Lubbert, H.; and Palacios, 
J.M. The distribution and cellular localization of 5-HT, c receptor 
mRNA in the rodent brain examined by in situ hybridization 
histochemistry. Comparison with receptor binding distribution. 
Neuroscience 35:577-592, 1990a. 

Mengod, G.; Pompeiano, M.; Maiiinez-Mir, M.I.; and Palacios, J.M. 
Localization of the mRNA for the 5-HT 2 receptor by in situ 
hybridization histochemistry. Correlation with the distribution of 
receptor sites. Brain Res 524:139-143, 1990h. 

Mokler, D.J.; Stoudt, K.W.; and Rech, R.H. The 5-HT 2 antagonist 
pirenperone reverses disruption of FR-40 by hallucinogenic drugs. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 22:677-682, 1985. 

Nedergaard, S.; Flatman, J.A.; and Engberg, I. Excitation of substantia 
nigra pars compacta neurones by 5-hydroxtrytamine in vitro. Neuro 
Report 3:329-332, 1991. 

North, R.A., and Uchimura, N. 5-Hydroxtryptamine acts at 5-HT 2 

receptors to decrease potassium conductance in rat nucleus accumbens 
neurones. J Physiol 417:1-12, 1989. 

Pazos, A.; Cortes, R.; and Palacios, J.M. Quantitative autoradiographic 
mapping of serotonin receptors in the rat brain. II. Serotonin-2 
receptors. Brain Res 346:231-249, 1985. 

Pierce, P.A., and Perotka, S.J. Antagonism of 5-hydroxytryptamine 2 
receptor-mediated phosphatidylinositol turnover by d-lysergic acid 
diethylamide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 247:918-925, 1988. 

Pierce, P.A., and Peroutka, S.J. Antagonist properties of d-LSD at 
5-hydroxytryptamine 2 receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology 3:503- 
508, 1990. 

Pritchett, D.B.; Bach, A.W.J.; Wozny, M.; Taleb, O.; Dal Toso, R.; Shin, 
J.C.; and Seeburg, P.H. Structure and functional expression of cloned 
rat serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor. EMBO J 7:4135-4140, 1988. 

Rasmussen, K., and Aghajanian, G.K. Effects of hallucinogens on 
spontaneous and sensory-evoked locus coemleus unit activity in the 
rat: Reversal by selective 5-HT 2 antagonists. Brain Res 385:395-400, 
1986. 

Rasmussen, K., and Aghajanian, G.K. Potency of antipsychotics in 
reversing the effects of a hallucinogenic drug on locus coeruleus 
neurons correlates with 5-HT 2 binding affinity. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 1:101-107, 1988. 

Rasmussen, K., and Aghajanian, G.K. Serotonin excitation of facial 
motoneurons: Receptor subtype characterization. Synapse 5:324-332, 
1990. 


200 



Roth, B.L.; Nakaki, T.; Chuang, D.M.; and Costa, E. 

5-Hydroxytryptamine 2 receptors coupled to phospholipase C in rat 
aorta: Modulation of phosphoinositide turnover by phorbol ester. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 238:480-485, 1986. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M. Choroid plexus epithelial cells in 
primary culture: A model of 5-HT, c receptor activation by 
hallucinogenic drugs. Psychopharmacology 105:340-346, 1991. 

Sanders-Bush, E.; Burris, K.D.; and Rnoth, K. Lysergic acid 

diethylamide and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine are partial 
agonists at serotonin receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246:924-928, 1988. 

Sheldon, P.W., and Aghajanian, G.K. Excitatory responses to serotonin 
(5-HT) in neurons of the rat piriform cortex: Evidence for mediation 
by 5-HT lc receptors pyramidal cells and 5-HT 2 receptors in 
intemeurons. Synapse 9:208-218, 1991. 

Sheldon, P.W., and Aghajanian, G.K. Serotonin (5-HT) induces IPSPs in 
pyramidal layer of rat piriform cortex: Evidence for the involvement 
of a 5-HT 2 -activated interneuron. Brain Res 506:62-69, 1990. 

Sprouse, J.S., and Aghajanian, G.K. Electrophysiological responses of 
serotonergic dorsal raphe neurons to 5-HT. A and 5-HT m agonists. 
Synapse 1:3-9, 1987, 

Sprouse, J.S., and Aghajanian, G.K. Responses of hippocampal 

pyramidal cells to putative serotonin 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 1B agonists: A 
comparative study with dorsal raphe neurons. Neuropharmacology 
27:707-715, 1988. 

Takahashi, T., and Berger, A.J. Direct excitation of rat spinal 
motoneurones by serotonin. J Physiol 423:63-76, 1990. 

Titeler, M.; Lyon, R.A.; and Glennon, R.A. Radioligand binding 
evidence implicates the brain 5-HT 2 receptor as a site of action for 
LSD and phenylisopropylamine hallucinogens. Psychopharmacology 
94:213-216, 1988. 

VanderMaelen, C.P., and Aghajanian, G.K. Intracellular studies showing 
modulation of facial motoneurone excitability by serotonin. Nature 
287:346-347, 1980. 

VanderMaelen, C.P., and Aghajanian, G.K. Serotonin-induced 

depolarization of rat facial motoneurons in vivo: Comparison with 
amino acid transmitters. Brain Res 239:139-152, 1982. 

White, S.R., and Fung, S.J. Serotonin depolarizes cat spinal motoneurons 
in situ and decreases motoneuron after hyperpolarizing potentials. 
Brain Res 502:205-213, 1989. 


201 



AUTHOR 


George K. Aghajanian, M.D. 

Professor of Psychiatry and Pharmacology 
Departments of Psychiatry and Pharmacology 
Yale University School of Medicine and the 
Connecticut Mental Health Center 
34 Park Street 
New Haven, CT 06508 


202 



Neurochemical Evidence That 
Hallucinogenic Drugs Are 5=HT 1C 
Receptor Agonists: What Next? 

Elaine Sanders-Bush 


INTRODUCTION 

Behavioral, electrophysiological, and neurochemical evidence points to 
the serotonin 2 (5-HT 2 ) receptor as an important site of action for 
hallucinogenic drugs (Glennon, this volume). Several years ago, the 
hypothesis was developed that hallucinogenic drugs might also be 5-HT lc 
receptor agonists. This hypothesis was based on the significant sequence 
homology in the deduced amino acid structure of the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc 
receptors, their pharmacological similarities, and the evidence that both 
receptors are linked to the same signal transduction pathway: 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis. In the past 4 years, the author and 
colleagues at Vanderbilt University have accumulated compelling 
evidence in support of this hypothesis. 

A more profound question remaining unanswered is the relative roles of 
the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors in the various actions of these drugs, in 
particular, hallucinations. Studies of this question are just beginning and 
are based on three strategies: a neurochemical effect important to 
hallucinations should be a common property of all hallucinogenic drugs; 
close structural analogs of hallucinogenic drugs that do not elicit 
hallucinations should also not elicit the neurochemical response; and 
tolerance should develop to the behavioral effects of hallucinogenic 
drugs. Results of these studies are summarized in this chapter. 


IS 5-HT 1c RECEPTOR ACTIVATION A COMMON PROPERTY 
OF HALLUCINOGENIC DRUGS? 

In the choroid plexus, 5-HT lc receptors are positively coupled to the 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis signaling cascade (Conn et al. 1986). The 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis response was therefore used to characterize 
the properties of hallucinogenic drugs at 5-HT lc receptors. The first 
study examined (+) lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), the most potent 


203 



hallucinogen known. (+)LSD potently activated phosphoinositide 
hydrolysis in the choroid plexus (median effective concentration 
[EC 50 ] = 10 nanomolars [nM]), although the maximum response was less 
than that produced by serotonin (figure 1). (+)LSD produced an 
incomplete blockade of the effect of serotonin, suggesting that it is a 
partial 5-HT, c receptor agonist (Sanders-Bush et al. 1988). 

Consistent with this interpretation, the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc antagonists 
mianserin and ketanserin antagonized the agonist effect of LSD on 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis whereas spiperone, a selective 5-HT 2 
antagonist, was without effect (figure 2). Since these original studies, a 
number of hallucinogens of different chemical classes have been 
examined, and all were found to act as agonists—some full, some 
partial—at 5-HT lc receptors (Sanders-Bush and Breeding 1991). 
Comparison of the properties at 5-HT lc and 5-HT 2 receptors shows that 
the hallucinogenic drugs are nearly equally effective at the two receptors. 

The studies of Sanders-Bush and Breeding (1991) were the first to show 
that hallucinogenic drugs are 5-HT, c receptor agonists. Because this 
property is common to all hallucinogens tested, this action may be 
important in the behavioral effects of these drugs. The challenge now is 
to formulate testable hypotheses, given the limitations of studies of 
hallucinogenic properties in animals. The most obvious and 
straightforward approach is to determine whether 5-HT lc receptor 
antagonists block the behavioral effects of hallucinogenic drugs in animal 
models that are predictive of human activity (e.g., the drug discrimination 
[DD] paradigm). Such studies are not feasible, however, because there 
are no suitable antagonists (i.e., drugs that block 5-HT lc but not 5-HT 2 
receptors or vice versa). In vitro studies have relied on spiperone, which 
blocks 5-HT 2 but not 5-HT, c receptors. However, behavioral studies of 
spiperone are not possible because of its potent neuroleptic action. 
Definitive behavioral studies await the development of specific 5-HT 2 
and 5-HT lc receptor antagonists. 


WHAT ARE THE PROPERTIES OF CLOSELY RELATED 
STRUCTURAL ANALOGS OF LSD THAT ARE NOT 
HALLUCINOGENIC? 

Recent studies have focused on three drugs: (-)LSD, 2-bromo LSD 
(BOL), and lisuride, all of which are close chemical relatives of (+)LSD 


204 




log [LSD], M 

FIGURE 1. Partial agonist effect of LSD at 5-HT 1C receptors in rat 
choroid plexus. [ 3 H]-Inositol-labeled choroid plexi 
were incubated for 45 minutes with lithium chloride, 
pargyline, and increasing concentrations of ( + )LSD 
with and without 100 nM serotonin. [ H]-Inositol- 
monophosphate (IP) formation is expressed as 
percentage of the basal radioactivity. The circles 
represent a dose-response for LSD alone (n=4). The 
diamonds show the effect of 100 nM serotonin plus 

increasing concentrations of LSD alone (n=4). The 

2 

maximum [ H]-IP formation in the presence of 1 pM 

serotonin was 1363 ± 143% of basal. Mean basal 

2 

[ H]-IP formation was 729 ±117 cpm. 


SOURCE: Sanders-Bush et al. 1988. 


(figure 3) but apparently do not mimic its effects in humans (White 
1986). The properties of these drugs at both 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors 
were examined. (-)LSD and BOL were pure antagonists of these 
receptors, with no evidence of agonist properties (Burris et al. 1991). 

The effects of lisuride on the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT, c receptors are illustrated 
in figure 4. As shown, lisuride had no apparent 5-HT 1C receptor agonist 
activity, and it completely blocked the response to 100 nM serotonin. In 


205 




O 350 

nj 

U) 

■° 300 



FIGURE 2. Antagonism of (+)LSD-stimulatedphosphoinositide 
hydrolysis in rut choroid plexus. Antagonists (1 pM) 
were added 15 minutes before the addition of 20 nM 
(+)LSD. Results are expressed as percent of basal, 
which was 2,751+219 cpm (n=21). Antagonists alone 
did not alter basal. *p<0.05, ***p<0.001. Spi = 
Spiperone; Ket = Ketunserin; Mia = Mianserin. 


contrast, lisuride was an agonist at the 5-HT 2 receptor, eliciting a strong 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis signal that was somewhat less than that of 
serotonin. Like LSD, lisuride partially blocked the effect of serotonin 
consistent with a partial agonist action at 5-HT 2 receptors. Therefore, 
lisuride, a nonhallucinogenic congener of LSD, appears to mimic LSD’s 
agonist properties at the 5-HT 2 receptor. Lisuride does not, however, 
reproduce the effects of LSD at the 5-HT 1C receptor, consistent with the 
hypothesis that the 5-HT 1C receptor may be involved in the hallucino¬ 
genic action of LSD. On the other hand, the finding that 5-HT 2 receptor 
activation is a property shared by (+)LSD and lisuride is not consistent 
with a critical role for the 5-HT 2 receptor in the production of such au 
action. 


206 




FIGURE 3. Chemical structures of LSD, lisuride, and 2-bromo- 
lysergic acid diethylamide. 


DOES TOLERANCE DEVELOP TO ACTIVATION OF 5-HT 1c 
RECEPTORS BY HALLUCINOGENS? 

Early clinical studies showed that a profound and rapid tolerance 
occurred after the administration of LSD in humans (Abramson et al. 
1956; Isbell et al. 1959). This tolerance has since been confirmed 
innumerous animal studies of hallucinogenic drugs (Adams and Geyer 
1985; Carvey et al. 1989; Darmani et al. 1990; Leysen et al. 1989). One 
of the most common mechanisms of tolerance is a reduction in the 
density of receptors for the drug (i.e., down-regulation). Down- 
regulation of 5-HT 2 receptors is found in rat brain after chronic 
administration of LSD and hallucinogenic amphetamines (Buckholtz et 
al. 1990; Leysen et al. 1989; McKenna et al. 1989). This neurochemical 


207 




H-IP Formation (% of basal) 



FIGURE 4. Effect of lisuride at 5-HT IC receptors in choroid plexus 


(upper panel) and 5-HT 2 receptors in transferred cells 
(lower panel). [ 3 H]-Inositol-labeled tissue was 
incubated for 45 minutes with lithium chloride, 
pargyline, and increasing concentrations of lisuride in 
presence and absence of 100 nM serotonin. [ H]- 
Inositol-monophosphate (IP) formation is expressed as 
percentage of the basal radioactivity. The circles 
represent a dose-response for lisuride alone (n=6). The 
diamonds show the effect of 100 nM serotonin plus 

2 

increasing concentrations of lisuride. Mean basal [ H]- 
IP formation was 195+21 cpm in choroid plexus and 
257+36 cpm infibroblasts transfected with 5-HT 2 
receptor cDNA. Julius et al. 1990 


208 






response may be involved in the tolerance that occurs to the behavioral 
effects of hallucinogens. 

Recent studies have begun to explore the question of whether a down- 
regulation of 5-HT 1C , receptors is also produced after chronic treatment 
with hallucinogenic drugs. These studies have been done in choroid 
plexus epithelial cells that express the 5-HT, c receptor. Chronic exposure 
to 1 micromolar (pM) of (-)l(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2- 
aminopropane (DOB) elicited a delayed decrease’in the density of 5-HT lc 
receptors (Barker and Sanders-Bush 1993). This loss of receptors 
presumably will blunt the response to 5-HT 1C , receptor agonists such as 
hallucinogenic drugs; however, this effect has not yet been demonstrated. 
A blunted response would be consistent with the interpretation that 
5-HT 1C receptors may be involved in the behavioral effects of 
hallucinogenic drugs. 


WHAT IS DIFFERENT ABOUT 5-HT 2/1 AGONISTS THAT ARE 
HALLUCINOGENIC VERSUS THOSE THAT ARE NOT? 

This author advocates the opinion that actions shared by lisuride and 
LSD, such as 5-HT 2 receptor activation, are probably not important in 
mediating hallucinations. This is not a new idea; for example, it was 
eloquently defended several years ago by White (1986). An alternative 
interpretation is that although LSD and lisuride, as well as other 
nonhallucinogenic 5-HT 2 agonists (e.g., quipazine), are capable of 
eliciting a receptor signal, they do so by different mechanisms (e.g., by 
interacting with different functional domains of the receptor). This 
possibility is especially interesting in light of the suggestion that LSD is 
an allosteric antagonist of the 5-HT 2 receptor (Kaumann 1989; Xu and 
Purdy 1989). Since the antagonist and agonist properties of a partial 
agonist such as LSD presumably reflect the same binding event, this may 
indicate that LSD has unique agonist properties (i.e., it may interact with 
a domain that is different from the serotonin binding domain). 

Conversely, lisuride and other nonhallucinogenic 5-HT 2 /5-HT, c agonists 
may not interact in an allosteric fashion. 

Recent investigations have explored the putative allosteric interactions of 
LSD in cells transfected with the 5-HT 2 receptor (Burris and Sanders- 
Bush 1992). LSD produced a noncompetitive blockade of 5-HT- 
mediated phosphoinositide hydrolysis; high concentrations of serotonin 
were not able to overcome the LSD blockade. One possible 


209 



interpretation of these results is that LSD interacts at a site on the 5-HT 2 
receptor that is different from the site where serotonin binds (i.e., an 
allosteric site). An alternative interpretation is that LSD binds tightly to 
the active site of the receptor in an irreversible or pseudoirreversible 
manner. To investigate the latter possibility, the dissociation rate of LSD 
was determined in membranes isolated from cells expressing the cloned 
5-HT 2 receptor carrier deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA). 

In the initial studies of H-LSD binding by Bennett and Snyder (1975), 
3 H-LSD dissociated slowly, but since a whole brain was used and LSD is 
nonspecific, it is not clear which 5-HT receptor was involved. This is not 
a problem with fibroblasts transfected with the 5-HT 2 receptor cDNA, 
since only one 5-HT receptor subtype is expressed: the 5-HT 2 receptor 
(Julius et al. 1990). In membranes from these cells, H-LSD dissociated 
slowly, with a half life (t 1/2) of 20 minutes. Consistent with this slow 
off-rate, LSD caused an apparent loss of receptors in the usual 
H-ketanserin binding assay, where the incubation time was 30 minutes. 
However, this receptor loss was not found when H-ketanserin was 
incubated with the LSD-pretreated membranes for 60 minutes (Burris and 
Sanders-Bush 1992). Therefore, it is likely that the apparent blunting of 
the phosphoinositide hydrolysis response, as well as the blunting of 
serotonin-elicited contractions in smooth muscle (Kaumann 1989; Xu and 
Purdy 1989), are explained by the fact that LSD dissociates slowly from 
the 5-HT 2 receptor. With short incubation times, equilibrium is not 
reached. 

These data suggest that LSD is not an allosteric agonist/antagonist, but 
rather that it binds tightly to the 5-HT 2 receptor and dissociates very 
slowly. This property of slow dissociation could be important. It would 
be interesting to compare the rates of dissociation of hallucinogenic 
versus nonhallucinogenic agonists from 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors. 


CONCLUSION 

Hallucinogens of different chemical classes activate the 5-HT, c receptor 
whereas nonhallucinogenic congeners interact with the receptor as 
antagonists. The numerous behavioral studies of hallucinogens that 
utilize 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists should be reevaluated in light of this 
finding, especially because currently available 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists 
also block 5-HT lc receptors (Sanders-Bush and Breeding 1988). These 
neurochemical studies are consistent with a role for the 5-HT lc receptor 


210 



in the psychoactive effects of hallucinogenic drugs, but they are far from 
conclusive. In the future new pharmacological tools that discriminate 
between 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptor subtypes may become available and 
can be used to explore this possibility in greater detail. 


REFERENCES 

Abramson, H.A.; Jarvik, M.E.; Govin, M.H.: and Hirsch, M.H. Lysergic 
acid diethylamide antagonists. II. Development of tolerance in man to 
LSD-25 by prior administration of 1-methyl-d-lysergic acid 
diethylamide. J Psychol 51:81-82, 1956. 

Adams, L.M., and Geyer, M.A. A proposed animal model for 

hallucinogens based on patterns of exploration in rats. Behav Neurosci 
5:881-900, 1985. 

Barker, E.L., and Sanders-Bush, E. 5-HT lc receptor density and mRNA 
levels in choroid plexus epithelial cells after treatment with mianserin 
and (-) 1 -(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane. Mol 
Pharmacol 44:725-730, 1993. 

Bennett, J.P., and Snyder, S.H. Stereospecific binding of D-lysergic acid 
diethylamide to brain membranes: Relationship to serotonin receptors. 
Brain Res 94:523-524, 1975. 

Buckholtz, N.S.; Zhou, D.F.; Freedman, D.X.; and Potter, W.Z. Lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD) administration selectively downregulates 
serotonin, receptors in rat brain. Neuropsychopharmacolgy 3:137- 
148, 1990. 

Burris, K.D.; Breeding, M.; and Sanders-Bush, E. (-i-)Lysergic acid 
diethylamide, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is a potent 
serotonin 5-HT lc receptor agonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 258:891- 
896, 1991. 

Burns, K.D., and Sanders-Bush, E. Unsurmountable antagonism of brain 
5-HT 2 receptors by (+)lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and bromo- 
LSD. Mol Pharmacol 42:826-830, 1992. 

Carvey, P.; Nausieda, P; Weertz, R.; and Klawans, H. LSD and other 
related hallucinogens elicit myoclonic jumping behavior in the guinea 
pig. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 13:199-210, 1989. 

Conn, P.J.; Sanders-Bush, E.; Hoffman, B.J.; and Hartig, P.R. A unique 
serotonin receptor in choroid plexus is linked to phosphatidylinositol 
turnover. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83:4086-4088, 1986. 


211 



Darmani, N.A.; Martin, B.R.; and Glennon, R.A. Withdrawal from 
chronic treatment with (+/-)-DOI causes supersensitivity to 5-HT 2 
receptor-induced head-twitch behavior in mice. Eur J Pharmacol 
186:115-118, 1990. 

Isbell, H.; Miner, E.J.; and Logan, C.R. Cross tolerance between 
2-bromlysergic acid diethylamide and lysergic acid diethylamide. 
Psychopharmacologia 1:109-116, 1959. 

Julius, D.; Huang, K.N.; Livelli, T. J.; Axel, R.; and Jessell; T.M. ‘The 
5-HT 2 receptor defines a family of structurally distinct but functionally 
conserved serotonin receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:923-932, 
1990. 

Kaumann, A.J. The allosteric 5-HT 2 receptor system. In: Fozard, J.R., ed. 
The Peripheral Actions of 5-Hydroxytryptamine. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1989. pp. 45-71. 

Leysen, J.E.; Janssen, P.F.M.; and Niemegerrs, C.J.E. Rapid 
desensitization and down-regulation of 5-HT 2 receptors DOM 
treatment. Eur J Pharmacol 163:145-149, 1989. 

McKenna, D.J.; Nazarali, A.J.; Himeno, A.; and Saavedra, J.M. Chronic 
treatment with (+/-) DOI, a psychotomimetic 5-HT 2 agonist, 
downregulates 5-HT 2 receptors in rat brain. Neuropsycho¬ 
pharmacology 2:81-87, 1989. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M. Putative selective 5-HT 2 antagonists 
block serotonin 5-HT, c receptors in the choroid plexus. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 247:169-173, 1988. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M. Choroid plexus epithelial cells in 
primary culture: A model of 5-HT, c receptor activation by 
hallucinogenic drugs. Psychopharmacology 105:340-346, 1991. 

Sanders-Bush, E.; Burris, K.D.; and Rnoth, K. Lysergic acid 

diethylamide and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine are partial 
agonists at serotonin receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246:924-928, 1988. 

White, F.J. Comparative effects of LSD and lisuride: Clues to specific 
hallucinogenic drug actions. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 24:365-379, 
1986. 

Xu, Z., and Purdy, R.E. Evidence for allosteric blockade of serotonergic 
receptors in rabbit thoracic aorta. J Phurmacol Exp Ther 248:1091- 
1095, 1989. 


212 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This chapter was prepared with support from National Institute on Drug 
Abuse grant DA-01581. Kevin D. Burris, Ph.D., Marsha Breeding, B.S., 
and Antoinette Poindexter, B.S. were primarily responsible for the 
experimental results presented in this manuscript. 


AUTHOR 

Elaine Sanders-Bush, Ph.D. 

Professor of Pharmacology 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine 
432 Medical Research Building 
Nashville, TN 37232-6600 


213 



Autoradiographic Approaches 
to Studying Hallucinogens 
or Other Drugs 

Nathan M. Appel 


INTRODUCTION 

The technique of autoradiographic localization of neurotransmitter and 
drug binding sites, often referred to as receptor autoradiography, has 
become a frequently used approach to investigate drug effects in the 
central nervous system (CNS). The technique enables the researcher to 
reveal the anatomic locus of actions of drugs and can be used to evaluate 
consequences of drug treatment. It is a rare issue of Current Contents in 
which the keyword “autoradiography” does not yield relevant citations. 

This chapter provides brief descriptions of the theory and practice of in 
vitro and in vivo receptor autoradiography, provides examples of how 
this approach has been used to study hallucinogens and other drugs in 
experimental animals, describes how the technique of receptor 
autoradiography has been extended to study hallucinogens in a clinical 
setting using positron emission tomography (PET), and describes a novel 
autoradiographic approach for assessing fatty acid incorporation that is a 
promising research and clinical tool for studying the response to and 
effects of hallucinogens and other classes of drugs or stimuli. 

There are many excellent review articles and books that address the 
theoretical basis, practical aspects, and limitations of the receptor 
autoradiographic technique. For the reader who is interested in a more 
comprehensive treatment of the subject, the chapters on receptor 
autoradiography by Kuhar are an excellent “first read” (Kuhar 1985; 
Kuhar and Unnerstall 1990). 


RECEPTOR AUTORADIOGRAPHY 

Receptor autoradiography is essentially a receptor binding assay. The 
assay is performed on an intact, instead of homogenized, tissue sample. 
Thus, the anatomic integrity of the tissue under investigation is preserved. 


214 



Binding of the radiotracer follows the law of mass action. Radiotracer 
binding is saturable and stereospecific and displays nanomolar affinities. 
For a particular radiotracer, the optimum incubation time (ligand 
association) and the optimum rinse times (separation of bound drug from 
free) are determined. Thus, binding kinetics can be determined, as can 
orders of potency of competing drugs, sensitivity to ions, nucleotides 
temperature, and other factors. 

In practice, the differences between the techniques are manifested in how 
the tissue of interest is radiolabeled and how the quantity of bound 
radiolabel in tissue is determined. To perfoim in vitro receptor 
autoradiography, tissues are labeled by incubating slide-mounted tissue 
slices (microtome sections) instead of homogenized tissue with a 
radiolabeled drug. Nonspecific binding is detected by incubating tissues 
with the radiolabeled drug in the presence of excess (typically 
thousandfold) unlabeled (“cold”) competing drugs. For in vivo receptor 
autoradiography, tissues are labeled by injecting test animals with a 
radiolabeled drug. By using in vivo receptor autoradiography, 
nonspecific binding can be determined in animals treated with excess 
unlabeled competing drug prior to injection of the radiotracer. An 
alternative method for illustrating specific binding using the in vivo 
approach is to express binding as the ratio of radioactivity in a region of 
interest and another area where few receptors are known to exist, for 
example, the ratio of spiperone-labeled dopamine (DA) receptors in 
caudate putamen and cerebellum (Kuhar 1985; figure 1). 

With receptor autoradiography, the binding of radiotracer is quantified by 
determining the intensity of the image that results from exposing the 
radiolabeled tissue to a photosensitive medium. In contrast, for a 
homogenate receptor binding assay, the radioactivity accumulated on a 
filter or pelleted at the bottom of a test tube is counted. The 
photosensitive medium is typically photographic emulsion. It can be 
directly applied to the radiolabeled tissue, apposed to the radiolabeled 
tissue in the form of an emulsion-coated coverslip, or apposed to the 
radiolabeled tissue in the form of commercially available 
autoradiographic film. 

An exciting new development is filmless autoradiography in which 
autoradiographic images are acquired by apposing radiolabeled 
specimens to screens coated with a storage phosphor. A latent image of 
the pattern of labeling forms within the storage phosphor and is 
visualized by scanning the screen with a laser that allows the image to be 


215 










A 

FIGURE 1. 


SOURCE: 



125 

Distribution of [ I] DOI-Iabeled serotonin, (5-HT 2 ) 
receptors in cerebral cortex. A: Bright-field 
photomicrograph of a Nissl-stained horizontal 
section through parietal cortex. Lamination is 
annotated with Roman numerals and delineated by 
the short black horizontal bars. B: Dark-field 
photomicrograph of the “coverslip” autoradiograph, 
generated by the section shown in A (same 
magnification), depicting ([ IJDOI) l-(2,5- 
dimethoxy-4-[ ~ I]iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane) 
binding in cerebral cortex. Note that silver grains 
are most concentrated in laminae I and IV. 
Magnification bar (lower right-hand corner) 

= 200 pm. 

Appel et al. 1990a 


216 



detected electronically using a photomultiplier. The image then is stored 
on a computer for subsequent analysis (Appel et al. 1991; Kuhar et al. 
1991). The image pattern (autoradiographic distribution) depicts the 
spatial distribution of binding sites in the tissue. 

Regardless of the photographic medium used, the optical density or 
intensity of the image is related to the quantity of bound drug and, by 
extension, of binding sites in a particular' region of interest. Thus, the 
principal advantage that receptor autoradiography provides over 
homogenate binding assays is increased anatomic resolution. For 
example, using a homogenate binding assay, it can be determined that 
binding of a certain drug is greater in the cerebral cortex than in the 
cerebellum. Using autoradiography, it can be said with certainty that 
binding is greater in cerebral cortex layer V than layer VI but less than in 
layers I or IV (e.g., figure 1). For an exact quantitative assessment of 
regional binding, regional optical densities can be measured by 
densitometry and compared with the optical density produced by 
calibrated radioactive standards coexposed with the experimental 
material. Several computer-assisted digital image analysis systems are 
available commercially to facilitate quantification of autoradiographs. 

Another advantage of receptor autoradiography over homogenate binding 
assays is increased sensitivity. In a homogenate binding assay, the ability 
to detect binding is limited if the density of a particular binding site or the 
specific activity of a labeled drug is low. Using autoradiography, one can 
increase the duration the photosensitive medium is exposed to the 
radiolabeled tissue to overcome these impediments. 


IN VITRO RECEPTOR AUTORADIOGRAPHY TO STUDY 
POTENTIAL SITES OF ACTION OF HALLUCINOGENS 

The exact criteria that categorize a substance as a hallucinogen remain 
unresolved (Szara, this volume). However, three classes of compounds 
constitute the majority of what typically are referred to as hallucinogenic 
drugs (see chapters by Glennon; Pfaff et al.; and Jacob and Shulgin, this 
volume). They are indolealkylamines (e.g., dimethyltryptamine [DMT]), 
ergolines (e.g., lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD]), and phenylalkylamines 
(e.g., 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine [DOM]). They have in 
common a high affinity for serotonin 2 (5-HIT 2 ) receptors. Drug 
discrimination studies, other behavioral tests, and homogenate receptor 
binding assays have related hallucinogenic potency to binding affinity of 


217 



5-HT 2 receptor agonists (Glennon and Rosecrans 1982; Glennon et al. 
1984; Heym and Jacobs 1987, 1988; Titeler et al. 1988). Moreover, a 
significant positive correlation has been demonstrated between 5-HT 2 
binding affinities of drugs and their human hallucinogenic potencies 
(Glennon et al. 1984). In consideration of these data, drugs that label 
5-HT" receptors would, by extension, label at least some sites in the brain 
where hallucinogenic effects of these drugs may be manifested. 

In an early study in which binding sites for a hallucinogen were 
demonstrated, autoradiographic distribution of 5-HT binding sites was 
demonstrated using [ 3 H]LSD. However, unlabeled serotonin (5-HT) was 
unable to displace [ 3 H]LSD labeling in all areas (Meibach et al., 1980). 

The recognition of subtypes of 5-HT receptors, as distinguished by 
differential binding of [ 3 H]5-HT, [ 3 H]LSD, and [ 3 H]spiroperidol 
(spiperone), would point the way toward using more selective ligands to 
study the now apparent different classes of 5-HT receptors (Peroutka and 
Snyder 1979). Thus, anatomic distribution of 5-HT 2 receptors has been 
studied autoradiographically using radioligands such as [ H] spiperone 
(Altar et al. 1985; De Souza 1986; Palacios et al. 1981; Pazos et al. 1985) 
and [ 3 H]ketanserin (Fishette et al. 1987; Pazos et al. 1985; Slater and 
Patel 1983). However, both these radioligands are antagonists: 

[ 3 H] spiperone potently labels DA type 2 (D 2 ) receptors (Niznik et al. 

1985; Stefanini et al. 1980), and [ 3 H]ketanserin labels nonserotonergic 
sites in striatum (Leysen et al. 1987). 

The autoradiographic distribution of 5-HT 2 receptors also has been 

125 

studied using another radioiodinated ligand, [ " I]-LSD (Altar et al. 1986; 
De Souza 1986; Engel et al. 1984; Nakada et al. 1984). However, 
because [ I]-LSD binds D 2 receptors with nanomolar affinity (Engel et 
al. 1984; Hartig et al. 1985 a), one must perform [ 125 I]-LSD 
autoradiography for 5-HT 2 receptors in the presence of unlabeled D 2 
ligands to ensure that only 5-HT 2 receptors are being visualized. There is 
another congener of LSD, Al-methyl-2-[ “I]-LSD, that is more selective 
for 5-HT 2 receptors than D 2 receptors. It also has been used to 
autoradiographically localize 5-HT 2 receptors (Hoffman et al. 1987). 

The hallucinogenic potency of drugs appears to be related to their 5-HT 2 
receptor binding affinities and their being agonists at this binding site 
(Glennon and Rosecrans 1982; Glennon et al. 1984; Heym and Jacobs 
1988; Titeler et al. 1988). However, evidence has been presented 
suggesting that 5-HT 2 receptors exist in two states-one state having high 
affinity for agonists and one state having low affinity for agonists-and 


218 



that antagonists (such as ketanserin and spiperone) do not discriminate 
between these two states. Moreover, the density of the high-affinity state 
of 5-HT 2 receptors is only a small fraction of the total 5-HT 2 receptor 
binding sites (Lyon et al. 1987; Teitler et al. 1990). Thus, to examine 
autoradiographically the distribution of the high-affinity state of the 
receptor, and by extension a hallucinogen binding site, would require an 
agonist 5-HT 2 receptor radioligand with high specific activity so that it 
could be detected in spite of the low density of these sites. A drug 
satisfying these criteria is [ I]DOI. It is a potent agonist at 5-HT 2 
receptors and has high specific activity (-2200 curies per millimole 
[Ci/mmol]) (Glennon et al. 1988; Johnson et al. 1987; Teitler et al. 1990). 
These pharmacological and radiochemical properties make [ “ I]DOI well 
suited for studying this state of 5-HT 2 receptors. 

125 

[ " I]DOI has proven to be an excellent ligand to autoradiographically 
label 5-HT 2 receptors (Appel et al. 1990b; McKenna and Saavedra 1987; 
McKenna et al. 1989). Patterns of autoradiographs of [ T]DOI binding 
to 5-HT 2 receptors were similar to those seen when 5-HT 2 receptors were 
labeled with [ 3 H]ketanserin or I-LSD (Appel et al. 1990a; McKenna 
et al. 1989). High densities of [" I]DOI labeling were present in the 
olfactory bulb, anterior regions of cerebral cortex, claustrum, caudate 
putamen, globus pallidus, ventral pallidum, islands of Calleja, 
m a mmillary nuclei, and inferior olive. Binding in the hippocampus, 
thalamus, and hypothalamus generally was sparse (see figures 1 and 2). 
The choroid plexus, a site rich in 5-HT 2 receptors, had a high density of 
[ IJDOI binding sites, but [ HJketanserin binding in this region was low 
(figure 2). [ " I]DOI binding on autoradiographs also displayed 
appropriate pharmacology for agonist-labeled 5-HT 2 receptors, in that it 
was inhibited by guanyl nucleotides but not adenosine triphosphate 
(Appel et al. 1990a; Battaglia et al. 1984; Lyon et al. 1987). 

Such data allow speculation on possible circuits mediating hallucinogenic 
effects of drugs. For example, the serotonergic innervation of the brain is 
widespread and not uniform (Kosofsky and Molliver 1987; Steinbusch 
1981). In particular, the cerebral cortex displays a distinctive, highly 
organized laminar pattern of innervation (for review, see Audet et al. 
1989). Similarly, [ " I]DOI binding in the cerebral cortex has a laminar 
pattern. [ I]DOI binding was especially enriched in layer IV in this 
study, with additional relative enrichment of binding sites also seen 
corresponding to layers I and V (see figure 1). On the other hand, 

[ “ I]DOI binding in the claustrum was especially dense, but the 
serotonergic innervation of this brain region was not (Steinbusch 1981). 


219 




FIGURE 2. Autoradiographs comparing the distribution of 
[ I25 I]DOI- and [ 3 HJketanserin-labeled 5HT 2 
receptors in coronal sections of rat brain. Left-hand 
column: Nissl-stained sections sampled adjacent to 
sections used for autoradiography and annotated to 
denote anatomical structures. Center and 
right-hand columns: Distribution of 5-HT 2 binding 
sites as revealed using [ U5 l]DOI and [ 3 HJketanserin, 
respectively. These images were generated by using 
the autoradiographs (Ultrofilm 3 H) as photographic 
negatives; thus, lighter areas in individual 
autoradiographs correspond to brain regions 
displaying higher densities of binding. For J 1 ' 5 IJDOI 
autoradiographs, tissues were labeled with 200 pM 
J 1 ^ 5 IJDOI. For [ 3 HJketanserin autoradiographs, 
tissues were labeled with 2 nM [ 3 HJketanserin. 

KEY: ACg = anterior cingulate cortex; ChP = choroid 

plexus; Cl = claustrum; Fr = frontal cortex; 

Par = parietal cortex; PVN = paraventricular nucleus. 

SOURCE: Appel et al. 1990a 


220 




Similar enrichment of [ 3 H]ketanserin- and [*"'I]-LSD-labeled 5-HT 2 
receptors has been noted in the claustrum (Appel et al. 1990a; McKenna 
et al. 1989). McKenna and colleagues (1989) suggested that the 
claustrum may play an important, but as yet unrecognized, role in 
mediating the effects of hallucinogens via its extensive connections with 
the cerebral cortex and the limbic system (Pearson et al. 1982; Wilhite et 
al. 1986). 

Relatively high densities of [ “ I]DOI binding sites also have been noted 
in mammillary nuclei, which are richly innervated by serotonergic 
afferents (Steinbusch 1981). -Similar to the claustrum, mammillary nuclei 
may play an important, but as yet unrecognized, role in mediating effects 
of hallucinogens via their extensive connections with the limbic system 
(Bleier and Byne 1985; MacLean 1985). Likewise, the ventral pallidum, 
which displays high levels of [ “ I]DOI binding sites and is richly 
innervated by serotonergic afferents, may mediate effects of 
hallucinogenic 5-HT 2 agonists via its extensive connections with the 
limbic system and basal ganglia (Heimer et al. 1985; Steinbusch 1981). 

The choroid plexus, a site rich in 5-HT 2 receptors, has a high density of 
[ 125 I]DOI binding sites (Appel et al. 1990a; McKenna et al. 1989). 
Competition studies on autoradiographs demonstrated that [ 12 T]DOI was 
binding at 5-HT 2 receptors (figure 3). Using [ " I]DOI autoradiography, 
the distribution of 5-HT“ receptors now can be demonstrated in the brain 
outside of the choroid plexus (figure 4). In situ hybridization 
histochemistry studies have demonstrated that 5-HT 2 receptor messenger 
ribonucleic acid mRNA) is widespread in rat brain (Hoffman and Mezey 
1989; Molineaux et al. 1989). Such observations take on added 
significance in the context of accumulating evidence that hallucinogenic 
drugs may be acting at 5-HT, c receptors (Burris et al.1991; Sanders- 
Bush, this volume; Sanders-Bush and Breeding 1991; Titeler et al. 1988). 


IN VITRO RECEPTOR AUTORADIOGRAPHY TO STUDY 
EFFECTS OF HALLUCINOGENS ON STRUCTURAL 
INTEGRITY OF NEURONS 

Receptor autoradiography need not be limited to studying 
neurotransmitter or drug binding sites. A candidate for receptor 
autoradiography essentially requires a saturable and specific binding at a 
biologically relevant site and the availability of a selective ligand with 


221 



A B 



0 -10 9 4-74 Mm Rlt dLSO 5HT U»t Mm 

log DO! Concentration (M) Competing Drug 


125 

FIGURE 3. Pharmacological characterization of [ I]DOI 
binding to 5-HT lc receptors in rat choroid plexus. 
Slide-mounted sections (2/slicle, 10 um thick) of rat 
brain were labeled with 200 pM J ~ IJDOI in the 
presence of spiperone (100 nM, to block [ 1 ~ 5 I]DOI 
binding to 5-HT 2 receptors) and varying 
concentrations of drugs. Nonspecific binding was 
determined in the presence of 1 pM mianserin. 

A: Displacement of [ IJDOI binding to 5-HT lc 
receptors in rat choroid plexus by (±)DOI. Median 
effective concentration (IC 50 ) is approximately 12 nM. 
B: Potencies of various drugs that displace J 1 ^IJDOI 
binding to 5-HT lc receptors in rat choroid plexus. 

SOURCE: Appel et al. 1990a 


sufficient specific activity to facilitate its detection. To date, several 
cellular components in the brain have been studied using principles of 
receptor autoradiography. They include ion channels, neurotransmitter 
reuptake sites, second messenger molecules, metabolic enzymes, and 
hexose transporters, among others (Appel and De Souza, in press; Kuhar 
and De Souza 1989). 

Detection of nonneurotransmitter binding sites by autoradiography can be 
used as an approach for studying the anatomic locus of structural or 
functional consequences of drug treatment. One approach is to assess 
changes in the density of presynaptic markers as an index of the 
neurotoxic potential of a drug. For example, in vitro assessment of 


222 




125 

FIGURE 4. Distribution of [ ~ I]DOI-labeled 5-HT IC receptors in a 


sagittal section of rat brain. The tissue was incubated in 
125 

200 pM [ ~ I]DOI in the presence of 100 nM spiperone to 
block [ " IJDOI binding to 5-HT 2 receptors. Under this 
condition the fractional occupancy of [ U5 1]D01 at 5-HT 2 
receptors is <0.1 percent. This image was generated by 
using the autoradiograph (Ultrofilm H) as a photo¬ 
graphic negative; thus, lighter areas correspond to brain 
regions displaying higher densities of binding. 


monoamine uptake sites can be used as an index of brain monoamine 
neuron structural integrity following a drug treatment. The validity of 
this approach has been established (D’Amato et al. 1987; De Souza and 
Kuyatt 1987; Javitch et al. 1985). In vitro autoradiography of 5-HT 
uptake sites as labeled by [ HJparoxetine can serve as an index of 
structural integrity of brain serotonergic axons following fenfluramine 
treatment. Serotonin uptake sites are highly concentrated on 
5-HT-containing nerve terminals (Kuhar and Aghajanian 1973); thus, a 
decrease in the density of [ HJparoxetine binding would reflect loss of 
5-HT axons following drug treatment. By extension, the same approach 
can be used to examine drug effects on catecholamine axons by looking 
for alterations in density and distribution of catecholamine uptake sites as 
labeled by [ HJmazindol. 

The ring-substituted phelylalkylamines 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine 
(MDA) and 3,4-methylenedioxymeth-amphetamine (MDMA) have 
received much notoriety recently because of their use as recreational 


223 




drugs. (For a comprehensive review, see Asghar and De Souza 1989.) 
Although these compounds differ in structure by only a single methyl 
group, evidence suggests that, whereas MDA is hallucinogenic, MDMA 
is not (Glennon 1989; Nichols and Oberlender 1989). Evidence has been 
presented that MDA and MDMA are neurotoxic and cause diffuse and 
prolonged decreases in brain 5-HT markers (Battaglia et al. 1987; 
Commins et al. 1987; Insel et al. 1989; Ricuarte et al. 1985). 

Effects of these compounds on serotonergic neurons have been assessed 
using immunohistochemistry (O’Heam et al. 1988). Widespread loss of 
5-HT-like immunoreactivity was observed in the cerebral cortex, 
hippocampus, caudate putamen, hypothalamus, and other forebrain areas. 
Decreases in immunostaining appeared to be more profound following 
MDA treatment than following MDMA treatment. In addition, some 
remaining 5-HT-like immunoreactive axons displayed morphology 
reminiscent of that seen following treatment with the 5-HT neurotoxin 
5,7-dihydroxytryptamine. Such axons appeared swollen, fragmented, and 
intensely stained. They suggested also that, in particular, axons derived 
from the dorsal raphe nucleus, which are morphologically distinct from 
axons derived from the median raphe nucleus (Kosofsky and Molliver 
1987), were selectively vulnerable to these drugs. Serotonin-like 
immunoreactive cell bodies did not appear to be affected. When treated 
tissues were immunostained for tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker of 
monoaminergic neurons, immunostaining appeared unaffected by 
treatment with either drug. O'Hearn and colleagues (1988) thus 
concluded that MDA, a purported hallucinogen, and MDMA were 
exerting neurotoxic effects on dorsal raphe-derived serotonergic axons. 

Although these immunohistochemical data strongly supported the 
conclusion that MDA and MDMA were neurotoxic, a shortfall of 
interpreting immunohistochemical data is that detection techniques 
depend on the presence of the antigen (in this case, 5-HT). Thus, if drug 
treatment causes depletion of the antigen of interest, lack of or decreased 
immunostaining could mistakenly be interpreted as an actual loss of 
axons. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry is limited from the 
perspective that related changes in staining are difficult to assess 
quantitatively. 

To address this question with respect to MDA and MDMA, 

[ 3 H]paroxetine autoradiography was used to assess the potential 
neurotoxic effects of these drugs by examining changes in a presynaptic 
marker, 5-HT uptake sites (Battaglia et al. 1991; De Souza and Kuyatt 


224 



1987). Both the hallucinogen MDA and MDMA caused widespread 
decreases in regional [ HJparoxetine binding that correlated with loss of 
5-HT-like immunoreactivity noted by O'Hearn and coworkers (1988). 

Furthermore, regional decreases in [ HJparoxetine binding in 
MDMA-treated rats were greater 2 weeks after, rather than immediately 
after, cessation of drug treatment. This suggested that there was a 
continuing degenerative process occurring during this time interval 
(Battaglia et al. 1991). 

To confirm the neurochemical specificity of this effect, Battaglia and 
colleagues (199 1) performed parallel experiments using [ HJmazindol to 
assess the structural integrity of catecholaminergic nerve terminals. 
[ 3 H]Mazindol is a marker for DA and norepinephrine (NE) uptake sites 
(Javitch et al. 1985). [ HJMazindol binding was unaffected by either 
MDA or MDMA treatment, confirming the specificity of the neurotoxic 
effect of these drugs to 5-HT monoaminergic neurons. 

Such autoradiographic assays also have been used to investigate the 
neurotoxic potential of other drugs structurally derived from 
phenylalkylamines. Regional decreases in 5-HT-uptake site density have 
been noted following treatment with the CNS stimulant methamphet- 
amine using [ 3 H]cyanoimipramine binding as a marker (Kovachich et al. 
1989). Fenfluramine is a substituted phenylalkylamine derivative 
structurally similar to MDA and MDMA. Unlike methamphetamine, 
MDA, or MDMA, it is devoid of undesirable psychostimulant effects. 
Racemic fenfluramine and its dextrorotary (D) isomer are used 
therapeutically as anorectics to treat obesity (McTavish and Heel 1992; 
Rowland and Carlton 1986). Short-term administration of racemic 
fenfluramine at high doses results in a pattern of 5-HT immunoreactivity 
similar to that seen with MDA, suggesting neurotoxic effects of this drug 
on 5-HT axons using this treatment protocol (Appel et al. 1989; Molliver 
and Molliver 1990). 

This hypothesis was supported by autoradiographic studies using 
[ HJparoxetine and [ HJmazindol as markers for 5-HT and catecholamine 
uptake sites, respectively (Appel et al. 1990b). Decreased paroxetine 
binding parallels decreases in 5-HT-like immunostained axons following 
an identical fenfluramine treatment protocol. Catechol-aminergic axons 
as assessed by [ HJmazindol autoradiography were unaffected. These 
data suggest that as a class, phenylalkylamine derivatives may have 
increased potential for neurotoxic side effects regardless of their being 


225 



hallucinogenic and may reinforce the utility of autoradiographic 
approaches as a tool for studying such effects of drug treatment. 


PRECLINICAL AND CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF IN VIVO 
RECEPTOR AUTORADIOGRAPHY IN THE STUDY 
OF HALLUCINOGENS 

As discussed earlier, receptor autoradiographic technique lends itself to 
being applied in vivo. The obvious advantage is that assessment can be 
made in situ in a living subject. Furthermore, using tracer drugs labeled 
with positron-emitting isotopes such as C, F, O, and N, dynamic 
mapping studies can be accomplished in animal or, potentially, human 
subjects using PET. In PET, the spatial distribution of positron-emitting 
isotopes in the brain or any other body region is detected using a circular 
array of detectors that surrounds the subject. Precise spatial localization 
is realized by accepting as the signal pairs of simultaneously emitted 
511-kiloelectron volt (keV) gamma rays that are detected 180” apart from 
each other. The gamma rays are the result of positron annihilation that 
occurs when a positron interacts with a negatively charged electron to 
form a short-lived positronium that is subsequently converted into 
electromagnetic radiation in the form of two photons (gamma rays) (Frost 
1990; Ter-Pogossian 1985). With high probability, the gamma rays 
represent the product of a single disintegrating positron. An obvious 
advantage of PET over postmortem (in vitro) receptor autoradiography is 
that it permits measurements several times from the same subject. Thus, 
dynamic studies during, as well as longitudinal studies following, 
hallucinogen administration are possible. 

Several preconditions limit whether a drug is useful as an in vivo marker. 
As a minimum, the tracer drug cannot be toxic to the host. Other basic 
requirements summarized by Kung (1990) are that the radiotracer; 

• Be labeled with a short-lived isotope and be quickly prepared 
(minutes); 

• Possess high specific activity; 

• Be able to penetrate the intact blood-brain barrier following 
intravenous (IV) injection; 

• Be relatively resistant to in vivo metabolism; 


226 



• Have a high affinity for the binding site of interest (nM K d ); 

• Possess a high target-to-nontarget ratio after IV injection; and 

• Can be modeled to quantitate receptor density based on kinetic 
information obtained by imaging. 

For the most part, in vivo studies performed with radiotracers in 
experimental animals and having the potential for improving 
understanding of hallucinogens have been focused not so much toward 
imaging binding sites in that setting as toward determining whether a 
particular tracer is of potential clinical use. For this purpose, regional 
binding under different experimental conditions is quantified by 
solubilizing dissected regions of the brain and counting bound 
radioactivity in a scintillation counter. As discussed earlier, ligands that 
label 5-HT 2 binding sites would theoretically label these binding sites in 
living brain and, by extension, identify initial sites of action of 
hallucinogenic drugs. Drugs tested for this use include derivatives of 
spiperone (spiroperidol) and ketanserin (Frost 1990; Kuhar et al. 1986). 
However, these drugs are 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists and do not label 
5-HT 2 receptors exclusively (Leysen et al. 1987; Niznik et al. 1985; 
Stefanini et al. 1980). A tritiated naphthosultam derivative, RP 62203, 
also is being used as an in vivo probe for 5-HT 2 receptors. This drug is 
also a 5-HT 2 receptor antagonist but is reported to have greater 5-HT 2 
receptor selectivity than spiperone or ketanserin (Fajolles et al. 1992). 

Derivatives of LSD also have been used as in vivo probes for 5-HT 2 
receptors. They include [ 125 I]-LSD (Hartig et al. 19856), 

N 1 -methyl-2-[ 125 I]-LSD (Hoffman et al. 1987), and D-(+)-(Nl- 
[ n C]methyl)-2-Br-LSD ([“CJMBL) (Lever at al. 1989). [ U C]MBL has 
been used to image 5-HT 2 receptors in living baboon and human brains 
by PET (Wang et al. 1987). In the baboon brain, specific binding of 
[ n C]MBL to 5-HT 2 receptors in vivo was demonstrated by comparing 
binding ratios between the frontal cortex and cerebellum in the presence 
and absence of ketanserin. In a human subject, widespread uniform 
labeling of brain structures not associated with 5-HT 2 receptors, such as 
the cerebellum, was seen soon after administration of [ U C]MBL. 

However, this most likely reflected blood flow delivery of the tracer 
because persistent labeling was seen subsequently in the frontal cortex 
and temporal poles, sites endowed with 5-HT 2 receptors. No 
pharmacological effects of drug administration were noted in any subjects 
receiving [ U C]MBL. However, MBL may be an antagonist at 5-HT 2 


227 



receptors (Ginzel and Mayer-Gross 1956). As discussed earlier, 
theoretical arguments support using 5-HT 2 agonists as probes for sites of 
action of hallucinogens rather than anatagonists (Lyon et al. 1987; Teitler 
et al. 1990). One such compound under investigation is l-[2’,5’-di- 
methoxy-4'- (6-fluoroethyl)phenyl]-2-aminopropane, a phenylalkylamine 
(Gerdes et al. 1988). 

As discussed earlier, presynaptic markers are useful probes to assess 
structural integrity of neurons. By using this approach, the regional 
distribution of neurotoxic effects of the hallucinogenic phenylalkylamine 
MDA and its nonhallucinogenic chemical congener fenfluramine have 
been reported using radiotracers selective for serotonin uptake sites in 
vitro (Appel et al. 1990Z?; Battaglia et al. 1991). Radiotracers with in 
vivo selectivity for serotonin uptake sites also have been reported, 
including radiolabeled derivatives of paroxetine, quipazine, imipramine, 
chlorimipramine, cyanoimipramine, citalopram, fluoxetine, and sertralme. 
However, all these compounds have limitations that compromise their 
usefulness as radiotracers in a clinical setting (Scheffel et al. 1992). 

Recently, radiolabeled congeners of another class of compound have 
appeared that label cocaine binding sites. For example, RTI-55 is a 
parasubstituted cocaine analog derived from WIN 35,065-2 that labels 
DA and serotonin uptake sites (Boja et al., 1992; Madras et al. 1989; 
Scheffel et al. 1992). In vivo studies in mice using [ 12 IJRTI-55 have 
yielded satisfactory autoradiographs demonstrating regional binding 
patterns that reflect the distribution of serotonin and DA uptake sites 
(Cline et al. 1992). By labeling 5-HT uptake sites in vivo with 
[ IJRTI-55, investigators have been able to detect regional changes in 
densities of 5-HT uptake sites following fenfluramine treatment in rats 
(Scheffel et al. 1992). Fenfluramine effects on 5-HT uptake sites are 
similar to those seen following MDA treatment (Appel et al. 1990 b 
Battaglia et al. 1991). These data suggest that RTI-55 might be useful in 
a clinical setting to assess potential long-lasting adverse effects on the 
CNS in individuals who may have been abusers of phenylalkylamine 
hallucinogens such as MDA. 


228 



AUTORADIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT OF IN VIVO FATTY 
ACID INCORPORATION TO STUDY HALLUCINOGENS OR 
OTHER DRUGS 

In addition to its use in receptor or binding site mapping applications, the 
in vivo autoradiographic approach has been used to study brain 
metabolism. The best-characterized and most well-known example of 
this approach is metabolic mapping by assessing incorporation of 
[ 14 C]deoxyglucose (2-deoxy-D- [l- l4 C]glucose). 2-Deoxyglucose is 
transported bidirectionally from blood to brain by the same hexose 
transport protein as glucose. Glucose is the primary metabolic substrate 
of the brain in the fed state. The functional activity of the brain in vivo 
has been correlated with regional cerebral glucose utilization and with 
regional cerebral blood flow. By assessing incorporation of 
[ 14 C]deoxyglucose into the brain, regional glucose consumption and, by 
extension, regional cerebral metabolic activity can be estimated (for a 
review, see Sokoloff 1985). Using this approach, Freo and colleagues 
(1991) observed decreased incorporation of [ 14 C]deoxyglucose into rat 
hippocampus and prosencephalic regions (cingulate; prefrontal; 
precentral medial; and motor, auditory, and visual cortices) following 
high (25 milligrams per kilogram [mg/kg]) intraperitoneal (IP) doses of 
DOI. Another in vivo autoradiographic metabolic mapping approach 
under development is assessment of local cerebral [ 14 C]leucine 
incorporation as an index of regional brain protein synthesis (Smith et al. 
1984; Sokoloff 1985). However, this model may underestimate actual 
protein synthesis (Smith et al. 1988). 

The Laboratory of Neurosciences of the National Institute on Aging has 
developed in vivo autoradiographic methods to quantify local cerebral 
rates of incorporation of radiolabeled long-chain fatty acids into brain 
phospholipids (DeGeorge et al. 1989; Rimes et al. 1983; Noronha et al. 
1990). A partial model underlying this approach has been described 
(Robinson et al. 1992). The technique is based on infusing radiolabeled 
fatty acids, such as [ 3 H]palmitic, [ 14 C]arachidonic, or [ 14 C]docosa- 
hexaenoic acids, into conscious rats. Regional accumulated radioactivity 
in the brain and integrated plasma fatty acid radioactivity (integrated over 
the time course of the experiment) are determined. Currently, data are 
expressed as normalized regional activities (k) having units of milliliters 
per second times grams (ml/sec x g). However, exact quantification of 
‘fatty acid incorporation will not be possible until the kinetics of protein 
binding of fatty acids and the contributions of different precursor pools 


229 



and metabolic pathways have been determined (Robinson et al. 1992). 
Nevertheless, the technique has proven useful in that regional brain 
changes in fatty acid incorporation can be correlated with alterations in 
regional structural integrity and functional activation. 

When infused in vivo, [ Hjpalmitic acid is incorporated into brain 
membrane phospholipids, with the majority incorporated into 
phosphatidylcholine. This allows its use as a marker for synthesis and 
turnover of this phospholipid and, by extension, as a marker for neuronal 
structural integrity (Gnaedinger et al. 1988; Noronha et al. 1990). 
Increased [ 14 C]palmitate or [ 3 H]palmitate incorporation has been 
demonstrated in regions where cell division or proliferation is taking 
place, such as in active tumors or in areas of glial reaction and phagocytic 
invasion of the brain having extensive cell death secondary to carotid 
occlusion (Nariai et al. 1991a; Tone et al. 1987). In contrast, regional 
brain [ 3 H]palmitate incorporation is not altered in response to chemical 
stimulation of neurotransmitter receptors (DeGeorge et al. 199 1; Freed et 
al. 1991). 

When infused in vivo, [ 14 C]arachidonic acid is incorporated into brain 
phospholipids primarily as phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylcholine. 
Turnover of arachidonate in brain inositol phosphoglycerides, which is 
catalyzed by phospholipase C, is a metabolic pathway used for signal 
transduction by several neurotransmitters, including alpha, adrenergic 
receptors, cholinergic muscarinic receptors, excitatory amino acid 
receptors, H, histaminergic receptors, and 5-HT 2 and 54-HT lc serotonin 
receptors (Fisher and Agranoff 1987; Sanders-Bush et al. 1990). Thus, 
incorporation of in vivo administered [ 14 C]arachidonic acid could act as 
an index of regional functional activation in response to neurotransmitter, 
drug, or other stimulation whose transduction is coupled to phospha¬ 
tidylinositol. [14C]Arachidonic acid incorporation is increased in 
response to muscarinic cholinergic receptor activation with arecoline. In 
contrast, [ 3 H]palmitate incorporation is unaffected (DeGeorge et al. 1991; 
Nariai et al. 1991h). Similarly, visual stimulation to unilateral enucleated 
rats resulted in increased [14C]arachidonic acid incorporation in brain 
structures afferent to the intact orbit when compared with incorporation in 
the brain structures afferent to the enucleated orbit. No differences 
between sides were noted for [ 3 H]palmitate incorporation (Wakabayashi 
et al. 1992). These data support the validity of using fatty acid incorpora¬ 
tion as indices of structural integrity and functional activation of neurons. 


230 



The fatty acid incorporation technique also has been applied to studying 
effects on rats treated with hallucinogens. DOI (10 mg/kg IP) resulted in 
increased [ 14 C]arachidonic acid incorporation in frontal cortex layer IV, 
claustrum, medial cortex, and motor cortex. In contrast, [ HJpalmitic acid 
incorporation was unaffected in these brain regions assayed (Freed et al. 
1991). These brain regions have high densities of 5-HT 2 serotonin 
receptors (Fishette et al. 1987; Pazos et al. 1985; Slater and Patel 1983) 
and are strongly labeled by [ 125 I]DOI, which binds both 5-HT 2 and 
5-HT, c , serotonin receptors (Appel et al. 1990a; McKenna et al. 1989). 
Activation of 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc serotonin receptors results in 
phosphatidylinositol turnover (Sanders-Bush et al. 1990). 

Evidence has been presented that hallucinogens are likely acting at 5-HT 2 
(Glennon and Rosecrans 1982; Glennon et al. 1984; Heym and Jacobs 
1987, 1988; Titeler et al. 1988) and possibly 5-HT lc serotonin receptors 
(Burris et al. 1991; Sanders-Bush, this volume; Sanders-Bush and 
Breeding 1991; Titeler et al. 1988). The Freed and colleagues (1991) 
data demonstrate brain regions that appear to be specifically activated in 
response to administration of a hallucinogen. Moreover, these data offer 
further evidence that fatty acid incorporation can be used to study 
receptors linked to brain lipid metabolism. This approach should be a 
powerful tool for studying functional aspects of hallucinogen 
administration. 

The fatty acid technique also lends itself to a clinical setting. Fatty acids 
have been labeled with 1 'c and detected using PET (Channing et al. 

1991). Thus, in the future, it may be possible to study dynamic 
functional activation of human brain in response to hallucinogen 
administration to provide a better understanding of how these drugs 
produce their psychotropic effects. 


SUMMARY 

Autoradiography provides a powerful tool whereby an investigator can 
study different aspects of hallucinogens in the laboratory and the clinic. 
Receptor autoradiography can be performed in vitro to map binding sites 
of hallucinogens or to assess potential neurotoxic sequelae of 
hallucinogen treatments. Similarly, such studies can be performed in 
vivo to the same end. Receptor autoradiography can be performed in a 
clinical setting using PET to study acute dynamic binding properties of 
hallucinogens in humans or for long-term followup studies. In vivo 


231 



autoradiography of metabolic markers appears useful in the laboratory 
and potentially in the clinic to help researchers understand not only 
where, but also the manner in which, the brain responds functionally to 
hallucinogens. 


REFERENCES 

125 

Altar, C.A.; Boyar, C.; and Maiden, M.R. I-LSD autoradiography 
confirms the prefrontal localization of caudate-putamen S 2 receptors to 
the caudal (peripallidal) region. Brain Res 372:130-136, 1986. 

Altar, C.A.; Kim, H.; and Marshall, J.F. Computer imaging and analysis 
of dopamine (D 2 ) and serotonin (S 2 ) binding sites in rat basal ganglia 
or neocortex labeled by [ H] spiroperidol. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
233:527-538, 1985. 

Appel, N.M., and De Souza, E.B. Autoradiographic localization of 
nonreceptor proteins in brain. In: Stumpf, W.E., and Solomon, H.F., 
eds. Autoradiography and Correlative Imaging. New York: Academic 
Press, in press. 

Appel, N.M.; Contrera, J.F.; and De Souza, E.B. Fenfluramine selectively 
and differentially decreases the density of serotonergic nerve terminals 
in rat brain: Evidence from immunocytochemical studies. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther 249:928-943, 1989. 

Appel, N.M.; Mathews, S.A.; Storti, G.M.; and Kuhar, M.J. Storage 
phosphors as an alternative to photographic emulsion for recording 
and quantifying autoradiograms. Soc Neurosci Abstr 17:373, 1991. 

Appel, N.M.; Mitchell, W.M.; Garlick, R.K.; Glennon, R.A.; Teitler, M.; 

125 

and De Souza, E.B. Autoradiographic characterization of [ I]-l- 

(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2aminopropane ( I]DOI) binding to 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors in rat brain. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
255:843-857, 1990a. 

Appel, N.M.; Mitchell, W.M.; Contrera, J.F.; and De Souza, E.B. Effects 
of high-dose fenfluramine treatment on monoamine uptake sites in rat 
brain: Assessment using quantitative autoradiography. Synapse 
3:33-44, 19906. 

Asghar, K., and De Souza, E., eds. Pharmacology and Toxicology of 
Amphetamine and Related Designer Drugs. National Institute on Drug 
Abuse Research Monograph No. 94. DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)89-1640. 
Washington, DC: Supt. of Dots., U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1989. 

Audet, M.A.; Descarries, L.; and Doucet, G. Quantified regional and 
laminar distribution of the serotonin innervation in the anterior half of 
adult rat cerebral cortex. J Client Neuroanat 2:29-44, 1989. 


232 



Battaglia, G.; Shannon, M.; and Titeler, M. Guanyl nucleotide and 
divalent cation regulation of cortical S 2 serotonin receptors. J 
Neurochem 43:1213-1219, 1984. 

Battaglia, G.; Sharkey, J.; Kuhar, M.J.; and De Souza, E.B. 

Neuroanatomic specificity and time course of alterations in rat brain 
serotonergic pathways induced by MDMA (3,4-methylene¬ 
dioxymethamphetamine): Assessment using quantitative 
autoradiography. Synapse 8:249-260, 1991. 

Battaglia, G.; Yeh, S.Y.; O’Heam, E.; Molliver, M.E.; Kuhar, M.J.; and 
De Souza, E.B. 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine and 
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine destroy serotonin terminals in rat 
brain: Quantification of neurodegeneration by measurement of 
[ 3 H]paroxetine-labeled serotonin uptake sites. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
242:911-916, 1987. 

Bleier, R., and Byne, W. Septum and hypothalamus. In: Paxinos, G., ed. 
The Rat Nervous System. Vol. 1. Forebrain and Midbrain. Sydney: 
Academic Press, 1985. pp. 87-118. 

Boja, J.W.; Mitchell, W.M.; Patel, A.; Kopajtic, T.; Carroll, F.I.; Lewin, 
A.H.; and Kuhar, M.J. High affinity binding of [ 1251 ]RTI-55 to 
dopamine and serotonin transporters in rat brain. Synapse 12:27-36, 
1992. 

Burris, K.D.; Breeding, M.; and Sanders-Bush, E. (-i-)Lysergic acid 
diethylamide, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is a potent 
serotonin 5-HT 1C receptor agonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
258:891-896, 1991. 

Channing, M.A.; Freed, L.; Wakabayashi, S.; Carson, R.; Simpson, N.; 
Dunn, B.B.; and Rapoport, S.I. l-[ n C]Labeled polyhomoallylic fatty 
acids: Phospholipid metabolic tracers for the brain. Am J Nucl Med 
13:1093, 1991. 

Cline, E.J.; Scheffel, U.; Boja, J.W.; Mitchell, W.M.; Carroll, F.I.; 
Abraham, P.; Lewin, A.H.; and Kuhar. M.J. In vivo binding of 
[ IjRTI-55 to dopamine transporters: Pharmacology and regional 
distribution with autoradiography. Synapse 12:37-46,1992. 

Commins, D.L.; Vosmer, G.; Viris, R.; Woolverton, W.; Schuster, C.R.; 
and Seiden, L.S. Biochemical and histological evidence that 
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) is toxic to neurons in rat 
brain. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 241:338-345, 1987. 

D'Amato, R.J.; Largent, B.L.; Snowman, A.M.; and Snyder, S.H. 
Selective labeling of serotonin uptake sites in rat brain by 
[ Hjcitalopram contrasted to labeling of multiple sites by 
[ 3 H]imipramine. J Pharmacol Exp 'Ther 242:364-371, 1987. 


233 



DeGeorge, J. J.; Nariai, T.; Yamazaki, S.; Williams, W.M.; and Rapoport, 
S.I. Arecoline-stimulatcd brain incorporation of intravenously 
administered fatty acids in unanesthetized rats. J Neurochem 
56:352-355, 1991. 

DeGeorge, J.J.; Noronha, J.G.; Bell, J.; Robinson, P.; and Rapoport, S.I. 
Intravenous injection of [l- 14 C]arachidonate to examine regional brain 
lipid metabolism in unanesthetized rats. J Neurosci Res 24:413-423, 
1989. 

De Souza, E.B. Serotonin and dopamine receptors in the rat pituitary 
gland: Autoradiographic identification, characterization, and 
localization. Endocrinology 119: 1534-1542, 1986. 

De Souza, E.B., and Kuyatt, B.L. Autoradiographic localization of 
3 H-paroxetine-labeled serotonin uptake sites in rat brain. Synapse 
1:488-496, 1987. 

Engel, G.; Muller-Schweinitzer, E.; and Palacios, J.M. 2-[ 125 Iodo]LSD, a 
new ligand for the characterization and localisation of 5-HT 2 receptors. 
Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 325:328-336,1984. 

Fajolles, C.; Boireau, A.; Ponchant, M.; and Laduron, P.M. [ 3 H]RP 
62203, a ligand of choice to label in vivo brain 5-HT 2 receptors. Eur J 
Pharmacol 216:53-72, 1992. 

Fisher, S.K., and Agranoff, B.W. Receptor activation and inositol lipid 
hydrolysis in neural tissues. J Neurochem 48:999-1017, 1987. 

Fishette, C.T.; Nock, B.; and Renner, K. Effects of 5,7- 

dihydroxytryptamine on serotonin, and serotonin, receptors 
throughout the rat central nervous system using quantitative 
autoradiography. Brain Res 421:263-279, 1987. 

Freed, L.M.; Nariai, T.; and Rapoport, S.I. Effect of 5-HT 2 receptor 
agonist on fatty acid incorporation into brain. Tr Am Soc Neurochem 
22:189, 1991. 

Freo, U.; Soncrant, T.T.; Holloway, H.W.; and Rapoport, S.I. Dose- and 
time-dependent effects of l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)- 
2-aminopropane (DOI), a serotonergic 5-HT 2 receptor agonist, on 
local cerebral glucose metabolism in awake rats. Brain Res 541:63-69, 
1991. 

Frost, J.J. Imaging the serotonergic system by positron emission 
tomography. Ann NY Acad Sci 600:272-280, 1990. 

Gerdes, J.M.; Mathis, C.A.; and Shulgin, A.T. Synthesis of 

1 - [2 ’ ,5' -dimethoxy-4' (B-fluoroethyl)pheny 1] -2aminopropane: 
Studies related to F-labeled serotonin receptor ligands. Tetrahed Lett 
29:6537-6540, 1988. 


234 



Ginzel, K.H., and Mayer-Gross, W. Prevention of psychological effects 
of d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD 25) by its 2-Brom derivative 
(BOL-148). Nature 178:210, 1956. 

Glennon, R.A. Stimulus properties of hallucinogenic phenalkylamines 
and related designer drugs: Formulation of structure-activity 
relationships. In: Asghar, K., and De Souza, E., eds. Pharmacology 
and Toxicology of Amphetamine and Related Designer Drugs. 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 94. 

DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)89-1640. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., 
U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1989. pp. 43-67. 

Glennon, R.A., and Rosecrans, F.A. Indolealkylamine and phenalkyl- 
amine hallucinogens: A brief overview. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
6489-497, 1982. 

Glennon, R.A.; Seggel, M.R.; Some, W.H.; Herrick-Davis, K.; Lyon, 
R.A.; and Titeler, M. [ 125 I]-1-(2,5-dimcthoxy-4-iodophcnyl)-2-amino¬ 
propane: An iodinated radioligand that specifically labels the agonist 
high-affinity state of 5-HT 2 serotonin receptors. J Med Chem 31:5-7, 
1988. 

Glennon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; and McKenney, J.D. Evidence for 5-HT 2 
involvement in the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic agents. Life 
Sci 35:2505-2511, 1984. 

Gnaedinger, J.M.; Miller, J.C.; Latker, C.H.; and Rapoport, S.I. Cerebral 
metabolism of plasma [ 14 C]palmitate in awake, adult rat: Subcellular 
localization. Neuro chem Res 13:21-29, 1988. 

Hartig, P.R.; Evans, M.J.; Krohn, A.M.; Leder, S.A.; Sze, P.C.; and 
Staffers, D.A. [ IJLSD binding to serotonin and dopamine receptors 
in bovine caudate membranes. Neurochem Int 7:699-707, 1985a. 

Hartig, P.R.; Scheffel, U.; Frost, J.J.; and Wagner, H.N., Jr. In vivo 

125 

binding of I-LSD to serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors in mouse brain. Life 
Sci 37:657-664, 1985b. 

Heimer, L.; Alheid, G.F.; and Zaborszky, L. Basal ganglia. In: Paxinos, 
G., ed. The Rat Nervous System. Vol. 1. Forebrain and Miclbrain. 
Sydney: Academic Press, 1985. pp. 37-86. 

Heym, J., and Jacobs, B.L. Serotonergic mechanisms of hallucinogenic 
drug effects. Monogr Neural Sci 13:55-81, 1987. 

Heym, J., and Jacobs, B.L. 5-HT 2 agonist’activity as a common action of 
hallucinogens. In: Rech, R.H., and Gudelsky, G.A., eds. 5-HI 
Agonists as Psychoactive Drugs. Ann Arbor, MI: NPP Books, 1988. 
pp. 95-106. 

Hoffman, B.J., and Mezey, E. Distribution of serotonin 5-HT, c receptor 
mRNA in adult rat brain. FEBS Lett 247:453-462, 1989. 


235 



Hoffman, B .J.; Scheffel, U.; Lever, J.R.; Karpa, M.D.; and Hartig, P.R. 

AH -methyl-2- I-lysergic acid diethylamide, a preferred ligand for in 
vitro and in vivo characterization of serotonin receptors. / Neurochem 
48:115-124, 1987. 

Insel, T.R.; Battaglia, G.; Johannesson, J.; Marra, S.; and De Souza, E.B. 
3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine ("Ecstacy") selectively 
destorys brain serotonin terminals in rhesus monkeys. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 249:713-720, 1989. 

Javitch, J.A.; Strittmatter, S.M.; and Snyder, S.H. Differential 

visualization of dopamine and norepinephrine uptake sites in rat brain 
using [ 3 H]mazindol autoradiography. JNeurosci 5: 1513-1521, 1985. 

Johnson, M.P.; Hoffman, A.J.; Nichols, D.E.; and Mathis, C.A. Binding 

125 

to the serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor by the enantiomers of “I-DOI. 
Neuropharmacology 26:1803-1806, 1987. 

Kimes, A.S.; Sweeney, D.; London, E.D.; and Rapoport, S.I. Palmitate 
incorporation into different brain regions in the awake rat. Brain Res 
274:291-301, 1983. 

Kosofsky, B.E., and Molliver, M.E. The serotoninergic innervation of 
cerebral cortex: Different classes of axon terminals arise from dorsal 
and median raphe nuclei. Synapse 1:153-168, 1987. 

Kovachich, G.B.; Aronson, C.E.; and Brunswick, D.J. Effects of high- 
dose methamphetamine administration on serotonin uptake sites in rat 
brain measured using [ 3 H]cyanoimipramine autoradiography. Brain 
Res 505:123-129, 1989. 

Kuhar, M.J. Receptor localization with the microscope. In: Yamamura, 
H.I.; Enna, S.J.; and Kuhar, M.J., eds. Neurotransmitter Receptor 
Binding. New York: Raven Press, 1985. pp. 153-176. 

Kuhar. M.J., and Aghajanian, G.K. Selective accumulation of 

3 H-serotonin by nerve terminals of raphe neurons: An autoradiography 
study. Nature New Biol 241:187-189, 1973. 

Kuhar, M.J., and De Souza, E.B. Autoradiographic imaging: Localization 
of binding sites other than neurotransmitter receptors. In: Ottoson, D., 
and Rostene, W., eds. Visualization of Brain Functions. New York: 
Stockton Press, 1989. pp. 57-66. 

Kuhar, M.J., and Unnerstall, J.R. Receptor autoradiography. In: 
Yamamura, H.I.; Enna, S.J.; and Kuhar, M.J., eds. Methods in 
Neurotransmitter Receptor Binding Analysis. New York: Raven Press, 
1990. pp. 177-218. 

Kuhar, M.J.; De Souza, E.B.; and Unnerstall, J.R. Neurotransmitter 
receptor mapping by autoradiography and other methods. Arum Rev 
Neurosci 9:27-59, 1986. 


236 



Kuhar, M.J.; Lloyd, D.G.; Appel, N.; and Kuhar, M.J. Imaging receptors 
by autoradiography: Computer-assisted approaches. J Chem 
Neuroanat 4:319-327, 1991. 

Kung, H.F. Radiopharmaceuticals for CNS receptor imaging with 
SPECT. Int J Radiat Appl Instrum [B] 7:85-92, 1990. 

Lever, J.R.; Dannals, R.F.; Wilson, A.A.; Ravert, H.T.; Scheffel, U.; 
Hoffman, B.J.; Hartig, P.R.; Wong, D.F.; and Wagner, H.F., Jr. 
Synthesis and in vivo characterization of D-(+)-(Nl-[ u C]methyl)- 

2- Br-LSD: A radioligand for positron emission tomographic studies of 
serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors. Int J Radiat Appl Instrum [B] 16:697-704, 
1989. 

Leysen, J.E.; Eens, A.; Gommeren, W.; Van Gompel, P.; Wynants, J.; 
and Janssen, P.A.J. Non-serotonergic [ 3 H]ketanserin binding sites in 
striata; membranes are associated with a dopac release system on 
dopaminergic nerve endings. Eur J Pharmacol 134:373-375, 1987. 
Lyon, R.A.; Davis, K.H.; and Titeler, M. 3 H-DOB (4-bromo-2, 5- 

dimethoxyphenylisopropyl-amine) labels a guanyl nucleotide-sensitive 
state of cortical 5-HT 2 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 31:194-199, 
1987. 

MacLean, P.D. Fiber systems of the forebrain. In: Paxinos, G., ed. The 
Rat Nervous System. Vol. 1. Forebrain and Midbrain. Sydney: 
Academic Press, 1985. pp. 417-440. 

Madras, B.K.; Spealman, R.D.; Fahey, M.A.; Neumeyer, J.L.; Saba, J.K.; 
and Millus, R.A. Cocaine receptors labeled by [ 3 H]26-carbomethoxy- 

3- (4-fhiorophenyl)tropane. Mol Pharmacol 36:518-524, 1989. 
McKenna, D.J., and Saavedra, J.M. Autoradiography of LSD and 

2,5-dimethoxyphenyl-isopropylamine psychomimetics demonstrates 
regional, specific cross-displacement in the rat brain. Eur J Pharmacol 
142:313-315, 1987. 

McKenna, D. J.; Nazarali, A. J.; Hoffman, A.J.; Nichols, D.E.; Mathis, 
C.A.; and Saavedra, J.M. Common receptors for hallucinogens in rat 
brain: A comparative autoradiographic study using [ I]-LSD and 

125 

[ I]DOI, a new psychomimetic radioligand. Brain Res 476:45-56, 
1989. 

McTavish, D., and Heel, R.C. Dexfenfluramine: A review of its 

pharmacological properties and therapeutic potential in obesity. Drugs 
43:713-733, 1992. 

Meibach, R.C.; Maayani, S.; and Green, J.P. Characterization and 
radioautography of [ H]LSD binding by rat brain slices in vitro: The 
effect of 5-hydroxytryptamine. Eur J Pharmacol 67:371-382, 1980. 


237 



Molineaux, S.M.; Jessell, T.M.; Axel, R.; and Julius, D. 5-HT receptor is 
a prominent serotonin receptor subtype in the central nervous system. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:6793-6797, 1989. 

Molliver, D.C., and Molliver, M.E. Anatomic evidence for a neurotoxic 
effect of (+)-fenfluramine upon serotonergic projections in the rat. 
Brain Res 511:165-168, 1990. 

Nakada, M.T.; Wieczorek, C.M.; and Rainbow, T.C. Localization and 

125 

characterization by quantitative autoradiography of [ “I] LSD binding 
sites in rat brain. Neurosci Lett 49:13-18, 1984. 

Nariai, T.; DeGeorge, J.J.; Greig, N.H.; and Rapoport, S.I. In vivo 
incorporation of [9,10- H]-palmitate into a rat metastatic brain-tumor 
model. J Neurosurg 74:643-649, 1991a. 

Nariai, T.; DeGeorge, J.J.; Lamour, Y. ; and Rapoport, S.I. In vivo brain 
incorporation of [l- l4 C]arachidonate in awake rats, with or without 
cholinergic stimulation, following unilateral lesioning of nucleus 
basalis magnocellularis. Bruin Res 559:1-9, 1991 b. 

Nichols, D.E., and Oberlender, R. Structure-activity relationships of 
MDMA-like substances. In: Asghar, K., and De Souza, E., eds. 
Pharmucology and Toxicology of Amphetamine and Related Designer 
Drugs. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 

94. DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)89-1640. Washington, DC: Supt. of 
Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1989. pp. 1-29." 

Niznik, H.B.; Grigoriadis, D.E.; Pri-Bar, I.; Buchman, O.; and Seeman, 

P. Dopamine D 2 receptors selectively labeled by a benzamine 
neuroleptic: [ Hj-TM-09151-2. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch 
Pharmacol 329:333-343, 1985. 

Noronha, J.G.; Bell, J.M.; and Rapoport, S.I. Quantitative brain 

autoradiography of [9,10- Hjpalmitic acid incorporation into brain 
lipids. J Neurosci Res 26: 196-208, 1990. 

O'Hearn, E.; Battaglia, G.; De Souza, E.B.; Kuhar, M.J.; and Molliver, 
M.E. Methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA) and methylenedioxy¬ 
methamphetamine (MDMA) cause ablation of serotonergic axon 
terminals in forebrain: Immunohistochemical evidence. J Neurosci 
8:2788-2803, 1988. 

Palacios, J.M.; Niehoff, D.L.; and Kuhar, M.J. [ 3 H]Spiperone binding 
sites in brain: Autoradiographic localization of multiple receptors. 
Brain Res 213:277-289, 1981. 

Pazos, A.; Cortes, R.; and Palacios, J.M. Quantitative autoradiographic 
mapping of serotonin receptors in the rat brain. II. Serotonin-2 
receptors. Brain Res 346:231-249, 1985. 


238 



Pearson, R.C.A.; Brodal, P.; Gatter, K.C.; and Powell, T.P.S. The 

organization of the connections between the cortex and the claustrum 
in the monkey. Bruin Res 234:435-441, 1982. 

Peroutka, S.J., and Snyder, S.H. Multiple serotonin receptors: Differential 
binding of [ H] 5-hydroxytryptamine, [ H] lysergic acid diethylamide 
and [ 3 H]spiroperidol. Mol Pharmacol 16:687-699, 1979. 

Ricuarte, G.; Bryan, G.; Strauss, L.; Seiden, L.S.; and Schuster, C.R. 
Hallucinogenic amphetamine selectively destroys brain serotonin 
nerve terminals. Science 229:153-163, 1985. 

Robinson, P.J.; Noronha, J.; DeGeorge, J.J.; Freed, L.M.; Nariai, T.; and 
Rapoport, S.L A quantitative method for measuring regional in vivo 
fatty acid incorporation into and turnover within brain phospholipids: 
Review and critical analysis. Brain Res Rev 17:187-214, 1992. 

Rowland, N.E., and Carlton, J. Neurobiology of an anorectic drug: 
Fenfluramine. Prog Neurobiol 27:13-62,1986. 

Sanders-Bush, E., and Breeding, M. Choroid plexus epithelial cells in 
primary culture: A model of 5-HT, c receptor activation by 
hallucinogenic drugs. Psychopharmacology 105:340-346, 1991. 

Sanders-Bush, E.; Tsutsumi, M.; and Burris, K.D. Serotonin receptors 
and phosphatidylinositol turnover. Ann NY Acad Sci 600:224-236, 
1990. 

Scheffel, U.; Dannals, R.F.; Cline, E.J.; Ricuarte, G.A.; Carroll, F.I.; 
Abraham, P.; Lewin, A.H.; and Kuhar, M.J. [ 123/125 I]RTI-55, an in vivo 
label for the serotonin transporter. Synapse 11: 134-139, 1992. 

Slater, P., and Patel, S. Autoradiographic distribution of serotonin, 
receptors in rat brain. Eur J Pharmacol 92:297-298, 1983. 

Smith, C.B.; Crane, A.M.; Kadekara, M.; Agranoff, B.W.; and Sokoloff, 

L. Stimulation of protein synthesis and glucose utilization in the 
hypoglossal nucleus induced by axotomy. J Neurosci 4:2489-2496, 
19847 

Smith, C.B.; Deibler, G.E.; Eng, N.; Schmidt, K.; and Sokoloff, L. 
Measurement of local cerebral protein synthesis in vivo: Influence of 
recycling of amino acids derived from protein degradation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 85:9341-9345, 1988. 

Sokoloff, L. Application of quantitative autoradiography to the 

measurement of biochemical processes in vivo. In: Reivich, M., and 
Alavi, A., eds. Positron Emission Tomography. New York: Alan R. 
Liss, 1985. pp. 1-42. 

Stefanini, E.; Marchisio, A.M.; Devoto, P.; Vernaleone, F.; Collu, R.; and 
Spano, P.F. Sodium-dependent interaction of benzamides with 
dopamine receptors. Brain Res 198:229-233, 1980. 


239 



Steinbusch, H.W.M. Distribution of serotonin-immunoreactivity in the 
central nervous system of the rat-cell bodies and terminals. 
Neuroscience 6:557-618, 1981. 

Teitler, M.; Leonhardt, S.; Weisberg, E.L.; and Hoffman, B.J. 

4-[ I]Iodo-(2,5-dimethoxy)phenylisopropylamine and [ HJketanserin 
labeling of 5-hydroxytryptamine 2 (5-HT 2 ) receptors in mammalian 
cells transfected with a rat 5-HT 2 cDNA: Evidence for multiple states 
and not multiple 5HT 2 receptor subtypes. Mol Pharmacol 38:594-598, 
1990. 

Ter-Pogossian, M.M. Positron emission tomography instrumentation. In: 
Reivich, M., and Alavi, A., eds. Positron Emission Tomography. New 
York: Alan R. Liss, 1985. pp. 43-61. 

Titeler, M.; Lyon, R.A.; and Glennon, R.A. Radioligand binding 
evidence implicates the brain 5-HT 2 receptor subtype as a site of 
action for LSD and phenylisoproplyamine hallucinogens. 
Psychopharmacology 94:213-216, 1988. 

Tone, 0.; Miller, J.C.; Bell, J.M.; and Rapoport, S.I. Regional cerebral 
palmitate incorporation following transient bilateral carotid artery 
occlusion in awake gerbils. Stroke 18:1120-1127, 1987. 

Wakabayashi, S.; Freed, L.M.; Bell, J.M.; and Rapoport, S.I. Fatty acid 
incorporation into brain lipids after enucleation in the rat. Tr Am Soc 
Neurochem 23:147, 1992. 

Wilhite, B.L.; Teyler, T.J.; and Hendricks, C. Functional relations of the 
rodent claustral-entorhinal-hippocampal system. Brain Res 365:54-60, 
1986. 

Wong, D.F.; Lever, J.R.; Hartig, P.R.; Dannals, R.F.; Villemagne, V.; 
Hoffman, B.J.; Wilson, A.A.; Ravert, H.T.; Links, J.M.; Scheffel, U.; 
and Wagner, H.N., Jr. Localization of serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors in 
living human brain by positron emission tomography using 
N1 -([ 11 C]-methyl)-2-Br-LSD. Synapse 1:393-398, 1987. 


AUTHOR 

Nathan M. Appel, Ph.D. 

Biologist 

Division of Research and Testing 

Office of Research Resources 

Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 

Food and Drug Administration 

8301 Muirkirk Road 

Laurel, MD 20708 


240 



Hallucinogens Acting at 5-HT 
Receptors: Toward a Mechanistic 
Understanding at Atomic 
Resolution 

Harel Weinstein, Daqun Zhang, and Juan A. Ballesteros 


INTRODUCTION 

The cumulative scientific evidence, including new data discussed at the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) technical review meeting and 
presented elsewhere in this chapter, suggests that entire classes of 
compounds which elicit the complex array of psychotomimetic responses 
classifying them as hallucinogens shark specific actions on 5-hydroxy- 
tryptamine (5-HT) receptors and bind to 5-HT binding sites (for some 
additional recent reviews see Glennon 1990; Glennon et al. 1991; 

Peroutka 1991; Weinstein and Osman ‘ 1990a ; Weinstein et al. 1987). The 
correlation between affinity for 5-HT 2 -type binding sites and receptors 
and the doses required to elicit hallucinogenic responses in humans has 
been demonstrated repeatedly (Glennon 1984, 1990). Of special interest 
in this context are si mi larities and differences in the pharmacological 
profiles of compounds belonging to the various families of chemical 
structures that yield hallucinogenic agents, that is, tryptamine (TRYP) 
derivatives (including the hallucinogenic N,N,-dimethyltryptamine), 
ergolines (including d-lysergic acid diethylamide [d-LSD]), and 
derivatives of phenylethylamine and phenylisopropylamine (including 
mescaline, l-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane [DOM], 
and methylenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA]). These families of 
compounds are active both on the 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2 receptor systems 
(Weinstein and Osman 1990a), but hallucinogenic action has been 
connected with partial agonism on 5-HT 2 receptors (Sanders-Bush et al. 
1988) and more recently on 5-HT, c receptors (Burris et al. 1991). 

If one can understand what in the structures of the ligands is most directly 
involved in receptor activation and what receptor activation involves in 
terms of specific changes in molecular structure resulting from ligand 
binding, then one can design drugs to target such receptors and activate or 
inactivate them, as required. The actions of any other receptor ligands, 
the hallucinogens among #em, then could be understood and 


241 



countermanded by such specifically targeted and designed drugs. In 
addition to novel understanding of cellular signaling processes at the 
molecular level, the practical significance of this insight is therefore 
inherent to the potential it offers for targeted molecular design. Such 
designed compounds should provide new tools for investigation of the 
mechanisms of actions of hallucinogenic compounds and a promise of 
new therapeutic and preventive modalities. 

The design of effective therapeutic agents with predetermined actions at 
specific receptors requires solid information on the pharmacology of the 
target compounds. A detailed understanding of the processes of drug- 
receptor interaction and the mechanisms involved in the evolution of 
pharmacological responses elicited by ligand-receptor interactions is also 
required (Jensen et al. 1990). All of these requirements are essential 
elements in rational design (Weinstein and Osman 1989a, 1989/?, 1990 b; 
Weinstein et al. 1987) and are subjects of the authors’ studies (Weinstein 
and Osman 1990a; Weinstein et al. 1988). The resulting insights are 
summarized elsewhere; recent developments are reviewed briefly in this 
chapter. These insights and developments constitute the first steps in a 
novel understanding of the relationships between ligand structure, 
receptor structure, and receptor response. 

This novel understanding is achieved at an atomic level of resolution 
from the analysis, modeling, and simulation of molecular mechanisms of 
drug-receptor interaction. Such computational simulations have become 
possible because of new information available on the molecular and 
structural biology of 5-HT receptors (Adham et al. 1992; Demchyshyn et 
al. 1992; Guan et al. 1992; Hen 1992; Julius et al. 1988, 1989; Shih et al. 
1991) combined with insights from the molecular pharmacology of 
hallucinogens and other 5-HT receptor ligands (Mylecharane et al. 1989; 
Peroutka 1991). 

An initial focus of the authors’ work in the molecular and structural 
biology of the 5-HT receptors has been the computational modeling of 
the transmembrane helix bundle of the serotonin receptors of the 5-HT 2 
subtype. This chapter describes success in the first steps of constructing 
macromolecular models of the membranal portions of the receptors 
because of a redefinition and refinement of structural criteria and 
functional considerations. These models are used to simulate 
computationally the effects of some receptor ligands binding inside the 
structure of the model receptor proteins under various conditions in order 
to explore the mechanisms of receptor activation. 


242 



The first aim of these computational simulations is to investigate the 
structural correlates of properties that affect the receptor proteins 
function. The current literature contains ample examples for simulations 
of this kind, usually performed on cytosolic proteins and water-soluble 
systems and leading to targeted experimental probing (e.g., through 
mutation studies) (Aqvist and Warshel 1992; Karplus and Petsko 1990; 
Levitt and Sharon 1988; Pascual-Ahuir et al. 1991; van Gunsteren et al. 
1992; Weinstein 1986; Weinstein and Mehler 1992; Weinstein and 
Osman 1989b, 1990b). 

The computational exploration of membrane protein systems is more 
complex because of methodological difficulties and uncertainties related 
to the representation of the protein in the membrane environment and the 
nature of the embedding of the entire system in a surrounding aqueous 
solvent (Ahlstrom et al. 1989; Milik et al. 1992; Stigter et al. 1992; 
Wendoloski et al. 1989; Xing and Scott 1992). Nevertheless, cautious 
computational studies performed on the transmembrane bundle 
components of the receptor structures, combined with the experimental 
probing, can be used as described below to define molecular correlates of 
pharmacological efficacy. In the context of computational simulations of 
receptor function, these insights can be evaluated further with known 
ligands exhibiting a range of efficacies at the 5-HT receptor subtypes. 

Difficulties in the accurate description of the biophysical mechanisms 
further increase the importance of experimental validation of the 
inferences emerging from the computational simulations. Such validation 
depends on a concomitant probing of all the resulting pharmacological 
models and predictions in collaborative efforts, including experimental 
determination of the pharmacological profiles of compounds acting at the 
5-HT receptor subtypes. As illustrated by examples from recent 
publications, the pharmacological assays used in the authors’ 
collaborative studies have included measurements of responses mediated 
by the 5-HT,A, receptor coupledto adenylate cyclase in membrane 
preparations from rat hippocampus (DeVivo and Maayani 1990), the 
contraction of the isolated rabbit aorta mediated by 5-HT 2 receptors (Ben- 
Harari et al. 1991; Christ et al. 1990; Mahle et al. 1990), and the response 
to 5-HT[C receptors coupled to the hydrolysis of phosphatidyl inositol in 
selected areas of the brain (Burris et al. 1991). In addition, the 
collaborative experimental studies probe the modulation of agonist 
binding in various brain sections by receptor-guanosine triphosphate 
binding protein (G-protein) interactions to learn about the relations 
between receptor selectivity in vitro and the likelihood that the agonists 


243 



will elicit responses on multiple receptors in the brain (Yocca et al. 1990). 
The results are analyzed for clues on the chemical determinants required 
for recognition (binding) and activation (efficacy) for each of the two 
receptors. 

The combination of computational simulation studies and experimental 
verifications is expected to yield a quantitative relationship between the 
molecular structures of such ligands and their efficacy in activating the 
receptor. Such a mechanistic understanding of structure-function 
relationships will lead to new molecular structures that will be selective 
for 5-HT receptor subtypes and have a predicted degree of activity on 
these receptors. The following sections provide a brief overview of 
recent results from such studies. 


CONSTRUCTION AND EXPLORATION OF MOLECULAR 
MODELS FOR THE TRANSMEMBRANE PORTION 
OF 5-HT RECEPTORS 

Identification of an Appropriate Template 

The construction of molecular models for the transmembrane region of 
the 5-HT receptor subtypes by homology modeling and energy 
refinement requires specific structural templates. The molecular 
architecture of bacteriorhodopsin (BR) and the photosynthetic reaction 
centers (PRCs) is commonly regarded as a model for membrane proteins 
(Rees et al. 1989). In particular, BR has been offered as a structural 
template for the three-dimensional (3-D) structure of membrane receptors 
that are functionally coupled to regulatory guanine nucleotide-binding 
proteins (G-proteins) (Findlay and Eliopoulos 1990). 

More recently, specific molecular models of such G-protein coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) were constructed on the basis of the functional and 
structural relation of rhodopsin to BR and the sequence homology 
between rhodopsin and the GPCR (Dahl et al. 1991; Hibert et al. 1991). 
Such models of GPCRs suffer from the apparent lack of any significant 
degree of sequence homology between the seven transmembranal helices 
(TMHs) of BR and the portions in the sequence of the various GPCRs 
that are considered their transmembrane domain (TMDs). However, 
strong arguments have been proposed in favor of the structural relation 
between BR and the opsins and, hence; the GPCR (Lefkowitz 1991). 


244 



These arguments prompted the authors’ investigation of the possibility 
that the true sequence homology, including any existing similarity in the 
distribution of kink-inducing proline (Pro) among the helices, might have 
been obscured by the assumption that the TMHs maintained their 
sequential order from BR in the evolution of the mammalian proteins. 
With a definition of the TMHs in the neurotransmitter GPCRs guided by 
hydropathicity predictions and additional criteria used to define the span 
of each helix, an optimal alignment is achieved for each pair of sequences 
calculated with no gaps allowed in the matching (Pardo et al. 1992). This 
proposed alignment reveals considerable homology between the TMHs in 
BR and those in GPCRs, if the sequential order of the helices is ignored. 
The findings point to the possibilities of modifying the BR template to 
account for the coixect packing of the helices in the tertiary structures of 
GPCRs. 

This strategy was followed in the construction of a 3-D model of the 
neurotransmitter GPCR of 5-HT 2 on the basis of specific interhelical 
interactions such as those observed in BR and in PRC as well as on 
additional criteria. The main advantage of the resulting modified 
template for the modeling of GPCRs based on the nonsequential 
homology to BR is that it is possible to incoiporate several additional 
criteria in the construction of the helix bundle at the level of protein 
sequence comparisons as well as at the level of helix-helix and helix- 
membrane interactions. Such considerations (described in the next 
section) should improve the quality of 3-D models of GPCRs and 
facilitate inferences on the mechanisms by which these proteins perform 
their biological functions. 


ANALYSIS AND REFINEMENT OF THE CRITERIA 
FOR PREDICTING THE STRUCTURE AND RELATIVE 
ORIENTATION OF TRANSMEMBRANE HELICES IN MODELS 
OF THE NEUROTRANSMITTER RECEPTOR 

The membrane-spanning domain of the serotonin GPCRs is considered to 
share at least the general topology of a seven-transmembrane helix bundle 
observed in BR. As a result of the significant homologies that were 
found (as described above, by allowing for a rearrangement of the helix- 
bundle template), the strategy for building the model for the 5-HT 2 
receptor has been to construct hypotheses concerning helix-helix 
interactions, their orientations, and their arrangement in bundles 
surrounded by lipid based on inferences and observations from the 


245 



3.5 angstrom (A) resolution structure of BR (Henderson et al. 1990). 
Criteria resulting from such considerations are being tested against the 
2.3 A resolution Structure of the PRC from Rhodobacter viridis 
(Deisenhofer and Michael 1989). 

These comparisons led to a reevaluation of some of the methods available 
for the prediction and relative orientations of membrane-embedded 
a- helices (Ballesteros and Weinstein 1992a). The authors found that 
methods used in the construction of helical transmembrane domains 
could be misleading; e.g., by assuming that the arginine (Arg) and lysine 
(Lys) residues that appear preferentially at the cytoplasmic end of the 
transmembrane helices of BR and PRC must be inside the cell because of 
their polar nature. More careful structural considerations would place 
only the ends of these residues close to the phospholipid headgroups of 
the membrane, with the rest of the residues inside the lipid portion. Thus, 
the intramembrane helix “gains” 1 to 1.5 turns, and the span is redefined 
by 3 to 7 residues (Ballesteros and Weinstein 1992a). Because the 
orientation of the p-carbon atom positions the Arg-Lys side chains in a 
direction pointing from the C-terminus toward the N-terminus of the 
helix, the inaccuracy in determining the helix span caused by the Arg-Lys 
residues affects the helices traversing the membrane from inside to 
outside (i.e., N-temiinal to C-terminal) more than it affects those oriented 
inward. 

Consequently, the inaccuracy can lead to significant errors in packing the 
helices against each other in the transmembrane bundle and thus induce 
errors in the construction of models for these structures. Therefore, these 
considerations will have a significant effect on the results of methods 
commonly used in constructing such models, including the criteria based 
on hydrophobicity profiles, hydrophobic moments, helix amphiphilicity, 
and charge neutralization. 

Another consideration centers on the structural role of the kinks induced 
by the presence of Pro residues in the a-helix. (For some recent reviews 
of these structural properties of Pro-containing helices and their possible 
consequences for protein function, see Mac Arthur and Thornton 1991 
and Williams and Deber 1991.) Because the region of the Pro-induced 
kink does not have a 3.6 amino acids/turn periodicity, one would expect a 
twisting of the faces before/after the Pro-kink compared with the case of a 
straight helix. Such an effect would vitiate the profiles for amphiphilicity 
and hydrophobic moments of Pro-containing helices because the 


246 



algorithms for the calculation of these properties assume that the helices 
are regular and straight. 

Yet, such profiles are commonly used for the prediction/modeling of 
transmembrane helices without special attention to the effects of Pro- 
induced kinks. Consequently, the modeling approaches will require 
modification according to the authors’ findings. The proposed 
refinements from the considerations presented above overcome some of 
the shortcomings inherent in the use of the above-mentioned methods; 
they constitute an additional guide for identifying the cytoplasmic end of 
a transmembrane helix. Importantly, such criteria can be explored 
quantitatively from computational simulations after a specific mechanistic 
model has been proposed. 

The authors have recently described such a model for a dynamic 
activation mechanism in the function of a transmembrane protein based 
on the structural properties induced by the presence of Pro residues in key 
transmembrane helices (Ballesteros and Weinstein 1992 a,b). The model 
takes advantage of the following properties of the kink region: A Pro 
residue within a helix disrupts two 1-4 backbone H-bonds: the 
C=O i . 4 ...CN 1 due to the imide functional group replacing the amine and 
the C=Oi_ 3 .....HN 1+1 due to the axial kink. This can generate up to three 
putatively H-bond-free reactive sites around the kink region, the C=Os 
being unusually exposed (Woolfson and Williams 1990). Most charged 
and polar side chains in transmembrane domains are likely to be involved 
in extensive H-bonding because of the low dielectric constant of the 
transmembrane domain. Consequently, the three types of reactive sites in 
the backbone should be expected to make up a significant percentage of 
the total number of free H-bonding donors or acceptors within the 
transmembrane region. 

The involvement of such available polar sites in the function of the 
proteins has been illustrated recently in the structure of the bacterial 
aspartate receptor where the crystal structure of the binding domain 
shows the ligand binding site to include the -C=0 groups exposed by a 
Pro-induced kink (Milburn et al. 1991) and by the structure of a bacterial 
Ca 2+ -channel crystallized in nonpolar solvents (Karle et al. 1991). 

The putative gating mechanism for a channel formed by the 
transmembrane arrangement of a bundle of helical leucine (Leu)- 
zervamicin peptides that the authors proposed recently (Ballesteros and 
Weinstein 1992b) is based on the likely dynamic properties of the 


247 



structure containing Pro-induced kinks in a transmembrane helix. These 
dynamic properties are induced by the Pro-kink which, as shown below 
from a molecular dynamics simulation of the 5-HT 2 receptor model, is 
likely to be involved in the propagation of the structural response of the 
receptor protein to ligand binding. Thus, the dynamic mechanism 
supported by the special structure around a Pro site in a helix is likely to 
be involved in the relay of information about ligand binding into the 
transmembrane structure connected to the effector (i.e., a G-nucleotide 
binding regulatory protein). This mechanism requires a low activation 
energy as illustrated by the structure and dynamics of the Pro-containing 
helix of melittin (Bazzo et al. 1988; Pastore et al. 1989) and thus provides 
a reasonable mode for the transduction of a signal produced by ligand 
binding. Such mechanistic hypotheses for receptor activation, anchored 
in the structural and dynamic properties of a 3-D model of the receptor 
protein, are amenable to exploration by the methods of theoretical 
biophysics used in the computational simulations described briefly below. 

A Three-Dimensional Structural Model of the 5-HT 2 Receptor 

The authors have constructed a complete 3-D model of the TMD of the 
5-HT 2 receptor at atomic resolution. Preliminary molecular dynamics 
simulations also have been carried out on the receptor model and its 
complexes with ligands, including full agonists, partial agonists, and 
antagonists. The results suggest an activation mechanism of the receptor 
based on the structural response of the receptor to the binding of ligands. 
Both the local effects at the recognition site, which produce the activation 
trigger, and the distal effects, which are propagated from the recognition 
site into the receptor region responsible for coupling to the effector, are 
identifiable from the analysis of the dynamic behavior of the ligand- 
receptor complex. 

The 5-HT 2 receptor model was constructed based on specific criteria from 
the following considerations; ligand, structure-affinity relationships 
developed for pharmacologically well-characterized ligands, structural 
features of membrane proteins for which structures are available at atomic 
resolution (BR and PRC-see above), and results of studies on the 
molecular biology of GPCRs. 

The construction of the 5-HT 2 receptor model and the first computational 
simulation of the dynamic behavior of the transmembrane helix bundle in 
the presence and absence of ligand bound at the putative recognition site 
are described in detail elsewhere (Zhang and Weinstein 1993). The main 


248 



considerations in the construction of the model and the qualitative 
features of the results from the computational simulations are outlined 
briefly here. 

Ligand Binding Site. As discussed in detail elsewhere (Weinstein and 
Osman 1990a), the nature of the interaction between ligands and 
recognition sites in the various subtypes of 5-HT receptors is expected to 
be different, consonant with the differences in ligand selectivity of the 
receptor subtypes. The main molecular property related to recognition at 
5-HT 1A receptors was shown to be the directional character of the 
electrostatic potential generated by the ligands in the molecular region 
corresponding to the indole in 5-HT. The corresponding recognition site 
in the receptor was predicted to have properties of a positively charged 
(imidazolium) form of the side chain of a histidine residue (Mercier et al. 
1988, 1989; Weinstein and Osman 1989 b, 1990 a,b). 

From studies of model proteins incorporating the type of residues 
proposed for the recognition site in the structural arrangement required to 
be selective for 5-HT 1A ligands, the mechanism of recognition at the 
5 -HT, a receptor was shown to be electrostatic and conducive to a 
triggering of the receptor response through the change in the electronic 
structure of the imidazolium recognition site when it interacts with an 
activating ligand (agonist) (Weinstein and Osman 1990//). This effect 
was shown to induce a proton transfer from the ring to a neighboring 
residue to which it can be hydrogen bonded in the resting state (Mercier 
et al. 1988, 1989; Weinstein and Osman 1990 b). 

However, a different model was proposed for selective recognition at the 
5-HT 2 receptors based on structural details of 5-HT-binding peptides 
(Weinstein and Osman 1990a). The recognition site in the 54-HT 2 
receptor was thus proposed to consist of two aromatic residues separated 
by a hydrophilic residue. 

In contrast to the model for 5-HT, A , the recognition was considered to be 
based on the interaction of neutral molecules with the stabilization 
provided by dispersion forces (Weinstein and Osman 1990a and 
references therein). These inferences front structure-activity relationships 
(SAR) and specific calculations of molecular complexes (see Weinstein 
and Osman 1990a and references therein) were incorporated in the 
cons traction of the receptor model. 


249 



Putative residues of the ligand binding site in the 5-HT 2 receptor 
sequence were determined according to the requirements for matching 
recognition sites in the ligand binding pocket based on specific models 
proposed from SAR studies (Glennon et al. 1991; Weinstein and Osman 
1990a); the specific sequence of amino acids in the receptor subtype and 
its relation to BR (Pardo et al. 1992) and the other 5-HT receptors 
(Adham et al. 1992; Hartig 1989; Hen 1992), and published results of 
GPCR structures modification using methods of molecular biology, 
including point mutations and chimeric receptors of various types (Guan 
et al. 1992; Shih et al. 1991; Strader et al. 1989). The positions of the 
putative residues of the ligand binding site were used as constraints in 
positioning the TMHs relative to one another. 

The ligand binding sites are assumed to be aspartic acid (Asp) 133 
(TMH3) to interact with the protonated amine group of the ligand; side 
chains of phenylalanine (Phe)-218 and Phe-222 (TMH 5) to interact with 
the aromatic rings of the ligand; methionine (Met)-313 (TMH 6) to match 
the region of the ligand corresponding to Nl, C7 of the indole ring in 
5-HT; and serine (Ser)-350 (TMH 7) to interact with the region 
corresponding to the 5-OH of 5-HT. 

Assembly of the Helix Bundle. With 5-HT as the template of ligands, 
TMH 3,5, 6, and 7 were positioned so that the residues in the putative 
ligand binding site could interact with the key groups of 5-HT as 
mentioned above. These initial positions of the TMHs were refined by 
the guideline of maximizing interactions between conserved residues. 

The position of TMH 2 is determined further by possible interaction 
between conserved residues, specifically Asp-98 (TMH 2), Ser-140 
(TMH 3), and asparagine (Asn)-354 (TMH 7). The position of TMH 1 is 
determined by allowing for an interaction between Asn-79 (TMH 1) and 
histidine (His)-143 (TMH 3), which also interacts with Asp-98 (TMH 2). 
Such a positioning of TMH 1 relative to TMH 2 is based on the 
assumption that conserved residues in a receptor sequence play an 
important role in determining the structure and function of the receptor 
and that their interaction is essential for accomplishing this function. 
Consequently, the conserved residues, like the polar residues, were 
placed in the interior of the assembled helix bundle to the fullest extent 
possible. 

Molecular Dynamics Simulations. After the assembly of the seven 
TMHs, energy minimization and dynamics simulation were run to 
optimize the structure of the model. Average structures were obtained 


250 



from the simulations, energy was minimized, and then the average 
structures were used as the starting structures for studies on the 
interaction between the receptor model and ligands of the receptor. 

Ligands were roughly docked into the putative ligand binding site with 
nuclear overhauser effect (NOE)-type constraints to the ligand 
recognition sites. Molecular dynamics simulations were applied again to 
obtain the structure of model/ligand complexes and to study the 
interactions between ligands and the model. 

All the molecular - dynamics simulations on the model were performed 
with the CHARMm program, following protocols similar to those 
described in other publications (Mehler and Weinstein 1990; Pascual- 
Ahuir et al. 1991) but with a fixed dielectric permittivity constant of 
e = 4. The energy-minimized average (more than 20 picoseconds [ps]) of 
a final equilibrated structure was taken as a starting structure for studies 
of the interaction between the receptor model and various ligands. 

The detailed analysis of the ligand-receptor complexes is expected to 
yield information on the mode of ligand recognition expressed as the 
physicochemical nature of the complex between the ligand and the 
recognition sites as well as on the mechanism by which the response of 
the receptor to ligand binding is triggered and then propagated toward the 
effector. The resulting activation mechanism from such a mode of ligand 
recognition and binding is based on a structural reamangement 
propagated from the recognition site into the receptor protein structure 
connected to the portion that interacts with the effector protein. These 
inferences were explored with the computational simulations of the 
dynamics of the modeled transmembranal region of the 5-HT 2 receptor. 

Dynamics of the Receptor Response to Ligand Binding. The 
conformational changes of the receptor model induced by the interaction 
with ligands were analyzed from the root mean square (mis) deviation of 
the alpha-carbon (C-a) atoms of the complexes with respect to the 
starting structures to obtain information on the structural response of the 
receptor to the binding of the ligand. The preliminary results indicate that 
the patterns of the distribution of rms are different for the three 
complexes of full agonists, partial agonists, and antagonists, suggesting 
that different types of the ligands induce different types or degrees of 
conformational changes of the receptor model (Zhang and Weinstein 
1993). In the results from initial simulations, these conformational 
changes were found to be consistent with experimental results, most 


251 



significantly by their concentration in the region connecting TMHs 
5 and 6. 

Mutation experiments and the pharmacology of chimera from different’ 
receptor subtypes have indicated that the beginning and ending regions of 
the third intracellular loop are important for GPCRs to interact with 
G-proteins and that the regions that affect the binding of the activating 
ligands are the extensions of TMH 5 and TMH 6 in the intracellular side 
(Strader et al. 1989; Kjelsberg et al. 1992). 

Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that the binding of an agonist would 
induce the most significant conformational changes in these two helices 
and that the binding of a partial agonist also would induce conformational 
changes similar to, but less significant than, those induced by an agonist. 
The binding of an antagonist should not induce confoimational changes 
of this kind. All these expectations were met by the first results from the 
computational simulations (Zhang and Weinstein 1993). 

Thus, figure 1 illustrates a comparison between the averaged structures 
obtained from a simulation of the receptor model and a simulation of the 
receptor with a 5-HT ligand in the recognition site described above. The 
initial position of the 5-HT molecule is indicated in the same shade as the 
structure of the receptor without the ligand (light grey), but the molecular 
dynamics run had been performed in the absence of ligand. The 
structures of the helices and the ligand outlined in solid black represent 
the result of the simulation of the receptor-ligand complex. It is evident 
that the position of 5-HT in the recognition pocket changes significantly 
during the simulation (compare the position of the initial [gray] structure 
of 5-HT with that of the final black one). 

Although the interaction with Asp-133 is maintained at the same distance, 
there is considerable rearrangement around the flexible side chain with a 
resulting strengthening of the interactions indicated in the description of 
the recognition site. However, the overall orientation of the indole ring 
remains similar to the starting point, and the planes are nearly parallel. 
This finding is in striking contrast to the results obtained with TRYP as a 
ligand (figure 2), where a “flip” of the indole ring positions the bond 
dipole of the N-H group in the indole in roughly the same position 
relative to the recognition site that the -OH group occupies in the 
complex with 5-HT (Zhang and Weinstein 1993). 


252 



intracellular side 


FIGURE 1. 


Comparison of the structures of the molecular model of 
the transmembrane helix bundle of the 5-HT 2 receptor 
in the absence and presence of 5-HT. The C-a ribbon 
structures of the helices are shown in a view parallel to 
the membrane bilayer. The structures represent the 
results from molecular dynamics simulations (see text) 
of the receptor model without ligand (40 picosecond 
average structure representing 215 picosecond run, in 
shaded gray) and in the presence of 5-HT bound in the 
recognition site (snapshot at 65 picoseconds, in solid 
black). The initial position of 5-HT in the receptor is 
indicated in the gray shade; the position after dynamics 
simulation is shown in solid black. 


253 





FIGURE 2. 


Comparison of the structure of the 5-HT 2 receptor 
model in the presence of different ligands bound 
in the recognition site: 5-HT (snapshot at 65 
picoseconds, in solid black) and TRYP (snapshot at 
115 picoseconds, shaded gray). The view is 
perpendicular to the plane of the membrane, from 
outside the cell. See text and figure I legend for 
other details. 


The structural rearrangement in the helix bundle also is identifiable 
qualitatively from the comparison in figure 1. The Ga ribbons of helices 
1, 2, 3, 4, and 7 are similarly arranged, whereas those of helices 5 and 
6 show clear differences in the lower half pointing toward the cell 
interior. It is noteworthy that the major rearrangements in the structures 
of the two helices occur after the Pro-kink that exists in both. All the 
helices move during the dynamics simulation, but the major changes 
occur only in helices 5 and 6. 

The differences in the structures of these helices in the presence and 
absence of the ligand are recognized in the dynamic averages from the 
results of the simulation, showing that the binding of the ligand has 
induced a force that causes the distortion in the positions of these two 
helices more than for the others in the bundle. The involvement of only 


254 






helices 5 and 6 at this level of comparative analysis (for more extensive 
details and analyses see Zhang and Weinstein 1993) is significant because 
these helices arc the intramembrane ends of the cytoplasmic Loop III that 
constitutes the major structural element in the interaction of the receptor 
with the effector system (Kjelsberg et al. 1992; Strader et al. 1989). 

As a probe of the validity of this receptor model, it is most gratifying that 
the main structural response to ligand binding seems to be in the region 
required for transmission of the signal to the effector system. The strong 
correlation between the structure of this region and ligand binding has 
been demonstrated from mutation studies in the general area of the loop 
(Strader et al. 1987) and has focused more specifically on one residue in 
that region (Kjelsberg et al. 1992). 

Further support for the relation between the structural rearrangement 
caused by the ligand binding in the recognition site and the mechanism of 
receptor activation toward interaction with the effector is provided by the 
correlation the authors observed between the extent of the rearrangement 
and the known pharmacological efficacy of the ligand (Zhang and 
Weinstein 1993). This is illustrated in figure 2, which shows the 
comparison between the receptor helix bundle in the presence of the full 
agonist 5-HT and the partial agonist TRYP. The view of the helix 
bundles in figure 2 is perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. 

Careful inspection reveals that the bundles representing complexes with 
5-HT (solid black) and TRYP (gray) differ little with the exception of 
helix 6. In fact, helix 6 in the TRYP-bound receptor is not significantly 
distorted from its position in the free receptor. Because 5-HT distorts 
helix 6, the superposition shown in figure 2 identifies a difference in that 
region. On the other hand, helix 5 superimposes well from the dynamics 
of the receptors with 5-HT and with TRYP, showing that the distortion 
produced by 5-HT (see above) is similar to that induced by the binding of 
TRYP. Overall, TRYP induces less distortion in the structure of the 
Loop III region than 5-HT does, consonant with its lower efficacy 
indicated by the pharmacological property of partial agonism. 

A computational simulation of the receptor complex with the structurally 
related 5-HT 2 -receptor antagonist gramme (not shown here) is remarkable 
in that no distortion in the average structure of the receptor bundle is 
observed in the key regions of helices 5 and 6 (Zhang and Weinstein 
1993). Similar results are being obtained in preliminary studies with the 
5-HT 2 antagonist ketanserin and with the hallucinogenic DOM, which 
behaves in this simulation in accordance with its pharmacological profile 


255 



as a partial agonist. Therefore, it is clear that a coherent outline of the 
molecular mechanism of ligand recognition and receptor response to 
ligand binding is emerging from the computational simulations with the 
present model of the transmembrane helix bundle of the 5-HT 2 receptor. 
The qualitative features of this mechanism of receptor function at atomic 
resolution are in good agreement with the molecular pharmacology of the 
receptor. 


CONCLUSION 

The major work of probing against experimental data the inferences 
obtained here for the first time from the simulation of the dynamic 
response of a receptor model to the binding of structurally related ligands 
is still ahead. To validate the model and the inferences to produce a 
reliable description of the molecular pharmacology of hallucinogens, it is 
necessary to extend these exciting preliminary findings to agonists, partial 
agonists, and antagonists in different chemical classes and to relate the 
structural effects of ligand binding to a reliable mechanistic hypothesis at 
atomic resolution. Such developments would permit specific 
physicochemical testing of the mechanisms and examination in detail of 
the behavior of hallucinogenic compounds in models of this type for 
other relevant receptor subtypes (e.g., 5-HT lc ). 

These aims constitute only some of the exciting tasks that can be 
addressed by computational simulations with the 3-D receptor model. 
Such projects offer a comprehensive analysis of fundamental aspects of 
mechanisms of drug-receptor interactions and receptor function described 
at atomic resolution and also offer arguably the best hope of interfering 
with and/or exploiting the properties of hallucinogenic substances based 
on rational mechanistic means and specifically designed medications. 


REFERENCES 

Adham, N.; Romanienko, P.; Hartig, P.; Weinshank, R.L.; and Branchek, 
T. The rat 5-HT m receptor is the species homologue of the human 
5 -HT, d beta receptor. Mol Pharmacol 41:1-7, 1992. 

Ahlstrom, P.; Teleman, 0.; and Jonsson, B. Interfacial water studied by 
molecular dynamics simulations. Chim Scripta 29A:97-101, 1989. 

Aqvist, J., and Warshel, A. Computer simulation of the initial proton 
transfer step in human carbonic anhydrase. J Mol Biol 224:7-14, 1992. 


256 



Ballesteros, J.A., and Weinstein, H. Analysis and refinement of criteria 
for predicting the structure and relative orientations of transmembranal 
helical domains. Biophys J 62:107-109, 1992a. 

Ballesteros, J.A., and Weinstein, H. The role of Pro/Hyp-kinks in 

determining the transmembrane helix length and gating mechanism of 
a Leu-zervamicin channel. Biophys J 62:110-111, 19926. 

Bazzo, R.; Tappin, M.J.; Pastore, A.; Harvey, T.S.; Carver, J.A.; and 
Campbell, I.D. The structure of melittin. Eur J Biochem 173:139-146, 
1988. 

Ben-Hararl, R.R.; Dalton, B.A.; Osman, R.; and Maayani, S. Kinetic 
characterization of 5-hydroxytriptamine receptor desensitization in 
isolated guinea-pig trachea and rabbit aorta. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
257:416-424, 1991. 

Burris, K.D.; Breeding, M.; and Sanders-Bush, E. (-i-)Lysergic acid 
diethylamide, but not its nonhallucinogenic congeners, is a potent 
serotonin 5-HT 1C receptor agonist. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 258:891- 
896,1991. 

Christ, G.J.; Goldfarb, J.; and Maayani, S. Receptor-mediated mutual- 
effect amplification elicited by phenylephrine and serotonin in isolated 
rabbit aorta. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 252:500-506, 1990. 

Dahl, S.G.; Edvardsen, 0.; and Sylte, I. Molecular dynamics of dopamine 
at the D 2 receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:8111-8115, 1991. 

Deisenhofer, J., and Michael, H. The photosynthetic reaction center from 
the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas viridis. Science 245:1463- 
1473, 1989. 

Demchyshyn, L.; Sunahara, R.K.; Miller, K.; Teitler, M.; Hoffman, B.J.; 
Kennedy, J.L.; Seeman, P.; van Tol, H.H.M.; and Niznik, H.B. A 
human serotonin 1D receptor variant (5-HT iD beta) encoded by an 
intronless gene on chromosome 6. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:5522- 
5526, 1992. 

DeVivo, M., and Maayani, S. Stimulation and inhibition of adenylyl 
caclase by distinct 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors. Biochem 
Pharmacol 40:1551-1558, 1990. 

Findlay, J., and Eliopoulos, E. Three-dimensional modelling of G 
protein-linked receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 11:492-499, 1990. 

Glennon, R.A. Evidence for 5-HT 2 involvement in the mechanism of 
action of hallucinogenic agents. Life Sci 35:2505-25 11, 1984. 

Glennon, R.A. Do classical hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or 
antagonists 1 Neuropsychopharmacology 3:509-517, 1990. 


257 



Glennon, R.A.; Westkaemper, R.B.; and Bartyzel, P. Medicinal chemistry 
of serotonergic agents. In: Peroutka, S.J., ed. Serotonin Receptor- 
Subtypes: Basic and Clinical Aspects. New York: Wiley-Liss, Inc., 
1991. pp. 19-64. 

Guan, X.-M.; Peroutka, S.J.; and Kobilka, B.K. Identification of a single 
amino acid residue responsible for the binding of a class of beta- 
adrenergic receptor antagonists to 5-HT, A receptors. Mol Pharmacol 
41:695-698, 1992. 

Hartig, P.R. Molecular biology of 5-HT receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
10:64-69, 1989. 

Hen, R. Of mice and flies: Commonalities among 5-HT receptors. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 13:160-165, 1992. 

Henderson, R.; Baldwin, J.M.; Ceska, T.A.; Zemlin, F.; Beckmann, E.; 
and Downing, K.H. Model for the structure of Bacteriorhodopsin 
based on high-resolution electron cryo-microscopy. J MoZ Biol 
213:899-929, 1990. 

Hibert, M.F.; Trumpp-Kallmeyer, S.; Bruinvels, A.; and Hoflack, J. 
Three-dimensional models of neurotransmitter G-binding protein- 
coupled receptors. Mol Pharmacol 40:8-15, 1991. 

Jensen, B.; Jorgensen, F.S.; and Kofod, H., eds. Frontiers in Drug 
Research: Crystallographic and Computational Methods. Alfred 
Benzon Symposia 28. Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1990. 

Julius, D.; Livelli, T.J.; Jessell, T.M.; and Axel, R. Ectopic expression of 
the serotonin 1C receptor and the triggering of malignant 
transformation. Science 244:1057-1062, 1989. 

Julius, D.; MacDermott, A.B.; Axel, R.; and Jessel, T.M. Molecular 
characterization of a functional cDNA encoding the serotonin 1C 
receptor. Science 241:558-564, 1988. 

Karle, I.L.; Flippen-Anderson, J.L.; Adarwalla, S.; and Balaram, P. 

Crystal structure of [Leujzervamicin, a membrane ion channel peptide: 
Implications for gating mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
88:5307-5311, 1991. 

Karplus, M., and Petsko, G.A. Molecular dynamics simulations in 
biology. Nature 347:631-639, 1990. 

Kjelsberg, M.A.; Cotecchia, S.; Ostrowski, J.; Caron, M.G.; and 
Lefkowitz, R.J. Constitutive activation of the alphal B-adrenergic 
receptor by all amino acid substitutions at a single site. J Biol Chem 
267:1430-1433, 1992. 

Lefkowitz, R.J. Variations on a theme. Nature 35 1:353-354, 199 1. 

Levitt, M., and Sharon, R. Accurate simulation of protein dynamics in 
solution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:7557-7561, 1988. 


258 



Mac Arthur, M.W., and Thornton, J.M. Influence of proline residues on 
protein conformation. J Mol Biol 218:397-412, 1991. 

Mahle, C.D.; Weiner, H.L.; Yocca, F.D.; and Maayani, S. Destabilization 
of hormone/receptor/G-protein (H-R-G) ternary complex is dependent 
on receptor occupancy but independent of drug efficacy. Neuroscience 
16:1036, 1990. 

Mehler, E.L., and Weinstein, H. Computer-simulation studies of 
calmodulin and troponin C in solution. Experientia 46:A4, 1990. 

Merrier, G.A.; Osman, R.; and Weinstein, H. A molecular theoretical 
model of recognition and activation of a 5-HT receptor. In: Rein, R., 
and Golombek, A., eds. Computer Assisted Modeling of Receptor- 
Ligand Interactions. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1989. pp. 399-410. 

Merrier, G.A.; Osman, R.; and Weinstein, H. Role of primary and 

secondary protein structure in neurotransmitter activation mechanisms. 
Protein Eng 2:261-270, 1988. 

Milbum, M.V.; Prive, G.G.; Milligan, D.L.; Scott, W.G.; Yeh, J.; 

Jancarik, J.; Koshland, D.E.; and Kim, S.-H. Three-dimensional 
structure of the ligand binding domain of the bacterial aspartate 
receptor with and without a ligand. Science 254:1342-1347, 1991. 

Milik, M.; Skolnick, J.; and Kolinski, A. Monte Carlo studies of an 
idealized model of a lipid-water system. J Phys Chem 96:4015-4022, 
1992. 

Mylecharane, E. J.; Angus, J. A.; de la Lande, I.S.; and Humphrey, P.P.A., 
eds. Serotonin: Actions, Receptors, Pathophysiology. London: The 
Macmillan Press Ltd., 1989. 

Pardo, L.; Ballesteros, J.A.; Osman, R.; and Weinstein, H. On the use of 
the transmembrane domain of bacteriorhodopsin as a template for 
modeling the three-dimensional structure of guanine nucleotide¬ 
binding regulatory protein-coupled receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 89:4009-4012, 1992. 

Pascual-Ahuir, J.-L.; Mehler, E.L.; and Weinstein, H. Calmodulin 
structure and function: Implication of arginine residues in the 
compaction related to ligand binding. Molec Eng 1:231-247, 1991. 

Pastore, A.; Harvey, T.S.; Dempsey, C.E.; and Campbell, I.D. The 
dynamic properties of melittin in solution. Eur Biophys J 16:363-367, 
1989. 

Peroutka, S.J., ed. Serotonin Receptor Subtypes: Basic and Clinical 
Aspects. Vol. 15. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1991. 

Rees, D.C.; Komiya, H.; Yeates, T.O.; Allen, J.P.; and Feher, G. The 
bacterial photosynthetic reaction center as a model for membrane 
proteins. Annual Rev Biochem 58:607-633, 1989. 


259 



Sanders-Bush, E.; Burt-is, K.D.; and Knoth, K. Lysergic acid 

diethylamide and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine are partial 
agonists at serotonin receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. 

J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246:924-928, 1988. 

Shih, J.C.; Yang, W.; Chen, K.; and Gallaher, T. Molecular biology of 
serotonin (5-HT) receptors. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 40:1053-1058, 
1991. 

Stigter, D.; Mingins, J.; and Dill, K.A. Phospholipid interactions in model 
membrane systems. Biophys J 61:1616-1629, 1992. 

Strader, C.D.; Dixon, R.A.F.; Cheung, A.H.; Candelore, M.R.; Blake, 
A.D.; and Sigal, I.S. Mutations that uncouple the beta-adrenergic 
receptor from Gs and increase agonist affinity. J Biol Chem 
262:16439-16443, 1987. 

Strader, C.D.; Sigal, I.S.; and Dixon, R.A.F. Structural basis of 
B-adrenergic receptor function. FASEB J 3:1825-1831, 1989. 

van Gunsteren, W.F.; Brunne, R.M.; Mark, A.E.; and van Helden, S.P. 
Computer simulation of biomolecules: Comparison with experimental 
data. In: Bertram J-, ed. Molecular Aspects of Biotechnology: 
Computational Models and Theories. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992. pp. 105- 122. 

Weinstein, H., ed. Computational Approaches to Enzyme Structure and 
Function. (Enzyme , Vol. 36.) Basel, Switzerland: Larger Scientific 
Publishers, 1986. 

Weinstein, H., and Mehler, E.L. Structural specificity in the engineering 
of biological function: Insights from the dynamics of calmodulin. In: 
Bertran, J., ed. Molecular Aspects of Biotechnology: Computational 
Models and Theories. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1992. pp. 153-173. 

Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. Interaction mechanisms at biological 
targets: Implications for design of serotonin receptor ligands. In: 
Richards, W.G., ed. Computer-Aided Molecular Design. London: 

IBC Technical Services, 1989a. pp. 105-108. 

Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. Molecular biophysics of specificity and 
function in enzymes, receptors and calcium binding proteins. In: 
Beveridge, D.L., and Lavery, R., eds. Theoretical Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biophysics: A Comprehensive Sun’ey. New York: Adine 
Press, 1989b. pp. 275-289. 

Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. On the structural and mechanistic basis of 
function, classification, and ligand design for 5-HT receptors. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 3:397-409, 1990a. 


260 



Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. Simulations of ligand-receptor interactions 
as guides for design. In: Jensen, B.; Jorgensen, F.S.; and Kofod, H., 
eds. Frontiers in Drug Research: Crystallographic and 
Computational Methods. Alfred Benzon Symposium 28. Copenhagen: 
Munksgaard, 1990b. pp. 169-182. 

Weinstein, H.; Osman, R.; and Mazurek, A.P. Simulations of molecular 
stereoelectronic mechanisms for the interaction of hallucinogens and 
indole derivatives at 5-HT receptors. In: Naray-Szabo, G., and 
Kalman, 5., eds. Steric Aspects of Biomolecular Interactions. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1987. pp. 199-210. 

Weinstein, H.; Osman, R.; and Mercier, G., Jr. Recognition and 

activation of a 5-HT receptor by hallucinogens and indole derivatives. 
In: Harris, L.S., ed. Problems of Drug Dependence 1988: Proceedings 
of the 50th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee on Problems of 
Drug Dependence, Inc. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research 
Monograph No. 90. DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)89-1605. Washington, 
DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1988. pp. 243-255r 

Wendoloski, J.J.; Kimatian, S.J.; Schutt, C.E.; and Salemme, F.R. 
Molecular dynamics simulation of a phospholipid micelle. Science 
243:636-638, 1989. 

Williams, K.A., and Deber, C.M. Proline residues in transmembrane 
helices: Structural or dynamic role? Biochemistry 30:8919-8923, 

1991. 

Woolfson, D.N., and Williams, D.H. The influence of proline residues on 
alpha-helical structure. FEBS Lett 277:185-188, 1990. 

Xing, J., and Scott, H.L. Monte Carlo studies of a model for lipid- 
gramicidin A bilayers. Biochim Biopliys Acta 1106:227-232, 1992. 

Yocca, F.D.; Moon, S.L.; Torrente, J.; Iben, L.; Ryan, E.; and Lamy, R. 
Region-dependent drug efficacy in brain: Pre- vs. postsynaptic actions 
of drugs on the 5-HT, A receptor in rat hippocampus and cortex. 
FASEBJ 4:A810, 1990. 

Zhang, D., and Weinstein, H. Signal transduction by 5-HT 2 receptor: A 
mechanistic hypothesis from molecular dynamics simulations of the 
three-dimensional model of the receptor complexed to ligands, J Med 
Client 36:934-938, 1993. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The work was supported in pail by National Institute on Drug Abuse 
grant DA-06620 and Research Scientist Award DA-00060 (to HW) and 
by a Fulbright/MEC scholarship (to JAB). Computations were performed 


261 



on the supercomputer systems at the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center 
(sponsored by the National Science Foundation), Cornell National 
Supercomputer Facility (sponsored by the National Science Foundation 
and IBM), Advanced Scientific Computing Laboratory at the Frederick 
Cancer Research Facility of the National Cancer Institute (Laboratory for 
Mathematical Biology), and University Computer Center of the City 
University of New York. 


AUTHORS 

Hard Weinstein, D.Sc. 

Professor and Chairman 

Daqun Zhang, B.Sc. 

Graduate Student 

Juan A. Bahesteros, B.Sc. 

Graduate Student 

Department of Physiology and Biophysics 

Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the City University of New York 
New York, NY 10029-6574 


262 



Molecular Modeling 
of the Interaction of LSD 
and Other Hallucinogens 
With 5-HT 2 Receptors 

Richard B. Westkaemper and Richard A. Glennon 


INTRODUCTION 

Multiple populations of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) 
receptors have been identified, including 5-HT 1A , 5-HT B , 5-HT lc , 

5-HT, d , 5-HT 2 , 5-HT 3 , and 5-HT 4 subtypes. The 5-HT 2 and possibly the 
5-HT, c receptors have been implicated as the probable sites of action of 
classical hallucinogenic agents (Glennon 1990). The goal of this chapter 
is to identify potential modes of interaction of hallucinogens with 5-HT 2 
receptors, 

In general terms, there are two ways to embark on a program designed to 
elucidate drug-receptor interactions. These have been referred to as the 
ligand-ligand and ligand-receptor approaches (Westkaemper and Glennon 
1991). In the first approach, indirect information about specific receptor 
structural features and their locations in three dimensions is inferred 
indirectly from the structures of ligands. Typically, common features of 
structurally related ligands are graphically superimposed to illustrate 
common and disparate features that aid formulation of hypotheses related 
to specific drug-receptor interaction. 

For example, (-i-)lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) contains many 
structural features in a rigid polycyclic template that are important for 
5-HT 2 receptor binding. Figure 1 shows one way in which the structures 
of LSD and the more flexible hallucinogenic agent l-(4-bromo-2,5- 
dimethoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOB) can be related. For additional 
examples of the application of this approach to serotonergic agents, see 
Glennon and colleagues (199 1). 


263 



FIGURE 1. DOB (solid bonds) superimposed on the structure of 
(+)LSD. 

SOURCE: Reprinted from Westkaemper, R.B., and Glennon, R.A., 
Approaches to molecular modeling studies and specific 
application to serontonin ligands and receptors. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 40:10 19- 
1031, 1991, with kind permission from Pergamon Press 
Ltd., Headington Hill Hall, Oxford 0X3 OBW, UK. 


The ligand-receptor approach has been used extensively for biological 
macromolecules for which high resolution x ray structures are available. 
Until recently, this approach has not been feasible for neurotransmitter 
receptors because the three-dimensional (3-D) structures of 
neurotransmitter receptors have yet to be determined. Some of the 
earliest approaches to modeling ligand-receptor interactions utilized 


264 





simulations employing fragments that might be present at the ligand¬ 
binding site of a receptor. 

Kier and Aldrich (1974) investigated ligand-receptor interactions using 
semiempirical molecular orbital methods to calculate the interaction 
energies between a drug and a small molecule thought to mimic a portion 
of the receptor binding site in a process known as receptor mapping using 
model interaction energy calculations. Later, this paradigm was applied 
to hallucinogenic phenethylamines (Di Paolo et al. 1978). In these 
studies, interaction energies between ring-substituted phenethylamines 
and methylindole, a presumed tryptophan surrogate, were found to 
coixelate with hallucinogenic potency. 

Weinstein explored a similar approach by calculating interaction energies 
between an imidazolium ion as a receptor model and 5-HT (Weinstein 
and Osman 1989). Although the implications of such studies are 
intriguing, the receptor models do not incorporate what is known about 
the molecular architecture of proteins. Later, more elaborate models, 
based on known protein structures not related to neurotransmitters, were 
used to provide a framework for the incorporation of ligand and receptor¬ 
like features (Weinstein and Osman 1990). 

The construction of more complete receptor models had not been possible 
because information pertinent to 3-D structure, such as deduced amino 
acid sequence, was not available. Although several 5-HT receptors have 
now been cloned and their sequences reported (Fargin et al. 1988; 
Hamblin and Metcalf 1991; Hartig 1989; Hartig et al. 1990 a,b\ Huang 
and Julius 1991; Julius et al. 1988, 1990; Pritchett et al. 1988; Shih and 
Chen 1990; Voigt et al. 1991), their 3-D structures remain unknown. 

On the other hand, the 3-D structure of the light-sensitive proton pump 
from bacteria, bacteriorhodopsin (BRH), has been determined to near 
atomic resolution (Henderson et al. 1990; Henderson and Schertler 1990). 
Although BRH is not a guanosine triphosphate binding protein 
(G-protein) receptor, it may be possible to deduce the structures of 
neurotransmitter receptors from it. BRH consists of seven membrane- 
spanning a-helices linked by extracellular and intracellular loops. The 
N-terminus is extracellular, and the C-terminus is located within the cell. 
The amphiphilic helices are found to form a pore in the membrane, with 
lipophilic sides oriented toward the membrane and with the more 
hydrophilic residues located in the central cavity. 


265 



The mammalian visual pigment rhodopsin, which is G-protein coupled, is 
functionally different from BRH, but both are light- and retinal- 
dependent (Henderson and Schertler 1990). There is little sequence 
homology between the mammalian visual pigments and BRH (Dohlman 
et al. 1987). However, evidence suggests that the overall topology for the 
mammalian protein is similar to that of BRH: both consist of seven 
membrane-spanning a-helices (see Westkaemper and Glennon 1991). 

There is a significant homology between rhodopsin and the G-protein- 
coupled neurotransmitter receptors and an even greater homology 
between the neurotransmitters. Studies utilizing secondary structure- 
predicting methods, the analysis of the distribution of hydrophobic spans 
of amino acids, and the fact that the G-protein receptors have the greatest 
degree of sequence homology in the putative helical segments suggest 
that the architecture of G-protein neurotransmitter receptors is similar to 
that observed for BRH and to that presumed for rhodopsin (Dohlman et 
al. 1987). 

If sequence homology between BRH and serotonin receptors were good, 
construction of 3-D receptor models could begin by graphically changing 
the amino acid side chains of the experimentally determined structure to 
those of the receptor of interest. Because there is no unambiguous 
alignment of the transmembrane portions of the 5-HT receptors and BRH 
sequences, model building is much more tenuous. Given that the helical 
segments of the serotonin receptors can be identified, placement of these 
in three dimensions requires the establishment of helix connectivity, 
vertical placement of each helix (perpendicular to the membrane), 
rotational alignment (in the plane of the membrane), and side chain 
geometry, none of which can be known with absolute certainty. 

Given these ambiguities, abbreviated receptor models in which only a 
single helix is represented were chosen for investigation (Westkaemper 
and Glennon 1991). Docking studies performed with 5-HT ligands and 
models of helix 3 and helix 2 of 5-HT 2 (and other) receptors indicated 
that helix 3 is the more probable primary ligand-binding site; this has 
been recently verified by site-directed mutagenesis (Shih et al., this 
volume). Calculated binding energies for 5-HT ligands and the helix 3 
model of 5-HT 2 receptors correlated qualitatively with experimentally 
determined affinities for a wide range of structural types, indicating that 
the features of helix 3 can account for ligand binding. 


266 



Despite this success, more complete receptor models are necessary for 
detailed understanding of ligand-receptor interaction and, in particular, 
linkage between agonist binding and second messenger coupling. 

Hibert and coworkers (1991) recently described the first seven-helix 
model of a serotonin receptor. A potential sequence alignment between 
the helical segments of multiple G-protein receptors and BRH was 
established. The helix connectivity (both in the Hibert model and in the 
model presented below) of BRH was preserved; that is, helix 1 of the 
5-HT receptor corresponds with helix 1 of BRH and so on. Alternative 
connectivity schemes have been proposed (Weinstein et ah, this volume). 
Although not described, it appears that the final receptor configuration 
was arrived at by rotational adjustment of helices guided by the principles 
that highly conserved and charged amino acids should be oriented toward 
the receptor pore (central to the aggregate of helices). Consideration also 
was given to site-directed mutagenesis data for B-adrenergic receptors 
(B-AR). 

The authors have taken a somewhat different approach and have 
attempted to identify sequence alignments between the 5-HT receptors 
and BRH that could be used to construct serotonin receptor models by 
mutating amino acid side chains without manual modification of helix 
disposition. White and Jacobs (1990) recently have shown that lengths 
and centers of helical spans in the photosynthetic reaction center and 
BRH can be accurately predicted (helical centers within 0.2 amino acids 
and helix ends within 1 to 3 residues of the experimentally determined 
values) using a modified hydrophobicity index, and that the helix turn 
potential has a minimum value at helix centers. Figure 2 shows the 
results of such an analysis for the 5-HT 2 receptor sequence. 

The authors have chosen to evaluate the hypothesis that helical centers of 
serotonin receptors and BRH (see figure 3 for amino acid sequence of 
BRH) are structurally coincident. Once such a coincidence and sequence 
alignment are established, 3-D models of serotonin receptors can be 
constructed, subjected to molecular mechanics geometry optimization, 
and evaluated for reasonableness with respect to important criteria: helix 
packing, disposition of polar and hydrophobic residues, orientation of 
highly conserved residues, and accessibility of side chains known to 
interact with ligands. 


267 




FIGURE 2. Hyclrophobiciy and turn potential analysis of the 5-HT 2 
receptor sequence. Horizontal bars indicate helical 
segments. The upper trace represents turn potential. The 
lower traces are the hydrophobicity indexes for interfacial 
hydrophobicity scale where h=0, 0.5, 1.0. 


RECEPTOR MODEL FEATURES 

As determined by alignment, the disposition of the ammoniumion¬ 
binding aspartate of helix 3 with respect to the rest of the aggregate is 
perhaps the most important single issue in the model-building process. 
Unfortunately, identification of the helix center is the least certain in the 
case of helix 3, perhaps because of the presence of several highly 
hydrophilic residues. Needleman and Wunsch (1970), using either 
physical properties or identity as the similarity criteria, produced an 
alignment shown in figure 4, panel A (identity of 23 percent, alignment 
score 0.6+0.08; 0.46 for jumbled alignments) which is within the range of 
possibilities identified using the method of White and Jacobs (1990). The 
second and third alignments (figure 4, panels B and C, respectively) are 
also consistent with helix center identification but result only in 4 percent 
identity. The first alignment places the helix 3 aspartate near the interface 


268 





HI 

5HT2 76 80 85 90 95 100 

8RH 8 12 17 22 27 32 

II i III 

SHT 2 VULLTTWI I L I I A G K I l V I H * V S 
5 KT 1 C W P A L S I V V I I [NT 1 GGMI LVIHAVS 
5 HT 1 A ITSlUtTUFCAVlCKACVVAAIA 
BRH PEUIUlAlfiTALDGlGUYf LVKCK 

H3 

5HT2 148 152 155 157 162 167 

BRH 79 S3 86 88 93 98 

I I I I I I 

5HT2 lFSHCAlViri P V L f S T A S I A H 1 C A I 
5HT1C IPRYLCPVWtSLDVLFSTASIMHLCAI 
5HY1A IGOVICDIFIALDVLCCISSIIHICA] 
BRH E9NP I YVAIIYADV[mPUUDlAU 

MS 

SHT2 236 240 245 250 255 

BRH 137 141 146 151 156 

I I I I I 

5HY2 LIGSFVAFFIPITIKVIYYFI 
5H71C LIGSFVAFf iPLllAVIlrfl 
5KY1A I YSTFGAFTIPLlLHLVtrGR 
BRH WUAI STAAHVYILYVLFFCFY 

K7 

5HY2 356 360 365 370 375 

8RH 202 206 211 216 221 

I I I I I 

5K72 HVIGALLHVFVWICYISSAVHPLVY 
5HY1C KlMEKllHVFVVI GYVCSCIHPVtY 
5HT1A KKPTLLGAI iNWLGYSNSlLNPVtY 
BRH HlETllFMVLDVJAKVOfGltLLR- 


H2 

5 HY 2 112 116 121 126 131 136 

8 RK 38 42 47 52 57 62 

I I I I I I 

5 HT 2 FIHSLA lADHUJf IVHPVSHt T ! L 
5 HT 1 C FLNHAIADHLVGLIVHPISILAIL 
5 HT 1 A L l GSIAVTDIHVSVIVIPHAAIYGV 
BRH OAtmAimVJAIAFTAUSHU 

H 4 

5 HI 2 195 199 204 209 214 

8 RK 106 110 115 120 125 

1 I I I I 

5 M 72 X) 1 AVWT ISVOF 5 HP 1 PVFGIC 
5 HT 1 C KIAIVWAISI G V 5 V P IPVI GIR 
5 H 71 A UUIVL (GFL I 5 IPPHLGWRR 
BRH GTIIAIVGADGIHI G 1 GLV 6 AL 

H 6 

5 HT 2 324 328 333 338 343 

BRH 170 174 179 184 189 

I I I I I 

5 HY 2 KACKVLGIVFFLFyVMVCPFFlYNIM 
5 HY 1 C KASKVLCIVFFVFL IHWCPFFI YNIl 
5 HT 1 A KYVKYLGI IKGYFtLCWLPFFJVAlV 
BRH EVASTIKVIRHVYVVIWSAYPVVWt 1 


FIGURE 3. Amino acid sequences for the seven transmembrane 
helices of 5-HT 2 , 5-HT lc , and 5-HT IA receptors and 
BRH. Underlined residues indicate the most probable 
locations of helix centers. 


between helix 3 and helix 2. The third alignment places the helix 3 
aspartate inaccessible to ligands at the interface between helix 3 and helix 
4 and closer to the membrane than to the pore of the receptor. Although 
identity is poorer than that for the first alignment, the second alignment 
has been evaluated most extensively because it places the aspartate of the 
helix in the central pore. 

The 5-HT 2 receptor was generated by mutation of the BRH side chains 
according to the alignment shown in figure 3, retaining as much of the 
original side chain geometry as possible. The entire structure was 
subjected to molecular mechanics geometry optimization (Weiner et al. 
1984) after removing obviously bad side chain contacts. The model of 
the 5-HT 2 receptor constructed in this manner (figures 5 and 6) is only 
one of several possibilities. Because of limited sequence homology, this 


269 




and all models should be considered provisional; nevertheless, several 
interesting points emerge from the model. 


A BRH P SKLCAIWIYLDVLFSTASIMHLCAIS 

5-HT2 EQNPIYWARYADWLFTTPLLLLDLALL 

B BRH LPSKLCAIWIYLDVLFSTASIMHLCAI 

5-HT2 EQNPIYWARYADWLFTTPLLLLDLALL 

C BRH PLPSKLCAIWIYLDVLFSTASIMHLCA 

5-HT2 EQNPIYWARYADWLFTTPLLLLDLALL 


FIGURE 4. Several potential alignments of the helix 3 portions of 
the 5-HT 2 receptor and BRH. 


• The overall packing geometry of BRH is retained in the energy- 
minimized 5-HT 2 receptor model. The total calculated energy of the 
receptor model is comparable to the calculated energy of BRH. 
Helix-helix interactions observed in the model are qualitatively 
consistent with the experimental structures of adjacent proteins with 
nearly parallel a -helices. 

• Conserved residues generally are located in the central cavity, as are 
most of the polar - amino acid side chains. Exceptions occur at helix 
termini. 

• The ammonium ion-binding aspartate of helix 3 is located in the 
central cavity nearer to the extracellular side than to the interior of the 
cell. It is central to two potential ligand binding cavities, one formed 
from helices 4, 5, and 6 (site I) and a second formed by helices 1, 2, 
and 7 (site II) (figure 7, panel A). 


270 




• Phenylalanine (Phe)-89 and tryptophan (Trp)-82 flank aspartic acid 
(Asp)-86 of helix 3 (see figure 8) and are in positions that would be 
accessible for interaction with a bound ligand. 

• The hydroxy group of tyrosine (Tyr)-216 of helix 7 forms a hydrogen 
bond with Asp-86 (figure 8). This structural finding is particularly 
interesting given the observation that it is conserved only in G- 
protein receptors that have ammonium ion ligands (Hulme et al. 

1990). 

• Valine (Val)-212 of helix 7 is near the helix 3 aspartate. An 
asparagine at the analogous position in the 5-HT 1A receptor may 
modulate ligand selectivity (Surryanarayana et al. 1991). 



FIGURE 5. Stereoscopic view of a 5-HT 2 receptor model as viewed 
from the plane of the cell membrane. 



FIGURE 6. Stereoscopic view of a 5-HT 2 receptor model shown in 
figure 5 as viewed from the extracellular (N-terminal) 
side. 


271 







FIGURE 7. A schematic view of sites I and II formed by 
helices 4, 5, and 6 and by helices 2, 1, and 
7, respectively (A). A view of sites I and II 
showing only the helix backbone of the 
5HT 2 receptor model (B). A representa¬ 
tion of DOB bound in site I of the 5HT 2 
receptor model (C). 


272 




FIGURE 8 . Closeup of the region surrounding Asp-86 (helix 3) and 
Tyr-216 (helix 7) of the 5-HT 2 receptor model. Note the 
hydrogen bond between Asp-86 and Tyr-216. 


273 






One major difference between the model reported here and that reported 
by Hibert and colleagues (1991) is the rotational orientation of helix 5. In 
the present model, one of the same two serine (Ser) residues that may be 
involved in ligand-receptor interactions for the 6-AR (Strader et al. 1989) 
appears at the interface between helix 4 and helix 5. 


LIGAND-RECEPTOR DOCKING 

Several structurally similar 5-HT2 receptor models have been developed. 
One way to evaluate potential receptor models is to investigate modes of 
ligand-receptor interactions. This process requires selection of an 
appropriate ligand. Ideally, the ligand should be conformationally rigid 
and sterically demanding. Table 1 depicts the relative merits of 
dihydroergotamine (DHE), LSD, and DOB as ligands. LSD and DOB, 
both of which are hallucinogenic, were selected for initial docking 
studies. Preliminary studies using the program DGEOM (Blaney et al. 
1990) for the automated docking of LSD and a 5-HT 2 receptor model 
indicated that, for steric reasons, the only reasonable orientation of the 
rigid polycyclic structure was in sites I or II (figure 7, panel A), with the 
plane of the aromatic nucleus of LSD more or less parallel to the helical 
axes. The program GRID (Goodford 1985) was used to identify receptor 
features that could provide energetically favorable noncovalent 
interactions. Probe species included an aromatic carbon, water, a 
nrethoxy group, an ammonium ion, a carbonyl moiety, and a bromine 
The information from structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies of 
ring-substituted phenylisopropylamines such as DOB also was used to 
guide docking studies (Seggel et al. 1990). The ligand binding site of the 
receptor must account for the fact that the 2-nrethoxy group of DOB is 
critical for high affinity. The 5-methoxy substituent is also important for 
5-HT lc and 5-HT 2 affinity, and may play a recognition role analogous to 
the indole nitrogen of serotonin and LSD. The substituent at the 
4-position (e.g., the Br of DOB) modulates affinity over a 50,000-fold 
range. Typically, nonpolar substituents enhance affinity, the most 
effective being the halogens (H<L, Cl, Br, I) and alkyl groups (e.g., 
methyl, ethyl, propyl, butyl, t-butyl, amyl, hexyl, octyl). The receptor 
recognition site must accommodate alkyl groups as large as 4-octyl and 
4-(3-phenylpropyl). In addition, primary amine alkylation decreases 
affinity, whereas stereochemistry and the presence of an a-methyl group 
have little effect on receptor affinity.atom. Manual docking was 
performed using GRID contours as a guide. 


274 



TABLE 1. Potential ligands for receptor model docking. 


DHE LSD DOB 


Steric demand + + 

Conformationally restricted + + 

Subtype selectivity 
SAR data 

Hallucinogenic + 

KEY: DHE = dihydroergotamine; DOB = l-(4-bromo-2,5- 
dimethoxyphenyl)-2aminopropane; 

SAR = structure-activity relationships 


+ 

+ 

+ 


Both sites I and II can accommodate the steric bulk of DOB. Both sites 
have numerous polar, hydrogen-bond-donating side chains, but the side 
chains are somewhat more numerous in site II. Both sites have aliphatic 
amino acid side chains in the receptor pore, but site I is slightly richer in 
aromatic residues at the level of the helix 3 aspartate. Several potential 
modes of DOB-receptor binding have been evaluated, but only one is 
discussed in this chapter. There is some evidence that the analogous site I 
receptor features may be the important ligand recognition region for 
G-protein receptors other than serotonin receptors (Strader et al. 1989). 

The first fact that becomes evident (partially from DGEOM docking 
experiments) is that the helix 3 aspartate must move away from its 
hydrogen-bonded, unligated conformation (figure 8) with rotation about 
the Ck-CTJ bond and move toward site I to allow the bound ligand access 
to functionally significant side chains. This process is shown 
schematically in figure 9. Disruption of the resting receptor confor¬ 
mation, in which the helix 3 aspartate and helix 7 Tyr hydrogen bond is 
intact, may prove to be the event initiating a confoimational change that 
may be responsible for receptor activation. 


275 






FIGURE 9. Schematic representation of the possible sequence of 
events that occurs on the interaction of a ligand 
(D-NH 3 +) with the helix 3 aspartate of a 5-HT 2 receptor 
model. 


DOB was found to bind favorably in site I (figure 7, panel C), with the 
aromatic ring approximately parallel to the helical axis, with the primary 
amine pointed toward the extracellular side and the 4-Br group downward 
toward the intracellular side. The helix 3 Asp-86 foims an ionic bond 
with the primary ammonium ion (figure 10). Ser-118 of helix 4 donates a 
hydrogen bond to the 2-metboxy group, and Ser-90 of helix 3 donates a 
hydrogen bond to the 5-methoxy substituent. Two aromatic residues 
(Phe-145 and Phe-185) form an edge-to-face hydrophobic interaction 
with the phenyl ring of DOB. Aliphatic side chains complete the 
remainder of the phenyl ring binding site. Trp-182 of helix 6 appeal's 
near the bottom of the DOB phenyl ring near the 4-Br group (figure 10), 
suggesting that this residue may form part of the hydrophobic region that 
can accommodate a variety of hydrophobic substituents. Further in the 
intracellular direction, the 4-position of DOB is surrounded by aliphatic 
and aromatic residues in a way that results in the formation of a short 
hydrophobic tunnel that can be expected to accommodate several 
substituents, even long chain aliphatic ones. A serine analogous to 
Ser-118 (figure 10) is uniformly conserved in the serotonin receptors as 
well as in the receptors for catecholamines. 


276 





FIGURE 10. Schematic of possible interactions 


between DOB and features of a 5-HT 2 
receptor model as derived from figure 
6, panel C 


The neurotransmitters for these receptors all have a phenolic hydroxy 
group in the position analogous to the 2-methoxy group of DOB (e.g., the 
5-hydroxy group of 5-HT). Receptors for acetylcholine, which do not 
have an aromatic hydroxyl group, have a tryptophan residue at this 
position. Among the serotonin receptors, a Ser-90 at helix 3 occurs only 
for the 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors. This position hears a cysteine (Cys) 
in all other serotonin subtypes. Although a Cys can donate a hydrogen 
bond, the bond is considerably less energetically favorable than that 
formed by the Ser hydroxy group. This finding is consistent with the 
observation that groups analogous to 5-methoxy of DOB are not 
necessary for 5 HT 1A binding. Taken together, these observations 
indicate that the mode of interaction described is feasible but is not 
proven. 

LSD can bind to the receptor in a fashion analogous to DOB. Ser-118 of 
helix 4 may form a hydrogen bond with the amide carbonyl or with the 
C10-C11 double bond of LSD, and Ser-90 interacts with the indole 


277 




nitrogen (figure 11). Aromatic residues Phe-185, Phe-145, and Trp-182 
can interact with the aromatic ring system of LSD as shown in figure 11. 
Other closely situated residues may participate in ligand-receptor 
interaction. 



FIGURE 11. Schematic of possible interactions 
between (+)LSD and features of a 
5-HT 2 receptor model 


SUMMARY 

Current evidence suggests that classical hallucinogens act via a 5-HT 2 
(possibly 5-HT lc ) agonist mechanism. To gain further insight into the 
mechanism of action of these agents, the authors have attempted to model 
this drug-receptor interaction. Because of the unavailability of the 3-D 
structure of neurotransmitter receptors, it was necessary first to develop a 
hypothetical 5-HT 2 receptor model. By analogy to the structure of BRH 
and by utilizing pertinent information from other neurotransmitters, 
several 5-HT 2 receptor models were developed; one of these is shown in 
figures 5 and 6. 


278 



Using this model, the authors attempted to dock the structures of DOB 
and (+)LSD using DGEOM and GRID to aid this process. Docking also 
was guided by known SAR. (That is, the validity of any model rests with 
its ability to account for what is known about the binding of hallu¬ 
cinogens at 5-HT 2 receptors.) Two potential binding domains were 
identified (i.e., site I and site II, see figure 7). Several different modes of 
binding are possible within each of these sites. Figure 7, panel C shows 
one way in which DOB can bind at site I of the 5-HT 2 receptor model. A 
closeup view of the specific amino acid residues that may be involved in 
binding is shown as a schematic (figure 10). The proposed mode of 
interaction also accounts for the binding of (+)LSD and is consistent with 
established SAR. The proposed mode of interaction between drug and 
receptor is neither inflexible nor static. (That is, ligands with slightly 
different aromatic substitution patterns may still interact in an analogous 
manner with the receptor features that have been identified.) Further¬ 
more, it must be emphasized that figures 10 and 11 represent one 
potential mode of binding of DOB and (+)FSD at site I of a single 
multiple-helix 5-HT 2 receptor model. Other modes of binding-indeed, 
other 5-HT 2 receptor models-are possible. Although the present drug- 
receptor model is certainly reasonable, not all other possible drug- 
receptor models have been fully evaluated yet. 

The objective is to identify the most likely drug-receptor models using 
site-directed mutagenesis. For example, all models utilize the helix 3 
aspartate as the ammonium ion binding site; thus, this aspartate must play 
a critical role in binding, and its elimination or replacement should result 
in reduced affinity. In collaboration with Dr. Shih, the authors now have 
demonstrated that replacement of this aspartate (but not the aspartate of 
helix 2) by asparagine (Asn) results in a dramatic decrease in affinity for 
various 5-HT 2 ligands. Similar studies are required to test other potential 
binding features consistent with the different models. 

The classical hallucinogens bind at 5-HT 1C receptors with affinities 
comparable with the affinities for 5-HT 2 receptors. Indeed, there is less 
than a tenfold difference in 5-HT lc versus 5-HT 2 affinities for a large 
series of DOB-related analogs (Glennon et al. 1992). Thus, any drug- 
receptor model developed for 5-HT 2 receptors should possess those (or 
structurally analogous) features found in 5-HT lc receptors. In contrast, 
because classical hallucinogens (with the exception of (+)FSD) typically 
bind with low affinity at 5-HT IA receptors, structural features common to 
5-HT 2 and 5-HT 1A receptors would likely be unable to account for 
selectivity. One of several possible drug-receptor 5-HT 2 models is 


279 



described here in detail. The model accounts for, and is consistent with, 
much that is known about classical hallucinogens. Studies are under way 
to further validate this (and other) models. These studies, in addition to 
being relevant to the investigation of hallucinogenic agents, go well 
beyond the present limited scope of study and can have a significant 
influence on the understanding of drug-receptor interactions in general. 


NOTE 

All sequence numbers refer to the BRH numbering system for purposes 
of comparison and uniformity. The actual numbering system for the 
amino acid sequence of 5-HT 2 receptors is shown in figure 3. 


REFERENCES 

Blaney, J.M.; Crippen, G.M.; Dealing, A.; and Dixon, J.S. DGEOM. 
QCPE program number 590. QCPE Bull 10:27-38, 1990. 

Di Paolo, T.; Hall, L.H.; and Kier, L.B. Structure-activity studies on 
hallucinogenic amphetamines using model interaction calculations. 

J Theor Biol 71:295-309, 1978. 

Dohlman, H.G.; Caron, G.C.; and Lefkowitz, R.J. A family of receptors 
coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. Biochemistry 
26:2657-2664, 1987. 

Fargin, A.; Raymond, J.R.; Lohse, M.J.; Kobilka, B.K.; Caron. M.G.; and 
Lefkowitz, R.J. The genomic clone G-21 which resembles a 6- 
adrenergic receptor sequence encodes the 5-HT 1A receptor. Nature 
335:358-360, 1988. 

Glennon, R.A. Do hallucinogens act as 5-HT 2 agonists or antagonists? 
Neuropsychopharmacology 56:509-517, 1990. 

Glennon, R.A.; Westkaemper, R.B.; and Bartyzel, P. Medicinal chemistry 
of serotonergic agents. In: Peroutka, S.J., ed. Serotonin Receptor- 
Subtypes: Basic and Clinical Aspects. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1991. 
pp. 19-64. 

Glennon, R.A.; Raghupathi, R.; Bartyzel, P.; Teitler, M.; and Leonhardt, 
S. Binding of phenylalkylamine derivatives at 5-HT lc and 5-HT 2 
serotonin receptors: Evidence for a lack of selectivity. J Med Chem 
35:734-740, 1992. 

Goodford, PJ. A computation procedure for determining energetically 
favorable binding sites on biologically important macromolecules. 

J Med Chem 28:849-857, 1985. 


280 



Hamblin, M., and Metcalf, M. Primary structure and characterization of a 
human 5-HT m receptor. Mol Pharmacol 40:143-148, 1991. 

Hartig, P.R. Molecular biology of 5-HT receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
10:64-69, 1989. 

Hartig, P.R.; Hoffman, B.J.; Kaufman, M.J.; and Hirata, F. The 5-HT lc 
receptor. Ann N Y Acad Sci 600:149-166, 1990a. 

Hartig, P.R.; Kao, H.-T.; Macchi, M.; Adham, N.; Zgombic, J.; 

Weinshank, R.; and Branchek, T. The molecular biology of serotonin 
receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology 3:335-347,1990b. 

Henderson, R., and Schertler, G.F.X. The structure of bacteriorhodopsin 
and its relevance to the visual opsins and other seven-helix G protein- 
coupled receptors. Philos Trans R Soc Loncl [Biol] 326:379-389, 

1990. 

Henderson, R.; Baldwin, J.M.; Ceska, T.A.; Zemlin, F.; Beckmann, E.; 
and Downing, K.H. Model for the structure of bacteriorhodopsin 
based on high-resolution electron cryo-microscopy. J Mol Biol 
213:899-929, 1990. 

Hibert, M.F.; Trumpp-Kallmeyer, S.; Bruinvels, A.; and Hoflack, J. 
Three-dimensional models of neurotransmitter G-binding protein- 
coupled receptors. Mol Pharmacol 40:8-15, 1991. 

Huang, K.N., and Julius, D. Molecular characterization of three serotonin 
receptor subtypes. In: Peroutka, S.J., ed. Serotonin Receptor Subtypes: 
Basic and Clinical Aspects. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1991. pp. 1-17. 

Hulme, E.C.; Birdsall, N.J.M.; and Buckley, NJ. Muscarinic receptor 
subtypes. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 30:633-673,1990. 

Julius, D.; MacDermott, A.B.; Axel, R.; and Jessel, T.M. Molecular 
characterization of a functional cDNA encoding the serotonin 1C 
receptor. Science 241:558-564, 1988. 

Julius, D.; Huang, K.N.; Livelli T.J.; Axel, R.; and Jessel, T.M. The 
5-HT 2 receptor defines a family of structurally distinct but functionally 
conserved serotonin receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:928-932, 
1990. 

Kier, L.B., and Aldrich, H.S. A theoretical study of receptor site models 
for trimethylammonium group interaction. J Theor Biol 46:529-541, 
1974. 

Needleman, S., and Wunsch, C.J. A general method applicable to the 
search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. 

J Mol Biol 48:443-453, 1970. 

Pritchett, D.B.; Bach, A.W.J.; Wozny, M.; Taleb, O.; Dal Toso, R.; Shih, 
J.C.; and Seeburg, P.H. Structure and functional expression of cloned 
rat serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor. EMBO J 7:4135-4140, 1988. 


281 



Seggel, M.R.; Yousif, M.Y.; Lyon, R.A.; Titeler, M.; Roth, B.L.; Suba, 
E.A.; and Glennon, R.A. A structure-affinity study of the binding of 

4- substituted analogs of l-(2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane at 

5- HT 2 serotonin receptors. JMed Chem 33:1032-1036, 1990. 

Shih, J.C., and Chen, K. Molecular studies of 5-HT receptors. Ann N Y 

AcaclSci 600:206-211, 1990. 

Strader, C.D.; Candelore, M.R.; Hill, W.S.; Sigal, I.S.; and Dixon, R.A.F. 
Identification of two serine residues involved in agonist activation of 
the B-adrenergic receptor. J Biol Chem 264:13572-13578, 1989. 
Surryanarayana, S.; Daunt, D.A.; von Zastrow, M.; and Kobilka, B.K. A 
point mutation in the seventh hydrophobic domain of the a 2 
adrenergic receptor increases its affinity for a family of 13 receptor 
antagonists. J Biol Chem 266:15488-15492, 1991. 

Voigt, M.M.; Laurie, D.J.; Seeburg, P.H.; and Bach A. Molecular cloning 
and characterization of a rat brain cDNA encoding a 5 -hydroxytrypt- 
amine,, receptor. EMBO J 10:4017-4023, 1991. 

Weiner, S.J.; Kollman, P.A.; Case, D.; Singh, U.C.; Alagona, G.; Profeta, 
S.; and Weiner, P. A new force field for molecular mechanical 
simulation of nucleic acids and proteins. J Am Chem Soc 106:765-784, 
1984. 

Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. Interaction mechanisms at biological 
targets: Implications for design of serotonin receptor ligands. In: 
Richards, W.G., ed. Computer-Aided Molecular Design. New York: 
VCH Verlagsgesellshaft mbH, 1989. pp. 105-118. 

Weinstein, H., and Osman, R. On the structural and mechanistic basis of 
function, classification, and ligarid design for 5-HT receptors. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 3:397-407, 1990. 

Westkaemper, R.B., and Glennon, R.A. Approaches to molecular 
modeling studies and specific application to serotonin ligands and 
receptors. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 40:1019-1031, 1991. 

White, S.H., and Jacobs, R.E. Observations concerning topology and 
locations of helix ends of membrane proteins of known structure. 

J Membrane Biol 115:145-158, 1990. 


282 



AUTHORS 


Richard B. Westkaemper, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor 

Richard A. Glennon, Ph.D. 

Professor 

Department of Medicinal Chemistry 
Medical College of Virginia 
School of Pharmacy 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Richmond, VA 23298 


283 



Structure and Function 
of Serotonin 5-HT 2 Receptors 

Jean C. Shih, Kevin Chen, and Timothy K. Gallaher 


INTRODUCTION 

One of at least seven known subtypes of serotonin (5 -hydroxytryptamine 
[5-HT 2 ]) receptors is the 5-HT 2 receptor. The molecular cloning of these 
subtypes has unequivocally defined receptor subtypes and confirmed the 
existence of 5-HT receptor subtypes found by earlier pharmacological, 
biochemical, and physiological studies. The 5-HT 2 receptors are integral 
membrane proteins that elicit a cellular response to serotonin in 
conjunction with a guanosine triphosphate binding protein (G-protein) 
and an effector enzyme (Shih et al. 1991). The 5-HT 2 receptors are 
known to activate the inositol triphosphate (IP 3 )/diacylglycerol second 
messenger system via enzymatic cleavage of polyphosphoinositol by 
phospholipase C, which ultimately results in increased calcium ion levels 
in the cell (Conn and Sanders-Bush 1986; Pritchett et al. 1988). 

The 5-HT 2 receptors are found in the brain cortical regions and may be 
involved in depression and suicide (Meltzer and Lowy 1987; Sternbach 
1991). In addition, 5-HT 2 receptors are targets for hallucinogenic drugs 
that also implicate 5-HT 2 receptors as being important in mental health 
(Glennon, this volume; Pierce and Peroutka 1989; Sadzot et al. 1989). 
Outside the brain, 5-HT 2 receptors are found in platelets and smooth 
muscle tissue and play a role in blood pressure and in hypertension 
(Vanhoutte 1982). The 5-HT 2 receptors are of great interest for their 
multifaceted actions in the body and the importance of their function for 
mental and physical health. 

This chapter presents the background of the research leading up to the 
identification and cloning of 5-HT 2 receptors and the current molecular 
knowledge of the 5-HT 2 receptor, with an emphasis on the structure and 
functions of these receptors. 


284 



BACKGROUND 


Many fields of research contributed to the formation of receptor theory 
and the identification of 5-HT 2 receptors. Studies of hallucinogenic drugs 
and antipsychotic drugs provided information that led directly to the 
identification and cloning of 5-HT 2 receptors. Hallucinogenic drugs have 
been used for millennia in human culture, and scientific analysis of their 
chemical properties and functions began in this century. In 5-HT 
receptor research, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) has made an 
invaluable contribution. Hofmann first synthesized LSD and discovered 
its profound psychological properties (Hofmann 1975). The effects of 
LSD were recognized to be related to the effects of mescaline, a 
compound from the peyote cactus that has been used traditionally by 
Native Americans in religious ceremonies (Schultes 1938, 1972). LSD 
and mescaline present two basic structural types of hallucinogenic drugs: 
indoleamines (LSD) and phenylalkylamines (mescaline). Hofmann later 
isolated psilocybin and psilocin, the active ingredients of hallucinogenic 
mushrooms, and discovered that these compounds also were 
indolealkylamines (Schultes and Hofmann 1973). The shared 
indolealkylamine structure of hallucinogenic drugs and serotonin 
suggested that they acted through identical or similar physical 
mechanisms that were unknown at the time. 

Concurrent with the early studies of hallucinogenic drugs was the 
development of a class of compounds known as antipsychotics. These 
drugs, exemplified by chlorpromazine and haloperidol, greatly reduced 
psychosis in mental patients and also were able to counteract LSD- 
induced psychosis (Shoichet and Solursh 1969). The observations of the 
structure and actions of hallucinogens and the actions of antipsychotics 
produced information indicating that specific functions of the, brain can 
be altered by specific drugs. The question then was how the drugs exert 
these effects. 

Now it is clear that the actions of these drugs are explained by the 
existence of specific receptors at the neuronal surface. Early studies of 
receptors used isolated tissue systems such as the guinea pig ileum, where 
two types of serotonin receptors were identified: the D- and M-type 
receptors (Gaddum and Picarelli 1957). Much work also was done using 
electrophysiological methods to measure electrical responses of neurons 
to neurotransmitters and drugs such as LSD and chlorpromazine. The 
breakthrough technique of radioligand binding analysis occurred in the 
early 1970s and led to detailed pharmacological analyses of receptors and 


285 



identification of different receptor subtypes based on pharmacological 
specificities of individual receptors. Peroutka and Snyder (1979) first 
identified 5-HT[ and 5-HT 2 receptors using [ H[serotonin, [ H]LSD, and 
[ H[spiperone as radiolabels. Since that time, at least eight different 5-HT 
receptor subtypes have been identified by pharmacological analysis. The 
classification of 5-HT receptors by pharmacological methods now has 
been confirmed, and the pharmacological definitions are known to have 
been extremely accurate. 


MOLECULAR CLONING OF 5-HT RECEPTORS 

Today all 5-HT receptors that were identified by radioligand analysis 
have been cloned. (Table 1 summarizes the cloned G-protein-coupled 
5-HT receptors and some of their molecular and functional properties.) 
The 5-HT lc receptor was the first serotonin receptor cloned and identified 
(Julius et al. 1988). This receptor was cloned by using messenger 
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) extracts in conjunction with the Xenupus 
oocyte expression system to provide the basis for a functional assay. The 
5-HT 2 receptor was cloned next, using a hybridization approach with a 
probe derived from the 5-HT 1C receptor (Pritchett et al. 1988). 

The 5-HT 1A receptor was cloned by screening a genomic deoxyribo¬ 
nucleic acid (DNA) library with a probe derived from the 6-adrenergic 
receptor (P-AR). The isolated clone was called G-21, and its identity was 
unknown; it was later identified as the 5-HT 1A receptor (Fargin et al. 

1988). The list of cloned receptors now includes the 5-HT 1D , 5-HT, B , 
5 -HT, e (also cloned as S31), and three 5-HT receptors from Drosophila. 
Another 5-HT receptor that has been cloned is the 5-HT 3 receptor 
(Maricq et al. 1991). It is not a member of the G-protein-coupled 
receptor family but a member of the ligand-gated ion channel receptor 
family. 

The gene structures of several of the serotonin receptors have been 
determined, including the 5-HT, A , 5-HT 1D , 5-HT 2 , and Drosophila 5-HT 
receptors. Of considerable interest is that 5-HT 1A , receptors, 5-HT m , 
receptors, and two of the three Drosophila receptors are intronless genes, 
whereas the 5-HT 2 receptor and one of the Drosophila receptors contain 
multiple introns. These observations raise questions concerning the 
relationship and evolution of serotonin receptors and G-protein receptors 
in general. 


286 



TABLE 1. Biochemical properties of cloned G-protein-coupled 5-HT 
receptors 


Receptor 

No. Amino 

Acids 

No. 

Introns 

Second 

Messenger 

Species 

5-HT 1A 

421 (human) 

422 (rat) 

0 

CAMP l, 

K + channel, IP 3 

Human, rat 

5-HT 1b 

390 (human) 

386 (rat, mouse) 

0 

CAMP 1 

Human, 
rat, mouse 

5-HT 1d 

377 

0 

CAMP! 

Human, dog 

5-HT 1e (S31) 

365 

0 

cAMPl 

Human 

5-HT lc 

459 (mouse), 

460 (rat) 

Has 

introns; 

no. 

not 

available 

IP 3 

Human, rat, 

mouse 

5-HT 2 

471 

2 

IPs 

Human, rat, 

mouse, 

hamster 

5-HT-DrO[ 

564 

0 

CAMP 1 

Drosophila 

5-HT-Dro 2A 

834 

0 

CAMP 1 

Drosophila 

5-HT-Dro 2B 

645 

4 

CAMP 1 

Drosophila 


287 





Traditionally, classification of receptors has been along lines of shared 
ligands, for example, the serotonin, acetylcholine, or gamma 
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors. However, molecular cloning of 
receptors has demonstrated clearly that protein structural relations are not 
reflected in ligand specificities of receptors. For example, 5-HT acts on 
the G-protein-coupled receptors and the 5-HT 3 receptor coupled with an 
ion channel. The observation that a receptor’s functional and 
evolutionary relationship to other receptors cannot be determined by 
shared ligands is reinforced by the demonstration of the intronless nature 
of some 5-HT receptors. 

Further evidence arose from the molecular cloning of the human and 
mouse 5-HT 2 receptor genes (Chen et al. 1992; Yang et al. 1992). The 
5-HT 2 receptor genes contain three exons for the coding region of the 
receptor (figure 1). This was the first demonstration of an intron 
containing the 5-HT receptor gene; The 5-HT IA , 5-HT B , 5-HT D , and 5-HT E 
receptors are intronless. The 5-HT lc , (Yu et al. 1991) and 5-HT 2 receptors 
have a high degree of sequence homology, and both contain introns. On 
the other hand, 5-HT 1A , 5-HT 1B , and 5-HT, D , receptors are intronless, as is 
the 6-AR. The intronless 5-HT receptors are clearly more closely related 
to the P-AR than to the 5-HT lc , and 5-HT 2 , receptors, based on sequence 
homology and gene structure, but share activating ligand 5-HT with the 
5-HT lc , and 5-HT 2 , receptors, not the more closely related P-AR. 

Thus, in many cases the use by two receptors of the same activating 
ligand is seen as a convergent evolution that does not reflect a common 
ancestral source gene. More anomalies are presented by the structures of 
Drosophila 5-HT receptor genes when evolutionary relationships are 
examined. Three Drosophila 5-HT receptors have been cloned. The 
primary structures of these genes indicate that they are more closely 
related to the intronless 5-HT/B-AR group, but one of these three genes 
in Drosophila contains introns. The intron organization is different from 
that of the 5-HT 2 gene. The questions concerning 5-HT gene structure 
and functional and evolutionary relationships—when and where introns 
were acquired or lost-are open and amenable to further study. 


288 




gene. A-<Clones designated ASE-5 ,ASE-2, and ASH-2 
were isolated from A-phage genomic DNA libraries. 

The filled boxes are the three exon coding regions, and 
the open box is the untranslated region. '//’ represents 
the intron gap between the genomic clones. Arrows 
indicate the start sites and direction of sequencing. The 
restriction enzyme sites are as follows: E = EcoRI; 

X = Xbal; S = Smal; P = PstI; H = HinclIII. 


SOURCE: Chen et al. 1992. Copyright 1992 by Elsevier Science 
Publishers, New York. 


FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE OF 5-HT RECEPTORS 

Except for the 5-HT 3 receptor, 5-HT receptors are members of the 
G-protein-coupled family of integral membrane receptor proteins. These 
receptors show seven hydrophobic regions that are believed to traverse 
the lipid bilayer seven times analogously to bacteriorhodopsin (BR) and 
rhodopsin. This topological structure acts as the major determinant for 
the functional three-dimensional (3-D) structure. The receptors are 
classified into three main domains: the extracellular domain, which 
includes the amino terminal and three extracellular loops between 
membrane spanning regions; the transmembrane domain (TMD), 
consisting of the seven hydrophobic a-helices that span the membrane; 
and the intracellular domain, comprising the carboxy terminal and three 
cytoplasmic loops between the TMDs. 

Experimental evidence indicates that the TMDs form the binding sites for 
agonists and antagonists and that certain TMD residues are necessary for 
allbsteric activation of the G-protein and signal transduction. The 
cyroplasmic loops two and three are implicated in G-protein coupling and 


289 




are necessary for activation of the G-protein and conferring the specific 
G-protein/receptor coupling. Most of the knowledge of the structure and 
function of the G-protein receptors comes from studies of adrenergic and 
muscarinic receptors. The general principles of their structure and 
function mentioned above are expected to be true also for 5-HT receptors 
and other G-protein receptors, but as yet little work has been done on the 
5-HT receptors. The authors’ laboratory has begun an analysis of the rat 
5-HT 2 receptor using site-directed mutagenesis and the known primary 
structures of 5-HT 2 receptors from different species. 


MUTAGENESIS OF ASPARTIC ACID RESIDUES IN THE 5-HT 2 
RECEPTOR-G-PROTEIN COUPLING 

Three aspartic acid (Asp) residues of the rat 5-HT 2 receptor were mutated 
to asparagine (Asn) residues to determine the role of the negatively 
charged aspartate on receptor function. The mutated residues were 
Asp- 120, Asp-1 55, and Asp- 172. The effects of the mutations were 
analyzed by using [ 125 I]-LSD for radioligand binding studies to determine 
agonist and antagonist binding properties and by measuring agonist- 
stimulated [ HJpolyphosphoinositol formation in the mutant and wild- 
type receptors. 

The results indicate that Asp-120 is necessary for the activation of second 
messengers through the G-protein. Mutation of this residue in the second 
TMD abolishes 5-HT-stimulated phosphoinositol (PI) turnover. This 
mutation also confers a loss of affinity for 5-HT and (±)-l-(2,5-dimeth- 
oxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI) binding to the receptor, 
comparable with the loss of affinity seen in wild-type receptors caused by 
the presence of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) that induces uncoupling of 
the receptor G-protein complex and a lower affinity state for agonist. The 
effect of GTP on the binding of 5-HT and DOI is greatly reduced in this 
mutation. Little difference is seen in DOI and 5-HT binding in the 
presence of GTP, whereas the wild-type receptor affinity is greatly 
reduced because of the presence of GTP. These results are consistent 
with Asp- 120 being necessary for G-protein/receptor allostericity where 
the receptor activates the G-protein and the G-protein/receptor complex 
confers the high-affinity agonist binding state to the receptor. When 
uncoupled because of GTP, the receptor exhibits lower affinity agonist 
binding. The Asp-120 mutation is seen as an uncoupled mutant that is 
unable to activate second messenger production because of its inability to 
allosterically modulate the G-protein. This uncoupling may be caused by 


290 



a loss of allosteric effects conferred by the loss of the negatively charged 
aspartate, rather than the loss of a direct interaction between Asp-120 and 
the G-protein, because the position of Asp-120 in the lipid bilayer TMD 
of the protein makes a direct contact unlikely. 

The result of this mutation correlates well with mutagenesis of the P-AR, 
a -adrenergic receptor (a-AR), and muscarinic receptors where the 
cognate Asp in the TMD of these receptors also played the same role. 

The conserved structure of G-protein receptors where an aspartic acid 
occurs in the hydrophobic second TMD suggests that this is an allosteric 
feature retained by all members of the G-protein-coupled receptor family. 


AGONIST-BINDING SITE 

Mutagenesis implicates Asp-155 in the third TMD as being necessary for 
high-affinity agonist and antagonist binding. Mutation of this residue to 
Asn causes a profound loss of binding affinity for the agonists 5-HT and 
DOI, as determined by competition for [ “I]-LSD binding, and also 
decreases antagonist affinity. Phosphoinositide turnover is not abolished 
in this mutant, and GTP-sensitive binding is retained. The role of this 
negative amino acid in the hydrophobic third TMD is presumably to act 
as a counter ion for the amine group of the ligands. As a negative a min o 
acid, Asp-155 acts as one of the epitopes for ligand binding but not as a 
determinant for G-protein coupling. 

These observations parallel those seen for the adrenergic receptors and 
the muscarinic receptor. The conserved nature of the Asp residue in the 
third TMD in receptors for amine-containing ligands (e.g., adrenergic, 
muscarinic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic receptors) and its absence in 
receptors whose ligands do not contain aliphatic amines, support a 
conserved role in binding in the aliphatic amine receptors such as the 
5-HT 2 receptor. 

Another putative binding epitope for 5-HT association with the 5-HT 2 
receptor is serine (Ser)-239 in the fifth TMD. The difference in primary 
structure of the rat and human 5-HT 2 receptors has been advantageous in 
examining this possibility. The human 5-HT 2 receptor and rat receptor 
are highly homologous in their amino acid structure. Both contain 
Ser-239, but one of the three differences in the TMD sequence is seen at 
position 242 in the fifth TMD, where the human receptor expresses a Ser 
and the rat receptor expresses an alanine (Ala). The Ser-239 is predicted 


291 



to act as a hydrogen-bonding site for serotonin’s 5-hydroxyl group in 
both rat and human 5-HT 2 receptors. 

Ser-242 of the human receptor presents another possible hydrogen bond 
donor, whereas Ala-242 of the rat receptor does not. The helical structure 
of the fifth TMD indicates that a hydroxy group at the 4-position of the 
indole ring could interact with Ser-242 of the human receptor with the 
same geometry as 5-HT interacting with Ser-239. Therefore, a 
4-hydroxyl serotonin analog should bind with higher affinity to the 
human receptor than to the rat receptor. 

The hallucinogenic drugs 4-hydroxyd i mcthy Itryptam i nc (psilocin) and 
5 -hydroxydimethyltryptamine (bufotenin), both amino-dimethylated 
analogs of 5-HT, were used to examine this possibility. Psilocin bound to 
human receptors with a fifteenfold higher affinity than to rat receptors, 
whereas bufotenin bound to both species’ receptors with equal affinity 
(less than twofold difference in dissociation constants). These results 
indicate the hydoxyl substituents serve as binding epitopes and that 
Ser-239 associates with 5-hydroxy groups as in serotonin. 

The human receptor with the Ser-242 can bind 4-hydroxytryptamines 
such as psilocin with high affinity, but other 5-HT 2 receptors that express 
Ala-242 do not. These results are also consistent with observations 
concerning the adrenergic receptors and their interactions with ligand 
hydroxy groups. The conservation of hydroxyl-containing amino acids in 
the fifth TMD of receptors for agonists, with hydroxyl substituents 
(e.g., serotonin), but not in those without, also supports this analysis. 


TOPOLOGICAL STRUCTURE 

The role of Asp-172 at the interface of the third TMD and the second 
cytoplasmic loop is not clearly defined by mutagenesis to asparagine. 
This mutation reduces the binding affinity of agonists and antagonists; 
decreases the magnitude of GTP-induced binding affinity changes, but 
does not abolish it; and does not abolish 5-HT-stimulated PI production. 
These results could be interpreted to indicate that Asp-172 may serve as 
an epitope for the ligand amine groups as suggested for Asp-155. 
However, the inconsistency of mutagenesis results in other G-protein 
receptors indicates Asp-172 may serve another role in 5-HT 2 receptor 
structure. When mutated, cognate aspartic acids sometimes abolish 
second messenger stimulation and sometimes do not, depending on the. 


292 



receptor. Asp-172 and its cognates are found in virtually all G-protein 
receptors, regardless of the structure of their ligand, in a three amino acid 
motif of Asp-Arg-Tyr (aspartic acid-arginine-tyrosine [DRY]). Some 
opsin proteins express the functionally analogous motif of Glu-Arg-Tyr 
(ERY). 

It is possible that this motif serves as a topological determinant for the 
positioning of the third TMD in the lipid bilayer. Charged amino acids 
have been shown to serve this function in other membrane proteins (Boyd 
and Beckwith 1989). Mutation of Asp-172 would thus result in a 
changed topography and affect the global 3-D structure of the receptor. 
This mutation would account for lowered affinities seen for ligand 
binding and can account for the loss of G-protein coupling in some 
receptors but not others. The global changes induced by this mutation 
would slightly change the binding site geometry, conferring the observed 
lower affinity binding. In some receptors the topological difference 
would affect G-protein coupling, whereas in others such as the 5-HT 2 
receptor the change would not affect such a coupling. Different receptors 
couple with different G-proteins, so this interpretation is consistent with 
the known properties of G-proteins and the nature of membrane protein 
topological determinants. 


FUTURE 

It is evident that 5-HT 2 receptors and other G-proteins are structurally 
complex and that the mutagenesis studies of these receptors and proteins 
have just begun to address their structure-function relationship. Many 
more studies combining mutagenesis with biophysical investigations can 
reveal the molecular mechanisms of their function. Currently, 
mutagenesis yields the most information regarding the structure of the 
receptors and provides the most easily accessible, although indirect but 
powerful, method to study the structure and function of 5-HT receptors. 

Biophysical studies that can provide direct information concerning 
structure and function are hampered by the unavailability of purified 
receptor preparations. For example, fluorescent ligand studies using 
purified reconstituted 6-AR have shown the binding site to reside in the 
hydrophobic TMD of the receptor, a finding consistent with the results of 
mutagenesis. Because of the low percentage of 5-HT 2 receptor protein 
expressed in brain tissues, the receptors are difficult to purify in any large 
quantity. To overcome this problem, alternate expression systems need 


293 



to be developed in microorganisms such as yeast or bacteria to provide 
ample source materials for purification. 

Detailed knowledge of the structure and function of the 5-HT 2 receptor 
obtained by a variety of methods will provide a basis for designing new 
therapeutic agents for treating diseases associated with 5-HT 2 receptors. 

The isolation of the carrier deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) and genomic 
clones of 5-HT 2 receptors provides more than just a basis for the study of 
their molecular structure and function. The possibility that polymorph¬ 
isms in 5-HT 2 receptor genes may contribute to disease states can be 
examined. Any polymorphisms in the gene can be examined using 
cDNA or gene probes. If a polymorphism is found to be associated with 
a disease state, then the DNA sequences can provide possible diagnostic 
tools for these states. 

The most exciting future project is the regulation of the 5-HT 2 receptor 
gene expression. The promoter region of a gene consists of the core 
promoter, enhancer, and repressor. The core promoter is the region 
controlling the transcription of the gene and is regulated by enhancers or 
repressors. These DNA sequences bind specific protein transcription 
factors to fine-tune gene expression. An example of such gene 
expression regulatory factor is SP-1 proteins known to be active in the 
regulation of monoamine oxidase A gene expression, 

Researchers are at an exciting point where they can use molecular 
biological techniques to investigate the mechanisms for regulation of the 
5-HT 2 receptor gene. It is now possible to investigate whether 
hallucinogenic agents play a role in the gene expression by influencing 
either cis-element or Iran.?-element. 

Moreover, it is interesting to note that there may be tissue-specific 
elements in the 5-HT 2 receptor promoter. Once brain-specific elements 
are identified, it would be possible to manipulate the expression of the 
receptor only in the brain to better understand the function of brain 5-HT 2 
receptors and their relation to hallucinogenic effects. This new 
knowledge will help researchers to design therapeutic agents that are 
brain specific. Any mutations in this region may affect the expression of 
the receptor and contribute to diseases. The molecular cloning of the 
5-HT 2 receptor gene allows many possibilities to be examined and can 
contribute to the knowledge and treatment of mental disease or other 
serotonin-related illnesses. 


294 



REFERENCES 


Boyd, D., and Beckwith, J. Positively charged amino acid residues can 
act as topogenic determinants in membrane proteins. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 86:9446-9450, 1989. 

Chen, K.; Yang, W.; Grimsby, J.; and Shih, J.C. The human 5-HT 2 
receptor is encoded by a multiple intron-exon gene. Mol Brain Res 
14:20-26, 1992. 

Conn, P.J., and Sanders-Bush, E. Regulation of serotonin-stimulated 
phosphoinositide hydrolysis: Relation to the serotonin 5-HT 2 binding 
site. J Neurosci 6:3669-3675, 1986. 

Fargin, A.; Raymond, J.R.; Lohse, M.J.; Kobilka, B.K.; Cat-on, M.G.; and 
Lefkowitz, R.J. The genomic clone of G-21 which resembles a 
B-adrenergic receptor sequence encodes the 5-HT, A receptor. Nature 
335:358-360, 1988. 

Gaddum, J.H., and Picarelli, Z.P. Two kinds of tryptamine receptors. Br J 
Pharmacol Chemother 12:323-328, 1957. 

Hofmann, A. Chemistry of LSD. In: Sankar, D., ed. LSD: A Total Study. 
Westbury, NY: PJD Publications, 1975. pp. 107-139. 

Julius, D.; MacDermot, A.B.; Axel, R.; and Jessell, T.M. Molecular 
characterization of a functional cDNA encoding the serotonin 1C 
receptor. Science 241:558-564, 1988. 

Maricq, A.V.; Peterson, A.S.; Brake, A.J.; Myers, R.M.; and Julius, D. 
Primary structure and functional expression of the 5-HT 3 receptor, a 
serotonin-gated ion channel. Science 254:432-437, 1991. 

Meltzer, H.Y., and Lowy, M.T. The serotonin hypothesis of depression. 
In: Meltzer, H.Y., ed. Psychopharmacology: The Third Generation of 
Progress. New York: Raven Press, 1987. pp. 513-526. 

Peroutka, S.J., and Snyder, S.H. Multiple serotonin receptors: Differential 
binding of [ H]5-hydroxytryptamine, [ H]lysergic acid diethylamide 
and [ 3 H]spiroperidol. Mol Pharmacol 16:687-699, 1979. 

Pierce, P.A., and Peroutka, S.J. Hallucinogenic drug interactions with 
neurotransmitter receptor binding sites in human cortex. 
Psychopharmacology 97:118-122, 1989. 

Pritchett, D.B.; Bach, A.W.J.; Wozny, M.; Taleb, O.; Dal Toso, R.; Shih, 
J.C.; and Seeberg, P.H. Structure and functional expression of cloned 
rat serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor. EMBO J 7:4135-4140, 1988. 

Sadzot, B.; Baraban, J.M.; Glennon, R.A.; Lyon, R.A.; Leonhardt, S.; 

Jan, C.-R.; and Titeler, M. Hallucinogenic drug interactions at human 
brain 5-HT 2 receptors: Implications for treating LSD-induced 
hallucinogenesis. Psychopharmacology 98:495-499, 1989. 


295 



Schultes, R.E. The appeal of Peyote (Lophophora williamsii) as a 
medicine. Am Anthropologist 40:698-715, 1938. 

Schultes, R.E. An overview of hallucinogens in the western hemisphere. 
In: Furst P., ed. Flesh of the Gods: The Ritual Use of Hallucinogens. 
New York: Praeger, 1972. pp. 3-54. 

Schultes, R.E., and Hofmann, A. The Botany and Chemistry of 
Hallucinogens. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1973. 

Shih, J.C.; Yang, W.; Chen, K., and Gallaher, T. Molecular biology of 
serotonin (5-HT) receptors. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 40:1053-1058, 
1991. 

Shoichet, R., and Solursh, L. Treatment of the hallucinogenic drug crisis. 

Appl Therapeutics 11:283-286, 1969. 

Sternbach, H. The serotonin syndrome. Am J Psychiatry 148:705-713, 
1991. 

Vanhoutte, P.M. Does 5-hydroxytryptamine play a role in hypertension? 

Trends Pharmacol Sci 3:370-373, 1982. 

Yang, W.; Chen, K.; Lan, N.C.; Gallaher, T.K.; and Shih, J.C. Gene 
structure and expression of the mouse 5-HT 2 receptor. J Neuro sci Res 
33:196-204, 1992. 

Yu, L.; Nguyen, H.; Bloem, L.J.; Kozak, C.A.; Hoffman, B.J.; Snutch, 
T.P.; Lester, H.A.; Davidson, N.; and Lubbert, H. The mouse 5-HT lc 
receptor contains eight hydrophobic domains and is X-linked. Mol 
Brain Res 11:143-149, 1991. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health grants 
R01-MH37020, R37-MH39085 (Merit Award), and Research Scientist 
Award K05-MH00796. The support from the Boyd and Elsie Welin 
Professorship is also appreciated. 


296 



AUTHORS 


Jean C. Shih, Ph.D. 

Boyd and Elsie Welin Professor 

Kevin Chen, Ph.D. 

Research Associate Professor 

Timothy K. Gallaher, Ph.D. 

Research Associate 

Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology 
University of Southern California School of Pharmacy 
1985 Zonal Avenue 
Los Angeles, CA 90033 


297 



Summary 

Richard A. Glennon 

It is perhaps appropriate that the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(NIDA) sponsored a technical review on hallucinogenic agents during the 
500th anniversary of Columbus’ sailing to the New World, because it is 
reportedly Columbus who wrote the first account of the use of 
psychoactive (presumably tryptamine- or 6-carboline-containing) plants 
in this hemisphere (Holmstedt and Lindgren 1967; Wassen 1967). 

This meeting was the first technical review devoted solely to classical 
hallucinogens and covered the exciting progress being made in 
researchers’ understanding of this class of agents. Just before coming to 
this meeting, the author reread the monographs from the NIDA technical 
reviews of hallucinogenic agents held in 1976 and 1978. An enormous 
amount of progress has been made on some fronts, whereas more needs 
to be done on others. The earlier two meetings were primarily concerned 
with the identification of new chemical entities and the development of 
novel pharmacological techniques and animal models to investigate 
hallucinogenic agents. For example, both of those reviews were held 
before the widespread use of radioligand binding and autoradiography, 
the discovery of multiple populations of central serotonin (5-HT) 
receptors, elucidation of second messenger systems, molecular graphics, 
and receptor cloning. Consequently the present meeting addressed topics 
and issues and described technologies that were essentially unknown at 
the time of the prior meetings. Serotonin, (5-HT 2 ) receptors were 
originally identified in 1979 and were first implicated as playing a 
mechanistic role in the actions of hallucinogens in 1983. Much of the 
focus of the present meeting was on 5-HT 2 receptors. 

There has been, and continues to be, dissatisfaction with the term 
hallucinogen; not all classical hallucinogens produce frank 
hallucinations. This point was emphasized by the first several speakers, 
including Szara, Glennon, and Shulgin. Szara presented a historical 
perspective of the different phases of research with classical 
hallucinogens over the years and concluded with the suggestion that these 
agents be referred to as psychoheuristic agents. Many of the attendees 
agreed that a new terminology would be useful, but there was no 
consensus on any specific term. 


298 



After an introductory overview on classical hallucinogens by Glennon, 
Shulgin and Strassman presented papers on the human evaluation, 
including qualitative and quantitative aspects, of hallucinogens. 

Shulgin's presentation was broad in scope, of a review nature, and 
covered many examples of the classical hallucinogens. In contrast, 
Strassman described in depth his recent clinical studies on one specific 
agent, N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT). Both speakers commented on a 
need for the availability of more human data; this feeling was shared by 
many of the participants. 

During the overview, it was mentioned that structure-activity 
relationships (SAR) have been formulated for certain subclasses of the 
classical hallucinogens but that such information is rather limited with 
regard to ergoline derivatives. Nichols presented the results of his timely 
SAR studies on ergolines, with specific emphasis on the nature of 
substituents at the 6- and 8-positions. 

The next two speakers, Geyer and Winter, presented new data and 
reviewed some of the older results using several animal techniques that 
have been employed to study a large number of classical hallucinogens 
and structurally related agents. It might be noted that these techniques 
were scarcely mentioned during the 1976 and 1978 meetings. 

Aghajanian outlined his work on the electrophysiology of hallucinogens 
and addressed the issue of whether these agents act as agonists, 
antagonists, or partial agonists. Depending upon what cells are 
examined, it appears that hallucinogens behave as agonists or partial 
agonists; in some cells, there is evidence that certain hallucinogens appear 
to have a significantly greater intrinsic activity than 5-HT itself. Sanders- 
Bush also addressed this issue and further described her second 
messenger studies attempting to find differences in the actions of agents 
at 5-HT 2 and 5-HT, c receptors. Although hallucinogens bind at both 
populations of receptors, it is not yet known which (or whether both) are 
involved in their mechanism of action. Sanders-Bush showed that 
(+)LSD is a partial agonist, and the non-hallucinogenic 2-bromo-LSD 
(BOL) is a pure antagonist both at 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors, whereas 
lisuride is a pure antagonist at 5-HT 1C receptors but a partial agonist at 
5-HT 2 receptors. Lisuride could become a useful tool to further study the 
role of 5-HT lc versus 5-HT 2 receptors. 

The locus of action of hallucinogens in the brain is unknown. With the 
recent availability of radiolabeled hallucinogens and hallucinogen 


299 



analogs, it should eventually be possible to identify such loci. Appel 
described his (and others’) work using autoradiography, positron 
emission tomography (PET) scanning, and other imaging techniques to 
label 5-HT 2 and 5-HT lc receptors, and apprised the participants of new 
techniques currently being developed. 

After discussion about human and animal evaluations and studies at the 
molecular, receptor, and second messenger level, the concluding session 
was devoted to investigations at the atomic level. Weinstein and 
Westkaemper presented their attempts to develop molecular graphics 
models of 5-HT 2 receptors. Both models begin with the known structure 
of bacteriorhodopsin, but each investigator described a unique approach 
to the problem. Weinstein presented a model to account for the actions of 
agonists, antagonists, and partial agonists, whereas Westkaemper 
identified several specific amino acid residues that could be important for 
ligand binding. One such key residue is the aspartate of transmembrane 
helix III. The models, although hypothetical, provide a framework for 
future investigation. Indeed, both models have been recently revised 
(Westkaemper and Glennon 1993; Zhang and Weinstein 1993). Shift 
outlined her work with the cloning of 5-HT 2 receptors and with site- 
directed mutagenesis. Mutation of the above mentioned aspartate to 
arginine reduces significantly the affinity of 5-HT 2 ligands, supporting a 
role for this aspartate moiety in a binding interaction, Additional site- 
directed mutagenesis is required to further test the receptor models. 

Again, it should be emphasized that the present meeting was very timely. 
Certain philosophical issues such as terminology and explicit definition 
of the actions of classical hallucinogens remain undefined but, while 
important, have not detracted from other scientific studies. It is realized 
that animal models have severe limitations but provide useful data; this is 
particularly true when human data are hard to come by. Nevertheless, 
there was a consensus that there is an urgent need for new human testing. 
There is also a realization that certain agents are enigmatic in that they are 
routinely identified as being “active” in certain animal models even 
though human data (scant as they may be in some instances) suggest that 
they are not hallucinogenic. Hopefully, these agents will be used to 
challenge other animal models, and, conversely, the agents themselves 
may become the subject of additional investigations. 

The identification of 5-HT 2 (perhaps 5-HT lc ) receptors as possibly being 
involved in the action of hallucinogens has provided a focal point for new 
studies. State-of-the-art techniques and methodologies have been brought 


300 



to hear to investigate this possibility. There is no question that 
hallucinogens interact at both populations of receptors (regardless of 
whether this is their site of action); thus, hallucinogens are providing a 
stimulus for the investigation of these, and other, populations of 
receptors. 

Legitimate human investigation with classical hallucinogens was severely 
curtailed about 25 years ago. During the ensuing period, a significant 
body of information has been accrued primarily on the basis of animal 
studies. Novel agents have been identified, mechanisms of action have 
been proposed, new animal models have been developed, and means to 
antagonize the effects of classical hallucinogens have been described. 

New clinical data are now required to challenge or validate the results of 
these studies. 


REFERENCES 

Holmstedt, B., and Lindgren, J. Chemical constituents and pharmacology 
of South American snuffs. In: Efron, D.H.; Holmstedt, B.; and Kline, 
N.S., eds. Ethnopharmacological Search for Psychoactive Drugs. 
National Institutes of Mental Health, Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., 
U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1967. pp 339-373. 

Wassen, S.H. Anthropological survey of the use of South American 
snuffs. In: Efron, D.H.; Holmstedt, B.; and Kline, N.S., eds. 
Ethnopharmacological Search for Psychoactive Drugs. National 
Institutes of Mental Health, Washington, DC: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 
1967. pp 233-289. 

Westkaemper, R.B., and Glennon, R.A. Molecular graphics models of 
members of the 5-HT 2 subfamily: 5-HT 2A , 5-HT 2B , and 5-HT 2C , 
receptors. Med Client Res 3:317-324, 1993. 

Zhang, D., and Weinstein,, H. Ligand selectivity and the molecular 
properties of the 5-HT 2 receptor: Computational simulations reveal a 
major role for transmembrane helix 7. Med Client Res 3:357-369, 

1993. 


301 



National 
Institute on 



While limited supplies last, single copies of the monographs may be 
obtained free of charge from the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and 
Drug Information (NCADI). Please also contact NCADI for information 
about availability of coming issues and other publications of the National 
Institute on Drug Abuse relevant to drug abuse research. 

Additional copies may be purchased from the U.S. Government Printing 
Office (GPO) and/or the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) 
as indicated. NTIS prices are for paper copy; add $3.00 handling charge 
for each order. Microfiche copies also are available from NTIS. Prices 
from either source are subject to change. 

Addresses are: 


NCADI 

National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information 
P.O. Box 2345 
Rockville, MD 20852 
(301) 468-2600 
(800) 729-6686 

GPO 

Superintendent of Documents 
U.S. Government Printing Office 
P.O. Box 371954" 

Pittsburgh, PA 15220-7954 
(202) 738-3238 
FAX (202)512-2233 

NTIS 

National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
Springfield, VA 22161 
(703) 487-4650 

For information on availability of NIDA Research Monographs from 
1975-1993 and those not listed, write to N1DA, Community and 
Professional Education Branch, Room 10A-39, 5600 Fishers Lane, 
Rockville, MD 20857. 


302 



26 THE BEHAVIORAL ASPECTS OF SMOKING. Norman A. 
Krasnegor, Ph.D., ed. (Reprint from 1979 Surgeon General’s 
Report on Smoking and Health.) 

NCADI#M26 NTIS PB #80-118755/AS (A09) $27.00 

42 THE ANALYSIS OF CANNABINOIDS IN BIOLOGICAL 
FLUIDS. Richard L. Hawks, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M42 NTIS PB #83-136044/AS (A07) $27.00 

50 COCAINE: PHARMACOLOGY, EFFECTS, AND 
TREATMENT OF ABUSE. John Grabowski, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M50 NTIS PB #85-150381/AS (A07) $27.00 

52 TESTING DRUGS FOR PHYSICAL DEPENDENCE 
POTENTIAL AND ABUSE LIABILITY. Joseph V. Brady, Ph.D., 
and Scott E. Lukas, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M52 NTIS PB #85-150373/AS (A08) $27.00 

53 PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCTS IN SMOKING 
CESSATION. John Grabowski, Ph.D., and Sharon M. Hall, Ph.D., 
eds. 

NCADI #M53 NTIS PB #89-123186/AS (A07) $27.00 

54 MECHANISMS OF TOLERANCE AND DEPENDENCE. 

Charles Wm. Sharp, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M54 NTIS PB #89-103279/AS (A19) $52.00 

56 ETIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE: IMPLICATIONS FOR 

PREVENTION. Coryl LaRue Jones, Ph.D., and Robert J. Battjes, 
D.S.W., eds. 

NCADI #M56 NTIS PB #89-123160/AS (A13) $36.50 

61 COCAINE USE IN AMERICA: EPIDEMIOLOGIC AND 
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES. Nicholas J. Kozel, M.S., and Edgar 
H. Adams, MS., eds. 

NCADI #M61 NTIS PB #89-131866/AS (A1 1) $36.50 

62 NEUROSCIENCE METHODS IN DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH. 

Roger M. Brown, Ph.D., and David P. Friedman, Ph.D., eds. 
NCADI #M62 NTIS PB #89-130660/AS (A08) $27.00 


303 



63 PREVENTION RESEARCH: DETERRING DRUG ABUSE 
AMONG CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS. Catherine S. Bell, 
M.S., and Robert J. Battjes, D.S.W., eds. 

NCADI #M63 NTIS PB #89-103287/AS (All) $36.50 

64 PHENCYCLIDINE: AN UPDATE. Doris H. Clouet, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M64 NTIS PB #89-131858/AS (A12) $36.50 

65 WOMEN AND DRUGS: A NEW ERA FOR RESEARCH. 

Barbara A. Ray, Ph.D., and Monique C. Braude, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M65 NTIS PB #89-130637/AS (A06) $27.00 

69 OPIOID PEPTIDES: MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY. Rao S. 

Rapaka, Ph.D.; Gene Barnett, Ph.D.; and Richard L. Hawks, Ph.D., 
eds. 

NCADI #M69 NTIS PB #89-158422/AS (A17) $44.50 

70 OPIOID PEPTIDES: MOLECULAR PHARMACOLOGY, 
BIOSYNTHESIS, AND ANALYSIS. Rao S. Rapaka, Ph.D., and 
Richard L. Hawks, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M70 NTIS PB #89-158430/AS (A18) $52.00 

72 RELAPSE AND RECOVERY IN DRUG ABUSE. Frank M. 

Tims, Ph.D., and Carl G. Leukefeld, D.S.W., eds. 

NCADI #M72 NTIS PB #89-151963/AS (A09) $36.50 

74 NEUROBIOLOGY OF BEHAVIORAL CONTROL IN DRUG 
ABUSE. Stephen I. Szara, M.D., D.Sc., ed. 

NCADI #M74 NTIS PB #89-151989/AS (A07) $27.00 

78 THE ROLE OF NEUROPLASTICITY IN THE RESPONSE TO 
DRUGS. David P. Friedman, Ph.D., and Doris H. Clouet, Ph.D., 
eds. 

NCADI #M78 NTIS PB #88-245683/AS (A10) $36.50 

79 STRUCTURE-ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIPS OF THE 
CANNABINOIDS. Rao S. Rapaka, Ph.D., and Alexandras 
Makriyannis, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M79 NTIS PB #89-109201/AS (A10) $36.50 


304 



80 NEEDLE SHARING AMONG INTRAVENOUS DRUG 
ABUSERS: NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL 
PERSPECTIVES. Robert J. Battjes, D.S.W., and Roy W. Pickens, 
Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M80 NTIS PB #88-236138/AS (A09) $36.50 

82 OPIOIDS IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS. Jacqueline F. McGinty, 

Ph.D., and David P. Friedman, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M82 NTIS PB #88-245691/AS (A06) $27.00 

83 HEALTH HAZARDS OF NITRITE INHALANTS. Harry W. 
Haverkos, M.D., and John A. Dougherty, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M83 NTIS PB #89-125496/AS (A06) $27.00 

84 LEARNING FACTORS IN SUBSTANCE ABUSE. Barbara A. 
Ray, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M84 NTIS PB #89- 125504/AS (A10) $36.50 

85 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF INHALANT ABUSE: AN UPDATE. 
Raquel A. Crider, Ph.D., and Beatrice A. Rouse, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M85 NTIS PB #89-123178/AS (A10) $36.50 

87 OPIOID PEPTIDES: AN UPDATE. Rao S. Rapaka, Ph.D., and 
Bhola N. Dhawan, M.D., eds. 

NCADI #M87 NTIS PB #89-158430/AS (All) $36.50 

88 MECHANISMS OF COCAINE ABUSE AND TOXICITY. Doris 
H. Clouet, Ph.D.; Khursheed Asghar, Ph.D.; and Roger M. Brown, 
Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M88 NTIS PB #89-125512/AS (A16) $44.50 

89 BIOLOGICAL VULNERABILITY TO DRUG ABUSE. Roy W. 
Pickens, Ph.D., and Date S. Svikis, B.A., eds. 

NCADI #M89 NTIS PB #89-125520/AS (A09) $27.00 

92 TESTING FOR ABUSE LIABILITY OF DRUGS IN HUMANS. 
Marian W. Fischman, Ph.D., and Nancy K. Mello, Ph.D., eds. 
NCADI #M92 NTIS PB #90-148933/AS (A17) $44.50 


305 



94 PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY OF AMPHETAMINE 
AND RELATED DESIGNER DRUGS. Khursheed Asghar, Ph.D., 
and Errol De Souza, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M94 NTIS PB #90-148958/AS (A16) $44.50 

95 PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, 1989. PROCEEDINGS 
OF THE 51st ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING. THE 
COMMITTEE ON PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, INC. 
Louis S. Harris, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M95 NTIS PB #90-237660/AS (A99) $67.00 

96 DRUGS OF ABUSE: CHEMISTRY, PHARMACOLOGY, 
IMMUNOLOGY, AND AIDS. Phuong Thi Kim Pham, Ph.D., and 
Kenner Rice, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M96 NTIS PB #90-237678/AS (All) $36.50 

97 NEUROBIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE: LEARNING AND 
MEMORY. Lynda Erinoff, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M97 NTIS PB #90-237686/AS (All) $36.50 

98 THE COLLECTION AND INTERPRETATION OF DATA 
FROM HIDDEN POPULATIONS. Elizabeth Y. Lambert, M.S., 
ed. 

NCADI #M98 NTIS PB #90-237694/AS (A08) $27.00 

99 RESEARCH FINDINGS ON SMOKING OF ABUSED 
SUBSTANCES. C. Nora Chiang, Ph.D., and Richard L. Hawks, 
Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M99 NTIS PB #91-141119 (A09) $27.00 

100 DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE: RESEARCH AND 
EVALUATION DATA. VOL II. Steven W. Gust, Ph.D.; 

J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D.; Linda B. Thomas, B.S.; and Dennis J. 
Crouch, M.B.A., eds. 

NCADI #M 100 GPO Stock #017-024-01458-3 $8.00 

101 RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF ABUSED DRUGS ON BEHAVIOR. 
John W. Spencer, Ph.D., and John J. Boren, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M101 NTIS PB #91-172858/AS (A09) $27.00 


306 



102 ANABOLIC STEROID ABUSE. Geraline C. Lin, Ph.D., and 
Lynda Erinoff, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M102 NTIS PB #91-172866/AS (All) $36.50 

106 IMPROVING DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT. Roy W. Pickens, 
Ph.D.; Carl G. Leukefeld, D.S.W.; and Charles R. Schuster, Ph.D., 
eds. 

NCADI #M106 NTIS PB #92-105873(A18) $50.00 

107 DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION INTERVENTION RESEARCH: 
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES. Call G. Leukefeld, D.S.W., and 
William J. Bukoski, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M107 NTIS PB #92-160985 (A13) $36.50 

108 CARDIOVASCULAR TOXICITY OF COCAINE: 

UNDERLYING MECHANISMS. Pushpa V. Thadani, Ph.D., ed. 
NCADI #M108 NTIS PB #92-106608 (All) $36.50 

109 LONGITUDINAL STUDIES OF HIV INFECTION IN 
INTRAVENOUS DRUG USERS: METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES 
IN NATURAL HISTORY RESEARCH. Peter Hartsock, Dr. P.H., 
and Sander G. Genser, M.D., M.P.H., eds. 

NCADI #M109 NTIS PB #92-106616 (A08) $27.00 

111 MOLECULAR APPROACHES TO DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH: 
RECEPTOR CLONING, NEUROTRANSMITTER 
EXPRESSION, AND MOLECULAR GENETICS: VOLUME I. 
Theresa N.H. Lee, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M111 NTIS PB #92-135743 (A10) $36.50 

112 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES AND NEW DIRECTIONS IN 
DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH. Rao S. Rapaka, Ph.D.; Alexandras 
Makriyannis, Ph.D.; and Michael J. Kuhar, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M112 NTIS PB #92-155449 (A15) $44.50 

113 ECONOMIC COSTS, COST EFFECTIVENESS, FINANCING, 
AND COMMUNITY-BASED DRUG TREATMENT. William S. 
Cartwright, Ph.D., and James M. Kaple, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M113 NTIS PB #92-155795 (A10) $36.50 


307 



114 METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES IN CONTROLLED STUDIES 

ON EEEECTS OE PRENATAL EXPOSURE TO DRUG ABUSE. 
M. Marlyne Kilbey, Ph.D., and Khursheed Asghar, Ph.D., eds. 
NCADI #M114 NTIS PB #92-146216 (A16) $44.50 

115 METHAMPHETAMINE ABUSE: EPIDEMIOLOGIC ISSUES 
AND IMPLICATIONS. Marissa A. Miller, D.V.M., M.P.H., and 
Nicholas J. Kozel, MS., eds. 

NCADI #M115 NTIS PB #92-146224/11 (A07) $27.00 

116 DRUG DISCRIMINATION: APPLICATIONS TO DRUG 

ABUSE RESEARCH. R.A. Glennon, Ph.D.; Toubjorn U.C. Jarbe, 
Ph.D.; and J. Frankenheim, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M116 NTIS PB #94-169471 (A20) $52.00 

117 METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES IN EPIDEMIOLOGY, 
PREVENTION, AND TREATMENT RESEARCH ON DRUG- 
EXPOSED WOMEN AND THEIR CHILDREN. M. Marlyve 
Kilbey, Ph.D., and Kursheed Asghar, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01472-g $12.00 
NCADI #M117 NTIS PB #93-102101/LL (A18) $52.00 

118 DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT IN PRISONS AND JAILS. Call 
G. Leukefeld, D.S.W., and Frank M. Tims, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01473-7 $16.00 
NCADI #M118 NTIS PB #93-102143/LL (A14) $44.50 

120 BIOAVAILABILITY OF DRUGS TO THE BRAIN AND THE 
BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER. Jerry Frankenheim, Ph.D., and 
Roger M. Brown, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01481-8 $10.00 
NCADI #M120 NTIS PB #92-214956/LL (A12) $36.50 

121 BUPRENORPHINE: AN ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT FOR 
OPIOID DEPENDENCE. Jack D. Blame, Ph.D., ed. 

GPO Stock #117-024-01482-6 $5.00 
NCADI #M121 NTIS PB #93-129781/LL (A08) $27.00 

123 ACUTE COCAINE INTOXICATION: CURRENT METHODS 
OF TREATMENT. Heinz Sorer, Ph.D., ed. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01501-6 $6.50 
NCADI #M123 NTIS PB #94-15433/LL (A09) $27.00 


308 



124 NEUROBIOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO BRAIN-BEHAVIOR 
INTERACTION. Roger M. Brown, Ph.D., and Joseph Fracella, 
Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01492-3 $9.00 
NCADI #M124 NTIS PB #93-203834/LL (A12) $36.50 

125 ACTIVATION OF IMMEDIATE EARLY GENES BY DRUGS 
OF ABUSE. Reinhard Grzanna, Ph.D., and Roger M. Brown, 

Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01503-2 $7.50 
NCADI #M125 NTIS PB #94-169489 (A12) $36.50 

126 MOLECULAR APPROACHES TO DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH 
VOLUME II: STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND EXPRESSION. 
Theresa N.H. Lee, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M126 NTIS PB #94-169497 (A08) $27.00 

127 PROGRESS AND ISSUES IN CASE MANAGEMENT. Rebecca 
Sager Ashery, D.S.W., ed. 

NCADI #M127 NTIS PB #94-169505 (A18) $52.00 

128 STATISTICAL ISSUES IN CLINICAL TRIALS FOR 
TREATMENT OF OPIATE DEPENDENCE. Ram B. Jain, Ph.D., 
ed. 

NCADI #M128 NTIS PB #93-203826/LL (A09) $27.00 

129 INHALANT ABUSE: A VOLATILE RESEARCH AGENDA. 
Charles W. Sharp, Ph.D.; Fred Beauvais, Ph.D., and Richard 
Spence, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01496-6 $12.00 
NCADI #M129 NTIS PB #93-183119/LL (A15) $44.50 

130 DRUG ABUSE AMONG MINORITY YOUTH: ADVANCES IN 
RESEARCH AND METHODOLOGY. Mario De La Rosa, Ph.D., 
and Juan-Luis Recio Adrados, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01506-7 $14.00 
NCADI #M130 NTIS PB #94-169513 (A15) $44.50 


309 



13 1 IMPACT OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG DIVERSION CONTROL 
SYSTEMS ON MEDICAL PRACTICE AND PATIENT CARE. 
James R. Cooper, Ph.D.; Dorynne J. Czechowicz, M.D.; Stephen P. 
Molinari, J.D., R.Ph.; and Robert C. Peterson, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01505-9 $14.00 
NCADI #M131 NTIS PB #94-169521 (A15) $44.50 

132 PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, 1992: PROCEEDINGS 
OF THE 54TH ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING OF THE 
COLLEGE ON PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE. Louis 
Harris, Ph.D., ed. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01502-4 $23.00 
NCADI #M132 NTIS PB #94-115508/LL (A99) 

133 SIGMA, PCP, AND NMDA RECEPTORS. Errol B. De Souza, 

Ph.D.: Doris Clouet, Ph.D., and Edythe D. London, Ph.D., eds. 
NCADI #M133 NTIS PB #94-169539 (A12) $36.50 

134 MEDICATIONS DEVELOPMENT: DRUG DISCOVERY, 

DATABASES, AND COMPUTER-AIDED DRUG DESIGN. Rao 
S. Rapaka, Ph.D., and Richard L. Hawks, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-0151 1-3 $11.00 
NCADI #M134 NTIS PB #94-169547 (A14) $44.50 

135 COCAINE TREATMENT: RESEARCH AND CLINICAL 
PERSPECTIVES. Frank M. Tims, Ph.D., and Carl G. Leukefeld, 
D.S.W., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01520-2 $11.00 
NCADI #M135 NTIS PB #94-1 69554 (A13) $36.50 

136 ASSESSING NEUROTOXICITY OF DRUGS OF ABUSE. 

Lynda Erinoff, Ph.D., ed. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01518-1 $11.00 
NCADI #M136 NTIS PB #94-169562 (A13) $36.50 

137 BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS FOR DRUG ABUSE AND 
DEPENDENCE. Lisa Simon Onken, Ph.D.; Jack D. Blame, M.D., 
and John J. Boren, Ph.D., eds. 

GPO Stock #017-024-01519-9 $13.00 
NCADI #M137 NTIS PB #94-169570 (A15) $44.50 


310 



138 


IMAGING TECHNIQUES IN MEDICATIONS 
DEVELOPMENT: CLINICAL AND PRECLINICAL ASPECTS. 
Heinz Sorer, Ph.D., and Rao S. Rapaka, Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M138 

139 SCIENTIFIC METHODS FOR PREVENTION INTERVENTION 
RESEARCH. Arturo Cazares, M.D., M.P.H., and Lula A. Beatty, 
Ph.D., eds. 

NCADI #M139 

140 PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, 1993: PROCEEDINGS 
OF THE 55TH ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING, THE 
COLLEGE ON PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, INC. 
VOLUME I: PLENARY SESSION SYMPOSIA AND ANNUAL 
REPORTS. Louis S. Harris, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M140 

141 PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, 1993: PROCEEDINGS 
OF THE 55TH ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING, THE 
COLLEGE ON PROBLEMS OF DRUG DEPENDENCE, INC. 
VOLUME II: ABSTRACTS. Louis S. Harris, Ph.D., ed. 

NCADI #M141 

142 ADVANCES IN DATA ANALYSIS FOR PREVENTION 
INTERVENTION RESEARCH. Linda M. Collins, Ph.D., and 
Larry A. Seitz, Ph.D., eds. 

143 THE CONTEXT OF HIV RISK AMONG DRUG USERS AND 
THEIR SEXUAL PARTNERS. Robert J. Battjes, D.S.W.; Zili 
Sloboda, Sc.D.; and William C. Grace, Ph.D., eds. 

144 THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY: ADVANCES IN RESEARCH 
AND APPLICATION. Frank M. Tims, Ph.D.; George De Leon, 
Ph. D.; and Nancy Jainchill, Ph.D., eds. 

145 NEUROBIOLOGICAL MODELS FOR EVALUATING 
MECHANISMS UNDERLYING COCAINE ADDICTION. 

Lynda Erinoff, Ph.D., and Roger M. Brown, Ph.D., eds. 


rtU.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1994 /300-973 00004 


311 



NIDA 

mm 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE 



NIH Publication No. 94-3872 
Printed 1994 







