DOCUMENT RESUME

SE 007 743

ED 034 696
AUTROP
TITLE
1rNSTTTUTTON

PUB DATP
NOTE

Meyer, Roger E. , Fd.
Adverse Reactions to Hallucinogenic Drugs.
National Test. of Mental Health (DHEW) , Bethesda, Md.
Sep 67
118p.; Conference held at the National Institute of
Mental Health, Chevy Chase, Maryland, September 29,
1967

AVATLABLE FROM

Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing
Office, Washington, D. C. 20402 ($1.25).

FDPS PRICE
DESCPTPTOPS

FDPS Price MFc0.50 HC Not Available from EDRS.
Conference Reports, *Drug Abuse, Health Education,
*Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, *Medical Research,
*Mental Health
Hallucinogenic Drugs

IDENTIFIEPS
ABSTPACT

This reports a conference of psychologists,
psychiatrists, geneticists and others concerned with the biological
and psychological effects of lysergic acid diethylamide and other
hallucinogenic drugs. Clinical data are presented on adverse drug
reactions. The difficulty of determining the causes of adverse
reactions is discussed, as are different methods of therapy. Data are
also presented on the psychological and physiolcgical effects of
L.S.D. given as a treatment under controlled medical conditions.
Possible genetic effects of L.S.D. and other drugs are discussed on
the basis of data from laboratory animals and humans. Also discussed
are needs for futher research. The necessity to aviod scare
techniques in disseminating information about drugs is emphasized. An
aprentlix includes seven background papers reprinted from professional
journals, and a bibliography of current articles on the possible
genetic effects of drugs. (EB)

National Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information

alb

Alb

VA-w.

!bAm

I.S. MOMS Of NAM MON t MAN
IONE Of NMI
105 NUNN NU IN WINES UAW AS RCM NIN 01

NUN N ONMININI 01011110 0. NOS 01 NM N INNIS
STAN w IN OKISSANY MIN OMDAt NM Of MAIN

MINN N SUM
11.11_

oh,

t\
O

The National list'

a of Mental Health

Koski

Mental

of

WNW.

MANNA

Administration

Health

Mental

and

Services

Health

Service

Health

Public

WELFARE

AND

EDUCATION.

HEALTH.

OF

DEPARTMENT

U.S.

Editor

M.D.,

Meyer,

L

Roger

1967

29,

September

Maryland,

Chase,

Chevy

Health

Mental

of

institute

National

the

at

Held

Conference

Papers

Background

with

DRUGS

HALLUCINOGENIC

TO

REACTIONS

ADVERSE

i.4,1

C.:11

0

MENTAL

FOR

CLIAIIINONOINM

NATIONAL

4.

INFORMATION

HEALTH

Pr>,

014 43

Public Health Services Publication No. 18io
1969

For sale by Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Dike,
Price S1.23
Washington, D.C. 20402

Foreword
The National Institute of Mental Health through its Center for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse serves as the focal point for support of research into the problems of drug abuse. The growing problem of hallucinogenic drug usage has been of
great concern to the staff of this Center. In the midst of reports of the spreading epidemic of drug misuse and its sequelae, the National Institute of Mental Health has
sought to clarify the many questions and myths that have arisen in both the lay and

scientific press.

Consistent with this effort, the Center for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse
sponsored a meeting of scientists in September 1967 to discuss the psychological and
biological sequelae of LSD use. This volume consists of the proceedings of that meeting, plus significant background papers which were available to the participants in advance of the meeting. While few definitive answers emerged from the discussions, the
major questions were clearly defined and some research strategies were proposed. This
book, in a way, serves as a bench mark of our knowledge at that time. The geneticists
were as keenly interested in the deliberations of the psychiatrists and psychologists as
the latter were intrigued by the findings of the former.
Subsequent to the meeting, the efforts of a number of people were responsible for
its preparation in readable form. Miss Arlene Jaffe and Miss Eleanor Carroll, of the
Center for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse, and Miss Marilyn Wilhelms of the
Office of Communications, NIMH, greatly assisted in the editing of the manuscript.

iii

Participants at the Conference
Dr. Maimon Cohen
Department of Pediatrics
School of Medicine
State University of New York
Buffalo, New York 14214

Dr. Joseph A. Di Paolo

National Cancer Institute
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, Maryland 20014
Dr. Keith Ditman
10921 Wilshire Boulevard
Suite 809
Los Angeles, California 90024

Dr. Daniel Freedman, Chairman
Department of Psychiatry
University of Chicago School of Medicine
Chicago, Illinois 60601

Training and Research
National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015

Dr. Jerome Levine, Chief
Psychopharmacology Research Branch
National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015

Dr. Hermann Lisco
Cancer Research Institute
New England Deaconess Hospital
194 Pilgrim Road
Boston, Massachusetts 02215

Dr. William McGlothlin
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
UCLA

Dr. William Frosch
Department of Psychiatry
New York University School of Medicine

Los Angeles, California 90024

New York, New York 10016

National Institute of Mental Health

Dr. Kurt Hirschhorn
Mt. Sinai Hospital
New York, New York 10029

Dr. David Hungerford
Institute for Cancer Research
7701 Burholme Avenue
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111
Dr. Milton Joffe, Chief
Abuse and Liabilities Branch
Division of Drug Sciences
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
1405 I Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20537

Dr. Martin Katz, Chief
Clinical Research Branch
Division of Extramural Research Programs
National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015
Dr. Sherman Kieffer, Director
National Center for Mental Health Services,

Dr. Roger E. Meyer, Acting Chief
Center for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015

Dr. Morton Miller, Director
Special Mental Health Programs
National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015
Dr. Robert W. Miller, Chief
Epidemiology Branch
National Cancer Institute
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, Maryland 20014

Dr. Humphrey Osmond
New Jersey State Neuropsychiatric Institute
Princeton, New Jersey 08540

Dr. Walter Pahnke
Spring Grove State Hospital
Baltimore, Maryland 21228
Dr. John Scigliano, Consultant
Pharmaceutical Sciences
Center for Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse

[

National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin &venue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015
Dr. Charles Shagass
Department of Psychiatry

Temple University
Henry Avenue and Abbottsford Road
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129
Dr. Julian Silverman
Adult Psychiatry Branch
National Institute of Mental Health
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, Maryland 20014
Dr. David Smith, Director
Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic
588 Clayton Street
San Francisco, California 94117

Dr. Thomas Ungerleider

vi

The Neuropsychiatric Institute
UCLA Medical Center
760 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, California 90024

Dr. Josef Warkany
Professor of Research Pediatrics
Children's Hospital Research Foundation
El land Avenue and Bethesda
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229
Dr. Louis Wienckowski, Director
Division of Extramural Research

National Institute of Mental Health
5454 Wisconsin Avenue
Chevy Chase, Maryland 20015

Dr. Lyman C. Wynne, Chief
Adult Psychiatry Branch

National Institute of Mental Health
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, Maryland 20014

Contents
Page

Foreword

111

List of Participants

v

Conference Proceedings
Introduction: Dr. Roger Meyer, Dr. Morton Miller
Dr. Daniel Freedman
Dr. Thomas Ungerleider
Dr. Milton Joffe

1
1

2
5
8

Dr. Charles Shagass

11

Dr. Julian Silverman
Dr. William Frosch
Dr. David Smith
Dr. Keith Ditman
Dr. Humphrey Osmond
Dr. Maimon Cohen
Dr. Kurt Hirschhorn
Dr. David Hungerford
Dr. Josef Warkany
Dr. Hermann Lisco

14

20
22
26
27
34
39

Dr. Joseph Di Paolo

42
47
48
49

Summary of the Conference

54

Appendix

57

I. Background Papers

59

"On the Use and Abuse of LSD " Daniel X. Freedman, M D
"Patterns of Response to Self Administration of LSD"
William A. Frosch, M.U.
"Harmful Aspects of the LSD Experience"Keith S. Ditman, M.D
"The 'Bad Trip'The Etiology of the Adverse LSD Reaction"
J. Thomas Ungerleider, M.D.
"Persons with Exceptionally High Risk of Leukemia"
Robert W. Miller, M D
"Chromosomal Damage in Human Leukocytes Induced by Lysergic
Acid Diethylamide"NIaimon M. Cohen, M . D. . . . . . . . .
"Therapeutic Effects of LSD: A Follow-up Study"Charles Shagass, M.D. .

. ..

II. Bibliography of Current Articles on the Possible Genetic
Sequelae of Hallucinogenic and Other Drugs

59
74
80

88
95

99
103
109

vii

Introduction
Dr. Roger Meyer: On behalf of Dr. Yolles, I
would like to welcome you to the National Institute of Mental Health and to thank you in
advance for your participation today. A number
of representatives of the Institute are present
todayunderlining our tremendous interest in

grams in the area of hallucinogenic drug abuse.
Again, I want to thank you very much for com-

ing. This is a key conference, and I'm very
pleased that I have a chance to spend at least
some time with you today.

for the members of our National Advisory

Dr. Meyer: Broadly speaking, our format today
is almost pseudo-Lamarckian, that is, we shall
be talking about a behavioral disorder that may
have genetic implications. I would like to draw
your attention to a letter we received from Dr.
Morton Reiser 1 which was one of the stimuli
for this meeting. Dr. Reiser expressed concern
about possible toxic sequelae of LSD usage on
the central -rvous system. In particular, he was
troubled b) atypical psychotic reactions in some
of his patients. These people did not appear to
be schizophrenic (as defined in the traditional
nomenclature) and he was alarmed about the
possibility of an epidemic of heretofore undescribed organic brain syndromes.

Mental Health Council, who have expressed
extreme interest in this meeting, I would very

abuse caused us to widen our format subsequent

much like to welcome you here. I was most impressed to see how many of you interrupted your
very busy schedules to come to the meeting to-

Science.2 I hope that the format today, a round
table discussion, will give you the freedom to

your deliberations. Dr. Louis Wienckowski, Di-

rect.,- Division of Extramural Research; Dr.
Sherman Kieffer, Director, National Center for

Mental Health Services, Training and Research;
Dr. Jerome Levine, Chief, Psychopharmacology
Research Branch; and Dr. Morton Miller, Director, Division of Special Mental Health Programs
are seated in various parts of the room. Before
assuming my role as "David Susskind for a Day,"
I'd like to call upon Dr. Miller for some additional words of welcome.
Dr. Morton Miller: Speaking both for myself
and the Director of the Institute, Dr. Yo lles, and

The possible genetic implications of LSD

to the publication of Dr. Cohen's article in

day, and I think it indeed reflects the concern
of all of us about a very critical topic.
Just a few comments about what we consider
to be the major significance of this particular

discuss your findings, both current and past,
very freely. We are taping the material because
we've had such a demand to attend the conference that we've had to turn people away. We
plan, therefore, to reproduce the proceedings.

a tremendous amount of interest nationally,

This morning we sha.1 ;)e addressing ourselves
to the psychological and '..)ehavioral problems as-

meeting. It has been obvious that there has been

both scientifically and politically, in the whole
area of hallucinogenic drugs, with particular
reference to the question of adverse effects, both
short and long term, associated with LSD. This
meeting, I think, is a very important step for us
in the Division, particularly in the Center for
Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse. We hope
to define the current state of the art here today
and to utilize your ideas and suggestions as a
base for increasing our own efforts in the de-

velopment of research and intervention pro-

sociated with the use of LSD and other hallucinogenic drugs. I think that we have to define
what the problem of LSD is now; to distinguish
between the findings about LSD in the laboratory compared with its use in less formal sur1 Professor of Psychiatry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New York.
2 Cohen, M.M.; Marinello, M.J.; and Back, N. Chromosome

damage in human leukocytes induced by Lysergic Acid
Diethylamide. Science, 155:1417-1419, March 17, 1967.
1

roundings. In other words, are adverse reactions
clearly related to the setting in which the drug

very little hope that when most psychiatrists
have their first contact with this drug they are

is administered? The reports of Drs. Smith,

going to be particularly sensible about viewing

Frosch, Ungerleider, Wynne. dnd Silverman on

the phenomena induced by LSD. The same

illicit users of hallucinogens should be compared with some of the earlier reports of Drs.
Osmond, Ditman, Freedman, and Shagass in

problem has occurred each time we've encountered any intense fluid mental state. Look at the
way we've dealt with schizophrenia or hypnosis;
it has taken time to sort out the details and it's
going to take us time here, especially in the area
of adverse reactions.
The difficulty of deciphering these new syndromes is particularly complicated by the fact
that they may present themselves in different social or social-psychiatric contexts. For example,
emergency rooms differ. The college campus

various experimental studies.
Dr. Frosch has delineated three general psy-

chological syndromesthe "bad" trips, the recurrent experiences, and the chronic psychoses.
Others have listed suicide and chronic anxiety
states as special syndromes secondary to LSD.
Dr. Smith from San Francisco indicated his feel-

ing that the drug might be implicated in the
genesis of dysphoric feeling states that are being
observed among some of the hippies. Again, Dr.
Reiser's letter is fairly spec;fic. He asks whether
adverse reactions are not new syndromes,

whether they are in fact toxic sequelae of the
drug effects on the central nervous system. He
feels they are not schizophrenic reactions and
that most patients seem inaccessible to ordinary

treatment. He also wonders whether the syndromes of black-market patients are different
from those seen in controlled settings. One of
the questions we would ask Dr. Joffe, from the
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, is
whether contaminants are to be implicated in
some of these syndromes that are being observed

in the street? Can we better describe the reactions that are being observed in the street, or

are we really limited to the three descriptive
states that Dr. Frosch delineated in one of his
earlier papers? What research strategies need to
be pursued to further understand the problem?

What stances are available to the Center, in
research, and in professional, and preventive
education? Finally, can this group make a start
toward systemization of what is known while

giving directions for the future? As a start I
think I'd like to pass to Dr. Freedman.
Dr. Daniel Freedman: The view that I've taken
is one advocating caution as to how we interpret
and talk about adverse drug reactions because
I think it's really a problem of clinical psychia-

try and clinical description. We have a great
deal of sorting out to do with these drug reactions.

It's been my view as I've watched abuse develop over the past five or six years that there's
2

differs from the city hospital. On the campus, the clinician has a greater potential for
understanding the youngster who is in trouble
and, knowing about his environment, what preceded his drug taking, and what went on during
the drug episode. It is essential to sort out the
several facts from their sum. We also have to
cope with psychedelic philosophy far more often than we have to deal with drug problems; at
least that's been my experience.
Aside from the questions of somatic changes
which we are going to have to come to deal with,
I think we have to recognize that the outcomes,

at least of LSD use, are quite variable and we
have to account for the variability. Despite this
variability, many of the outcomes are quite predictable, and one could infer them from the
multi-potential fluid mental state produced by
the drug. I've tried to describe that from time
to time but there's no question that the split of
the self, that is, the entire experience of the self
seeing the self, and the self seeing the self seeing,

is an astonishing experience. It can also be a
banal one. How could Heinrich Kliiver give
mescaline for years and never have a freak-out
or even the intimation of a freak-out? 3 When I
asked him, he said, "Because during the drug

state we paid attention to what's out there.' "
The ability to hang on to stable, familiar anchors and clues is crucial.
I have for a couple of years now been talking
with some of the people in the Native American
3 Heinrich Kluver, Ph.D.--One of the most distinguished
experimental biological psychologists and one of the earliest

investigators in the field of hallucinogenic drugs with the
publication of his monograph in 1928 entitled "Mescal, the
'Divine' Plant and Its Psychological Effects." Professor of Biological Psychology (Emeritus; Sewell L. Avery Distinguished
Service Professor, University of Chicago).

Church. A resident, Dr. Robert Bergman, who
was at the University of Chicago, has been work-

ing in the Public Health Service out there and
has matic a lot of observations. If we really take

the Indian experience sei iously it's useful because, in another psychosocial context, we have
reports of drug-linked psychotic episodes that
are generally brief and self-terminating. They
have said that the persons who have these are
generally pretty upset people to start withpeople who have been psychotic.

I have a letter from Dr. Bergman reporting
a "bad"trip of an Indian on mescaline; the reasons for it seemed to be that this fellow had a lot

of problems that he wasn't sharing with the
group before he took the drug, and yet it was a
self-terminating experience. This raises the issue
of what kind of problems a person does get into

if he pays inordinate attention to what's "in
here." The real danger of LSD is that the wrong
people seem to be taking it at the wrong time
and for the wrong purposes.

While I think I could make a case in terms
of psychodynamic and psychological reasons
alone as to why some adverse reactions would oc-

as he was commuting because the telephone
poles flashing by the train window bothered
him. He lost the normal suppression of peripheral input. Well, that didn't seem to bother him
too much. I've known people who are functioning well who have had macropsia and micropsia
without LSD. It seems that there is a range of
ways in which we normally habituate and relate

fluidity and constancy in our perceptual behavior which these drug reactions should be
making us think about.
I don't know what the barrier isor what the

switch isbetween dereistic and reality thinking, but LSD and some of the events occurring
under its influence make you think we haven't

been focusing on that particular mechanism
enough, namely, how to switch on and off two
orders of reality. Having watched some of these
things evolve over time, there's no question in
my mind that the two orders of reality (Freud
called them the two principles of mental func-

tioning") revealed by this drugand known to
man in many different forms for a long time
are hard to live with.
I'm trying to say that in behavior there's a

cur, I am aware that some of the syndromes

dimension we'll call portentousness, by which I

we've seen look like something's wrong with the
brain. I would, however, point again to the fact
that there are no data. Ross Adey observed EEG
changes in the cat for several weeks after LSL ,

mean the capacity of the mind to have a psychedelic experience. Portentousness taps part of

our experiencewe see more than we can tell

but that cat had been trained to avoid electric

and experience more than we can explicate; we
experience boundlessness as well as boundaries.

shock.4 The changes did not occur if the cat was

Of this we're all quite capable. And we have sym-

nct so trained. Thus the data do not mean that
there is hippocampal "damage." They may
mean that there are changes in brain waves that

bolism for it; we speak of the cosmic, the end-

go along with changes in experience or in learn-

less, the infinite. I've been struck by the fact
that when somebody takes this drug, he is so im-

ing. Reserpinewith or without painful experiencescauses longer-term changes in the cat

pressed by the two orders of realityor the fact
that this can happenthat he's at least puzzled
and may be confused. It takes a lot of time to

hippocampus, and we weren't told that we have
to be wary of this drug because it causes brain

integrate the experience afterwards.

damage.

Thus, while we look for somatic sequelae of
LSD usage it is important to look for possible
psychological or psychodynamic precedents. For
example, I have no difficulty recognizing traumatic neurosis in those people I've seen who
have trips without the drug. I do, however, have
a lot of difficulty in figuring out why this repetitive behavior can occur under banal as well as
disturbing circumstances.
I give the example of the scientist who simply
could not suppress his peripheral vision for several months; he couldn't read his London Times

With regard to reports of birth defects and
chromosomal abnormalities, I think it impor-

tant to initiate a study of native American
Indian groups having long histories of hallucinogenic drug use. At the present time, however,
we don't know of any psychedelic monsters being born into these native cults. We need a good
public health survey (including still-births and
fertility) of these people, although I suspect that
4 Adey, WM.; I otter, ft.; and Walter, DA. Prolonged effects of LSD on LEG removes during discrimination performance in cats; evaluation by computer analysis. Ekdroencephalovaphy and Clinical Nenrophysialagy, 11115-35.
January 1965.

3

any suspicious trend would have struck the local
enemies of peyote who've not picked up that ob-

jection to their neighbors' habits. In any case,
I don't know of any problems that imply chromosomal change among these groups or any
other native groups taking the drug. Accordingly, I come here prepared with a certain kind
of skepticism about some of the basic science
and laboratory indications that there are somatic
dangers to LSD. I also come prepared as a phy-

.;rian, as I suppose most of us do, to believe
ft any drug can be harmful. It will take time

4

to sort these things out.
I also come equipped with a deep wish that
there would be a dire somatic consequence of

the drug, because then we wouldn't have to
spend all our time meeting about it, talking

low-up of the volunteers at NIMH who had LSD
in 1952 or 1953.* I worked with a group of about
ten for a year. These were well-screened people

in many ways; I knew of no truly bad aftereffects.

We have to understand why bad after-effects
don't happen in order to understand better why
we are ascribing certain causative factors to the
adverse reaction. This is the reason for trying to

map out what we can about the nature of the
experience, its immediate after-effects. and its
longer-term after-effects. How are they related?
Obviously, prior set before a trip (or you might

even call it the trip before the trip) what a
kid is going after, where he happened to be mov-

ing in life as he went into drug takingare im-

about it to parents, teachers, clubs, churches. My

portant factors to tease apart. Expectation
both conscious and unconsciousas well as

social life has changed a good deal due to the

guidance during a trip are important.

accident that I happened to study LSD ten years
ago. Given this kind of skepticism, I've looked

Finally, even if we patiently tease out the psychological and environmental factors, we may
find that we are dealing sometimes with toxic
psychoses. If we find this is to be true, we'll still
have to distinguish the "bad" trip from all the
other various outcomes, including "good" ones.
We'll also have to remember that panic always
"looks" organic. Homosexual panic often, at its
height, shows organic features and makes you
think something organic is going on. I think we
ought to remember Weinstein and Kahn's ap-

over the somatic data and the only thing I can
conclude from looking at the rat and mouse
data on still births is that if you're a prudent
woman and yet you're going to take LSD, you
either ought to be a confirmed virgin or on the
pill.
I've been confronted from high quarters with
the question: "How come my child, who was do-

ing so well at college, is now a dropout?" I've
been confronted with that, however, in 1952,
1955, 1957, 1960, and 1964. I really am not sure,

therefore, whether some very bright people
(who are exposed to the drug) would indeed
drop out without the aid of drugs. In other
words, I don't know what's concomitant, precipitant, accidental, incidental, or whatever. I'm not
convinced that we have any more problems with
borderline states, adolescent turmoil, or the inability to meet the next life crisis than we have

ever had. I have no question that the drug can
reinforce any behavior pattern the person wishes
or needs to adopt, but in assessing outcome we'll

have to sort out what was before the trip. It is
important to consider some of this: to remember that there are different motives for trying a
drug, for interpreting its subj:reive effects, for
maintaining the intake of a drug, for either taking it irresponsibly or ritually, for regulating its
usage, and for stopping it.
Asa start, I urge that a project that I proposed
to Robert Cohen about three or four years ago
now be implemented. This would involve a fol4

proach to this problem! In other words, I'd
urge us, in teasing this apart, to try to be skeptical clinical psychologists and psychiatrists until

we can begin to order the phenomena. So far
as I'm concerned the people whom I have seen
who have real trouble over a long period of time
were headed there.

I'd like to know now what the usual time
period is for the usual adverse reaction and that

in partwill depend on what the hospital is
doing. If you haul a kid in panic to a state hospital, you've got a person in flux in whom you're
reinforcing a break! If you've got a kid in panic
and you calm him down and you don't make a
"case" out of him, he may, with a few questions
and follow-up over the next couple of weeks, be
perfectly all right. Even with no follow-up, he
may be all right.
volunteers belonged to a man religious group which
does not permit its members to make or drink.
Weinstein, LA., and Kahn, ILL. Denial of Illness: Spnbolic and Psychophysiological Aspects. Springfield, Illinois:
Charles C ?lentos, 1955.

In other words, if you've got a person in a
fluid lute, how you reinforce that state may
make a great deal of difference, and it's my impression that we had many more "bad" trips
called to our attention after all of the panic publicity. I'd like to see a social-psychological study

of newspaper articles and publicity and incidence. I think you will find that incidence follows publicity.

Well, this is just a range of problems. In a
sense, they are of basic interest to this Institute,

not simply because you are interested in the
public health issue, but also because it is a beau-

worked with him until we felt he was in fairly
good charge of himself, and that was all of the
problem that he had. This adverse trip and flash-

back was unanticipated. He had been thoroughly screened. All I can say is that he was
immature. I then began to prefer counterphobic people who had at least been drunk
once in their liveswho with favorable circumstances could sustain an altered stateand who
had firm habits on which to rely. The chief issue

is to know how to reinforce people during the
trip.

tiful challenge to tease apart those social, psychological, and biological variables which must
be operating in any kind of behavior dysfunction.

Dr. Meyer: Thank you. Dr. Ungerleider will be
our next speaker.

Dr. Meyer: Do you know what dose they were
given back in 1952?

but as far as I am concerned the words LSD

Dr. Freedman: Yes, they were given various dosages, from 50 to 150 micrograms, as I recall.

Dr. Wynne: 150 is pretty standard dosage.
Dr. Freedman: They had patients and also volunteers that were treated. These volunteers got
intravenous LSD (which gave them a more intense experience but in a highly comfortable
setup) . I didn't know then about all the beads
and pads and so forth, but the research nurse
and I would sit there and drink coffee while they
performed various psychological tests for us
from time to time. They got the drug at least
once every ten days because I was studying acute
and chronic tolerance. These people did come to

new conclusions about their life, as any young
kids would have done had they sat around in
the cancer ward for a year volunteering their

services. I think they were interested in the
drug, but they were not entranced.
I saw one bad reaction. The youngster had

the drug and went into a catatonic posture. He
later said he heard himself giggle and thought
he giggled "like a girl." That scared him. He in
fact was young and somewhat immature and
beardless. He stayed in this posture a few hours
and we just worked with him until he came out
of it. We talked with him over the next weeks

and did not give him any more drugs. Six

months later, he came back and said he had
been looking out of his window at home and
suddenly it was like the drug state; he wondered
what that meant. We talked more about it and

Dr. Thomas Ungerleider: Dr. Meyer asked for
some scientific objectivity in this meeting today,
and scientific objectivity are mutually exclusive,

at least at this time. I would like to address
some comments to this. I think we would all
agree that LSD is a powerful chemical agent.
Perhaps we would also agree that LSD can be
abused under certain circumstances. Beyond
that, I doubt that we would find much, if anything, that we here can all agree upon concerning the LSD situation today.
Some of you may agree with the New York
Academy of Medicine that LSD is more danger-

ous than heroin. Perhaps some of you would
agree with the ..uperintendent of the California
school system who stated recently that the use of
LSD is the most critical problem in California's
schools today. On the other hand, I have heard
some of you say publicly that "anyone who can

hold his alcohol can hold his LSD," and that
"the chromosome problem is all due to the fear
that adults have because LSD causes young people to become more artistic. They don't want to
work from eight to five at the boring jobs which
adults want everybody to hold."
Can we even agree on what is an adverse reaction to LSD? For example, at the last Ameri-

can Psychiatric Association meeting in May
1967, in Detroit, a foreign psychiatrist, who has

made notable contributions in LSD therapy,
claimed to have given patients up to 30 LSD
treatments without observing any side effects.
When my colleague, Dr. Fisher, later questioned

him, the researcher admitted that some of his
patients did become psychotic and others became suicidal and required hospitalization, but
he insisted that these were not side effects but
5

of our' youth to such social problems as Viet

ditions warrant prompt psychiatric attention for
whatever reason are designated emergencies."
Let me hasten to add that person often seek
help in indirect ways. When taking careful histories of those persons who come into our emergency rooms for help following LSD ingestion,
we often find that these youngsters have been
living nomadic lives away from their families.
When they begin to have adverse effects from
LSD, however, they find their way, often hun-

Nam, civil rights, and the like. Other physicians
have informed me with equal sincerity that all

dreds of miles, home to their parents. They
know that their parents, being very "straight"

LSD use is a giant Communist plot which is
perpetrated by U. S. radio stations which play
various songs such as "Acapulco Gold," and
"Eight Miles High."
Such lack of basic agreement results in a cli-

and "up- tight," will immediately seek aid for

just part of "working through the LSD experience." Fif even regarded convulsions with tonicclonic mhvements and loss of consciousness as

part of the abreactive experience under LSD
and not as a side effect of the drug.
Some of you share the opinion that even extensive LSD and other drug use in certain sections of various cities is not a problem of drug
abuse but merely represents an eloquent protest

mate of hysteria which has its unfortunate effects

on all of us and on our studies. Certainly those
of you who have used LSD in research and treatment have been especially affected. For example,

the one pharmaceutical company with the experience and the equipment to analyze LSD
samples has refused to analyze my (black market) samples out of fear of reprisals from the
Government, particularly our own Food and
Drug Administration. And representatives of
another drug company, which manufactures a
tranquilizer used to combat LSD-induced side effects, recently approached me to arrange a panel

on the treatment of such reactions. They soon
withdrew their offer, again because of difficulty

with Federal agencies. The representatives of
the company had told me that they were being
bombarded with requests from physicians all
over the country about choice of tranquilizers
and dosage schedules to use in treating LSD reactions. They added that these requests would
have to continue to be answered with a "no com-

ment" type of statement. Whether their fears
are justified or unjustified is not the point. The
point is that with such rampant fear, many
worthwhile projects are being abandoned, and
LSD research faces a dismal future.

Now, can we define the "bad" trip, "bummer," or "freak-out" following LSD ingestion?
I would say yes, or at least sometimes. My def-

inition of an adverse reaction to LSD is this:
"Symptoms following LSD ingestion which
cause a person to seek professional help." There
is precedent for such a definition. In the book,
The Psychiatric Emergency,7 a psychiatric emergency is defined thus: "All patients whose con6

them. Yet these youngsters, when brought in for

help by their parents, will often say, "I'm only
here at my parents' request." They can get help
and still "save face" that way. It is surprising
how readily they consent to and are relieved by
psychiatric hospitalization.
At UCLA's Neuropsychiatric Institute, in the
seven months beginning in September 1965, the
first 70 cases of adverse effects from LSD were
studied. The results have been detailed in a

publication entitled, The Dangers of LSD" in
the Journal of the American Medical Association. The predominant symptoms of these patients were hallucinations followed by anxiety,
depression, and confusion, in decreasing order.
The word hallucination is used loosely and also
includes illusory phenomena. 1...ist_any.-of -.y.911.___
be surprised that confusion follows LSD ingestion (and
e of you have expressed surprise
to me in the past) , let me refer you to an article
by Dr. John MacDonald in the American Journal of Psychiatry' He reports the exper;mental
administration of LSD to 50 persons. Of the 50,
29 had some clouding of consciousness which
varied from intermittent slight confusion to stupor.
During the time that our first 70 patients were
seen at UCLA, for every person seen we received
an additional three or four telephone calls from
other people in trouble from LSD who did not
subsequently come in for help. Since that time,
at UCLA we have actively tried to discourage
T GlasKote, R.M., et al. The Psychiatric Emergency. Joint
Information Service of the American Psychiatric Association
and the National Assodation for Mental Health, Washington.
D.C., 1966.

Ungerleider, J. T., et al. The dangers of LSD. JAVA,
197:399-392, August IL 1966.

9 MacDonald, J.M., and Galvin, J.A.V. Experisnenul psychotic states. American Journal of Psychiatry, 112:970-976,
June 1936.

r

LSD patients from coming to our Neuropsychiatric Institute. In fact, for the first time since our
Institute opened, a blanket rule was passed that

a certain type of patient would not be hospitalized, namely, LSD patients. This is necessary
because UCLA is a residency training hospital,
and the psychiatric residents were seeing mainly
one type of patient, the LSD casualty. Despite
active discouragement, since April 1966 another
115 patients whose symptoms were directly re-

lated to LSD ingestion have been seen at the
Neuropsychiatric Institute's Emergency Room.
This figure excludes those patients who had used

LSD in the remote past and whose presenting
symptoms did not appear related to the LSD ingestion. (Some "flashback" re-creations of previous LSD trips have been included in the figures.) The figure also excludes a number of
paranoid schizophrenia who claimed to have
been poisoned by LSD, by the Communists or
others, but who had little likelihood of exposure

to the drug. It further excludes the multiple
telephone calls and referrals (from five to ten
each week day) that Dr. Fisher and I receive di-

rectly from the community which do not go
through the Emergency Room.
It is important to emphasize that the symptoms I have described, namely, hallucinations,
anxiety, depression, and confusion, frequently
are experienced following the ingestion of LSD.
These acute effects only come to be called side
effects or an adverse reaction when the user seeks

help for them. Many and perhaps most LSD
users experience some or all of these effects but
they are able to get over them, either by themselves (often with various aids such as readings

from the Tibetan Book of the Dead) or with
the help of a sitter or guide. We do not say then
that these users are having adverse LSD reactions.
I am excluding many of the chronic changes
due to LSD in my definition of the "bad" trip.
Dr. Fisher and I left the hospital environment
early to observe "love-ins, love sessions, and happenings" involving LSD throughout the State of

California. These have included serious religious rites in the Orange County Southern California area, as well as our local Sunset Strip and
Hollywood kick-type parties, hippies "dropping

acid" at Big Sur, and college students experimenting in the San Francisco Bay Area. We
have seen many persons on LSD who appeared
grossly psychotic. I personally have seen several

Virgin Marys wandering about on LSD, but
either their culture supported them or they were

not aware of enough difficulty to seek aid. I
would therefore exclude them from our definition of adverse reactions to LSD. This
also avoids the controversy about value-system
changes with people "turning on" with LSD and
then dropping out of society as we know it.
Unfortunately, we do not know and probably
will never know the true prevalence of LSD usage in the community. We do not even know the
incidence of "bad" trips seen in hospitals and
by professionals because few statistics exist. We

are now beginning a questionnaire survey of
professional persons in Los Angeles County to
try to determine how many adverse LSD reactions they have seen in the 18-month period end-

ing this past July.
Much controversy has arisen as to whether
pure LSD causes adverse effects or whether it is
the black-market LSD with its alleged impurities and dosage irregularities. I have had several
samples spot-checked and analyzed and, in each
sample, where the user claimed he was getting
LSD he always was. These users were chronic
"acid heads," who claimed they could tell within
5 micrograms how much LSD they were ingest-

ing. There were no impurities or other drugs
found in these few samples, but the user always
thought he was taking much more LSD than he
really was.
We professionals often debate the etiology of
the adverse LSD reaction as well as the definition of it. Is it the impure LSD with methedrine
or atropine derivatives that causes the adverse

reactions? I personally don't think so. Is it set
and setting with whimsical or kick-type parties
that are responsible for most of the "bad" trips?
I don't think so. In fact I am more impressed
with the set and setting of many of the serious
black-market users than I am with the often ster-

ile medical atmosphere and environment in
which we have given the pure Sandoz LSD. Is
the adverse LSD reaction to be explained by
psychopathology in the user who is borderline
or emotionally ill anyway? I am most unimpressed with this factor. Certainly, existing
screening tediniquei have failed to rule out a
number of adverse reactors while many very disturbed persons take LSD in huge doses multiple

times, without apparent adverse effects.
I would however like to suggest one factor
which I do not feel has received enough empha7

sis and which may help us to resolve our appar-

Scigliano, Center for Studies of Narcotic and

ent disagreements about the dangers of LSD.
The average age of the user in our study of the

Drug Abuse, NIMH.

adverse reactor to LSD was 21. In other studies
the age has been reported as the same or even
younger. We all know that adolescence is a time

of instinctual crisis with youngsters trying to
handle their sexual and aggressive feelings and
to resolve their identity problems. I am convinced that using LSD makes this resolution
much more difficult, both in the chronic "acid
head" and in the occasional LSD user. The "antiinstinctual" properties of the drug give the LSD
user the illusion that he has no sexual or angry
conflicts. He can thus postpone or avoid conflict

resolution for many months, while he "turns
on. "

As far as the quotation from Dr. Freedman
that "fear of sensationalism in the bureaucracy
due to the sanction of drug abuse" is concerned,

he has not dealt with the Division of Drug
Sciences, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, particularly with Dr. Richards, our social psychologist; Dr. Smith, our clinical psychologist; and myself, a pharmacologist. I think
that he will find that we are not afraid to sanction the use of drugs in research. We are trying
to assist scientific investigators in every way that
we can. It is true we would like to avoid sensa-

tionalism. I think almost everyone would. We

are a Government agency with a regulatory
function and "a different outlook." Contrary to

To my knowledge, virtually all of the work

most government regulatory agencies we are also

that has been done in both therapy and research

responsible for research to determine what the
problem is about, what the extent of it is, and
what might be done about it. We hope that we
will be able to foster and extend this point of

with LSD has been done in subjects over 21
years of age. Perhaps, then, the ageor youth
of the black-market users explains many of the
adverse reactions to LSD. Certainly Drs. Sidney
Cohen, Ditman, and Grof, to name a few, have
only very rarely administered LSD to persons
under 21. I am aware, however, that paranoid
personalities, very compulsive persons, and some
others in the older age groups have had adverse

reactions to the drug.
Dr. Meyer: Thank you very much. I am certain
that Dr. Joffe, representing the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, might want to respond to some of your comments about Federal
regulatory agencies.

Dr. Milton Joffe: I'm rather glad that Dr.
Meyer suggested that I answer some of these

view.

As to observations about the illicit sources, I
think if one wanted to know more about these,
he should call on our criminal investigators. I
can say just a few things about the illicit production from what I know; I do not make it a

point to investigate or even to find out about
all of the illegal laboratories that investigators
turn up. The most common type of facility of
this kind is the home-type laboratory where
somebody in a rooming house sets up a window
fan for exhausting organic vapors and employs
unquantitative chemical procedures. Generally
the discovery of the laboratory is made because
in the same rooming house there are people who

edly in the last year. I wanted to comment that

are not familiar with the odor of organic solvents and they call the police.
The product turned out by these laboratories
is of course very questionable. The matter that

Dr. Freedman and Dr. Osmond, in their prepared statements, had been writing in 1966,

taminants is a problem which we would cer-

comments because I wanted to answer them anyway. As to the Government's role in regulation
of this compound, I think it has changed mark-

some months before those of us who are scientific people were in the Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs in the Food and Drug Administration."' I might say that their statements are
now rather outdated, that there is a Joint FDAPHS Psychotomimetic Agents Advisory Committee which will approve the use of psychedelic
drugs and provide for their supply. Anyone of

you can reach this committee through Dr.
8

Dr. Unger leider brought up concerning the con-

tainly like to get into, but it would require more
resources and more study than we can devote to
it right now. We don't know whether the contaminants are due simply to residues from the
chemical processing, a breakdown of the actual

product, or an incomplete synthesis; the only
thing we can tell is that the sample does not assay to be 100 percent.
to This Bureau was originally under the Food and Drug
Administration and is now part of the Justice Department.

In connection with this problem, I have had
a call from one of the participants here who
is on the negative side of the chromosomal-break

investigation; his thought was that perhaps it
was the contaminants rather than the pure material which were producing this break. While
I am in a position to furnish him with illicit
material, I cannot guarantee what the contaminants will be. A first step might be to determine
whether pure LSD does not break chromosomes

while the illicit stuff does. After this, one can
look for identification of contaminants. Apart
from the smaller household laboratories there
are also some bigger processors that we have
come across. One example was the laboratory
truck found in Colorado whose owners had a
rather high level of sophistication. There were
xeroxed copies of all of Roger Adams' patents on
the tetrahydrocannabinols, of John Biel's papers
on the anticholinergics, and of course several re-

prints of Dr. Shulgin's work on the mescaline

and I believe that it has a certain status in the
subculture which the other drugs do not have.
The unpredictability of the "good" versus the
"bad" trip really puts the user on what the animal psychologist would call the "variable-ratio"

or "gambler's schedule." You don't have to be
reinforced each time, but if you get one or two
reinforcements from "good" trips, the user will
continue to use this material.
Another problem that we have had with compounds, mainly on the East rather than on the

West Coast, has been with the indole compounds of dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and diethyltryptamine (DET) . These are easily made.
They are, of course, used by inhalation since
they are inactive orally. And they are used in a
peculiar way. It sometimes takes the police quite
a while to catch on to the fact that the purchase
they have made from illicit sources is not obviously illegal. They bring the material to the laboratory for analysis and are told, "You have been

next. My own particular guess is that anti-

stuck this time because there's nothing here
but parsley leaves." It turns out to be parsley
leaves with the liquid DMT spiked on it and

cholinergics will not become a large problem.
The reaction to them is rather unpleasant. I do
not expect the illicit chemists' level of sophisti-

dried.
The techniques that the illicit -..urces will resort to are rather clever; and I'm sure it's going

compounds.

We don't ever know what's going to turn up

cation to be such that they will be able to
synthesize tetrahydrocannabinols in any sizable
quantity, at least, at present. I personally expect
a flood of more phenylethylamines such as the
DOM or STP.
These compounds are easily made. The literture on them is rather extensive, as far as syn-

thesis goes. There are no tricks to it; it is a
simple straightforward following of known

chemical techniques. I also expect that the users

will gravitate to these substances rather than
seeking out the exotic or compounds unknown
today. I don't expect the illicit chemists to go
about and synthesize or carry out research on
any new series of compounds. There is certainly
the possibility of the synthesis of the tetrahydrocannabinols since Mechoulam's publication of a
rather easy synthesis. Here the problem for the
investigator is the purchase of starting materials
and the development of a synthesis capable of

generating significant quantities of the substance. At this point in time, it is easier for the
illicit chemist to prepare THC from the plant.
In reality, the main problem that we are facing on a long-range basis is that of LSD. It is
extremely potent, with generally low toxicity,

to be a problem for the enforcement people to

keep ahead of them. From our standpoint of
scientific investigation, we are obviously incap-

able of fostering every type of research that
needs to be done. I think we would all be most

receptive to proposals for work in this area.
There are times, as I say, when we, partly because of our particular mission, will not be able
to do anything about the problem. We certainly
can offer you encouragement and advice con-

cerning Government regulation. Our whole
mission is to foster research, and we would be
more than happy to try and help you wend your
way through the bureaucracy. It's a problem not
just for you, but it's a problem for me. There
are other Government agencies which I am not
a part of, and I have to wend my way through
them.

I think that, in looking over what Dr. Smith
has submitted concerning STP use, I might anticipate him just a little bit. I don't know what
he's going to say in regard to the matter of treatment and the chlorpromazine issue. You will re-

call that there were reports from Dr. Smith's
clinic that chlorpromazine potentiated STP,
causing death in one individual, and suggesting
9

that STP therefore acted like an anticholinergic
substance rather than a phenylethylamine. I've

not had the opportunity to talk directly with
Dr. Smith about this report. I did, however, talk
to his co-worker, Dr. Frederick Meyers, who was
not sure about the findings of the initial report
and the conclusions drawn from it.
I've recently had some experimental work run
off in a human subject. The chlorpromazine was
not given as antidotal treatment but rather was
given simultaneously with the DOM, and the reaction of the individual was considerably less.
This was an individual who had had a full-scale
reaction to STP when chlorpromazine was not
administered. His reaction was considerably di-

minished upon taking the chlorpromazine simultaneously.

The general thought of the man who did this
work was that we were simply depressing the

been able to obtain or that I have been able
to obtain from scientific peopleevery tablet

which was said to be STP and contained

a psychogenic compoundhad only one compound in it, namely 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine. To my knowledge, there are no
other psychogenic compounds circulating under

the name of STP.
Dr. Meyer: Dr. Freedman had one comment to
make, I think.
Dr. Freedman: The source of my statement refers back to the Kennedy hearings, in which I
had observed that what I meant by bureaucratic
power was simply the option to make decisions.
It is my feeling that it is difficult to make controversial decisions when a man has to face Congress.

whole individual; there was nothing specific

Dr. Joffe: We are trying to hold up our end of

about it and perhaps the tranquilizers should be

it.

considered as some therapy for an individual
who is in danger of becoming either violent or

Dr. Freedman: Yes, I know.
Dr. Smith: Can I ask one question? On what do
you base your conclusion that tetrahydrocannabinols (THC) will not become a problem?
Dr. Joffe: I would say that the present synthesis
is relatively easy as compared with the original
synthesis of Roger Adams, but it still does not
represent an easy synthesis. As I said, the illegal
sources provided us with a very nice series of
xeroxed copies. If they are taking this literature
seriously, are capable of understanding it, and
have the facilities, it would not be beyond their
powers to make it.

very panicky.

I don't think I have anything more to say ex.

very simply, every tablet that our agents have

cept to reiterate that the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs is more than willing to
discuss with anyone the problems involved in
scientific investigation. I may say now that, even

though the Government has the reputation for
repressing research in the LSD area, there are
at present over 100 individuals who are authorized legally to do scientific work with LSD and
other psychedelics, and this number will increase, probably significantly, every two months
as the special committee meets to approve these
applications.

Dr. Smith: There have been reports of tetrahydrocannabinol circulating in the Haight-

Dr. Meyer: Dr. Joffe, there has been one report
that STP on the East Coast is different from that
on the West Coast. Would you care to comment?

Ashbury.
Dr. Joffe: Can you get me a sample? I would be

Dr. Joffe: We have had a small amount from

really two compounds in one series and a whole

the East Coast but most has been from the West

Coast. There is an individual here who is responsible for providing me with the very first
tablet on which our structure was established
and I'm very grateful to him. This tablet, obtained from the New York area, was of a different color and size than the ones from the West

Coast. The West Coast ones were blue-green,
the New York one a beige color. This doesn't
really mean too much because we don't know
too much about the manufacture of them, but
10

very glad to have a sample because there are
flock of compounds in another series that we
have to worry about. The two compounds in

the one series are the L--trans-THC, the
L-A8-trans-THC. There are compounds which
can be isolated from the plant. They are also
synthesizable and have been tested in man. The
other series of compounds is based on the delta

3, 4 tetrahydrocannabinols which are Roger
Adams' compounds. Furthermore, since the sub-

stitutions of R-3 can be of an almost infinite
variety, we have here at least a potential for li

great many compounds. A number of them have
been made including synhexyl, synheptal, and

ones with an even longer chain which have a
higher potency. I don't ask Dr. Smith for a sample out of idle curiosity. I would certainly like
to determine whether this synthetic material is
made by Mechoulam's synthesis which would give

the L-trans delta 1 or whether it is made from
the Roger Adams' series which would be the
delta 3, 4.
Dr. Meyer: Thank you. I'd like now to call on
Dr. Shagass.

Dr. Charles Shagass: What I have to say this
morning is a background to what Dr. Hungerford is going to be saying this afternoon about
our chromosome study. I have had various kinds

of interest in LSD. I started giving it in 1950

to try to produce abreactions in therapy, and for
the next decade I continued to give it sporadically. I was very unimpressed by the effects and
wondered why the literature was so full of statements which my observations failed to confirm.
I was probably not giving enough LSD, and was
giving it to the wrong people; my patients were
people who didn't display psychotomimetic effects with small doses.

Another interest was whether the LSD reaction resembles schizophrenia. Most people don't

believe this anymore, and in fact, there is a good
deal of evidence from various sources to support
the notion that the psychotomimetic effects are

toxic. For instance, if you give the BenderGestalt test, the people who show the greatest
clinical reaction to LSD are those who have deterioration of performance. On the other hand,
LSD, as we showed in another study, is quite
different from an agent like Ditran, which is a
deliriant. If you take a group of subjects and
give them a performance test, and then test them
when they are under the influence of the agent,
the performance level is maintained under LSD.

There is a significant correlation between the
pre- and post-drug scores. On the other hand,
with Ditran, the performance level is completely
lost; you can't predict what the drug performance is going to be from the pre-testing. So LSD

is certainly not as toxic an agent in that sense
as Ditran. There are other differences electrophysiologically.

In 1963 we again became interested in the
issue of treatment with LSD. This time we set
out to determ;ne whether we could predict clin-

ically who would have a so-called psychedelic experience (Dr. Osmond's term) or insightful

experience, or whatever you want to call it. We
loaded our group with conduct disorders; 10 of
our first 20 subjects were court referred. They
were first given a standardized psychiatric interview schedule for diagnostic classification. Our
LSD treatment method was of the kind that has
been used in the treatment of alcoholism; the
dose was 2.5 micrograms per kilo given intravenously, which is a large dose in terms of its
effects.

Two psychiatrists rated the taped records of
the experience for the presence and degree of
insightful response. Thus we were able to divide
our group roughly into two segments: those with
more evidence of insightresponders, and those

with little or no insightnonresponders. It

turned out that most of our responders had been
diagnosed as psychopathic personalities by our
interview schedule. Furthermore, no responder
was under 22 years old. Parenthetically, we have
never seen what we would call a favorable therapeutic response to LSD in anybody under 22.
Thus, on the basis of age and personality there
was a way of selecting in advance those capable
of having an immediate insightful response to
LSD. The group was a mixed bag of alcoholics,
homosexuals, exhibitionists, and dexedrine takers.

We then did a follow-up study. Each patient
to be treated with LSD was described (i.e. symptoms) in advance. From the records we found
another patient of the same age, sex, symptom
pattern, and socio-economic status. After one
year we sought out these individuals, both the
LSD-treated patients and their controls, and interviewed them and a significant relative.
Each symptom was inquired into and, if they
said there had been a change, they were asked
to rate the degree of change on a rough scale.
Although our matching for symptom patterns
was very close, we did not control for other treatments; it turned out that three of the LSD pa-

tients had had some regular psychotherapy,

whereas 13 of the 20 control cases had been seen
at least once weekly in psychotherapy during the
one-year follow up. Mean ratings of improve-

ment in symptoms were computed for six

months after treatment (a retrospective rating)
and at 12 months. The people given one 200
microgram, or 2.5 microgram per kilo, treatment with LSD showed significantly more im11

provement at both six and 12 months. Those

since people do relapse. However, we have

who showed the greatest improvement were our
eight responders; at six months they were very
much improved, and then they started to show a
tendency to relapse. The relapse had a remarkable time characteristic. Within seven months
after taking LSD the individual started to want
to consort with homosexuals again, to drink
again, and so on. We have no idea why there is

retreated some of the relapsers and produced another six months benefit. Secondly, the electrophysiological changes that we have been able to
measure do not last beyond the acute phase. This

this six month improvement and then the tendency to relapse. It raises the question of a possible mechanism that is set off by the LSD which
remains operative for this period of time.
Another finding that came out of this analysis,
which may be a chance finding, although it is
statistically significant, is that the change in the
ratings from six to 12 months showed significant
improvement only in the group of 12 LSD nonresponders. These people just seemed to keep
on improving gradually. If this is a genuine phenomenon, what could be going on? Something
of a long-term nature must have been triggered.

Concomitantly with treatment, we studied
some electrophysiological changes in 17 of our
subjects. We looked at the EEG and at the sensory-evoked responses to light flash and to electrical stimulation of the median nerve.
Histograms showing the distribution of wave

durations in the electroencephalogram were
computed before LSD was given, at a time close

to the height of the LSD effect, and then the
next day. EEG frequency was generally increased
by LSD, as other people have found. It is impor-

tant to note, however, that one day later the
frequency histogram was about the same as before LSD. It seems that these EEG effects don't
last.

A paper in JAMA 11 last week, concerning
brain damage by LSD in a five-year-old girl,
states that there have been no long-term EEG
studies of LSD. We have seen the EEG's of many

patients a long time after they have had LSD;
there are no changes evident after 24 hours.
Similarly, the average evoked responses to light
flash show some definite changes produced by

LSD, but the records are pretty much back to
the pre-drug form in one day. The same is true
of the responses to median nerve stimulation.
The position that we had to take from our
results is that, first of all, we do have evidence
suggesting that LSD may produce therapeutic ef-

fects; although this is certainly not anything to
get overly excited about as a specific procedure,
12

is in accord with the notion that there is some
kind of toxic reaction. The nature of this reaction is electrophysiologically interesting, in that
we are seeing a speeding up of brain activity.
Most toxic agents, such as the anticholinergics,
of which Ditran is an example, slow brain activity. This is one of the few examples we have
of the postulated parabolic relationship between
performance and underlying physiological activ-

ity. At the extremes of physiological activity,
which could be exemplified by panic and sleep,
very little intelligent performance can occur. It
has been extraordinarily difficult to obtain a
physiological parallel at the panic level, although it is very easy to record the slow sleep
activity. Now, what we have with LSD is a speed-

ing up that is associated with decrement of performance, and this is of some interest.
Lastly, it seems to me that a lot of things that
one sees in working with LSD suggest that this
drug, or something like it, should be able to tell
us a great deal about the basic structure of personality. Why does a sociopath, having had LSD

once, say: "I will not come back for a second
treatment, because when I had my first one, all
it did was tell me that it was my fault."? Cognitively, he knew it was his fault before he ever
had any LSD. Apparently the LSD made him
know in an affective sense, and this was an experience to which he was not going to subject
himself again. What kind of personality organization was shifted by LSD?
Because of these interests, after I moved to

Philadelphia about a year and a half ago, we
continued our work with LSD. We have been
trying to block what I think is the major toxic
phase of the LSD reaction, that taking place during the first four hours. We give patients a pill,
which is either chlorpromazine or placebo, before giving the LSD. The blocking is of varying
success; some people just don't block and go to
sleep for 12 hours with chlorpromazine. In any
case, our aim has been to compare blocked and
unblocked treatments to see whether the initial
three or four hours of what I believe to be toxic11 Milman, D.H. An untoward reaction to accidental ingestion of LSD in a five-year-old girl. JAMA, 201(11):821-824,
September 11, 1967.

ity is at all necessary for later behavioral change.
We want to know whether the patient will have

his insightful experience without having to be
quasi-psychotic for awhile. This has been our
purpose. Now, in connection with this, we were
really only getting started when Dr. Cohen's re-

port came out. I happened to be talking to a
biologist at the time who suggested that I do
something about this, and referred me to Dr.
Hungerford. This was how we started to collect
blood samples for chromosome studies in each
patient, and that is the background for Dr. Hungerford's story.

One final small point I should like to make
concerns reports of LSD dosage. In the JAM/412
article of last week there appears to be uncritical
acceptance of the statement that a sugar cube,
impregnated with illicit LSD, which was swallowed by a five-year-old girl, contained a standard 100 microgram dose of LSD. How do they

know the dose? It was an impregnated blackmarket sugar cube which an 18-year-old boy had

put in the refrigerator.
Dr. Freedman: What has been your experience
with "freak-outs" in the treatment situation?
Dr. Shagass: We have had three people become
lastingly psychotic. I agree with Dr. Ungerleider
that during the treatment session a "freak-out"
is a very uncommon affair. However, when we
were deliberately trying to produce a psychotic
reaction, our yield was 50 percent. This was in

could be called psychotic, but these are quite
well controlled. 1 didn't go into detail about the
context. My view, and I go along with Dr. Freedman here, is that we have a very complex inter-

action when we try to use LSD for treatment.
We have the expectancies of the patient; we
have the expectancies of the therapist; we have
this potent agent which heightens suggestibility;
and we have the setting. I think all of these are
necessary in order to produce some of these effects.

QUESTION: What dosage was it initially in
studying psychosis?

Dr. Shagass: In another study using a group of
14, we went as high as 500 micrograms without
success in producing what we call a psychotic
reaction.

QUESTION: These included your alcoholics?
Dr. Shagass: No. This was an entirely different
study. In our use of LSD as a therapeutic agent,
we have used one of two doses: 2.5 micrograms
per kilo or 200 micrograms, whichever is

smaller. We gave it intravenously which, I am
told, makes the effect of the drug two and onehalf to three times more rapid in onset.
QUESTION: What was the dose that gave you
up to 50 percent psychosis?
Dr. Shagass: This wasn't set, but we went from
2.5 to 9 micrograms per kilo in that study in an
attempt to produce psychosis. What we were

trying to do, you see, was to compare in the

a study we did in 1960.
Dr. Freedman: What is it you were trying to

same person a psychotic and a non-psychotic re-

produce? You and I will have an argument later
as to what psychosis is.
Dr. Shagass: What we were trying to produce at

done with Dan Pauk about 1961.13

that time was something that would meet the
clinical criteria of a psychotic reaction as these

Dr. Shagass: Yes. Certainly at one-half microgram per kilo you get a very low yield of anything.
I am distinguishing between a reaction to a
drug which you get in nearly anybody to whom
you give it at most dosage levels above a minimum, and a disorganized behavioral reaction
which fits a syndrome picture. At that time we
were very much concerned with the question of
whether this was really an hallucinogenic drug,
when actually the phenomena may have been il-

were defined in the standard APA nomenclature
terms.
Dr. Freedman: Secondary or permanent?
Dr. Shagass: Secondary. In 14 patients to whom
we gave several doses of LSD, we got seven immediate sudden reactions that were clearly clinical psychosis, Lut three of them, as I recall, were

organic in the sense that there was disorientation. There was one clear case of catatonia. One
man became sufficiently paranoid to try to kill
the investigator. He was sorry about it later.

In our therapeutic context, our experience
has been that people have a lot of symptoms that

action to LSD using different tests. This was
QUESTION: Was the incidence of psychoses
dose related?

12 Mid.

13 Pauk, Z.D., and Shagass, C. Some test findings associated

with susceptibility to psychosis Induced by Lysergic Acid
Dietitylamide. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 2:188-193, August
1961.

13

lusions. The term psychotogenic is used and this
implies the notion that the effects are like schizophrenia. These are reactions which involve seri-

ous departures from the organization of the
mind in relation to what we ordinarily see. We
started out by asking: Are they the same?
QUESTION: Your feeling is that they are the
same?

Dr. Shagass: For the most part, yes. In the three

patients that I have mentioned, we have seen
the development of psychotic reactions which
were clinically exactly like the schizophrenic
syndromes that one sees in the absence of LSD.
One schizophrenic reaction occurred in a man
who had a prior history of a brief psychotic episode subsequent to leaving an isolated work area.

This perhaps should have warned us, but we
treated him because of his exhibitionism which
had been refractory to psychiatric therapy and
he did not appear overtly psychotic at the time.
This patient developed a schizophrenic reaction
after his fourth session with LSD. It started during the experience, and afterwards it required

about two months of traditional treatment for
recovery. The treatment was the same as for a
schizophrenic reaction which has not been precipitated by LSD.
Dr. Meyer: Had these reactions been seen in
people who had been previously unstable?
Dr. Shagass: Yes.
Dr. Meyer: You would feel that a psychological
diathesis was there?
Dr. Shagass: Yes.

QUESTION And these were the only persisting reactions?
Dr. Shagass: Yes. Of special interest was a man
who came to us with a methedrine psychosis. He

wal also a former narcotic addict. The methe-

drine reaction cleared in three days and he
appeared clinically in excellent contact and we
decided to take a chance on him with LSD. He
had a beautiful psychedelic experience, seemed

to reorganize, became ambitious, and really
looked marvelous. Yet 16 days after his fourth
and last LSD experience, he became floridly paranoid and presented exactly the same picture as
he did under the methedrine. This did not clear

up until he was treated, as before (with the
methedrine psychosis) . On both occasions, he
was very difficult to treat.

Dr. Meyer: To your knowledge, has anyone
14

done any EEG studies of the so-Lalled recurrent
experiences without the LSD?
Dr. Shagass: No. I'm just a little skeptical about

what this means. We recently gave LSD to a
Popular Science writer who is a very anxious person. He now feels fine and he has written a very

nice story about his experience for the magazine." In talking to him later, he brought up
the fact that he had an anxiety dream one night
and said it was just like the LSD experience.
Well, I think if I had focused on a previous
experience that had some kind of dramatic context, I could have elicited a similar report before
he ever got any LSD.
Dr. Frosch: We've done EEG's on some of the
people whom we've labeled as recurrences. We
found no encephalographic abnormalities. But
of course, Dr. Shagass observed no electrocephalographic changes unless he did the computerized wave analysis.

Dr. Meyer: Thank you very much. I'd like to
call on Dr. Silverman next.
Dr. Julian Silverman: I'm going to report on a
study carried out in collaboration with Drs.
Monte Buchsbaum, Winfield Scott, Douglas
Welpton, Lyman Wynne, and Theodore Zahn
of NIMH and Dr. Robert Henkin of NHI. The
subjects in the study were eight male chronic
LSD users who ranged in age between 21 and
33 years, average number of drug experiences35; they were examined intensively every day
for a week with an elaborate battery of physiological and psychological tests. Measures of sen-

sory thresholds, perceptual functioning, EEG
averaged cortical evoked responses, autonomic
reactivity, and a battery of clinical psychological
and personality tests were administered to each

subject under four conditions: (a) baseline
day one, (b) with 15 mg. d-Amphetamineday

(c) with 50 micrograms of LSD-25da
four, (d) 24 hours after LSD dayday five.

two,

The baseline measurements made on these subjects were compared with those of 20 normal
male volunteers of similar age. The overall significant effects of LSD will be reported, in de-

tail, by Dr. Henkin at the Eastern meaings of
the American Federation for Clinical Research
in December 1967. Since the main emphasis of
my talk is on individual differences in LSD re14 Gannon, R. My LSD trip: non-cop, non-hippie report.
Popular Science, 191:60-65+, December 1967.

actions, I will only summarize briefly our general findings regarding LSD effects:

1. Auditory Thresholds, measured by a standard audiometric procedure, were lower on
baseline day for LSD subjects than for nondru:4:ed, non-psychiatric control subjects.
2. Following LSD ingestion, auditory thresholds were found to decrease even further in

the majority of subjects

(5)

and not to

change, but to remain low, in the other subjects. This finding is in accord with the sensory threshold results of other investigators
who have taken special care to establish a relaxed and cooperative attitude on the pan of
their subjects (e.g., Roland Fischer, Ohio
State Medical School) . Dr. Henkin, who carried out the sensory threshold testing, was
especially impressed with the performances of
the ISD-drugged subjects. He compared them
with patients with Addison's disease who are
extraordinarily hypersensitive to low intensity

stimulation when not treated with adrenal
cortical hormone.
3. No significant changes were found in taste

and smell thresholds under any condition.
4. Thresholds for "auditory discomfort" were
found to be significantly higher than normal
on baseline day and were increased further on
LSD day. This finding is consistent with research reports of decreased sensitivity to pain
under the influence of LSD." The paradoxical
positive correlation within the same subjects
of increased sensitivity to low intensity stimulation and decreased sensitivity to high intensity stimulation, i.e., to pain, is considered in

detail in a paper entitled "A Paradigm for
the Study of Altered States of Consciousness,"
by J. Silverman."

Dr. Lyman Wynne: Let me just underline that
our subjects' chronic usage of LSD had been interrupted prior to their coming in for the study

so that there wasn't any likelihood of an immediate toxic effect or other kind of effect from
usage during the previous week.
Dr. Silverman:
5. On speech discrimination tests designed to

measure auditory integration capacity, our
subjects evidenced some deficit in auditory integration on baseline day and a highly signif-

icant integration deficit on LSD day. Other
investigators have noted a positive correlation,

within subjects, between unusually low sensory thresholds and deficient performance on
tests of perceptual integration.:? This relationship is found in both clinically normal
and abnormal subjects.
6. Pupillary dilation measured after LSD was
ingested was significantly greater than on any
other testing occasion.
7. An interesting electroencephalographic effect was observed. Using a newly developed
procedure for measuring cortical averaged
evoked responses (to light flashes) , four dif-

ferent intensities of stimulation were employed." The amplitude and latency values
of the averaged evoked responses (AER) were

computed for different peaks of the AER
Waveform. One (and only one) remarkable
effect was noted on one peak of the AER
Waveform which deserves to be elaborated
upon. Briefly, among non-drug-user, nonpsychiatric subjects, increasingly shorter averaged evoked response latencies are recorded as
you increase the intensity of the photic stimuli. The slope of the stimulus intensity-AER

latency function is linear and very steep for
normal male subjects; that is, AER latencies
are relatively long at the lowest stimulus intensity and very short at the highest stimulus
intensity. (a) For our drug-user subjects, on
baseline day, the stimulus intensity-latency
function (slope) was significantly less steep
than that for a group of normal male subjects.
The average slope score was more similar to

that of a group of normal female subjects.
(It certainly is noteworthy that when sex differences are found on sensory threshold tests
and perceptual integration tests, females evidence lower threshold and less efficient per-

ceptual integrationsimilar to our male,
LSD-user subjects. The difference in AER latency slope scores of normal males and normal
females is highly significant.) (b) A couple
15 Kau. E.. and Collins, V.J. Study of Lysergic Add
Diethylamide as an analgesic agent. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 43:285-291, M4y-June 1964.

11 Silvennan, J. A paradigm for the study of altered states
of consciousness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 114:1201 -1218,
October 1968.
17 Kaswan, J.; Haralson, S.; and Cline, R. Variables in

perceptual and cognitive organization and differentiation.
Journal of Personality, 33:164-177, June 1965.
11. Buchsbaum, M., and Silverman. J. Stimulus intensity

control and the cortical evoked response. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 30:12-22, January-February 1968.

15

of hours after ingestion of 50 micrograms of
LSD, our drug-subjects' AER latency slope

knew that they were receiving LSD on day four.

scores changed in the direction of, normal

were observed between subjects on baseline day,

male subjects, and no significant latency slope
score difference was found between our LSD-

to our other results are intriguing but since

a rather marked range of symptom scores was
recorded on the three other experimental days.
On the basis of total symptom scores on LSD
day and on the day following LSD ingestion,
subjects were differentiated into two groups

many AER scores were analyzed, the possibil-

(Table 1) . Analyses of the test battery were then

drugged subjects and normal subjects. The
implications of these AER findings in relation

ity must be mentioned that the AER effect
observed could have occurred by chance.
I would like to turn to a consideration of differences in the ways in which our experimental

subjects reacted to LSD. The literature on
the behaviors and subjective reports of LSDdrugged individuals indicates that there is considerable variability in the kinds of experiences
possible. The data to be presented here suggest
that individuals who differ in systematic ways in
personality characteristics also differ in sensory

and perceptual response characteristics and
hence in the ways in which they make sense out
of an LSD experience.
Subjective reactions of each subject were re-

c.orded by the clinical psychiatrist (D.W.) on
the resParch team with the aid of the Subjective
Drug Effects Questionnaire (SDEQ) developed

by Katz Waskow, and Olssen of NIMH. The
questionnaire, which contains items dealing with

(a) clarity of thinking, (b) degree of ambivalence, (c) perceptual changes, (d) degree of
euphoria, and (e) degree of dysphoria, was administered at the beginning of each of the four
testing sessions. During the drug days (day two

and day four) the questionnaire was administered approximately 45 minutes after ingestion

of the drugs. Although doubtful as to the drug
they were receiving on day two, all subjects
Table I.SYMPTOM SCORES FOR EIGHT
SUBJECTS ON THE SDEQ
So Wet

No.

symptoms

symptoms
past-LSD day

am* day)

46
40
36
48

(63)

A

95

Group

B

71

I

C

59
59

D

Group
II

16

(No. "'volition's

(621

(70)
(441

44
40

15

F

2

(45)
(38)

3

H

33
33

(411

E

6

1

carried out on the basis of this two group
distinction.

I. CLINICAL AND PERSONALITY
TESTING
A. Clinical Psychological Testing. The clinical psychologist (W.S.) on the research team
was given a list of the subjects in each group,

but not one bit of information regarding
their behaviors on or off drugs. He was asked
to compose summary descriptions of the personalities in the two groups of subjects. The
following is excerpted from the clinical psychologist's report. His formulation regarding
two personality types is based primarily upon
the subjects' Rorschach test verbalizations.
There was a fundamental difference of ap-

proach to the inkblots between type I
[Group I] " and type II [Group II] subjects

a different relationship between the observer and the observed inkblots. While
Group II [Low Symptom report] subjects
acted upon the inkblots, actively analyzing,

dissecting, structuring, and with a strong
sense of authorship of their own percepts,
Group I [High Symptom report] subjects
demonstrated an attitude that the inkblots
authored the percepts, to which they only
gave voice. This difference in attitude is revealed by the way in which responses were

offered. Subject MC [Group II] consistently introduced responses with such

phrases as, "The very first thing I notice

N..
LSD day

Whereas no remarkable symptom differences

(31)

that it reminds me of . . ."; "I do see a . . .";
"I also see . . . ." In contrast, Subject SN
[Group Ij used such expressions as, "This
looks like . . ."; "There are . . . ."; and
"Now it's beginning to look like . . . ."

Group I subjects seemed to accept uncritically the meaning presented by the
inkblots, submitting to the immediate stimulus without reservation or judgment, letting
1. Bracketed words are my inserts.

the inkblot change its form and meaning
before their eyes. There was no tension
created by no meaning, no particular investment in finding many meanings. The
horrifying was no more rejected than was
the pleasant if it was presented by an ink-

and the Welsh Anxiety Scale. (None of the
IE measures discriminated between the two

blot. Nor was any response rejected because

consistent with the clinical psychological
and psychiatric evaluations. Group I sub-

it would fail the test of consensual reality.
In striking contrast to Group II subjects,
whose responses were consistently reasonable (even at the expense of form appropriateness) , Croup I subjects developed
responses which, while they fit the inkblots

well enough, were often unreasonable or
absurd. . . . Absurdity or paradox apparently created no tension for Group I sub-

jects. They were able to admit absurd,
paradoxical, or "unrealistic" ideas suggested

by an immediate (inkblot) stimulus. . . .
Group I subjects apparently have more
basic trust in people, and when anxious
about interpersonal stresses, seek to resolve

types of LSD reactors.")

1. Stimulus Change Seeking Scalethe
higher scores of subjects in Group I as
compared with those in Group II were
jects' higher scores were indicative of a
greater degree of stimulus-seeking behavior
and a greater receptivity to novel stimula-

tion during ordinary, everyday situations
(Table 2) .
Table 2.STIMULUS CHANGE-SEEKING SCORES
OF TWO GROUPS OF LSD REACTORS
DIFFERENTIATED ON THE BASIS OF
SDEQ SCORES
Grou

Group 11

1

Subject

Ripm. chg. score

Subject

Pim. chg. score

A

31

E

21

B

25
29
27

F

23

G

It

H

24

them in interpersonal interaction. Group

C

II S's, in contrast, become distrustful when
anxious, and rely on their own internal resources to resolve the anxiety.

2. Pleasantness-Unpleasantness Word Use

B. Clinical Psychiatric Impressions. The inferences regarding the two personality types
derived from the Rorschach test were clearly
similar to the impressions recorded indepen-

dently by the clinical psychiatrist (D.W.)
who had administered the SDEQ.
Group I. Open, experiencing, able to "let

go" of controls and "go with the
drugs." Score high in openness to

D

ScaleHigher scores tended to predominate in Group I. These scores were indicative of a tendency for Group I subjects to
use more unpleasant words and to be more
open to unpleasant ideas and affects than
Group II subjects (Table 3) .
Table 3.PLEASANTNESS-UNPLEASANTNESS

(PUP) WORD USE SCORES OF TWO GROUPS
OF LSD REACTORS

contradictory experience on SDEQ.

Group II. Analytic, rational emphasis on
thinking rather than feeling, less
open to change. Under the effects
of the drugs they report relatively
little subjective change. Highly
motivated to stay in control and to
structure their experiences. Rarely
experience contradictory feelings.

C. Personality QuestionnairesSeveral per-

GROUP 1
PUP score
Subject

Subject

GROUP 11
PUP score

12
16

E

s

B

F

14

C

I6

G

10

H

5
9

A
D

3. Maudsley Personality Inventory (abbreviated version) Neuroticism Scorealthough a clearcut difference in Neuroticism

sonality questionnaires were administered to

each of the subjects on baseline day. The
procedures were the Stimulus Change Seeking Scale," the Pleasantness-Unpleasantness
Word Use Scale," the well known Maudsley
Personality Inventory, two other short questionnaires of Introversion-Extroversion (IE) ,

20 Garlangton, W.K.. and Shimota, H.E. The change seeker

index: a measure of the need for variable stimulus input.
Psychological Reports, 14:919-924, June 1964.

21 McReynolds. P., and Ullmann, L.P. Differential recall of

pleasant and unpleasant words as a function of anxiety.
journal of Clinical Psychology, 20:79-60, January 1964.
22 The Meyers -Briggs indicator was not among the questionnaires used.

17

scores was not found between the Groups,
the two highest Neuroticism scores were
found in Group I and the two lowest Neu-

roticism scores were found in Group II.
This is a curious finding in relation to the
other data obtained in that the more "receptive to stimulation," more "open to
unpleasant ideational stimuli"

subjects

(Group I) also had the high Neuroticism
scores. High-scoring subjects admitted to
(i.e., responded YES to) the six items
which comprise the Neuroticism scale
whereas low-scoring subjects responded NO
to most of the same items:

1. Do you sometimes feel happy, some
times depressed without any apparent
reason?

3. Do you have frequent ups and downs
in mood, either with or without apparent cause?
5. Are you inclined to be moody?

6. Does your mind often wander when
you are trying to concentrate?

9. Are you frequently "lost in thought"
even when supposed to be taking part

hypotheses regarding behavior under the influence of LSD:
A. Subjects in Group I will evidence lower
sensory thresholds (i.e., will be more sensitive) than subject., in Group II on the audiometric threshold procedure.
B. Subjects in Group I will evidence greater
impairment than subjects in Group II in their
ability to organize and articulate speech stim-

uli into meaningful patterns on Henkin's
auditory integration procedure.
C. Subjects in Group I will evidence greater
responsiveness to irrelevant, contextual cues
than subjects in Group II on our measures
of "anchoring" of psychophysical judgments.

D. Subjects in Group I will evidence a
greater tendency than subjects in Group II
to reduce automatically the experienced intensity of strong stimulation. This response
disposition, which usually is inferred from
performances on a kinesthetic figural aftereffects test, has been studied extensively in
our laboratory and in Aseneth Petrie's laboratory.

in a conversation?
11. Are you sometimes bubbling over with
energy and sometimes very sluggish? "

For each of the four measures, a trend was
found in the predicted direction. On the whole,
the trends were more clearly apparent in subjects who were lighter in weight. This latter

Tablit 4.--MAUDSLEY PERSONALITY INVENTORY
NEUROTICISM SCORES OF TWO
TYPES OF LSD REACTORS

finding was consistent with the results of a number of other investigators' findings" that the re-

GROUP I
Subject
MM score

GROUP II
Subject
MM score

A

0

E

F

C

+6
+6

6

D

0

H

+i

2
4
0

Note: A Zero score indicates that a subject answered half
YES, half NO. A positive score indicates that more items were
answered YES; a nosativa score such as a 4 indicates that five
items were answered NO and one item was answered YES.

II. SENSORY-PERCEPTUAL TESTING
Taken together, the clinical and personality
testing suggested a relatively clearcut basis for
differentiating subjects into two categories. The
next step was to develop hypotheses regarding
the relationship between the personality-trait
patterns of the two groups and their modes of
registering and organizing sensory input. Primarily on the basis of work done by myself and
my colleagues,"-" I formulated the following
18

lationship between the microgram dosage of

LSD used in the experiment and the body
weight of the subject is an extremely important
consideration. It is an especially important con-

sideration in low-dosage experiments. In the
present study in which a 50 microgram dosage
was employed, differences between the two
groups usually were apparent in subjects who
weighed less than 70 kilograms. It is suggested
23 The term Neutotidsm is not the term of choice of this
investigator for describing individuals with many Yes responses. It is considered misleading and is retained only be-

cause it has been used this way by the originators of the
MPI questionnaire.
Silverrnan, J. Variations in cognitive control and psychophysiological defense in the schizophrenias. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 29:225-251, May-June 1967.
Silverman, see footnote 16, page 15.
21 Buchsbaum, see footnote 18, page 15.

27 Silverman, J.; Buchsbaum. M.; and Henkin. R. Stimulus

sensitivity and stimulus intensity control. Journal of Perceptual and Motor Skills (to be published).
28 Key. B.J. Effect of Lysergic Acid Dierhylamide on potentials evoked in the specific sensory pathways. British Medical Bulletin, 21:30-33, January 1965.

that the lighter-weight subjects were more affected by the 50 microgram dosage and thus
were more prone to evidence their unique patterns of adjusting to an LSD-induced altered

subject. Recall that all LSD subjects demon-

strated an unusual sensitivity on the audiometric procedure. Perhaps because the
"range of talent" was so skewed in the greater-

state of consciousness.

sensitivity direction, no further differentiation between the groups was possible (Table

1. The lowest auditory threshold score was
found in a Group I subject; the highest auditory threshold was found in a Group H

5)

2. There was no overlap in the scores of the

Table 5.-AUDITORY THRESHOLD SCORES OF SUBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LSD-25
Subject

Body wt.
in kg.

GROUP I
# Symptoms
LSO

Post

Auditory
threshold

day

LSD

SCAM

Subject

GROUP II
Body wt.

in kg.

day

day

A
B

C
D

62.0
67.5

71

99.3
72.0

59
59

95

46
40
36

48

# Symptoms
LSD

Ls

Auditory
threshold

sat

day

-10
-20
-10

-IS

70.3
76.4
55.6
64.5

E

F

G
H

-IS

44
40

15

2

5

33
33

3

-10
-10

I

Note: The higher the negative number, the greater the sensitivity of fla subject, i.e.. the lower the auditory threshold.

two groups on the auditory integration measure. Group I subjects evidenced greater im-

ability to organize and articulate speech stimuli into meaningful patterns (Table 6) .

pairment than Group II subjects in their

Table 6.-AUDITORY INTEGRATION SCORES OF SUBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LSD-25
GROUP I
Subject

Body wt.

LSD# Symptoms

in kg.

Post

day

Integration

Subject

SC01111

Body wt.
in kg.

LSD

day

A
B

C

0

62.0
67.5
99.3
72.0

71

46
40

-18
-12

59
59

36
49

8

95

-12

70.3
76.4
55.6
64.5

E

F

G
H

GROUP II
# Symptoms

Integration

LSD

Post

day

LSD
doY

44
40

15

+4

2
3

+4

33
33

SCOT.

-4
0

1

Note: The larger the negative number. the greater the impairment in auditory integration.

3. The highest "anchoring" scores, indicative
of hyper-responsiveness to irrelevant stimuli
during perceptual judgment tests, were found

in Group I; the lowest "anchoring" scores
were found in Group II (Table 7) .

Table 7.-ANCHORING SCORES OF SUBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LSD 25
i

Subject

A
B

C
D

Body wt.
in kg.

62.0
67.5
99.3
72.0

GROUP I
# Symptoms
L SD
Post
day
LSD
day

95

Anchoring
score

Subject

GRO UP II
Body wt.

in kg.

# Symptoms

LSD

Post

day

LSD

Anchoring

soon

day

IS

E

71

46
40

14

F

59
59

36
48

6
5

G

4. Perceptual performance scores indicative

of a reduction in the experienced intensity of
strong stimulation were clear-cut in three out
of four Group I subjects. Not one subject in

70.3
76.4
55.6
64.5

H

44
40

15

2

2
7

33
33

3

12

I

1I

Group II evidenced behavior on the figural
after-effects procedure which was indicative of

pronounced sensory input reduction (Table
8) .
19

Table 8.--STIMULUSINTENSITY REDUCTION SCORES OF SUBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LSD25
Subject

Body wt.
in kg.

GROUP I
# Symptoms
LSD

Post

day

LSD

GROUP II
Reduction

Subject

VANS

Body wt.
in kg.

# Symptoms
LSD

Post

day

LSD

day

day

A
B

C
D

62.0
67.5
99.3
72.0

95
71

59
59

46
40
36

48

Reduction
scores

2.0
2.0
2.3
0.3

E

F

6
H

70.3
76.4
55.6
64.5

44
40

15

33
33

3

2
1

+0.8

1.3
1.3
0.8

Note: Scores of 2.0 or greater are indicative of significant stimulus-intensify reduction responsiveness. Smaller number negative
scores are indicative of less pronounead reduction responsiveness.

In summary, the results of this pilot study are
not inconsistent with the hypothesized relationships, especially among lighter-weight subjects.
On the basis of clinical and personality testing,
it appears that Group I subjects are more open,
receptive, and seeking of environmental and in-

ternal stimulation than Group II subjects. On
the basis of the LSD-day sensory-perceptual testing, Group I subjects are found to be quite sensi-

tive to low-intensity auditory stimulation and

tend to reduce the experienced intensity of
strong stimulation to a greater extent than
Group II subjects. Group I subjects also evidence more impairment on tests of perceptual
integration and judgment. The greater impairment in perceptual functioning which is characteristic of Group I subjects under the influence
of LSD is consistent with their disposition to
yield to the drug experience, to "go along with
it," rather than to counteract its effects. Since
LSD induces a state in which attention to everyday events (e.g., sensations, ideas, memories) is
dramatically altered, it is not surprising that or-

dinary perceptual functioning is impaired and
that it is more impaired in open, receptive individuals. The unusual reaction to LSD-25 is
typically one in which no impressive impairment
in perceptual and cognitive functioning occurs.

Indeed, a concerted attempt on the part of an
individual to maintain an active analytic intellectual style rather than to yield psychologically
(and physiologically) to the effects of LSD, is
probably an important precursor of an aborted
LSD experience.

Until further research has been carried out,
all of the above inferences must be considered
as, at the most, tentative ones. The very small
number of subjects in the sample, the lack of
clear-cut differences, in some instances, and the
small dosages of LSD-25 employed are just a few
of the factors which limit the kinds of conclus20

ions which can be drawn from this study. I
believe, however, and with good reason, that future investigations in this field will confirm and

expand upon our work and that the kind of research strategy described here will contribute in
a significant way to our understanding of human
behavior.
Dr. Meyer: Now we turn to Dr. Frosch.

Dr. William Frosch: I would like to start by referring to the problem that Dr. Shagass brought
up concerning recurrent experiences. These first

came to my attention when our research group
received a call from the admitting office saying,
"We have a crazy guy down here who sounds
like he's on a trip, but denies it. Do you want
to see him?" We did. The patient came up and
said, "Doctor, there is something wrong with me;

my wife says I'm beginning to talk crazy. I've
never talked this way before and things are beginning to look funny, just as they did when I
took LSD." He attributed the changes in perception and in self-feeling to his earlier LSD
experience. He was terribly worried that he had
perhaps permanently damaged himself and this
was why he had come to the hospital. He insisted

that these kinds of experiences had never occurred to him before. He was a good historian
and in many ways one of the most stable of the
people we had seen. He had a wife and children
and worked as a junior executive and has continued to do so. While it is difficult to evaluate
such post-hoc reports, it is likely that he had not

been psychotic or pre-psychotic prior to his
earlier LSD trip. The drug may have changed
or triggered something. The presenting symptoms were not only transient anxiety states, but
were also very characteristic perceptual distortions of the sort that are usually associated with
LSD (e.g.: kaleidoscopic color changes) . These
recurrent states were, however, associated with

events in his mental life. For example, this man
had a difficult situation with his boss, and as he
looked at his boss' face it would begin to break
up into kaleidoscopic patterns. He lost his job
as a result of this situation. In summary, while
some of our patients very clearly link the onset
of these recurrent experiences to their ingestion
of LSD, the episodes are frequently triggered by
real events and may represent phenomena or exaggerations of phenomena perhaps previously
experienced (i.e.: prior to LSD ingestion) .

In viewing adverse reactions generally, we
have had an average of two patients a week ad-

mitted to Bellevue for whom we feel that the
LSD experience played, at the very least, a precipitating role in the admission. As was said in

the circulated paper, we've seen many, many
more people who had LSD experiences, but who
were hospitalized for some other reason. These
were usually acute schizophrenic episodes

which, as far as we can determine, were unrelated to the previous drug experience. Whether
this average admission rate (two patients a
week) really represented a stable admission rate
is difficult to determine. Initially we saw almost
all of the patients with this problem in the New
York City area. In the intervening year or so,
some other hospitals have begun to admit them.
Dr. Hirschhorn tells me that Mount Sinai has
now been seeing a number of these patients,
and I know that in the last year Kings County
has evaluated and admitted many patients with
this diagnosis. This may represent an increasing
admission rate.

Although my research group hasn't seen all
of the LSD patients, we have studied a number
of samples over the years. Each sample is essen-

tially identical to every other in terms of the
basic demographic characteristics, as well as the
clinical picture. In contrast with the usual Bellevue population, they are all young, middle class,

and almost exclusively white. This is certainly
consistent with our usual stereotype of this population. It is of interest, however, that the Kings
County sample has a relatively high proportion
of Negroes and is a lower class population. Kings

County also feels that their patients' involvement with LSD starts with the onset of a psychosis. They seek out the drug in an attempt at
self cure. This has certainly been true for some
of our patients, but doesn't seem to have been
true for all.
We've done routine psychological testing on

some of the patients that we've seen. Once the
acute episode is over, we've been unable to determine anything that would be described classically as organicity on either the Wechsler scales
or the Bender-Gastalt. We've also done EEG's.
Within the three days following admission we've
seen some non-specific "drug-effect EEG

changes." These are transient and may be re-

lated to the ingestion of other drugs in the
period preceding admission. In fact 90 percent
of the patients admitted because of LSD have
had experience with amphetamines; two-thirds

have taken barbiturates; and, rather surprisingly, about one-half have tried one of the opiates. As one would expect, there is an almost
universal use of marihuana in this group. We've
seen only one patient who had never used marihuana. This woman was somewhat unusual in
other respects. She was a woman of 34 who went

to a psychologist looking for help. She claims
that the psychologist said, "Here is some LSD,
go home and take it." She had an acute psychotic reaction. She is now furious and has an
evangelical anti-LSD attitude.
Several years ago Dr. Korein and Dr. Musacchio from our department were interested in the
use of LSD to unmask latent neurological defects, similar to the way amobarbital may induce
focal weakness. Since many of the effects of LSD
are sensory, they felt that administration of LSD

might induce sensory disturbances in patients
with neurological disease. They administered
100 micrograms of LSD intravenously to 14 patients with sensory disorders resulting from focal
cerebral diseases. These included visual field defects and hemisensory defects.
All of the patients had symptoms within five
to ten minutes. The usual initial symptom was
drowsiness which, as in Hoffman's original de-

scription, was described as a feeling of dizziness and drunkenness. Nine of the 14 patients
showed anxiety and agitation, three had alternating euphoria and depression. Six had what
the investigators (who were neurologists)
termed clinical psychosisconsisting of hallucinations, depersonalization, and marked anxiety.
In three subjects the reaction was "violent" and

in two the procedure was interrupted with
chlorpromazine. There were specific neurological effects in all of the 12 patients on whom data
could be obtained. In three out of four patients
a mild aphasia became worse. There didn't seem
to be any change in the organic mental syn21

dromes which were mildly present in four

to go on to Dr. Smith who will talk about the

patients. Five of the seven patients with homonymous visual field defects showed visual changes
such as flashing lights, or distortions of color or
distance. There were lateralized somatosensory
distortions which appeared to be related to the

West Coast scene.

locus of the cerebral disease in patients with
hemisensory defects. One patient had a localized
clonic seizure of the upper extremity. The EEG

appeared "less abnormal" after administration
of LSD. There was a decrease in the amount
and/or amplitude of slow-wave activity.
I would also like to comment on Dr. Silverman's suggestion that hypersensitivity is an impairment of sensory integration. Clinically, in
those patients whom I have been able to observe
during a recurrence, this seems to be what's go-

Dr. David Smith: A number of questions have

been raised relative to drug practices in the
Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, and
I'll look forward to discussing these questions
during the question and answer period. In this
part of my presentation, I'd like to focus primarily on our specific experience with the compound STP. As I'm sure you know, STP .is in
effect a "proprietary name" established by the
underground or black market. It means serenity,
tranquility, and peace. The generic name for this

chemical substance is DOM or 2,5dimethoxy-a, 4-dimethyl phenethylamine. It is a compound related to the amphetamines, but it has

ing on. While sitting with me, a patient will

some very unusual and different properties which

hear a sound. This distracts him and he will get
lost in a perceptual distortion.
One final word, we've seen very little DMT
(Dimethyltryptamine) or DET (Diethyltryptamine) resulting in hospitalization even though
it apparently is present in New York. I wonder
if this is related to the length of the trip. Even
a "bad" trip doesn't last long enough for them
to get to the hospital. We've also had one drug
sample which was reputed to be STP. It was a
green-blue-grey tablet. One-half of this tablet,
which weighed 172 milligrams, was given intravenously to a dog. Nothing was observed except
mild fore-limb tremor which may have been related to the fact that it was a suspension rather
than a solution that was injected. Chemical tests
have not yet been completed.

I'll attempt to describe not only the clinical

COMMENT FROM AUDIENCE: Most of
these mescaline-type compounds are extremely
difficult to get any kind of evidence and analysis

were very surprising to us. In this presentation
properties of the drug, but also its introduction
into a highly susceptible drug-using population.
First I would like to describe the population
into which STP was introduced. We first heard
reports of STP by "psychedelic leaders" as early
as February 1967, but the first written reports

appeared in the underground newspapersfollowing a predictable marketing pattern. The
Berkeley Barb described the compound as being
a guaranteed "good" trip that was not yet illegal.
We heard enough of these reports to know that
something was coming.

On June 6, 1967, we opened the HaightAshbury Medical Clinic which was a general
medical facility dealing with the hippies in the
Haight-Ashbury. The population at risk during
the summer was by no means homogeneous. We

have a large drug survey going now, entitled

on.

"Drug Practices in the Haight-Ashbury Subculture." Our ,lata have not been completely ana-

Dr. Frosch: Some of the original descriptions of
STP sounded to us like a Ditran effect, but it's

lyzed bat our impressions to date are that the
population at risk was composed essentially of

very clearly not a Ditran-related compound.
The only thing I know of that would distinguish a mescaline-like drug from a Ditran-like
compound is whether the patient has a mydria-

sis with or without cycloplegia. Dr. Samuel
Gershon who ran the dogs is very "hep" on anticholinergics. I would accept his findings that it

is not a Ditran-like compound. I think that he
would know.

Dr. Meyer: Thank you very much. I would like
22

three major groups. First of all, there was a large
group of teenagers who were in Haight-Ashbury
primarily for the summer experience. They had
not, by and large, had experience with any drug
but marihuana, although some may have taken
LSD one or two times. In essence this group was
oriented toward taking drugs, but had very little
experience. The second group consisted of indi-

viduals who had built their philosophy around
the mystical and evangelical experiences of LSD.

They are of the "drop-out category," and were

fully committed to the hippie philosophy. Many
were actively involved in some of the local organizations in the Haight-Ashbury, such as The

Diggers, The Straight Theatre (4 community
cultural center) , our clinic, etc. The third group
can be described best as an odd mixture of sociopathic personalities (including the motorcycle
gangs) that came to Haight-Ashbury for a vari-

ety of reasons. Certainly amongst this group
there were a lot of compulsive drug users. Some
of these individuals had a long previous history
of multiple drug abuse patterns.
Although we heard reports of the STP being
used, we did not see a case in the San Francisco

area until June 8, and this seemed an isolated
event. However, on June 21 at a hippie celebration of the summer solstice (one of a series
of events held in the Haight-Ashbury "summer
of love festival") , 5000 STP tablets were given
away without charge in the panhandle of
Golden Gate Park. Very soon after that we saw
a number of adverse reactions to STP. The tablets that were distributed on this occasion were
all stamped out of the same die. We have reports
that approximately 15,000 of these aquamarine

tablets were distributed and that many have
since been turned over to the Food and Drug
Administration for chemical analysis. We have

evidence that no new STP tablets have been
introduced into the Haight-Ashbury since that
time except for some amphetamine labelled as
STP (in order to get a higher price for that
material) .

I think it would be advisable for me to describe the clinical STP syndrome to give you
some idea of how our clinic handled the situation of an unknown drug. We have a population

of 10,000 to 20,000 people in the HaightAshbury, but this is a very transient population.
LSD use approaches 90 percent. At least 50 percent of the population had been there less than

two months and had come primarily for the
summer. We estimate that during the summer
of 1967 there were at least 100,000 persons passing through the community, although the steady

state population would be between 10,000 and
20,000. Our Haight-Ashbury Clinic saw 10,000
medical cases in three months.
Now, the clinical STP syndrome, as we ini-

tially saw it, was of long duration and it was
this long duration that produced many of the
"bad" trips. Many of the patients said that they
experienced initially good feelings, but that the

long duration of the STP trip (72 hours) produced a fear and panic with concerns that they
would "not come down." There were marked
and vividly colored hallucinations. Many of the
individuals who had taken LSD more than 100
times, and were therefore very experienced with
psychedelics, described themselves as encounter-

ing their first "bad" trip with STP. They described the experience as being more intense,
and lasting so long that eventually an adverse
reaction developed.
We saw almost universally a very rapid tachy-

cardia with fine muscle tremors, and dilated
pupils that were sluggishly reactive to light and

accommodation. I think that at the time we
should have been in a better position to describe

this as not being an atropine-like compound.
However, we had heard of the possibility of

the Ditran series being introduced into the
community and we were very much concerned
because of the high incidence of delirium with

these drugs. Just prior to this, we had heard
that an agent which had been used for Army
chemical warfare had been stolen, and these
vague rumors and the physical syndrome that
we were seeing made us think initially that we
were dealing with an atropine-like substance.
At the end of June we saw 20 cases enter the
clinic; we had no idea what the compound was
which had been ingested.
In the city of San Francisco thousands of adverse reactions to LSD occur. The standard approach in institutions is the utilization of large
dosages of intramuscular chlorpromazine. The
first few cases that were treated at San Francisco
General Hospital became markedly more agitated and very disturbed after the administration of chlorpromazine. At this time our feeling
was that the clinical syndrome represented that
of an atropine-like drug. This seemed to explain
several aggravated clinical states in which chlorpromazine was given and the patient then ap-

peared to get worse. We were particularly

disturbed because chlorpromazine is a very important drug on the Haight-Ashbury black mar-

ket and we knew that for every one case that
was seen in institutions at that time prior to the
opening of the Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic,
at least a hundred cases were treated outside of
institutions with self medication. We therefore
published widely in the underground literature
that chlorpromazine was contraindicated, and
that those having STP reactions should come to
23

the clinic where there would be medical assis-

sults in calming much of the anxiety and

tance without legal repercussions.

seemed preferable to chlorpromazine.

In July, chemical analysis revealed that this
compound was a substituted phenylethylamine
and that this was not an anticholinergic compound. However, in reviewing our hospital data
it would appear from our results that the question of chlorpromazine is still unsettled. Our in-

The hospitalized patients had a much
higher incidence of long-term psychological

itial results and impressions with cases that have

occurred since that time indicate that this phenothiazine in no case interrupted or shortened
the duration of the hallucinatory experience.
There is at the present time (September 1967)
very little STP usage. The majority of the approximately 50 cases that we studied in detail
came in the months of June and July. The drug
rapidly lost favor for a variety of reasons, but I
think that we can now come up with some valuable recommendations as to a treatment regime. In a forthcoming paper which Dr. Fred
Meyers and I will publish, we divide the STP
cases into the following four major categories:

1. "Good" trips occurred in a significant
number of people who took STP and who
were able to handle the experience. These
people were predominantly those who had
had a lot of experience with LSD, and a very
low liability to adverse reactions. They considered the STP experience to be the "caviar
of the psychedelic experiences." This group
still takes STP periodically.

2. Some "bad" trips were handled by the
community.

3. Some "bad" trips were handled by the
Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic which deemphasizes chlorpromazine treatment and
emphasizes the use of a non-professional guide

to sit with the individual and try to talk him
through his experience. We have found that
(as in the LSD experience) the patient can

be seen by a physician and encouraged to
work with either a physician or a sympathetic
individual to alleviate an acute panic reaction
(the major and dominant reaction seen in the
Haight-Ashbury) .
4. Some "bad" trips were admitted to the hos-

pital. At our county hospital the supportive
psychotherapeutic approach is deemphasized
because of lack *of personnel, but the regime
of chlordiazepoxide as a sedative and chloral
hydrate as a hypnotic seemed to have good re24

problems

(depression, "flash-backs," etc.) .

One sample case illustrates some of the reasons for this. An individual had taken an unknown drug and was admitted to the hospital
actively hallucinating. The psychiatrist on the
ward gave him a large dose of chlorpromazine

and when the hallucinations did not clear,
gave him progressively increasing doses of this

drug to 800 mg. four times a day. The reaction became progressively worse and on the
tenth day the individual walked out of the
hospital never to be seen again.

To summarize, in areas where there is
a high incidence of psychedelic drug-usage
there is far too much dependence upon the
phenothiazines. We would recommend that
when in doubt, the phenothiazines should not
be used, that these very extreme hallucinatory experiences can be handled with sedatives and supportive psychotherapy.
In conclusion, I would like to state that it is
very disturbing to us that the gap between the
psychedelic drug-using population and the scientific and medical community is widening so
rapidly. We are now faced with the introduction
of another hallucinogen in the DOM series. This

drug is called MDA. MDA is the chemical
name; the proprietary name for this compound
was to be FDA but the underground black market decided to change their approach, probably
because the STP got a lot of bad publicity which
essentially killed the market. When the scientific
community is not in contact with the drug-using
population, then the scientific community is hit
with a series of surprise "shock waves." In particular, those of us who are on the psychedelic
front lines are faced with a mass of patients who
have ingested the unknown compound and are
having a reaction that is very difficult to define.
I would like to close by asking that the scien-

tific community make more of an attempt to
come into contact with the drug-using population. One of the major problems with the population in the Haight-Ashbury is that they have

essentially turned away from institutions and
will not seek traditional medical help. They are
left to their own devices, which tend to potentiate and propagate the patterns of drug abuse.

We must realize that a majority of the "adverse
reactions to hallucinogenic drugs" (which is the
title for this symposium) are happening outside
of our institutions. If our studies do not emphasize more research of the participant-observation
type then our information about this topic will
continue in its present state of inadequacy.
Dr. Freedman: I do want to say one thing about
chlorpromazine. At Yale we stopped giving it for
bad reactions several years ago. We gave amytal

just as we would in a seizure state if we had
to. Generally we gave supportive therapy. As a
result, we never had any contaminating psychological reactions, that is, the chlorpromazine confusion and the LSD state. In animals it has been
shown that you could stop an LSD reaction in

the rat with as little as 30 gamma per kilo of
chlorpromazine where the normal dose is 2 mg.

per kilo. If you went higher, you got a compounded reaction, a chlorpromazine reaction
and an LSD reaction. While you never know
what inferences you can make from animals to
man, this tipped us off as to why we were getting some confusing reactions.
The second pharmacological point that I
think should be noted here is that the plasma
level of LSD correlates beautifully with the
period of acute effects of LSD in animals and in
man. The waves of reaction that we sometimes
get at least from animal data seem to be due to
the fact that LSD is sometimes held in tissues
and then comes out suddenly into the plasma
several hours later.
QUESTION: What tissues?
Dr. Freedman: We don't know yet. As I've said,
we have monitored plasma concentrations. I
have wondered whether STP and its duration of
actions shouldn't be monitored as you would

any other pharmacological problemthat is,

let's get plasma levels and see what's happening.
Can I also just raise one question? What is the
actual length of duration of the STP reaction?
Dr. Smith: It was between 16 and 72 hours. We
had one case of an undiagnosed, prolonged acute
brain syndrome that lasted for 10 days in which

the individual was actively hallucinating and
out of contact with reality. In this particular
situation the patient had been exposed to progressively and increasingly higher doses of phenothiazine in addition to his previously ingested
STP.
The first group who came into our clinic com-

plaining of adverse reactions stated that they
were on a "death" trip. The rapid tachycardia
induced by the STP led to the fear of a heart
attack. Thus. aspects of "What will happen
when I die?" were introduced into their minds,
followed by a panic reaction. In our "calm center" we have attempted to treat these problems
merely by sitting and talking with the patient;

explaining that all he was having was a rapid
heart rate which would go away. In other words,
by explaining the symptom we have endeavored
to divert his mind from thoughts of death. Many
times this has been all. that was necessary to stop
a "bad" trip. On the other hand, these same individuals when allowed to progress on the street
might end up at the San Francisco General Hospital, running down the street away from something in a very acutely paranoid state. The point

is that if you can reach these patients at a very
early stage in their psychotic reactions, many
times you can interrupt it. However, if the individual is forced to go through waiting lines,
ambulances, police, etc., this merely aggravates

the reaction. I think this is the reason that the
cases at the county hospital were so severe and
extreme and sometimes related to self-inflicted
wounds.

Dr. Meyer: Dr. Frosch, Dr. Ditman, and Dr.
Ungerleideris it your experience as well that
phenothiazines perhaps are contraindicated in
the management of some of the acute adverse
reactions?

Dr. Ditman: I would say no.
Dr. Ungerleider: Let me say that we have seen

six or seven paradoxical reactions to chlorpromazine when we gave up to 3,000 mg. per
day. One case was described in which the patient
showed neither improvement nor exaggeration
of symptoms until we stopped the chlorpromazine after which the patient improved. These

paradoxical reactions to chlorpromazine have
been reported, however, not only in the treatment of adverse LSD reactions but in the treatment of schizophrenia as well.

Dr. Frosch: We have been impressed with the
fact that many of our patients don't respond to
phenothiazines. I am not so sure about the paradoxical reactions. There may be a few but many
of them go right on their merry way. Additionally, we have hesitated to add something when
we knew so little about what was going on to
25

begin with. It sounds as though many of the
management problems are best handled by reassurance and by discreet use of hypnotics.
Dr. Freedman: May I raise one point. Back in
1956 Mayer-Gross 29 described chlorpromazine
as a psychotomimetic. This statement actually

appears in one of his papers. He found that
when it was given to normal people they had

peculiarly colored dreams and in one or two very
well recorded cases people had psychotic-like responses to it.
I also think it is important that we know what
we are treating. We are treating panic, depres-

sion, and hallucinations; we are not just treating a kid because he has dropped out of law
school.

Dr. Meyer: At this point, I would like to cut
off discussion until we hear from Drs. Ditman

and Osmond whose presentations will round out
the morning session.

Dr. Keith Ditman: What I am going to talk

about today is a study in which we tried to determine the harmful aspects of the LSD experience.

My experience with LSD goes back over the
past 11 years, during which time I have been

interested in LSD as a possible psychotherapeutic adjunct, particularly with alcoholics. I

have also been interested in developing instruments that could give us a better understanding
of the nature of the LSD experience. To this
end, John Whittlesey, Thelma Moss, and I have
developed a card sort which is an instrument to
obtain a retrospective description of a person's
LSD experience. It can be used actually for any
consciousness-changing experience, but is particularly useful for the LSD experience.
In following the current revival of the use of
hallucinogens and studying the literature of antiquity, I am impressed with the lack of reported
psychiatric complications among the Indians
and others who have used various hallucinogenic drugs. This apparent safety led many research investigators to view these compounds
benignly (until recently) . We should have been
more aware of the abuse potential of these substances. Some 70 years ago Havelock Ellis published on mescaline in Lancet," predicting that
it had a real future as an abuse substance. In my
early experience with LSD I saw some abuse,
even among professionals. I think it was here
(among the professionals) that the abuse
26

started. I suppose that we could have anticipated
the abuse of LSD, but perhaps not to the extent
that it has gone. In 1961, I first became aware
of a person selling sugar cubes with illicitly-

made LSD in them. Dr. Sidney Cohen and I
began reporting on this at that time. This was

the beginning of the black marketing of illicitlymade LSD. One of the earliest casualties of illicit LSD that I know of was a 14-year-old boy.
He had the recurrent symptoms that Dr. Frosch

has mentioned. The symptoms went on for a
period of a month or more.
I would like to digress slightly here. It is not
only with LSD that you see such "flashbacks."
They are reported for CO 2 therapy and we are
all familiar with the alcoholics' account of the
"dry drunk." I suspect that suggestion is an important factor in this syndrome.
With our card sort we have been trying to
study the nature of the LSD experience; to compare experiences for those who need treatment

afterwards with those who need no treatment,

or even claim beneficial effects from the experience. We obtained card sorts on 116 subjects
whom we divided into three groups: those who
apparently needed no treatment or even claimed
benefit, those who needed out-patient treatment,
and those who needed hospitalization. Group I,
the largest in number, consisted of 52 persons,
none of whom needed psychiatric care because
of the LSD experience. This group is of considerable interest because a great majority of
subjects were functioning either at jobs or as students at the time of testing. Many reported
having had several drug experiences. This population was recruited through a variety of community contacts, including students, patients,
and colleagues. I cannot state that they are

really comparable to the other two groups,

other than that they claimed that they had taken
LSD. Group II is composed of 27 subjects who
applied either privately or through clinics for
psychiatric out-patient care, apparently as a result of their LSD experiences. As with Group I,
a majority of these subjects were employed at
the time of testing and reported multiple-drug
experiences. Group III is composed of 37 subjects seen in psychiatric hospitals in the Los Anand Mayer-Gross, W. Prevention of
psychological effects d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25)
by its 2-Brom derivative (BOL 148). Nature, 178:210+, 1956.
30 Ellis, H. A note on the phenomena of mescal intoxication. Lancet, 1540-1542, 1897.
29 Ginzel,

K.H.,

geles area where they had been hospitalized as a
result of their LSD sessions. Again a multiple-

drug experience was reported for Group III,
but unlike Groups I and II, many of these sub-

ture. The only group reporting use of hard narcotics, however, was Group III, with 23 percent
in that category so reporting. We feel that personality factors have contributed to the hospi-

jects were unemployed.

talization of Group III. The percentage of

The card sort we used in this study has 156
items descriptive of the LSD experience. The
subjects were asked to sort the items into five

persons functioning at work or as students decreases from 88 percent in the non-treatment
group down to 39 percent in the hospitalized
group. A Chi Square test of this data reveals
significance at the .001 level. It should be noted
that the level of functioning was assessed just
prior to interviewing and not before the LSD

piles, depending on how descriptive of their experiences they were. The headings of these five
piles we.e:

1. Very much like the experience
2. Like the experience
3. Neither like nor unlike the experience
4. Unlike the experience
5. Very unlike the experience
We have classified, according to our own impressions, the items in this card sort into the following 12 categories:

1. Strong Pleasant Emotions
2. Self-Understanding and Aesthetic
Appreciation
3. Mystical and Paranormal Sensations
4. Empathy
5. Religious Feelings

6. Unusual Though Not Unpleasant Body
Sensations and Perceptions
7. Somatic Discomfort
8. Depression

9. Paranoia
10. Anxiety
11. Hallucinations

12. An Evaluation of the Experience
Surprisingly, the frequency of LSD usage shows
no significant differences among the three

groups. The percentage of Group I subjects
(the ones who did not need treatment) reporting 25 or more sessions with LSD, was 35 percent as compared with 38 percent in Group III
(the hospitalized group) . The percentage of
subjects who reported taking [Si) only once was

relatively small in all groups; 25 percent in
Group I to 11 percent in Group III. Similarly,
histories of other drugs taken by these 116 subjects revealed almost parallel percentages in all
three groups; 53 percent in Group I, 67 percent in Group II, and 63 percent in Group III.
In other words, over half of these people reported
casual to frequent usage of various drugs, stimulants, sedatives, tranquilizers, and hallucinogens.

I suppose that we were sampling the drug cul-

experience.

I do not have time to go over the 41 items
which differentiated among the three drug
groups, other than to say that those who needed

treatment had experiences indicating marked
anxiety, depression, feelings of persecutory paranoia, and fears of going insane. Such emotions

and thoughts were far more prevalent in the
treatment groups than in the non-treatment
groups. This was at .01 level of confidence or
better for all 41 items. The one item which differentiated among the three groups more than
any other item was, "I felt that I might become
permanently insane." Curiously, the hospitalized group (as compared to the out-patient
group) did describe some aspects of their experiences as euphoric. From this data we are under
the impression that it may be the nature of the
LSD experiences that is causing the untoward
after-effects in these individuals. In other words,
LSD is psychologically toxic, if I may use that
term. Complaints of these people after an upsetting LSD experience include anxiety, depression, borderline psychosis, psychosis, etc. I have
the impression from my experience treating a
number of these cases that one is dealing more
with young individuals who are non-achievers,
perhaps schizoid characters or borderline psychotics, and that superimposed on these problems there is the traumatic drug experience. I
think that a traumatic neurosis may have developed on top of already disturbed personality or
thought disorders.

Dr. Humphrey Osmond: During the past 15
years I have made a number of studies in a
variety of contexts, using LSD-25 and other
substances. Some of these studies were aimed at
producing psychotic-like effects; others at treating alcoholism and other conditions; still others
at studying more general psycho-social effects.
27

Our original subjects were university students.

It was clear that they were far less able to
"handle" LSD-25 than our alcoholic patients
who seemed very tolerant of it and could take
four to five times as much as the students.
In those early years of the 1950's one of
the bitter and recurring arguments concerned
whether or not the LSD experience resembled a
psychosis, particularly schizophrenia. This question has not yet been completely resolved. It all
depends on how you define a schizophrenic-like
state and, of course, on whether you have some
ways of measuring it, once it is defined. I do not

believe that we could measure it at that time.
We began by using the Rorschach, but many of
our subjects could only do one card and that, it

appears, is not enough. We tried other tests
which did not work and then, early in 1960, we

developed the HOD test, named in jest the
Hoffer-Osmond Diagnostic test. This test was
constructed following a squabble with our psychologist friends in which we rashly cast doubts
upon the tests which they had been using, and
they suggested rather tartly that if we were so
smart we could make one ourselves. We were
trapped into the attempt.
The test is extremely simple; indeed, with our
lack of knowledge of test making, it could hardly

be otherwise. It consists of 145 statements on
cards which the test-taker sorts as true or false.
Many of these statements' are taken from the
records or from talks with schizophrenic persons.

When used by those who have taken LSD-25,
we have found it best for them to take the test
retrospectively, for if the test cards are given
during the experience, many such subjects become extremely paranoid and one actually became catatonic. Luckily, schizophrenics are
much more obliging. Even "back-ward burntout" cases will cooperate splendidly. They seem
to be burning fiercely rather than to be burnt
out. Schizophrenics on the whole take the test
with zeal and alacrity. They have a test-retest
correlation of about 0.9 and seem to enjoy the
test and speak about it as being helpful to them.
Severely catatonic patients who did not express
satisfaction at the time, emphasized once they
were better that it was helpful for them to know
that someone had some notion of their strange
predicament.
By early 1961 we had a good deal of evidence
that schizophrenia and the states following the
taking of LSD-25 have many similarities, in so
28

far as our crude test showed. We knew that
something more refined was needed. We had
found in the HOD test that sensory perception,
time perception, self perception, and perception
of others were very useful. In our new instru-

ment, the EWI (Experiential World Inventory) we had greatly increased the number of
items dealing with these last three categories.
Our new test shows that the characteristic which
most clearly differentiates the state induced by
LSD-25 from clinical schizophrenia is our Dysphoria scale.
Schizophrenics, as we have shown, are usually

as, or even more, depressed than those diagnosed as having depressive illnesses, or melancholia. LSD-25 takers, on the other hand, are
usually much more cheerful. Otherwise the experiences of LSD-25 takers resemble those Of
severe schizophrenics rather closely. It would be
difficult to believe that many people would ever
take LSD-25 more than once if it were always
or often accompanied by severe depression and

despair. The schizophrenic patient has good
cause to be gloomy because he is trapped in his

illness and cannot get out. The LSD-25 taker,
whether his experience is pleasant or not, is always buoyed up with the thought that it will
soon be over. Even when he doesn't enjoy himself much, the thought of its ending and his being able to talk to friends about his experience
is a source of hope and comfort. If you cover
up the Dysphoria scale, it is not easy to distinguish schizophrenia from the LSD-25 state.
There is one other significant difference: we
have a scale, the impulse control scale, from
which it is clear that many schizophrenic pa-

tients feel that the situation is getting out of
hand and beyond their control. Most LSD-25
takers feel more or less in control, though not
all are completely sure. We have found that both

the HOD and EWI tests can be very useful if
patients are asked to do the tests as they are now,
as they were at their worst, and as they were at

their best. This saves a great deal of time and
allows one to estimate whether the patient is get-

ting better or worse.
By doing our tests over a number of years,
we have been able to show that most patients
have a clear and rather accurate recollection of
their illnesses. This is of great value clinically
because one of the most difficult decisions facing

the clinician is that of differentiating someone

who is becoming worse from someone who is
getting better.
The success of the HOD and EWI tests seems

to be due in part to the fact that patients consider the statements on the cards relevant to
their illness and so are very cooperative. Recently we have given our tests to people who
have been frequent users of LSD-25, or at least
substances labelled as such. We now have records from eight of these frequent users. Most of

them are functioning well according to their
standards. Their ages range from 18 to 42. They
are not like schizophrenics even though they do

have sensory, time, body, and self-perception
disturbances resembling those found in some
schizophrenia. They are overly alert, their perceptual constancy is impaired, their experience
of time is peculiar, their level of consciousness
fluctuates, and they have some disturbances in
their body image. One might expect that such
changes would impair conceptual thinking and
indeed, they do complain of some reduction of
intellectual efficiency, though they feel more
creative. Depression is almost always low and
even if they feel mildly depressed and irritable,
they claim there is an underlying euphoria and
that they are intrigued and excited. Paranoid
features are conspicuously lacking.
Just before I left Princeton, my colleague, Dr.
Moneim El-Meligi, checked on a special scale

that we have been developing which we call
hyperaesthesia. Seven out of eight of these LSD25 takers scored very high on this scale, higher
than nearly all normals we have studied. Some-

thing has clearly happened to them. However,
it is only a small group and it is too early to
draw any far reaching conclusions. These users
themselves believe that they have had a change
of personality which they feel is for the better.
I am not quite so convinced of this, but I am
certain that something has happened.
Yesterday we had a bonafide schizophrenic
with whom a number of colleagues and I have
been working for a year; from our clinical findings, her reports, and our tests we felt we had
largely succeeded in getting her better. Ten days
ago, with an appalling vexatiousness, she obtained some LSD--25, so-called, and took it. She
became very much frightened after taking it on

her own and went back to her earlier schizophrenic condition. Our most recent record suggests that she is now almost completely well
again, after five days of schizophrenia. Our rec-

ords show that her condition was not similar to
that of the frequent LSD-25 users but closely
resembled schizophrenia as seen in her own
earlier records and that of others. She bemoaned

her bad luck, to which I replied, "Sorry, bad
judgment is a more appropriate label."
I was delighted to find that using different
methods from ours, Dr. Silverman has come to
very similar conclusions. What happens to these
adventurers resembles some aspects of schizophrenia but is not identical to it. I believe that
one can produce a negative LSD-25 experience
that would closely resemble schizophrenia. One
of the easier ways is to tell a person who is in
the middle of an LSD-25 experience that he was

given a placebo; this is likely to be very disturbing, but could easily be harmful and, therefore, should not be tried. If one adds a good
deal of dysphoria to the LSD-25 takers' EWI
records, they look very much like those of schizo-

phrenia. Using our HOD test we have given a
random mixture of the records of schizophrenia
and LSD-25 takers to groups of psychiatrists,
asking them to say which were which. They did
not succeed, except for one group who did very
well indeed. At the time, we and they did not
know why they succeeded, but it seems possible
that they had recognized dysphoria as being the
key and so were able to do much better than we
ourselves and others.
We are still not at all sure that all psychedelic
substances produce the same experiences. One
would expect not, as people use rather different
words for describing the effects of different psychedelics. However, now that we have reliable
ways of establishing a baseline for a person's ex-

perience we should be in a much better position to explore these matters in depth. Using
the Experiential World Inventory, Dr. Bernard
Aaronson has shown that focal disturbances of
temporal and spatial perception which he produces by post-hypnotic suggestion aimed at a
single perceptual modality tend to spread to
other aspects of perception. This is both elegant

and puzzling. We do not yet fully understand
exactly what this means.

One implication of Dr. Aaronson's work
which I think we should consider very seriously
is that before long someone is going to find a

way of producing psychedelic phenomena by
post-hypnotic suggestion. I wonder what our
position will be when this happens. I can find
good reason now for encouraging people to keep
29

their distance from unauthorized psychedelics,
noting the low expertise of many of the enthusiastic amateur chemists involved in this work.

Dr. Osmond: One of our subjects used LSD-25
seven times, the last trip about two months before testing; another used it about 20 times. Our

This approach seems to be fairly effective

sample is not quite so intrepid as Dr. Silverman's.

and at least some young people heed the warning. It is a soft-sell approach; young folk who
would not hesitate about vexing their elders do
hesitate about becoming the victim of someone
else's inept chemistry. I do not know that this
technique would work in all cultures, but in the

"brand name" culture of the United States,
people seem willing to respond to it. It may not

prevent all of them from continuing to take
LSD, but it may get some of them to hesitate and

even to stop. It also encourages them to use
natural products which usually have a lesser de-

gree of danger, for nature is a better chemist
than many amateurs. We are encouraging psychedelic users, if they are going to undertake
these hazards, at least to screen out those potential users who are obviously perceptually un-

stable. The HOD test allows them to do this.
At least some young people are taking careful
notice of this.
We have also suggested something rather
more controversial, namely that those who intend to take psychedelics should have large doses
of nicotinic and ascorbic acid available, for these

reduce the impact of LSD-25. This has been
shown to be the case in animals and in humans,

though I should like to see more extensive
studies done in these matters. The effect of the
vitamins seems to depend upon how much is
taken and to some extent upon how early in the
experience it is injected. I believe that it is good
for people to have something to take that does

good and will not do harm; this reduces the
chances of panic. Further careful studies will be

needed to show how much of this beneficial
effect, if any, is a placebo effect. If amateur experimenters can be persuaded to screen out the
obviously ill and to use measures which will reduce the chances of prolonged "bad" trips, this
may serve as a bridge for further communication, since we know they are concerned about
these matters. Persuading them not to seek and
use these substances or preventing them from
obtaining them seems to me to be a more difficult matter.

QUESTION: I would ask Dr. Osmond about
how many times his chronic users had used the
drug?
30

One young man claimed to have used 100,000
micrograms of LSD-25 in about five months, interspersed with STP on several occasions; we
tested him some weeks after this last trip.
Dr. Meyer: We've now heard from the scheduled morning speakers and the floor is open to
general discussion. A great deal of new material
has been presented; particularly dealing with
the treatment of adverse reactions. Are there any
comments in this area?
Dr. Freedman: I think I'll underwrite the fact
that the chief abuse of LSD has been selling,
propaganda, and the whole ambience around
that. We all know this. I also think that you in

Government should not get into a position
where you are the Vatican adjudicatory of all
proper therapeutic procedures. You don't have
to be. It's one thing to say, "Look, this chlorpromazine can be complicating; some people
use it successfully, some do not. There are prob-

lems. Some people report antytal or chlor-

diazepoxide as effective." I think that the
treatment community needs to know these facts
because part of the reason the hippies move away

from us is that they are greeted by a combination of ignorance and the tradition in psychi-

atry that we know everything before we've
learned anything. This does not mean that you
have to be in a position where you've got to deliver the latest authoritative word. It's a matter
of style here.
Dr. Joffe: With respect to what Dr. Freedman
just said and to what Dr. Smith said before, I'd
like to make a plea on our behalf and show what
we are doing. The gap between the hippie community and the establishment is great, but not
any greater than between the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and everybody else.
With this as a given, I must depend upon those

of you who are in contact with drug using
groups to be the intermediaries to furnish information both ways. Anytime any of you learn

of a new compound, please send it to me and
I will get it analyzed, the way we got STP identified. The treating physicians need this information and the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs should have this information. Most of all
it is crucial to the afflicted that we know as much

as possible about their affliction. In the interest
of the public health it is imperative that we ob-

tain this information while guaranteeing total

confidentiality to your sources.

QUESTION: Would you elaborate on your
statement with regard to the identification of
black-market materials?

Dr. Joffe: Yes. Sandoz has said that since they
are no longer involved with LSD-25, they cannot analyze the substance. However, as far as the
analysis of the material goes, we can do this. In
addition, NIMH is supporting an investigator
on the West Coast to develop methods for the
identification of microgram quantities of psychotropic drugs (in particular, hallucinogenic
drugs which are involved in epidemics of drug
abuse) 31 We hope that this laboratory will be
able to identify unknown black-market compounds. Thus we will have two laboratories, and
NIMH can serve as intermediary, thus preserv-

ing confidentiality. There are also certain regional laboratories of the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs which are very competent
to do this type of analysis.
QUESTION: Would a scientist be in jeopardy
for possession of the black-market materials?
Dr. Joffe: I'm sorry; I don't know the answer to
that.
Dr. John Scigliano: The Customs House Lab-

oratory in Baltimore has expertise, and the
Chief of the Laboratory has indicated a desire
to cooperate in elucidating the composition of
many of these agents. Thus, on the East Coast

we have another resource for analysis which we
can develop.
Dr. Smith: I'd like to introduce a new subject
which concerns us in Haight-Ashbury. In our
recent drug survey we found that the population
has just about tried everything once. Thirtythree percent of our sample had at one time or
other taken methamphetamine intravenously.
The major drug problem in the HaightAshbury is the abuse of the amphetamines.
We're seeing a very high incidence of post-LSD
depression (presenting as a chronic depression
in repeated users of this substance) suggesting
that amphetamine abusers represent a certain
segment that gets on to amphetamine abuse because of post-LSD depression. In this group, amphetamines serve as a kind of self-treatmen_ for
depression. When they stop taking the ampheta-

mine, they're even more depressed. They then
turn to higher doses and eventually to intravenous medication. This is one factor in am-

phetamine abuse relative to the particular
subculture that we are working with. I would
like to get some advice, on what Drs. Frosch,
Ungerleider, and Ditman are doing with these

post-LSD depressions. If possible I'd like them to
discuss the problems of perceptual disturbances,

recurrent hallucinosis, and other chronic disturbances associated with LSD usage.

Dr. Ditman: I have seen 50 or 60 post-LSD
cases in treatment. Like Dr. Frosch, I am impressed that these cases do not respond to any
treatment as well as you might expect, regardless of the diagnostic category that they are put
in, whether it's anxiety, depression, or psychosis.

Some of the cases that come in with the diagnosis of LSD-induced psychiatric complication
often turn out to be people with problems that
have existed prior to LSD ingestion, but LSD
becomes the diagnosis or the excuse. I am think-

ing of a young man I saw yesterday who has
been trying to make it as a rock and roll artist;
he hasn't succeeded, and now he is using his
LSD experience as the reason for his failure. He
is depressed. It may be that LSD had a role in
it. He said LSD made him recognize some of
the things he has done wrong.
To summarize, I do not think that many of
these are just LSD complications. LSD sometimes even has a minor role. Where LSD has
had a major role, I am still very much perplexed

as to what the treatment should be. I am impressed on a short-term basis with what can be
done with sedatives, particularly with one of the
longer-acting ones.

I would like to ask you one question, Dr.

Smith. I keep hearing from patients about somebody who has had R "bad" trip and taken LSD
again, to erase the after-effects of the bad experience with good results. I have heard of this
a number of times, and wonder if this has become a treatment procedure in your group.
Dr. Smith: This is a very disturbing phenom-

enon in our community. There is a popular

drug-myth associated with the Leary group that
if you've had a "bad" trip, the thing to do is to
go up again immediately to rescramble the -ir31 Craig, John C. School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco, California. Microgram Identification of
Psychotropic Drugs (1 ROI MH 14321-01).

31

cuits and get back on the beam. It has been our

experience that this almost uniformly meets
with disastrous results.
Getting back to my point about the post-LSD

depressions, I would like to point to the low

There's no such thing as schizophrenia. I can
show you that by showing you types of response patterns within the diagnostic category of
schizophrenia that are so remarkably different

from one another that normals who fit into a
mid-range pattern resemble each of these types

state of knowledge in the general medical community where many physicians are uniformly
putting their patients on chlorpromazine. Frequently, they are treating post-LSD depressions
with this drug. As you know, this treatment may
actually worsen the depression. In fact, the only
successful cases that I've had in our group are
those taken off chlorpromazine by our staff.
When the level of knowledge is so low among
the medical community that they will prescribe
daily doses of chlorpromazine for depression,

more than these discrepant schizophrenic-types
resemble one another. In essence, when we look
at these LSD types, we are looking at radically
different modes of adjustment after the drug has
been ingested. I feel certain that the drug treatment or other technique of choice that we use in
the therapy of the patient experiencing panic or
depressior must depend upon the kind of reac-

then I think we've got a real problem.

reaction.

However, in specific reply to your question, we

focus on trying to convince the patients not to
take LSD again. When they take LSD again
without guidance, in approximately the same

situation as during the first "bad" trip, they
then have another bad reaction that further
deepens the depression. In fact, some of the suicide attempts that we've had in our community

have been a direct result of taking LSD again
after having a "bad" trip.
Dr. Jerome Levine: I think this discussion underscores what I have said on several occasions.
To confuse the picture, we've recently completed
a collaborative depression study in which we have

found that, on the whole, chlorpromazine is as
good as imipramine in the treatment of depres-

sion; and that both drugs are bets.., than

placebo in treating patients with this symptoma-

tology. This should shake up your conceptual
system as it will shake up a number of the "more

knowledgeable people in the community." It
shook us up. My answer is that your long-term
chronic depressions are the difficult ones whom

you should try and route into treatment with

tion which follou& LSD, and the particular
personality or perceptual type underlying this

Dr. Freedman: I think we ought to remind ourselves about the depression that you are talking
about. If you experience an order of insight or
revelation, and the world suddenly looks quite
startlingly different to you, then you have to integrate drab reality with drug-induced paradise.
This could very easily set up the ground work
for depression. There is also more than depres-

sion. There is the despair of the character
disorder represented by these kids and its reinforcement in the groups that they are in. I've

never been convincedeven without LSD in
the picturethat we have done too well in psychiatry with the tools we have in treating this

order of phenomenon (the character disorder)
in young people. Back in the 50's Greenwich
Village was full of chronic middle-aged dropouts who may have been pot smokers but certainly did not use LSD. Again, you've got to ask
yourself what your therapeutic ambitions are, as
well as what therapeutic skills, including group

therapy, you can bring to bear.

The second thing is that in terms of longterm effects, I've seen a number of compensated

some knowledgeable people who can offer them
what is known, and who can offer them a way
back to the ordinary community rather than offering them a pill which will reverse this pro-

schizophrenics who have what Bleu ler called
double registration. They live this way. I think

cess. I think each case must be treated by a
competent treatment person, and that he will
have to determine what the appropriate treat-

things at the same time. This could alter drastically the way these people now tend to perceive the world. Some people can adapt to it

ment is.

Dr. Silverman: To me the notion of LSD reaction is becoming as alien as the notion of
schizophrenia has been to me for several years.
32

the drug can give a relatively normal person this
experience of double registration, of seeing two

just as many schizophrenics have, and others cannot. I think we've got to respect the drug's power

to do this, and, hence, to give a person a new
task to deal with. This may be part of the long-

term perceptual changes you've been talking
about.

Dr. Osmond: That is a very good point, Dr.
Freedman. I think we also have to remember
that there is a very long history of this in the
mystical literature. St. John of the Cross, and
many others, give excellent accounts of it. There
seems to be a contraction of the world after the
divine revelation which produces great despair
and sorrow in many people. There is also in the
same literature a great deal of information as to
what you do about it. I think that we might look
at the actual way in which it was handled. While

the experience of that time may not be applicable to our time, it's quite likely that the general
responses they did observe are applicable today
in a different context, using different ideas.
Dr. Freedman: I would like to address a question to everyone here. It was introduced by Dr.
Osmond when he said that the alcoholics seem

to do better after LSD. I have never seen an
alcoholic who has had a bad effect due to LSD
in terms of what we've been talking about. I've

seen few, only one or two older people, who
have had a bad effect after LSD and I've known

a number of such people who are using LSD.
These are older intellectuals, and certainly middle-aged people, very few of whom have gotten
into trouble. It seems to me that this has some-

thing to do with age and the experiencing of
alteration of consciousness that may be very important in determining whether or not a person
has an untoward effect after LSD use. Certainly

older people, perhaps also alcoholics, should
have diminished reparative processes. If anything, they should be the ones who would suffer most, but apparently they don't, at least not
in my clinical experience.

Dr. Frosch: I'd like to comment about taking
LSD again to cure a "bad" trip. We've seen a

number of patients who have taken other
drugs after a "bad" trip. This other drug
marihuana, alcohol, or amphetaminewill
sometimes precipitate a "bad" trip similar to the
original LSD experience. We've also seen a few

patients who have psychotic reactions to any
drug they take. A number of people who come

1

i

terribly many, who have had "bad" trips. I'd like

to know if anybody has seen people in the involutional period who have taken LSD and, if
so, what the affective response is in such people.

Dr. Freedman: I've seen a few people, maybe a
dozen or so in their 50's, who have taken LSD,
and none of these that I can recall have had
bad after-effects.

Dr. Osmond: About three years ago I saw the
oldest man on record, as far as I know, who ever
took it. He was 89, an old Australian who came

to Abe Hoffer and said that he wished to do
this. Abe told him that this was a very bad idea,

that at his age he shouldn't be doing these
things. The old gentleman said that he intended

to; he had done everything in his life and he
intended to do this. He said that if Abe wouldn't
give it to him, he would go and get it from someone else. They inquired of his physician who saw
no particular reason for his not doing so. Indeed

he took it and had a truly remarkable experience; at one point he looked at the light and
it suffused the room in a very wonderful manner. At the end of the time he came to Abe and
said, "I am very grateful for this. This is the

greatest moment of my life; I'm extremely
happy. For all of my life I've been a conviured
atheist, but in later years I've been rather doubt-

ful about it. Now I know I was right all the
time."

Dr. Meyer: I wonder if some of the people sitting on the sidelines, such as Dr. McGlothlin,
Dr. Katz, and Dr. Pahnke who have had some
experiences with the drug have some comments
to make on some of the things that we have been
hearing.

Dr. Walter Pahnke: I have two questions and a
comment. First, regarding the age question. I've

been treating dying cancer patients, and although our series is small so far, we have seen
no adverse reactions to LSD under these controlled medical conditions. Dr. Silverman, when
the people took 50 gamma under your experi-

mental conditions how did their experiences
correspond with those they had using blackmarket LSD?

in with an amphetamine psychosis come back a
few weeks later with an LSD psychosis. They
may also have "bad" trips with marihuana. Drs.

Dr. Silverman: I would say that seven out of
eight thought they had minimal psychedelic

Freedman and Ungerleider have commented
about age. We've seen a few older people, not

Dr. Pahnke: Dr. Smith, if STP lasts for 30 to

experiences.

33

72 hours, do these people not sleep for the
whole time?

Dr. Smith: A majority of the patients do not
sleep all the time. The popular statement is that
under the influence of STP, a lot of them go into
a trance-like state which they describe as sleep.

They wake up and are still hallucinating. Although it seems highly unlikely that you can
sleep with a heart rate of 120 and the other physical signs, they do describe the ability to sleep;

but when they wake up they are still actively
hallucinating.

Dr. Osmond: Kliiver 32 describes one of his
cases, a man who went to sleep one evening after
a psychedelic experience and then woke up the

next day with it still going strong.
Dr. Pahnke: In terms of what has developed

with LSD abuse and the types of expertise
needed from all different fields, and in terms of
understanding LSD as a research tool, as a thera-

peutic agent, and as a social-anthropological
phenomenon, the situation now begins to remind me of the whole area of narcotic drug
addiction. The drugs are totally different. The
predominant types of individuals who abuse
these drugs are very different, but the way in
which the community is responding to the phenomenon is very similar. This reminds me of a
comment that Mitch Baiter of the Psychopharma-

cology Division, NIMH, made after visiting
Haight-Ashbury recently. He said that the culture there looks a lot more like a wino culture
than he had expected. I think there is some similarity there, too, which again makes us think

that we may have to bring our experience in
dealing with these other types of phenomena to
bear on this whole LSD issue.

Dr. Meyer: We turn now to the genetic area.
Drs. Cohen and Hirschhorn might bring us up
to date on their work.
Dr. Maimon Cohen: I should like to present
additional in vitro data to supplement that reported in the recent Science paper,33 and proceed to some in vivo experiments that have just
been completed. After presentation of the data,

Dr. Hirschhorn will discuss and interpret the
possible significance of these findings. The use
of a cytogenetic approach to the phenomenon
of chromosome breakage by LSD is the adapta-

tion of a method that has been used for some
time in the screening of various exogenous
34

agents. The basic in vitro approach is to expose
normal leukocytes to the test agent while using
untreated cultures from the same samples as controls. The system, for those of you who are not

familiar with it, consists of stimulating white
blood cells to divide in the culture, adding the
test agent, arresting the cells at the metaphase
stage of mitosis, and scoring chromosomal abnormalities.
The first observation, even before examining
the chromosomes themselves, is to study the ef-

fect of the agent on the mitotic rate. Do the
treated cultures differ from the controls in regard to the cell division? Figure 1 shows the results of such mitotic indices." The treatments or
the concentrations of LSD used ranged from 10

gamma per ml of culture to 0.001 gamma per
ml. The mitotic rate in the control cultures was
a bit over 6 percent, which is normal using our
method. However, as you can see, with all of
the dosages of LSD used, there were statistically
significant suppressions of mitosis. The longer

the drug was in contact with the cells, the
greater the suppression of the mitotic rate. The
data in these in vitro experiments were derived
from three males and three females who had no
known exposure to LSD, no recent radiation exposure, and no recent viral infections. The reason for these restrictions will be discussed later.
7

Control

0

0

0

6

5

0.0Iµ
0.00Ip

4

0 I FL
1

3

FL

10 FL

4

I

I

24

48

Hours of Treatment

Figure 1.Effect of LSD on Mitotic Rates of Leukocytes Derived from 6 "Drug-Free" Controls.
32 Kliier, see footnote 3, page 2.
33 Cohen, see footnote 2, page 1.

34 Figures 1-3 and tables 9-14 are reprinted with permis-

sion from the New England Journal of Medicine and the
author, from the article "In Vivo and in Vitro Chromosomal
Damage Induced by LSD-25," by Maimon M. Cohen, Kurt
Hirshhorn, and William Frosch. New England Journal of
Medicine, 277(20):1043-1049, November 16, 1967.

FIGURE 2.Types of Chromosomal Abnormalities Observed in Both the in Vitro Experiments and from the Leukocyte Cultures Derived from Drug "Users," Showing Chromatid Breaks (a), Isochromatid Breaks (6), Dicentric Chromosomes (c) (Arrows
Indicate Acentric Fragments), Exchange Figures (d), Chromatid Breaks Giving Rise to Terminal Deletions and Acentric Fragments (e) and Attenuation and Breakage at the Secondary Constriction in Chromosome No. 9 (f).

Figure 2 illustrates the types of chromosomal

its centromere. This structure attaches to the

abnormalities that can be quantitated. Figure

spindle during mitosis and the chromatids separate to the two daughter cells. Figure 2-c represents dicentric chromosomes, e.g., a chromosome, with two constrictions or two centromeres
with the occurrence of acentric fragments. This

2-a shows a simple type of break appearing as an

area in which the chromatid or the chromatin
material is nonstaining, with a nonalignment of
the distal portion of the chromatid. In other
words, the continuity of the chromatid is disrupted. The criterion of nonalignment is used
to define a breaka distal nonalignment of the
chromatid. A gap is a nonstaining portion
of the chromosome, which apparently looks
broken, but the remainder of the chromosome
arm is still normally aligned. This type of lesion
would not be scored as an abnormality. The frequencies of abnormalities included in the study

are those breaks, as defined by the alignmentnonalignment criterion. A chromatid break oc-

curs only in one chromatid of the two. An
isochromatid break or chromosome break occurs
in both chromatids, giving rise to a double fragment (Figure 2-b) .

QUESTION: Could you point out a normal
one?

Dr. Cohen: Here is a normal chromosome with

has some interest as far as LSD itself is concerned because this aberration isn't seen too frequently with other drugs.

An attempt to localize the breaks to given
areas of the chromosomes indicated that a large
number of terminal breaks occurred toward the
ends of the chromosome arm (Figure 2-e) . If

such breaks occur in two chromosomes in a
given cell and these two chromosomes are in
close proximity to each other and re-heal
through the broken ends, this would yield an
increased frequency of dicentric chromosomes as
observed. I have not seen this phenomenon with

several of the other agents that have been
screened this way. However, Dr. Hirschhorn has
seen a similar phenomenon with SV40 infection.
SV40 is an oncogenic virus which induces "endto-end" associations and dicentric chromosomes
35

from terminal breaks. The next type of struc-

Table

tural rearrangement of the so called quadriradial

BREAKS INDUCED IN CULTURED HUMAN LEUKOCYTES BY VARIOUS DOSAGES AND EXPOSURE
TIMES TO LSD-25.*

figures, or triradial figures, most probably involve breakage between two chromosomes and

9.-DISTRIBUTION OF CHROMOSOMAL

exchange of genetic material (Figure 2-d). Figure

2-f shows a particular area of certain chromosomes which is affected. These are secondary
constriction regions, which seem to be not only
affected by LSD but by a whole host of exogenous agents. These seem to be particularly
vulnerable areas of the chromosomes.
Table 9 is a composite of the in vitro break
frequencies observed. Again, let me remind you

that this is the pooled study from six individuals. There were no significant differences in

HR. BEFORE
HARVEST

DISTRIBUTION OF BREAKS WITH DOSAGE INDICATED

gglml

10

0.01 laglml

0.001 gglinl

53/425

50/398

30/390

77/439

55/515

(12.61

(7.71

(10.71

(12.51

24

61/530

93/587

81/527

57/519

(11.51

(15.81

(17.51
73/56(1
(13.01

(15.41

(10.81

4

95/554

62/587

76/582

81/534

65/578

(17.11
(10.61
65/1680 = (3.91

(13.11

(15.21

(11.21

48

Control

Ftgures in parentheses denote

of cells v,ith breaks

rate which you see at the bottom, the 0.039,

QUESTION: How does your first figure differ
from this table?
Dr. Cohen: The first figure describes mitotic

refers to breaks per cell, or if you look at figures

rate. We are now discussing chromosomal break-

outside the parenthesis, the number of breaks
divided by the number of cells examined (65/
1680) . This control figure is within the range

age. Table 10 depicts the uniformity or nonuniformity of the action of the drug across the
chromosomes. The question is-do all of the
chromosomes react in the same way or is there

frequencies of response either by sex or individuals, so these figures were pooled. The control

normally observed in my laboratory; Dr.

Hungerford, Dr. Warkany, and the other cytogeneticists who have had experience with chromosome breakage will bear me out. Control
figures range between 0.0 to 5 or 6 percent.

an apparent non-random distribution of chromosome breaks? This analysis is done on the basis
of length of the chromosomes by calculating the

length of each chromosome or chromosome

Table I0.-DISTRIBUTION OF CHROMOSOME BREAKS ACCORDING TO INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE
CHROMOSOMES OR CHROMOSOME GROUPS.

CHROMOSOME GROUP

UNIDEN111-1ARI E

\GMENTS &
BRTAKS

Observed
Expected

X'

AI

A2

154

119
75.7(1

41

80.82

63.43

93
113.0

420
346.52

66.26

24.77

7.93

3.54

15.58

10TAI

F

45

41

II

6

93.65

80.26

42.22

34.32

930
929.9

25.27

19.2(1

23.09

23.37

'209.01

79

df = 8; p <0.001

group. On this basis, it is possible to calculate

extremely sensitive to LSD. Outside of this there

the expected numbers of breaks in each chromosome. It is quite obvious from this distribution
and Chi-Square test that LSD does not break the
chromosomes uniformly. This is not peculiar or
unique to LSD; practically every agent with the
exception of radiation yields a non-uniform distribution.
Figure 3 shows an attempt to localize further
the breaks within given chromosomes. It appears that in many of the chromosomes or chro-

are other areas which show a piling up, so to
speak, of the chromosomal breaks, and this
again is not unique to LSD. These vulnerable
areas are the secondary constrictions, hetero-

mosomal groups the centromere regions are
36

chromatic regions, which apparently respond to

many types of insults more readily than the
euchromatic or darkly-staining regions of the
chromosomes.

So much for the in vitro studies. We have recently completed a collaborative effort with Dr.
Frosch and Dr. Hirschhorn, and I will describe

Percent Breaks

0

N)

A

CR

0
0
0
-1-1-1-1-1-1

Table I I.CHROMOSOMAL DAMAGE IN
SUBJECTS USED AS NORMAL "DRUG-FREE"
CONTROLS.

CASE No.

AC&

SEX

PER CENT BREAKS

ti
5

35

17

39
29
23
28
26
23
24
23
55
23
22

Male
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male

37
23

Female
Female

19

24
25
27

30
33
35

40
41

42

4

FIGURE 3.Distribution of Chromosomal Breaks within Given

13

5.0
4.9

(

(

5/ 100)
9/ 182)

5.5
4.3
4.1
4.5
2.8
2.3
5.0

(

111 200)

2.0
3.0
3.2

(

(

13/ 300)
13/ 314)

(

9/ 200)
7/ 250)
6/ 257)

(

111 221)

(

4/ 200)
6/ 200)
8/ 250)

(
(

(
(

3.8 (102/2674)
31.0t ( 31/ 100)
14.0t ( 28/ 200)

Chromosomes or Chromosomal Groups (Figures in Parentheses Indicate the Number of Breaks).
* Figures in parentheses denote number of breaks per cells

the design of this experiment briefly. The series
consisted of 18 LSD users and was derived from
Dr. Frosch's patients at Bellevue Hospital. Dr.

Frosch had blood samples drawn in tubes at
Bellevue; the coded tubes were given to Dr.
Hirschhorn who propagated the cultures at
Mt. Sinai Hospital and recoded the microscope
slides. There were two cover slips to a slide, no
two cover slips on the same slide coming from
the same individual. I received the coded slides,
and carried out the analysis for chromosomal
damage. Table 11 shows the control subjects.
There are 14 listed on this particular table, two

of whom I think we are justified in removing
from the study. These two females showed high
rates of chromosomal breakage, but within 24
hours after bleeding for the cultures, both came
down with diarrhea, vomiting, and high fever;

a picture compatible with the diagnosis of a
viral infection. Virus infections are known to
cause increased chromosomal breaks, but this
damage is of a transient nature. We examined
these individuals ten days later and the breaks
had disappeared. These two girls have been used

for controls in other experiments as well, and

their break rates are within the normal frequencies. The remainder of the controls exhibited chromosomal breakage rates ranging
anywhere from 2 to 5.5 percent, which is within

the normal range for individuals without drug
ingestion.

investigated.

t Viral infection, with high fever & diarrhea, developed within
24 hr. of bleeding.

Table 12 shows the data from LSD patients.
The subjects are listed in descending order of
the number of doses or the number of trips, and
since these are all from Dr. Frosch's records, he
will have to defend the numbers involved-300,
200, and so forth. The next-to-last column contains the chromosome-break data. There is a
wide range in the responses of these individuals as far as chromosomal breakage is concerned. Several were well within the control
rate of 5 to 6 percent, but the vast majority of

them were two to four times higher than the
controls. Again, to emphasize the point made repeatedly this morning and to quote Dr. Frosch's

phrase, "Most of the LSD users are inveterate
experimenters with other drugs," you can see

from the last column of this table, the other
drugs usedA's are the amphetamines, B's are
the barbiturates, and so forth. All of these individuals had ingested some other drugs. Of
course this is a confounding parameter in the
whole study. What effect, if any, do these other
drugs have on chromosome breakage, and, if in
vivo, is this due to LSD itself? To this end, Dr.
Frosch collected a group of patients who were
not taking LSD but who were ingesting some of
the other drugs.
37

CASE

AI.E

SEX

No.

NO. OE
I)osE%

INIERVkl BE-

PER CEN I BREAKS

OTHER DMA Accolumw., TO HISTORY*

TWEEN 1.ASI

DOSE & Hi EuuINC,

yr.
TO

19

3

24
22
28
29
22

34
9
22
29
7

32
6

20
37
14

36
39

24
20
19

22
52
25
26
23

2

21

26
38
28

20
22
21

Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Female

3(K)
2(K)

100
100
30-6(1

50
50
35

20-25
15-20
IS
15
15

6
4
4

2 wk.
I mo.
I mo.

9.0 ( 181200)
9.8 ( 28/285)
25.1 ( 44/175)

2 mo.

11.0 ( 22/200)t

I mo.
I mo.
7 mo.
I mo.

15.3 1

4 mo.
4 mu.
8 mo.
I mo.
I mo.
7 mu.
2 mo.

46/300)
5.5 ( 10/183)
11.6 ( 29/250)
12.0 ( 30/250)
10.3 ( 19/184)
12 6 ( 35/278)
13.0 ( 39/300)
20.3 ( 61/300)

22.0 ( 58/264)
24.0 ( 36/150)
6.4 (

5/ 78)

A,M.0,13

A,H ,M,0
A.H
A.B,C.H,M,P
A.M.P
H.M.O,P
A,B,C ,H .13
A.13

A.H,M,P$
A.H.M
P

A,H,M
A,H ,M ,P

A,H,M,O,P
A.B.C,H,M,0

I mo.

14.0 ( 42/300)

M

3

6 mo-

2

1 mo.

9.8 ( 28/285)
5.3 ( 16/300)t

A.C.M,P$

A.H.M

13.2 (566/4282)
*A indicates amphetamines. II barbiturates. C cocaine. H hallucinogens. M marijuana. 0 opiates. & P phenothiazmes.
tLow dose (50-100 tql.
#Phenothiazine at time of bleeding.

Table 12.CHROMOSOMAL DAMAGE IN PATIENTS INGESTING LSD.

QUESTION: Is there any relationship to the
doses?

Dr. Cohen: No, as far as we could ascertain,
there was no apparent relationship between the
number of doses, the time of exposure of the

after his last dose and he still had 13 percent
chromosome breaks, but the important thing is
that he also showed the structural rearrangements.

drugs, frequency of other drug use, and the rate
of chromosome damage.
QUESTION: What about individual dosages?

Table 13 will show the so-called LSD drugpositive controls. There were six subjects and
the first three individuals who were on chlorpromazine at the time of bleeding showed
chromosomal breakage as high, if not higher,
than the LSD users. The fact that these individ-

Dr. Cohen: These were all between 300 and 600

uals were on chlorpromazine at the time of

micrograms.

bleeding may be significant. This appears to be
akin to the transient virus infection. We are now
in the process of setting up experiments to test
chlorpromazine and similar tranquilizers in vitro
first and secondly in vivo with a series of patients to be examined before, during, and after
chlorpromazine treatment.
Some of you have undoubtedly seen the press
coverage of the National Foundation-March of
Dimes meeting that was held several weeks ago
(September 1967) in New York at which chlordiazepoxide and diazepam were also implicated
in chromosome damage. These were results by
Dr. Morton Stenchever from Western Reserve
University, who is interested in these drugs
when used during pregnancy. His results

last dose prior to the time of bleeding, other

Dr. Frosch: They mostly claim to take 500 micrograms. A few people who were asked claimed
only to have taken low doses, 50 to 100 micrograms. It's important to remember that this was
a black-market calculation.

One of the persons who took the drug the
longest time ago, seven months, had one of the
highest break rates, 24 percent.

Dr. Cohen: Let me modify a statement I made
earlier. These are not all of Dr. Frosch's patients.

The one individual who is 52 years old, midway down the table, was the patient origin-

ally described in the Science paper." This
patient was a schizophrenic who was on nonblack-market LSD therapy for a four-year
period. We took his blood sample eight months
38

35 Cohen, see footnote 2, page 1.

Table 13.CHROMOSOMAL DAMAGE IN

Table I4.--CHROMOSOMAL DAMAGE IN

PATIENTS INGESTING DRUGS OTHER THAN LSD.

OFFSPRING OF MOTHERS WHO INGESTED
LSD DURING PREGNANCY.

CAM

/WE

six

Rig r

DettA.s

Nu.

PER Utsr
BREAKS

yr.

8

16

31

18

20

34

30

11

Male

Fe-nale

Male

Male

W

N

N
W

17.4 04/1951
Chlorpromazine. 200
mg/day. for I mo.
until day of Needing
NI` - 10- yr. dura21.5 (43/2001
lion: chlorpromazine.
50 mg/day for 2
days until day
of bleeding.
13 (28/2051
Chlorpromazine. 200
mg/day. for 3 wk.
until day of bleeding.
A' - 4-yr. period up to 9.0 (18/200)
I gm/day (Fast

Ms - 15 yr : IV 9

Male

N

23

9

Male

N

intermittent.
Diphenhydramine.
100 mg/day for
1 mo. up to time
of bleeding.
Chlorpromazine &
thioridazire for

SU. Ot

No

MOTHER%

At.t

Six

No. of Put (E% 1 Stumm Oixua
Datu.s
Dusts
esto is
Ix

li rim'

Una°

i

IS
12

II

2
14

9t
9t

I I mo.
24 yr.
54 yr.
2 mo.

Female

4

Male

I

Female
Male

II

2

4

19.01 57/ 3001 A.C.M
(3.01 39/ 3001
7.S1 15/ 2001 M
4.01 8/ 2001 C.M
11.9 1119/10001

* See key to Table 12 for abbreviations
t Low dose (50-100 pg).

Dr. Frosch: It varied. Overall, I would say it
was certainly not a malnourished group.

dose 2 wk. before
bleeding): 0* - 6 yr.:

21

( AM

10.0126/2611

4.0 (12/3001

14 yr. up lo ; ino.
before bleeding: diphenhydramine for
1 wk. hefere bleeding: patient addicted to opiates

at birth - exposed
throughout pregnancy.

*See key to Table 12 for abbreviations.

are from in vitro investigations at this point.
He had not yet actually looked at the in vivo
situation. I think probably one of the more interesting points of the in vivo LSD study is
shown in the next table. We were able to study
four children who were exposed to LSD in nitro
(Table 14). The last two children in this series
were carried by one mother who, as Dr. Frosch
pointed out, was receiving low dosages. According to the pregnancy history, she took the LSD
late in pregnancy as opposed to the first two who

took it earlier in pregnancy, in the second
trimester. The two children, exposed in the
second trimester to LSD with the normal dose
(500 gamma) , showed significantly higher break

rates than the other two (exposed late in pregnancy) , and in these children as well, we saw
morpho:ogic rearrangements of the chromosomes. One child is two and one-half years old,
and adding the time in nitro, showed significant
breakage approximately three years after the
single dose. I may make a comment later on this
point when we talk about teratogenicity.
QUESTION: What was the nutritional status?

Dr. Meyer: Dr. Hirschhorn, we are now anx-

ious to hear your comments.
Dr. Kurt Hirschhorn: There are just a few comments I want to make on the interpretation and
possible significance of these data. I think the
first point (which I will come back to later) is

that we did find a variation in apparent susceptibility to chromosome breaks. I think some
of the previous discussion about psychological

reactions was hedging around this point to
some extent, and all I would do at this particular time is to remind you of a rapidly growing
field that the pharmacologists here will be acquainted with, the field of pharmacogenetics.
One must remember to account for individual
differences before making general statements
about anything, since these individual differences may in fact be on a genetic basis. With
reference to the potential dangers of the type of
chromosome breakage that we have seen, the
particularly important aberrations are the ones
which result in rearrangements, that is, . chromatid exchanges and dicentrics.
Let me first emphasize that we have no evi-

dence at this time that the dangers I'm going
to talk about do actually exist in the human
population. This question can only be settled by
a large epidemiological study, which I hope can
be put into effect with the rather large population available at this time. The potential dangers are the following: (a) To the individual
himself. It is well established and I think it will

be discussed later that chromosome breakage
and rearrangement induced either by radiation
or spontaneously occurring in certain genetic
diseases, such as Fanconi's anemia, and so on,
39

are associated with quite a high incidence of leu-

kemia and other neoplasms. This will have to
be looked into in the future. (b) To the unborn
child who is exposed to the drug in utero. There

are now three studies, one by Alexander in
rats," one by Auerbach in mice, ; and, perhaps
the best, by Geber in hamsters," that have demonstrated the teratogenicity of this drug if given

at a particular point in time during the pregnancy. Again this is something that will have to
be studied in man. It must be pointed out that
most of such chromosome damage is probably so
severe that it will not result in teratogenesis but
rather in spontaneous abortions, possibly quite
early in pregnancy; here again the epidemiologi-

cal study is the one that is important. (c) The
genetic damage to future generations. The important aspect of this is the chromosome rearrangement, which results in a so-called translo-

cation, in other words, a new chromosome
consisting of two parts of two different chromo-

somes. There results from this a high risk of
having abnormal children or children who will
die in utero, in the next generation, or of producing carriers of such translocations who will
show such abnormalities in the third generation.

Whether this is true or not will depend to a
great extent on the presence or absence of these

chromosomal rearrangements in the cells that
are going to make sperm and eggs. We now have

testicular biopsies planned in order to try this,
to see whether the germ cells carry the damage.
There is an analogy with drugs called streptonigrin and mitomycin C, both of which produce
effects on chromosomes quite similar to those
produced by LSD. There is now evidence that
in the germ cells there is the same kind of damage as that produced by streptonigrin; whether

LSD does this, I don't know as yet. Preliminary data from the laboratories of Cohen and
Philip 31-4° indicate that the germ cells of LSDtreated mice do carry the breaks and rearrangements.

The next point I want to discuss is the question of mechanisms. Chromosomes can probably
be broken by a variety of mechanisms, possibly
by direct damage to the chromosome as by ioniz-

ing radiatiod: possibly by way of cytoplasmic
enzyme release. This has been postulated for
some of the agents, including perhaps some of
the viruses. Another possible mechanism is by
inhibiting the healing of broken chromosomes.
Breakage probably occurs normally all the time,
40

but the chromosomes heal immediately. With
this in mind I now begin to wonder whether
LSD itself is breaking the chromosomes or
whether perhaps it has some metabolic effect on
the cell (possibly by way of serotonin metabolism, or by one of its metabolites, which in turn
either unstabilizes the lysosomes which contain
destructive enzymes that could break chromosomes) or alternatively interferes with the healing process that normally occurs in preventing
permanent chromosomal damage in normal individuals.
Let me for a moment come back to the ques-

tion of individual differences. We now have

genetic evidence that some people are more sus-

ceptible to chromosome breakage than others,
some to an extremely great extent. I think this
too will have to be looked into very carefully.
If one does find that there are some individuals
who are susceptible and others who are not, I
think that we will find here the clue as to what
is going on. I would also urge you in terms of
the psychiatrically-oriented studies to look at
this problem in a similar way; that is, your clue
may come by comparing reactors to nonreactors,
rather than by comparing LSD takers to normals.

Dr. Frosch: I'd like to add two clinical notes to
this study: (a) In this patient sample there was

no correlation that I could discover between
chromosome breaks and the presence or absence
of overt behavioral disturbance. (b) The physical and psychological examination of these four
children has not as yet revealed any gross physi-

cal, behavioral, or mental abnormality. However, they are very young and it is very difficult
to do accurate testing.
QUESTION: Can you demonstrate this in animals, and if so, don't you have a quick way of
finding out about the damage?
3. Alexander, G.J.; Miles, B.E.; Gold, G.M.; et al. LSD: in-

jection early in pregnancy produces abnormalities in off-

spring of rats. Science, 157:459-460, July 28, 1967.
37 Auerbach, R., and Rugowski. J.A. Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: effect on embryos. Science, 157:1325-1326, September
15, 1967.

3$ Geber. W.F. Congenital malformations induced by Mescaline, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, and Bromolysergic Acid
in the hamster. Science, 158:265-266, October 13, 1967.
39 Cohen. M.M.. and Mukherjee, A.B. Meiotic chromosome
damage induced by LSD-25. Nature, 219:1072-1074, September 7. 1968.

40 Skakkebaek, NM; Philip. J.; and Rabeben, 0.J. LSD in
miceabnormalities in meiotic chromosomes. Science, 160:
1246-1248, June 14, 1968.

Dr. Hirschhorn: Chromosome studies are now
being done in animals, but the results are not
yet known. Such studies have been done in animals with a variety of other drugs producing
similar chromosome breaks, but jet me again

warn of trying to derive information purely
from animal studies; it has been done, but such
interpretation is fraught with great danger. In
terms of teratogenicity, I am sure that Dr.
Warkany, who is probably the leading expert in
this field, would bear me out in saying that if

aspirin and thalidomide both had been subjected to animal tests before being put on the
market, thalidomide would much more likely
have been put on the market than aspirin.

Dr. Freed_man: Could I just inject a controversial note. I am dismayed at the lack of controls before this was published. You've still got
a lot of interesting work ahead of you.
Dr. Cohen: As far as the controls in the in vitro
study are concerned, I think the proper controls
are there. The cells were from identical blood
samples drawn from the same individuals and

sity of Iowa, in the Department of Obstetrics and

Gynecology, and regards a recent fetus with a
phocomelia anomaly. ". . . the mother and father were on daily doses of LSD prior to pregnancy and during the first three months. The
mother, father, and baby exhibited the typical
chromosome breaks." There is another observation.

Dr. R. Miller: I have two questions. First, it
seems to me that LSD does produce a tremendous fright in some people; maybe this experience is releasing a whole lot of things that cause
these breakages. It seems that control studies
comparing those people who have very rough ex-

periences and those who don't might be in order. Secondly, what do these abberrations in the
chromosomes relate to, other than some drug
that might have been taken? In other words, if
you find a high incidence of leukemia, what
meaning does that have?
Dr. Hirschhorn: In answer to the first question,

there was no apparent correlation between
whether they had a "bad" trip, a "good" trip,

then split into treated and untreated groups.
This is the only type of comparison you can

or otherwise. In terms of the second question,
this is exactly what I was getting at; we don't

make in this particular type of situation; there-

know. All we know is that with similar chromosome breaks after radiation there is a higher incidence of leukemia; with similar chromosome
breaks with patients with increased susceptibility

fore, as far as the in vitro experiments are
concerned, I think that there were adequate con-

trols; these are replicate samples, one treated
and one not. The control rates which we got
compare well with control rates gotten for untreated cultures in any cytogenetic laboratory
engaged in chromosomal studies.

Dr. Di Paolo: What about buccal smears?

to breaks there is a higher incidence of leukemia. With the same kind of chromosome breaks
caused by other drugs there is a higher rate of
abortion and of a variety of other things. With
regard to LSD, we only know one thing: teratogenesis occurs in some animals when LSD is ad-

Dr. Cohen: Buccal smears? They are good for
distinguishing males from females, but they are
not going to help a bit in this particular situa-

ministered during certain times of pregnancy.
What the story is in man can only be derived

tion.

Dr. Meyer: Do you know what the rates of

As far as in vivo system is concerned, then I
admit we really do have a problem with controls
except for the people who were not exposed to
the drug, who were the overall controls for the
whole group. I will grant you that this is a problem. They are not the ultimate control, but they
were the best control that we could find. I don't
know what better control you can ask for. I'm
open to all suggestions of how bean to control
these things.
While I have the microphone I would like to
read one sentence from a letter that I received
yesterday. it is from a physician at the Univer-

from a large epidemiological study.

breakage are in the community? In other words,

if you have a high rate of breakage, you may
have some problems in assessing the cause and
effect or other relationship between high rates
of breakage and leukemia.
Dr. Hirschhorn: What "community"?
Dr. Meyer: In the total population.
Dr. Hirschhorn: Yes we do. And that is around
4 percent, and this has been consistei.t.
Dr. Meyer: We can now go on to Dr. Hungerford's presentation.
41

Dr. David Hungerford: I'd like to say that the
largest single portion of this work was done by
Dr. Kenneth Taylor who is in the Biology De-

partment of San Diego State College and was in
my laboratory for a year on a special NIH Fellowship. Four other cytologists, including myself, were involved." Dr. Shagass has already recounted to you the opportunity we had to study

his patients. It arose last April just after Dr.
Cohen's paper appeared in Science 42 and for

that reason and because there was a prospect of
doing an almost completely prospective study,
we set out to do this. We have so far looked at
four patients. They were sampled in general
three times for each dose and they received three
doses per course of treatment. They were also
sampled on follow-ups. If you look at the cables
you can see this. A good place to start is with the
classification of chromosome abnormalities. It
shows our scoring methods and criteria, which
are very much like Dr. Cohen's.
CLASSIFICATION OF CHROMOSOME
ABNORMALITIES

A. No structural abnormality

I. Normal diploid
2. Hypodiploid or hyperdiploid
3. Polyploid

a) Triploid or tetraploid, or near triploid or

near tetraploid
b) Endoreduplication
B. Gaps or breaks

I. Chromatid gap(non-staining region in one
chromatid)
2. Chromatid break--(non-alignment or axial displacement of broken ends)
3. Isochromatid gap(non-staining region at same
position in both chromatids)
4. Isochromatid break(non-alignment or axial displacement of broken ends,

break point at same position in both chromatids)
(Gap is a region entirely or partially achromatic
and with or without constriction)
C. Other structural abnormalities
I. Acentric fragments, dicentrics,

rings, multiradiak-(classically regarded as unstable, Roble
to be lost or to undergo further change at mitosis)
2. One or more morphologically abnormal chromo-

somes resulting from multiple breaks leading to in-

versions, deletions, or translocations4regarded as
stable at mitosis)

42

Thom dofinitions were derived primarily from:

Jacobs, PA; Brunton, M.; and Court-Brown, W.M. Cytogonotic studios in leukocytes on ill. general population:

subjects of ages 65 years and more. howls of Hama
Generics, 27:353-365, Juni 1964.

Other discussions of classification of aberrations are in:
Evans, H.J. Chromosome aberrations induced by ionizing
radiations. Interactional Review of Cytology, 13:221-321,
I962.
Swift, M.R., and Hirschhorn, K. Fanconi's Anemia: inherited
susceptibility to chromosome breakage in various tissues.
Annals of Internal Makin, 65:490-503, 1966.
Chicago Conference: Standardization in Human Cyfogonotics. firth Defects: Original Article Series. Volume 2.
Now York: The National Foundation-March of Dimes, December 1966.

We have to begin with two controls (see

Table 15) which were matched initially for age,
sex, and sampling interval; the same scoring procedures were followed for them. It's interesting
in this respect that the younger patient shows
some of the effects of prior exposure to diagnostic radiation. We knew this when we started but
neither he nor we knew how much radiation
he had had, and you can see that it is considerably elevated in comparison to the 35-year-old
control in the second row. He had at least one
consistent chromosome change, a clone of cells
in which there was a pericentric inversion.
If we turn to Table 16, we can see the frequencies of breaks plus the more serious kinds
of rearrangement, including those which are unstable in subsequent mitosis. To interpret this
table briefly for you: the frequencies are numbers of rearrangements over number of cells in
which these have occurred. The items in paren
theses are the total number of metaphases in
each sample. If we sum the numerator of these
frequencies across rows, we end up with, in the
first case, 23 over 300 cells, which gives us 7.7
percent, etc., down.
Table 17 shows the same cells. Here we make

an attempt to maximize the effect, if any, of
LSD. We have included also the less serious
aberrations, of types indicated as items B.1. and
B.3. in the classification, which give a little bit
higher percentaps, and in both cases the per-

centages in the last column should be com-

pared for three of the four patients with the preLSD samples in table 17 column 1; maximizing
the data, we have 8 percent versus 9.3, 8 per41 Hungerford, D.A.; Taylor, K.M.; and Shards, C. Cytogeneic effects of LSD-25 therapy in man. JAMA, 206:
2287-2291. December Z 1968.
42 Cohen, see footnote 2, par I.

Table 15.CONTROLS
Frequencies of Structural Rearrangement of Chromosomes/Cells Involved; and Total

Chromosome Aberrations/Cells Involved

Cu.
8/8/67

8/22/67

To be studied

2/2; 9/9

control

8/1/67
7/6; 13/12

54411

(100)

35 yr. old
control

8/28/67*
0; 5/5

9/5/67*
0; 5/4

9/18/67*
0; 4/4

545H

(100)

(100)

(100)

28 yr. old

Cells
Studied

Aberrant
Calk

200

21/200=10.5%

300

13/300 =4.3%

(100)

500
Numbers in parentheses aro total number of rat/Upham Anhui per sample.
4$ hour and 72 hour intenrak in culture; all others 72 hour.
N.I. 544H had diagnostic X-rays to leg and spine 1952-54 and 1960. Clone is prangs, with pericentric inversion in one chromosome #2.

cent versus 8.7, and 10 percent versus 8.2. These

can be compared with the controls in table 15,
where we got 10.5 percent for the irradiated con-

trol and 4.3 percent for the unirradiated con-

tic leukemia. The Ph 1 is about 60 percent of a
normal small acrocentric. We have done a little
bit of cytophotometric work on this abnormal
chromosome and have found that about 40 per-

trol.
I should say that the statistical analyses have

cent of the DNA is gone. I think that Dr.

not yet been done. This is one thing that Dr.
Taylor is undertaking at the moment. We all
think that if there is any significance here it is

that the construction that is being put on this

borderline.
COMMENT: Well, this is an interesting set of

about the last point made by Dr. Hungerford

data to co: -ire with the results of Drs. Cohen

and Hirschhorn 43 and with Drs. Irwin and
Egozcue.44

Egozcue's chromosome is a little too small, and
in the press is misleading.

Dr. Cohen: I don't think there's any doubt
that the chromosome referred to by Dr. Egozcue
is Ph 1. Those of us who saw his Science article 4°
would have a great deal of difficulty telling what

it really was, and I don't think it was all his

Dr. Hungerford: I do not think that we neces-

fault, for the photographic plate was a very poor

sarily have real discrepancies here; we are dealthere is some question about the integrity of the

reproduction. Also I don't think that any of us
seriously think that the fragments of chromosomes we observe are Philadelphia chromo-

compound that the hippies are taking. I think

somes, because the diagnostic parameter of

one could draw a little bit of reassurance from the

therapeutic experiences, with pharmaceuticalgrade LSD, by physicians, but there seems to
be a clear need to investigate the nature of possible contaminants in illicit batches and their

leukemia is absent. So, it is apparently a fragmentation phenomenon, and not the formation
of the specific Philadelphia chromosome. The
problem is the general association of chromosomal breakage with neoplasia and leukemia.

effects specifically on chromosomes.

This is a question, which, as Dr. Hirschhorn has

I would like to turn briefly to the leukemia
question. Dr. Egozcue 45 has found in some of
this materia! a minute chromosome, which he
thinks is like the Philadelphia (Ph 1) chromo-

44 Irwin, S., and Egozcue, J. Chromosomal abnormalities in
leukocytes from LSD-25 users. Science, 157:313-314, July 21,

ing with two different kinds of material, and

some found in most cases of chronic granulocy-

43 Cohen, see footnote 34. page 34.

1967.

45 /bid46 Ibid.

43

I

(50)

0

(50)

4/3

(50)

5/4

(50)

5/3

(50)

3/3*

(50)

0

4/3

6/5

26 clays

(50)

1/1

24 hr.

(50)

I/I

(50)
24 hr.

(50)

0

(50)

2/2

(50)

(50)

1/1

(50)

I/I

(50)

(100)

0*

24 hr.

(50)

(50)
24 hr.
0

2/2

(50)

(50)
2 mos.
0

(50)

2/2*

3 mos.

(50)

2/2

75 clays

Follow-up

28 clays
0

48 hr.

other
post

48 hr.
2/1

6/5

Dose 3
I hr.
post

(50)

Numbers in parentheses are total number of metaphases studied per sample.
* 4$ hour and 72 hour intervals in culture; all others 72 hour.
All samples taken between 4/3/47 and 11/26/67.

(50)

14°/.1

550H

(50)

3/3

0

2/2

E

(50)

(25)
24 hr.

(50)

(2%)
(100)

o

2/2

2/2

C

(50)
24 hr.

1/1

528H

4/3

(50)

1/1
12%)

(50)

523H

9

(50)

pro

r

(50)

7/4

(50)

6/5

(50)
24 hr.

1/1

1/1*

post

522H

pro

24 hr.

post

10 clays

pro

other

A

CASE

hr.
post
I

I hr.

other
post

Dose 2

Dose I

Frequencies of Structural Rearrangement of Chromosomes (Rearrangements/Cells Involved)

Table 16.PATIENTS

1875

500

525

550

300

Cells
studied

10/450=2.2%

13/425 = 3.1%

26/500=5.2%

23/300=7.7%

LSD

Total rearrangemonis
after

7/5

3/3
(50)

3/3

24 hrs.

(50)

Numbers in parentheses are total number of metaphases studied per sample.
* 4$ hour and 72 hour intervals in culture; all others 72 hour.
All samples taken between 4/3/67 and II126/67.

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

7/7

24 hrs.
717

4/4*

8/6

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

4/4

(50)

13/12

(50)

3/3

48 hrs.

3/3

8/6

3/3

IIIIMM1

(50)

10/7
(50)

Pre

(50)
24 hrs.

19/14
(50)

Post

other

9/9

Pro

Dose 2
I hr.
Post

3/3*

10 days

Post

other

(50)

6/5

(50)

5/4

(50)

13/8

IMINIMI1

Dose 3
I hr.
Post

(100)

8/8*

24 hrs.

(50)

2/I

24 hrs.

(50)

9/9

48 hrs.

OIMIIM

Post

other

(50)

2/2

2 mos.

(50)

28 days
0

2/2

(50)

5/5*

3 mos.

(50)

75 days

12/10
(50)

Follow-up

26 days

Frequencies of Total Chromosome Aberrations/Cells Involved

Table I7. PATIENTS

1875

500

525

550

300

Cells
studied

37/450 = 8.2%

37/425 = 8.7%

54/500 = 9.3%

45/300 = 15%

LSD

Total aberrant
cells after

already pointed out, is going to take a lot of

Dr. Cohen: You did not get a pre-dose sample?

time and epidemiological study to clarify.

Dr. Hungerford: Patient A had started treatment a week before we started this study.
Dr. Cohen: Well, I think really then that the

Now, going back to your data for a minute,
I'd like to ask several questions concerning the
patients themselves. I'm sorry to say I didn't
entirely follow Dr. Shagass' presentation this
morning about how he obtained these patients
and if they had any LSD before he started treating them.
Dr. Hungerford: They had not.
Dr. Cohen: if I interpreted your Table 16 correctly, in the pre-LSD sample that you got, th,

was one cell with a rearrangement. What do
these rearrangements mean? Are these quadriradials?

Dr. Hungerford: No, by 'structural rearrangement" is meant, in Table 16, all abnormalities
except gaps. In the pre-LSD samples from patients B and E, only breaks were present. In the
pre-LSD sample from patient C, there was one

break and one acentric fragment. The various
other types of rearrangement did not appear in
the patients until after therapy had begun. No
statement can be made concerning patient A
prior to therapy.

important point in the entire discussion is the
comparison between rearrangement types. You
do show an increase in the LSD-treated individ-

uals, and from my own personal experience I
don't see chromosomal rearrangements in untreated cells. Were these individuals on anything else before coming in for the study?
Dr. Shagass: No, these happen to be more or

less drug-free patients. Now, Dr. Hungerford
didn't mention that we have a table, Table 18,
on the hippies who were on everything under
the sun. These are small samples for hippies, 50

cells per hippie. It has been commented that
this is a very small sample in Table 18, for the
hippie population in Philadelphia, and that you
are running three or four of them over 10 percent. You should note that the one who had the
highest drug consumption also had the lowest
percentage of chromosomal breaks.
In your in vitro studies, did you use blood samples from hippies?

Table 18. HIPPIES
Frequencies of Structural Rearrangement of Chromosomes/Cells Involved; and Total Chromosome
Aberrations/Cells Involved
Case

72 Hr. Cultures

S.E.

6/2/67

533H

0; 7/6

a

(50)

Aberrant Cells

6
-1-0

D.S.

6/2/67

534H
9

0; 6/5
(50)

50

M.A.

6/2/67
0; 7/7

7

535H

a
N.S.
536H
d'

(50)

6/2/67
1/1; 2/1
(50)

5

50

1

50

Claimed Drug History

= 12%

16 trips
+ other hallucinogens

= 10%

20 trips
-I- other hallucinogens

9 trips

= 14%

-I- marijuana
100 trips

= 2%

+ other hallucinogens
+ some hard narcotics

Numbers in parenthesis are total number of metaphases studied per sample.

Dr. Cohen: No, these included two technicians,
secretaries, and myself; we used pure Sandoz ma-

terial. I don't think there is any question here
about the in vitro findings.
Dr. Shagass: Of course my interest in seeing

what happens was in regard to whether or not
I should go on giving people LSD and breaking
up their chromosomes. Now for the data that

we have in the in vivo studywe know what
the blood was like before and what it was like

afterwards. The results suggest that not much is

happening. The fact that in vitro and in vivo
data are very different sometimes is borne out
by this discussion. I think that the major issue
in this situation concerns the in vivo findings. I

was interested in the data presented by Dr.
Cohen, which suggest that we really ought to
stop giving people chlorpromazine. According
to these data chlorpromazine seems to be just as
dangerous as LSD.

Dr. Hungerford: I just want to talk about leukemia once more. I wasn't taking issue with Drs.

Hirschhorn and Cohen about the relationship
of their data,47 and Fanconi's syndrome data to

leukemia, but simply about this one observation of Egozcue 48 and the subsequent play in the
press.

Dr. Meyer: I'd like Dr. Warkany to tell us
about his work at this point.
Dr. Josef Warkany: We've been interested for
a number of years in the effect of various teratogens upon chromosomes in the embryo. Conversely, we've also been interested in possible
teratogenic effects of substances known to bring
about chromosomal changes. Thus, when
Cohen, et al." found in 1963 that streptonigrin
causes much chromosomal breakage and rearrangement in cultured human leukocytes, we

thought that this drug could be helpful in our
studies of chromosomal aberrations and teratogenesis. We found indeed 5° that many interesting and unusual congenital malformations can
be produced in rats with streptonigrin. It's understandable, therefore, that we became interested

in LSD when Cohen and co-workers

announced in 1967 that this drug was producing
chromosomal abnormalities."

We applied to the National Institute of

Mental Health and obtained Delysid (Sandoz/
batch 65002) ampules containing 0.1 milligrams
LSD per milliliter. A pilot experiment was be-

gun injecting various amounts of the solution
intraperitoneally or administering it orally during periods of organogenesis. Single doses were
given on the seventh, eighth, or ninth day of
gestation, or multiple doses from the seventh to
the twelfth day. Total dosage to individual rats
ranged froM 1.5 to 300 micrograms. Fifty-five
pregnant rats were treated. Four litters were
completely resorbed; 47 rats were sacrificed on
the 21st day of pregnancy and their young were

removed; four rats were allowed to deliver and
raise their young.
The mean litter size of the 21-day fetuses and
the mean weight of the fetuses were not significantly different from those of control animals.
We obtained 508 fetuses, and of these, 504 were
found to be normal on external inspection; 409
were dissected and 95 cleared for skeletal examination and no abnormalities were found. Only
four fetuses were considered abnormal; one had
hydrocephalus, one had short extremities and
syndactylism, and two fetuses were small. These
fetuses appeared in litters which were otherwise
normal. No dose dependence could be recognized, and there was no common pattern in the

abnormalities of the four young. The four
treated rats that we let deliver had 44 apparently

normal young, some of which could be raised
and bred. No abnormalities could be demon-

strated, as they developed and there was no
tendency to disease or early death. Since an inci-

dence of about one percent of congenital malformations in the offspring of untreated Wistar
rats is not unusual, our pilot experiment did not
prove that LSD is teratogenic in rats. Even a
dosage as great as 300 micrograms given to preg-

nant rats did no harm to the embryos. Such
dosage is comparable to human dosage. On a
weight basis it is more than 200 times larger.

After these experiments were finished we
learned of the results of Alexander, et al.52 who
gave single injections of LSD to rats early in

pregnancy (fourth day of gestation) and observed resorption of one litter and some stillborn stunted young in others. On the fourth or
fifth day of pregnancy we gave 34 rats doses
ranging from 1 to 100 micrograms of LSD and
obtained from 32 females a total of 335 young.
Of these, 296 were removed on the 21st day by
Caesarean section. With the exception of one
fetus that was small, all were normal on external
inspection, dissection, or clearing. Thirty-nine
young were delivered and raised. They remain

alive and healthy. Two of the 34 rats had no
47 Cohen, see footnote 34, page 34.
48 Irwin, see footnote 44, page 43.

49 Cohen, M.M.; Shaw, M.W.; and Craig, A.P. Effects of
streptonigrin on cultured human leukocytes. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 50:16-24, July 1963.
50 Warkany, J., and Takacs, E. Congenital malformations
in rats from streptonigrin. Archives of Pathology, 79:65-79,
January 1965.
51 Cohen, see footnote 2, page 1.
52 Alexander, see footnote 36, page 40.

47

litters A resorption rate of 5.9 percent is not dif-

ferent from that for pregnant Wistar rats injected with saline solution.

Although most of the doses administered in
these experiments were very large (the highest
single doses administered by us were about 80
times larger than those given by Alexander, et
al.) , we found no abnormalities other than reduction in size of one of the young. There were
some differences between the experiments of
Alexander and ours. They used a dry LSD dissolved in saline while we administered Delysid.
We were puzzled by the animals used by Alexander, et al. since they mentioned that their control offspring weighed an average of 64 grams
at 10 days. We could not find such rats. In our
laboratory, rats weigh about 19 grams at 10 days.
Donaldson " cites weights of 15 grams for 10day -old rats. If the LSD-treated rats of Alexander, et al. weighed 44 to 46 grams at 10 days, it

would appear that these treated rats weighed
more than twice as much as rats in other laboratories weigh at that age.
Thus, we didn't find LSD teratogenic during
the organogenetic period, and we found no abnormalities in the offspring of rats injected on
the fourth or fifth day of pregnancy although
the doses administered to some of the pregnant
rats were as high as those used by human beings.
We draw no conclusions from the negative results with rats concerning teratogenicity of LSD
in man since it is known that a drug teratogenic
in one species may not be so in another. This
general rule applies also to results in mice 54 and
hamsters.55

QUESTION: When you repeated this study,
what day did you inject one
Dr. Warkany: We did it on the fourth and fifth
days.

Dr. Meyer: I'd like to go on to Dr. Lisco, Dr.
Miller and Dr. DiPaolo before we proceed to a
general discussion.

Dr. Hermann Lisco: Stimulated by the interesting observations of Cohen, et al. on the effects
of LSD-25 on human chromosomes in vitro,56

and encouraged by a number of highly motivated young volunteers anxious to donate their
blood, we embarked during the summer of 1967
on studies of chromosome aberrations produced
in vivo by LSD and psilocybin. This investiga-

tion was made in the course of a larger study
that has been under way in our laboratory for
48

several years on chromosome aberrations in
blood lymphocytes in a number of human populations exposed to ionizing radiations, such as
the Marshall Islanders exposed to fallout radiation 57 and others. We were persuaded to look
into the possibility of LSD-induced chromosome

damage primarily for the purpose of making
comparisons of types of chromosome aberrations
seen with these drugs and radiations.
Let me briefly summarize our observations to
date. They were made on three individuals who

had taken LSD only, on four others who had
taken LSD in combination with psilocybin, and
on four persons who had been given psilocybin

in the course of an "experiment" under controlled conditions. Control data were used from
normal subjects examined in some of the other
studies referred to above.
Cultures of blood lymphocytes were made by
conventional methods. Whenever possible, cells
were fixed after 48 to 51 hours in culture, since
with radiation-induced chromosome aberrations
it has been demonstrated that there is a reduc-

tion in the yield of chromosome-type aberrations with increasing culture time from 48 to 72
hours and longer. In most cases 200 cells were
scored as follows: (a) aneuploid, (b) chromosome aberrations, and (c) chromatid aberrations. Karyotypes were made of most of the cells
with chromosome-type aberrations and of cells
with equivocal chromosome morphology.
Before describing separately our findings on
the three groups of people, some comments must
be made on certain features common to all of
them. In almost all cultures here studied we have
observed stickiness of chromosomes in many
cells. This stickiness frequently led to the formation of dicentric-like configurations. These
dicentrics were composed of two otherwise intact chromosomes that were firmly attached to
each other in an end-to-end association. The terminal portions of the chromatids were perfectly
in line with each other, but frequently a small
overlap could be seen. Such chromosomes appeared to be firmly joined. On cursory examina53 Donaldson, H.H. The rat: data and reference tables for
the albino rat and the Norway rat. Memoirs of the Wistar
Institute of Anatomy and Biology, No. 6. Philadelphia:

Wistar Institute, 1924.

54 Auerbach, see footnote 37, page 40.
55 Geber, see footnote 38, page 40.
56 Cohen, see footnote 2, page 1.

57 Lisco, H., and Conard, R.A. Chromosome studies on
Marshall Islanders exposed to fallout radiation. Science,
157:443-447, July 28, 1967.

tion many of these structures appeared like bona
fide dicentrics as seen in radiation-induced chromosome aberrations, but on close examination it
was evident that no chromosome material was

months prior to examination also showed increased rates of aberrations, including both

lost, and there were no accompanying frag-

rations were within normal limits. To our

ments.

These structures have been scored and classified as a special category of dicentrics, and they

are included in the overall aberration rates. It
should be mentioned that such dicentric chromosomes are occasionally seen in controls, but
we have no estimate of their rate of occurrence
at present. However, they have been observed in

the present material with such frequency that
they must be included in the estimate of aberrations. Another feature worth mentioning is
the fact that translocations and inversions have
not been observed in excess of what would have
been expected in the 3,189 cells scored in this
population as compared with a similar number
of cells in the controls. One was found in each
group.
Two young men who had taken a total of 980
micrograms and 480 micrograms of LSD respectively in several small doses for about a year and

one-half prior to examination showed nothing
unusual, with the exception of a single dicentric
of the sticky type in 200 cells in one of the men.
Chromatid breaks were within normal limits
with 2.5 and 6 percent respectively. Several
months later the previously aberration-negative
person and a companion took a single dose of
about 500 micrograms of LSD; they experienced
marked psychic effects lasting several hours. Ex-

amination of both individuals five days later
showed an incidence of 16.5 and 25 percent
chromatid breaks, increased numbers of acentric
fragments, and also a few dicentri, s of the sticky

type in each. Reexamination of one of the individuals 16 days and three months later showed

a decrease both in chromatid breaks and in
chromosome aberrations but not a return to
normal.
The four persons who had ingested both LSD
and psilocybin in varying doses from 10 to 36

months prior to examination also showed increased rates of chromosome aberrations but no
excess numbers of chromatid breaks. There were

increased numbers of dicentrics of the sticky
type as well as of the classic type, some of them
with fragments; one individual showed ring chromosomes.

The four individuals who had taken a single

dose of psilocybin (40 and 30 mg) from 18 to 20
types of dicentrics and of rings. Chromatid aber-

knowledge these four individuals had taken no

other hallucinogenic drugs either before or

after the ingestion of psilocybin.
The results from this limited number of individuals support the observations of Cohen and
of others since then that LSD can produce chromosome damage in human lymphocytes. Furthermore, they provide evidence that another
hallucinogenic drug, psilocybin, has similar effects and that these effects can persist for 20
months and probably longer after a single dose
of 40 mg. Lastly, these observations indicate that
the mechanisms of production of chromosome
aberrations by these drugs may be different in
some important respects from those involved in
radiation-induced chromosome damage.
Dr. Meyer: Could we move on to the last two
speakers? Dr. Miller.

Dr. Robert Miller: I'm Dr. Robert Miller of

the National Cancer Institute. As an epidemiologist, the rare breed to which Dr. Hirschhorn
has alluded, I would like to talk at length, but
will not. I'll hardly talk at all. I would like to
reserve the time during which I would have
spoken for some discussion as to important roles
that the NIMH can play in exploring some of

the questions raised at this meeting. I would suggest, however, that epidemiology plays a very
large role. Almost every presentation this morning and this afternoon either concerned an epidemiological study or had implications for
them.

Dr. Joseph Di Paolo: I wish to make reference
to the carcinogenic, teratogenic, and blood studies which have been in the literature for some
time. In addition, I should like to add comments concerning some of our own results.
In 1959, Berenblum, et al." reported that although LSD was a powerful antagonist against
the anesthetic effects of urethan, it was ineffective in eliciting any antagonism against the
carcinogenic action on the lung or against the
initiating phase of skin carcinogenesis induced
58 Berenblum, I.; Blum, B.; and Trainin, N. Failure of the
urethan antagonistLysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD -25)
to inhibit lung carcinogenesis or the initiating phase of skin
carcinogenesis in mice. Biochemical Pharmacology, 2:197-199,
September 1959.

49

by urethan in mice. A single injection of LSD
failed to potentiate or minimize the effect of
urethan.
In reference to teratology studies, I should

like to point out that there has been a recent
paper in Science by Dr. Auerbach." This work
appears to have been well carried out. The frequency of malformations is high but it should

also be taken into consideration that the controls have 10 percent abnormalities. In all cases
the malformations involved brain defects. It
would be nice to see this work expanded, par-

ticularly since it had been reported by Auerbach that one dose level of LSD appeared to be
ineffective. I have commented at length on the
rat studies which were reported by Alexander
and I understand that these comments will appear as a technical note in Science.° Our own

attempts to demonstrate teratogenic response

specimens. With practice it should be possible

to obtain cellular immigration within a few
days after cultures are set. These then could be
analyzed for chromosomal anomalies. In addition, embryonic and/or fetal tissue from a variety of sources should be exposed to LSD.

Dr. Meyer: Thank you. I would like to focus
our discussion now on comments, namely, initiatives that the Institute can take and the role
of epidemiological studies in defining the problems raised here today.

Dr. Freedman: There are several people here
who were given LSD in the 1950's, and it may
be possible to ascertain the state of their chromosomes. I would recommend that Dr. Miller,
who has great experience in doing such studies
all over the country, could get in touch with
the people here or others whom he may know

mations. The amount of LSD we used varied

and let us find out the status of their leukocytes
and their offspring.
Dr. Smith: I'm in full agreement that epidemiological studies are necessary, but I think that

by astronomical figures from that reported to be
successful by Auerbach.

happened relative to the drug-using population.

with LSD have involved two strains of mice and
one strain of hamsters. In no instance were we
able to demonstrate that LSD produced malfor-

The next reference I wish to point out is a
paper by Sack ler, et al.81 which showed the effects of acute and prolonged administration of
LSD on white blood-cell count, body weight,

and organ weight. "Tail blood samples were
taken immediately prior to autopsy. Marked or
significant decreases were noted in total white

blood cell counts as well as lymphocyte and
eosinophil frequencies. Food consumption was
affected more adversely during the first week.
Analyses of the absolute organ-weight data re-

vealed significant reductions in the thymus
weights of both test groups, with consistent but

smaller decreases in the thyroid and uterine
weights of the test animals. Although adminis-

tration of LSD to female Wistar rats demonstrated greater resistance and less pronounced
effects than those noted in males, the results still
indicated stimulated adrenal activity with sug-

gestions of hypothyroidism and hypogonadal
function." Because of this effect on white count,
in particular lymphocytes, I think it would be

interesting and desirable to attempt to culture
other types of cells in the presence of LSD or
to take biopsies or any fluid such as amniotic
fluid which has been in an LSD environment.
There are techniques such as the cellophane
method which may be utilized for small biopsy
50

the gentlemen here have to realize what has
Certainly if we did demonstrate that chromosomal abnormalities were produced by LSD and

that they did have teratologic effects, then at
that moment in time the issue would still not
be settled for the drug-using population. Our
community of several thousand people who con-

sistently use LSD from one time per month to
two times per week have been widely refuting
the initial reports about LSD and chromosomes.
In fact there have been a series of recent articles
published in the underground press; one under

the esoteric title, "Acid Burned a Hole in My
Genes," openly stated that the data that has been
presented was a Government-sponsored plot to
stamp out the use of LSD. I think we've got to

realize that we can get a great amount of epidemiological data, but the credibility gap is so
wide that we also ought to address ourselves to
putting this data in a form that the drug-using
population will believe. If we prove that there is
chromosomal abnormality secondary to LSD usage, then the only way to prevent it is to have
59 Auerbach, see footnote 37, page 40.
60 Di Paolo, J.A. LSD: effects on offspring. Science, 158:522,
October 27, 1967.
61 Sack ler, A.M.; Weltman, A.S.; and Owens, H. Endocrine

and metabolic effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide on female rats. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 9:324-330,
1966.

the individual stop taking LSD. If the user believes that your data is epidemiologically false
and that it's designed specifically to induce him
to stop taking LSD (as is the current and dominant attitude now in Haight-Asbury) , then the
Institute should address itself not only to epidemiological studies but also to techniques of
education that the drug-using population will
believe.

Dr. Hirschhorn: First of all, there seems to be
a difference in attitudes between the East Coast
and West Coast. The East Village Other had a
very favorable article regarding the potential
dangers of chromosomal damage. It was recently

determined that a great number of individuals
in the New York area have in fact gone off the
drug on the basis of this article. I think however that publication alone is insufficient. The
type of contact that Dr. Smith can have and
that some of us have had directly with these peo-

ple, in which we do not tell them "it's going
to cause damage," but simply describe the possibilities, is extremely effective.
Dr. Meyer: Apropos of that in terms of the epidemiological studies, there are two questions we
have to be concerned about. First, if in fact these
drugs do have long-term effects, this would raise
serious questions in terms of the research efforts
with the drugs; the second issue is that there is
a credibility gap not only between the Haight-

Asbury and the professional community but
within the professional community itself. I
think we've uncovered here a degree of disagreement among various competent research people

as to what these findings really mean. I also
think that we do have a position that we must
upholtl, which is to find out what these things
mean. I think we can only find out through epidemiologic and other research. I see some other
hands up so I'd like to pass the microphone to

Dr. McGlothlin, and then to Drs. Levine, Osmond, and Robert Miller.
Dr. William McGlothlin: I just wanted to mention briefly a study that we are carrying out now,

which is a follow-up on 300 persons who took
LSD six to ten years ago through a physician
who did an experiment in therapy. It looks as

though about a third have continued to take
LSD to some extent. We are looking at birth
defects and miscarriages, etc. If any of you have
some ideas of other things that we should be
looking at, I'd appreciate it if you'd contact me.

Dr. Levine: With all due respect to epidemiological studies it might be a lot less expensive
to do a really controlled study of whether the
drug results in chromosome breaks. In looking
at the results here, one wonders how one finds
controls for so-called hippies. In other words,
how does one find controls for people who live
a very peculiar kind of existence in which a
great deal of abuse of the organism goes on
aside from LSD? I think one can't be convinced

by these kinds of controls. The one study in
which there is a pre- and post- kind of thing is
much too small to draw any conclusions; two of
the four patients actually go down in regard to
chromosome problems and two go up. I don't
think there's any hard evidence with regard to
chromosome breakage in humans from the data
that we've seen today.
Dr. Osmond: Just two points. We see quite a
lot of agreement that LSD could be usefully and
safely given to people whose perceptions have
become stabilized and who are probably beyond
their reproductive life. This seems to be rather

surprising. The other point is that I would
strongly agree with Dr. Smith that what is
needed with this information is a "soft-sell"; the

attempt of battering at the hippies and others
for about five years with a club has simply pro-

duced obstinacy. They are not sure that the
drug is very good for them; perhaps if we change

our ground here, it gradually will seep into
them that there are dangers, and they will think
about these and then gradually change. If, however, we try to bulldoze our way through, we'll
run into all those qualities that we actually admire in people whose views are being attacked.

Dr. R. Miller: I too think that epidemiology
isn't going to be the answer by itself. There has
to be a close interaction between laboratory,
clinical, and epidemiological observations, but
the final application to man of concepts developed at the bedside or in the laboratory will be
determined by epidemiologic study. We're not
afraid to report studies which are negative. We
do it all the time. And such negative findings
should be reassuring to persons who want to use
these drugs for therapeutic purposes.

Dr. Wynne: I'd like to raise for further study
and consideration the problem that was suggested in some of the data about other drugs
such as chlorpromazine which seem to have sim-

ilar effects. That kind of finding would pose
51

N

problems, I think, for epidemiological studies

a basis for reassurance; surely the data are small

where you have people who have a great variety
of life experiences with drugs, with therapeutic
and diagnostic X-rays, wiLh malnutrition, with
virus infections, etc. I'm greatly concerned,

but, so far, I haven't seen anything that con-

therefore, that if these studies are going to be
definitive, the problems of adequate controls
must be very carefully scrutinized. I think this
is of the utmost importance.
COMMENT: I'm going back to the question of
the effects of publicity, whether it is good or
bad. It was mentioned that it may be good be-

here is a definition of some of the questions. Perhaps it is the Utopian fantasy of a Government
scientist sitting in this building which makes me

cause it will scare a few or perhaps many young
people from taking LSD. There is a reverse side.

There are many pregnant girls now who have
taken LSD, and you know what it can do to a
pregnant woman to be told that she has to expect an abnormal child. Secondly, I think there
may be abortions being done right now because
some women have taken LSD.

vinces me that I don't have a basis for reassurance of a mild degree.
Dr. Meyer: I think that what we're aiming for

feel that getting people together of the competence that's in this room will clarify questions
(if not provide answers) . Additionally the Center is interested in supporting research and getting people of different research competencies
together, specifically the way you and Dr. Hungerford have done in Philadelphia. These are
the kinds of observations that need to be made,
and I think that only by finding out some of the
data that are available, as we have today, can

we begin to look more systematically at the

currently receiving chlorpromazine and had
blood levels of chlorpromazine. It has not yet

problem. We're looking at it from several different levels; when the meeting started this morning it appeared almost as though the people who
were giving LSD for treatment would be on one
side and the people who observed adverse reactions would be on the other side. I think what's
emerging is that we have many levels of observation and that they aren't contradictory; rather,

been determined whether this is a long-lasting
effect; we're doing a study to see if it it. These
were the features which distinguished the ISD
subjects from the chlorpromazine subjects.
Dr. Shagass In response to your comments, we

Bureau now, but that you came from traditional
institutes which fostered research. You should

Dr. Hirschhorn: As I understand it, none of
the data on subjects receiving chlorpromazine
showed rearrangements. These were chromatid

and isochromatid breaks and not rearrangmenu. The other issue is that these people were

do have an enormous number of people in

I think that they are complementary.
Dr. Freedman: I think there's only one posture
that you can take and that is that you're in a

invite research; make it clear that you'll re-

whom we deliberately maintain a high chlor-

ceive research proposals and that you'll program

promazine level, and we get very worried when
it isn't maintained, because they relapse into a

the research from here by contract. I think

psychosis.

I'd like to address a question to the chairman
regarding what sort of postural issues he wants
to discuss. It seems to me that we've got a num-

ber of things here. The most important one,
however, is that an otherwise small, yet important (but not sensational) scientific finding
about the chromosomes was precipitated into a
furor by virtue of publicity in a climate of concern. Certainly, as far as my own investigations
are concerned, I am hit negatively because my
subjects are not hippies; they are not people who

are drug users, but they are very frightened
about being treated with LSD, and I have to reassure them. My motive in getting Dr. Hungerford to do this work was to know whether I had
52

research. You're in danger if you program all
there's some that you can do best. The question
of posture is governed by somebody who controls the budget; you have to have enough funds

to disperse to extramural scientists for those
studies considered by you and your advisors to
be useful and important.
Dr. Silverman: I'm not sure of just how to go
about this, but it ought to be possible to develop

P safe atmosphere within which hippie types
could take their own drugs under NIMH supervision. The aim of such a project would be to
get a line on the contaminants in LSD which
are being used in its manufacture in the various
areas of the country. At present there is no way
of getting people into our laboratories to study
them while they are on their own drugs.

Dr. Joffe: I think we've got to facilitate information exchange. We can get the material for
you; you get the volunteers.
Dr. Shagass: I just wanted to say something
about this problem of communication. I got
these four blood samples from hippies by simply

saying to our student health psychiatrist that I
would like to get some and he said, "Well, will
you pay them?" and I said, "No, just tell them
that I'll let them know if they have any chromosomal abnormalities." I got a call the next
day and he offered me ten subjects, and he asked

how many I wanted. I don't think that's an attitude of massive denial. These kids are running
scared. I think that what's been reported is not
inconsistent with that, but our responsibility is
not to feed them scare information, but information.

-

Dr. R. Miller: I would like to suggest that a
role for NIMH is to try to identify gaps in our
knowledge to be filled either through direct research by NIMH, through contract research, or
grants; NIMH, perhaps, would want to reserve
for itself studies which cannot be done so effectively by other organizations, such as universities or drug companies.
Dr. Hungerford: A just wanted to ask one question. It seems to me that one of the experiments
that needs to be done is to administer illicit LSD
to hitherto unexposed patients, but I wonder
how many physicians would consider this to be
ethical? You can't do it in vitro because as we've
learned today Sandoz LSD has essentially the
same effect in vitro that illicit LSD has. Work

with primates might not be entirely relevant,
because monkeys aren't people either. There

might be human volunteers from various

that's an epidemiological word) and maybe we'd

better focus our attention on that.
Dr. Hirschhorn: What has to be remembered
about the difference between the findings with
LSD and radiation as against the findings with
viral infection: and probably chlorpromazine is
that with LSD and radiation the finding.- ire
long lasting; the findings contain chromosomal
rearrangements. In regard to transient viral infections, the findings occur for a few days and
they have been shown not to aact other somatic
tissues (which radiation does) . The .-hlorpromazine studies so far do not show rearrangements; the transient viral infe.:tiens produce
simple breaks and not rearrangements, whereas
the oncogenic viruses, for example, in tissue culture do cause rearrangements and are long lasting in culture, similar to the in vivo studies with
radiation and with LSD. There's a world of dif-

ference between the kind of finding that you
get in someone who has a transient viremia and
someone who has had LSD eight months ago.
You just can't put the two in the same basket.
QUESTION: How about things like hepatitis?

Dr. Hirschhorn: Hepatitis, so far as I'm concerned, has some questionable effects on chromo-

somes, and again, when they're there, they're
very transient.
QUESTION: These findings are all based on a
group that's had LSD many times? Are these the
results presented by Dr. Cohen?
Dr. Hirschhorn: No, we've heard today about
permanent and long-term chromosomal aberra-

tions in persons exposed on one occasion to
psilocybin in an experiment. It's unrealistic to
think that you're going to be able to track down

all the contaminants in these kinds of things.
You can't get an answer to the question of im-

sources, conscientious objectors and prisoner
populations, for example.

pure substances.

Dr. Joffe: I think perhaps with a little more

gestion. I would say that anyone who's working
with LSD at the present time might be encouraged to do some collaborative studies with a geneticist. For instance, at Spring Grove we hope
to study a host blood sample to get the sort of
thing that Dr. Hungerford has done. I think we
need a lot more studies like that.
Dr. Meyer: Thank you all very, very much. I
think you have done a magnificent job of defining the significant questions and suggesting relevant research strategies. I hope that we can be
as successful in implementing these investiga-

digging we would have the model system that
biology could present to study this particular
group of drugs and we may be able to utilize
an animal model.

COMMENT: I'm neither an epidemiologist
nor a geneticist but I was intrigued today by the
finding that it looked as though the highest rate
of abnormalities in these cells was noted in two
control patients who were dismissed as being un-

important because two days later they came
down with a viral ir. cection. It seems to me that
viral infections are a lot more prevalent (I guess

Dr. Pahnke: I'd like to make a practical sug-

tions.

53

Summary of The Conference
The extent and characteristics of hallucinogenic drug abuse among middle class young
adults is at this time unknown. Preliminary reports of grant-supported surveys in the spring of
1967 indicated that 15 to 20 percent of the college

population had used marihuana and approximately u to 8 percent of this same population
had used LSD (and/or other hallucinogenic
drugs). Much of this could be characterized as
"experimentation." Within hippie gathering
places, however, drug use more clearly approximates drug abuse with persons regularly taking
multiple and more dangerous compounds.

Some clinical and research observers of the
LSD scene have observed a discrete pattern of
psychopathologic behavior among chronic users
of LSD and persons on "bad" trips. These professionals have been concerned about possible
outbreaks of new forms of organic psychosis related to hallucinogenic drug use. Preliminary
reports from various biological laboratories have
also suggested the possibility that LSD may be
implicated in serious chthmosomal aberrations.
These observations have led some to conclude
that LSD may be leukemogenic and/or teratogenic. Concerned with these reports of psycho-

logical and biological damage, the Center for
Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse on September 29, 1967, convened a meeting of leading

research investigators in this area. This report
summarizes the proceedings of this meeting.
Most participants deplored the complication

Evidence of pert:sti-;:i psychological damage
from chronic LSD a;.12.aiiiisirk-Con was minimal.
This negative finding may be "real" or may re-

flect a lack of sophistication in out measur-

ing instruments. While some psychological tests

done on persons who have used LSD many
times suggest borderline evidence of organicity,
electroencephalographic findings subsequent to

LSD administration (but not during the LSD
trip) are generally normal. Dr. Julian Silver-

man, reporting on a study done with eight
chronic LSD users at the National Institute of
Mental Health, indicated that amplitudes of
EEG evoked responses (secondary to photic
stimuli) were elevated in some ch-onic LSD
users (while not under LSD) . These higher
amplitudes paradoxically returned to normal
levels when 50 micrograms of LSD was admin-

istered. Of some interest was the observation
that these chronic users (when not on LSD)
showed uniformly lower thresholds to auditory
stimuli, and that these thresholds resembled
those of Addisonian patients being withdrawn
from steroid maintenance. This suggests the possibility that sensory overload may be a problem
for some chronic LSD users, even when they are
not on the drug. It was speculated that, in some

way, this phenomenon may be related to the
absence of goal-directed behavior among the
chronic users of LSD.

Dr. Humphrey Osmond of the New Jersey
Neuropsychiatric Institute and a pioneer in

of reasonable research deliberation by exaggerations in the popular press and the tendency to
draw conclusions from preliminary data. Some
participants confirmed the spread of intravenous

early research efforts with LSD confirmed some
of Dr. Silverman's findings by his own observations at the New Jersey Neuropsychiatric Institute.

methedrine abuse in some of the hippie com-

Other participants focused on the treatment
of the "bad" trip. Some noted that chlorpromazine has been ofttimes ineffective and, that in

munities and described the outbreak of STP use
which took place early in the summer of 1967.

The original reports which had indicated that
chlorpromazine potentiated STP trips in a dangerous manner were specifically refuted by several participants. This drug (STP) was felt to
be more typically adrenergic, consistent with its
chemical structure.
54

some centers, routine sedation and psychological
support is the preferred treatment. Most participants agreed, however, that the psychiatric com-

munity should gain increasing familiarity with
this new syndrome and that each psychiatrist
should develop familiarity with a treatment pro-

gram that could include phenothiazines and/or
the use of sedative drugs and psychological support. Several clinicians present noted that "bad"
trips are seen almost exclusively among persons
in the 15 to 25-year age group. One postulated
that this relationship might represent the potentiation, by LSD, of adolescent adju3tment problems into severe acute crises.

Several participants described the phenomenon of recurring psychedelic experience without

recurrent ingestion of the drug. Of particular
concern were descriptions of recurrent paranoid
episodes, at times accompanied by vivid halluci-

nations, in some users of LSD. There were
neither psychological nor pharmacological explanations of this phenomenon, but the LSD experience generates powerful emotions and any
effectively rich experience is bound to recur in
the mental life of the individual.
Dr. William Frosch, of Bellevue Hospital in
New York, reported the continuing admission
of two patients per week to the Psychiatric Service secondary to LSD use. Dr. Thomas Ungerleider of UCLA indicated that the large
number of LSD admissions to the emergency
room at UCLA caused the Psychiatric Service
to close its doors to those experiencing "bad"

trips. While some have reported that the frequency of "bad" trip admissions to general hospitals and other institutions has been decreasing,
it appears that this is still a continuing problem
for mental health professionals. Additionally, a
number of participants pointed to the phenonenon of depression among chronic users of LSD.
This depression has been particularly refractory
to traditional psychiatric treatments and the participants were not agreed on the nature or treatment of the phenomenon. Unfortunately, many
chronic LSD users have turned to amphetamines
in an effort at self-treatment of the depression.
Relative to the question of leukemogenic or

teratogenic properties of LSD, Drs. Maimon
Cohen and Kurt Hirschhorn summarized their
data relative to LSD and in vivo and in vitro
chromosomal aberrations. Since their initial report in Science 62 they have also observed chromosomal damage secondary to chlorpromazine

and certain other tranquilizing drugs. They
noted, however, that these aberrations were not
as severe as the dislocations and translocations
observed secondary to LSD administration. Dr.
David Hungerford of the Cancer Research Institute in Philadelphia also reported investigat-

ing the circulating lymphocytes of some hippies
in the Philadelphia area but failed to confirm

Dr. Cohen's findings. On the other hand, Dr.
Hermann Lisco of Harvard University observed
similar chromosomal changes in persons who
had been given psilocybin in a psychological experiment. Persons attending this meeting were
unclear as to the ultimate significance of these

findings. Dr. Robert Miller of the Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Institute, noted
that time would be the significant factor in observing the evolution of possible leukemia-type
syndromes. Underlying all of the discussion was

the concern that these reported chromosomal
changes have also been observed in survivors of
the Hiroshima attack and other persons exposed
to high doses of ionizing radiation, all of whom
have an increased likelihood of developing leukemia-type syndromes.
Early reports from Dr. Auerbach 413 at the University of Wisconsin noting teratogenic effects
of LSD administered to mice (plus an increase
in the rate of spontaneous abortions) were not
confirmed in studies done on rats by Dr. Josef

Warkany of the Children's Hospital, Cincinnati. Subsequent reports of teratogenic effects in
the hamster suggest species differences in fetal
response to LSD.
Some reports cubsequent to this meeting suggest that the chromosomal changes secondary to
LSD may be transient phenomena similar to
those observed in viral illness and therefore not
analogous to the chromosomal changes observed
after radiation exposure (which are permanent).
At this time our information about the
biological hazards of LSD and other hallucinogenic drugs must be considered incomplete. One

observer at the meeting said that he almost
wished that some of these reports about chromosomal damage were true so that we could
stem the increase in illicit hallucinogenic drug
use. But the jury is still out. We would certainly
continue to warn potential mothers about the
possible hazards of LSD exposure; being always
clear about our facts while avoiding scare tech-

niques. The group was unanimous in feeling
that scare techniques only alienate the drugusing community so that they may not at some
future time listen to scientific facts about confirmed hazards of hallucinogenic drug use.
62 Cohen, see footnote 2, page 1.
63 Auerbach, see footnote 37, page 40.

55

...........................................maa.

APPENDIX
Background Papers and Bibliography

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
the ARCHIVES OF GENERAL PSYCHIATRY, March 1968, Volume 18, pp. 330-347
Copyright 1968, American Medical Association

On the Use and Abuse of LSD
DANIEL X. FREEDMAN, MD, Chicago

While scientists may debate the appropriate use
of hallucinogens, history records our unceasing urge
to cope with dreary reality or dread with the aid of
magic, drugs, drama, festival rites, and (with biological regularity) through dreams. The need to
transcend limits also finds a voice in utopian ideol-

ogiesbe they of the inner world, of this, or the
next; the promise of omnipotent mastery is always
either implicit or readily inferred. Thus whether
it is the proletarian masses, or youth mesmerized

by mellow yellow banana, or the princes of the
land of genital primacy, or the meekeach is prom-

iced the inheritance of what probably will be a
rather crowded earth. Given the prevalence of these

motives it is not surprising that drugs play a role
not only in the behavior of individuals but also in
social and ideological processes.

With the appropriate mctives and occasion, almost any psychoactive drug can provide a brief

"ego disruption"producing a moment of being

out of it.' This disruption in itself may promote the
release of powerful affects and this ego state will
be welcomed for its novel value as a remarkable
trip from reality. Etched upon it may be the specific pattern of the drug. I believe that the action
of drugs such as LSD extend and accent this primary ego state in a salient and sustained way. In
any event, scrutiny of the social use of drugs cannot
infallibly discriminate the "basic" pattern of effects.

We first have to distinguish the range of effects
of "ego disruption" and what is commonly called
the power of suggestion. With this in mind, we

can focus on the ways in which hallucinogens
Submitted for publication Oct. 13,1967.
From the Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago,
Chicago.

Reprint requests to 950 E 59th St, Chicago 60637.

do and do not selectively enhance suggestion and
various psychological and ideological phenomena.
The reported consequences of drugs such as LSD
range from isolated awe or benign or even bored
surprise to shifts of values. They range from transient to long-term psychoses to a gamut of confusional

states and depression to varieties of religious or
aesthetic experience and insight, to clique formation and ritual? There are now conflicting reports
of therapeutic effectiveness in alcoholism, depression, character disorders, and severe neurosis.3-12
There is also a mushrooming psychedelic culture.

This underlies the tribal motions (or brownian
movements) of young and aging dropouts, rebels
disavowing society's "games" if not all (nonmusical) instrumental behavior. The paraphernalia of
fringe fashions, music, and art comprise the trappings and trippings commercialized as psychedelic
"go-go." Some serious theologians, some "hippies"
as well as our peripatetic prophets now seek the
drugs as a promoter of love, of religious or selfenhancement. Some view the drug as transforming
western society into a Zen Elysium. Some are sincere and private in these pursuits, some provocative and evangelistic, and there are variant
subgroups whose rapidly evolving habits, ideologies, and behavior are as yet unrecorded.
Of course, gentle and ferocious reformers have
often held that special visions were not only their
inspiration but their expl; -it guide. The elite
threaten misery for those who do not accurately
assessie, agree withtheir claims of value. Truly
dispassionate assessmentthe exercise of judgment
may deprive one of access to the mysteries revealed in special states; there is only one way to

be "in" on the truththeir wayand if one is

"in" there may be no way out! The only answer to
such dilemmas posed by any cult is exposure to ex-

59

perience, to knowledge, and assessment over time
ie, perspective.
The "Psychedelic" Dimension in Behavior

The recurrent theme in historical records is that
certain drugs are compellingly related to "learning," to self-revelation, and that they are involved
in some mystical, often ritual, use.12 The American

had taken mescaline, wrote that there are potential
forms of consciousness which with . . . the requisite stimulus and at a touch . . . are there in all
their completeness . . . somewhere (they) have
their field of application and adaptation . . . How
to regard them is the question . . . they may determine attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas and open a region though they fail to give a
map (Italics mine) .

Indian often states that "peyote teaches." This

What about the experience of this "region" of

major theme does not dominate ordinary accounts

the mind is so striking? Two features are obvious,
the nature of the experience and the contrast with
ordinary experience. It is my impression that one
basic dimension of behavior latently operative at
any level of function and compellingly revealed in
LSD states is "portentousness"the capacity of the

of marijuana usage. The potent preparations of
cannabischaras and ganjaare an exception and
have been used in India to enhance contemplative
states as well as for a "high" and are not without
paranoid and other psychotomimetic effects 1 +.1a
Apparently, there is a continuum of effects along
the dimension of self-revealing and ritual usages.

To the extent that there are classes of agents
which reveal normally suppressed components of
the mindexposing these dimensions to our atten-

tionwe can say that both use and abuse stem
from an amazed response to a drug-induced subjective experience. If this is what Humphrey Osmond meant by the term "psychedelic" (or "mind
manifesting") , it is an apt though not novel description. Whatever the outcome, the mode of func-

tioning and experiencing called "psychedelic"
or "psychotomimetic"reflects an innate capacity
(like the dream) of which the waking human mind
is capable.16 The fact that a certain class of drugs
so sharply compels this level of function .(with all
the variability inherent in less organized states)
and does so for a chemically determined package
of time is what so intrigues the biobehavioral scientist.
From our work over the past nine years,17-12 we
now know that the indole and catechol derivatives

which are psychotomimetic in man can induce a
response in the brain of animals, altering brain
serotonin metabolism and probably increasing the
utilization of norepinephrine. Most of these drugs
show crosstolerance. In contrast, psychotomimetic
agents such as atropine or piperidylglycolates (eg,
Ditran) which produce amnesia and delirium 20-22
primarily affect brain acetylcholine rather than
monoamines.19 This indicates that we are dealing
with agents for which some exquisite molecular 23
and biological specificity exists; each of the brain
monoamines appears to be lawfully related to specific, largely polysynaptic neural systems and it is
not unlikely that with autoradiography, and fluorescence and electron microscopy,13.24 our knowledge of the involved neural systems and chemical
changes induced by these drugs can be ever more
finely specified.

At the behavioral and experiential level this specificity has intrigued many. William James,25 who
60

mind to see more than it can tell, to experience
more than it can explicate, to believe in and be
impressed with more than it can rationally justify,
to experience boundlessness and "boundaryless"
events, from the banal to the profound. If we were
to relate this to psychoanalytic theory, we would
say that an ego (or cognitive) consequence of the
primary process and its hypothesized mobility of
energies is this dimension of "portentousness." Affects are equally mobile; fragmentations and fusions--plasticityare, as Freud described it for
dreams, characteristic.
To this disjointed world of clear perceptions one
can react with awe rather than tempered judgment,

or even with irrational and boundless affectecstasy or terror. The sense of truth is experienced
as compellingly vivid but not the inclination to test
the truth of the senses. Unlike the sleeping dreamer,
the waking dreamer is confronted with the coexistence of two compelling and contradictory orders

of realitywith the interface of belief and the
orderly rules of evidence.

James saw this as a region of the mind which
knows both mysticism and madness; ". . . there
seraph and snake abide side by side." But experiences of this realm of the mind cannot be totally
disconnected from normal life; how they are connected is the crucial issue. As James remarked, what
comes from this inner world must, ". . . eventually

run the gauntlet of confrontation with reality just
as what comes from the outer world of our senses."
The "trip" back to reality after "tuning in" to this
region may be discordant or harmonious; one's
sense of both the inner and outer world may be
revised in the service of the ego or altered to suit
the requirements of irrational needs. There are,
then, modal and characteristic forms of mental operations which can underlie behavioral states and
experiences of widely different consequence, intent,
and meaning; and these modal operations are common both to madness and mysticism which must be

differentiated on other grounds." To summarlie,

I believe that there are few drugs which can so unhinge us from the constancies which regulate daily
life, or so clearly present us with unevaluated data
from the "inside world" and from the many normally useless perceptions potentially available to

us. It clearly has been tempting to snatch some
good from this. It also can do little harm, given
such an ample smorgasbord of claims, to seek per-

dosage J1 With doses of 200 to 1,000y there is, with
increasing dosage, an increasing loss of autonomy
and control of critical and discriminative functions.

Usually, one "trip" produces "psychological satiation" 13 and is sufficient for most people forever and
for others, at least for a few days, months, or years.

spective by concentrating on whatif anything

The Drug Experience

is common to all of these varied effects of LSD.
What must be described is a multipotential state
which, in its most general sense, can underwrite a
variety of outcomes: religious feeling and conversions, states of hyperperception leading to inspira-

It is the intense experience without clouded consciousnessthe heightened "spectator ego" witnessing the excitement, which is characteristic for these
drugs in usual dosages. Thus there is a split of the

tional insights, to psychosis, to exalted states, or
perhaps to behavior or value change. The more we
can grasp some of the intrinsic features of this state,

the more we will be able to predict and understand why such drugs can be properly called psychotominietic, psychedelic, or "cultogenic" agents.

it will also be clear that some of the modes
of experiencethe styleswhich characterize the
drug experience can be linked to the outcome or
to the style of life commonly centered around drug

taking: whether this frequently persistent "hangover" of drug effects represents new learning, or
reinforcement of the ongoing trend of goals and
adaptations, or more complex mechanisms is not
now known. Beyond impressions which are hardly
sanguine about long-term use, evaluated data are
still lacking.

Pharmacological Features
The sequence of effects following the usual doses
has been described elsewhere.27 During the first 41/2
hours there is generally a clear-cut self-recognition

of effectsan internal "TV show" (marked by
shifts of bodily sensations, affect, and percepti:ni)

which is followed by another four- or five-hour
period in which the subjective sense of change is
less marked but during which heightened selfcenteredness, ideas of reference, and a certain
"apartness" are observed. At 12 to 24 hours after
drug there may or may not be some letdown and
slight fatigue. There is no craving to relieve this
aini no true physiological withdrawal.
Contrary to previous myth, the acute stage correlates with the biological half-life of the drug in

plasma in rat 29 or man 29; and the duration of
what can be identified clearly as drug related effects
is dose dependent, lasting generally 8 to 12 hours.
There is a dose-contingent tolerance in both rat and

man requiring three or four daily doses for maximum effect and about four days for a loss of tolerance 30; with high dosage there is an unexplained

cyclicity of tolerancea sudden loss after eight
days and then a gradual build-up with continued

selfa portion of which is a relatively passive monitor rather than an active, focusing, and initiating
force, and a portion of which "receives" vivid experiences. Some people seem to repeat this long
after the drug state; standing apart from life and
its "games" or relying on the group to direct events,
they turn away from the prosaic worldor else are
turned away by society. The striking self-centered-

nessthe experience of the self seeing the self

can be elaborated in a variety of ways, from detachment to symptomatic narcissism. The dominant experience of seeing can be expressed as convictions

of revelationie, psychological, mystical, aesthetic, or religious "insights."

During the drug state, awareness becomes intensely vivid while self-control over input is di-

minished, fragile, and variably impaired. Thus
there is always the lurking threat of loss of inner
controlloss of control of integral stability. This
is variably experienced and symbolized. At its
height, it has been called "dying of the ego" and
is often reported in bad trips or in phases of mystical experiences with the drug. For some, such ex-

perience is dread transcended; for others, it is
unwelcome or denied anxiety and dyscontrol.
Many anxious concerns and problems after the

drug state center around issues of control, autonomy, self-directedness, and decision making.

In the drug state, customary boundaries become
fluid and the familiar becomes novel and portentous. Any event or category of events which comes

to one's attentionsensory, sexual, or cognitive
takes on a trajectory of its own. Qualities become
intense and gain a life of their own; redness is

more interesting than the object which is red,

meaningfulness more important than what is specifically meant. Connotations balloon into cosmic
allusiveness. This can be experienced religiously,
aestheticall, , sensually, or in a variety of clear or
confused frames of reference.

After the drug state, we may find pseudoprofundity 2'32 or omniscience as well as more tolerance
for the novel, the unusual, or for ambiguity. We
also can find an associated inability to decide, to
discriminate, to make commitments. Th;s occurred
61

as a Rorschach pattern in Indian peyote users."

seen in man 37 and animal 38 su : ests vividness more

Such a i.endency to avoid distinctions could lead to

alienation and retreatism, even if these were not

than powerful discrimination of the complex. Creativity requires some facility not only for seeing

preexisting traits (as they often are) . For many, the

but for implementing new meanings; but, as we

drug experience may represent a beginningan attempt to feel intenselywhich without luck or expertise, cannot easily come to a useful conclusion
(just as neurotic acts may be viewed as unguided
attempts at self-cure) .

Certainly when hidden meanings perpetually
contaminate the response to the explicit conventions of everyday life, "focus" and goal-directed ef-

ficiency are impaired. Judgment is not enhanced
during the drug state and isolation or apartness

shall stress, it is the need for synthesisnot the
ability to synthesize with due account for real limits

which tends to be reinforced in the drug state.
"Cultogenic" Effects of LSD

An important feature of the state is an enhanced

dependence upon the environment for structure
and support as well as enhanced vulnerability to

thenow novelsurrounding milieu. With the

bring their own problems: accordingly persons who
continually overvalue the modes experience of the
drug state could develop and reinforce poor practical habits. Pseudoprofundity, philosophical naivete,

loss of boundaries, persons or a group are used for

impractical detachment, and inadequate foresight
and judgment or impulsiveness in dedicated users
were already evident to an observer of the Harvard

fragmenting world.
With the fusion of self and surroundings, some

scene of 1963.32 The consequences of long-term and

strivings and their conflict with what is projected
as harsh authority, can (for the moment) be transcended or dissolved. At the same time there is a
leaning on others for structure and control. Hence,
when the drugs are taken in a group setting, the
breach with reality canand mustbe filled by the
directive mystique and support of the group. This
is, in part, why I have termed these drugs "culto-

frequent use of the druginvolving possibly 5%
to 15% of those experimenting with LSDwould
probably have to be evaluated in this context.
Immediacy, Novelty, and Creativity With LSD

In the drug stage, the experience of compelling
immediacy diminishes the normal importance of
past and future. One's organized anticipations of

such elemental functions as controlfor helping
one to know what is inside and what is outside,
for comfort and for binding and balancing the
of the strain caused by the exertion of personal

genic."
Many successful self-help groups are peer groups

time dissolve and the anticipatory factor, so important in the psychophysiology of pain, is similarly affected. (Thiscoupled with effects of suggestion- may be why the drug experience could be reported
as "replacing" narcotics in dying cancer patients.)

or form around a common flaw. If they are uncritical of weakness, less masking of inadequacy can

Dehabituation (ie, a response to the familiar as if
it were novel) was noted in early studies of the

render of a certain order of autonomy to the group,
a certain passivity, and dependence upon the concrete presence of a group to share the burdens of
initiative. The surrender of a conflictful autonomy
(reflecting a prior instability, isolation, or diffusion) may be preferable to the compensatory
delusional autonomy seen in proselytizers who aggressively threaten the establishment with love and
drugs. Of course, a compulsive tendency to externalize the conflict with authority can be reinforced
by peer-grouping. Nor are all the tribal affiliations

drug in cats 84-36

The overvaluation of "nowness" is not unrelated
to the fickle pursuit of the novel apparent in certain youth subcultures. The ability to see old and
familiar events in a new light is also a facet in the
poorly understood processes related to creativity.
But the impairment of goal-directed efficiency and
sustained focused attention carries with it the im-

pairment of integrative and synthetic functions.
Thus the mere mergings of sensory objects (the
synesthesias, the plastic rearrangements or the
dear focusing upon fine details or usually disregarded perceptual elements) or the elisions of
thoughts and concepts hardly are the same as an
organized building and arrangement in which
"boundaries". and distinctions are essential. Sharpcned or "heightened" perception and consciousness
is not equivalent to adaptive perception, nor is ab-

normal brilliance necessarily to be equated with
beauty. Indeed, the primitivization of perception
62

ensue. With such arrangements, the distance between authority and the miscreant is diminished
and so, too, is the inner tension. The cost is a sur-

we call groups endowed with the competence to
guide; many are loose alliances based on the denied
mutual despair of their members.

Object Relations and Values

Actual persons in the environment have positive
cr negative value in terms of quite elemental functions, eg, as threats or as anchors in maintaining
a primary self-control (quite as in the so-called psychotic transference) and intensities of affect can

mercurially escalate and .'iminish in the absence
of normal boundaries. Persons are self-centeredly
seen and usedeither to be clung to, or to be contemplated in terms of what essentially is a selfcentered ..ensory, aesthetic, or ideologic frame of
reference; they may become vivid objects of highly
personal transferences. At best there may be a narcissistic shifting of one's relationship to others and
to one's own ambitions which, as Kohut has noted,
can lead to outcomes which are socially valued

wisdom, humor, perspective. But such internal
syntheses never guarantee socially pleasant behavior, and pathological outcomes are also probable.
Model Psychosis in the Drug Experience

The elements of a model psychosis are present.

This does not mean identity; rather it is an approach to certain processes which are variably pres-

ent in both the drug state and psychoses. The
conditions for either state have similarities and
obvious differences

(just

as do dreams and

psychosis) .40

In the first hour after LSD most people refer
their altered perceptions and relationships to the
body and its parts; this period of changed bodily
sensations and perceptions could be called hypochondriacal (with all this connotes as a prodromic

difficult since the distinction of inside and outside
tends to diminish. Accordingly there are frequent
mislocations or misconceptionsprojectionsof
motives and sensations. This tendency is reinforced
when one must exert energy to account for even
slight changes in the environment; slight details not
only capture attention but also can gain the patina
of portentousness and are linked to the ever present threats of dissolution. The eventual outcome of
this hypervigilance, inefficient scanning,42.43 and
mislocation is called paranoid behavior.
There is also a remarkably heightened sensitivity
to gestures, inflections, and nonverbal sensorymotor cues which normally are in the background;
however, the ability accurately to judge these cues

and appropriately lodge them ill contextjust as
in schizophrenic sensitivityis easily impaired.
The altered relationship of figure and ground also
means that metacommunications fail; the context
no longer predicts the relationship of parts to the
whole.

Similarly the component affects can be enhanced
under the drug state but are difficult to focus upon.
Thus several contrary feelings coexist; or they fluctuate (just as sensations do) ; this is reminiscent of
ambivalence. Subjects later refer to the total state
as a pleasant-unpleasant experience. Those seeking

mystical experience speak of heaven and hell.

symptom) or simply altered body image, depending
on the context. The point is that there is a uni-

Euphoria mixed with tension may be seen.

form change in the experience of the relationship
of the body, the self, and their normal environ-

hours are common. With care, one observes that

mental coordinates.
The basis for hallucinations can be analyzed.41
For example, what is impinging on an ongoing per-

ception is a vivid memory of what has just been
perceived; these coexisting images can compete for

attention and thus give rise to illusions. (In our
laboratories we have observed monkeys under LSD
who may respond to serial stimuli as they had been
trained to respond to overlapping stimuli.) This is
marked usually two to three hours following 200pg

or less of the drug and following the period of
altered perceptions referred to the body and its

Laughing or crying or both in the first three
following the initial perceptual changes referred to

the bodythere is a primary need for elemental
tension-dischargea welling up which requires
laughing or crying for relief. Subjects have to
laugh or cry and they then seem to find the appropriate setting to rationalize this.
However these experiences may be represented
and symbolized, they are evolved from a groundwork entailing a coexistence, heightening, and fragmenting of component urges and feelings. Thus,
changes in ego organization and capacity seem to
occur first: this is usually manifest in the perception
of bodily changes. A tension or need for discharge

boundaries. With the increasing loss of distance,
such illusions can be imaginatively or regressively

then becomes apparent; perception of affective
changes and changes in the self and relationships

elaborated into hallucinations. Similarly, memories
can emerge as dear images competing for the status
of current reality. This failure to suppress the prior
perception or memory or thought is reminiscent of
what Bleu ler called "double registration" in schizo-

with objects in the milieu supervene and dominate
the experience. These changes in the first three or
four hours underlie the varied experiences of "insight." Expectations and preconscious fantasies
certainly stamp the content and even influence the
capacity to exert control during the drug state, but
with the loss of structure a "program" of vulner-

phrenia or what, in Rorschach parlance, is called
contamination. Similarly the failure of identities
and categories to be maintained underlies most of
the descriptions of paralogic in schizophrenia.
The capacity selectively and relevantly to direct
one's focus is impaired; allocation of the source of
a feeling, a sound, a sight, or a thought becomes

abilities and needs seems to be "released" 44 or com-

pelled by the drug.
The enhanced value and intense attention placed
on the self, the narcissism, ego splits and regression; the loss of boundaries; the "double registra63

dons"; the ambivalence; the heightened tension;
the diminished control and problems of focus 45;
the unstable (or inappropriate) affect; all can represent the primary symptoms of a psychosis. Given
this state of affairs one can see a variety of "psychotomimetic" or "psychedelic" phenomena elabo-

rated and expressedall of which require such

basic shifts in ego organization. Whether or not the
"observing ego" keeps touch with reality may be
crucial to outcome, but is irrelevant to the classification of a psychotomimetic state. Catatonic schizo-

phrenics often maintain a silent observing era
monitoring reality during their psychosis."
The appearance of peak experiences (or acute
psychedelic experiences) in clinical psychosis has
long been documented 47; early phases of acute psychoses often cannot be differentiated from accounts

of drug experience." In the hours following the

acute flux, as adaptations to the first phase begin,
we can note the subject's attempts to structure
while still impaired by the drug. Where energy for
scanning and testing the reality of unwanted input
is required, delusional simplifications, ideas of reference or passionate beliefs occur and provide an
economical explanatory anchorage.
We have with these drugs at least a tool with
which to study the genesis and sequence of a number of familiar phenomena in psychiatry. Whether
it can lead us to a better sorting and description
of the varied elements which are present in the
range of dinical disorders is yet unanswered; for
example it is obvious that differences in .outcome
of LSD states depend upon. specific prior strengths
as well as varying circumstances. It is also obvious
that a time-bound state such as a drug state cannot demonstrate symptomatic phenomena which
develop over time and are embedded in confusing
life circumstances." Indeed, the role of these factors
in symptomatology could be more readily distinguished by appropriate comparative study of clinical and drug-induced alterations of consciousness.
Comparative studies of drug-induced states could
also be useful in determining factors and sequences
related to outcomes of such a multipotential and

fluid state. Finally, it bears upon our thinking
about any psychosis to recognize thatwhatever
the role of motivationprimary or secondary shifts
in such elemental ego functions as attention and
discriminationthe adaptive control of sensory input and percept.on 42-0can underlie a range of
"psychotic" symptoms.

Adaptations During the Drug State

Some persons endure all this without es dent
harm. The spectator ego can simply be interested
in the reversal of figure and ground, the visual
tricks, orwith higher dosesthe spectator is en64

tranced or totally absorbed. But with increasing
dosage the experiencing ego can be overwhelmed.
At any level, defensiveness can appear; the spectator shuts his eyes and a blind struggle for control may dominate. Basic attitudinal shifts,
redirection of attention, projection denial, displacement, affective explosions, panic, confusion, withdrawal, or magical and delusional syntheses may be
seen as persons attempt to cope. Rarely there is an
acute loss of judgment or impulsive and primitive
thinking manifest in attempts to fly or defy gravity
which results in a concrete and fatal confrontation
with the real world. One protection is not to fight
the experiences during the drug state. An upsurge

of the traditional defensive operations requires
extra vigilance and may lead to temporary panic
even in relatively stable people.
It is striking that when self-examination or con-

frontation with personal problems is the motive
for illicit drug-taking, effects are not infrequently
bad. Both licit and illicit drug users note that unstable surroundings or confused motives lead to
"bad trips." When problems are aptly externalized
or shared there is less panic and subsequent upset.
Those who are unable to tolerate the flux by shifting attention from it or enduring it (or "guiding"
it by delusional, mystical, or aesthetic revisions)
may retreat into catatonic-like postures. Thus a certain yielding and surrender of ambition and personal autonomy helps some individuals to have a
good experience; but this requires if not group support, a certain personal strength, or at least a faality. It also requires stable groups.

Those who are encouraged or equipped to not
attend to the fragmented disparate elements, let
them flow into the sway of a mystique, steered by
latent guiding interests or memories. Thus all that
occurs is given a toneor a very diffuse direction.
With higher dosages and the increasing loss of detailed focusing, the importance of guiding "sets"
(music, mystique, affective expectation such as the

doctine of boundless love) is enhanced. Indeed,
under LSD it is the positive or negative attitudes
and postures toward the ego's varied experiences

which are most vulnerable to suggestion. The
"maps"the formulas and specific ideologies supplied by guidesare actively sought because of the
vulnerability of the ego and the relative loss of
synthetic and higher cognitive functions (such as
goal directedness) . Accordingly panic states may be

"guided" by redirection of attitudes, or attention
and by provision of structure.
Summary of the Drug State

Thus we may say that in the presence of a heightened sense of awareness, there is a diminished role
of the array of functions related to cognitive control

and discrimination of complexities. The ego may be

said to be less autonomousless reliablein the
deployment of focused and sustained attention. It
is vulnerable to being guided by a widened and
more variable range of both internal and external
factors. In order to anchor the drug-induced period
of flux, direction of attention and basic orienting
attitudes can be supplied either by the now impaired ego (with its defenses and prior expectations) or by the setting. Such expectations may be
explicit and implicit, conscious and unconscious;
accordingly, prediction and control over outcome
especially in self-experimentation are inherently
unreliable. Similarly, the utility, fittedness, and reliability of the setting will, in fact, vary widely.
The extent to which the experience of a specific
"trip" is related to outcome requires finer study.
So, too, does the fact that one good trip does not
predict a second. Accurate studies in this area are
important to our understanding of outcome. Nevertheless, the primary changes described are the
background state from which a number of divergent outcomes and adaptations ensueadaptations

both during and after the drug experience. No
doubt the rearrangements of reality which occur
during this state produce a memorable experience,
but one is reminded of Sidney Cohen's remark that

most people get what they "deserve" 0 or what
they are equipped at the time to experience as
modified by set, equipment, and setting.
Restoration of Constancies After the Drug
Two realities have been exposed in startling con-

trastprivate and public reality, both of which are
a part of experienced reality. Anyone who has experienced this intense episode must come to deal
with it; some judgment about the significance and
utility of these realms of the mind must be made.
Our dreams are an episode in a sequence of states
which we usually can somehow integrate into the
normal fabric of living; similarly something must
now be done to represent and cope with the total
drug experiencenightmare, illusion, or ecstasy.

drug state; it is not uncommon that there is an
equivalence of value for what is at the periphery
and what is normally perceived at the center of
the visual field. He commuted daily, reading during the trip. For months after the drug, he was
bothered by the telephone poles which flashed by
his train window. He could no longer suppress what
normally is background rather than compelling fig-

ure. Similarly, the unconscious "background" to
thoughts, gestures, and feelings can emerge.

There are numerous anticipatory sets or constancies which operate to keep the body oriented in
space and ready to meet the environment as we expect to experience it; the mind provides constancy
wherever the sense organs deal with variability. We

anticipate or correct for the images on our retina
to keep the world stable and ordered; the hand
stretched 8 inches before one, may appear small,
though on the retina or camera it is large. Coming off a boat one may still waddle, maladaptively
anticipating the roll of the ship. Such habits or sets
can smooth out our perceptions and actions; but
they can persist when they are not useful and lead
to inappropriate and confused responses. LSD appears to affect these stabilizing perceptual anticipa-

tions. It rearranges and unbalances our ideas of
order, whether the self and its defenses or perceptions are a referent.
The Need for Synthesis and Outcome

The intensity of the drug experience manifest
in the change of constancies can lead to a number
of repetitive behaviors. The search for synthesis
may take the form of attempts to reexperience the
intensity of elements within the drug experience in
order to master it, just as with the traumatic neurosis with its breaching of the "stimulus barrier." It
is an old theme in psychopathology that in a state

of altered consciousness in which control over
awareness is diminished, there is no way to bind
the intensities experienced and symptoms may ensue. Breuer (and more reluctantly, Freud) referred

to this as the hypnoid state; explanations of the

Some borrow stability from ready-made explanations or isolate the experience. Still others will decide that the experience of cosmic comprehension

consequences of early pregenital experience to repetitive neurotic symptoms in later development
have been placed in this context."

is equivalent to self-mastery. Still others, lacking
any other means of mastery, will be compelled repeatedly and unexpectedly, to confront what was
experienced. We see this in students who come in
for help weeks after a tripexperiencing anxieties
or brief unwanted trips in the absence of drug."
The breakdown of those constancies and habits
which normally smooth over the disparate details
of our perceptions and actions can persist in frightful but also benign ways. One sdetnist experience s

While "bad trips" occurring without the drug
may be explained in the model of the traumatic
neurosis or hypnoid state, it is astonishing to see

his peripheral vision to be enhanced during th,

an entire sequence of heightened sensations as well
as altered perceptions occurring with apparent suddenness weeks after the drug. This obviously evokes

comparison with psychomotor epilepsy; but this
connotation is as yet without foundation in facts.
The psychodynamics preceding these lapses from
reality also require close scrutiny; yet these reports

appear to present us with evidence that the "bar65

rier" against dereistic thinking and altered states

(or the "switch" permitting a shift of mental
states) is a factor which in itself merits intensive

investigation. There are schizophrenic patients who

appear eventually to have learned or discovered
that there was some control which they could exert

against "slipping" into such states. Whatever the
explanation for either the loss or the mastery of
such controls may be, it is evident that the experience of the LSD state with its intense clarity in

the presence of diminished control can have a

range of consequences which cannot always be an-

ticipated simply by monitoring the apparent intensity of the ongoing drug state.

Repetitive symptomssuch as acting outmay

occur. In part, these may be viewed as unsuccessful
attempts to restore or find constancies and bound-

aries. Such behavior, which invites control and
guidance, frequently appears as a provocative ac-

cusation against authority andby provocation
prr...lerves a tie with it. Others aggressively and end-

lessly talk about their experiences as if they were
trying to put them together.
For some, reflection about the sharp contrast of
drugged and real life may evoke mild or severe

rumination and depressionrelated to an urge to
recapture the lost illusionary and brilliant drug
world. The extent to which primitive and regressive fusion fantasies will dominate these reactions
varies.

Conflict and confusion about "what is

reality" or the experience of normally repressed
thoughts and urges by the unprepared ego can lead
to mild or severe symptomatic states, perplexity,
and disorganization.
In any event, variably determined needs or capacities to cope with the split or breach of normal
experience can be expected. This may be a simple
"sealing over," or even an enlightened and useful
thought formation we call insight. Some react with
a denial of inadequacy and anxiety about loss of
control; borrowing the enhanced omnipotence of
the drug state, they show a delusional autonomy.
This may lead to various outcomes: that of the be-

nevolent and foolish prophet, or the defensive,
alienated therapist, angry at those who prevent his
curing the rest of the world. Any threat to the values of the illusory experience of union and omni-

potencesuch as undrugged realitycould evoke

defensive denial and strident proselytizing.
It is interesting that classifications of pathological
outcomes of conversion 52 (including irresponsibil-

ity and omniscience) startlingly resemble patterns
we see with LSD. Indeed, we must seriously wonder
why those who find salvation are so implacably gen-

erous and so ready to advertise! Implied are unsolved problems with authority figures. Salvation
often involves renunciation of previous ties; those
who are saved must repetitively convince others in
66

order to diminish their own doubt, isolation, and
guilt. At best, they may do this not only to share
but in order to reachieve union with those from
whom they have been separated by their unique

vision and experience, and to synthesize these
breaches with important others.

The Role of Groups in Outcome

Some kind of continuity with the gap in reality
is sought. The bridge may be a book as it was with
Huxley, a silent synthesis, or change of values and
tastes, or the understanding of a group or person.
In the Native American Church, the Indian utilizes religious explanation and adherence, specific
ceremonies, and the group with its ideology to integrate the experience which serves a purpose in
the total fabric of his life.2

There are mixed consequences with the reliance on groups. In some chronic users one sees a
bland impulsivenessan indifference to the habitual and customary which may border on a supercilious posture of superiority. The elect of many

cults either assume this attitude or the outsider
feels this to be the attitude of those who know
something he does not. This benign or irritating
posture has also been remarked upon in the American Indian peyote users who are often a subculture
not infrequently at odds with established groups.
Nevertheless, the observed reliance of drug users on

cults can permit at least a measure of authentic
self-involvement at a level which is realistically
available to the persons involved. Where these
"cults" are but loosely juxtaposed cliques connected by common rationalizations, there is still
some comfort and protection from a ruminative
self-concern which is enhanced by isolation.

Mystical or religious representations also are
remarkably apt for synthesizing the experience. Religion can relate man to his limits while taking ac-

count of his boundlessness which occurs in all
aspects of this realm of the mind. It may be that
religious symbolism aptly represents the transforma-

tions characteristic of this latent part of the mind.
Against fragmentation and directionlessness, some-

thing coherent lends continuity to experience.
Against dread, transcendent love can prevail; loving like redness can apparently be enhanced and
is remembered. The "lovingness" and "strongness"
of a parent can be parted from the particular persons and transcendentally represented in various
forms of power ascribed to deities.

There are, then, a number of features of this
multipotential state related to its intensity, its
novelty, its boundlessness which account for some
of the expectable occurrences within it and some
of the expectableand observeddangers and variable outcomes.

11

LSD in Psychiatry

There are a number of psychotherapists who
have attempted to we the loosening of associations

and the intense experiencing produced by the
drug in order to influence behavior change in individual as well as group therapy (and the drug

obviously is useful for the study of group processes) .53.54 There are a few ongoing controlled

projects and a long history of experience with
the use *.**and abuse "of LSD in therapy. In
the late 1950's some physicians thought they had
discovered a new reality of the mind and were not
only struck by the drug-induced phenomena, but
apparently addled by them. Perhaps they were simply jealous of the subject when they insisted upon
taking the drug concurrently with him
Today, two major serious modes of treatment
prevail. That employed by many European workers
(called "psycholytic" by Leuner 44) represents a
method by which certain defenses are breached.
With a strong drug-enhanced tie to the therapist,
feelings, memories, and transferences are allowed
to emerge vividly and unforgettably before the eye
of the consciousness and their strength discharged.
The events are later worked over with care. Dosages are regulated in part by the capacity of the
patient to steer a course between being utterly lost
or overly constrained by habitual defenses. A kind
of active participation in the presence of a general
loosening is sought. As issues in therapy arise,
dusters of intense affects directed towards early experiences and objects are encouraged; thus, fantasies involving rebirth, early transference strivings,
and trauma can emerge with sensory intensity. The
therapist lends support and later interprets.
Certainly, people are initially less guarded under
the drug and can experience a range of "insights"
they might normally disown. Yet they also can react
quite defensively under the drug when what is seen

is, for personal reasons, overly traumatic. To an
extent they can ward off self-recognitions with affective outbursts and they can dearly distort them
by basic attitudinal shifts, displacements, redirection of attention and projections, denial, confusion,
withdrawal, or magical and delusional "syntheses."
For quite vivid self-encounters there is usually no
postdrug amnesia. The integration which follows
is a collaborative venture requiring the active par-

ticipation and the output of the patient. During
treatments, a sequence of defensive memories,
transferences, and distortions commonly arises and

requires further drug sessions and work. Illicit
drug users also encounter "hang-ups" but have little guidance to work them through sequentially.
The therapists find this absorbing and exhausting;
they generally work with inpatients and severely ill
or characterologically impaired patients.

In the so-called psychedelic therapies as they are
now being tested, there is an awareness of an immense amount of preparation, of salesmanship with

an evangelical tone in which the patient is confronted with hope and positive displays of it before

he has his one great experience with a very high
dose of drug. The drug experience is structured by
music and by confident good feelings. With the sup-

port of the enthusiastic therapist, the patient is encouraged to see his life in a new light, to think of

his future accordingly. There now tends to be a
rather long period of follow-up and support before

the patient is discharged. An earlier mode of intervention attempted to avoid the tangled problems
of relationship between therapist and patient 10 with

but a single high-dose drug session as the chief
therapeutic contact; the current approach is more
explicitly ritualized (in the model of nativistic
movements) ; the person and attitude of therapist
tends not to be analyzed but incorporated. It is
speculated that the egocentric problems of the
alcoholic may be specifically tailored for this
"ego-dissolving, ego-building" technique. Other approaches, eg, employing hypnosis,*/ lie somewhere

between these two. It is interesting that peyote
cultures also report cures of alcoholics but the effects may not persist without sustained group support and leadership.2 The effectiveness and selectiv-

ity of current therapies is far from settled and
research is still ongoing.* Obviously careful follow-

up is essential since the immediate glow which
occurs with drug-induced personality changes in
such contexts can be deceptive. The fact that under
LSD the therapist can often readily suggest posi-

tive or negative attitudes toward life experiences
and promote a state in which struggle may be diminished should arouse our fundamental curiosity
not only about LSD therapy and its effectiveness,
but about the mechanisms, utility, resistances, and
pitfalls in behavior change achieved through persuasion ...As

The Scope and Dangers of Illicit Use

We should recall that the increasing problem of
drug abuse in most countries is alcohol, followed
by the barbiturates, amphetamines, opiates, and
mild tranquilizers. In this context the consequences
to national health of hallucinogens are not as yet
truly startlingeither in terms of the utility of LSD
or its harm. In the long run, debates about whether
or not to use LSD are
as socially consequential as the use of "the Pill." The agent most frequently used by youth for illicit purposes and with
lethal effect is the automobile; and the most faithful monitor of the scope of such social problems is
the prevailing high insurance rates for young men.
The actuarial superego of our society has not yet
67

instituted insurance wate changes for medical, psy-

chiatric, or mortician's coverage in response to
these chemicals. This is an interesting generation
but they have not as yet gone completely to pot!

Not all users are youth nor are all youthful
users initially unconventicaul and utipmductive. A
few current illicit self-help groups reportedly employ the drug and religion to achieve a conven-

tional outcotne; eg, a group of exconvicts and a
group of homosexuals. Several religious and lay
groups have set up agencies to be phoned when
panics are encountered. We seem to be living in an
era when many practices (half-way houses, group
therapies, cathartic therapy, confrontation therapy)

built into the fabric of psychiatric work are imitated by ever proliferating self-help groups which
frequently tap our society's long tradition of distrust of medical science. Unfortunately, nonscientific searches for cures are too easily dismissed as
fanaticism, eccentricity, or ignorant superstition.
Yet these social responses in part reflect upon the
ability of the health professions to deliver relevant
services, to treat irrational anxieties, or to be competently aware of and responsive to the issues and
consequences of different patterns of drug abuse.
Reliable estimates of the incidence of psychedelic

drug "use" (however defined) are always vulnerable to criticism. They range from 1% to 15% on
certain campuses. Figures higher than 5% probably
do not distinguish single trials from habitual use
nor LSD from other drugs of abuse; eg, prosely-

tizers frequently tell us about the "inevitable"
growing use of "marijuana and LSD." Only a small
fraction of persons who have taken the truly potent
hallucinogenic drugs could be said to constitute a
reliable base for study of long-term users. Groups
of persons who drift in and out. of the category of
users are not easy to identify and are hardly reliable
reporters. The problem is that some are always first
discovering the drug (available now for 20 years)
and acclaiming it while the silent others are
experiencing disillusion after a year or two of absorption. Still others actively seek or passively accept one or two self-experiments. We clearly require
a study of the fad element in usage; cydes of interest may well be shown to follow certain press re-

leases and to vary sharply with opportunity and
the ethos of different settingseg, hippie centers
or campuses or enclaves of middle-aged imitators
who mourn their lost youth. Clearly the motives
for experimenting, maintainingor self-regulating
the intake of any drug differ as do the consequences of these varied patterns of use.
Complications for research also arise from sensational publicity. The select as well as the popular

press provide a structure for the curious, restless,
and lost as they compete to announce or denounce
drug usage. The psychedelic huckstersfor a band68

wagon effectconfidently announce that growing
hordes of youngsters are independently dedicated
chronic users. To the mature, their message is that
this is a revolution in which adults are helpless;
to the young it is a subtle invitation to revolt under

the sanction of inevitability. The establishment
then reacts with. irritation and fright. As the
advertising escalates and the empirical problem in-

deed grows, the young and their frequently confused and permissive parents must enter the debate
and assess the claims of value. Physicians hysterically crying alarm join the melee, lumping all bad
reactions into one dire outcome: permanent madness. They can now also cite somatic dangers.
Reports of chromosomal changes in preparations
of lymphocytes raised in tissue culture are not iden-

tical with "genetic damage" or dinical disease.

Apart from unwarranted biological inferences, the
reliability of such findings is not established; nor
do we as yet know the relationship to dose, to common stimulants, or to drugs related by structure or
behavioral effect. Similarly, a finding of LSDinduced stillbirth or stunted growth in rats is not
identical to fetal anomalies or germ cell damage;
effects in mice may differ; rodents may differ from
man; similar reports of effects of other drugs (including reserpine) should be evaluated prior to
sanctioning alarming reports about LSD. Nor does
the persistence of hippocampal discharges for several weeks following LSD (in cats trained to avoid
shock) indicate long-term brain changes nor brain
"damage" in man; reserpine, in fact, produces more
dramatic persisting effects in the hippocampus to
and without the intervention of shock. Neither the
history of folk usage of psychedelics nor the past 20

years of medical and lay use of LSD haveas

yetproduced dear and reliable evidence of somatically dangerous consequences of the drug in man.
While such important research continues, caution
about publicity is warranted on both scientific and
humane grounds lest we further panic the susceptible. A single past indiscretion with LSD now leads
to serious brooding over the shape of what the
young parents fear will be a psychedelic monster.
No doubt the social problems presented by LED
could easily be diminished if a dearcut son: tic

danger is established; we might, however, have yet

to cope with this phenomenon without the aid of
such facile warnings!

Psychiatric Complications of LSD

The facts are that dangerous and tragic psychological consequences are now unequivocally established,a47 and it is just this fact which users
deny (as if it were concocted to attack their autonomy and self-esteem) . From our own campus experiences it appears that users who end up in

hospitals with prolonged and serious psychoses are

initially a quite unstable group. They are, in any
event, a small group. Suicides and violence are also
uncommon. More frequently one sees a transient
panic occurring during the drug state from which
recovery (without the administration of often complicating phenothiazine medications) occurs within

24 hours. If other than supportive and reassuring
treatment is required, adequate barbiturate hypnosis or a sedative tranquilizer such as chlordiaze-

poxide is a simple regimen. A few visits for
follow-up can be instituted when required. Others
do not require hospitalization but often seek treatment because they are concerned about having
taken the drug. They are upset or depressed about
some of their thoughts and experiences during the
drug state, or about their basic life dilemmawhich
in many instances is obviously serious. And a few

others, as noted, may have serious "nondrug" induced panics some weeks after the drug state veyy
much as a bad dream recurs. Occasionally a complicated history of multiple drug intake by a rootless youngster leads to a picture of toxic psychosis.

We must make a distincolon between an un-

pleasant tripeven one which might lead to
emergency room referralsand various psychiatric
complications of drug use which may or may not
be contingent on a bad episode. Such unpleasant
episodes have "turned off" those who try a casual
experimenta socially valuable response! When
patients are brought to physicians by drugged or un-

stable friends, or in disorganized circumstances,
physicians should be aware not only of the role of
momentary panic (and the fact that any escalating
panic can look like a toxic state) but of the possibility of complicated drug-taking patterns, of
prior instability if not mental disorder. Similarly,
we should note that classical instances of identity
diffusion, of borderline phenomena and adolescent
turmoil mayin contemporary lifebe associated
with LSD; this is hardly a basis for citing the drug
as totally causal.
We now see little scare literature presenting an
unevaluated snapshot of steroid psychoses, because
we can now predict with more confidence what the

results will be and evaluate the risk. Similarly
we shouldin timebecome familiar with these
drugs. The facts are that a fair number of people
have had LSD without serious untoward effects.
The majority of acute untoward reactions with

LSDwhile severely troublesomeare not as yet

proven to be inevitably permanently crippling. The

suggestibility, despair, confusion, and latent disorganization of those who unwisely take LSD is, I
believe, as crucial a variable as the chemical which

renders themunexpectedlyvulnerable to more
trauma than they can handle. The habitual longterm use of LSD for pleasure or escape produces

the possibility for the impairment of good sense
and maturation. In this sense, the drug can reinforce a dissociative trend, leading to acute reactions
or insidious disorganization and failure successfully

to integrate life crises.
The Risk of LSD "Trips"
Impressions gathered from various observers in-

dicate that the experiencethough not necessarily
the outcomeof approximately 10% of any batch
of trips (whether or not it is an initial one) can
be potentially upsetting. With skilled guides perhaps many of these potentially unpleasant experiences are warded off or redirected. With skilled
therapists, 1% or less of drug experiences may be
unexpectedly traumatic. Certainly under these circumstances less than 1% is traumatic in outcome.
With proper immediate follow-up most of these reactions should be therapeutically resolved. This appears to have been the case even though attempts
to screen subjects in order to predict reactions have
not yielded clear-cut guidelines 5"; and it has not
been established that the drug is necessarily traumatic when given to severely mentally ill persons
with the structure and follow-up available in thera-

peutic settings. In all probability older subjects
(past 26 years) are less likely to have prolonged
reactions linked to a single bad experience.
While such impressions require research, we can

be confidentfrom the experience at responsible
research centers in the 1950's and in European clin-

icsthat the setting and the ability to manage the
experience and its aftermath are crucially important. We can also be reasonably certain that the
risk differs when the drugs are taken under unsupervised circumstances; or with unwise therapists

or guides; or by adolescents attempting selfanalysis; or in specifically therapeutic experiences
or in sensibly controlled research conditions. There

is no question that good sense and trained skills
can help to control bad LSD experiences and out-

comes. The inescapable problem is thatexcepting

within narrow limitsa bad experience and an un-

welcome outcome need not be associated and
neither can always be predicted.

The Drug Mystique

My current opinion is that the chief abuse of
LSD is irresponsible, alluring, and provocative advertising. Havelock Ellis' enthusiastic report of the
effect of mescaline,'0 while evoking alarm about pos-

sible abuse,71 did not flower into a cult or into
a topic for the bored mass media. An ideology
couched in the language of drugs has been insinuated into youth culture by a band of quite articulate writers and vagrant professionals. These have
69

replaced the old medicine show of yesteryear with
an updated campus version complete with readings
and tempting arguments if not pills to sell: "tune

in, turn on, ant: dropout." A drug mystique has
been welded to the underlyingly serious shifts and
strains inherently experienced by the most potentially unstable group of any societythe adolescent
and young adult.

We need not determine whether this is indeed
a "now" generation valuing honesty, love, direct confrontation and uncomplicated action, and
avoiding ideologies in favor of simple justice.
These values, however germane to the LSD experi-

ence, were not born from the drugged mind. The

Pied Pipers of LSDpeddling a drug which can
enhance poor judgmentwould lure youth from
the acquisition of competence (or even from the
serious study of man's attempts to deal with the
two orders of reality in his personal development
and in his religious, artistic, philosophical, and scientific endeavors) .

If we make the distinction between the psychedelic mystique and issues about the utility of LSD,
and if we attempt to account for the fact that the
greatest abuse has been among the well-educated
or those who might bewe would in all honesty

it is a civil matter) when irresponsible proselytizingborn from the spirit of oedipal revengeleads
to a number of drug-related cases in children and
young adults requiring psychiatric care for either
brief or long periods of time. It is often forgotten
that the real momentum for such claims arose when
a few psychologists who peddled the dreg resented

the notion that medical or even nurses training
were required for the responsible administration of
potentially toxic agents. The problem, of course, is

that the psychedelic guruswhile promoting frenetic advertisements for themselvesare not in a
position to manage the consequences of their ideo-

logical schemes. When they do admit the drug
might be dangerous, they do so by insisting that
only the very courageous should take the drug! The
rationalizations which prevail among those who experiment with LSD are often borrowed from these
various preachings.

Motives for Use
The motives for LSD use are varied. Sociologists

refer to problems of commitment and alienation
and at least add thereby to the younger generation's verbal mythology. We might remember that

have to question the strange tolerance for these

wild analysis and "psyching"probing into one

psychedelic follies in campus cultures. Forgetting
both Freud and James, many of our teachers and
intellectuals are either entranced or perplexed by
stories of LSD-induced revelations. They appear
neither to have learned from nor to teach from ex-

Curiosity about the mind, about what can be
experienced, about who one is and is to be can

perience.

We seem to have forgotten that there are trained
persons who in fact have more experience than the
self-appointed gurus in coping with adolescent turmoil and the more serious dysfunctions. There are
scholars and disciplines knowledgeable about man's
attempts to understand subjective experience and
its manifold aesthetic, literary, and intellectual expressions. The social psychology of groups, cults,
conversion, enthusiasm, and utopias is hardly a new
discipline. None of this seems to have crucially permeated our campus cultures in terms of new curricula or opportunities for both confrontation and
reflection. In brief, much of this advertising may
"take" because in exploring new frontiers we have
lost confidence in our traditions and seem to have
avoided dealing both with the rationalizations and
the honest probings of the drug cultists and other
youth on campus. In any event it is dear that "education" of the drug-prone young will require more

than a troop of physicians. Some sophistication
about the vicissitudes of man's gullibility might
render our institutions less vulnerable to sophistry.
The psychedelic apologists insist they have the
civil right to take any agent which does not harm
others. It is, of course, hardly a private matter (and

70

another's supposedly unconscious motivescharacterized youth of previous generations, as did selfexperiments with hypnosis even in the 19th century.

be expected. All the crises of adolescence 72the
fluidity, shift of primal objects, narcissism, somatic

changes, inexperience, and identity issuesplay
into the drug-taking culture.
Of the college users I have studied, a "need to

feel"to gain access to themselves and others--a
pervasive sense of being constricted seem charac-

teristic. In a recent report of a group in which
Rorschach and other studies were available, this
theme dominated even though outcomes sharply
differed: these ranged from psychosis, to instability,
to a reaction of bemused enlightenment :fa One
wonders whether the consequences of a "boundary-

less" or destructively permissive upbringing leads
to a lack of distinctions, a deficient recognition of
self-experience especially when drugs or authoritarianism (masked as rebellion) are common ways
to achieve feeling and a sense of distinctiveness.
Some college students dearly tried the drug as

part of clique activity; taking the drug puts the
student one-up--he has "been there." This is a challenge evoking interest among friends and can provide the basis for a loose group cohesion. For this

group, magical transformation of reality, omniscient union rather than painful confrontation of
separateness and effort is a lure. Old limits can be

dissolved andwith a single gulpphilosophical

infants are transformed into sages. The frustration
of years of inexper'ence are replaced by an intense
arcane experience; it is as if the secrets of the parental bedroom are instantly transcended by the mys-

teries of the drug! The tables are turned as the

young turn on; now it is the parents who stand by
in perplexed, uncomprehending, and fascinated
impotence.
Others sincerely feel they should confront an ex-

perience advertised to be so important. They can
be dared by accounts of pleasant or assertedly profound experiences. They see the drug as an emotional fitness test, somewhat analogous to physical
fitness. The issue for many is "control." They experiment with the right to drink and test their ability to stop. At this age they are doing the same

often with cigarette smoking, studying, or with masturbation. In general, they are rehearsing their

strength and autonomy at a time when their lives
are largely unwritten. Many behaviours of this age
constitute a probing for consequencesan impatient attempt to leap the barriers of time, to come
to grips with life and seize the fruits and risks prom-

ised in the future, the threshold of which is now
just barely visible. This underlies many of the

grimmer statistics of the 18 to 25 age group, includ-

ing accidents and suicide. One wonders if these
represent the inevitable costs of learning the lesson
of consequences, of limits, of mortality.
Summary and Conclusions

With respect to the LSD experience, we know
that many serious persons have reported some
transient or even long-term value in it. There is
some objective evidence that aesthetic appreciation
can be enhanced; eg, an LSD group bought significantly more records for a period of six months.'*
If, though, we search for major productions of art,
letters, music, or visionary insight few clear-cut
monuments to the drug are available. Related to
creativity, the effects of the drug do not seem to
have compelled it. Huxley's greatest output preceded his mescaline states; he thereafter, as I read
him, tended to write about drugs, not to create with

them. If we ask whether there have been cultures
which have eradicated mental disorders and disease
with these drugs, or groups which have seen the
dissolution of deviant behavior, we find some slight
association but no clear-cut overall differences that
I know of in the general titer of human misery. In

chemicals could have attained some spiritual equilibrium seems apparent, but whether no alternative
means exist within a culture is another question.

That startling examples of new learning or even

conversion can occur cannot be denied; but that we
can as yet control and systematically reinforce druginduced insights is uncertain.
We must ask whether a stable person is really
under sufficient control of his motives and shifting

circumstances let alone the dosage to take these
drugs as a civil right for whatever personal reasons
he wishes:15 If so, who has to care for the consequences of his misjudgments? How can the stability
of religious custom protect drug-takers who have
little authentic orientation to religion and unstable
groups and barely reliable leaders upon whom to
lean. If we learn from the effects of drugs on much
simpler biological systems, some side effects of any
chemical cannot be avoided. Few of the advocates
of unsupervised use seem to appreciate how difficult
it often is to assess risk and value in drug administrationeven in the best practice of medicine and
psychiatry.

We should not forget to assess the cost of sustained euphoria or of pleasure states. We can seriously wonder if man is built to endure more than
a brief chemically induced glimpse of paradise.
Many authors have stressed that we are endowed
with mechanisms with which to filter input and
structure and use the fluid and irrational components of behavior. Heinrich Kltiver 76 concluded his
systematic and pioneering series of neuropsychological studies of mescaline with speculations about
the drug's differential action on those vast subcortical areas characterized by emotionality and varia-

bility and those anchoring sensory-motor systems
which aid in constancy. The question is perhaps
not so much "expanding" the mindit is expanded

enoughbut to see if there are drugs (or developmental experiences) which can enhance a better
and more creative coordination among these socalled regions.
Thus etched upon the variabilities of culture and

personality are drugs with a certain skew toward
that mystical realm of the mind which knows both
psychosis and religion, both heightened and useful
self-insight and impaired and distorted judgment
about both the drugged and everyday world. Perhaps similarities and differences of these various
chemicals and their effects couldif analyzed23
reveal means for finer control of these experiences

at least in terms of their intensities. The possibil-

associated with some form of psychosocial depriva-

ity or impossibility of such manipulations are questions of basic importance to our notions of how

tionan equivalent form of which is marked privilege (as in Brahmins and college students) . That
private satisfactions might have been achieved,
that groups with the presence of these plants and

In general, then, it seems that we have been more

fact, the extensive use of these drugs is often

neurobehavioral mechanisms are intrinsically related and the extent and means by which they can
selectively be dissociated and controlled.17,77,78

71

awed than aided by our experience with these
drugs. They still remain agents which reveal but
do not chart the mental regions; to do that we must

employ our mental faculties available in the undrugged state. Accordingly we should do better
than simply be amazed, repeating thereby the ontogeny of past encounters with mind revealing
drugs. With these drugs we could learn to analyze
how behavior is organized, disrupted, and influenced and see what nature can teach us about the
ways in which the chemical organization of the
brain is related to the dimensions of experiencing
and behaving which compriseto use an archaic
termthe study of the mind.

This is an expanded version of a lecture given at the
Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, June 6, 1967.
It is a revision of a paper, "Perspectives on the Use and
Abuse of Psychedelic Drugs," published in Ethnopharmacologic Scgrch for Psychoactive Drugs, D. H. Efron (editor-inchief) , US Departmels: of Health, Education, and Welfare,
Public Health Service Publication No. 1645, 1967, with the
permission of the editors. Sections on the Definition of a
"Psychedelic" Dimension, Model Psychosis, and the Scope of
Contemporary Problems have been extensively revised and
that on Inherent Problems in Ethnopsychopharmacology ond
the Use and Abuse of Conversion omitted. Work with the
drug in man and animal over the past ten years has been
supported by Public Health Service grants MH-03363, 13186,
and Career Investigator Awards M-1204 and K3-18566.

References
1. Barron, F.; Jarvik, M.E.; and Bunnell, S., Jr.: Hallucinogenic Drugs, Sci Amer 210:29-37, 1964.

2. Aber le, D.F.: The Peyote Religion Among the Navaho,
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1966.

3. Abramson, H.A. (ed.): The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co., Inc.,
1967.

4. Chandler, A.L., and Hartman, M.A.: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25) as a Facilitating Agent in Psychotherapy, Arch Gen Psychiat 2:286-299, 1960.

5. Chwelos, N., et al: Use of D-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in the Treatment of Alcoholism, Quart J Stud Alcohol
20:577-590, 1959.

6. Leary, T., and Alpert, R.: The Politics of Consciousness Expansion, Harvard Review, 1 (No. 4) :33-37, 1963.
7. Ling, T.M., and Buckman, J.: Lysergic Acid and. Rita lin

in the Treatment of Neurosis, London: Lambarde Press,
1963.

8. MacLean, J.R., et al: The Use of LSD-25 in the Treatment of Alcoholism and Other Psychiatric Problems, Quart

17. Freedman, D.X.: "Aspects of the Biochemical Pharmacology of Psychotropic Drugs," in Solomon, P. (ed) : Psychiatric Drugs, New York: Grune & Stratton, Inc., 1966.
18. Freedman, D.X., and Aghajanian, GA.: Approaches to
the Pharmacology of LSD-25, Lloydia 29 (No. 4):309-314,
1966.

19. Giarman, N.J., and Freedman, D.X.: Biochemical Aspects of the Actions of Psychotomimetic Drugs, Pharmacol
Rev 17:1-25, 1965.

20. Bowers, M.B.; Goodman, E.; and Sim, V.: Some Behavioral Effects in Man Following Anticholinesterase Administration, J New Ment Dis 138:383-389, 1964.
21. Lebovits, B.Z.; Visotsky, H.M.; and Ostfeld, A.M.: LSD

and JB 318: A Comparison of Two Hallucinogens: Part III.
Arch Gen Psychiat 7:39-45, 1962.

22. Wilson, LE., and Shagass, C.: Comparison of Two
Drugs With Psychotomimetic Effects (LSD and Ditran) , I
New Ment Dis 138 (No. 3):277-286, 1964.

23. Snyder, S.H., and Merrill, C.G.: A Relationship Between

the Hallucinogenic Activity of Drugs and Their Electronic

Stud Alcohol 22:34-45, 1961.

Configuration, Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 54:258-266, 1965.

9. Sandison, RA.; Spencer, A.M.; and White law, J.D.A.:

24. Stumpf, W.E., and Roth, 14.: "Dry-Mounting HighResolution Autoradiography," in Roth, L.J. (ed.): Isotopes
in Experimental Pharmacology, Chicago: University of Chi-

The Therapeutic Value of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in
Mental Illness, J Ment Sci 100:491-507, 1954.

10. Savage, C.; Terrill, J.; and Jackson, D.D.: LSD, Tran-

scendence and the New Beginning, J New Ment Dis 135:
425 - 439,1962.

11. Shorvon, H.M.: "Abreaction and Brain," in Crockett, R.,

et al (eds.) : Hallucinogenic Drugs and Their Psychotherapeutic Use: Proceedings of the Royal Medico-Psychological
Association, London: H.K. Lewis k Co., Ltd., 1963, pp 74-78.

12. Smith, C.M.: A New Adjunct to the Treatment of Alcoholism: The Hallucinogenic Drugs, Quart J Stud Alcohol
19:406-417, 1958.

cago Press, 1965, pp 133-143.

25. James, W.: Varieties of Religious Experience, New
York: Longmans, Green & Co., Ltd., 1916.

26. Prince, R., and Savage, C.: Mystical States and the Concept of Regression, Psychedelic Rev, No. 8, pp 59-65, 1966.
27. Salvatore, S., and Hyde, R.W.: Progression of Effects of
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) , Arch Neurol Psychiat 76:
50-59, 1956.

28. Freedman, D.X.; Aghajanian, G.K.; and Coquet, CA.:
Effect of Reserpine on Plasma Binding and Brain Uptake of

13. McGlothlin, W.H.: Hallucinogenic Drugs: A Perspective With Special References to Peyote and Cannabis, Psyche-

LSD-25, Fed Proc 23:147, 1964.

delic R Ira, No. 6, pp 16- 57,1965.

Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in the Plasma of Human Subject,
Clin Pharmacol Therap 5:611-614, 1964.
30. Freedman, D.X . et al: Tolerance to the Behavioral Effects of LSD-25 in Rat, J Pharmacol Exp Therap 143:309-313,

14. llenabud, A.: Psycho-Pathological Aspects of the Cannabis Situation in Morocco: Statistical Data for 1956, Bull
Narcotics 9 (No. 4) :1-16, 1957.

15. Chopra, R.N., and Chopra, I.C.: Treatment of Drug
Addiction: Experience in India, Bull Narcotics 9 (No. 4) :2133, 1957.

16. Bowers, M.B., and Freedman, DX.: "Psychedelic" Experiences in Acute Psychoses, Arch Gen Psychiat 15:240-248,
1966.

72

29. Aghajanian, G.K., and Bing, O.H.L.: Persistence of

1964.

31. Koetla, W.P.; Beaulien, R.F.; and Bergen, J.R.: Stereotyped Behavior Cyclic Changes in Response Produced by LSD
in Goats, /nt I Neuropharmacol 3:397-403, 1964.

32. Gordon, N.: The Hallucinogenic Drug Cult, Reporter,
Aug. 15, 1963.

33. Spindler, G.: Personality of Peyotism in Menomini In-

56. Grinker, R.R., Sr.: Bootlegged Ecstasy, JAMA 187:768,

dian Acculturation, Psychiatry 15:151-159, 1952.

1964.

34. Bradley, P.B., and Elkes, J.: The Effect of Some Drugs
on the Electrical Activity of the Brain, Brain 80:77-117, 195'7.

57. Ludwig, A.M., and Levine, J.: "Hypnodelic Therapy,"
in Masserman, J. (ed.): Current Psychiatric Therapies, New
York: Grune & Stratton, Inc., 1967, vol 7, pp 130-141.
58. Frank, J.D.: Persuasion and Healing, Baltimore: Johns

35. Bradley, P.B., and Key, BJ.: The Effect of Drugs on
Arousal Responses Produced by Electrical Stimulation of the
Reticular Formation of the Brain, Electroenceph Clin Neurophysiol 10:97-110, 1958.

36. Key, BJ., and Bradley, P.B.: Effect of Drugs on Condi-

tioning and Habituation to Arousal Stimuli in Animals,
Nature 182:1517-1519, 1958.

37. Krus, D., and Wapner, S.: Effect of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25) on Perception of Part-Whole Relationships, J Psychol 48:87-95, 1959.

38. Becker, D.I.; Appel, J.B.; and Freedman, D.X.: Some
Effects of LSD on Visual Discrimination in Pigeons, Psychopharmacologia 11:354-364, 1967.

39. Kohut, H.: Forms and Transformations of Narcissism,
I Amer Psychoanal Assoc 14(No. 2):243-272, 1966.

40. Freud, S.: An Outline of Psychoanalysis, Nev: York:
W.W. Norton & Co., Inc., 1949.

41. Keeler, M.H.: The Effects of Psilocybin on a Test of
::mage Perception, Psychopharmacologia 8:131-139, 1965.
.1.2. Silverman, J.: Variations in Cognitive Control and Psychophysiological Defense in the Schizophrenias, Psychosom
Med 29:225-251, 1967.

43. Wiener, H.: External Chemical Messengers: III. Mind
and Body in Schizophrenia, New York J Med 67:1287, 1967.
44. Leuner, H.: "Present State of Psycholytic Therapy and

Its Pouibilities," in Abramson, H.A. (ed.): The Use of LSD
in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co., Inc., 1967, pp 101-116.

45. Pious, W.: "A Hypothesis About the Nature of Schizophrenic Behavior," in Burton A. (ed.): Psychotherapy of the
Psychoses, New York: Basic Books, Inc., Publishers, 1961.

46. Redlich, F.C., and Freedman, D.X.: The Theory and
Practice of Psychiatry, New York: Basic Books Inc., Publishers, 1966.

47. Maslow, A.H.: Toward a Psychology of Being, New
York: D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., 1962.
48. Lidz, T.; Fleck, S.; and Cornelison, A.R.: Schizophrenia

and the Family, New York: International Universities Press,
Inc., 1965.

49. Cohen, S.: The Beyond Within, New York: Atheneum
Publishers, 1964.

50. Rosenthal, S.H.: Persistent Hallucinosis Following Re-

peated Administration of Hallucinogenic Drugs, Amer I
Psychiat 121:238-244, 1964.

51. Loewald, H.: Hypnoid States-Repression, Abreaction,
and Recollection, I Amer Psychoanal Assoc 3:201-210, 1955.
52. Clark, W.H.: The Psychology of Religion, New York:
Macmillan Co., Publishers, 1958.

53. Tenenbaum, B.: Group Therapy With LSD-25, Dis
New Syst 22:459-462, 1961.

54. Lennard, H.: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25):
XII. A Preliminary Statement of Its Effects Upon Interpersonal Communication, I Psychol 41:186-198, 1956.
55. Cole, J.0., and Katz, M.M.: The Psychotomimetic Drugs:
An Overview, JAMA 187:758-761, 1964.

Hopkins Press, 1961.

59. Laing, RD.: Transcendental Experience in Relation to
Religion and Psychosis, Psychedelic Rev 6:7-15, 1965.

60. Adey, W.R.; Porter, R.; and Walter, D.O.: Prolonged
Effects of LSD on EEG Records During Discrimination Performance in Cat: Evaluation by Computer Analysis, Electroenceph Clin Neurophysiol 18:25-35, 1965.
61. Cohen, S.: A Classification of LSD Complications, Psychosomatics, 7:182-186, 1966.

62. Cohen, S., and Ditman, K.S.: Prolonged Adverse Reactions to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, Arch Gen Psychiat 8:
475-480, 1963.

63. Fink, M., et al: Prolonged Adverse Reactions in LSD in
Psychotic Subjects, Arch Gen Psychiat 15:450 -454, 1966.

64. Frosch, W.A.; Robbins, E.S.; and Stern, M.: Untoward
Reactions to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) Resulting in
Hospitalization, New Eng I Med 273:1235-1239, 1965.

65. Klee, G.D., and Weintraub, W.: "Paranoid Reactions
Following Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25)," in Bradley, P.B. (ed.): Neuro-psychopharmacology, Princeton, NJ.:
Elsevier Publishing Co., 1959, pp 457-460.

66. Ludwig, A.M., and Levine, J.: Patterns of Hallucinogenic Drug Abuse, JAMA 191:92-96 (Jan 11) 1965.

67. UngerlPider, J.T.; Fisher, D.D.; and Fuller, M.: The
Dangers or 0: Analysis of Seven Months' Experience in a
University aospital's Psychiatric Service, JAMA 197:389-392,
1966.

68. Eggert, D.C., and Shagass, C.: Clinical Prediction of
Insightful Response to a Single Large Dose of LSD, Psychopharmacologia 9:340-346, 1966.

69. Pauk, Z., and Shagass, C.: Some Test Findings Associated With Susceptibility to Psychosis Induced by Lysergic
Acid Diethylamide, Comp Psychiat 2:188-195, 1961.
70. Ellis, H.: Mescal: A New Artificial Paradise, Contemporary Rev 73:130-141, 1898.

71. Paradise or Inferno? editorial, Brit Med J 1898 (pt 1)
p 390.

72. Blos, P.: On Adolescence, New York: The Free Press of
Glencoe, Inc., 1962.
73. Bowers, M., et al: Dynamics of Psychedelic Drug Abuse:

A Clinical Study, Arch Gen Psychiat 16:560-566, 1967.

74. McGlothlin, W.H.; Cohen, S.; and McGlothlin, MS.:
Short-Term Effects of LSD on Anxiety, Attitudes and Performance, I New Ment Dis 1967, to be published.
75. Scher, J.: Patterns and Profiles of Addiction and Drug
Abuse, Arch Gen Psychiat 15:539-551, 1966.
76. Kliiver, H.: Mescal and Mechanisms of Hallucinations,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966.

77. Rosenbaum, G., et al: Comparison of Sernyl With
Other Drugs, Arch Gen Psychiat. 1:651-656, 1959.

78. Elkes, J.: "Psychoactive Drugs: Some Problems and
Approaches," in Solomon, P. (ed.): Psychiatric Drugs, New
York: Grune & Stratton Inc., 1966.

73

Patterns of Response to Self Administration of LSD
WILLIAM A. FROSCH, M.D.

Authors of magazine articles and popular books
about LSD have, until very recently, heralded primarily its beneficial effects. They have stressed its
capacity to "expand the consciousness" and to open
the way to greater self understanding, increased artistic powers, and in general to a richer, fuller life!
(1) . This popularization of the drug has resulted
in widespread, indiscriminate self-administration of
illegally obtained compounds reputed to be LSD.
The increasing popularity of the drug and the avidity with which it is now used would appear to be
a testimonial to the hopes and expections of the
takers.

This situation is reminiscent in some ways of
what happened to Alice in Wonderland (2) :
By this time she had found her way into a tidy
little room with a table in the window, and on
it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three
pairs of tiny white kid gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon
a little bottle that stood near the looking-glass.
There was no label this time with the words
"DRINK ME," but nevertheless she uncorked

it and put it to her lips. "I know something
interesting is sure to happen," she said to herself, "whenever I eat or drink anything: so I'll
just see what this bottle does. I do hope it'll
make me grow large again, for really I'm quite
tired of being such a tiny little thing!"
Such curiosity sometimes has unfortunate results.
In experimental work with LSD there has usually
been careful screening of subjects to exclude those
The author is with the Department of Psychiatry, New
York University School of Medicine and the Bellevue Psychiatric Hospital, 550 First Avenue, New York, New York.

Portions of this work were done in collaboration with
Edwin S. Robbins, M.D., Marvin Stern, M.D. and Moya M.
Groeschel, M.S.W. The author would also like to express his

thanks for the technical assistance of Paula Frosch and
Joan Gertz and for the thoughtful criticism of Murray Alpert, Ph.D.
This work was supported by Public Health Service Grants

MH-08618 and MH-04669 from the National Institute of
Mental Health.
Presented at the 5th Annual Meeting of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology, Puerto Rico, December 7,
1966.

74

with unstable or psychotic personalities. In addition, the conditions of an experiment minimize the
likelihood of bad reactions, such as panic or more
prolonged complications. There has been careful
supervision of the experimental subjects and
prompt psychiatric intervention when indicated.
Despite this, there are a number of reports in the
literature of brief or more prolonged adverse reactions occurring as a result of an LSD experience
during the course of an experiment. The incidence
of these appears to be quite low; certainly consider-

ably less than 1 percent (3) .
Less is known, however, of the incidence of adverse reactions in settings where there is no screening or supervision. The only two incidence figures
are those provided by Blum (4) and by Fink (5) .
Blum's data suggests a minimal hospitalized psychosis rate of 2 percent and indicates that the overall psychosis rate may be as high as 3.3 percent.
These figures are based on a population of 300 who
received LSD under institutional auspices. Two of
these were LSD institutions per se. Fink, in a recently published study, reports that 2 percent of
psychotics who are given LSD have prolonged adverse reactions. He feels these are separate from the
ongoing psychotic process. They were related very

specifically to the ingestion of LSD and showed
characteristic clinical findings, different from the
classical symptomatology of schizophrenia. After an

initial period of confusion, they showed an exaggerated emotional and affective lability.
During the past two years, there have been an
estimated 200 admissions to the Bellevue Psychiatric Hospital directly resulting from ingestion of
LSD. This number does not include those who give

a history of having taken LSD but who are admitted for other reasons. We would estimate, based
upon a recent survey, that 5 percent of the Bellevue
Psychiatric Hospital admissions have had at least

one experience with LSD. Our data suggests that
this is almost unheard of in the general hospital
population. Of the psychiatric patients who have
used LSD, 15 to 20 percent were admitted as a di-

rect result of the LSD experience. Thus the incidence of LSD use as a cause for admission is a
little less than 1 percent.

Of this large group of admissions, we have most
carefully studied three samples of LSD users. These
were the first 12 2atients admitted to the hospital
early in 1965 (6) , the first 22 successive admissions
in 1966 (7) , and the most recent 23 admissions.

groups over 30. There were almost as many women

as men. This sex distribution differs significantly
from that reported in most other addiction problems, such as with the opiates or with alcohol. Although less than 10 percent of the LSD takers were
married at the time of admission this may be primarily a function of their relative youth. In contrast
to the Bellevue Psymiatric Hospital population
there were almost no Negroes or Puerto Ricans in
this group. In striking contrast to both the Bellevue
population and the public stereotype of the drug

The first two samples included only patients admitted as a direct result of LSD ingestion, the last
sample induded all patients we were able to find in
the hospital who had taken LSD. The age, sex, mar-

ital status and race of the samples are shown in
Table 1. The three samples, taken at different times,

addict, they tended to come from a middle and

are remarkably similar to each other. The median
age is 22; there were almost no patients in these

upper socio-economic group.

Table 1.VITAL STATISTICS OF LSD USERS ADMITTED TO BELLEVUE PSYCHIATRIC nownAL

dek I

mp
Early MS

Semple U
Early 1111

Semple M

Late NU

Combined

21

22
16
33

15

N=U

2f = 22

24 = 12

24 = 17

Agein years
median
range

23
32

18

N

Sea

male
female

I

7
5

Marital Status
married
unmarried

43

15

%

N

58
42

11

1

11

22
43

%

N

%

N

%

50
50

14

61

9

39

32
25

56
44

5
52

91

1

6

2

9

2

9

11

92

20

91

21

92

white

12

100

21

88

0
0

0
0

1

96
4

20

negro

2

0

0

$
4

9

Race

oriental

=

1

I

53
3

93

1

2

5

level of 100) before ingestion resulted in hospitalization. Of the third sample, which includes all patients in the hospital who had taken LSD, seven took
the drug mdy once before hospitalization.

Table 2 presents the number of times that LSD
was taken by these patients. This ranges from a
single experience resulting in hospitalization to
claims of several hundred experiences (coded to top

Table 2,NUMBER OP TIMES LID WAS TAKEN

firetiefriri Dees

15

6

10

11 30
31

100

Ilemple I
Early MI5
N = 12
N
4d,
8
2
1
1

I

Combined

N

%

N

46

13

56

31

54

9

3

7

13

4

27

3

13
17
13

12
16
18

67

10

17

2
4
6

8
8

lample M
Late WU
24 = 13

DiliII

Early 13U
N=n
N
lb
I

24 = 17

9
10

;

%

We are able to say little about the dosage of LSD

had previously taken marijuana. Almost all had ex-

taken by these patients. It was usually taken as a
sugar cube impregnated with the drug. The users'

perimented with amphetamines or another of the
stimulant drugs. In addition, many had taken barbiturates and one of the opiate derivatives. They
appeared to use drugs in an attempt to embrace
life rather than to get away from it. Drugs gave
them a sense of liberation from conventional culture and a feeling of having undergone genuine

estimates of the amount ingested have ranged
from 100 to 5,400 micrograms. Most patients
claimed to have taken 400 to 600 micrograms each
time. However, without chemical identification we

are unable to be sure that they have actually ingested LSD.
Almost all of the patients who had ingested LSD

experiences.

Although LSD is publicized for its beneficial ef75

fects, a surprisingly small number of our LSD takers
said they took the drug primarily for these benefits.

Only two of our first 34 patients took LSD to
achieve personality improvement via psychedelic
experience. Fourteen sought "kicks" or "highs."
The rest, although primarily interested in excitement or companionship, said they would not have
minded being helped psychologically in addition to
achieving an experience. Almost all of these patients had some degree of personality disorder before taking the drug.
Syndromes

Although the patients were admitted for a variety
of reasons, it is useful to distinguish three somewhat

overlapping categories. We have previously described these as panic reactions, reappearance of
drug symptoms without reingestion of the drug,
and overt, prolonged psychosis. Cohen (8) has sug-

gested a somewhat more complex classification,
with major classifications of psychotic disorders,
nonpsychotic disorders, and neurologic complications. We would, at this time, suggest a classification of acute reactions; recurrent reactions, in which

there is a return of symptoms without reingestion
of the drug; and prolonged reactions.
Table 3 is a compilation of the number of patients with each of these syndromes in our first two
samples. There were no significant differences benveen the patients in each of the classifications with

regard to any of the patient characteristics previously described. A number of the patients first
appeared with acute reactions and later returned
to the hospital because of recurrent drug symptoms
without reingestion of the drug. This accounts for
the number of reactions being larger than the N of
the sample.
Table S.NUMBER Of PATIZNTS HAVING EACH TYPE
OF RESPONSE
I

Early 1N11

Sample n
Early INS

7

II

3
3

S

Simple I

N = 12

N=n

Type of Reaction
Acute
Recurrent
Prolonged

8

Coselbisel

N = 24

N
Ill

II
II

%
33
33
33

ACUTE REACTIONS

The acute reactions arise with ingestion and are
short lived. They include psychotoxic and panic reactions. Fifty-three percent of the patients admitted
as a result of LSD ingestion presented with such
acute reactions.

Psychotoxic ReactionsThis group includes
those Cohen has labeled acute paranoid states as
76

well as patients who show evidence of confusion.
These are transient episodes not extending beyond
the period of activity of the drug and the symptoms appear to be dosely related to the direct ac-

tion of the drug. For example, in response to
grandiose or persecutory delusions the individual
may expose himself to danger. This was seen in
the case of a young man who thought he was invulnerable and walked up the center of 5th Avenue
against traffic. He was brought in by the police. In
other cases an individual may be unable to cope
with conflictual material that may appear under the
influence of LSD. A man in his mid-thirties took
LSD while mourning the recent death of his wife.
Under the influence of the drug he experienced unrealistic guilt about her death and the return of a
series of traumatic memories from his earlier life.
While under the influence of the drug, he sla.hed
his wrists. For both these patients lack of adequate
supervision during the period of drug action resulted in behavior which was dangerous to themselves or others. Those patients who show confusion

at the time of admission have only an indistinct
memory of their LSD experience.

Panic ReactionsPanic is often seen at some
stage of the LSD experience Whereas the sympwins in the psychotoxic reactions appear to be the
direct effects of the drug, panic appears to be the
response of the individual to the drug induced
symptoms. In our patient population, panic reactions occurred both in the novice taking his first
trip and in the more experienced drug user. The
patients present with overwhelming anxiety, fear of
going crazy, a sense of helplessness and loss of con-

trol. They are often afraid they will not return --)
their pre-drug state. Both the setting in which the
drug was taken and the psychological state of the
person at the time of ingestion were important in
precipitating panic A confused, chaotic or lonely
setting, or anxiety or depression at the time of taking the drug, are more likely to result in a panic
reaction. Some patients came to the hospital themselves seeking relief from their terror; others were
brought by friends who felt they could not control
the patient or could not prevent him from harming himself. One person cut his wrists in a suicide
attempt; another jumped or fell from a window.
A subgroup within the panic reactions consists of
those patients who have been given LSD without
their being aware of it. Under these circumstances
even those patients who have previously had LSD
may experience panic One patient expressed this
as, "Now I'm experiencing this without taking the
drug. I must really be going crazy." She then came
to the hospital.
Recovery from these acute psychotoxic and panic
states was rapid, usually within three days. In our
experience a supportive environment and a sympa-

thetic nurse are adequate for the treatment of these
patients. When these are available, medication has
not seemed necessary and we have hesitated to add

another variable to a drug induced state about
which we know so little.
RECURRENT REACTIONS

The spontaneous return of perceptual distortions
or feelings of depersonalization occurred in onethird of our patients. These were similar to those
previously experienced under the influence of LSD.
They occurred up to a year after the last previous

use of the drug without further ingestion of it.
They varied in length from a few seconds to 30

they had previously known. Feelings of terror were
rapidly replaced by ecstasy. In the isolation of the

transcendental state they believed that they had
achieved a resolution of their problems; they felt
they had achieved a new self. As the effects of the
drug wore off these patients were faced with the

problem of returning to the real world and accommodating to it. Conflict arose as they found
that their new understanding was not readily
grasped or responded to by others. Rather than
give tip their new self, the psychotic patients strove

to maimain their sense of uniqueness, and withdrew from the world. These reactions respond to
treatment as do similar reactions unrelated to LSD

minutes, from transient "aesthetic" experiences to
trancelike states occurring sufficiently often to interfere markedly with the individual's reality adap-

ingestion.

tation. Recurrence tended to appear in those
individuals who had been preoccupied with the

Many of our patients in each of these categories
showed a general alteration of values of the sort

effect of LSD upon them before the experience, and

that Cohen has included in his subgroups"dis-

who thought of it often. Although some patients

social reactions'' and "antisocial reactions." For example, many patients felt a lessening of ambition.

enjoyed their newly found "aesthetic" appreciation,
others became terrified when they became aware
that the symptoms were no longer dependent on
drug use or even dosely related to previous ingestions. It was our impression, and that of the patients, that recurrent symptoms were correlated with
periods of stress or anxiety. The frequency of their

appearance appears unaffected by the administration of phenothiazine compounds.
PROLONGED REACTIONS

One-third of our patients presented with prolonged reactions. These indude chronic anxiety
states and chronic psychotic states. Although sometimes descriptively identical with similar states (e.g.,
depression, schizophrenia) unrelated to the ingestion of LSD, these patients' symptomatology is most
often colored by the LSD experience. They show a
preponderance of visual phenomena, depersonalization, and body image distortions.
Chronic Anxiety StatesThese appear to be common and may be accompanied by depression, somatic symptoms, and difficulty in functioning.

However, the individual remains in contact with
his surroundings and reality testing is not grossly
impaired. In our experience these chronic anxiety
states may last many months and are relatively re-

sistant to the phenothiazine drugs and to other
medication, as well as not responding well to psychotherapy.
Psychotic StatesThree of the patients who developed extended psychoses were not felt to have
been psychotic prior to ingestion of LSD. The patients who did become psychotic had expected increased self understanding from taking LSD. They
considered the recent experiences to be more vivid
and of greater personal significance than anything

OTHER CHANGES

This was often accompanied by the formulation
that life is a game. Withdrawal from competition
and social interaction followed. To some a downward movement in the social scale was justified by
the insight and empathy they felt they had derived
from taking LSD.

Despite their unfortunate experiences with the
drug, nearly 40 percent of the patients claimed beneficial effect from their transcendental experience;

however, 20 percent emphatically said they felt
worse after taking LSD. We were able to find no
objective evidenr- for such claims as "increased insight" or "greater love of fellow man." Most of the
women said they felt less social constraint after
taking LSD, one going so far as to change her occupation from office work to prostitution. In the literature on LSD the effects of the drug are described
in great detail, and in addition, communication between users further serves to disseminate knowledge
about typical reactions. It is difficult to find an un-

informed user. The role of anticipation and expectation

colors both the experience and its

interpretation and makes it difficult to evaluate
these claims.

Comparative Smve
A recent survey of 102 randomly selected psychia-

tric hospital admissions and 48 randomly selected
general hospital admissions may be used to compare these groups with the people who use LSD.
Table 4 presents the age, sex, marital status and
race of these groups as well as the combined LSD
group presented earlier.
The groups differ in a number of ways. It is dear
that those who use LSD are considerably younger
77

Table LDRUG USE HISTORY

Table ALMAL STATISTICS OF THREE PATIENT
SAMPLES
General
Hospital

N = 48

I

Prichiatric
Hospital
N = 102

N = 57
N = 48

Agein years
44

33

22

16-60

16-80

Sex

%

%

15 -43
%

male
female
Marital Status
single
married
Race
white
negro
other

73

55
45

56
44

82
18

91

median
range

General
Hospital

LSD

Users

27
71

29
62
33

4

60
37
3

9
93
6
2

than the other hospital populations studied. There
is a preponderance of whites among the LSD users.
Although not induded in this table, it should also
be noted that in marked contrast to the Bellevue
population there were no LSD users who had been
born in Puerto Rico. The psychiatric hospital population and the LSD users had the same percentage
of men and women. In contrast to the other Bellevue Hospital samples the LSD users tended to come
from middle and upper socio-economic groups.
These last two are in striking contrast to the usual
stereotype of the drug addict as a male from the
lower socio-economic group.

Table 5 is a summary of the drug histories of
these populations. The randomly selected psychiatric hospital sample has been divided into those
who have and those who have not used marijuana.
Analgesics and antacids are used primarily by the
general hospital population. Laxatives are used less
by those who take LSD. There appears to be little
difference in the use of alcohol and tobacco between
the various populations. There is a consistent increase in the use of stimulants, sedatives, narcotics,
marijuana and the major hallucinogens, as one proceeds from the general hospital population to the

psychiatric population who have not used marijuana, to those who have used marijuana; and finally to those who have taken LSD. This is most
striking for the stimulants. None of the general
hospital population had used them in contrast to
91 percent of those who had taken LSD. Almost

Psychiatric Hospital Population
without

marlins=
N = 72

Dr IWO

16

9h

Analgesia

73

64

Antacids
Laxatives
Alcohol
Tobacco
Stimulants
Sedatives
Narcotics
Marijuana
LSD and
Mescaline

60
33

21

71

17

83
78
10
25

6

4

77

0

44

10

0

1

with
marijuana

N = 80
lh
53
37
43
90
83
47
43
43
100
16

LSD

U
N --=2$

43

26
17

74
83
91
65
47

96
100

If one examines the drug histories of those who
have utilized marijuana or LSD, it is different from
the usual stereotype of the drug addict. The classic
drug addict is reported to utilize opiates exclusively

or with occasional use of barbiturates as substi-

tutes. The hallucinogen user is the drug equivalent
of polymorphous perverse. He is drawn to experiment with ary drug which has major central nervous system effects.

Conclusions

1. The patients admitted to the hospital with a history of ingestion of LSD appear to be a population
significantly different from both the general hospital and psychiatric hospital population. They also
differ from the classically described opiate addict
or alcoholic. The composite LSD taker admitted to
the hospital might be described as a 22-year-old
white man or woman with one year of relatively unsuccessful college work. He is likely to have come
from a lower middle dass family and to have some
history of rebellion against family norms. He has

taken LSD for "kicks" or experience rather than
for self-improvement. He will previously have ex-

perimented with marijuana, amphetamines, and

the 30 percent of the psychiatric hospital popula-

perhaps a barbiturate or an opiate.
2. These patients present with one of a variety of
syndromes of an acute, recurrent or chronic sort.
3. Although some of these patients claim subjective improvement as a result of their drug use, there
has been no objective evidence of this change in
our selected sample of patients hospitalized for ingestion of LSD.
Our continuing evaluation of the results of taking LSD substantiates our earlier impression that it
is a potentially dangerous drug when self administered. Because these are clinical observations rather
than well controlled experiments, we have little information about these patients' predrug state. The

tion who had used it had done so on many

changes we observed may represent the natural

occasions.

course of an ongoing neurotic or psychotic process.

one-half of the hospitalized patients who used marijuana or LSD also had used one of the opiate derivatives. The difference in marijuana use by the general hospital and psychiatric hospital populations is
greater than appears in the table. Of the 10 percent
of the general hospital population who used marijuana, most had used it only once or twice. Most of

78

However, LSD appears to be implicated for several
reasons: (a) We have reasonable evidence that they
actually took the drug; (b) it seems to have played

at least a precipitating role in their admission to

the hospital; and (c) the drug experience appears
to have colored their ongoing psychiatric difficulties. The exact nature of the relationship between
the drug and the reaction remains to be explored.

References
1. Cole, J.0., and Katz, M.M. The psychotomimetic drugs,
an overview. Journal of American Medical Association, 187:

adverse reactions to LSD in psychotic subjects. Archives of

182-185, 1964.

6. Frosch, WA.; Robbins, ES.; and Stern, M. Untoward
reactions to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) resulting in
hospitalization. New England Journal of Medicine, 273: 1235-

2. Carroll, L Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Chapt. IV.
3. Cohen, S. Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: side effects and
complications. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 130:
30-40, January 1960.

4. Blum, R.N., ed. Utopiates, and the Use and Users of
LSD-25. New York: Atherton Press, 1964.

5. Fink, M.; Simeon, J.; Hague, W.; and Itil, T. Prolonged

General Psychiatry, 15:450-454, 1966.

1239, 1965.

7. Robbins, E.; Frosch, WA.; and Stern, M. Further observations on untoward reactions to LSD. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 124:393-395, September 1967.

8. Cohen, S. A classification of LSD complications. Psychosomatics, 7:182-186, May-June 1966.

79

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE, Vol. 145, No. 6, pp. 464- 174,1968

Copyright 1968, The Williams

Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Maryland 21202, U.S.A.

Harmful Aspects of The LSD Experience
KEITH S. DITMAN, M.D.,1 WALTER TIETZ, M.D.,2 BLANCHE S. PRINCE,
M.S.W.,3 EDWARD FORGY, PH.D.3 AND THELMA MOSS, P.H.D.4

Why is it that some people, sometimes after only
one lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) experience,
become victims of depression, paranoia, psychosis
and even suicide, whereas others, even after numerous LSD sessions, appear to suffer no ill effects but
often even claim substantial benefits in personal insights, functioning and creativity? Prolonged adverse reactions to LSD usage have been reported

and dassified by Cohen and Ditman (4) , more
recently by Frosch et al. (8) and by Ungerleider

I

and Fisher (13) . Conversely, there has been considerable interest in the use of LSD as an adjunct
to psychotherapy and as a means to further creativity (1, 2, 5, 12) .5 How can this apparent paradox be explained?
It occurred to the authors that an understanding
might be found by exploring the nature of the drug
experience in those people who suffered ill effects
from their LSD sessions and comparing it with
that of those people who daimed no harm. To this
purpose, a standard card sort of 156 items descriptive of the LSD experience, a number that allows
that experience to be evaluated quantitatively, was
retrospectively administered to LSD users who required psychiatric care (either hospitalization or

outpatient treatment) and to a number of other
users of the drug who (lid not require treatment.
Procedure
SUBJECT'S AND GROUPS

We selected subjects who had reported taking
LSD one or more times and were willing to be interviewed for pertinent biographical data and then
be administered the card sort, as a means of describing their drug experience (s) . In all, 116 subjects participated in the study, all of whom were
80

seen by trained interviewers who obtained the
needed biographical information and administered
the card sort. There were 98 men and 18 women,
ranging in age from 15 to 47. Occupations varied
from unskilled laborer, student, housewife, artist,

to professional people. The number of times the
drug was taken ranged from once to well over 100
times for an individual. The dosage reported varied
from 75 to 1500 pg, but the dosage can be considered as only a poor approximation, since the drug
was usually obtained from illicit sources. However,
our experience with controlled dosage studies leads
us to believe that these subjects ingested enough of
the drug to have a "massive LSD alteration of consciousness."

Subjects were divided into the following 3

groups:

Group I: The largest in number, this group consisted of 52 persons, none of whom needed psychiatric care because of his LSD experience (s). This
group is of considerable interest, because the great
'Department of Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine;
Brain Research Institute, Los Angeles, California; Vista Hill
Psychiatric Foundation, San Diego, California.
This research was supported by a grant-in-aid from Wyeth
Laboratories; by the Alcoholism Research Clinic, Department
of Psychiatry, UCLA, which is supported by a grant from the
State of California Department of Public Health, Division of
Alcoholism; and by the Vista Hill Psychiatric Foundation,
San Diego, California. Computations were done at the Health
Sciences Computing Facility, UCLA, under the support of
MR Grant FR-3.
1 USC School of Medicine, Los Angeles County Hospital,
Los Angeles, California.

' Alcoholism Research Clinic, Department of Psychiatry,
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California.

Neuropsychiatric Institute, UCLA Center for the Health
Sciences, Los Angeles California.
3 Personal communication, S. Grof, 1965.

majority were functioning at the time of testing,
either at jobs or as students. In addition, many reported having had several drug experiences. This
group was recruited through a variety of community contacts, including students, patients, and colleagues.

Group II: This group consisted of 27 subjects
who applied privately or to clinics for psychiatric
outpatient care, apparently as a result of their LSD
experiences. Here, too, the majority were employed

aesthetic appreciation (20 items) ; 3) mystical and
paranormal sensations (14 items) ; 4) empathy (6
items) ; 5) religious feelings (7 items) ; 6) unusual
body sensations and perceptions, not unpleasant
(33 items) ; 7) somatic discomfort (1.2 items) ; 8)
depression (7 items) ; 9) paranoia (6 items) ; 10)
anxiety (19 items) ; 11) hallucinations (6 items) ;
and 12) evaluation of the experience (9 items) .
The DWM card sort, with its 156 items listed
under 12 categories, is furnished in Appendix A.

at the time of testing, and reported multiple drug

Results

experiences.

Group III: This group consisted of 37 subjects
in psychiatric hospitals in the Los Angeles area,
where they had been hospitalized as a result of
their LSD sessions. Again, multiple LSD experiences were reported, but unlike groups I and II,
many of these subjects were unemployed.
TEST INSTRUMENTS

In the interview, biographical information regarding age, sex, education, employment, number
of LSD experiences, approximate dosages, and his-

tories of drug taking was obtained. The "DWM

card sort," containing 156 items descriptive of the
LSD experience, was originally designed and assessed by three investigators (Ditman, Whittlesey
and Moss (5, 6) ) over a period of 9 years. Originally over 300 items were compiled, which seemed
to exhaust descriptions of the LSD experience. This
original card sort had been administered to more
than 200 subjects, who were asked to rate each of
the items on a five-point scale, ranging from "very
much like the experience" to "very much unlike
the experience." Gradually those items which did
not seem relevant or did not evoke a differential
response were eliminated, and duplications were
dropped. The remaining 156 items were classified
into the following 12 categories: 1) strong pleasant
emotions (17 items) ; 2) self-understanding and

BIOGRAPHICAL DATA

Table 1 provides a comparison of the three
groups in relation to levels of functioning, frequency of LSD usage, and drug histories. SurpIisingly, frequency of LSD usage shows no significant
difference among groups: 35 percent of the subjects
in group I reported 25 or more sessions with LSD,
as against 38 percent in group III. And the percentage of subjects who reported taking the drug

only once is relatively small in all groupsfrom
25 percent in group I to 11 percent in group III.
Similarly, drug histories reveal almost parallel
percentages across groups. It is pertinent, if odd,
that there is a high percentage in all groups of
multi-drug users: 53 percent in group I, 67 percent in group II, and 63 percent ' group III. In
other words, over half the people in all groups (and

thus, in this population) reported casual to frequent usage of various drugs: stimulants, sedatives,

tranquilizers and hallucinogens. Apparently this
study sampled "the drug culture." However, it is
pertinent to point out that the only group reporting a history of "hard narcotics" usage is the hospitalized group, with 23 percent in that category so
reporting. We wonder whether the use of hard narcotics (or personality factors) contributed to their
hospitalization.

Table LCOMPARATIVE DATA ON GROUPS STUDIED

Levels of functioning

Working in jobs or as students
Unemployed
Unknown
LSD usage
1

session

2 to 24 sessions
25 or more sessions
Drug history
Only LSD

Marijuana and LSD
Multi-drug use
Narcotics use
Unknown

No Treatment
Group I

Outpatient

Hospitalised

(N = 52)

(N = 27)

(N = $7)

44 (88%)
6 (12%)
2

16 (62%)
10 (38%)

roup II

1

Group III

11

(39%)

17 (61%)
10

13 (25 %)
18 (35%)

5 (19%)

4 (11%)

16 (59%)

19 (51%)

18 (35%)

6 (22%)

14 (38%)

10 (20%)

0 (0%)

14 (27%)

27 (53%)

8 (33%)
16 (67%)

0 (0%)

0 (0%)

1

3

2 (5%)
3 (8%)
22 (63%)
8 (23%)
2

The difference between group I and group III is significant beyond .001 level.

81

Finally, the percentages of persons functioning at

work or as students decreases from 88 percent in

items in the depression category, five items significantly discriminated these groups:

group I to 39 percent in group III. A chi-square
test shows that this is a significant difference, well
beyond the .001 level of probability. Before drawing conclusions from these data, we should note
that the level of functioning was assessed just prior
to the interview or hospitalization and not before
the LSD experience (s) .

"I felt like committing suicide."
"I felt as if life had lost its meaning."
"Everything seemed hopeless."

"I had a feeling of complete despair."

"I felt that life was not worth
CARD SORT

living."

For purposes of evaluating the LSD experience
quantitatively, each of the 156 items of the card
sort was rated on a five-point scale, with the following numerical values: 1 = very much like the

experience; 2 = a little like the experience; 3 =
neither like nor unlike the experience; 4 = a little
unlike the experience; 5 = very much unlike the
experience. Each subject scored all of the items
from 1 to 5, according to his reported experience (s)
with the drug. For each of the three groups of sub-

jects, it was then possible to obtain the mean re-

(p < .01)

(p < .05)
(p < .05)

(p < .05)
(p < .05)

Furthermore, three of the six paranoia category
items distinguished the treatment groups from the
nontreatment group; groups II and III reported all
three items with greater intensity than did group I:

"At times I had the sensation of
someone spying into my mind."
"I felt that other people were influencing my thoughts."

"At times I felt as if I were being

(p < .05)

(p < .05)
(p < .05)

sponse for each item. One-way analysis of variance
was used to determine the specific significant differences which occurred in the nature of the LSD experiences, as described by the three groups.
The most relevant finding in the card sort analysis is that of the 16 items significant beyond the .01
level of probability, 10 items were characterized by
strongly disruptive emotions (see Table 2) . And on

Anxiety, depression, and paranoia were also reported with far greater intensity by the treatment
groups II and III than by the nontreatment group

all 10 of those items, subjects in groups II and III
all of whom required psychiatric care as a result of
their LSD experience (s) described significantly
more unpleasant emotional feelings in their drug
sessions than did those in group I, who required
no treatment after their LSD experiences.
In all, 41 items differentiated groups significantly
beyond the .05 level of confidence. Seven of these
items were from the anxiety category. They are:

emotions, experienced in a nonmedical and perhaps nonsupportive setting, might be presumed to

persecuted."

I. It might be interpreted, on the basis of these
findings, that the characteristics of the harmful LSD
experience include such specific concerns as imminent death, disgusting sexuality, permanent insanity, despair to the point of wishing for suicide, and
persecutory paranoid ideation. These devastating

precipitate the need for psychiatric treatment.
In contrast, these five items, which reflect a positive, beneficial experience, were reported more

strongly by the nontreatment group I than by
either of the other groups:

"I felt I might become permanently insane."
"I felt on the fringes of sheer
horror."
"I kept thinking terrible
thoughts."
"I became afraid I might die."
"Certain things did frighten me."
"I felt something dreadful was
about to happen."
"I was disgusted by some sexual
ideas that came to mind."

(p <.001)

(p <.01)
(p < .01)
(p < .01)

(p < .05)

(p < .05)
(p < .05)

In addition to these fears, treatment groups II
and III reported far greater intensity of feelings of
despair and hopelessness than did the nontreatment

group I. Surely it is pertinent that of the seven
82

"I am much more satisfied with
life in general now."
"I can remember very clearly
everything that happened during the experience."
"I have been greatly helped by the
experience."
"I would like to try this again."

"I felt more alert and alive than I
have in a long time."

(p < .01)

(p < .01)
(p < .01)

(p < .01)

(p < .05)

Generally, it might be concluded that the nontreatment group experienced more beneficial, constructive sessions than did the treatment groups.
Further analysis of the individual groups reveals
interesting differences between the outpatient group

Table 2.-ITEMS DIFFERENTIATING THE LSD EXPERIENCE
Rank
1

2

Statement No.

Statement

Probability

18
138

I felt I might become permanently insane.
There was humor and a jolly atmosphere.
I felt like committing suicide.
I feel as if I "missed the boat" or somehow failed to get out of the
experience what was potentially there.
I felt on the fringes of sheer horror.
I am more satisfied with life in general now.
I can remember very clearly everything that happened to me during the experience.
Certain things did frighten me.
I have been greatly helped by the experience.
I kept thinking terrible thoughts.
I would like to try this again.
This was like a bad (alcohol) hangover.
I felt something dreadful was about to happen.
I learned what it is like to be really dead.
Everything seemed too bright, too harsh, too loud.
I felt closer to God.
I felt as if life had lost its meaning.
The experience was nothing unusual.
I felt as if I were traveling in time.
Everything seemed hopeless.
One side of my body felt different from the other side.
I was disgusted by some sexual ideas that came to mind.
I had a feeling of complete despair.
I saw myself as I really am, and I did not like what I saw.
I became afraid I might die.
At times I had the sensation of someone spying into my mind.
Words had strange new meanings.
I felt supremely happy.

< .001
< .001
< .01
< .01

4

99
70

5

7

6

33
53

3

7

8
9

75

10

76
78

11

133

12
13

47

14
15
16
17

106
137
159
109

18
19

141
101

20

124

21

34
88

22
23
24
25
26

31

153

36
59
39

27

144

28
29

4
86

30

61

31

6

32

108

33
34
35

29
74
119

36
37
38

69
80
44

39

72

40

90
46

I felt that other people were influencing my thoughts against my
will.

41

I felt that life was not worth living.
I felt more alert and alive than I have in a long time.
I felt as I do when I need a drink (alcohol) .
At times I felt as if I were being persecuted.
Hours went by like seconds-or one second seemed to last forever.

Everything seemed to have a place in life, even the "good" and
"bad."
It was an experience of great beauty.
I kept thinking of my problems.

In the future, the appreciation of beauty will play a greater part
in my life.
I understood some things far better than before.
I felt drowsy.

I felt that I knew what would happen before it did-like being a

< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01

< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05

< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05
< .05

lump ahead of time.

H and the hospitalized group III. The outpatient
subjects showed more intense anxiety in relation
to permanent insanity, terrible thoughts, and fear
of death, whereas the hospitalized subjects reported
greater feelings of hopelessness and paranoia (specifically, the desire to commit suicide, complete de-

spair, and feelings of persecution) . It might be

construed that the outpatient group, with its

jects seems to extend all along the continuum from

despair to ecstasy. For example, the hospitalized
group III reported about the same degree of emotion as the nontreatment group I on these items:
"There was humor and a jolly
atmosphere."
"1 felt closer to God."

stronger anxiety about permanent insanity, indi-

"It was an experience of great

cated enough contact with reality to seek help. But

beauty."
"I felt supremely happy."

the hospitalized group seems to have crumbled
under the impact of the drug experiences, so that
its subjects could no longer defend against the
powerful emotions of depression and paranoia.
Actually, this vulnerability of the hospitalized sub-

(p < .001)
(t) < .01)

(p < .05)
(p < .05)

Such extremes of feeling-from euphoria to dysphoria-are typical of the unstable personality. It
is conceivable that the unsupervised LSD experi83

ence could regress such personalities into acute psychotic episodes. The one item which most

significantly differentiated the treatment groups
from the nontreatment group is
"1 felt I might become perma(p < .001)
nently insane."

Actually, this item, which heralded psychological
difficulty to come, was felt more keenly by the out-

patient group than by the hospitalized group.
Again, this might be construed as an indication that
those victims of a bad LSD experience who felt the
danger of permanent insanity were still in enough

contact with reality to seek therapywhereas those
Who suffered depression and/or psychotic episodes
as a result of their experience had lost the capacity
to test the bounds of reality. Actually, it was found
impossible to test these patients during the first few
days of hospitalization because of their lack of contact.

Finally, these two items, significant beyond the
.05 level of probability, are provocative:
"I felt as if I were traveling in time."

"I felt I knew what would happen before it did
like being a jump ahead of time."
The treatment groups experienced both of these
items more profoundly than did the nontreatment

group. This will be elaborated in the discussion
which follows.
Discussion

Repeatedly it has been stated that the psychiatric
illnesses resulting from the "massive LSD experience" run the gamut from anxiety, panic reactions,
and depression, to borderline and acute psychoses
with occasional reports of suicide as well. Our data
also show that the disruptive LSD experience itself
is characterized by anxiety, depression, paranoia,
feelings of futility and loss of reality testing. Surely
such overwhelming fears as those of death, permanent insanity and disgusting sexuality could precipitate severe and sometimes prolonged psychiatric
disorders. That certain people experience such in-

procedure was to let them experience the psychosis,
but then, within a day or two, to provide them with
another LSD session so that they could overcome

the fear and experience catharsis, after which, he
claimed, the therapeutic recovery proceeded rapidly. This method of LSD therapy is more extreme
than that developed by Ling and Buckman (11),
who combined LSD with methylphenidate (Ritalin) and claimed to achieve abreaction and catharsis without the danger of acute anxiety attacks or
psychotic episodes. It might be that other techniques can be employed in therapy, such as combining LSD with other drugs to prevent or work
through anxiety, to eliminate the experiencing of
deep depression, suicidal ideation and psychotic
breaks.

Second, other hallucinogenic drugs, such as mari-

juana, its more potent counterpart, hashish, peyote (mescaline) and the mushrooms (psylocibin) ,
have been used for centuries by primitive peoples
without the disastrous effects our society has observed with LSD. L. has been noticed that marijuana and hashish increase appetite and have a
sedative influence, whereas LSD characteristically
decreases appetite and provokes sleep disturbance.

It may be that there are qualitatively different
psychopharmacological effects between LSD and
thec.e other drugs. Again, it is suggested that for
experimental and therapeutic purposes, it might be
profitable to combine LSD with sedative or tranquilizing drugs to eliminate the majority of undesirable reactions, such as panic and depression. We
do have reports of panic reactions from LSD which
have been successfully terminated with antianxiety
drugs without subsequent discernible untoward effects.6

Third, it is well known that other methods of
altering consciousness have produced disruptive
emotional states similar to those produced by LSD.
For example, sensory deprivation and sleep depri-

vation have resulted in many untoward effects,
including dissociation, hallucinations, and even
temporary psychosis. The well known "placebo ef-

tense fears under the influence of LSD has been
amply illustrated in this study. However, some
salient points should be considered in this context.

fect" can also produce untoward reactions. For
example, even distilled water, when injected instead of the anticipated LSD, has been known to

First, there is considerable literature extant

result in a temporary psychotic state (2) .6 And of
course it has been repeatedly reported that the nonmedical use of hypnosis has resulted in regression,
abreaction, dissociative states, and even acute psychosis. It may be within the bounds of probability
that LSD, alone, is not responsible for the psychiatric disorders here reported. It seems evident that
the LSD experience is influenced by the individual's
personality, his set and the setting, just as are the

which describes the use of LSD as an adjunct to
therapy (1, 2, 5, 9-11) .5 Repeatedly in these works
are reported vivid descriptions of abreactions

involving "disgusting sexuality," such as incest,
sadism and homosexuality, which, when interpreted by the therapist and patient, are claimed
to have considerable therapeutic value. Grof 5 even

reported that some patients have suffered a psychotic breakdown under LSD, usually when they
were overpowered by traumatic material brought
out in therapy with which they could not cope. His
84

experiences with placebos, hypnosis and sensory dePersonal communication, K. Ditman.

privation. Such a powerful drug as LSD, with its
consciousness-changing effects, can easily be destruc-

tive to an emotionally unstable personor even to
a healthy individualin an unsupervised setting.
LSD, in sufficient dosage, seems to have the capacity to strip the individual of his defenses, intensify his awareness and thus make him more
vulnerable. This capacity seems evident in the
"time-loosening" aspects of the LSD experience.
Orientation in time seems characteristic of the
stable individual, whereas the neurotic is disturbed
by the demands of time, as in many obsessions and
compulsions. Thus, "traveling in time" may be, for
the emotionally unstable person, an especially stressful experience.
Further, in this study it was significant that per-

sons functioning in jobs or as students just prior
to testing were far less likely to be psychiatrically
disturbed by their LSD experiences. If similar levels

of functioning also existed in these persons prior
to their LSD use, then this suggests that a person
committed to a regular program of activity (other
than drug taking) is somehow less likely to have a
disruptive LSD experience. Thus, the question
arises: is it the temporary situational state of being
unemployed and unoccupied which helps trigger
the bad LSD experienceor is it an already existing psychiatric malfunction (of which the lack of
employment is merely a symptom) that renders the
person more likely to have a bad LSD trip? In this
regard, the role of the use of hard narcotics needs
to be determined. These are areas for further study.
Still another hypothesis presents itself. Suppose
the lack of regular activities in the disturbed group

did not appear until after LSD usage (as with the
"drop-outs") , then it is reasonable to assume that
the LSD is part of the disruptive process, rather
than a noncontributing factor. Unfortunately, for
most of our sample, we do not know the actual
time sequence of events.

Two findings do seem clear, however. First, in
accord with previous reports, LSD in our study is
likely to be disruptive for some unstable, noncommitted individuals who take the drug in a setting
without medical support and protection. Second,
there is indication from this study that the nontreatment group, many of whom describe essentially beneficial and insightful LSD experiences,
supports the belief that the mind-altering properties of LSD offer potential value for research into
psychotherapy and esthetic appreciation.

The latter point should not be construed as a

plea for the unsupervised use of LSD! The authors
deplore the messianic attitude of those LSD takers

who advocate the indiscriminate (ab)use of the
drug, just as much as we deplore the emotionalism
and sensationalism against the drug per se, which
could lead to the banishment of the drug from controlled research, despite encouraging evidence that
it has value as a therapeutic adjunct and aids in
the investigation of the potentials of the mind. Nor
do we wish to ignore the possibilities, recently reported, that brain or chromosomal damage may result from LSD ingestion (3, 7). Certainly these
reports must be intensively researched; and until
they are, clinical use of LSD in human beings
should be severely limited. But at this time our
data on the LSD experiences of those persons who
have continued to function without the need of
psychiatric care suggest that the toxicity of LSD
may be psychological rather than organic in origin.
Summary

Some people have had disastrous reactions to the
LSD experience, including psychotic episodes and
even suicide. Others claim no bad effects, but rather
benefits from their LSD usage. In an attempt to understand this anomaly, the authors studied 116 subjects from three populations: 1) those not requiring
therapy after their LSD experiences, 2) those needing psychiatric outpatient care as a result of taking
LSD, and 3) those hospitalized after LSD usage. All
subjects were interviewed to obtain biographical

data and were administered the DWM card sort

(consisting of 156 items descriptive of the LSD experience) , which they were required to evaluate on
a five-point scale, ranging from "very much like the

experience" to "very much unlike the experience."
Statistical analysis revea'ed that the LSD sessions
were far more unpleasant for those groups requiring psychiatric care than for those requiring no
treatment. Specifically, the appearance of such fears
as those of death, permanent insanity and disgust-

ing sexuality and feelings of despair during the
LSD experience discriminated the treatment groups

from the nontreatment group well beyond the .01
level of probability. In addition, the hospitalized
group experienced far more depression and paranoia than did tl,,.. other groups. Interpretations of
these results are offered.

References
1. Abramson, H. A., ed. The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism. Bobbs-Merrill, New York, 1967.
2. Abramson, H. A., ed. The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy. Josiah H. Mary Foundation, New York, 1959.

3. Cohen, M. Chromosomal damage in human leucocytes induced by LSD. Science, 14-17, 1967.

4. Cohen, S., and Ditman, K. Prolonged adverse reactions

85

to lysergic acid diethylamide. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. (Chicago) , 8: 475-480, 1963.

5. Ditman, K. Psychotoznimetics: Pharmacodynamic and
Psychotherapeutic Properties [Proceedings of the Western
Pharmacological Society]. 6: 13-17, 1963.

6. Ditman, K., Hayman, M., and Whittlesey, J. Nature
and frequency of claims following LSD. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.,
134: 346-352, 1962.

7. Egozcue, J., and Irwin, S. Chromosome aberrations reported in LSD users. Med. News, 1: 3, 1967.

8. Frosch, W., Robbins, E., and Sterin, M. Untoward re-

actions to LSD resulting in hospitalization. New Eng. J.
Med., 273: 1235-1239, 1965.

9. Leuner, H,, and Holfield, H. Psycnutherapy under the
influence of the hallucinogens. Physician's Panorama, 2:
13-16, 1964.

10. Levine, J., and Ludwig, A. Alterations in consciousness

produced by combinations of LSD, hypnosis, and psychotherapy. Psychopharmacologia (Berlin) , 7: 123-137, 1965.
11. Ling, T., and Buckman, J. Lysergic Acid (LSD-25) and
Ritalin in the Treatment of Neurosis. Lombardo Press,
London, 1963.

12. Savage, C., Harman. W., Savage, E., and Fadiman, J.
Therapeutic effects of the LSD experience. Psychol. Rep.,
14: 111-120, 1964.

13. Ungerleider, T., Fisher, D., and Fuller, M. The dangers
of LSD. J.A.M.A., /97: 389-392, 1966.

Appendix A
1. Strong Pleasant Emotions (17 items)
1 I could not control my laughter
4 I felt supremely happy
6 I felt more alert and alive than I have in a long time
33 I am more satisfied with life in general now
40 I had a feeling of excitement and anticipation as when
something very important is about to happen

48 I enjoyed being in this state so much that I will want
it to last for days
51 This experience was the greatest thing that ever happened to me
52 I had wonderful sexual feclings
83 I felt a tremendous energy
131 I was tremendously relaxed
138 There was humor and a jolly atmosphere
146 I have a new capacity for love
148 I now have more enthusiasm for things

154 I felt in contact with unknown, wonderful forces in
the universe
155 I felt like talking it out
157 I felt more free
158 The whole universe was like a tremendous joke

2. Self-understanding and Esthetic Appreciation (20 items)

12 I actually seemed to return to certain moments in
childhood and experience myself there

36 I saw myself as I really am, and I did not like what I
saw

43 It is easier now to decide what I want

44 In the future, the appreciation of beauty will play a
greater part in my life
58 I wanted to sit and meditate

65 I had the feeling that I have much work to do to set
me straight
68 I became more self-accepting
69 It was an experience of great beauty
72 I understood some things far better than before
79 I felt more creative than usual

150 I fund I could just sit and look at something for
hours

3. Mystical and Paranormal Sensations (14 items)

23 I could make an object turn into something else just
by wanting it to
46 I felt that I knew what would happen before it did
like being a jump ahead of time
56 The whole experience seemed to have happened before
57 I felt as if I were several different people, only one of
which was the usual "me"

66 I felt I could communicate with others in the experience without words or gestures

74 Hours went by like secondsor one second seemed to
last forever
97 I felt as if I could read other people's minds
101 I felt as if I were traveling in time
106 I learned what it is like to be really dead

110 I was able to influence people and objects with my
thoughts
117 I became very open to suggestion and did what I was
told
127 Past, present and future seemed to be all one
132 1 now have more belief in things like telepathy, reincarnation, spiritualism, foreseeing the future, etc., as
possibilities for research
151 I felt as if I could change past events

4. Empathy (6 items)
24 I felt at one with those around me
54 I felt the people here understand me
71 I found it enjoyable when certain people were with me
140 I am more sensitive to the feelings of others even
when their feelings are not expressed
142 The touch of someone's hand seemed important
152 Doing something for someone else's happiness seemed
easier

85 I now have a new feeling regarding my marriage and
family

116 Things I remembered threw new light on some of my
problems
118 I felt I knew the real meaning of existence

119 Everything seemed to have a place in life, even the
"good" and "bad"
122 I had a higher evaluation of myself
128 I felt serene, content and knowing
134 I was able to express how I felt without shame or care
144 Words had strange new meanings
145 I felt the beauty and meaning of music as never before

86

5. Religious Feelings (7 items)
27 I felt a sense of wonder, joy, and peacefulness in the
world
35 I saw all the mysteries of the universe in certain objects
50 I felt that we are all one in this universe
64 I was on the verge of au important revelation, but not
able to express it
126 I had levels of thought I can't express in words
159 I felt closer to God
160 I felt as if I had been reborn

6. Unusual Body Sensations and Perceptions, Not Unpleasant (33 items)
3 My mind was flooded with thoughts
8 My hearing seemed much sharper than usual
10 The walls and floor moved and flowed
11 I felt as if I were floating in space
17 Walls or other objects seemed to be breathing
21 With my eyes closed I saw multicolored moving designs

25 Colors seemed brighter

30 Music affected my mood much more intensely than
usual
32 I became another object or another person and yet remained myself
34 One side of my body felt different from the other side
53 I can remember very clearly everything that happened
to me during the experience
55 I had a strange taste in my mouth

60 My thoughts kept shifting rapidly from one idea to
another

67 My hands and feet felt light, or as if they were not
attached to my body
73 Other peoples' faces seemed to become changing masks

92 I kept seeing things after I'd stopped looking at them
90 I felt drowsy
94 Objects seemed to glow around the edges

98 I lost interest in what I started saying so that a sentence was left unfinished
100 I was especially talkative
102 I had intense swings from "high" to 'low"
103 I saw music

112 My body seemed to grow younger or older all on its
Own

113 I had difficulty talking
114 My sense of smell became more acute
115 I felt the need to stretch or move
123 I had "x-ray vision"
125 My body seemed to change its size all on its own
129 My "I" or "self" seemed to leave my body
139 My mind sometimes became a complete blank and my
thoughts seemed to stop
143 My eyesight seemed blurred
149 I had peculiar sensations on my skin at times
196 I felt as if I had no body at all

7. Somatic Discomfort (12 items)
5 I felt unsteady and uneasy
9 I felt cold or had chills
16 I felt like I was shaking or trembling
41 My head ached
47 This was like a bad (alcohol) hangover
77 I felt hot or flushed at times
81 My stomach hurt

87 I had nausea, headache or other physical pain which
dominated the experience
91 I had a craving for food
108 I felt as I do when I need a drink (alcohol)
111 My hands kept perspiring
137 Everything seemed too bright, too harsh, too loud

8. Depression (7 items)
42 I felt depressed
61 I felt that fife was not worth living

89 I felt remorse over things in the past
99 I felt like committing suicide
109 It felt as if life had lost its meaning
124 Everything seemed hopeless
153 I had a feeling of complete despair
9. Paranoia (6 items)
15 People thought what I said was not important
29 At times I felt as if I were being persecuted

39 At times I had the sensation of someone spying into
my mind
86 I felt that other people were influencing my thoughts
against my will

104 I was worried that something within me showed what
I didn't want seen
107 I resented what was being done to me
10. Anxiety (19 items)
2 I felt confused
7 I felt on the fringes of sheer horror
14 I felt anxious or tense
18 I felt I might become permanently insane
26 I felt separated from everyone and everything
28 I felt upset and distraught
31 I felt something dreadful was about to happen
37 I was easily distracted and was not able to control my
thoughts
38 I felt choked or found it hard to breathe
49 I had trouble understanding what was being said
59 I became afraid I might die
73 Certain things did frighten me
78 I kept thinking terrible thoughts
80 I kept thinking of my problems
84 I tried to fight off what was happening
88 I was disgusted by some sexual ideas that came to mind
93 I couldn't keep from crying
120 My conscience bothered me
136 I felt paralyzed

11. Hallucinations (6 items)
13 I heard things that I knew were not real

19 Solid objects changed their shapes and even disappeared
62 Sounds seemed to affect what I saw
63 My own face in a mirror looked quite different; it even
turned into dale: -rat faces

93 I saw people or animals in motion who weren't really
there
156 I saw faces or little animals coming out of the walls
or other places
12. Evaluation of the Experience (9 items)
45 This experience had no therapeutic value

70 I feel as if I "missed the boat" or somehow failed to
get out of the experience what was potentially there
76 I have been greatly helped by the experience
82 I now fed more ambitious

130 I felt I was not able to give myself up completely to
the experience
133 I would like to try this again

135 None of these cards really can describe what I experienced
141 The experience was nothing unusual
147 There is no good reason to LAC such drugs

87

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
THE MIERICAN JOURNAL or PSYCHIATRY. Vol. 124, pp. 1483-1490, 1968

Copyright 1968, The American Psychiatric Association

The "Bad Trip"The Etiology of the Adverse LSD Reaction
J. THOMAS UNGERLEIDER, M.D., DUKE D. FISHER, M.D.,
MARIELLE FULLER, AND ALEX CALDWELL, PH.D.

In an attempt to identify the factors responsible
for adverse reactions to LSD and to elucidate the
rising incidence of hospital admissions associated
with use of the drug, the authors compared 25 psychiatric inpatients hospitalized following LSD ingestion with 25 members of a group who took LSD
together regularly without reported difficulty. Although some differences were found between the
groups, there were no outstanding historical or current clinical features which could be used to predict an individual's response to LSD with accuracy.
These findings support the hypothesis that LSD interacts with schizoid trends, unsteady reality test-

ing, and related factors in a complex way that

try have reported a similar increase. The demographic characteristics of the first 70 such patients
seen at UCLA have previously been reported (9) .

These patients came most often with hallucinations, followed by anxiety to the point of panic,
by depression, often with suicidal thoughts or attempts, and by confusion.
The question has thus been raised why these persons should have experienced difficulty from LSD
when others claim to take the drug regularly and
apparently have no adverse effects. A number of
pertinent additional questions are then raised. First

of all, how do we know the persons who get in
trouble from alleged use of LSD are really taking

makes accurate prediction of response virtually im-

LSD? Since Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, the one legiti-

possible.

mate manufacturer, discontinued production, all
LSD that is available is black market, with all the
impurities and dosage confusion that is attendant
upon such illegal supply. Secondly, how do we
know that those persons who have difficulty from
LSD were not already emotionally disturbed? (In
our original study 37 percent had had psychiatric
care previously and 33 percent were unemployed,

Since approximately the fall of 1965 the incidence

of adverse LSD reactions throughout the country
has mushroomed. At the UCLA Neuropsychiatric
Institute prior to September 1965 one problem case
associated with LSD ingestion was seen approximately every two months. Beginning at that time
the incidence increased gradually from five to 20
cases a month, with three to five telephone calls
being received, for every person seen, from other
persons in trouble from LSD who were not subsequently seen. Other hospitals throughout the counRead at the 123rd annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, Detroit, Mich., May 8-12, 1967.
The authors are with the department of psychiatry, UCLA
Center for the Health Sciences, Los Angeles, Calif. 90024,
where Dr. Unger 'eider is assistant professor, Dr. Fisher is a
resident in psychiatry, Miss Fuller is research associate, and
Dr. Caldwell is assistant professor of medical psychology.

The authors would like to express their appreciation to
Nancy West, R.N., for her assistance in obtaining the questionnaire data from the comparison group.

88

which were perhaps gross indices of mental illness.)

There is no applicable chemical test for LSD
once it is inside the body and no pathognomonic
signs or symptoms on which to make the diagnosis.
Although most typically passive, the ISD user may
present with almost any kind of behavior. However,
beyond the history of LSD ingestion, there are no
unique features although dilated pupils along with

the peculiar "I feel sorry for you nonusers" smile
are characteristic.

LSD users describe the perceptual changes following drug ingestion in intense and often charac-

teristic ways. When one hears about visual and
auditory "unfolding" of nature it is typical of LSD

and other psychedelics alone. In addition, the most
common side effects reported by these subjects were
consistent with those described elsewhere following
experimental administration of LSD (3, 4). We had
several drug samples spot-checked for LSD content.
Although the user always overestimated the amount
of LSD in his sample, all did contain LSD (8) .
The entire issue of predictability for the adverse
LSD reaction is unsettled. This is particularly cogent in view of the fact that some researchers have
advocated the use of LSD not only experimentally
but in clinics where "creative and normal" persons

could receive the drug in order to create a psychedelic experience for them. This study is a preliminary attempt to try to assess some of the factors in
the etiology of the "bad trip," the adverse LSD
reaction.
Methodology

Of the previous 70 patients reported upon, 25

were hospitalized and the rest were treated as outpatients. This group of 25 inpatients, hospitalized
following adverse LSD reactions, are compared in
this study with 25 other frequent LSD users who
reported no difficulties from the drug. This latter
comparison group claimed to have ingested the
drug in doses of from 250 to 1200 pg. from once to
three times a week for up to 18 months. It should
be emphasized that these 25 subjects were pan of
an existing "religious" group who took their LSD
together.
We initially made contact with this group when
one of their members sought us out following a
lecture which two of the authors U.T.U. and
D.D.F.) were giving on the LSD situation to a com-

munity service organization in a suburb of Los
Angeles. The member had initially tried to read
a statement advocating unlimited use of LSD during a question and answer session following the
lecture. Afterwards, he approached us and insisted
that there were many persons who were taking the
drug without difficulty. They had formed a group,
to be referred to as the "Disciples," which consisted
of 100 regulars with as many as 500 total members
who met regularly and took LSD. This was before
possession of LSD was made illegal in California.

ion. There were pictures of Buddha and Jesus on
the walls. Every Wednesday night the group gathered to have a non-LSD religious experience consisting of prayer and meditation. The drug-taking
sessions were scheduled for the weekends.

The group did not go along with the "drop out"
part of the "turn on, tune in and drop out" that Dr.

Timothy Leary advocates. They claimed to be
working, making money, and to have rehabilitated
themselves. Most of the members of the group said
that they were "ex-criminals and drug addicts" who
were now finding a new and useful life through
LSD.

After we observed a number of their "love sessions" and all-day LSD experiences, the group
agreed to psychiatric interviews, induding mental
status examinations and the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory (MMPI) . We examined the
first 25 who were available on one weekend. We
then compared these data to corresponding data
from the 25 hospitalized patients.
Results

Background. There were no significant differences in race, sex or age between the two groups.
Both groups had comparable amounts of curly parental deprivation.' Both groups resided predominantly in the Los Angeles area.
Marital status. There was a highly significant difference (p less than .001) in marital status between
the two groups. No inpatients were married at the
time of admission to the hospital (84 percent of the
inpatients had never been married) versus 60 percent married (with 19 children) in the comparison

group at the time they were examined (see Table
1)

Table LMARITAL STATUS

Status

Single
Married
Divorced

Other (widow)

No data
Total

Inpatients
Percent
Number
21

84

0
1

8
4
4

25

100

2
1

parison

Subjects

Number

Percent

10
15

40
60

25

100

After we agreed to observe the group, we were
"screened" by five members at the Los Angeles Airport. They were satisfied that we were not law enforcement officials and we were invited to observe
some of their LSD "happenings."

Numerous subsequent visits were made to the
headquarters of the "Disciples." This was located
in a suburb of Los Angeles where about a dozen
of the group were living in a large house on spacious grounds. They were literally tilling the soil
and had decorated the house in psychedelic fash-

Employment. Only 20 percent of the inpatients

were earning a living at the time of admission,
while over 70 percent of the controls were working; this was a highly significant difference (p less
than .01) . The comparison subjects were mainly
blue-collar workers and their jobs included those
of plumber, longshoreman, gas station attendant,
1 Separation from one or both parents for over six months
before the age of 16(2) .

89

grocery and drug store clerk, janitor, construction

worker, truck loader, tractor mechanic, aircraft
plant worker, stockboy, gardener, and surfboard
renter. The average length of time working was
three years for this comparison group (see Table
2)

Table toOCCUPATION
Inpatients
Number
Percent

Status

Unemployed
Housewives
Students
White-collar jobs
Artists
Blue-collar jobs

13

Total

25

Comparison
Subjects
Number
Percent

52

5

2

2
5

20

0
0

12

0

100

18
25

2
3
0

20
8

of 72 percent who were at least high school graduates. The remaining twenty-eight percent were high

school dropouts. For the inpatient group 64 percent had finished high school, 32 percent were drop-

outs, and one patient was a high school student.
This difference was not significant.
Previous psychiatric history. Seventy-six percent
of the comparison group had no previous psychiatric history (see Table 4) . Sixteen percent had
been in outpatient treatment and eight percent had
been inpatients. This is not significantly different
from the 44 percent of the inpatient group who had
had previous psychiatric care.
Table 4 PAST PSYCHIATRIC HISTORY

72
100

Treatment

Religion. We could not obtain religious information for the comparison group. They had formed
a new religion, and they all denied having any pre-

vious religion or that their families even had any
religion. In fact they had repudiated orthodox religions totally until they "found God under LSD."
Thirty-two percent of the inpatient group said they
had no religion.
Police records. Table 3 shows the histories of
criminal behaviour-64 percent of the comparison
group had police histories. The major crimes that
the comparison group had been involved in were
forgery, stealing, carrying concealed weapons, man-

slaughter, grand theft auto, and aiding a fugitive.
Disturbances of the peace, delinquency, minor
fights, and petty thefts were classified as minor
crimes. Only eight percent of the inpatient group
gave histories of police records, which was a significantly smaller proportion (p less than .001) .
Table 3.POLICE RECORD

Conviction For

Major crime only
Alcohol only
Drugs only
Minor crime only

Inpatients
Number
Percent

1

4

1

4

Comparison
Subjects
Number
Percent

3
2
2

12

8

(induding
delinquency)
drugs, alcohol
drugs or alcohol
None

Total

5

23
25

20

4

16

92

9

100

25

36
100

Education. Fifty-six percent of the comparison
group finished high school and an additional 16
percent had had some college education, for a total
90

Outpatient
Inpatient

3

None

13

No data
Total

25

8

1

32
12
52
4
100

Com
Sugjaletsigim

Number

Percent

4
2

16

19
0

25

8
76
100

Drug history. Half of the inpatient group were
taking only LSD at the time of admission and the
other half were taking both LSD and marihuana or
LSD and other drugs, in approximately equal numbers (see Table 5) . The comparison group was taking either LSD alone (44 percent or LSD and marihuana (56 percent). It was part of the "Disciples"
religion not to take other drugs.
As for past drug history prior to six weeks before
being seen in the emergency room, 40 percent of
the inpatient group had taken only psychedelics.
Twenty percent of the inpatient group had taken
multiple drugs excluding heroin, while 20 percent
had used multiple drugs including heroin. Thus 40
percent were chronic multiple drug users. Twenty
percent had never used any drugs in the remote
past. In the comparison group in the remote past
(before joining the "Disciples") 32 percent had
taken only psychedelics, 44 percent were multiple
drug users excluding heroin, and 24 percent were
multiple drug users induding heroin. Thus 68 percent were chronic multiple drug users. It should
be noted that none of these differences was statistically significant.
Diagnosis. As recorded in the hospital charts, the

Major crime plus

or minor crime
Minor crime plus

Inpatients
Percent
Number

resident psychiatrists diagnosed 40 percent of the
inpatients as psychotic and 28 percent as neurotic;
diagnoses of character disorder, borderline psychotic, and multiple diagnoses accounted for eight
percent each (see Table 6) . Four percent each were
diagnosed as addict and adolescent adjustment reactions. We compared these diagnostic frequencies
with a random sample of 95 other inpatients in the
same hospital. The differences in frequency were

Table 5.DRUG HISTORY
Drug Used

Number

Inpatients

Comparison Subjects
Number
Percent

Percent

Current history

Marihuana + LSD

7

LSD only

12

Other
Total

Past drug history
Only psychedelics (marihuana. LSD, mescaline, psilocybin)
Multiple (excluding heroin)
Multiple (including heroin)

14

6

28
48
24

25

100

25

0

(Over 6 weeks before seen)

5
5
25

None

Total

100

(Before joining Disciples)

40
20
20
20

10
5

56
44

11

8

6

32
44
24

25

100

11

100

More than one of amphetamines, barbiturates, alcohol, psychedelics. and tranquilizers.

Table 6.DIAGNOSIS

DiarIMAS

Inpatients'

Number

Percent

2
8

8
32
28

Psychotic

Toxic (organic)
Functional
Neurotic
Character disorder
Borderline psychotic
Addict
Adolescent adjustment
reaction
Multiple diagnoses
Invalid (extreme F)
Undiagnosabk
Total

7

1

8
8
4

1

4

2

8

2
2

25

100

Comparison

Inpatients*

Subjects"

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

3

12

1

4

1

6
6

4
24
24

12

48

4
0

16

6

24

3

12

25

100

0

0
3

12

5
25

100

20

* Diagnosis via hospital chart.
" Diagnosis by MMPI testing.

small and appeared to be random; greater differences would occur by chance seven times in ten.
No attempt was made to dassify the comparison
group diagnostically since so many were function-

ing without symptoms, were not in psychiatric
treatment, and were working at the time they were

seen. Their indices of psychosocial disturbance
were: previous school trouble (28 percent dropped
out of high school) , police trouble (64 percent) ,
past psychiatric history (24 percent had had previous outpatient or inpatient care) , and past history
of symptoms (one person admitted to hallucina-

tions while on LSD and another person had had
anxiety symptoms prior to but not after taking
LSD) . Eighty percent of the group claimed to have

extrasensory perception when under LSD, but this
was considered to be a part of their religious beliefs and not truly delusional.
We did, however, assess psychopathology on the
mental status examination (for the comparison

group) and by the MMPI (for both groups). On
mental status examination two comparison subjects
showed a clinical concreteness in their interpreta-

tions of proverbs and one subject could not subtract sevens or threes serially. The latter subject
subsequently volunteered that he had been "out of
my head with pot" at the time of the examination
and then did the subtractions correctly.
One of the subjects who was unable to abstract
stated that he often could not think straight since
he had begun to take LSD, but he had held his
job as mechanic for 18 months without difficulty. He
had never seen a psychiatrist, but had been addicted

to barbiturates and dextroamphetamine sulfate in
the remote past and had been arrested several years
previously for drunk driving. His MMPI revealed
a definite personality disorder associated with passive-aggressive, antisocial, paranoid, and sexually
deviant trends.
The other comparison subject who was unable to
abstract proverbs was a 24-year-old married father
of two who had no previous psychiatric history. He

had been on marihuana, barbiturates, and dextroamphetamine sulfate before joining the religious
group two months prior to the initial interviewing.
He had a drug and theft police record and daimed
91

to have had trouble talking (stammering) which

ambiguously defensive. However, none of these five

was cured by LSD. He had used LSD approximately
40 times in reported doses of up to 900 Ag. Before

he joined the group, LSD had caused "the past to
come rushing forth," and occasionally "suspicious
thoughts," but this was never true after joining the

were openly schizoid patterns; rather, all were of
a controlled and potentially paranoid type.
4. The comparison subjects obtained character
disorder types of patterns quite consistently, but
many of these were well within the normal range.

group.
About ten months after the initial interview one
of us (J.T.U.) reveived a call from this man's wife.
She stated that he had been using LSD almost every
day for several months, and that she had just signed
papers to have him committed to the hospital. How-

Although character disorder elements occurred consistently in the profiles of the inpatients, they were
complex, mixed, and predominantly psychotic patterns.
To summarize our results, the inpatient and comparison groups did not show significant differences

ever, he was refusing to talk to anyone but the
senior author, and the judge had acquiesced. His
wife stated that he had quit his job and often
stayed away from home, wandering about in the
woods for days at a time. He refused to eat any-

in race, sex, age, education, or early parental deprivation. Significant differences were found in

thing colored red and threw out everything red in
their house, and he frequently told her to shut up
while he conversed with Jesus and the saints. The
final "straw" for her was when he refused to pick
up the unemployment checks.

marital status, occupational history, and police records. Severe psychopathology was seen clinically in

the inpatient group while hospitalized. No comparable clinical psychopathology was evident in the
comparison sample. The MMPI profiles clearly corresponded to these results, although the comparison
group was much more defensive toward the testing.
(MMPI profiles are shown in Figure 1.)

When interviewed, he detailed his plans for beginning a new church. He spoke about green vapors
interchanging from his body into the atmosphere
through the umbilicus and leaned forward to whisper, "You wouldn't eat anything red, would you?"

looNsole (20 soh/ polho)

C0000nso suloodh

Iss 0 op PO /1 Pe Sc Ms

mly 0 my P4 Po Pe Sc

He denied having any problems, however, and
claimed total happiness.
Another MMPI was obtained and compared with

that from the previous year's comparison group
His initial MMPI (presymptomatic)
showed a paranoid personality pattern. The second
testing yielded a very similar profile with even more
guardedness, denial, and evasiveness.
A comparison of the MMPIs on both groups retesting.

vealed:
1. Most of the comparison subjects were quite de-

fensive toward the MMPI (two-thirds at least
moderately so) , and they did not exaggerate or

"fake sick." The inpatients did overstate; three
profiles were clearly invalid, and several others were

borderline. Only one inpatient was notably defensive.

2. Pd (psychopathic deviate) was the predominant peak in the comparison group and Sc (schiz-

ophrenia) was the most frequent peak of the
hospitalized group (see Figure 1) . All 25 inpatients

had one or more deviant scores (elevations at or
over a T score of 70) . In contrast, only 11 of the
25 comparison subjects had one or more pathological scores. Eight men among the comparison cases
and none of the inpatients had the specific sexual

deviation pattern (Code 45 or Code 54) .
3. A majority of the inpatients obtained mixed,
borderline, and overtly psychotic patterns; only five
of the 25 comparison subjects appeared borderline
psychotic on the testing, although a few others were

92

Scam

hopoocy

01

3302

2

o

I

S

14

I

lb

0 0

Figure 1.Frequency of Highest Elevations Among the Two
Groups on the Eight Basic Clinical Scales of the MMPI
(Hypochondriasis, Depression, Hysteria, Psychopathic Devi-

ate, Paranoia, Psychasthenia, Schizophrenia, and Hypomania)

Discussion

It can be asked whether all those who had
chronic adverse LSD reactions were emotionally
predisposed or were to some degree emotionally ill
prior to LSD ingestion. This is very difficult to

answer. Well known at many hospitals are the
anecdotal reports of local interns and residents who
were carefully screened before taking LSD (or had
even been psychoanalyzed) but who subsequently
had severe adverse reactions from LSD. In addition

there are now a number of reports of nonprofes-

sional persons screened by psychiatric history and/

or psychological testing who have had adverse
LSD reactions. Although 44 percent of our inpatients with a history of previous psychiatric care is
a high figure, it is certainly less than 100 percent.
None of the 24 percent of the comparison group
who had previous psychiatric treatment had difficulty from their ingestion of LSD.
Among psychiatric patients with LSD histories,
we are now seeing at the hospital fewer chronic,
multiple drug users who are obviously emotionally
disturbed. Instead we are seeing more teenagers who

tried LSD once, for example at a party, got over
its effects in 12 to 16 hours, but then presented
at a hospital some months later with recurrent
symptomatology without ever having taken the
drug again. A decreasing proportion of our patients

are chronic drug users. However, it is not clearly
demonstrable whether this is due to a change in
incidence or to a shift in selective referrals to our
hospital.

This brings us to a consideration of set or, specifically, the attitude with which one approaches
the LSD experience and the setting or environment
in which one takes the LSD. Everyone recognizes
the importance of these factors in the LSD experience. In fact people now have "psychedelic experiences" in groups in the proper setting where they
hallucinate, etc., but never take drugs at all (5) .
The parallels between the LSD subject and the
good hypnotic subject are striking, particularly in
the realm of passivity and suggestibility. Our comparison group dressed alike and even used identical
phrases in answering questions. One of their favorites was "for sure," chanted over and over. They
obviously received a tremendous amount of sup-

port, both during and between trips, from the
group itself. The average length of stay with the
group was eight months, and 24 of the 25 controls
claimed that LSD (taken with the group) had led
them to "God, love, or peace of mind." They may
thus have been successful LSD users because the
group support outweighed or overcame the adverse
potentials of the drug.
We should not conclude, however, that set and

settings are the only determinants of the type of
trip one has. There is ane study reported where all
subjects expected psychosis, but all felt only relaxed and friendly after LSD (1) . There is an evergrowing LSD mythology, too, much of it having to
do with set and setting (6, 7) . For example, one
commonly hears that a bad LSD experience will not
result if:

One is in a calm frame of mind (no fights
that day with spouse or employer) ;

One takes the LSD with one or two good

friends or with an experienced sitter or guide present;

The room has soft lighting and a thick carpet
or mattress to sit on;

One is listening to the Indian music of Ravi
Shankar and reading reassuring phrases from the
Tibetan Book of the Dead; and perhaps if one has
a "downer" or chlorpromazine pill at hand.
But we have hospitalized many persons who had
taken these precautions and who also had had up
to 100 previous good LSD experiences. Our inpatient group took their LSD in many varied settings,
from kick-type, acid-test parties (56 percent) to isolated ingestions in their rooms (16 percent) . However, some (8 percent) were most careful and serious

about the preparations for taking LSD. (There
were no data for setting in 20 percent of the inpatient group.) Despite their hospitalizations a large
proportion of the inpatients persisted in claiming
benefit from the drug and many returned to it after
discharge.

How reliable were the data from our comparison
group? Obviously they were proselytizers of LSD.
This could explain why they all claimed no previous religion and even no religion for their parents.
It also could explain why they claimed to have developed "ESP" as well as to have found love from
LSD and also why they identified themselves as a

"bunch of ex-criminals and drug addicts" before
using the drug.
Summary

Twenty-five hospitalized psychiatric patients with
adverse LSD reactions were compared to a sample
of 25 subjects who had not had adverse reactions
from the repeated use of LSD.
In all of our comparisons there were no historical elements or current clinical aspects that were
unique to either group. Clearly there is no single
factor that guarantees immunity from an adverse
LSD reaction. The prediction of successful versus
unsuccessful users is further complicated by the occurrence of cases in which subjects used LSD 100
times or more with no adverse reactions and then
subsequently developed psychiatric symptomatology. Set and setting appear to help but not to guarantee against adverse complications.
One hypothesis, strongly supported by our test
data, is that the LSD interacts with schizoid trends,
unsteady reality testing, and related psychological
factors. Such a complex interactionwhich is diffi-

cult to anticipate even with the best of clinical
and test datawould predict that adverse LSD reactions will be with us for some time to come.

References
I. Blum, R., ed.: Utopiates: The Use and Users of LSD25. New York: Atherton Press, 1964.

2. Brill, N. Q., and Liston, E. H., Jr.: Parental Loss in
Adults with Emotional Disorders, Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 14:
307-314, 1966.

3. Cohen, S.: LSD: Side Effects and Complications, J.
Nero. Ment. Dis. 130:30-40, 1960.

4. Cole, J. 0., and Katz, M. K.: "The Psychotomimetic

5. Hoffman, R.: The Psychedelic Game, Mademoiselle,
March 1966, p. 179.

6. Ungerleider, J. T., and Fisher, D. D.: LSD: Research
and Joyride, The Nation 202:574-576, May 16, 1966.

7. Ungerleider, J. T., and Fisher, D. D.: LSD: Fact and
Fantasy, Arts and Architecture 83:18-20, December 1966.

8. Ungerleider, J. T., and Fisher, D. D.: The Problems
of LSD and Emotional Disorders, Calif. Med. 106:49-55,

Drugs: An Overview," in Solomon, D., ed.: LSD: The Consciousness Expanding Drug. New York: G. P. Putnams' Sons,

1967.

1964.

Dangers of LSD, J.A.M.A. 197:389-392, 1966.

9. Ungerleider, J. T., Fisher, D. D., and Fuller, M.: The

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
CANCER RESEARCH, Vol. 27, Part 1, pp. 2420-2423, December 1967

Persons with Exceptionally High Risk of Leukemia
ROBERT W. MILLER

Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
Summary

Epidemiologic research has helped to identify 5
classes of persons whose probability of developing
leukemia within a relatively short time is 1 in 100
or greater. Common to all is a distinctive genetic
or cytogenetic characteristic, eith,,. inherited or acquired. These observations suggest studies to identify additional high-risk groups and to clarify the
role of genetics in leukemogenesis.

Introduction
Epidemiology has helped to clarify the origins of
leukemia (a) by testing hypotheses developed
through laboratory experimentation and (b) by
generating hypotheses through descriptive studies
and the identification of persons at exceptionally
high risk of the disease. My present purpose is not
to review comprehensively information we have
published elsewhere (12, 19, 20) , but to examine
recent developments concerning high-risk groups to

evaluate how they relate to one another and to
future epidemiologic research on leukemogenesis.
The advantage in identifying groups of persons
especially prone to a disease is that one can seek
among them features in common which may be of
etiologic significance. In the past decade a variety
of circumstances have been defined which carry a

high risk-1 in 100 or greaterof developing leukemia within a relatively short time. This information is summarized in Table 1.

Identical Twins

At the greatest risk thus far known is the child
whose identical twin has developed leukemia. The

probability is about 1 in 5 that he will develop the
disease usually within weeks or months after his
twin falls ill (17) . There is no such risk among

fraternal twins. This finding has not been confirmed in England and Wales (14) , but additional
cases have been observed in the U. S. (R. W. Miller,
unpublished observations) . The near-simultaneous
onset of the disease among both members of the
twin-pair adds to the belief that these occurrences
are not due to chance. The evidence to data suggests that the risk among identical twins may not
extend beyond 7 years of age. This point will be
clarified when the 15,500 male twins who served
in the U. S. Army during World War II have been
classified as to probable zygosity (15) , and a determination made of the concordance rates for leu-

kemia. It is, of course, important to continue to
seek confirmation here and abroad for the previously reported concordance rate of about 20% for
leukemia among identical twins in childhood. Additional data in the U. S. will be sought through a
recently established national registry of birth and
death certificates for all children who have died of
cancer since 1960.

Recognition of the extraordinary risk of leukemia in the young child whose identical twin has
developed the disease provides investigators with
the opportunity to study the as yet unaffected twin
in regard to cell kinetics, immunity, virologic status,
and chromosomes with the expectation that, on the

average, in one out of five instances the child will
develop the disease within a short time. Retrospective investigations may reveal why 80% of co-twins
escape the disease, although both members of a pair
are genetically identical and share the same environment.
95

Inherited Tendency to Chromosomal Breakage
Eloom's syndrome inherited through an autosomal recessive gene, is characterized by photosensi-

tive telangiectasia of the face and an unusual
susceptibility to acute leukemia. Though the data
are as yet scarce, they suggest that 1 in 8 persons
with the syndrome will develop leukemia over the
first 30 years of life [3 leukemics among 23 persons
with the syndrome (26)]. In Bloom's syndrome there
is excessive chromosomal breakage and rearrangement on cell culture, a trait shared with Fanconi's
aplastic anemia and ataxia-telangiectasia, inherited
disorders which also apparently predispose to acute
leukemia (5, 13) . As experience with these congenital defects increases and as diagnoses are made
earlier in life, a more accurate estimate of leukemia
occurrence will be obtained. Should excessive chro-

was still elevated when last reported, twenty years
after exposure (3) . In both studies, acute leukemias
and chronic granulocytic leukemia were induced
by radiation, but chronic lymphocytic leukemia was
not. In neither study could it be determined
whether there was a radiation dose below which no
leukemia was induced; the sample size, large as it
was, was still too small to evaluate an effect below
about 80 rads (7) . Further observations are re-

quired to determine how long the rates among
the atomic-bomb survivors remain elevated, and
whether the rates in either study will rise again as
the latent period lengthens or as environmental

mosomal breakage be recognized in other genetically induced diseases, study of affected persons and

their families for the occurrence of leukemia will
be informative.
Acquired Chromosomal Breaks
Chromosomal breaks can be produced by a variety of agents to which man is exposed (4, 9, 24,
30) , and 2 of these, ionizing radiation and benzene,
have been implicated in human leukemogenesis.

Observations on the Japanese survivors of the
atomic bombs provide convincing evidence that

whole-body radiation in sufficient dosage is leukemogenic in man (3) . Study of patients given radio-

therapy for ankylosing spondylitis indicates that
partial-body exposures may also induce leukemia
(10) . In both studies, the frequency of the neoplasm was proportionate to the radiation dose, and
the peak incidence occurred about 6 years after ex-

posure. In the spondylitis study the elevation in
leukemia rate disappeared 15 years after X-ray
therapy, but among the atomic-bomb survivors it

circumstances change. Time will tell also if chronic
lymphocytic leukemia is a long delayed sequel of
radiation exposure.
It should be noted that the risk of leukemia following heavy exposure to the atomic bomb (within
1000 meters of the hypocenter) was about 1 in 60
over 12 years, substantially less than that in Bloom's
syndrome or for the child whose identical twin has
developed leukemia.
The marked predisposition to leukemia in polycythemia vera (16% of patients treated with X-ray,

32P or both) has been attributed by Modan and
Lilienfeld (22) to a radiation effect, since leukemia
developed in only 1.6% of patients who were not

treated with radiation. Kay et al. (16), however,
have since described aneuploidy in 7 of 11 cases before treatment, a circumstance which may contrib-

ute to leukemogenesis. It should be noted that, as
shown in Table 1, the frequency of leukemia in
radiation-treated polycythemia vera (1 in 6) was
substantially higher than it was among persons
heavily exposed to the atomic bombs in Hiroshima
(1 in 60) or among British patients given X-ray
treatment for ankylosing spondylitis (1 in 270) .
The implication is that persons with polycythemia
vera are much more prone than usual to the leukemogenic effect of ionizing radiation.

Table 1.GROUPS AT EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH RISK OF LEUKEMIA
Group

Identical twins of children with leukemia
Radiation-treated polycythemia vera
Bloom's syndrome
Hiroshima survivors who were within 1000 meters of the hypocenter
Down's syndrome
Radiation-treated patients with ankylosing spondylitis
Sibs of leukemic children
U. S. Caucasian children < 15 years of age

Approximate
risk

Time interval

References

1 in 5a

Weeks or months
10-15 years
<30 years of age

MacMahon and Levy (17)
Modan and Lilienfeld (22)
Sawitsky et al. (26)
Brill et al. (7)
Barber and Spiers (2)
Court Brown and Doll (10)
Miller (18) ; Stewart (29)
U. S. Vital Statistics (23)

1 in 6

1 in 8b
1 in 60
1 in 95
1 in 270
1 in 720
1 in 2880

12 years

<10 years of age
15 years
10 years
10 years

Of 22 identical twins with leukemic the co-twin was affected in 5 instances.
b Three leukemics among 23 persons with Bloom's syndrome.

The evidence that benzene is leukemogenic in
man depends largely on an occupational cluster of
cases among Italian shoe workers who used benzene

in their trade (31) . It remains for some investi96

gator with access to workers heavily exposed to this
chemical to conduct a prospective study to estimate

the magnitude of the risk.
In the search for other leukemogens, attention

should be directed to agents, chemical or viral,
which produce chromosomal breaks. A prime
suspect at present is lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD-25), which has been widely used for its hallucinatory effects. It induces long-lasting chromosomal abnormalities ("quadriradials") which charac-

terize Bloom's syndrome and Fanconi's aplastic

anemia (8). It will be of interest to study the
frequency of leukemia not only among adults who
have taken LSD-25, but also among children exposed in utero when their mothers took the drug.

enough (1000 or more sibs) . The excess over normal expectation is about fourfold. Other investigators have described 2 families in which aggregation
of leukemia or a leukemia-like disease was genetically influenced: ataxia-telangiectasia with acute
lymphocytic leukemia in 2 sibs (13) , and a myeloproliferative disorder simulating myelogenous leukemia among four sets of sibs in a kindred (25) . It
is to be expected that acute leukemia may also aggregate among sibs in families with other heritable
leukemia-prone disorders: Bloom's syndrome, Fan-

coni's aplastic anemia or congeaital (X-linked)
Extra Chromosomes
The risk of leukemia is increased not only in certain conditions with excessive chromosomal break-

age, inherited or acquired, but also in Down's
syndrome (2) , which typically has an extra chromo-

some in the G group. Whether persons with other
congenital aneuploidy are also prone to this neoplasm is as yet uncertain. An accumulation of case
reports su:4:ests that Klinefelter's syndrome, in
which there is an XXY sex-chromosome complement, predisposes to leukemia (12) . Conclusive evi-

dence of a relationship between the two diseases
awaits (a) the results of a prospective study by
Court Brown et al. (11) based on a registry of persons with abnormalities of the sex chromosome
complement, or (b) the demonstration of an exa.bs
of Klinefelter's syndrome among persons with leukemia. Another form of congenital aneuploidy,
D-trisomy, rare as it is, has been described with
leukemia in 2 instances despite the short life-span
of infants with the syndrome (27, 32) .
These observations suggest that cytogenetic study

of leukemic children in remission might reveal an
excess frequency of chromosomal abnormalities.
Among 25 leukemic children so studied, Borges
et al. (6) found 3 with congenital aneuploidy on examination of the skin and blood: XXY, probable
XYY, and F-trisomy. The study is being extended
to obtain a more precise estimate of the frequency
and variety of chromosomal aberrations present before the onset of leukemia.
Case histories indicate that congenital chromo-

somal aneuploidy and leukemia may aggregate
more often among sibs than can be attributed to
chance (21) . Definitive evidence through epidemiologic study is difficult to achieve because of the
large sample size required to demonstrate an excess
of such clusters even if the frequency were several
times greater than normal expectation.

Sibs of Leukemic Children
Two published reports (18, 29) leave little doubt
that aggregation of childhood leukemia in sibships
can be demonstrated when the sample size is large

agammaglobulinemia. These possibilities indicate
that, when leukemia is found in sibs, the family be
studied cytogenetically and immunologically for
the characteristic abnormalities of the known inherited diseases which predispose to leukemia. It
would also be of value to determine if the morphology or natural history of leukemia in these families
differs from usual.
The association of acute leukemia with the diseases mentioned above apparently is influenced by
the action of rare recessive genes. The role of in-

heritance may be further defined by study of a
series of cases in Japan with respect to the frequency of parental consanguinity. An inbreeding
effect would be revealed if cousin marriages had
occurred more often than usual among the parents
of leukemic persons [about 4% of the marriages in
Japan involve first cousins (28) ]. The elevated concordance rate for leukemia in identical twins under
7 years of age (17) suggests that leukemia early in
life may in particular reveal a consanguinity effect.
Table 2.DISTINCTIVE GENETIC FEATURES OF
GROUPS AT HIGH RISK OF LEUKEMIA
High-risk category

Genetic feature

Identical twin of child with

Genetically identical

leukemia

Bloom's and Fanconi's syndromes
Radiation-treated polycythemia

Exposure to ionizing radiation or benzene
Down's syndrome

Genetically induced chromosomal fragility

Aneuploidy prior to radiation; chromosomal breaks
subsequently
Long persisting chromosomal
breaks
Congenital aneuploidy

Perspective

There is a surprising diversity of cytogenetic find-

ings among groups at high risk of leukemia. Yet,
as shown in Table 2, there is a common denominator in that each high-risk group has a distinctive
genetic or chromosomal feature which may well
play a role in leukemogenesis.
Though certain viruses alter chromosomes, induce leukemia in experimental animals, and cause
97

origin of leukemia, for subtlety in the mode of

agents which predispose to leukemia do not also
predispose to lymphoma (12) . On the other hand,
genetically induced disorders characterized by severe immunologic deficiency carry a high risk of
lymphoma and probably of acute lymphocytic leukemia, but, so far as we know, there is no predisposition to granulocytic leukemia. These observations
indicate that in etiologic studies it is desirable to
separate the various forms of leukemia from one

transmission may defy present technics to reveal it.
It is noteworthy that diseases or environmental

system.

human tissue culture to undergo malignant transformation (1) , no virus has yet been implicated in
the genesis of human leukemia. A large array of
epidemiologic tests have failed to show that the dis-

ease is transmitted from one person to another in
either a vertical or horizontal fashion which suggests an infectious spread (19) . The negative epidemiologic results to date do not disprove the viral

another and from solid tumors of the lymphoid

References
1. Andrewes, C. Tumour viruses and Virus-tumours. Brit.
Med. J., 1: 653-658, 1964.

2. Barber, R., and Spier.% P. Oxford Survey of Childhood

Cancer; Progress Report II. Monthly Bull. Minist. Health
(London) , 23: 46-52, 1964.

3. Bizzozero, 0. J., Johnson, K. G., and Ciocco, A. Radiation-related Leukemia in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 1946-64.
I. Distribution, Incidence and Appearance Time, New Engl.
J. Med., 274: 1095-1101, 1966.

16. Kay, H. E. M., Lawler, S. D., and Millard, R. E. The
Chromosomes in Polycythemia Vera. Brit. J. Haematol., 12:
507-528, 1966.

17. MacMahon, B., and Levy, M. A. Prenatal Origin of
Childhood Leukemia. Evidence from Twins. New Engl. J
Med., 270: 1082-1085, 1964.

18. Miller, R. W. Down's Syndrome (Mongolism), Other
Congenital Malformations and Cancers Among Sibs of Leukemic Children. New Engl. J. Med., 268: 393-401, 1963.

4. Bloom, A. D., Neriishi, S., Kamada, N., Iseki, T., and
Keehn, R. J. Cytogenetic Investigation of Survivors of the
Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Lancet, 2:

19. Miler, R. W. Radiation, Chromosomes and Viruses
in the Etiology of Leukeuia: Evidence from Epidemiologic

672-674, 1966.

20. Milks, R. W. Etiology of Childhood Leukemia: Epic' 'etiologic Evidence. Pediat. Clin. North Am., 13: 267-277,

5. Bloom, G. E., Warner, S., Gerald, P. S., ;..;id Diamond,
L. K. Chromosome Abnormalities in Constitutional Aplastic
Anemia. New Engl. J. Med., 274: 8-14, 1966.

6. Borges, W. H., Nicklas, J. W., and Hamm, C. W.
Prezygotic Determinants in Acute Leukemia. J. Pediat., 70:
180-184, 1967.

7. Brill, A. B., Tomonaga. M., and Heyssel, R. M. Leukemia in Man Following Exposure to Ionizing Radiation:
Summary of Findings in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and Comparison with other Human Experience. Ann. Intern. Med.,
56: 590-609, 1962.

8. Cohen, M. M., Marinello, M. J., and Back, N. Chromosomal Damage in Human Leukocytes Induced by Lysergic
acid Diethylamide. Science, 155: 1417-1419, 1967.

9. Cohen, M. M., and Shaw, M. W. Specific Effects of
Viruses and Antimetabolites on Mammalian Chromosomes.
In: Tissue Culture Association: The Chromosome; Structural and Functional Aspects; a Symposium Organized by
George Yerganian, Miami, June 1-4, 1965 In Vitro, Vol. 1.,
pp. 50-66.

Research. New i.ngl. J. Med., 271: 30-36, 1964.

1966.

21. Miller, R. W. Relation between Cancer and Congenital Defects in Man. New Engl. J. Med., 275: 87-93, 1966.
22. Modan, B., and Lilienfeld, A. M. Polycythemia Vera

and Leukemia-the Role of Radiation Treatment. A Study
of 1222 Patients. Medicine, 14: 305-344, 1965.

23. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Statistics

of the United States, Annual Report, 1964. Washington,
D.C.: U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1964.

24. Nichols, W. W. Studies on the Role of Viruses in
Somatic Mutation. Hereditas, 55: 1-27, 1966.

25. Randall, D. L., Reiquam, C. W., Githens, J. H., and
Robinson, A. Familial Myeloproliferative Disease. A New
Syndrome Closely Simulating Myelogenous Leukemia in
Childhood. Am. J. Diseases Children, 110: 479-500, 1965.
26. Sawitsky, A., Bloom, D., and German, J. Chromosomal
Breakage and Acute Leukemia in Congenital Telangiectatic
Erythema and Stunted Growth. Ann. Intern. Med., 65: 487-

10. Court Brown, W. M., and Doll, R. Mortality from
Cancer and Other Causes after Radiotherapy for Ankylosing

495, 1966.

Spondylitis. Brit. Med. J., 2: 1327-1332, 1965.

Trisomie (Patau-Syndrome) mit kongenitaler myeloischer
Leukamie. Med. Welt., 50: 2690-2692, 1962.

11. Court Brown, W. M., Harnden, D. G., Jacobs, P. A.,
MacLean, N., and Mantle, D. J. Abnormalities of the Sex
Chromosome Complement in Man. (Med. Research Council,
Spec. Rept., Series No. 305.) 239 pp. London: Her Majesty's
Stationery Office, 1964.

12. Fraumeni, J. F., and Miller, R. W. Epidemiology of
Human Leukemia: Recent Observations. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst., 38: 593-605, 1967.

13. Hecht, F., Koler, R. D., Rigas, D. A., Dahnke, G. S.,
Case, M. P., Tisdale, V., and Miller, R. W. Leukaemia and
Lymphocytes in Ataxia-Telangiectasia. Lancet, 2: 1193, 1966.

14. Hewitt, D., Lashof, J. C., and Stewart, A. M. Childhood Cancer in Twins. Cancer, 19: 157-161, 1966.
15. Jablon, S., Neel, J. V., Gershowitz, H., and Atkinson,
G. F. The NAS-NRC Twin Panel: Methods of Construction
of the Panel, Zygosity Diagnosis and Proposed Use. Am. J.
Hum. Genet., 19: 133-161, 1967.

98

27. Schade, H., Schoeller, L., and Schultze, K. W. D.

28. Schull, W. J., and Ned, J. V. The Effects of Inbreeding in Japanese Children. New York: Harper & Row, 1965.
29. Stewart, A. Aetiology of Childhood Malignancies. Con-

genitally Determined Leukaemias. Brit. Med. J., 1: 452-460,
1961.

30. Tough, I. M., and Court Brown, W. M. Chromosome
Aberrations and Exposure to Ambient Benzene. Lancet, 1:
684, 1965.

31. Vigliani, E. C., and Saita, G. Benzene and Leukemia.
New Engl. J. Med., 271: 872-876, 1964.

32. Zuelzer, W. W., Thompson, R. I., and Mastrangelo, R.

Chromatid Exchange and Breakage in the Pedigree of a
Child with Leukemia and Partial D-Trisomy: Evidence for
a Genetic Factor in Leukemogenesis and Congenital Malformations. (Abstr.). Blood, 28: 1008, 1966.

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
SCIENCE, Vol. 155, No. 3768, pp. 1117 -1119, March 17, 1967

Chromosomal Damage in Human Leukocytes
induced by Lysergic Acid Diethylamide
MAIMON M. COHEN, MICHELE J. MARINELLO and NATHAN BACK

Abstract. Addition of lysergic acid diethylamide
to cultured human leukocytes resulted in a marked
increase of chromosomal abnormalities. The distribution of chromosome breaks deviated significantly
from random, with an accumulation of aberrations
in chromosome No. 1. Cytogenetic investigation of
a patient extensively treated with this drug over a
4-year period for paranoid schizophrenia showed a
similar increase in chromosomal damage.
The induction of chromosomal abnormalities by
various exogenous agents has been studied extensively (1, 2) . In addition, compounds with specific
pharmacologic and chemotherapeutic value cause
chromosome damage (3) . The psychotomimetic
agent lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25), when
added to cultures of human peripheral leukocytes,
produces a marked increase in the frequencies of
chromosomal breaks and rearrangements compared
to untreated cultures.
Chromosomal preparations were made from cultures of whole blood with a microtechnique and
standard procedures (4) . All cultures were incubated for 72 hours at 37°C, and colcemide (0.05

pg/ml) was added for the last 2 hours of culture
to arrest cells at metaphase. Lysergic acid diethyla-

mide was dissolved in sterile distilled water and
added to the cultures in various concentrations
(100, 50, 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 pg/m1 of culture) for different periods of exposure before harvest (48, 24, and 4 hours) . Concentrations of 100
and 50 pg/ml caused cellular degeneration and sup-

pressed mitosis so that the number of analyzable
cells was insufficient. Leukocytes obtained from two

healthy individuals (one male and one female)
were treated with LSD-25 at final concentrations of
10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001 dug /ml for 48, 24, and 4 hours.

Each concentration and exposure time was repeated

twice. The controls consisted of untreated cultures from these two individuals as well as from
four additional persons, two males and two females.

Several slides from each culture were prepared
and coded by individuals who did not participate
in the microscopic scoring of the cells. It was hoped

that 25 metaphases per slide could be obtained to
yield a total of 200 cells for each concentration and

time period. However, in some of the treated
cultures, we could not find this number of cells.
Well-spread mitoses were selected under low magnification (X 250), and chromosomes were scored
under oil-immersion phase-contrast microscopy (ap-

proximately X 1560). Once a cell was selected
under low power, it was included in the study.

Abnormalities were scored as breaks only if a
dear discontinuity of the chromatid was visible.
Breaks were classified as "chromatid" if only one
chromatid was affected and "isochromatid" if both
sister chromatids were broken at the same location.
Both of these types of abnormalities were scored as
single breaks. Single fragments were induded with
chromatid breaks while "double' fragments were
scored as isochromatid breaks. Dicentric chromosomes and "translocation" configurations were considered as containing two breaks. Attenuated,
pale-staining chromosomal regions, other than the
normal secondary constrictions, were scored sepa-

rately as "gaps" but were not induded in the
calculation of breakage rates. Whenever possible,

each break was assigned to a given identifiable
chromosome or chromosome group according to
the Denver classification (5).
Since there was no observable difference in the
responses of the two individuals, the data for each
treatment were pooled. Table 1 illustrates the dis-

99

tribution of chromosomal abnormalities observed
for various exposure times and concentrations of
the drug. At least a twofold increase in the rate of
chromosomal breaks over the control rate was evident for all treatments (except 0.001 pg/m1 for 4
hours). A relationship between dose and response
existed; however, this appeared to be time dependent. The highest concentration (10 pg/ml)
caused greater damage in shorter incubation times,

an indication that the longer exposure may have
caused cellular destruction. The same effect is also
noted with a concentration of 1.0 pg /ml in the 48hour treatment. Conversely, with 0.001 pg/ml,
more chromosomal damage was evident at longer

exposure times, while, with the 4-hour exposure
with this dosage, a direct reduction in the number
of chromosome breaks was observed.

Table 2 depicts the distribution of chromosome

Table 1- DISTRIBUTION OF CHROMOSOMAL BREAKS INDUCED IN CULTURED HUMAN LEUKOCYTES BY
VARIOUS DOSAGES OF AND TIMES OF EXPOSURE TO LSD-25. DATA ARE GIVEN AS BREAKS PER NUMBER OF

CELLS. FIGURES IN PARENTHESES DENOTE BREAKS PER CELL

Don* (M/mi)

Time before

harvest
(hours)

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

48

15/164

13/194

41/125

19/200

27/195

(0.091)

(0.067)

(0.328)

(0.095)

24

22/200

46/125

34/175

28/175

(0.110)

(0.368)

(0.194)

4

38/150

18/200

23/200

28/200

72/175
(0216)
10/200

(0.253)

(0.090)

(0.115)

(1.148)

(0.050)

Control

(0.138)

(0-160)

34/925 = (0.037)

Table 2.-DISTRIBUTION OF CHROMOSOME BREAKS ACCORDING TO INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE
CHROMOSOMES OR CHROMOSOME GROUPS. THERE WERE 35 UNIDENTIFIABLE FRAGMENTS AND
BREAKS. DATA ARE GIVEN AS NUMBERS OF BREAKS.
Distribution by chromosome group

Al

A2

AS

74

28

18

33

161

30.8

28.8

24.1

43.0

131.9

Total

Observed
15

16

7

2

354

35.6

30.6

16.1

13.1

354.0

7.0

5.1

9.4

1042

Expected

Chi-square test
60.6
Lt. 3=0

1.5

2.3

6.4

11.9

P < .001.

breaks among the various identifiable chromosomes
or chromosome groups. The test of significance in-

ing these longer exposure times, while 4 hours be-

dicates a nonrandom distribution of breaks (P <
0.001) , with a disproportionate accumulation of
anomalies in chromosome No. 1. The array of ex-

DNA synthesis) of the cell cycle. Since in most cases

pected values is based on random breakage per unit
of chromatin as calculated from the Denver measurements (5) . Studies of other agents inducing
nonrandom breakage of human chromosomes have
demonstrated "hot spots" in the heterochromatic
regions of chromosome No. 1 [for example, the cen-

tromere and secondary constriction (2)]. Lysergic
acid diethylamide also shows an apparent affinity
for these chromosomal regions.
At most concentrations, the greatest damage was
induced by 24- and 48-hour exposure periods.
Although the leukocyte system is not an absolutely
synchronized cell population, a large proportion

of the cells seen at metaphase after 72 hours of
culture must have been in either the GI (before
DNA synthesis) or S (DNA synthesis) period dur100

fore harvest the cells are in the G2 period (after
the lowest frequency of breaks was observed after
this 4-hour exposure (except where the dose was 10
pg/ml), LSD-25 may cause chromosome breaks
during the Gl or S period of the cell cyde. Figure
1, a-d, illustrates typical chromosomal aberrations
observed in vitro.

We also studied the leukocytes of one patient
who had undergone extensive treatment with LSD25 in conjunction with psychotherapy for paranoid
schizophrenia. This patient is a 51-year-old male

who, with the exception of his schizophrenia, is
physically healthy with no history of malignancy,
viral infection, or radiation treatment other than
routine diagnostic procedures. From 30 September
1960 to 9 March 1966 he had a total of 15 treatments with LSD-25. The ingested dosages were 80,
100 (three times), 150, and 175 pg for the first six

treatments, while the last nine treatments were

i
rib

I

vie

#

ipak-

elk

0.4202

Figure 1.Partial cells with various chromosomal abnormalities induced by LSD-25 (approximately X MOO). (a) Arrows indicate dicentric chromosomes seen in two cells. In the cell on left notice two double fragments and one single fragment.
(b) Chromatid exchanges from three different crib. (c) Single chromatid breaks. (d) Isochromatid breaks. (e) Chromosomal
anomalies in leukocytes of the patient treated with LSD-25 (quadriradial and two chromatid breaks).

with 200 pg. Leukocyte cultures were initiated for
chromosomal preparations 8 months after the last

treatment. There was no other known ingestion
of drugs of any kind during thi3 interval. The
chromosome breakage rate of 200 cells in metaphase was 12 percent compared to the normal 3.7
percent. Figure le demonstrates some of the chro-

mosomal anomalies seen in the patient. Of extreme interest is the one quadriradial formation
observed between two No. 1 chromosomes. Such
figures are seen in only extremely low frequencies
in untreated, normal cultures but may be induced
routinely by treatment of human leukocytes with
mitomycin C (6). The genetic consequences of this
phenomenon have been discussed (7). "Quadriradials" and increased chromosomal breakage also
characterize the cytogenetic picture in two syndromesBloom's syndrome and Fanconi's anemia
caused by autosomal recessive genes (8) . Such

exchange figures also are frequently observed in
tumor cells as well as cells that have undergone
"malignant transformation" by the oncogenic virus
SV40 (9) . It is also of interest that patients with
Bloom's syndrome and Fanconi's anemia demonstrate an increased frequency of developing neoplasia (10) .

Since the patient we studied had been treated
for short periods of time with the tranquilizing
drugs chlorpromazine (thorazine) and chlordiazepoxide (librium) before and during treatment with
LSD, our cytological findings should be interpreted
with caution. However, screening of chromosomes
from 35 schizophrenic patients, some of whom were

treated with these tranquilizers in a double-blind
study, revealed no increase in the frequency of
chromosome breakage over that in untreated individuals (11) .
The significance of these findings cannot yet be
101

assessed fully. However, LSD-25 is apparently another agent which is capable of quickly producing
chromosomal damage in vitro, perhaps in the first
or second division of cultured leukocytes. Moreover,
the observation of increased chromosomal damage
in the patient suggests an additional long-term effect of the drug. Individuals accidentally exposed
to irradiation (12) , therapeutically irradiated (13) ,
or treated with the chemotherapeutic agent 1, 3bis

(2chloroethyl)-1nitrosourea (14) and then stud-

ied long after the initial exposure still manifest increased frequencies of chromosomal abnormalities.
Such studies suggest two possible mechanisms of
LSD action: (i) permanent damage to the stem

cells that may give rise to subsequent leukocytes,
or (ii) damage in the G1 period to long-lived lymphocytes, the damage not being observed as chromosomal abnormalities until mitosis. The latter
may be the more likely hypothesis.
MAIMON M. COHEN
MICHELLE J. MARINELLO

Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, State

University of New York, and Buffalo Children's
Hospital, Buffalo
NATHAN BACK

Department of Biochemical Pharmacology, School
of Pharmacy, Stale University of New York

References and Notes
1. For reviews of induced breakage of chromosomes see:
S. H. Reveil, Heredity 6 (suppl.), 125 (1953); B. A. Kihlman,
Advance. Genet. 10, 1 (1961) .
2. M. M. Cohen and M. W. Shaw, In Vitro (Waverly Press,
Baltimore, 1965) , vol. 1, p. 50.

3. P. E. Conen and G. S. Lansky, Brit. Med. 1. 2, 1055

(1961); F. E. Arrighi, T. C. Hsu, D. E. Bergsagel, Texas Rep.
Biol. Med. 20, 545 (1962) ; M. M. Cohen, M. W. Shaw, A. P.
Craig, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S. 50, 16 (1963) ; P. C. Nowell,
Exp. Cell Res. 33, 445 (1964) ; M. M. Cohen and M. W. Shaw,
I. Cell Biol. 23, 386 (1964) ; T. J. Ryan, M. M. Boddington,
A. J. Spriggs, Brit. J. Dermatol. 77, 541 (1965) ; M. K. Jensen,
Acta Med. Scand. 177, 783 (1965).
4. Cultures were initiated in commercially available diromosome microculture tubes from Grand Island Biological Co.,
Grand Island, N.Y. (chromosome media IA). Chromosomal
preparations were made by following a modification of Moorhead et al. [P. S. Moorhead, P. C. Nowell, W. J. Me lhnan,
D. M. Battips, D. A. Hungerford, Exp. Cell Res. 20, 613
(1960) ].

5. Denver Report, Lancet 1960-I, 1063 (1960).

6. M. M. Cohen and M. W. Shaw, J. Cell Biol. 23, 386
(1964) .

7. M. W. Shaw and M. M. Cohen, Genetics 51, 181 (1965) .
8. J. German, R. Archibald, D. Bloom, Science 148, 506
i

(1965) ; G. E. Bloom, S. Warner, P. S. Gerald, L K. Diamond,

New Engl. I. Med. 274, 8 (1966) .
9. T. C. Hsu and G. K. Manna, Amer. Naturalist 93, 207

(1959) ; M. Fraccaro, A. Mannini, L. Tiepolo, C. Zara,
Mutation Res. 2, 559 (1965) ; S. R. Wolman, K. Hinchborn,
G. J. Todaro, Cytogenetia 3, 45 (1964).

10. S. Garriga and W. H. Crosby, Blood 14, 1008 (1959);
G. E. Bloom, S. Warner, P. S. Gerald, L. K. Diamond, New
Engl. J. Med. 274, 8 (1966); A. Sawitsky, D. Bloom, J. L.
German, Ann. Intern. Med. 65, 486 (1966) .
11. A. A. Sandberg, unpublished data.

12. M. A. Bender and P. C. Gooch, Radiation Res. 16, 44
(1962) .

13. K. L Budcton, P. A. Jacobs, W. M. Court-Brown, R.
Doll, Lancet 1962 II, 676 (1962); J. Visfeldt, Acta Radiol.
2, 95 (1964) ; M. M. Nofal and W. H. Beierwaltes, I. Nucl.
Med. 5, 849 (1964) ; W. D. Macdiarmid, Quart. J. Med. 34,
133 (1965) ; A. Dekaban, I. Nucl. Med. 6, 740 (1965) .
14. K. Harrod, J. Cortner, A. A. Sandberg, Proc. Soc.
Pediat. Res. (1966).
15. Supported in part by US. Children's Bureau Project
No. 417. We thank Dr. R. Bircher, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals,
for the supply of LSD given to N. Back; Dr. Eleanor Jacobs

for referral of the patient; and Dr. Margery W. Shaw for
critical reading of the manuscript.
14 December 1966

Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from
THE JOURNAL OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE, Vol. 144, No. 6, pp. 471-478,1967

Copyright 1967, The Williams e.: . Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Maryland 21202, USA.

Therapeutic Effects of LSD: A Follow-up Study
CHARLES SHAGASS, M.D.1 AND ROBERT M. BITTLE, M.D.2

Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) has been used
to treat many psychiatric patients, but its status as
a therapeutic agent remains uncertain and controversial. Specific indications for therapy with LSD
have not been established, although there is some
evidence that patients with conduct disturbances,

e.g., chronic alcoholics and sexual deviates, tend
to respond favorably even to limited treatment (3,
4) . The present investigation was carried out in an
attempt to define some indications for LSD therapy

and to develop prognostic indicators. The study
was divided into two phases: the first focused on the
relationship between insightful experience produced by LSD and swift clinical improvement; the
second extended the study to evaluate the stability
of this improvement by studying the patients a year
after LSD treatment.
Results of the first phase have been reported previcusly by Eggert and Shagass (6) . This aspect of

the study was designed to test the assumption that
patients who react to LSD with an insightful response are more likely to show favorable behavioral
change than those who do not. One aim was to determine clinical criteria predictive of insightful response.

Other authors have used terms such

as "mystical," "cosmic," "psychedelic" and "consciousness-expanding" to designate the insightful
response (7, 8). For the purposes of this study an
insightful response occurred if, during an LSD session, the patient experienced early memories and
1 Temple University Medical Center and Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute, 3300 Henry Avenue, Philadelphia,
Pa., 19129.

This study was conducted at the Psychopathic Hospital,
Iowa City, Iowa. The cooperation of the medical staff, directed by Dr. Paul E. Huston, is gratefully acknowledged.
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals supplied the LSD.

2 Psychopathic Hospital, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa.

altered his perception of his relationships to the
world; if he related these memories and fresh perceptions to his present problem; and if he made a
convincing resolution to change his future behavior
as a consequence of his new understanding.
Patients who responded to LSD therapy with insightful experiences of this kind were distinguished
from those who showed no such response by rater5

who listened to tape recordings of the sessions.
Eight patients were classified as "responders," and
12 were classified as "nonresponders."
Seven of the eight responders were found to be
among nine patients who had been diagnosed as
psychopathic personality because they showed five
of 15 criteria for this diagnosis designated in the
Small (10) structured interview. The results, demonstrated a significant relationship between psychopathic personality characteristics and a tendency to

react to LSD with an insightful response. It was
also found that no subject under 22 years of age
was classified as a responder.

The present report deals with results from the
second phase of the study, a follow-up evaluation
of the same 20 patients after one year. Obviously,
the prognostic value of predicting immediate insightful response to LSD depends upon the later
clinical course associated with the type of immediate response. Although the answer to this question
rests on comparisons of outcome in the responder
and nonresponder groups, the design of the follow-up study also permitted comparison of outcome

in all patients treated with LSD with that of a
matched group of patients who were not given LSD.
Methods
SUB JECTS

Subjects were 20 psychiatric inpatients at the Psychopathic Hospital, Iowa City, Iowa. All submitted
103

voluntarily to treatment and signed a special exper-

of the LSD session totaling about 60 to 90 minutes.

imental treatment release form. A deliberate attempt was made to recruit patients with conduct
disturbances. Ten subjects were court-referred or

Ratings were on a scale from 0 to 3+. The raters
had available full routine case material about each
patient but not the structured interview data. A 3+
rating was assigned to sessions in which there was
reliving of forgotten childhood experiences, inte-

had some legal problem related to psychiatric contact. Ages ranged from 16 to 36 years (median, 24) ;
13 were men. Selection procedures were designed
to exclude subjects with overt psychoses, mental retardation and brain syndromes. Small's (10) struc-

tured interview was used to clinically evaluate
patients prior to LSD administration. All responses
to standard questions were recorded verbatim on a
protocol sheet; these were then used to complete a
check list of diagnostic criteria, which led to classification according to predetermined rules. Although

gration of this material, and realistic self-acceptance

with the resolution to improve. Ratings of the two
observers were identical in 11 of 20 cases anu within
one point in 18 of 20. Ratings were skewed toward

the zero end of the scale, but it was possible to
divide the cases into those responding more and
those responding less by taking a mean rating of
1.0 or more to indicate a responder.

the classification system differs in some respects
from that of the American Psychiatric Association,
use of the Small procedure insures greater reliability because it reduces variability. By this method

FOLLOW-UP PROCEDURE

the patients were grouped in the following diagnostic categories: psychopathic personality, nine cases;
exogenous depression, five; psychoneurotic reac-

treated with LSD the hospital records were searched
to find a patient treated by means other than LSD,
who would match the LSD case closely for age, sex,
marital status, years of education, psychiatric diagnosis, and for his pattern of symptoms and deviant

tion, four; schizophrenic reaction, one; no diagnosis, one. The patient diagnosed as schizophrenic
reaction was not at the time obviously psychotic,
although later observation verified this diagnosis.

No patients received drugs for at least 48 hours
before test injections; only five had taken medications for their present condition.

Case histories were reviewed, and a list of symp-

toms and deviant behavior characteristic of each

LSD patient was compiled. For every patient

behavior. Due to the large number of hospital
cases available, it was possible to achieve satisfactory matching. Two examples presented in Table 1
illustrate the similarity of clinical features in LSD

and control patients. All LSD cases and their
matched controls were contacted by letter; letters

TREATMENT PROCEDURE

were also sent to significant relatives such as parents

LSD was administered intravenously at a dose of
2.5 mg/kg body weight. In this group it was given

and spouse. If the letter did not elicit a response,
telephone calls were placed. Appointments were
then made for both the patients and their relatives
to be seen and interviewed. Those who could not

only once. The intravenous method was used to
speed the action of the drug and to reduce variability of response due to absorption differences. Preparation for the drug sessions consisted of at least
six interview hours over a seven- to 14-day period.
In these interviews current problems were explored
and subjects were informed that the drug session
could lead to unusual and important experiences.
Sessions took place in the office of the investigator
who administered the drug and stayed with the patient almost continuously from 9 A.M. until evening;
he attempted to maintain a supportive, interested

and generally nondirective attitude. At bedtime
chloropromazine, 25 to 50 mg, was administered.
Twelve patients also received 20 mg of methamphetamine intravenously on another day (alternate
order of administration) in an attempt to compare
the effects of the two drugs. However, it was found
that observers could easily distinguish between LSD
and methamphetamine.
CLASSIFICATION OF INSIGHTFUL RESPONSE

Degree of insightful response to LSD was rated
independently by two psychiatrists, not otherwise
involved in the study, from tape-recorded samples
104

come to the hospital were interviewed by telephone,

as were the relatives. In one instance, the whereabouts of the patient was unknown, so only his wife
was interviewed. In another case, the patient was in

prison, and an interview was conducted by the
prison psychiatrist, v.ho followed a prescribed interview schedule.

Each patient and relative was asked to rate
changes in symptoms and deviant behavior listed
for that patient at six months and 12 months following treatment with LSD, or following discharge
from hospital in the group not treated with LSD.
The patient and his relative were also asked to note
improvement in any particular aspect of behavior.
If there had been improvement, they were asked to
rate its degree on a 4-point scale wi..h steps defined
as 25, 50, 75 or 100 per cent. A 100 per cent improvement was indicated if the behavior or symptom in question was no longer a problem to the
individual or his family. Improvement ratings
were coded on a scale from 0 to 4, and the ratings
of the patient and his relative were averaged for
each manifestation.

Table 1.TWO EXAMPLES OF CASE MATCHING

I

LSD Case

Manifestation Rated

Control

Case 1

Dexedrine habituation
Overt homosexuality
Excessive useother meds.
Poor relationship to females
Anxiety and depression
Feels sexually inadequate

who had insightful responses during the LSD session were considered much more improved at six
months than those classified as nonresponders (p
< .001) . The LSD responders were still significantly more improved than the nonresponders at 12
months (p < .02) but the difference was not as
great.

Table 2 also shows the mean change in ratings of
improvement between six and 12 months and the
significance of the difference. Only the LSD nonresponders showed acceptably significant continuing improvement (p < .01) . Clinical improvement
tended to recede between six and 12 months in the
LSD responder group.

Case 2
Checks with insufficient
funds
Embezzlement (S13,000)

Extorting money from people

The data were examined to determine whether

Lying
Excessive drinking
Sexual promiscuity

particular behavior or symptom areas showed
greater change in response to LSD; responders and

Conflict with authority
Poor work record
Gambling
Irresponsible to family
Feels inadequate

nonresponders were also compared along these
lines. Table 3 shows some comparisons in three behavior areas. The small number of cases precluded
meaningful statistical tests on these findings. How-

Indicates presence.

Results

In view of the diversity of symptom and behavioral manifestations, it seemed reasonable to compare overall ratings of clinical change. The change
ratings from 0 to 4 were averaged to achieve a single
overall change rating at six and 12 months for each

patient. Mean ratings were then compared for the
LSD-treated and non-LSD-treated group and for
the LSD responders and nonresponders. A summary
of the follow-up results is shown in Table 2. Statistical significance was evaluated by means of t-test
(two-tailed) . It is seen that the LSD-treated group
at six months was rated significantly more im-

proved than the control group (p < .05). At 12
months, the LSD group still showed greater improvement (p < .02) . Within the LSD group, those

ever, the LSD responders showed more improvement than any other group in the areas of sexual
behavior and excessive use of alcohol or drugs. On
the other hand, in ratings of school, home or job
performance, the considerable improvement of the
LSD responder group at six months had largely
vanished by the 12-month period, so that these pa-

tients had the same mean change rating as the
group which did not receive LSD.
Discussion

The results indicate that, as a group, patients
treated with LSD showed more improvement than

similar patients not so treated. Furthermore, the
LSD patients who showed the greatest clinical improvement were those who displayed an insightful

response during or within 24 hours of the single
LSD treatment session. These patients, most of

Table 2.FOLLOW-UP RESULTS
i

Mean Ratings of Overall Change
Subject Group

LSD (N = 20)
No LSD (N = 29)

At 6 mos

At 12 mos

1.69 ± 0.39

1.94 ± 0.30

p

0.82 ± 0.20
< .05
3.09 ± 0.45
0.76 ± 0.32

p

< .001

LSD responders (N = 8)
LSD nonresponders (N = 12)

1.03 ± 020
< .02
2.51 ± 0.46
1.55 ± 0.38
< .02

Change from 6 to 12 mos
Mean

LSD responders (N = 8)
LSD nonresponders (N = 12)
No LSD (N = 20)

0.58 ± 0.27

P

.10

0.79 ± 0.19

< .01

021 ± 0.12

.10

*Stands-d error of mean.

105

Table 3.COMPARISONS WITH RESPECT TO SOME
BEHAVIOR AREAS

Behavior Area

Mean Rating of
Change

6 mos

12 mos

3.83
2.00
1.64

2.83
2.00
1.64

2.80
0.25
0.00

2.40
0.50
0.00

3.20
0.00

1.60

1.08

1.62

A. Sexual
LSD responders (N = 6)
LSD nonresponders (N = 5)
No LSD (N = 11)
B. Excessive alcohol or drugs

LSD responders (N = 5)
LSD nonresponders (N = 4)
No LSD (N = 7)
C. School, home or job performance

LSD responders (N = 5)
LSD nonresponders (N = 8)
No LSD (N = 13)

0.88

Homosexuality, frigidity, impotency. promiscuity.

whom had disorders of conduct, were initially di-

agnosed as psychopathic personalities with the
Small structured interview (10) . The findings suggest that Small's criteria for this diagnosis can be
used to select candidates for LSD therapy. An im-

tion of the ratings of change given by the patient
and his relatives. Different clinical outcomes also
could have resulted from differential motivation for
treatment. However, this seems unlikely since ten

patients of the LSD group were court-referred or
had some legal problem relevant to hospital admission, such as threat of divorce; and similar legal
problems were present in nine of the patients not
treated with LSD. It is also obvious that the group
was small and that any generalizations based on a
small sample must viewed with great caution. However, similar findings have been obtained by other

workers from different countries. For example,
Johnsen (7) noted in his large series of cases that
sexual perverts and psychopaths frequently had
"deep emotional reactions with cosmic and mystic
experiences" to LSD, whereas compulsive neurotics
rarely reported such experiences.
Some LSD patients interviewed in the follow-up
study indicated that they had recently begun to relapse and asked for additional treatment. One such
case was a 25-year-old homosexual man who had
achieved his first heterosexual intercourse six weeks
after his LSD treatment and had managed to estab-

mediate check on the adequacy of selection is

lish a relatively stable relationship with a woman

provided by the LSD treatment session itself; for
those patients who experience an insightful response can be expected to show relatively swift
clinical improvement. Since only those patients

until about eight months following this treat-

who were 22 years of age or older showed insightful

responses to LSD, age may also be an important
variable.
Although results from the follow-up study clearly

indicated that the LSD group showed more improvement than the matched control group, it
seemed possible that the difference might be due to

other forms of psychiatric treatment. That is, patients in the LSD group might also have had more
follow-up treatment than control patients. When
case records were examined to check this possibility,
the results confirmed the opposite conclusion: three

LSD cases had weekly psychotherapy in the year

following treatment, but 13 control cases had
weekly psychotherapy during this period.
It is of interest that the patients given LSD and
classified as nonresponders tended to show significant improvement in a more gradual manner, so
that they were rated as more improved at 12 months
than at six months. In contrast, the LSD responders

improved dramatically almost immediately but
tended to show signs of relapse at a mean interval
of about seven months following their LSD session.
Certain aspects of the study are clearly open to
criticism, particularly the fact that the interviewer
knew which patients had received LSD. It would be
extremely difficult to avoid this problem, because of
the distinctive effects of LSD. It can only be stated
that the interviewer attempted to avoid interpreta106

ment. At this point he had begun to have homosexual fantasies once again and stopped dating. He
was readmitted for another LSD treatment session,
after which he felt that he had solved his problem.
But he returned again after one month saying that
he feared a relapse. He was readmitted once again
for an additional treatment. At this time he stated

that he was certain that his problem was solved.
Following this third LSD session he left the hospital
confident that he could maintain a heterosexual adjustment and he has succeeded in doing so for many
months. Such cases suggest that follow-up contact
after LSD treatment is desirable and that readmission for further sessions should be very seriously

considered when there is impending relapse. It is
noteworthy that most cases of relapse did not occur
suddenly; as in the case cited, an interview would
be likely to disclose the change in fantasy content

which could be used as indication for further
therapy.

It is also possible that a series of concentrated
LSD sessions may yield results superior to those obtained with single treatments. In an LSD study currently in progress we have found several patients
in whom insightful response appeared only with a

second or third injection of LSD. In no case did
a fourth treatment produce an insightful response
when the first three had failed to elicit one.
Workers using LSD for psychotherapeutic purposes have frequently introduced adjunctive procedures, such as intensive psychotherapy and hypnosis
(2) or sensory stimulation, such as music and pic-

tures into the LSD sessions. We used no procedures
of this kind. We deliberately refrained from interpretive comments, assumed a nondirective attitude,

and allowed the patient to arrive at his own insights during the LSD sessions and subsequently.
Despite this nondirective approach, the responses of

the patients, e.g., insights concerning their relationship to the world and realization of the need to
respect other persons' dignity, were similar to those
recorded by other observers using more forceful psychotherapeutic intervention (4) . Many of our patients were motivated by external pressures to seek
treatment for problem behavior, and, in our psychotherapeutic preparations for the LSD session attempts were made to define the behavior problem
which required assistance. The working hypothesis
underlying this approach is that the probability of
favorable behavioral change with LSD is increased
in individuals in whom the behavior to be changed
can be specified. It follows that problems, such as

homosexuality or consuming too much alcohol,
might be more amenable to change than those
which involve multiple activities and which can be

described only in a general way, e.g., passiveaggressive behavior. Our results support this expectation.

General personality assets of patients may also
furnish prognostic cues for LSD treatment. Patients
with good ego assets in spheres other than their
personality deviation appeared to show more favor-

able change. The apparent relationship between
favorable result and age may also be a function of
the level of personality development.
It is important to emphasize that LSD treatments
were administered to hospitalized patients under
closely supervised conditions and that careful observation was maintained for at least 24 hours after
the treatment. These conditions were instituted at
the beginning of our work with LSD in accordance

with a general attitude of caution and maximal
safety. The necessity of such careful supervision is
documented by recent reports of prolonged adverse
reactions to LSD (5). Although careful selection of
patients will, hopefully, minimize possible complications of LSD therapy, they can be recognized and

dealt with only in a controlled setting. Furthermore, it seems possible that the supervised setting,
designed to diminish the patient's anxiety as well
as to promote safety, may be an essential condition
for therapeutic benefit.
Several observations raise questions about the

duration of LSD effects and their relation to the
immediate response. The fact that the LSD-treated
nonresponder group showed continuous improvement between six- and 12-month follow-ups raises
the question, "Can one LSD experience facilitate
personality growth over a long subsequent period
of time, even though there is little immediate be-

havioral change?" The tendency of those who
showed the greatest immediate behavioral change
to relapse after several months gives the impression
that, in some way, effects of the drug could have
continued to be present for several months before
they gradually disappeared. Observable neurophysiological changes produced by one dose of LSD in
man are usually no longer evident after 24 hours
(9) . However, Adey et al. (1) observed some electrical effects lasting for about a week after LSD in
the hippocampal regions of the cat, so that longlasting functional changes in some brain areas seem
quite possible.

Results to date support the view that immediate
and subsequent reaction to LSD may be predicted
from clinical observations and that the drug has
favorable therapeutic benefits in a category of patients otherwise very difficult to treat. Further exploration of the use of LSD in treatment appears
indicated; and research elucidating the mechanism
of action of the drug should contribute in an important way to psychiatric pathophysiolugy.
Summary
Twenty psychiatric patients treated with a single
large dose of LSD were studied to determine degree

of improvement in symptoms and problem behavior six months and one year after treatment. Clinical change in the LSD-treated group was compared
with that in a patient group matched for age, sex,
education, marital status, psychiatric diagnosis and
clinical manifestations. The LSD group was divided
into two groups: those displaying an immediate insightful response to LSD (responders) and those
failing to do so (nonresponders). The responder
group was found to consist mainly of patients with
diagnoses of psychopathic personality and all were
at least 22 years old.
Patients treated with LSD showed greater improvement than those in whom LSD was not used,
even though two-thirds of the non-LSD group received systematic psychotherapy compared to only
one-sixth of the LSD group. The LSD responders
showed significantly more improvement than the
LSD nonresponders. However, the responder group

showed a tendency to relapse after six months,
whereas the nonresponder group showed progressive improvement between six and 12 months.
It was concluded that patients with specific conduct disorders, who otherwise have reasonably well
developed personality assets, are probably the most
favorable candidates for LSD therapy. Although the
probability of relapse is high after six months, successful retreatment has been demonstrated. Several
possible shortcomings of the study, including the
small number of cases, invite caution in interpretation of results, but they clearly encourage further
study of the use of LSD in treatment.
107

References
1. Adey, W. R., Porter, R., Walter, D. 0. and Brown, T. S.
Prolonged effects of LSD on EEG records during discrimina-

6. Eggert, D. C. and Shagass, C. Clinical prediction of insightful response to a single large dose of LSD. Psychophar-

tive performance in cat: Evaluation by computer analysis.

macologia (Berlin), 9: 340-346, 1966.

Electroenceph. Clin. Neurophysiol., 18: 25-35, 1965.

2. Alnaes, R. Therapeutic application of the change in
consciousness produced by psycholytica (LSD, psyloc) bin,
etc.) . In Janssen, B., ed. Report on the 14th Congress of

Scandinavian Psychiatrists. Acta Psychiat. Scand., Suppl. 180,
pp. 397-409, 1964.

3. Ball, J. R. and Armstrong, J. J. The use of LSD 25
(d-lysergic acid diethylamide) in the treatment of sexual perversions. Canad. Psychiat. Ass. J., 6: 231-235, 1961.
4. Chwelos, N., Blewett, D. B., Smith, C. M. and Hoffer, A.
Use of d-lysergic acid diethylamide in the treatment of alcoholism. Quart. J. Stud. Alcohol, 20: 577-590, 1959.
5. Cohen, S. A classification of LSD complications. Psychosomatics, 7: 182-186, 1966.

108

7. Johnsen, G. Three years experience with the use of LSD
as an aid in psychotherapy. In Janssen, B. ed. Report on the
14th Congress of Scandinavian Psychiatrists. Acta Psychiat.
Scand., Suppl. 180, pp. 383-388, 1964.

8. Osmond, H. A review of the clinical effects of psychotomimetic agents. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 66: 418-434, 1957.

9. Shagass, C. Effects of LSD on somatosensory and visual
evoked responses and on the EEG in man. Recent Advances
Biol. Psychiat., 9: 209-228, 1967.

10. Small, I. F., Small. J. G., Gonzalez, C. R. and Gynther,
M. D. Content reliability of a structured psychiatric interview. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. (Chicago), 11: 192-196, 1964.

Bibliography of Current Articles on the
Possible Genetic Sequelae of Hallucinogenic and Other Drugs
A genetic trip. Journal nt the American Medical
Association, 204:259-260, April 15, 1968.
ADLER, I. D. Cytogenetic investigations of mutagenic action of caffeine in premeiotic spermiogenesis in mice. Humangenetik, 3:82-83, 1966.

duced by Lysergic Acid Diethylamide. Science, 155:
1417-1419, March 17, 1967.
COHEN, M. M., and MUKHERJEE, A. B. Meiotic

ADLER, I. D., and SCHONEICH, J. Mutagenic action

DENSON, R. Effects of LSD on chromosomes. Ca-

of caffeine in an ascites tumour strain of mice: cyto-

nadian Medical Association Journal, 98:609, March

genetic investigation. Humangenetik, 4:374-376,

23, 1968.

1967.

DIPAOLO, J. A., and ALEXANDER, G. J. LSD: effects
on offspring. Science, 158:522, October 27, 1967
DIPAOLO, J. A.; GIVELBER, H. M.; and ERWIN, H.

ALEXANDER, G. J.; MILES, B. E.; and GOLD, G. M.

LSD: Injection early in pregnancy produces abnormalities in offspring of rats. Science, 157:459460, July 28, 1967.
AUERBACH, R., and RUGOWSKI, J. A. Lysergic

Acid Diethylamide: effect on embryos. Science,
157:1325-1326, September 15, 1967.
BABA, T.; NAGAHAMA, M.; and AKIYAMA, N. Ex-

perimental production of malformations due to
acetyl salicylate and phenyl salicylate in rats. Osaka
City Medical Journal, 12:23-29, 1966.
BENDER, L., and SANKAR, D. V. Chromosome dam-

age not found in leukocytes of children treated with
LSD-25. Science, 159:749, February 16, 1968.
BIEBERMAN,

L.

The Psychedelic Information

Center Bulletin, No. 22, February 1969.
BROWNING, L. S. LSD: mutagenic effects in Droso-

phila. Science, 161:1022-1023, September 6, 1968.

Chicago Conference: Standardization in Human
Cytogenetics. Birth Defects: Original Article Series.

Volume 2. New York: The National FoundationMarch of Dimes, December 1966.
COHEN, M. M. LSD and chromosomes. Science
Journal, 4:76-80, September 1968.

chromosome damage induced by LSD-25. Nature,
219:1072-1074, September 7, 1968.

Evaluation of teratogenicity of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide. Nature, 220:490-491, November 2,
1968.
EGOZCUE, J.; IRWIN, S.; and MARUFFO, C. A.

Chromosomal damage in LSD users. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 204:214-218, April
15, 1968.
FABRO, S., and SIEBER, S. M. Is Lysergide a terato-

gen. Lancet, 1:639, March 23, 1968.
FITZGERALD, P. H. Radiomimetic properties of
LSD. New England Journal of Medicine, 278:1404,
June -20, 1968.
FITZGERALD, P. H., and DOBSON, J. R. Lysergide

and chromosomes. Lancet, 1:1036-1037, May 11,
1968.

FRONTINO, G. On the teratogenic effect of some
substances. Archivio Putti, 21:285-301, 1966.
GAUTHIER, J.; MONNET, P.; and SALLE, B. Ectro-

melic type defects. Discussion of the teratogenic
role of medications during pregnancy. Pediatrie,
20:489-493, June 1965.

GEBER, W. F. Congenital malformations in-

W. A. In vivo and in vitro chromosomal damage

duced by Mescaline, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide,
and Bromolysergic Acid in the hamster. Science,

induced by LSD-25. New England Journal of Med-

158:265-267, October 13, 1967.

COHEN, M. M.; HIRSCHHORN, K.; and FROSCH,

icine, 277:1043-1049, November 16, 1967.

GROSSBARD, L.; ROSEN, D.; and MCGILVRAY, E.

COHEN, M. M.; HIRSCHHORN, K.; and VERBO, S.

Acute leukemia with PH1like chromosome in an

The effect of LSD-25 on the chromosomes of children exposed in utero. Pediatric Research, 2:486492, November 1968.

LSD user. Journal of the American Medical Association, 205:791-793, September 9, 1968.
HANAWAY, J. K. Lysergic acid diethylamide: ef-

COHEN, M. M.; MARINELLO, M. J.; and BACK, N.

fects on the developing mouse lens. Science, 164

Chromosomal damage in human leukocytes in-

(3879) :574-575, May 2, 1969.
109

Hazards

of drug prescribing in pregnancy.

British Medical Journal, 3:220-223, July 22, 1967.
HEMING, A. E., and BROWN, J. H. Chemical
mutagenesis. Science, 163 (3873) :1361-1362, March
21, 1969.
HIRSCHHORN, K., and COHEN, M. M. Nonpsychic

effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 67:1109-1111, November 1967.
HOFFELD, D. R.; WEBSTER, R. L.; and MCNEW, J.

Adverse effects on offspring of tranquilizing drugs

during pregnancy. Nature, 215:182-183, July 8,

LSD and chromosomes. British Medical Journal,
4:124-125, October 28, 1967.

LSD and chromosomes. British Medical Journal,
2:778-779, June 29, 1968.
MARTIN,

P. A.

Cannabis and chromosomes.

Lancet, 1 (7590) :370, February 15, 1969.
McCoLL, J. D. Drug toxicity in the animal fetus.
Applied Therapeutics, 9:915-917, November 1967.

McCoLL, J. D. Teratogenicity studies. Applied
Therapeutics, 8:48-52, January 1966.
McCoLL, J. D.; ROBINSON, S.; and GLOBUS, M. Ef-

1967.
HUNGERFORD, D. A.; TAYLOR, K. M.; and SHAGASS,

fect of some therapeutic agents on the rabbit fetus.
Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 10:244-

C. Cytogenetic effects of LSD-25 therapy in man.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 206:

252, March 1967.

2287-2291, December 2, 1968.
IRWIN, S., and EGOZCUE, J. Chromosomal abnormalities in Leukocytes from LSD-25 users. Science,
157:313-314, July 21, 1967.
IRWIN, S., and EGOZCUE, J. Chromosome damage

the answers. Science, 160:1062, June 7, 1968.
NEU, R. L.; POWERS, H. 0.; KING, S.; and GARDNER, L. I. Cannabis and chromosomes. Lancet,
1 (7596) :675, March 29, 1969.

not found in leukocytes of children treated with

verse effects and complications of LSD. Ugeskrift
for Laeger, 130:1381-1384, August 22, 1968.

LSD-25. Science, 159:749, February 16, 1968.
JACOBSON, C. B., and MAGYAR, V. L. Genetic eval-

uation of LSD. Clinical Proceedings of Children's
Hospital of the District of Columbia, 24:153-161,
May 1968.
JARVIK, L. F., and KATO, T. Is Lysergide a tera-

togen. Lancet, 1:250, February 3, 1968.
KING, C. T., and HOWELL, J. Teratogenic effect
of buclizine and hydroxyzine in the rat and chlorcyclizine in the mouse. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 95:109-111, May 1, 1966.
KRUSKAL, W. H., and HABERMAN, S. Chromosomal

effect and LSD: samples of 4. Science, 162:1508, December 27, 1968.
KUHLMANN, W.; FROMME, H. G.; and I- IEEGE,

E. M. The mutagenic action of caffeine in higher
organisms. Cancer Research, 28 (11) :2375-2383,
November 1968.
LARSSON, K. S., and ERIKSSON, M. Salicylate-

induced fetal death and malformations in two
mouse strains. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica, 55:
569-576, November 1966.
LARSSON, K. S.; IVEMARK, B.; and ENGFELDT, B. A

microradiographic study of salicylate-induced skeletal anomalies in mouse embryos. Acta Pathologica
et Microbiologica Scandinavica, 66:560, 1966.
LOUGHMAN, W. D., and SARGENT, T. W. Chromo-

some damage by LSD. Science, 159:1493, March 20,
1968.
LOUGHMAN, W. D.; SARGENT, T. W.; and ISRAEL-

STAM, D. M. Leukocytes of humans exposed to
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: lack of chromosomal
damage. Science, 158:508-510, October 27, 1967.
110

MYERS, W. A. LSD and Marihuana: where are

NIELSEN, J.; FRIEDRICH, U.; and JACOBSEN, E. Ad-

NIELSEN, J.; FRIEDRICH, U.; and JACOBSEN, E. Ly-

sergide and chromosome abnormalities. British
Medical Journal, 2:801-803, June 29, 1968.
NIELSEN, J.; FRIEDRICH, U.; and TSUBOI, T. Chro-

mosome abnormalities and psychotropic drugs. Nature, 218:488-489, May 4, 1968.
PERSUAD, T. V., and ELLINGTON, A. C. Teratogenic

activity of cannabis resin. Lancet, 2 (7564) :406407, August 17, 1968.
PETERS, J. M. Factors affecting caffeine toxicity.
A review of the literature. Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 7:131-141, May-June 1967.
SATO, H., and PERGAMENT, E. Is Lysergide a teratogen. Lancet, 1:639-640, March 23, 1968.

SAX, K., and SAX, H. J. Radiomimetic beverages,

drugs and mutagens. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 55:1431-1435, June
1966.
SCHLEIERMACHER, E.; SCHROEDER, T. M.; and AD-

LER, I. D. Chemically induced mutations in mam-

mals and man. In vivo and in vitro cytogenetic
studies. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift, 92:
2343-2350, December 22, 1967.
SKAKKEBAEK, N. E.; PHILIP, J.; and RAFAELSEN,

0. J. LSD in mice: abnormalities in meiotic chromosomes. Science, 160:1246-1248, June 14, 1968.

SLATIS, H. M. Chromosome damage by LSD.
Science, 159:1492-1493, March 20, 1968.
SMART, R. G., and BATEMAN, K. The chromosomal

and teratogenic effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: a review of the current literature. Candian

Medical Association Journal, 99:805-810, October
26, 1968.
SMITH, D. E., and ROSE, A. J. The use and abuse

of LSD in Haight-Ashbury (observations by the
Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic) . Clinical Pediatrics, 7:317-322, June 1968.
SPARKES, R. S.; MELNYK, J.; and BOZZETTI, L. P.

Chromosomal effect in vivo of exposure to Lysergic

Canadian Medical Association Journal, 100 (4) :223,
January 25, 1969.
WARKANY, J., and TAKACS, E. Lysergic Acid
Diethylamide (LSD) : no teratogenicity in rats.
Science, 159:731-732, February 16, 1968.
WHITMORE, F. W. Chromosomal effect and LSD:
samples of 4. Science, 162:1508-1509, December 27,
1968.

Acid Dieilylamide. Science, 160:1343-1345, June

WILSON, J. G., and GAVAN, J. A. Congenital mal-

21, 1968.
SPARKES, R. S.; THOMAS, D.; and MELNYK, J.
Chromosomal effect and LSD: samples of 4. Science,
162:1509, December 27, 1968.
UHER, J., and DVORAK, K. Drug-induced injuries

formations in nonhuman primates: spontaneous
and experimentally induced. Anatomical Record,
158:99-109, May 1967.
ZELLIVEGER, H..; MCDONALD, J. S.; and ABBO, G.

to the fetus. Ceskoslovenska Gynekologie, 32:337-

Is Lysergic-Acid Diethylamide a teratogen. Lancet,
2:1066-1068, November 18, 1967.

350, June 1967.
VINCE, D. J. Congenital malformations following

Is Lysergide a teratogen. Lancet, 2:1306, December

phenothiazine administration during pregnancy.

16, 1967.

ZELLIVEGER, H.; MCDONALD, J. S.; and ABBO, G.

'Cr U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING arnica: me 04419-337

111

DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH. EDUCATION. AND WELFARE
PUBLIC HEALTH _RV ICE
HEALTH SERVICES AND MENTAL HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH
5454 WISCONSIN AVENUE
CHEVY CHASE MARYLAND 20015

POSTAGE AND FEES PAID
U S. DEPARTMENT OF H.E.W

OFFICIAL BUSINESS

INF ANAL GTR
DIR ERIC
SCIENCE EDUCATION
CHIC STATE UNIV
1460 h LANE AVE
CCLUMBUS

OH

*0609
*0
*0705

43221

Public Health Service Publication No. 1810

U.S. DEPART MENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION. AND WELFARE
Public Health Service
Health Services and Mental Health Administration

National Institute of Mental Health

