Source fetched: https://archive.org/details/bj-psych_1952-04_98_411 (Internet Archive, British Journal of Psychiatry archive of Journal of Mental Science)
Original: Journal of Mental Science, vol. 98, no. 411 (April 1952), pp. 309-316
Fetched: 2026-08-20
Method: curl download of djvu.txt full-text OCR of the whole issue, then sliced to the article's page range

Full OCR text of Osmond and Smythies's article, pp. 309-315 (plus the first line of p. 316, the start of the next article).
======================================================================



SCHIZOPHRENIA: A NEW APPROACH. 


By Humpury Osmonp, M.R.C.S., D.P.M., 
and 


Joun SmyTuHiers, M.B., B.Ch. 
From the National Hospital, Queen Square, W.C.1. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr. Gladstone, with that candour which a great Statesman can afford, once 
said, ‘‘ Government is a rough business, and the results are most unsatisfactory.”’ 
Unfortunately no great psychiatrist has described the present state of our know- 
ledge and treatment of schizophrenia in an equally robust phrase; but surely, 
“rough business and unsatisfactory results ’’ would not be an unfair summing 
up? 

We have now known of this illness for nearly half a century, and yet our under- 
standing of it is slight and our useful information scanty. This is not because 
we have been idle, but because our efforts have been poorly rewarded. Thousands 
of papers are written every decade; tens of thousands of observations are made ; 
there is no lack of opportunity for studying patients when about one hospital bed 
in five in this country is occupied by a schizophrenic, yet we are still entirely 
ignorant of the cause of this disease. There are, it is true, numerous theories, but 
none is generally accepted. We have one form of treatment, deep insulin, which 
produces remission of symptoms in some cases and what seems to be a cure in 
others, but even the value of this treatment is hotly disputed. Because deep 
insulin is a purely empirical procedure the psychiatrist is always tempted to become 
preoccupied with details of technique so that he forgets, or at least becomes less 
aware of our fundamental ignorance. 


THE PRESENT SITUATION. 


Since Bleuler (1), over forty years ago, defined schizophrenia in his great mono- 
graph, and advanced the hypothesis that it was a metabolic disorder with mani- 
festations in the psyche, the bodily functions of schizophrenics have been studied 
intensively, but these investigations have not, with few exceptions, been illu- 
minating, and where some abnormality has been found this can usually be accounted 
for by the poor condition of the patients. This is no place to catalogue the extra- 
ordinary efforts of nearly two generations of research workers, but an observer is 
astonished by the ill-rewarded zeal and activity. No stone has been left unturned ; 
indeed showers of stones seem to have been thrown up indiscriminately. From 
Bellak’s (2) extensive survey it is clear that not everyone agrees with Bleuler that - 
schizophrenia is a metabolic disorder. The psychoanalysts hold with more or less 
tenacity that the illness is largely psychogenic. In their view, so far as an un- 
initiated person can summarize it, the schizophrenic, unable to adjust to difficulties 
occurring in very early childhood, retires into a fantasy world when confronted 
with some insupportable situation later in life. Between these polar opposites 
there is plenty of scope for theorizing, and there has been no lack of it. Nutritional 
disorders, head injury, infections including syphilis and tuberculosis, hereditary 
and various endocrine deficiencies have all been implicated, and either in concert 
or separately have their supporters. 


TREATMENTS. 


Where causation is obscure, treatment is usually varied. In this illness it 
extends from the highly intensive and often non-verbal psychotherapy used by 
Rosen, through more formal psychoanalysis, to a whole range of physical therapies 
including electrical and insulin shock, freezing and over-heating, increased oxygen 
intake and nitrogen inhalations. Psychosurgery is also used, and at the other end 


XCVIII. 20 


310 SCHIZOPHRENIA ! A NEW APPROACH, fApril, 


of the scale are those who believe in custodial care and eugenic advice. Insulin 
shock alone has received some measure of general approval, but even here there is 
no agreement as to how it works, and some disagreement about whether it works. 


THE FUTURE. 

Future campaigns planned include sociological studies, special psychoanalytic 
techniques, refined shock therapies, more accurate surgery, and fuller endocrino- 
logical and biochemical investigations. Gjessing’s (3) scheme 1s an example of 
the type of prolonged study from every angle which it is hoped will solve the 
problem. He suggests that a group of schizophrenics should be studied in every 
conceivable way for an indefinite period ; at the end of some long time he believes 
something valuable will emerge: but are these hopes justified ? The body is 
prodigal in its chemical syntheses, and an experiment of this sort might go on 
indefinitely, bringing nothing but discouragement. The toxic substance, if toxic 
substance there is, may not be easily identifiable because its effects may be largely 
psychic and there may be only slight physical disturbances in animals. It is 
difficult to be sure when a guinea-pig is deluded. A substance whose most impor- 
tant properties were only discoverable by human experiment would remain long 
hidden until someone happened to know what he was looking for, which no one at 
present does. 

A New APPROACH. 

It is possible, however, to approach the illness from another direction. Suppose 
that we start with the signs and symptoms and natural history of schizophrenia 
and ask ourselves how these could be produced, refusing to be diverted by the 
existing schools of thought. 

There are no constant physical findings, but Hoskins (4), who has had a unique 
opportunity to study the illness, agrees with many others that disorder of the 
adreno-sympathetic system is one of the most constant features. Mott (5) some 
years ago observed some peculiarity in the adrenal medulla in schizophrenics, but 
he became more interested in the gonads and the matter seems to have been 
dropped. Early in the illness physical symptoms of anxiety are often found, but 
these die out as the illness progresses. It is as well to emphasize that the majority 
of authorities are agreed that there is no physical pathology known in schizophrenia. 

The psychic symptoms are disturbances of association, thought, mood, and 
behaviour without dementia. Delusions and hallucinations occur frequently, and 
disturbances of bodily function lumped together as catatonia are important. The 
illness may sweep down in a few hours or may be very insidious. It may last a 
few days or a whole lifetime. Acute onset is usually considered a good prognostic 
sign, but it is not a certain one. An early response to treatment is also looked on 
as a good augury, but people who have been degraded lunatics for years have been 
known to recover long after treatment has failed. Now that schizophrenics are 
surviving longer than in the past, more cases are being seen in which the illness 
has died out in late middle age, leaving behind a socially crippled person who is not, 
however, a schizophrenic. 

There is evidence that shy, shut-in people are more liable to schizophrenia 
than outgoing folk, but this is disputed, and some psychiatrists maintain that the 
“ shut-inness ’’ is just an early stage of the illness. What is certain is that people 
who apparently enjoyed excellent physical and mental health have been struck 
down by it. Most doctors agree that long thin people are more likely to develop 
it than short fat people. 

No age is exempt, but the first attack usually occurs in young adulthood. 
Psychological investigation has yielded little except that clever and stupid people 
are equally affected. 

Its association with difficulties in early life is uncertain and by no means proved ; 
it is often hard to decide when the illness began, because the childhood disturbances 
may only be early symptoms. Psychoanalytic evidence is vitiated by the lack of 
an objective standard due to the paucity of published analyses of normal people. 
We have therefore no sure means of telling whether the schizophrenic usually has 
a more unhappy childhood than the non-schizophrenic, but it is certainly not 
unknown for schizophrenics to have histories which suggest a happy and contented 
childhood. 

We must therefore account for a situation in which a person of any age, but 
usually a young’ adult, in response to stress or with little evidence of it, becomes 


 1952.] BY H. OSMOND, M.R.C.S., AND J. SMYTHIES, M.B. 311 


slowly and insidiously, or with overwhelming speed and accompanied by acute 
confusion, subjected to disturbances of association, changes in affect, thought 
disorder, hallucinations and delusions and catatonic symptoms to such an extent 
that life outside a mental hospital becomes impossible. The sick person, on the 
other hand, may never even need to visit a doctor but may simply appear odd ana 
eccentric. The illness may terminate quickly either with or without medical aid, 
or may be completely resistant to any form of treatment and continue for years 
without any pathognomonic physical changes being demonstrable. It must be 
influenced by a wide variety of treatments, such as psychoanalysis, deep insulin, 
metrazol, E.C.T., thyroid therapy and leucotomy. Occasionally events such as a 
severe physical illness or a psychic or physical shock may affect it favourably. 
It must be possible for the patient to recover after years of illness without measur- 
able evidence of intellectual impairment, and to appear remarkably normal in 
spite of a long period of incarceration. The illness should bear some understandable 
relationship to the manic-depressive disorders, and not infrequently be indistin- 
* guishable from them at an early stage. It would be in keeping with our present 
knowledge if an inherited constitutional basis could be provided for its occurrence. 


THE SYNTHETIC ILENESS. 


The first question that one asks is whether any known substance could produce 
results of this sort ; not merely confusion with secondary delusions, but a disturbed 
mental state which could be mistaken for schizophrenia. It has been known for 
over fifty years that mescaline, the alkaloid extracted from the peyotl—A nhelonium 
Lewinii, an American cactus—produces symptoms almost identical with schizo- 

-phrenia, including catatonia and thought disorder. The symptoms differ in 
different subjects, but not more markedly than different cases of schizophrenia 
differ. No account of the effect of altering the dosage of mescaline in the same 
subject has come to our notice, so that it is impossible to decide whether the 
difference in symptoms is due to differences in rates of absorption, or the ratio of 
body weight to dose, or to other factors. It has been taken for years by psychia- 
trists who wish to experience schizophrenic symptoms and to investigate synaesthesia. 
From time to time investigators have mentioned that it is unfortunate that more is 
not known about it. Kliiver (6) in America and Eric Guttmann (7) in this country 
drew attention to our ignorance on this subject and to its importance respectively ; 
but are we really so ignorant ? The formula of mescaline has been known for at 
least twenty-five years, and probably much longer. It had not, however, been 
published in a psychiatric paper for many years until Mayer-Gross’s recent lecture 
(8).. Unfortunately in this paper the formula was misprinted, and in addition the 
structural diagram was so arranged that its most remarkable quality was obscured. 
Organic chemists have, of course, known its biochemical affinities for many years, 
but they have rarely been interested in its psychological properties. 

There are many other hallucinogenic drugs, but none has either such striking 
properties or such a simple chemical constitution as mescaline. It would therefore 
be an excellent candidate for a schizophrenic agent, if there were any likelihood 
of its appearing in the body. 

Before discussing this question it is necessary to examine a widely held view 
whose most recent proponent is Mayer-Gross. To quote his own words: ‘“ The 
symptoms of mescaline intoxication have been compared to those of schizophrenia, 
but it is much more the strangeness experienced by the patient suffering from 
schizophrenia and the difficulties of describing what is happening in the two condi- 
tions which is similar. Many typical schizophrenic symptoms, especially in sub- 
acute and chronic states, are never seen in mescaline intoxication. Early psychotic 
phenomena in acute schizophrenia show certain analogues, especially in the field of 
hallucinations and other sense abnormalities’’ (8). Surely, in trying to lump 
together acute and chronic scdizophrenic reactions and compare them with the 
laboratory observations of trained psychiatrists taking mescaline voluntarily, 
Mayer-Gross is comparing two innately different situations. It is highly unlikely 
that the unheralded schizophrenic psychosis of indefinite duration in an unprepared 
victim, and the experiences of a voluntary mescal taker who knows what to expect 
and how long his ordeal will last, would be exactly similar. The remarkable thing 
is that these acute reactions have so much in common. In the accompanying 
table it will be seen that mescaline reproduces every single major symptom of acute 
schizophrenia, although not always to the same degree. 


= a a rte 


312 SCHIZOPHRENIA : A NEW APPROACH, [April, 


TaBLE I.—A Comparison between the Psychological Effects of Mescaline 
and the Symptoms of Acute Schizophrenia. 


\ ‘Mescalin. Acute schizophrenia. 
Ce esta —w— 
; Hallucina- : Hallucina- 
5 Illusions. . 
Tlusions. AS S tions. 
1. Sensory disorders : ; 
@: Nision —. : ; ; sO xX : xo Exoxe 
b. Hearing . é j : BG x ‘ De NOx 
c. Body image . é é XXX -—— : Sole — 
d. Smell and taste : : YOO HOOK ; XX NOK 
A e. Skin sense : 3 : pee — : XxX — 
f. Temperature . E : xox = : NOK = 
g. Synaesthesia . d A XKX — ? -—— 
2. Motor disorders : 
a. Catatonia : : : OX : KOK 
3. Behaviour disorder . 
a. Negativism . 3 5: XOX ; 30;0.4 
‘7 b. Withdrawal . c 3 XX : El S096 
(big doses) 
c. Antisocial violence . : Reported a: Sa 
4. Thought disorder : 
a. Pressure : ‘ : XxX : 2 O.< 
b. Disturbed association 7 LOOX : 3O:84 
‘ c. Blocking b : : Do XXX 
d. Substitution of primitive 
thinking in the form of 
visual images for con- ; 
‘ ceptual thought . ; BROKEN: : XOKOX. 
e. Neologisms . ; : aK ' XX 
5. Disorders of interpreiation ¢ 
aes a. Ideas of influence . ; SOx : XXX 
i b. Paranoid ideas ; XXX EKO 
c. Heightened significance of 
objects : : : Xxx : XX 
6. Delusions é 5 ¢ ‘ OK : TOR 
(time factor) 
7. Splitting é : : ; EK : BOCK 
(time factor) 
_8. Depervsonalization (a) : ; XX P 5X 
Derealization (b) 4 : XXX : Wrek 
g. Mood disorders : 
" a. Fear and terror . ‘ SRK : SKK 
b. Depression ; : : X ; x 
c. Indifference and apathy . XX : exon 
(time factor) 
d. Manicsymptoms . : ox ; x 
e. Euphoria : : - SOK 4 xx 
f. Schizoid humour. : xx : XxX 
10. Insight . ¢ 5 : . Sometimes absent . Sometimes present 


(time factor) 


o, does not occur. x, occurs. xx, marked when it occurs but not al 
xxx, marked and frequent. —, not relevant. TOS agi 
We have actually noted in our six subjects all these effects of mescaline except 1(b 
reported by Rouhier (15) and Tayleur-Stockings (16) and 3 (c) reported by Hey a y 


sf 
; 
\ 


1952. | BY H. OSMOND, M.R.C.S., AND J. SMYTHIES, M.B. B18 


Subacute and chronic schizophrenia cannot be compared legitimately with 
acute mescaline poisoning, but should be compared with chronic mescaline intoxica- 
tion. Very little seems to be known about this condition, and one of the few 
references to it known is quoted in Mayer-Gross’s lecture. It reads: “‘ The use of | 
the drug was, and probably still is, a problem to the Christian Missionaries who 
insist that its regular intake leads to increasing laziness and impairment of will- 
power.” Surely a lay person might describe a chronic schizophrenic in such a 
phrase ? May it not be that to use his own words, “‘ the strangeness experienced 
by the patient suffering from schizophrenia and the difficulties of describing what 
is happening in the two conditions ”’ constitute an essential similarity ? Language 
is not designed to depict the weird world of the mescaline taker and the schizophrenic. 
Only very rarely is the latter willing or able to describe his experiences coherently. 
When he does, as in Henning’s (9) astonishing book The Witnesses, the world 
which he describes is more like that of the mescaline taker than any other. 

The objection that all the symptoms of schizophrenia are not found in acute 
mescaline poisoning is not valid. So far as one can judge from the little evidence 
available, the effects of mescaline vary as much as but not more than the symptoms 
of schizophrenia, which unhappily for psychia‘rists allows a wide range of variability. 

To return to the chemical constitution of mescaline, which is— 


O CH, CH,.CH,.NH, 
O CH, 


O.CH, 
it is a fairly simple compound, and those with biochemical knowledge will realize 
that it is not very dissimilar from adrenaline. This observation was made by one 
of us in June, 1950, with the assistance of Dr. Julian Redmill, then a medical 
student at St. George’s Hospital. The adrenergic qualities of mescaline and many 
similar drugs were investigated by Dr. J. Harley-Mason, M.A., F.R.LC., University 
Demonstrator in Organic Chemistry at Cambridge. He has been good enough to 
allow the following biochemical observations on this aspect of the subject to be 
published. 
BIocHEMICAL NOTE, 


He writes: ‘It is extremely probable that the final stage in the biogenesis of 
adrenaline (II) is a transmethylation of nor-adrenaline (I), the methyl group arising 
from methionine or choline. 

CH.OH.CH,.NH, CH.OH.CH,.NH.CH, 
—_ 
OH +CH,— OH 


OH OH 
ile Ine 


It is just possible that a pathological disordering of its transmethylation mechanism 
might lead to methylation o1 one or both of its phenolic hydroxyl groups instead 
of its amino group, leading to the formation of (III) and (IV). Methylation of 
phenolic hydroxyl groups in the animal body is of rare occurrence, but a significant 
case has been reported recently by Maclagon and Wilkinson (10). It is particularly 
interesting to note that out of a series of phenylethylamine derivatives tested by 
Noteboom (11), 3.4-dimethoxyphenylethylamine (V) was the most potent in 
producing catatonia in animals, and that this substance 


@H.OH.CH,: NH, CH.OH.CH,.NH, 


IUOe IY 


314 SCHIZOPHRENIA : A NEW APPROACH, [April, 


differs frons (IV) only in the absence of its side chain hydroxyl group. It is however 
doubtful, in view of the relatively high dosage of (V) required to produce a catatonic 
effect, whether enough of a compound such as (IV) could be elaborated in the body 
to produce mental symptoms, having regard to the normal capacity for adrenalin 
production. It may be, however, that in chronic intoxication smaller amounts 
would be effective. : 

“ The extremely high activity of lysergic acid diethylamide is remarkable, the 
dosage level of 30-50 mgm. being one-tenth the amount of adrenalin or thyroxin 
required to produce an observable response. The compound bears no relationship 
to any substance at present known to occur in the animal body and the mechanism 
of its action is wholly obscure.”’ 

Surely it is significant that a single biochemical failure could occur in the stress 
mechanism and produce these dangerous toxins, one of which is already known to 
be a powerful catatonic agent ? Mescaline itself is not, of course, the toxic agent 
in schizophrenia. It is not nearly active enough, and the adrenals could not 
possibly make 500 mgm. or more daily, which would be necessary to produce 
symptoms. It is, however, thought that mescaline itself is non-toxic, and that the 
toxic agent in mescalism is a breakdown product. 

We therefore suggest that schizophrenia is due to a specific disorder of the 
adrenals in which a failure of metabolism occurs and a mescaline-like compound or 
compounds are produced, which for convenience we shall refer to as “‘ M substance.” 
The striking implications of the relationship between the bizarre Mexican cactus 
drug and the common hormone have, so far as we know, never been recorded 
before. Psychiatrists appear to have been unaware of its biochemical structure, 
biochemists to have been uninterested in its production of an artificial psychosis. 
The close clinical connections between schizophrenia, anxiety states and stress 
have been known for a long time, and the process involved may be that in certain 
people when the adrenals are overworked (due perhaps to an inherited latent fault 
as Kallman has suggested) (12) the process of methylation becomes disturbed and 
highly toxic substances are produced. This M substance, once produced, would 
naturally set up a vicious circle, since one of the prominent features of both the 
mescal ‘‘ psychosis ”’ and of many cases of schizophrenia is the stress and terror 
experienced by the victim. There is already a certain amount of evidence for the 
presence of such an agent (13). This hypothesis could also account for the somatic 
manifestations of schizophrenia—the excessive adrenocortical activity perhaps 
generated by Vogt’s mechanism, the vascular changes, the disturbances of carbo- 
hydrate metabolism, the overloading of the detoxicating mechanisms of the liver, 
and the pigmentation (melanin and adrenaline metabolism are linked). 

The result of these endogenous disturbances in sensation, feeling and thought 
upon the sick person would depend on the age of onset, the rate at which M-substance 
is produced, the patient’s previous personality and special mode of reaction to 
M-substance, and the cultural setting in which the illness occurs. These variables 
allow for the enormous range of different reactions such as is actually observed in 
schizophrenia, which could thus appear to have many and various “ precipitating 
causes. 

Similarly, many forms of treatment could be expected to alleviate the condition 
to some extent—acute physical illnesses with their general metabolic upset : 
psychotherapy, where the attempt made to help the patient adapt to his strange 
new environment might serve to break the vicious circle by alleviating the stress 
experienced and thus depressing the production of M-substance; leucotomy 
which might break the circle at the level of cerebral reaction to stress ; and lastly 
and most significantly the only generally accepted treatment, insulin, is itself an 
anti-adrenaline agent. Further, since it is known that mescaline produces its effects 
by interfering with the glucose metabolism of the brain, the beneficial effects of 
insulin treatment may be produced, not so much by the comas, as by the large 
amount of glucose that is forced into the bodily metabolism. It is of interest that 
Mayer-Gross (14) reports that high doses of glucose raising the blood sugar above 
200 mgm, inhibit the action of lysergic acid (LSD. 25). 

Many of the results of schizophrenia have little to do directly with disturbances 
of brain function, but depend on factors which are, in the anthropological sense, 
cultural. The isolation and dislike which the patient experiences in our com- 
munity forces him to retreat into his private world. The schizophrenic regresses 
because, faced with an incomprehensible change in his external and interna! sur- 


Rees 


. 1952. | “BY H. OSMOND, M.R.C.S., AND J. SMYTHIES, M.B. 315 


/ 


roundings, his painfully learned patterns of behaviour suddenly become useless 
and he is left isolated and enmeshed in his own fantasies and the phantasmagoria 
produced by M-substance. He is literally and not figuratively out of touch with 
his environment. In societies different from our own the results of this universal 
metabolic abnormality (the production of M-substance) may be socially beneficial 
to the individual. For instance the Shamans in Siberia and the Mystics in Tibet 
are in fact leaders of society though undoubtedly having schizophrenic experiences. © 


DISCUSSION. 


It is easy enough to speculate about an illness which has been the subject of so 
much investigation and remains so barren in established aetiology, but the first 
essential for any directed programme of research is a hypothesis based on fact, 
otherwise observation hardly progresses beyond the stage of cataloguing. It 
seems to us that the advantage of this new approach lies in its combination of the 
clinical and the biochemical, which allows one to substitute a definite plan of 
campaign in place of the present state of speculation about unknown substances. 
Mescaline is the simplest agent producing a schizophrenic-like psychosis, and the 
only one that closely resembles a substance found naturally in the body. The 
proper course of action to test this hypothesis is clear. It would consist in the 
pharmacological investigation of mescaline, its breakdown products, and the range 
of compounds between it and adrenaline (especially 3.4-dimethoxyphenylethyl- 
amine), and the attempt would have to be made to isolate these substances from 
the body-fluids of acute schizophrenics. Once these investigations have been 
done our hypothesis will either join the large number of plausible theories which 
have failed to stand up to the test of experiment and are now to be found on the 
scrap-heap of psychiatry in the pages of old journals, or the cause of schizophrenia 
will be known. 

SUMMARY. 


After a brief survey of the present state of our knowledge regarding schizophrenia 
we have drawn attention to the close biochemical relationship between adrenaline 
and mescaline. This, taken in conjunction with the clinical relationship between 
acute mescaline intoxication and acute schizophrenia, and between the latter condi- 
tion and stress, appears to us to be significant. The clinical and biochemical 
implications of this are discussed. 


REFERENCES. 


) BLEULER, E., Dementia Praecox, 1950. New York. 

) BerakK, L., Dementia Praecox, 1947. New York. ; 

3) Gyessinc, R., article in D. Richter (ed.), Perspectives in Neuropsychiatry, 1950. 
London. (Pp. 217-29.) 

4) Hoskins, R., Biology of Schizophrenia, 1946. New York. 

5) HenpDERSON and GILLESPIE, Text-book of Psychiatry, 1950. London. (P. 297.) 

6) Kitver, H., Chapter X in Studies in Personality, 1942. New York. 

