

wv ereat aovemunes OLEKING THE 


MAGIC MUSHROOM 


A New York banker goes to Mexico’s mountains 


to participate in the age-old rituals of Indians 


who chew strange growths that produce visions 


By R. GORDON WASSON 


The author of this article, a vice president of 
J. P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, together 
with his wife, Valentina P. Wasson, M.D., 
a New York pediatrician, has spent the last 
four summers in remote mountains of Mex- 
ico. The Wassons have been on the trail of 
strange and hitherto unstudied mushrooms 
with vision-giving powers. 

They have been pursuing the cultural role 


N the night of June 29-30, 1955, in a Mex- 
ican Indian village so remote from the 
world that most of the people still speak no 
Spanish, my friend Allan Richardson and I 
shared with a family of Indian friends a cele- 
bration of “‘holy communion” where “divine” 
mushrooms were first adored and then con- 
sumed, The Indians mingled Christian and pre- 
Christian elements in their religious practices 
in a way disconcerting for Christians but natu- 
ral for them. The rite was led by two women, 
mother and daughter, both of them curanderas, 
or shamans. The proceedings went on in the 
Mixeteco language. The mushrooms were of a 
species with hallucinogenic powers; that is, they 
cause the eater to see visions. We chewed and 
swallowed these acrid mushrooms, saw visions, 
and emerged from the experience awestruck. 
We had come from afar to attend a mushroom 
rite but had expected nothing so staggering as 
the virtuosity of the performing curanderas and 
the astonishing effects of the mushrooms. Rich- 
ardson and I were the first white men in record- 
ed history to eat the divine mushrooms, which 
for centuries have been a secret of certain In- 
dian peoples living far from the great world in 
southern Mexico. No anthropologists had ever 
described the scene that we witnessed. 

I am a banker by occupation and Richard- 
son is a New York society photographer and 
is in charge of visual education at The Brear- 
ley School. 

It was, however, no accident that we found 
ourselves in the lower chamber of that thatch- 
roofed, adobe-walled Indian home. For both of 
us this was simply the latest trip to Mexico in 
quest of the mushroom rite. For me and my 
wife, who was to join us with our daughter a 
day later, it was a climax to nearly 30 years of 

CONTINUED 


of wild mushrooms for 30 years. Their trav- 
els and inquiries throughout the world have 
led them to some surprising discoveries in 
this field in which they are pioneers. They 
are now publishing their findings in Mush- 
rooms Russia and History, a large, richly 
illustrated two-volume book, which is lim- 
ited to 500 copies and is now on sale at 
$125 (Pantheon Books, New York). 


AUTHOR WASSON sits in New York home with 
recorder, mushroom pictures and “mushroom stone.” 
A onetime newspaperman, he took up banking in 1928. 


PREPARING FOR CEREMONY at which author chewed hal- 
lucinogenic mushrooms and had visions, Curandera Eva Mendez 
ceremonially turns fungus in the smoke of burning aromatic leaves. 


MUSHROOMS conrnueo 


inquiries and research into the strange role of toadstools in the 
early cultural history of Europe and Asia. 

Thus that June evening found us, Allan Richardson and me, 
deep in the south of Mexico, bedded down with an Indian family 
in the heart of the Mixeteco mountains at an altitude of 5,500 feet. 
We could stay only a week or so: we had no time to lose. I went to 
the municipio or town hall, and there I found the official in charge, 
the sindico, seated alone at his great table in an upper room. He 
was a young Indian, about 35 
years old, and he spoke Span- 
ish well. His name was File- 
mon. He hada friendly manner 
and I took a chance. Leaning 
over his table, I asked him ear- 
nestly and in a low voice if I 
could speak to him in confi- 
dence. Instantly curious, he en- 
couraged me. ‘Will you,” I 
went on,"‘help me learn the se- 
crets of the divine mushroom?” 
and I used the Mixeteco name, 
’nti sheeto, correctly pro- 
nouncing it with glottal stop 
and tonal differentiation of the 
syllables. When Filem6n re- 
covered from his surprise he 
said warmly that nothing could 
be easier. He asked me to pass 
by his house, on the outskirts 
of town, at siesta time. 

Allan and I arrived there 
at about 3 o'clock. Filemén’s 
home is built on a mountain- 
side, with a trail on one side at 
the level of the upper story and 
adeep ravine on the other. File- 
mén at once led us down the 
ravine to a spot where the divine mushrooms were growing in 
abundance. After photographing them we gathered them in a 
cardboard box and then labored back up the ravine in the heavy 
moist heat of that torrid afternoon. Not letting us rest Filemén 
sent us high up above his house to meet the curandera, the woman 
who would officiate at the mushroom rite. A connection of his, 
Eva Mendez by name, she was a curandera de primera categoria, 
of the highest quality, una Sefiora sin mancha, a woman without 
stain. We found her in the house of her daughter, who pursues the 
same vocation. Eva was resting on a mat on the floor from her 
previous night’s performance. She was middle-aged, and short like 
all Mixetecos, with a spirituality in her expression that struck us at 
once. She had presence. We showed our mushrooms to the woman 
and her daughter. They cried out in rapture over the firmness, the 
fresh beauty and abundance of our young specimens. Through an 
interpreter we asked if they would serve us that night. They said yes. 


BOUT 20 of us gathered in the lower chamber of Filemén’s 
house after 8 o'clock that evening. Allan and I were the only 
strangers, the only ones who spoke no Mixeteco. Only our hosts, 
Filemén and his wife, could talk to us in Spanish. The welcome 
accorded to us was of a kind that we had never experienced before 
in the Indian country. Everyone observed a friendly decorum. They 
did not treat us stiffly, as strange white men; we were of their 
number. The Indians were wearing their best clothes, the women 
dressed in their huipiles or native costumes, the men in clean white 
trousers tied around the waist with strings and their best serapes 
over their clean shirts. They gave us chocolate to drink, somewhat 
ceremonially, and suddenly I recalled the words of the early Span- 
ish writer who had said that before the mushrooms were served, 
chocolate was drunk. I sensed what we were in for: at long last we 


102 


HOUSE where mushroom sessions took place is built of adobe, has thatch 
“‘dog-ears” over gable ends. Door, lower right, leads into ceremonial room. 


were discovering that the ancient communion rite still survived and 
we were going to witness it. The mushrooms lay there in their box, 
regarded by everyone respectfully but without solemnity. The 
mushrooms are sacred and never the butt of the vulgar jocularity 
that is often the way of white men with alcohol. 

At about 10:30 o'clock Eva Mendez cleaned the mushrooms of 
their grosser dirt and then, with prayers, passed them through the 
smoke of resin incense burning on the floor. As she did this, she 
sat on a mat before a simple 
altar table adorned with Chris- 
tian images, the Child Jesus 
and the Baptism in Jordan. 
Then she apportioned the 
mushrooms among the adults. 
She reserved 13 pair for herself 
and 13 pair for her daughter. 
(The mushrooms are always 
counted in pairs.) I was on tip- 
toe of expectancy: she turned 
and gave me six pair in a cup, 
I could not have been happier: 
this was the culmination of 
years of pursuit. She gave Al- 
lan six pair too. His emotions 
were mixed. His wife Mary had 
consented to his coming only 
after she had drawn from him 
a promise not to let those nasty 
toadstools cross his lips. Now 
he faced a behavior dilemma. 
He took the mushrooms, and 
Theard him mutter in anguish, 
“My God, what will Mary 
say!” Then we ate our mush- 
rooms, chewing them slowly, 
over the course of a half hour. 
They tasted bad—acrid with a 
rancid odor that repeated itself. Allan and I were determined to 
resist any effects they might have, to observe better the events 
of the night. But our resolve soon melted before the onslaught 
of the mushrooms. 

Before midnight the Sefiora (as Eva Mendez is usually called) 
broke a flower from the bouquet on the altar and used it to snuff 
out the flame of the only candle that was still burning. We were 
left in darkness and in darkness we remained until dawn. For a 
half hour we waited in silence. Allan felt cold and wrapped himself 
in a blanket. A few minutes later he leaned over and whispered, 
“Gordon, I am seeing things!” I told him not to worry, I was too. 
The visions had started. They reached a plateau of intensity deep in 
the night, and they continued at that level until about 4 o'clock. 
We felt slightly unsteady on our feet and in the beginning were 
nauseated. We lay down on the mat that had been spread for us, 
but no one had any wish to sleep except the children, to whom 
mushrooms are not served. We were never more wide awake, and 
the visions came whether our eyes were opened or closed. They 
emerged from the center of the field of vision, opening up as they 
came, now rushing, now slowly, at the pace that our will chose. 
‘They were in vivid color, always harmonious. They began with art 
motifs, angular such as might decorate carpets or textiles or wall- 
paper or the drawing board of an architect. Then they evolved 
into palaces with courts, arcades, gardens—resplendent palaces all 
laid over with semiprecious stones. Then I saw a mythological 
beast drawing a regal chariot. Later it was as though the walls of 
our house had dissolved, and my spirit had flown forth, and I was 


TEXT CONTINUED ON PAGE 109 


MUSHROOMS connnueo 
A strange, solemn rite 
and wonders in the dark 


For two strange timeless nights in almost complete darkness, Was- 
son and Richardson sat in an underground room with the curan- 
dera, Eva Mendez. On the first, both partook of the sacred mush- 
rooms, and both saw visions. On the second Richardson refrained: 
instead he set up flash equipment and, aiming his camera at sounds 
in the blackness, recorded on film parts of the ceremony. 

Ina solemn musical chant, Eva Mendez began with an invoca- 
tion to the mushroom in the name of Christ and the saints. She 
proclaimed her own good intentions and then, impatiently, en- 
treated the spirits, ‘I am a mouth looking for you, but you are not 
paying attention. Come.” As the ritual proceeded Wasson lost 
himself in wondrous flights of fancy which moved him to say after- 
ward, ‘‘For the first time the word ecstasy took on real meaning. 
For the first time it did not mean someone else’s state of mind.” 


HOLDING a ci AT THE CLIMAX of this session, at about 3:30 in the morning, Eva Men- 
of copal, an an ative Eva Mendez invokes the saints, c dez ministers to her ailing 17-year-old son. As he lies lost in the ecstasy of his 
ys in the room though they did not take active part in th ony. _visions evoked by the mushrooms, she asks divine help for him, The child 


CHANTING early in the night, Eva Mendez lists her qualifications: “Am I 
not good? I am a creator woman, a star woman, a moon woman, a cross wom- 
an, a woman of heaven. I am a cloud person, a dew-on-the-grass person.” 


at right, perhaps soothed by the rhythm of the chanting, is sleeping quietly MEDITATINGsilently, Eva Mendez sits before her mushroom bowl. Though 
through the ritual, About a dozen Indians remained in the 20 by 20 foot room she ate twice as many mushrooms as the rest, she stayed calm and dignified, of- 
throughout the night. A few of them sat up but most lay on reed mats. ten lyrical in herexhortations, sometimes impatient when spirits did not come, 


CONTINUED 


MUSHROOMS connnuco 


WITH Professor Heim, Wasson (right) searches a mountainside near the 
village for specimens of the sacred mushrooms, They found two species here. 


Rare vision-giving fungi 
shown for first time 


On his latest expedition to seek out and study the hallucinogenic 
mushrooms, Wasson was accompanied by Professor Roger Heim, 
an old friend, one of the world’s leading mycologists and head 
of France’s Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle. Wasson had 
sent Heim specimens from three of his previous trips. Now Heim 
was able to study the mushrooms in the field, eat them with the 
Indians and work out techniques for growing some of them in 
the laboratory. Lire here publishes Professor Heim’s life-size water- 
color paintings of the seven kinds of hallucinogenic mushrooms 
so far discovered. Four of these are species new to science and 
two others are new varieties of a known species, Psilocybe cae- 
rulescens Murrill. 

At the present time no one knows what drug it is in these mush- 
rooms that causes the eater to see visions, and until its proper- 
ties are clearly defined the hallucinogenic mushrooms must be 
treated with extreme caution. Among the Indians, their use is 
hedged about with restrictions of many kinds. Unlike ordinary 
edible mushrooms, these are never sold in the market place, and no 
Indian dares to eat them frivolously, for excitement. The Indians 
themselves speak of their use as muy delicado, that is, perilous. 


CALLED “Children of the Waters” by Aztecs, Psilocybe 
Aztecorum Heim grows in grass on volcano Popocatepetl. 


GROWING on certain kinds of dead tree trunks, Cono- 
cybe Siligineoides Heim was collected by Wasson in 1955, 


CROWN of Thorns,” Psilocybe Zapotecorum Heim (left) 
grows in marshy ground. It was first found in 1955. 


LANDSLIDE” mushroom, Psilocybe caerulescens Mur- 
rill, var. Mazetecorum Heim, grows on sugar cane residue, 


MOST PRIZED by Indians and most widespread of 
these fungi, Psilocybe mexicana Heim grows in pastures. 


MUSHROOM of Superior Reason,” Psilocybe caerule- 
scens Murrill var. nigripes Heim (left), grows near Juquila. 


FIRST DISCOVERED in Cuba in June 1904, Stropha- 
ria cubensis Earle (right) grows on cow dung in pastures. 


So quiet you can hear a frog's ‘‘jug-o-rumm” 


POKIN’ THROUGH THE NARROWS OR FULL SPEED AHEAD... 


“Sweetest-running Johnsons ever!” 


Want to go where fish run and folks don't . . ohnsons no} or 35 hp. Ther 

where the whole family can relax undistracted? tic quiet and economy. And, of course 

Just one solution—boating! And for 1957, there | Johnson dependability biotite Biestage eo I 
¢ nine new reasons why your outboard should See the swee -running Johnsons e' AND WONDERFUL CHalos) 

be a Johnson. Eight new Sea-Horses in Holiday your dealer’s now. He’s listed under “Outbos || Sotden vein. .25 ho. .$625 Seaorse 18... 18h. 

Bronze, plus the mighty 35 hp Golden Javelin. Motors” in your « ied directory a-Horse 35. 35hp... 585  Sea-Horse 10... 10hp. 
‘There’s easier manual starting on all model 
2-volt electric starting on some. There 
ip-clutch that ends drive pin changin; 

are two new power classes in the line—with fi 


a Horse 35... 35 hp. Sea-Hor 7% bo. 
Free! For 195' Horse catalo, 


Johnso1 ershing Road, Waukeg: 
Illinois. Div. of Outboard Mar: rp. In Canada: mi 


Sea-Horse 18°.. 1Bhp... 475 Sea-Hor SY hp, 
Sea-Horse 3... 3hp.... $155 


A million Sea-Horse owners will tell you JOHNSON KNOWS BEST 


MUSHROOMS connnueo 


suspended in mid-air viewing landscapes of mountains, with 
camel caravans advancing slowly across the slopes, the moun- 
tains rising tier above tier to the very heavens. Three days later, 
when I repeated the same experience in the same room with the 
same curanderas, instead of mountains I saw river estuaries, 
pellucid water flowing through an endless expanse of reeds down 
to a measureless sea, all by the pastel light of a horizontal sun. 
This time a human figure appeared, a woman in primitive cos- 
tume, standing and staring across the water, enigmatic, beauti- 
ful, like a sculpture except that she breathed and was wearing 
woven colored garments. It seemed as though I was viewing a 
world of which I was not a part and with which I could not hope 
to establish contact, There I was, poised in space, a disembodied 
eye, invisible, incorporeal, seeing but not seen. 

The visions were not blurred or uncertain. They were sharply 
focused, the lines and colors being so sharp that they seemed 
more real to me than anything I had ever seen with my own 
eyes. I felt that I was now seeing plain, 
whereas ordinary vision gives us an 
imperfect view; I was seeing the arche- 
types, the Platonic ideas, that under- 
lie the imperfect images of everyday 
life. The thought crossed my mind: 
could the divine mushrooms be the 
secret that lay behind the ancient 
Mysteries? Could the miraculous mo- 
bility that I was now enjoying be the 
explanation for the flying witches that 
played so important a part in the folk- 
lore and fairy tales of northern Eu- 
rope? These reflections passed through 
my mind at the very time that | was 
ALLAN RICHARDSON _ seeing the visions, for the effect of the 
eats a mushroom in spite mushrooms is to bring about a fis- 
of his pledge to his wife. sion of the spirit, a split in the per- 

son, a kind of schizophrenia, with the 
rational side continuing to reason and to observe the sensations 
that the other side is enjoying. The mind is attached as by an 
elastic cord to the vagrant senses. 

Meanwhile the Sefiora and her daughter were not idle. When 
our visions were still in the initial phases, we heard the Sefiora 
waving her arms rhythmically. She began a low, disconnected 
humming. Soon the phrases became articulate syllables, each dis- 
connected syllable cutting the darkness sharply. Then by stages 
the Sefiora came forth with a full-bodied canticle, sung like 
very ancient music. It seemed to me at the time like an introit 
to the Ancient of Days. As the night progressed her daughter 
spelled her at singing. They sang well, never loud, with authority. 
What they sang was indescribably tender and moving, fresh, 
vibrant, rich. I had never realized how sensitive and poetic an 
instrument the Mixeteco language could be. Perhaps the beauty 
of the Sefiora’s performance was partly an illusion induced by 
the mushrooms; if so, the hallucinations are aural as well as 
visual. Not being musicologists, we know not whether the chants 
were wholly European or partly indigenous in origin. From time 
to time the singing would rise to a climax and then suddenly 
stop, and then the Sefiora would fling forth spoken words, vio- 
lent, hot, crisp words that cut the darkness like a knife. This was 
the mushroom speaking through her, God’s words, as the Indians 
believe, answering the problems that had been posed by the par- 
ticipants. This was the Oracle. At intervals, perhaps every half 
hour, there was a brief intermission, when the Seiiora would 
relax and some would light cigarets. 

At one point, while the daughter sang, the Sefiora stood up in 
the darkness where there was an open space in our room and 
began a rhythmic dance with clapping or slapping. We do not 
know exactly how she accomplished her effect. The claps or slaps 
were always resonant and true. So far as we know, she used no 


CONTINUED 


: ie 


For his magnificent NEW 


(Desi Arnaz Western Hills Hotel 


INDIO, CALIFORNIA 


Desi Arnaz chooses 


RUBBER-TOP 


America's Finest Rug Cushion 


for comfort 
and protection 
under carpets 


Desi Arnaz 
nd 


a 
Lucille Ball 
stars of 

“T Love Lucy” 


In the fabulous new DESI ARNAZ WESTERN HILLS HOTEL . . . as in other fine 
hotels and homes. you'll find RUBBER-TOP under the carpets. RUBBER-TOP 
cushions every step. . making any carpet feel more luxurious. And RUBBER-TOP 
actually doubles their life. It is first in the floor covering field to be endorsed by the 
laboratories and editors of McCall's. Get economical RUBBER-TOP . . . 44 oz. In 
Terra Cotta Red, with patented rubberized waffied top, ribbed rubberized back and 
shock-absorber center. 4 

Ask your dealer also to show you Allen RUBBER-LOC . . . America’s luxury rug 
cushion, extra heavy, 52 02., in Chlorophyll Green, 


Now available... The exciting NEW “Do-it-yourself” carpet 


ALLEN INDUSTRIES. IN‘ 


rmconnetnion a SHA ryal-SqUALeS 
aahapei quis 


109 


Lee’s 20 Tough-Tailored Extras incuze... 


RIDERS 


Ranch-born...Rodeo-bred... 


Lee—the action-jeans of champion cowboys! 


You're looking at a top rodeo star, bronc-bustin’ Guy Weeks. When Guy 
buys cowboy-jeans, Lee Riders are the only brand he'll wear. Lee's 20 
Tough-Tailored Extras stand the rough abuse his job gives ‘em. 

Guy likes the way Lee Riders hug his legs and hips, yet keep ’em free for 
action! He knows Lee Tailored Sizes always fit perfectly; Sanforizing 
keeps ‘em that way. All sizes—men’s and boys’ (with doubled knees in 
sizes 4~12)—and women’s and girls’, too. Lee must fit better, look better, 
wear longer or your money back or A NEW GARMENT FREE! 

GO TO THE RODEO FOR THRILLS OF THE WEST REBORN! 
LEESURES: LEE COMFORT CLOTHES FOR WORK AND PLAY. THE H. D. LEE CO. INC., KANSAS CITY, MO. 


10 


ON MORNING after eating mushrooms, Wasson and his wife review 
his notes, taken in the dark. Jars contain mushrooms later sent to Heim, 


MUSHROOMS cowrinueo 


device, only her hands against each other or possibly against 
different parts of her body. The claps and slaps had pitch, the 
rhythm at times was complex, and the speed and volume varied 
subtly. We think the Sefiora faced successively the four points 
of the compass, rotating clockwise, but are not sure. One thing 
is certain: this mysterious percussive utterance was ventrilo- 
quistic, each slap coming from an unpredictable direction and 
distance, now close to our ears, now distant, above, below, here 
and yonder, like Hamlet’s ghost hic et ubique. We were amazed 
and spellbound, Allan and I. 

There we lay on our mat, scribbling notes in the dark and 
exchanging whispered comments, our bodies inert and heavy as 
lead, while our senses were floating free in space, feeling the 
breezes of the outdoors, surveying vast landscapes or exploring 
the recesses of gardens of ineffable beauty, And all the while 
we were listening to the daughter's chanting and to the unearthly 
claps and whacks, delicately controlled, of the invisible creatures 
darting around us. 

The Indians who had taken the mushrooms were playing a 
part in the vocal activity, In the moments of tension they would 
utter exclamations of wonder and adoration, not loud, respon- 
sive to the singers and harmonizing with them, spontaneously 
yet with art. 

On that initial occasion we all fell asleep around 4 o’clock in 
the morning. Allan and I awoke at 6, rested and heads clear, but 
deeply shaken by the experience we had gone through. Our 
friendly hosts served us coffee and bread. We then took our 
leave and walked back to the Indian house where we were stay- 
ing, a mile or so away. 


ROM the many mushroom celebrations that I have now wit- 

nessed, nine in all, it is clear to me that at least in the Mixe- 
teco country the congregation is indispensable to the rite. Since 
the congregation, in order to participate, must be brought up 
in the tradition, any white persons should be greatly outnum- 
bered by the Indians. But this does not mean that the mush- 
rooms lose their potency if not eaten communally. My wife and 
our daughter Masha, 18, joined us a day after the ceremony 
that I have described, and on July 5, in their sleeping bags, they 
ate the mushrooms while alone with us. They experienced the 
visions too. They saw the same brilliant colors; my wife saw a 
ball in the Palace of Versailles with figures in period costumes 
dancing to a Mozart minuet. Again, on Aug. 12, 1955, six weeks 
after I had gathered the mushrooms in Mexico, I ate them 
in a dried state in my bedroom in New York, and found that 
if anything they had gained in their hallucinogenic potency. 


CONTINUED 


Fitted with 15 spools of Belding Corticelli thread—needles, 


pwing aids and 


thimble, handy needle threader. Remove th 


it becomes an evening case to hold your glamour accessories. 
Black a Id faille, lined in red satin, with a mirrored in- 


side cover 


that’s soft as a whisper, and follow directions on coupon 


EW AND GO” KIT 


The sophisticated sewing kit you can use as an evening purse! 


'o get yours, just buy Modess with the fabric cover 


Yours for only 


$100 


with Modess 


PERSONAL PRODUCTS CORP. BOX 197 
BROOKLYN 1, NEW YORK 


 Kit(s). 1 am enclos- 


w and 
ing one perforated box flap from Mc 
box top from Modess Belt package 

) money onder for each kit. Offer expires July 81, 19 


Please send me ( 
Jess package (or one 


NAME 
STREET - — 
a 


ry of Hawaii only. Tt in void in 
otherwise restricted. Allow 


JOHN J. ASTOR AND HENRY CLAY DISCUSS U.S. FISCAL POLICY 


The noted financier listens as the great statesman talks of monetary affairs, 
the course of politics and the quality of Old Crow. 


~~ 
chew 
86 
‘ Famous statesmen, authors, generals, men who left indelible impressions on the - 
mit pages of American history for well over a hundred years now—all have enjoyed 
/ \} the magnificent taste and superb quality of Old Crow. Try this traditional lp N 
ama i favorite yourself tonight. It's the finest Kentucky bourbon ever put into glass! (> £ Sey 


jOLD CROW) 
Old Crow is now available in a milder \ } ror P| 
MK 86 Proof bottling, today’s highly popular companion Ww 
\ to the historic 100 Proof Bottled in Bond. Vin © p 


IND: ~— 5 The Qoealsl Name Mn Bn bon ‘e 


‘THE OLD CROW DISTILLERY COMPANY, FRANKFORT, KENTUCKY, DISTRIBUTED BY NATIONAL DISTILLERS PRODUCTS COMPANY. 


MUSHROOMS continue 


T was a walk in the woods, many years ago, that launched 
my wife and me on our quest of the mysterious mushroom. 
We were married in London in 1926, she being Russian, born 
and brought up in Moscow. She had lately qualified as a phy- 
sician at the University of London. I am from Great Falls, Mont. 
of Anglo-Saxon origins. In the late summer of 1927, recently 
married, we spent our holiday in the Catskills. In the after- 
noon of the first day we went strolling along a lovely moun- 
tain path, through woods crisscrossed by the slanting rays of 
a descending sun. We were young, carefree and in love. Sud- 
denly my bride abandoned my side. She had spied wild mush- 
rooms in the forest, and racing over the carpet of dried leaves 
in the woods, she knelt in poses of adoration before first one 
cluster and then another of these growths. In ecstasy she called 
each kind by an endearing Russian name. She caressed the 
toadstools, savored their earthy perfume. Like all good Anglo- 
Saxons, I knew nothing about the fungal world and felt that 
the less I knew about those putrid, treacherous excrescences the 
better. For her they were things of grace, infinitely inviting to 
the perceptive mind. She insisted on gathering them, laughing 
at my protests, mocking my horror. She brought a skirtful back 
to the lodge. She cleaned and cooked them. That evening she 
ate them, alone. Not long married, I thought to wake up the 
next morning a widower. 

These dramatic circumstances, puzzling and painful for me, 
made a lasting impression on us both. From that day on we 
sought an explanation for this strange cultural cleavage sep- 
arating us in a minor area of our lives. Our method was to 
gather all the information we could on the attitude toward 
wild mushrooms of the Indo-European and adjacent peoples. 
We tried to determine the kinds of mushrooms that each people 
knows, the uses to which these kinds are put, the vernacular 
names for them. We dug into the etymology of those names, 
to arrive at the metaphors hidden in their roots. We looked for 
mushrooms in myths, legends, ballads, proverbs, in the writers 
who drew their inspiration from folklore, in the clichés of daily 
conversation, in slang and the telltale recesses of obscene vocab- 
ularies. We sought them in the pages of history, in art, in Holy 
Writ. We were not interested in what people learn about mush- 
rooms from books, but what untutored country folk know 
from childhood, the folk legacy of the family circle. It turned 
out that we had happened on a novel field of inquiry. 


S the years went on and our knowledge grew, we discoy- 
ered a surprising pattern in our data: each Indo-European 
people is by cultural inheritance either “‘mycophobe” or ‘‘myco- 
phile,” that is, each people either rejects and is ignorant of the 
fungal world or knows it astonishingly well and loves it. Our 
voluminous and often amusing evidence in support of this thesis 
fills many sections of our new book, and it is there that we sub- 
mit our case to the scholarly world, The great Russians, we find, 
are mighty mycophiles, as are also the Catalans, who possess a 
mushroomic vocabulary of more than 200 names. The ancient 
Greeks, Celts, and Scandinavians were mycophobes, as are the 
Anglo-Saxons. There was another phenomenon that arrested 
our attention: wild mushrooms from earliest times were steeped 
in what the anthropologists call mana, a supernatural aura. The 
very word “toadstool” may have meant originally the “demonic 
stool” and been the specific name of a European mushroom 
that causes hallucinations. In ancient Greece and Rome there 
was a belief that certain kinds of mushrooms were procreated 
by the lightning bolt. We made the further discovery that this 
particular myth, for which no support exists in natural science, 
is still believed among many widely scattered peoples: the Arabs 
of the desert, the peoples of India, Persia and the Pamirs, the 
Tibetans and Chinese, the Filipinos and the Maoris of New 
Zealand, and even among the Zapotecs of Mexico. ... All of 
our evidence taken together led us many years ago to hazard a 


‘conTINUED 


Destination: America 


Cargo: Good Will! 


The Mayflower Sails Again! 


She's on her way... an exact replica of the little ship that 
served as seedpod for a new nation! 

She's a gift from the British people to the American people. 
In her hold are good-will offerings: oak chests containing arti 
cles representing the highest standards of modern British 
manufacture and craftsmanship, and specially-bound Bibles for 
the governors of our New England States.* 

She'll be berthed permanently at Plimoth Plantation in 
Plymouth, Massachusetts. This is a 100-acre reconstruction of 
the original Pilgrim settlement, complete with Common Store 
House, Trading Post, Indian Village and Museum, It is now 
being built, and will become a national shrine after the May- 
flower is handed over to it on Thanksgiving Day, 1957. 

We hope you'll visit Plimoth Plantation, and come aboard 
the Mayflower. Bring the children, too. Can you think of a 
better way of bringing history to life? 


* Fittingly, these gifts will be delivered by Aero Mayflower. We of 
Mayflower are delighted 10 have even s0 small a part in this bidoric 


project.—Aero Mayflower Transit Company, Inc., Indianapolis, Ind. 


Mayiiowe 


NATION-WIDE 


FURNITURE MOVERS 


AMERICA’S FINEST LONG-DISTANCE MOVING SERVICE 


u3 


"4 


Risé Stevens’ Mother’s Day Gift... 


A NECKLACE MADE OF 


COIWID IFLLILyzyD 


The family of Risé Stevens — world-famous Metropolitan 
Opera star — selected a gleaming necklace in precious Gold 
Filled for her Mother's Day present. 

Fashioned of Gold Filled (karat gold bonded under heat and 
pressure to a strong supporting metal), her necklace will look 
lovelier longer...gleam with the unmistakable beauty of real gold. 

For the days that must be perfect . .. for the gifts that must 
be perfect — select something made of Gold Filled. 


GOLD FILLED: 
it is karat gold where it’s se 


Resists tarnishing — b = where 


it has a layer of karat gold, 


just 


authorized mark 
old Filled 


For the pride of owning or giving make sure it’s 


MUSHROOMS connnueo 


bold surmise: was it not probable that, long ago, long before 
the beginnings of written history, our ancestors had worshiped 
a divine mushroom? This would explain the aura of the super- 
natural in which all fungi seem to be bathed. We were the first 
to offer the conjecture of a divine mushroom in the remote cul- 
tural background of the European peoples, and the conjecture 
at once posed a further problem: what kind of mushroom was 
once worshiped and why? 

Our surmise turned out not to be farfetched. We learned that 
in Siberia there are six primitive peoples—so primitive that an- 
thropologists regard them as precious museum pieces for cultur- 
al study—who use an hallucinogenic mushroom in their sha- 
manistic rites. We found that the Dyaks of Borneo and the 
Mount Hagen natives of New Guinea also have recourse to 
similar mushrooms. In China and Japan we came upon an 
ancient tradition of a divine mushroom of immortality, and 
in India, according to one school, the 
Buddha at his last supper ate a dish of 
mushrooms and was forthwith trans- 
lated to nirvana, 

When Cortez conquered Mexico, 
his followers reported that the Aztecs 
were using certain mushrooms in their 
religious celebrations, serving them, 
as the early Spanish friars put it, ina 
demonic holy communion and call- 
ing them teonanacatl, ‘God's flesh.” 
But no one at that time made a point 
of studying this practice in detail, and 
until now anthropologists have paid 
little attention to it. We with our in- 
terest in mushrooms seized on the 

Mexican opportunity, and for years 
MustRooMstone” from have devoted the few leisure hours 
the highlands of Guatemala . 
dates back to 300-600 A.D, Of Our busy lives to the quest of the 

divine mushroom in Middle America. 

We think we have discovered it in 
certain frescoes in the Valley of Mexico that date back to about 
400 A.D., and also in the “‘mushroom stones” carved by the 
highland Maya of Guatemala that go back in one or two in- 
stances to the earliest era of stone carvings, perhaps 1000 B.C. 

For a day following our mushroom adventure Allan and 1 
did little but discuss our experience. We had attended a shaman- 
istic rite with singing and dancing among our Mixeteco friends 
which no anthropologist has ever before described in the New 
World, a performance with striking parallels in the shamanistic 
practices of some of the archaic Palaeo-Siberian peoples. But 
may not the meaning of what we had witnessed go beyond this? 
The hallucinogenic mushrooms are a natural product presuma- 
bly accessible to men in many parts of the world, including 
Europe and Asia. In man’s evolutionary past, as he groped his 
way out from his lowly past, there must have come a moment 
in time when he discovered the secret of the hallucinatory mush- 
rooms. Their effect on him, as I see it, could only have been 
profound, a detonator to new ideas. For the mushrooms re- 
vealed to him worlds beyond the horizons known to him, in 
space and time, even worlds on a different plane of being, a 
heaven and perhaps a hell. For the credulous primitive mind, 
the mushrooms must have reinforced mightily the idea of the 
miraculous. Many emotions are shared by men with the animal 
kingdom, but awe and reverence and the fear of God are peculiar 
to men. When we bear in mind the beatific sense of awe and 
ecstasy and caritas engendered by the divine mushrooms, one is 
emboldened to the point of asking whether they may not have 
planted in primitive man the very idea of a god. 

It is no accident, perhaps, that the first answer of the Spanish- 
speaking Indian, when I asked about the effect of the mush- 
rooms, was often this: Le /levan ahi donde Dios esta, **They 


ig 


CONTINUED 


Hop, nonstop by Clipper, 
sbon, 
Shannon or Glasgow 
vacation pietu 


into London, Paris, 


It's more fun with the whole family. When you're 
planning a vacation in Europe, don’t you dare 
leave your children at home. Leave them, and they 
won't let you forget it... take them along, we'll 
promise you a far more rewarding trip abroad. 

For through the eyes of children you see so much 
more, And there’s no friendlier passport than a 
child’s smile. Just try and beat a six-year-old when 
it comes to melting a stranger’s heart. 

Pan Am loves playing sitter to children—and to 
prove it, we take youngsters under 12 for half 


Be there 
together 


++ OVERNIGHT 


TO EUROPE 


fare. (Usually enough savings to take care of their 
expenses in Europe.) Believe it or not, taking your 
children along can be just as easy as a family 
vacation at home. Aboard a high-flying Clipper*, 
Europe is hardly a bedtime story away. 

The breadwinner will find it easy, too, with 
Pan Am’s World-Wide Plan, Go Now—Pay Later 
+++ only 10% down. For instance, from New York 
visit Rome, Nice, Paris and London for $67 down 
(per adult) on inclusive 17-day Pan Am Holiday 
(#404). Call your Travel Agent or Pan American. 


WORLD’S MOST 
EXPERIENCED 
AIRLINE 


Now-a full strength anti-perspirant 
for “difficult cases” 


SH DEODORANT, 
IY checks Pere 


Cos 


Prefer a Cream deodorant? 
You'll find New Fresh Cream the 
neatest, nicest cream deodorant 
you ever used. It even looks 
fresh, with a little dimple on top 
when you open the jar. 


fra is @ registered trademark of Pharma-Craft Company 


If you have found you have to use 
a deodorant every day, if you know 
you really need extra protection, if 
you switch from one deodorant to 
another constantly, ladies and 
gentlemen, this New Fresh Stick is 
for you. 
Scientists at Fresh discovered it—the 
new moisture-absorbing ingredient 
that gives New Fresh Stick continuing 
drying action. 

‘It gets underarms dry in seconds. . . 
ends all danger of perspiration, moisture 


WITH CONTINUING DRYING ACTION 


and odor when used daily... and still 
New Fresh Stick is harmless, no 
matter how often you use it. In addi- 
tion, it goes on dry, invisibly, without 
any greasy or runny messiness. 

In New Fresh Stick you use this 
highly effective formula full strength. 
Yet it can’t harm clothes; it’s gentle to 
your skin, because it’s non-acid. In 
fact, New Fresh Stick is as free from 
acid as a fine facial soap. 

Ever hear of anything like it? It’s 
the newest—and greatest for daylong 
protection. 


MEXICAN drawing of 16th Century shows three mushrooms, a man 
eating them and a god behind him, who is speaking through the mushroom. 


MUSHROOMS conrinueo 


carry you there where God is,” an answer that we have received 
on several occasions, from Indians in different cultural areas, 
almost as though it were in a sort of catechism. At all times 
there have been rare souls—the mystics and certain poets—who 
have had access without the aid of drugs to the visionary world 
for which the mushrooms hold the key. William Blake possessed 
the secret: ‘‘He who does not imagine in . . . stronger and bet- 
ter light than his perishing mortal eye can see, does not imagine 
at all.” But I can testify that the mushroonis make those visions 
accessible to a much larger number. The visions that we saw 
must have come from within us, obviously, But they did not 
recall anything that we had seen with our own eyes. Somewhere 
within us there must lie a repository where these visions sleep 
until they are called forth. Are the visions a subconscious trans- 
mutation of things read and seen and imagined, so transmuted 
that when they are conjured forth from the depths we no longer 
recognize them? Or do the mushrooms stir greater depths still, 
depths that are truly the Unknown? 


N each of our successive trips to the Indian peoples of south- 

ern Mexico, we have enlarged our knowledge of the use of 
the divine mushrooms, and as our knowledge has increased, 
new and exciting questions keep arising. We have found five 
distinct cultural areas where the Indians invoke the mushrooms, 
but the usage varies widely in every area. What is needed is a 
perceptive approach by trained anthropologists in every area, 
cooperating with mushroom specialists. Of these latter there are 
in the whole world relatively few: mushrooms are a neglected 
field in the natural sciences. In this field Professor Roger Heim 
is known the world over. He is not only a man with vast experi- 
ence in the field of mushrooms: he is an outstanding scientist 
in other fields, a man steeped in the humanities, the head of the 
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle in Paris. At an early 
stage of our inquiries he had lent us his counsel, and in 1956 
our progress had been such as to justify him in accompanying 
us on another field trip. There came with us also a chemist, 
Professor James A. Moore of the University of Delaware; an 
anthropologist, Guy Stresser-Péan of the Sorbonne; and once 
again our loyal friend Allan Richardson as photographer. 

This time the immediate problem was to identify the hallu- 
cinogenic mushrooms and to command a steady supply of them 
for laboratory study. This is harder than a layman would think. 


Though the early Spanish writers wrote about the divine mush-_ 


rooms four centuries ago, no anthropologist and no mycologist 
had been sufficiently interested to pursue the problem until our 
own generation. Those who know these mushrooms are Indians 
belonging to tribes farthest removed from us culturally, locked 


conTINUED 


What Fun on Family Picnics 
with (@Gutim PICNIC PALS! 


With plenty of fresh food and cold drinks in your Snow-Lite 
Cooler and a handy little Coleman Picnic Stove along, your 
family is all set for plenty of care-free outdoor fun on day-long 
picnics, a week-end outing or a whole summer vacation. Go as 
far as you like... stop where you please... stay as long as you 
want...and anywhere, anytime you can enjoy a tasty snack 
or a delicious meal in a jiffy, It’s the modern fun-way to picnic 
or travel... to enjoy at its best today’s casual outdoor living. 


COLEMAN PICNIC STOVE— weighs only COLEMAN SNOW-LITE COOLER—The most 
4¥2 Ibs. Lights instantly, cooks like gos sanitary cooler made. Keeps foods ond 
snacks anytime. drinks always delight 

wipe it off, 

jel cartri 


@ “spore”, refueled in 5 longer. From $16.95. Coleman all-metal 
reconds. Take it anywhere, Only $9.95. coolers from $10.95. 


Get Coleman Coolers and Picnic 

Stoves now ct your fovorite | The Coleman Compony, Inc. 

Grog, hardwore, sporting goods | Dept. 54L1, Wichita 1, Kansox 

or department store. See the H Please send me Free Outdoor Book. 
1 


FREE! oi Sicze state 
© outdoor tips and hints. 


entire Coleman outdoor line! 


THe COLEMAN conpany, nc. | Ade — 
proven ree | Gin 


Do you still 
wind your watch? 


you never have to wind a Mido! 


Winding a watch is a nuisance. Outmoded. Unnecessary! 


But, you never have to wind a Mido. It starts winding itself 
the instant you put it on, keeps winding as you wear it. 

Yet for all its slim elegance, a Mido wants no pampering. 
Swim with your Mido. Shower with it. Play tennis 

or golf with it. Waterproof*. Shock-protected. Anti-magnetic. 
Unbreakable mainspring. The worry-free watch! 


A Mido can’t help but be accurate. Its mainspring 
stays wound at precisely the right tension for 
perfect timekeeping. Never overwound...never 
‘underwound .... automatically ! 


Mido (pronounced Meedo) makes only self-winding 
watches —the world’s largest gift selection. 
And, isn’t it time you replaced your own 
watch with a modern, self-winding timepiece? 


Ask to see Mido watches at better jewelers. For 
the one nearest you and our new catalog, write 
Mido, Dept.L-13, 580 Fifth Ave., New York 36. 
In Canada: 410 St. Peter St., Montreal 1. 


Sold and serviced in 65 countries, 


"As long 08 case, crystal ond crown remain intact. 


watoore 
with ‘poe Stoinless steel eos 
17 jewels, wore 
Wa ak gold (Worwict) $978 
‘Othe models om $59.75 
THE WATCH YOU NEVER HAVE TO WIND to $500 (Fed. Tar Incl] 


us 


MUSHROOMS conrinueo 


in their mountains remote from highways, locked also behind 
the barrier of their languages. One must win their confidence and 
overcome their suspicion of white men. One must face the phys- 
ical discomforts of life and dangers of disease in the Indian 
villages in the rainy season, when the mushrooms grow. Occa- 
sionally a white face is seen in those parts in the dry season, but 
when the rains come, those rare beings—missionaries, archaeol- 
ogists, anthropologists, botanists, geologists—vanish. There are 
other difficulties. Of the seven curanderos that by now I have 
seen take the mushrooms, only two, Eva Mendez and her 
daughter, were dedicated votaries. Some of the others were 
equivocal characters. Once we saw a curandero take only a 
token dose of mushrooms, and there was another who ate and 
served to us a kind of mushroom that had no hallucinogenic 
properties at all. Had we seen only him, we should have come 
away thinking that the famed properties of the mushrooms were 
a delusion, a striking instance of autosuggestion. Do we discover 
here an effort at deception, or had the dried mushrooms through 
age lost their peculiar property? Or, much more interesting 
anthropologically, do some shamans deliberately substitute in- 
nocent species for the authentic kinds in a retreat from what is 
too sacred to be borne? Even when we have won the confidence 
of a skilled practitioner like Eva, the atmosphere must be right 
for a perfect performance and there must be an abundance of 
mushrooms. Sometimes even in the rainy season the mushrooms 
are scarce, as we have learned from costly experience. 


E now know that there are seven kinds of hallucinogenic 
mushrooms in use in Mexico. But not all the Indians know 

them even in the villages where they are worshiped, and either 
in good faith or to make the visitor happy, the curanderos some- 
times deliver the wrong mushrooms. The only certain test is to 
eat the mushrooms. Professor Heim and we have thus established 
beyond challenge the claims of four species. The next best thing 
is to obtain multiple confirmation from informants unknown to 
each other, if possible from various cultural areas. This we have 
done with several additional kinds. We are now certain as to 
four species, reasonably sure about two other kinds, and inclined 
to accept the claims of a seventh, these seven belonging to three 
genera. Of these seven, at least six appear to be new to science. 
Perhaps in the end we shall discover more than seven kinds. 
The mushrooms are not used as therapeutic agents: they them- 
selves do not effect cures. The Indians “‘consult” the mushrooms 
when distraught with grave problems. If someone is ill, the mush- 
room will say what led to the illness and whether the patient 
will live or die, and what should be done to hasten recovery. If 
the verdict of the mushroom is for death, the believing patient 
and his family resign themselves: he loses appetite and soon 
expires and even before his death they begin preparations for the 
wake. Or one may consult the mushroom about the stolen don- 
key and learn where it will be found and who took it. Or if a 
beloved son has gone out into the world—perhaps as a wetback 
to the states—the mushroom is a kind of postal service: it will 
report whether he still lives or is dead, whether he is in jail, mar- 
ried, in trouble or prosperous. The Indians believe that the mush- 
rooms hold the key to what we call extrasensory perception. 
Little by little the properties of the mushrooms are beginning 
to emerge. The Indians who eat them do not become addicts: 
when the rainy season is over and the mushrooms disappear, there 
seems to be no physiological craving for them. Each kind has its 
own hallucinogenic strength, and if enough of one species be not 
available, the Indians will mix the species, making a quick calcu- 
lation of the right dosage. The curandero usually takes a large 
dose and everyone else learns to know what his own dose should 
be. It seems that the dose does not increase with use. Some per- 
sons require more than others. An increase in the dose intensifies 
the experience but does not greatly prolong the effect. The mush- 
rooms sharpen, if anything, the memory, while they utterly 


CONTINUED 


Champions! Independent engineers proved 
Champions give cars of all makes an immediate 
boost in road horsepower—the real power actually 


© More road horsepower —Better hill climb, 
faster get-away, surer pick-up for safe 
. you can get them all with a new set of 5-rib 


ed at the rear wheels, Most cars gained 6% 
! No wonder 9 out of 10 racing drivers—men 
who really know cars—insist on Champions! 


ing 


If you havent changed your plugs in about 10,000 miles — 


You can make your car 4 ways newer 
with Champion spark plugs 


ORDINARY 
ELECTRODE 


POWERFIRE 
ELECTRODE 


© Wicker starts—Your engine 

arts ing so you save 
time and batt Tests with 
cars whose plugs had gone about 
10,000 miles showed new 5-rib 
Champions cut starting time by as 
much as 71%—with an average of 39%. 


© bess engine wear Old pl 
misfire (left)... dilute e 
oil with raw gasoline. New full-fr 
Champions (right) burn all the gas 
+ «protect your oil from dilution, help 
you avoid costly repairs. At every oil 
change, ask for a spark plug check! 


@ bower cost-per-mile—As 
you see above, Champion's 
great new Powerfire electrode 
stands up better than ordinary 
types under identical use. Yor 
top powe economy for life 
of plug. Insist on 5-rib Champions! 


LOOK FOR THE 5 RIBS 


Your first step 


LOOK FOR THIS BLUE LABEL 


United States Rubber 


ROCKEFELLER CENTER, NEW YORK 20, 
{Sc£ THINGS YoU NEVER SAW BEFORE. VISIT U.S. RUBBER’S NEW Ot 


120 


GROWING in Paris, cultures brought back from Mexico by Heim pro- 
duce mushrooms in his laboratory. These are Psilocybe mexicana Heim, 


MUSHROOMS oonrinueo 


destroy the sense of time. On the night that we have described 
we lived through eons. When it seemed to us that a sequence of 
visions had lasted for years, our watches would tell us that only 
seconds had passed. The pupils of our eyes were dilated, the pulse 
ran slow. We think the mushrooms have no cumulative effect on 
the human organism. Eva Mendez has been taking them for 35 
years, and when they are plentiful she takes them night after night. 

The mushrooms present a chemical problem. What is the 
agent in them that releases the strange hallucinations? We are 
now reasonably sure that it differs from such familiar drugs 
as opium, coca, mescaline, hashish, etc. But the chemist has 
long road to go before he will isolate it, arrive at its molecular 
structure and synthesize it. The problem is of great interest in 
the realm of pure science. Will it also prove of help in coping 
with psychic disturbances? 

My wife and I have traveled far and discovered much since 
that day 30 years ago in the Catskills when we first perceived the 
strangéness of wild mushrooms. But what we have already dis- 
covered only opens up new vistas for further study. Today we are 
about to embark on our fifth expedition to the Mexican Indian 
villages, again seeking to increase and refine our knowledge of 
the role played by mushrooms in the lives of these remote peo- 
ples. But Mexico is only the beginning, Alll the evidence relating 
to the primitive beginnings of our own European cultures must 
be reviewed to see whether the hallucinogenic mushroom played 
a part there, only to be overlooked by posterity. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


For help in Middle America the author and Mrs. Wasson are in- 
debted in Mexico chiefly to.Robert J. Weitlaner; to Carmen Cook 
de Leonard and her husband, Donald Leonard; to Eunice V. Pike, 
Walter Miller, Searle Hoogshagan, and Bill Upson of the Summer 
Institute of Linguistics; also to Gordon Ekholm of the American 
Museum of Natural History, New York; and to Stephan F. de Bor- 
hegyi, director of the Stovall Museum of the University of Okla~ 
