A CONTRIBUTION TO OUR KNOWLEDGE
OF RIVEA CORYMBOSA: THE NARCOTIC
     OLOLIUQUI OF THE AZTECS
    A CONTRIBUTION TO OUR
KNOWLEDGE OF RIVEA CORYMBOSA
THE NARCOTIC OLOLIUQUI OF THE AZTECS



                    BY

       RICHARD EVANS SCHULTES




   BOTANICAL MUSEUM OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY
          CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
                    1941
                                           "I',-{
                                   }Pc]', Ur;Ll,
                               •


PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT THE
   BOTANICAL MUSEUM
 CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS




                                                    •
             TABLE OF CONTENTS



   I. Introduction                                    8
   II. The history and identification of ololiuqui    4
 III. The nomenclature and taxonomy of Rivea
      corymbosa                                      15
  IV. The chemical composition of Rivea corymbosa 20
   V. The chemical composition of related Convol­
      vulaceae                                       28
 VI. The uses of Rivea corymbosa                     25
VII. The vernacular names of Rivea corymbosa in
     Mexico                                     88
VIII. Plants confused with the narcotic ololiuqui    89
 IX. Summary                                         40
       Bibliography                                  42
            LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



Plate I.    Reproduction of the earliest illustration
            of Rivea corymbosa                           6

Plate II.   Rivea corymbosa                             17
Text cut.   Fruit and seed of Rivea corymbosa           19

Plate III. Distribution of the use of Rivea
           corymbosa                                    28
A CONTRIBUTION TO OUR KNOWLEDGE
OF RIVEA CORYMBOSA: THE NARCOTIC
     OLOLIUQUI OF THE AZTECS
A CONTRIBUTION TO OUR KNO\VLEDGE
OF RIVEA CORYMBOSA: THE NARCOTIC
     OLOLIUQUI OF THE AZTECS

                    1. I N'l'RODUCTION
   N the life of primitive peoples, narcotic plants have
I   usually played an extremely important part. Because
oftheir intoxicating or poisonous properties, a large num­
ber of such plants have been valued by the aborigines of
North, Middle and South America. But perhaps nmvhere
in the New \Vorld did a greater variety of narcotic plants
enter into the religious ceremonies, medieal practices and
daily life of a people than in Mexico.
   The Aztecs, in pre-hispanic Mexico, from their own ex­
periences and from association with conquered or friendly
tribes, had acquired a knowledge of many narcotic and
poisonous plants. The most important of these were the
cactus, peyotl (LophopllOra fVilliamsii (Lem.) Coulter) ;
the mushroom, teonanacatl (Paneolus ra1llpanulatus L.
var. sphinctri71us (Fr.) Bresadola); and the convolvula­
ceous vine, ololiuqui (Rivea corY1llbosa (L.) Hallier fili­
us), the plant with which this article deals.
   Ololiuqui has received relatively little critical attention
in anthropological and botanical studies, notwithstanding
the fact that it presents a number of fascinating ethno­
 botanical problems. One reason for this neglect may be
 that the identity of the ololiuqui plant has been imper­
fectly understood. The information necessary for a clear
 understanding of it, even though available, has been mis­
 interpreted.
   The purpose of the present paper is to review the his­
 tory of the use of ololiuqui and to present the pertinent
 details for an understanding of its identity. \Vith this
                            [a]
purpose in mind, I have endeavored to refer to all of the
writings concerning the use of ololiuqui among the In­
dians of Mexico, but since the published records are
widely scattered and are often incidental, it is probable
that some may have been overlooked. As many of the
anthropological records of ololiuqui are preserved in ob­
scure or rare publications, it has been thought advisable
to include in this paper translations of the relevant pas­
sages from these records. The historical material has been
correlated with several discoveries which have recently
been published as well as with field notes made during
my ethnobotanical investigations in Oaxaca in 1938 and
1939.

 II. THE HISTORY AND IDENTIFICATION OF OLOLIUQUI
   In 1615, Francisco Ximenez issued a Spanish transla­
tion (21,61) of a portion of the unpublished ethnobiolog­
ical notes of Francisco Hernandez, a Spanish physician
who, between 1570 and 1575, carried out for Philip II
extensive research on the flora and fauna of Mexico. He
described ololiuqui under the heading: De la yerva que
llaman ololiuqui que quiere decir planta de qjas redondas.
Ximenez did not attempt to identify this plant nor did
he figure it. He merely stated that:
   ... it will not be wrong to refrain from telling where it grows, for
it matters little that this plant be here described or that Spaniards
be made acquainted with it. l

  A contemporary of Hernandez, Bernadino de Saha­
gun, whose Historia de las cosas de Nueva Espana was
written after careful investigation of Mexican life and
customs, gathered comprehensive information regarding
the use of plants and plant products. He enumerated
  IThe translations in this paper are, unless otherwise credited, free
translations made by the author from the original sources.

                                [ 4]
three plants which wcre called ololiuqu.i (44,45,46), but
only one of these was a narcotic. Under the heading:
De ciertas hierbas qu.e emborrachan, he mentioned olo­
liuqui and stated that:
   There is an herb called coatl-xoxouhqui, and it bears a seed called
ololiuqui.

The Aztee name coatl-(JJo(JJo'uhqui means "green snake"
and probably refers to the twining habit of the plant.
In the Paso y Troncoso edition of Sahagun's writings
(1905), a number of early illustrations made under the
direction of Sahagun were reproduced. Figure 449 on
Lam. CI is crude, but it agrees in all essentials with the
figure of ololiuqui published by Hernandez. It has con­
gested fruits, cordate leaves, a swollen root, and a twin­
ing habit-characteristics of Rivea and related genera of
the C071volvulaceae.
   Writing in 1629, Hernando Ruiz de Alarcon (5) de­
scribed in great detail the Aztec method of using ololiu­
qui. In his description, he recorded several peculiarities
of the plant and stated that:
   ... ololiuqui is a kind of seed like the lentil [Lens culinaris Medik.]
which is produced by a species of ivy of this land; when it is drunk,
this seed deprives of his senses him who has taken it, for it is very
powerful.

Although this account of such an important narcotic
plant leaves much to be desired, there can be little doubt
but that the plant which Alareon had in mind was the
same as the one which Hernandez subsequently deseribed
and figured.
   In 1651, Hernandez (15) described and figured ololiu­
qui under the heading: IJe Oliliuhqui, seu planta orbic­
ularium foliormn. This is the earliest detailed account
and the first illustration of the plant (see Plate I). A free
translation of the 1651 Latin version follows:
                                 [ .1) ]
  PLATE I




  De 0 L I L I V H ~V I, flu planta orhicularium foliorum.          Cap. XlP.
                                          LILlVHQVI , qllam Coaxihuitl,
                                   O      feu herbam Serpent is alij vocant,
                                 volubilis herba eLl:, folia viridia ferens, re­
                                 nuia,cordis figura. caules teretes,virides, te­
                                 nuefq; . flores albos, & longi ufculos . femen
                                 rorundum limite Coriandro.vnde nomen.
                                 radices fibris Gmdes. calida quarto ordine
                                 plant.1 eLl: .luem Gallicam curat. dolores e
                                 frigore ortos fedat . Barum, ac pra:ter naru­
                                 ram rumores difcutit . puluis rdina mixrus
                                 pellie frigus. luxatis aut frachs offibus, &
                                 lumbis freminarum laxis,auCl:o robore mi­
                                 rum auxiIiarur in modum.S eminisetiam...
                                 ell: v[us in medicina, quod tritum,ac deuo­
                                  ratum, ilIitumq; capiti, & fronti, cum laCl:~
                                  & chilli, ferrur morbis oculorum mederi •
                                  deuorarum vero, venerem excitat. Acri eft
                                  fapore) & temperie , veluti & plant a eius ,
                                  impense calida. Indorum facrifici cum vi­
                                 deri volebant verfari cum Superis,ac refp6­
                                 fa accipere ab eis,ea vefcebarur planta,vt de­
fiperent,milIeq; phamafmata,& dzmonii obuersatium effigies circumfpecta­
rent. qua in re Solano maniaco Diofcoridis limilis fona(fe alicui videri poffie •

       Reproduction of the earliest illustration and detailed discussion of
    the uses of Rivea corymbosa. Hernandez, Francisco: "Rerum medi­
    carum Novae Hispaniae thesaurus, seu plantarum, animalium, miner­
    alium mexicanorum historia" (Rome, 1651) p. 145.
   Oliliuhqui, which some call coa.xihuitl, or snake-plant, is a twining
herb with thin, green, cordate leaves; slender, green, terete stems;
and long, white flowers. The seed is round and very much like cori­
ander, whence the name [in Nahuatl, the term ololiuqui means "round
thing"J of the plant. The roots are fibrous and slender. The plant is
hot in the fourth degree. It cures syphilis and mitigates pain which
is caused by chills. It relieves flatulency and removes tumors. If
mixed with a little resin, it banishes chills and stimulates and aids in
a remarkable degree in cases of dislocations, fractures, and pelvic
troubles of women. The seed has some medicinal use. If pulverized
or taken in a decoction or used as a poultice on the head or forehead
with milk and chili, it is said to cure eye troubles. When drunk, it
acts as an aphrodisiac. It has a sharp taste and is very hot. Formerly,
when the priests wanted to commune with their gods and to receive
a message from them, they ate this plant to induce a delirium. A
thousand visions and satanic hallucinations appeared to them. In its
manner of action, this plant can be compared with Solanum maniacurn
of Dioscorides. It grows in warm places in the fields.

   Jacinto de la Serna (54), one of the early chroniclers
of Mexico, wrote at great length on the superstitions of
the Aztecs. He observed and recorded carefully every
detail concerning the method of using ololiuqui, but he
failed, as did Alarcon, to describe the plant fully. How­
ever, his statement that the seeds resemble the lentil is
in agreement with the corresponding observation of Her­
nandez and Alarcon.
   An early attempt to identify ololiuqui botanically
was made in 1854 when Oliva (27) declared that it was
"Convolvulus microcalyx". Although this identification
was later shown to be incorrect, it was important since,
for the first time, it referred ololiuqui to the proper
family-the Convolvulaceae. Oliva's identification was
adopted in Leon's edition of Cuatro libl'OS de la natural­
eza y virtudes de las plantas y animales de la .1Vueva
Espaiia (21). Among one hundred and twenty three
plant determinations, Leon included ololiuqui as "Con­
volvulus microcaly.1J ??,'. Notwithstanding the fact that
                                 [7]
the author of this important contribution to Mexican
ethnobotany had accepted Oliva's identification, it was
not adopted in other contemporaneous publications.
Martinez Gracida, for example, in his comprehensive
Catalogo de la flora y la fauna del Estado de Oaxaca
(12), reported the occurrence of ololuc or ololiuqui (also
called yerba de las serpientes) in Oaxaca, but he failed
to include the botanical identification made by Oliva and
accepted, with reservation, by Leon.
   In 1897, Doctor Manuel Urbina (58) identified ololiu­
qui as Rivea corymbosa (Ipomoea sidaifolia (HBK.)
Choisy). This identification was published in a more
detailed form in 1903 in an article entitled: El peyote y
el ololiuqui (59), which was reprinted in 1912 (60).
   In 1911, Hartwich (14), probably unacquainted with
Urbina's work, stated that he could not identify ololiu­
qui from Hernandez' illustration of the plant, but that
it might well be a member of the Solanaceae.
   Doctor William E. Safford in his well-known paper
An Aztec narcotic (37) expressed his belief that Urbina's
conclusions were wrong. He suggested that ololiuqui
might not be Rivea corymbosa, but he did not definitely
identify it until a later date. He wrote:
    "Dr. Manuel Urbina, ... declared it to be Ipomoea sidaifolia of
Choissy; but this identification, while agreeing with Hernandez's il­
lustration, lacks confirmation through investigation of the chemical
properties and physiological action of the seeds of this species; and
it is not known that any of the Convolvulaceae are narcotic, though
many of the Solanaceae, which have somewhat similar flowers, are
highly so. It is very strange that Mexican botanists living in the
country of the Ololiuhqui have not solved the mystery of its identity."

Furthermore, Safford expressed doubt as to the value
of certain early Mexican accounts of plants and plant
uses when he stated:
   " A knowledge of botany has been attributed to the Aztecs which

                                [8]
they were far from possessing. . . . The botanical knowledge of the
early Spanish writers, Sahagun, Hernandez, Ortega, and Jacinto de
la Serna, was perhaps not much more extensive: their descriptions
were so inadequate that even to the present day the chief narcotic
of the Aztecs, Ololiuhqui, which they all mention,remains unidentified. "

   Safford's lack of faith in the reliability of the botani­
cal knowledge ofthe Aztecs and the early Spanish writers
seems unjustified. It was undoubtedly this lack offaith,
together with a belief in the absence of narcotic principles
from the Convolvulaceae which led Safford to disagree
with Urbina's identification of ololiuqui and to look upon
his conclusions with suspicion.
   In 1915, Safford (38) definitely stated that ololiuqui
should be referred to Datura meteloides Dunal ex DC.,
a species of the Solanaceae. This identification, repeated
in his later papers (39,40,41,42,43), has received such
serious consideration that anthropologists and botanists
have very generally accepted it. Indeed, this identifica­
tion has been accepted in several very recent anthropo­
logical and botanical papers (10, 1l,20).
   Ololiuqui had been indirectly linked with the Solana­
ceae prior to the time of Hartwich and Safford. For
example, Hernandez, who worked in pre-Linnean times
and who had none of the modern concepts of families
and genera, likened ololiuqui to Solanum maniacum of
Dioscorides, a solanaceous plant (15). However, it must
 be emphasized that Hernandez did not identify ololiuqui
 as Solanum maniacum but merely compared the two
 plants from the point of view of their physiological ef­
 fects. He also pointed out similarities between the action
 of ololiuqui and that of Cannabis, Papaver, and other
 Old vVorld narcotic plants. In this connection, it is in­
teresting to note in passing the effects which were once
 attributed to "Solanulll maniaculll". Translations of two
 ancient writers are accordingly quoted:
   DODOENS:   A new herbal, or hislorie qf plants (Translated by Henry
Lyte) (1619) 320. "Tbe roote of Solanum Manicum, taken in wine to
the quantitie of a dram, causeth idle and vaine imaginations: and,
taken to the quantitie of two drams, it bringetb frensie and madnesse,
which lasteth by the space of three or foure dayes: and if foure drams
thereof be taken, it killetb."
    THEOPHRASTUS: Enquiry into plants (Translated by Sir Arthur Hort)
2 (1916) 278. "Of the plants called str!Jkhnos one induces sleep, the
other (thorn-apple) causes madness...• The kind which produces
madness .•. has a white, hollow root about a cubit long. Of this
three twentieths of an ounce in weight is given, if the patient is to
become merely sportive and to think himself a fine fellow; twice this
dose if he is to go mad outright and have delusions; thrice the dose,
if he is to be permanently insane; .•. four times the dose is given,
if the man is to be killed. The leaf is like that of rocket, but larger,
the stem about a fathom long; the 'bead' is like that of a long
onion, but larger and rougher. And it also resembles the fruit of the
plane-tree. "

   In the index of plants accompanying Sir Arthur
Hort's translation (THEoPHRAsTus 1. c., p. 478), Sol­
anum maniacum is referred to Datura Stramonium
L. There can be no doubt but that Solanum maniacum
was a species of Datura, but it is by no means certain
that the species was D. Stramonium. Safford (42), who
monographed the genus Datura, held to the opinion
that D. Stramonium was an American species unknown
in the Old vVorld before the 16th Century. He held that
Daturaferox L. and D. Metel L. were the only repre­
sentatives of the genus in the Old World in pre-Colom­
bian times. There has been much debate concerning the
native home of Datura Stramonium, and opinion is still
divided between an Old and aNew 'V orld origin. The
evidence would seem to support Safford's viewpoint, but
it is not yet possible to state positively that Datura
Stramonium was exclusively aNew World species before
1492. All authorities, however, are in agreement that
this species was unknown in Europe until the 16th Cen­
                                [ 10 ]
tury. It is doubtful, therefore, whether Solannm maTli­
acum can be referred to Datu'ra StTamol1ium. When all
the many details are examined, it seems more probable
that the narcotic Datum of which Dioscorides wrote was
D. Metel, the widely known metel-nut of southern
Europe and Asia.
   The European and Asiatic narcotic metel-nut (DatuTa
Metel) has often been confused with the New \Vorld D.
meteloides, the species to which Safford referred ololiuqui.
   Safford's reasons for identifying ololiuqui as a species
of Datura were severaL In the first place, Datura was
used in northern Mexico and in North America for pur­
poses of divination (43). '1'0 Safford, it seemed very prob­
able that ololiuqui, a narcotic of central and southern
 Mexico, merely extended the use of Datura southwards.
This appeared all the more likely since the symptoms of
 Datum and ololiuqui intoxication are very similar.
   In the second place, Safford suspected that Hernandez
 might have erroneously figured a convolvulaceous plant
instead of a Datura. He argued:

   " ... it is not surprising that it should have been so confused [Le.,
Datura metelaides with liil'ea carymbasa1, for its trumpet-shaped flower,
like that of the closely allied Datura discol,or, strongly suggests a
morning-glory" (38).

Although it is true that the Convolvulaceae and the Sol­
anaceae are related (belonging to the Tubijiorae of the
Metachlamydeae) and have certain similarities in their
floral structure, this argument is hardly a convincing one.
It must be remembered that the vegetative differences
between Rivea corymbosa (a large, woody vine) and Da­
tura meteloides (an erect herb) are so great that mere floral
similarity should not cause confusion. It should be em­
phasized also that the natives were interested chiefly in
the seeds, which are quite different in the two genera.
                                 [ 11 ]
  Concerning the possibility of error on the part of Her­
nandez, Safford further states:
   "The identity of the latter plant [ololiuqui], held sacred hy all the
Indian tribes who use it, was carefully kept secret from strangers..•.
The late Dr. Manuel Urbina •.• believed it to be a morning-glory,
Ipomoea sidaifolia; but none of the Convolvulaceae have narcotic prop­
erties. He was misled by Hernandez, who never learned the identity
of this sacred plant, but who described and figured in its stead the
Ipomoea referred to. As a matter of fact, the name ololiuhqui, originally
applied to certain species of Convolvulaceae, was given to a certain
Solanaceous plant with flowers shaped very much like those of a
Convol vulus or Ipomoea."

   From a study of the older writers on ololiuqui, I have
been unable to find supporting evidence for Safford's
statement that the name was formerly applied to species
ofthe Convolvulaceae and was later used to designate cer­
tain species of the Solanaceae. Neither of the two earliest
figures of the narcotic ololiuqui are solanaceous in aspect,
and I have been unable to find a description which would
suggest that this supposed transfer of name had taken
place. There apparently was no definite transfer of the
name to the Solanaceae until 1915, when Safford himself
applied it erroneously to Datura meteloides.
   The eminent toxicologist Lewin (22,28) agreed with
Safford in identifying ololiuqui as Datura meteloides. He
did not refer to Safford's studies, however, and it may
be that he arrived at his conclusions independently.
   In Mexico, where Urbina published his identification
of ololiuqui, the attribution of the narcotic to Rivea
corymbosa is rather generally accepted (16,26,29,81,82,
46,58,59,60). Some hesitation and doubt, however, have
been caused by the Datura identification made by Saf­
ford. Herrera (16), for example, while identifying the
 "ololiuqui" of J alisco, Oaxaca, and Vera Cruz as Rivea
corymbosa, complicated the problem in his catalogue by
                                 [ 12 ]
accepting Safford's assertion that the "ololiuqui" of Sin­
a]oa, Guanajuato, and Jalisco is Datura meteloides. In
1933, Martinez (25) rejected Safford's determination, but
he did not accept Rivea corymbosa as the plant from which
ololiuqui seeds were obtained. He believed ololiuqui to
be a species of Ipomoea, possibly I.hirsutula .lacq.f. (I.
mexicana A. Gray) and stated that it could not, because
of discrepancies in seed characters, be referable to Rivea
corymbosa. In 1937, however, Martinez (26) accepted
Rivea corymbosa as the correct identification.
   Finally, in a popular account of New \Vorld narcotics,
written in 1936, V. A. Reko (34) rejected Urbina's iden­
tification and seemed to favor the conclusions of Safford.
   A number of writers (1,8,13,17,18,19,36,56,57) who
have mentioned ololiuqui incidentally have refrained
from discussing the botanical identity of the plant. In
some cases, this was probably due to the uncertainty and
confusion which existed in the minds of the botanists
who had studied the problem.
   The first actual field evidence to corroborate the work
of Hermindez and lJ rbina's identification was found by
Doctor 13. P. Reko who had studied the works of some
of the older writers and interpreted their reports in the
light of his own discoveries. He concluded that Urbina's
determination was correct and that Safford's was incor­
rect. In 1919, he (30) defined ololuc (as ololiuqui is known
in parts of Oaxaca) as the round, lentil-like seeds of Rivea
corymbosa and stated that the medicine-men used them
to produce an intoxication resembling somnambulism.
 In a letter written in 1923/ he wrote that the natives of
the Sierra Juarez of Oaxaca (Zapotec Indians) "use the
ololiuqui which is doubtless Ipomoea sidaefolia Choisy."
 Again, in 1929, he (31) accepted Urbina's identification
2 B. P.
      Reko to J. N. Rose, July 18, 19'23; preserved on sheet No.
1745713, United States National Herbarium, Washington, D.C.
                            [ ]3 ]
and rejected the determination suggested by Safford.
   Subsequently, in 1984, Relm published a review of
the identity and use of ololiuqui (82). Going back to the
reports of Hernandez and Sahagun and reprod ucing
Hernandez' figure of ololiuqui, he outlined some of his
own field observations which agreed with the ancient
records and which argued against the possibility that
ololiuqui was a species of Datura. Furthermore, the
narcotic seeds which he collected in Oaxaca were sent to
Safford who identified them as the seeds of Rivea corym­
bosa.
   Admitting that nareotic constituents were unknown
in the Convolvulaceae, Reko insisted that this fact could
not be used to discredit the reports of earlier writers in­
asmuch as Rivea corymbosa had not, as yet, received
chemical investigation, and he suggested that a narcotic
principle-possibly a glucoside-actually was present in
the plant.
    In several articles on narcotic plants, I have referred
to ololiuqui (50,51,52,58). I accepted as correct the Ur­
bina identification, basing my conclusions on a study of
the reports of early writers and on an evaluation of the
arguments for and against the Urbina and Safford iden­
tifications.
    In summarizing the problem of the identification of
ololiuqui, therefore, we may state that all of the avail­
able early reports, the field observations of Reko, and
my own ethnobotanical studies indicate that Urbina was
correct in referring ololiuqui to Rivea corymbosa and that
Safford was wrong in suggesting that it was derived from
a species of Datura. Furthermore, recent pharmacolog­
ical work, in demonstrating the presence of an intoxicat­
ing principle in the seeds of Rivea corymbosa, removes
the most important argument which Safford advanced
 in favor of his identification.
                          [ 14 ]
     III. THE NOMENCLATURE AND TAXONOMY OF
                   RIVEA CORYMBOSA


  Rivea corymbosa ( L.) Hallier filius in Engler Bot.
.Jahrb. 8 (1893) 157.
   Convolvulus corymbosus Linnaeus Syst. Nat. ed. 10, 2
   (1759) 923.
   Convolvulus domingensis Desrousseau in Lamarck En­
   cyel. 3 (1791) 554.
   Convolvulus sidaefolius Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth
   Nov. Gen. & Sp. 3 (1818) 99.
   Ipomoea corymbosa (L.) Roth Nov. PI. Sp. Ind. Ori­
   ent. (1821) 109.
   Ipomoea sidalifolia (HBK.) Choisy in Mem. Soc. Phys.
   Hist. Nat. Geneve 6 (1833) 459.
   '}'urbina cOTymbosa (L.) Rafinesque FJ. Tellur. 4
   (1838) 81.
   Ipomoea Burmanni Choisy in DeCandolle Prodr. 9
   (1845) 350.
   Ipomoea antillana Millspaugh in Field Mus. Nat.
   Rist. Hot. Ser. 2, pt. ] (Plantae Utowanae), Publ.
   No. 43 (1900) 84.
   Ipmnoea domlllgensls (Desr.) Rouse in Muhlenbergia
   3 (1907) 38.

   Plant a large, scandent, twining, woody vine. Leaves
5"9 cm. long, 2.5-4 cm. wide, broadly cordate or ovate­
cordate, entire, glabrous or very sparingly pubescent,
long-petiolate. Peduncles axillary, usually many -flower~
ed. Flowers borne in congested cymes. Corolla gamo~
petalous, infundibuliform or hypocraterimorphous, 2-4
cm. long, white or whitish, the lobes entire, glabrous.
Stigmas two. Stamens included. Ovary glabrous,2-celled.
Sepals ovate to ovate-Ianceolate, enlarged in fruit, scari~
OllS, somewhat ligneous, about 1 cm. long. Fruit ellip­

                          [ 15 ]
Flowering and fruiting branches of Rivea c01'l/mbosa
(L.) Hall.f. Flowering branch drawn from a speci­
men in the Gray Herbarium (Harvard University)
-Seier 1381l!, Cuicatlan, District of Cuicatlan, Oa­
xaca, Mexico, November 15, 1895. Fruiting branch
drawn from specimen number 6595 in the Economic
Herbarium of Oakes Ames (Botanical Museum,
Harvard University}--Schultes <t Reko 871l!, Santo
Domingo Latani, District of Choapam, Oaxaca,
Mexico.
                     Drawn by GORDON W. DILLON




                      [ 16 ]
PLA TE II
soidal, baccate, indehiscent, I-celled, I-seeded. Seed
roundish, minutely puberulent, rather woody.
   Rivea, a genus which Choisy established in 1833, has
been separated from the large genus Ipomoea on several
minor characters. These characters are technical and ap­
parently often intergrade. Rivea corymbosa may be dis­
tinguished from the Middle American species of
Ipomoea by the type of its fruit, by the texture of its
sepals and by the shape of its flowers. Rivea corymbosa,
                                 first descri bed by Linnaeus
                                 in 1759 as a species of Con­
                                 volvulus, has sepals which are
                                 somewhat ligneous, whereas
                                 the species of I pornoea usually
                                 have membranous, often her­
                                 baceous, sepals. In Rivea co­
                                 rymbosa, the flower is usually
                                 hypocraterimorphous,a shape
                                 which is not common among
                                 species of Ipomoea. The fruit
                                 of Rivea corymbosa is distinc­
                                 tive, being baccate, dry and
                                 indehiscent, with only one
                                 seed, while the fruit of most
                                 species of Ipomoea is a de his­
   The fruit and seed of Rivea cent capsule, usually with
  corymbosa magnified ten times. two or more seeds.
    In his monographic treatment of the genus Ipomoea
 in North America, House (in Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 18
 (1908) 182) stated that he considered Rivea worthy of
 generic rank.
    Recently, the combination Turbina corymbosa (L.)
 Raf. has been frequently used to designate the ololiuqui
 plant. The tendency at the present time, however, is to
 abandon this combination in favor of Rivea corymbosa.
                             [ 19 ]
Among recent writers who have accepted Rivea corym­
bosa, the following may be cited: Urban (Symb. Antill.
8 (1920) 572; Grey & Hubbard (List PI. Grow. Bot.
Gard. Atkins lnst. Arnold Arb. (1933) ); Standley (in
Field Mus. Nat. Hist. Bot. Ser. 18, 3 (Fl. Costa Rica)
973 (Pu bi. 420) ).
   Of the synonyms of Rivea corymbosa which have most
frequently been used in reference to the narcotic ololiu­
qui, the following are the most important: Ipomoea //i­
daefolia (HBK. ) Choisy and T'llrbina corymbosa (L.) Raf.
   The genus Rivea is represented in the East Indies and
adjacent regions, in Africa, in South and Middle Amer­
ica, and in the West Indies. Rivea corymbosa is the only
species of the genus known to be native to the New
World. It is very widely distributed in Middle America,
occurring in Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica,
and Nicaragua. In South America, it is known from
Venezuela, Peru and Bolivia. It occurs also in Florida.
Hallier filius (in Engler Bot. Jahrb. 8 (1893) 157) reports
it as possibly occurring in Ceylon. In Mexico, the plant
is frequent from Sinaloa and Tamaulipas but appears to
be more abundant in Vera Cruz, Oaxaca, Tabasco and
Yucatan.

I V.   THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF RIVEA CORYMBOSA

   Until recently, nothing was known of the chemical
composition ofthe seeds of Rivea corymbosa. Preliminary
studies which have been made on the pharmacology and
chemistry of ololiuqui indicate that its chemical constit­
uents are very complex.
   When Urbina identified ololiuqui as Rivea corymbosa.
he recognized that no narcotic substance was known to
occur in the Convo/vulaceae, but he pointed out that the
family was rich in glucosides. All doubt as to the nar­
cotic properties of Rivea corymbosa was dispelled in
                          [ 20 ]
1937, when the late Professor C. G. Santesson of Stock­
holm discovered active narcotic principles in ololiuqui
seeds (47,48).
   According to Santesson, a heavy, white precipitate is
produced if water is added to an alcoholic extract of the
seeds of Rivea corymbosa. This is an indication of the
presence of a resin. Whether or not this resin contains
active principles is a question which must await further
research. If an alcoholic extract is freed from its resin
content and evaporated and the residue taken up with
water, the resulting aqueous solution is doudy and, after
heating, contains a slimy mass. Freed from this slime; the
filtrate, a yellow solution, gives strong acid reactions.
Santesson believed that the Scltleim might playa chem­
ical part in the physiological role of the narcotic constit­
uent.
   The aqueous solution of the residue from the original
alcoholic extract does not give a positive sugar reaction,
but if it is heated with hydrochloric acid, a positive Fehl­
ing's test is obtained. This indicates that a glucoside is
set free during treatment with hydrochloric acid, but
that prior to this treatment, the glucoside is in some
way masked.
   Experiments which Santesson conducted suggest that
the condition which ololiuqui induces is, in his own
words, "eine partielle Liihmung des Gehirns, eine Art
 N arkose oder Halbnarkose. " The extracts containing the
 unsplit glucoside and those containing the split glucoside
produced comparable effects. The only difference be­
 tween the two extracts is that the one containing the
split glucoside seems to be slightly more narcotic in
lower animals than the one with the unsplit glucoside.
 Inasmuch as the splitting of the glucoside did not seem
 to be of importance in rendering the narcotic active,
 Santesson suspected that the active principle might not
                           [ 21 ]
be the glucoside but something else which is masked
under ordinary circumstances. The results of a number
of tests indicated that, when the glucoside was split, an
alkaloid was set free.
   The alkaloid is not perceptible (or only very slightly
so) to alkaloid-reagents before the splitting of the glu­
coside. After the splitting, however, all alkaloid tests are
strongly positive. All the evidence from experiments and
tests indicates that the alkaloid, normally in combination
with a sugar, is set free only by destruction of the bond
with heat and hydrochloric acid. Remarking that "ein
solcher Korper ist meines Wissens eine Seltenheit",
Santesson compared this with the gluco-alkaloid solanine
which is found in Solanum Dulcamara L. of Europe.
   Although the alkaloid is chemically masked before it
is freed from the sugar, its physiological activity is ap­
parently not affected by this union. This is evident from
the fact that the extract containing the unsplit, as well
as that containing the split glucoside, produces narcotic
effects.
   Doctor Marsh of the United States Department of
Agriculture obtained negative results when he experi­
mented with the seeds of Rivea corymbosa (32), and Reko,
although he had been warned that five or six seeds would
produce an intoxication, ate a handful without notice­
able effects (32). Santesson cannot explain the failure of
ololiuqui to produce effects in the experiments of Marsh
and Reko, but he offers the interesting suggestion that
racial differences in susceptibility to intoxication may
account for the phenomenon. He points out the long
recognized fact that appreciable quantitative and quali­
tative differences in the effects of opium (Papaver som­
niferum L.), coca (Erythroxylon Coca Lam.), and other
drugs are evident among members of the white, red and
 yellow races.
                           [ 22 ]
   Neither the glucoside nor the alkaloid of Rivea corym­
bosa is known chemically. Their peculiar properties seem
to suggest that they are new. The chemical and pharma­
cological studies of this interesting hypnotic narcotic are
still in preliminary stages and it is not unreasonable
to anticipate even more significant discoveries when
thorough investigations of Rivea corymbosa are under­
taken.
          V. THE CHEMICAL COl\fPOSITIO~ OF
              RELATED CO~VOLVtJLACEAE

   The chemical composition of a number of species of
the related genus Ipomoea and its segregates is kIiown
and presents certain similarities to that of Rivea corym­
bosa.
   A number of official drugs of this family are useful
because of their purgative properties. Among these may
be mentioned the following: Radix J alapae or Jalapa
root (Ipomoea Purga (Wend.) Hayne); Kaladona or
Pharbitis seeds (Ipomoea lVil (L.) Roth); Turpeth root
(Operculina TurpetllUm (L.) Sil va Manso); and Mexican
Scammony (Jpomoea orizabensis (Pel I. ) Ledenois). Other
species find rather extensive uses in the native materia
medica of a number of countries.
    In possessing a peculiar group of resins of a glucosidal
character, the Convolvulaceae are unique in the plant
kingdom. There are several resins of this nature, all very
closely related, which are known as the glucoretines.
\Vhen hydrolyzed, they yield a sugar. This is a parallel
eondition to that in Rivea corY1llbosa, but in this plant
it is an alkaloid that is combined with the sugar.
    According to Tschirsch & Stock in the most recent
and comprehensive treatment of the chemistry of the
 resins (Die Harze 2 (1936) 1618-1634), eight species
 of convolvulaceous plants are known to contain gluco­
 retines: Ipomoea Purga (\Vend.) Hayne; I. orizabensis
                          [ 23 ]
(Pell.) Ledenois; I. sirnulans Hanb. ; 1. triflora Maria &
Velasco; I. Nil (L.) Roth; Convolvulus Scammonia L. ;
Operculina macrocarpa (L.) Urb.; and O. Turpethum
(L.) Silva Manso. Some of these plants contain as much
as twenty percent of resin. Undoubtedly further chem­
ical research will reveal the presence of glucoretines in
many more, if not in most, ofthe convolvulaceous plants.
   Although there is as yet considerable disagreement
among chemists concerning the constitution of the glu­
coretines, Tschirsch & Stock suggest that there are two
basic resins in the group: Jalapin (orizabin, turpethin,
scammonin) and convolvulin (rhodeoretin, Jalapurgin,
tempicin). These authorities also suggest that the sub­
stances which have been called alpha- and beta-turpethin,
pharbitisin, and ipomoein are impure mixtures of simpler
glucoretines. The purgative properties of the Ipomoea
drugs are attributed to the gluco-resins which they con­
tain.
   Standley (in Field Mus. Nat. Hist. Bot. Ser. 10 (1931)
329) (Publ. 283) reports that Stictocardia campanulata
(L.) StandI. (Rivea campanulata (L.) House) is used in
Panama to coagulate rubber-the sap ofthe Stictocardia
being added to the latex from species of Castilla. This
use is of interest since the rubber-coagulating properties
of Stictocardia companulata may possibly be a result of
the glucosidal resin content which it may, like its near
relatives, contain.
   In Morelos, Mexico, Ipomoea arborescens (Humb. &
Bonpl.) S. Don is believed to cause insanity and cerebral
disorders if taken internally and to be poisonous to do­
mestic animals (Standley in Contrib. U.S. Nat. Herb.
23 (1924) 1205). An investigation of the chemical con­
stitution of this species might reveal the presence of a
principle similar to the narcotic gluco-alkaloid of Rivea
corymbosa. It is very suggestive that Ipomoea arb ores­
                          [ 24 ]
cens, like Rivea corymbosa, can act physiologically on the
human brain.
    Henry (The plant alkaloids, ed. 3 (1937) 95) reports
that recently Orekhov & Konovalova (Arch. Pharm. 271
(1933) 814; Brit. Chern. Abstr. a2 (1937) 311) have found
four alkaloids in the seeds of Convolvulus pseudocantab­
'ricu8 Schrenk: convolvine,' convolamine; convolvidine;
and cOrlvolvicine. Convolvine is said to possess local an­
aesthetic properties (N olle: Khim. Farm. Prom. 5 (1934)
35). This discovery of anesthetic properties in a convol­
vulaceous plant coincides in a striking manner with sev­
eral 17th Century Spanish reports that ololiuqui seeds
were used by Aztec priests to deaden pain and to be­
 numb the flesh. These reports will be considered In
 greater detail in a later section of this paper.

          VI. THE USES OJ;' RIVEA CORYMBOSA
   \Vithout any doubt, the most important use of Rivea
corymbosa was and is as a narcotic for divination. The
seeds were widely used for this purpose among the an­
cient Aztecs and are still used for divination among many
Indians ofsouthern Mexico. In three hundred years, the
methods and purposes of using ololiuqui have undergone
but slight changes.
   I t is indeed significant that all of the reports of the
use of ololiuqui in modern times come from the State of
Oaxaca. In this State, large tribes of Indians still live in
comparative isolation and carry out a number of their
ancient rites, influenced little or not at all by Christianity.
There are reports of ololiuqui from several groups of Za­
potec Indians as well as from the Chinantecs, Mazatecs
and Mixtecs. All ofthese tribes were in cont&ct with the
Aztecs in pre-hispanic times. Whether narcotization with
ololiuqui is a practice which the Aztecs learned from the
Oaxacan tribes or whether the Oaxacans borrowed it
                            [25 ]
from the Aztecs is uncertain. The writer believes, how­
ever, that further investigation along botanical, ethno­
logical and ethnographical lines will prove that the more
southern of these peoples (the Oaxacans) became ac­
quainted with the properties of this plant long before
their Aztec neighbors to the north.
   The use of Rivea corymbosa as a narcotic has not been
reported from the Maya area, although the plant is well
known there and is called xtabentun. (Standley in Field
Mus. Nat. Hist. Bot. Ser. 3, 2 (1930) 894; Berendt:
Noticiasde varias plantas y sus virtudes (mss.) (1864) 24).
   In 1917, Reko (32) found the Zapotecs in AmatIan,
District of MiahuatIan, Oaxaca, employing a narcotic
seed in divination. Among the natives, this seed was
called piule or la senorita. \Vhen specimens were sent to
Safford, they were identified as the seeds of Rivea corym­
bosa. Reko also stated that piule seeds were used among
the Zapotecs of the Sierra J mirez where they were known
as bitoo ("the god"). Among the Mixtecs, this narcotic
was called yucu-yaha, a name which means' 'chili-plant",
probably in allusion to the hotness to the taste of ololiu­
qui seeds. Reko further stated that this narcotic was used
in Tehuantepec and in the Chinantla in Oaxaca.
   During her study of the Zapotecs of MitIa, Elsie Clews
Parsons (28) discovered that a small, narcotic seed was
used commonly in divination. Descriptions of the plant
and of the type of intoxication which it induces indicate
that these seeds, which the Zapotecs of Tlacolula call
bador, are doubtless those of Rivea corymbosa. This con­
clusion is strengthened by the fact that Zapotecs in four
nearby parts of Oaxaca are known to use Rivea corym­
bosa. According to Parsons:
    " ... divination about recovery in sickness is also practiced by
means of a plant which is described as a narcotic. This plant, bador,
little children, the only plant of its kind in town, grows in the yard

                               [26 ]
of a family who sells its leaves and seeds to two or three curanderos
to administer to patients. After drinking the infusion, the patient,
who must be alone with the curer if not in a solitary place where he
cannot hear even a cock's crow, falls into a sleep during which the
little ones, male and female, the plant children (bador), come and
talk. These plant spirits will also give information about lost objects".1
Parsons also states:
   " ..• vine of the clematis-like bador climbs over the cactus hedge.
It is a small capital for the family because the leaves and seeds are
bought by ... the curanderos for a few centavos. They put a leaf on
the forehead of one who has lost something and give him thirteen
seeds to take in water. He has to be alone with the curandero. His
eyes will close ... and the little ones of the plant will come to him
in a vision and show him the whereabouts of his lost property. ,"

Commenting on the antiquity of the use of these seeds
in divination, Parsons writes:
   "The divinatory function of the curandero, whether by corn or by
the giving of the narcotic bador, was undoubtedly a function of the
early Zapotecan doctor."

It seems very probable that the Zapotecs, among whom
the use of ololiuqui is widespread at the present time,
used Rivea coryrnbosa in pre-hispanic times as did their
Aztec neigh bors to the north.
   In 1938 and 1939, I heard numerous reports among
the Mazatecs of the use of the seeds of a convolvulaceous
plant for purposes of divination. Descriptions of this
plant and its use indicate that it is probably Rivea coryrn­
bosa, even though specimens were not found in cultiva­
tion or growing wild in the Mazatec country. There can
be no doubt, however, that the plant occurs there. John­
son (18,19), working on the ethnology and linguistics of
the Mazatecs, has found these Indians using the semilla
de la Virgen for divination in addition to teonanacatl
(Paneolus carnpanulatus L. var. spltinctrinus (Fr.) Bres-

IThe passages from Parsons (28) are quoted with the permission of
the University of Chicago Press.

                                  [27 ]
PLATE   III




          The distribution of the use of Rivea corymbosa as
          a narcotic in pre-hispanic and modern Mexico.
adola) and the hierba Maria, an unidentified plant. In a
recent letter to the writer, .T ohnson reports that among
the Mazatecs, there are curanderos who grind the flowers
(flor de La Virgen) on a metate and eat them before
divination and before attempting to find lost articles.
He reports the Mazatec name as na-so-Le-na, the literal
translation of which he gives as "flower-her-mother".
   The name semilla de La Virgen or yerba de La Virgen,
as well as the synonymous semilla de La senorita, is ap­
plied to Rivea corymbosa in many other parts of Oaxaca.
   In 1939, in the Chinantec-Zapotec town of Santo
Domingo Latani, District of Choapam, I encountered
under cultivation an extremely large vine of Riveacorym­
bosa, the seeds of which were utilized as a narcotic among
the Indians. A specimen from this plant is preserved in
the Economic Herbarium of Oakes Ames (No. 6595) in
the Botanical Museum of Harvard University.
   In Latani, this appeared to be the only plant of Rivea
corYlllbosa. It was heavily laden with fruit and must have
supplied sufficient seeds for the needs of the local cw'­
anderos. 'l'his situation-the monopoly of the supply of
ololiuqui in a village-closely parallels that which Par­
sons (28) described for the Zapotec town of Mitla, where
there was one bador plant, " ... the only plant of its
kind in town, [which] grows in the yard of a family who
sells its leaves and seeds.... "
   In Latani, knowledge of the plant and its properties
is common to all the townspeople. Indeed, several natives
who were not curanderos had had personal experience
 with its narcotic properties. There was no hesitation in
 answering questions about the use of the seeds and the
 nature of the intoxication induced. Among the Zapotecs
 of this town, the plant is called kwan-La-si; among the
 Chinantecs, a-mu-kia ("medieine for divination"). In
 Santiago Y aveo, a Zapotec settlement south of Latani,
                          [ 29 ]
the plant is known as kwan-do-a (' 'children's medicine").
The Zapotec names in these two towns as well as the
Chinantec name indicate that Rivea corymbosa is consid­
ered to be a medicine. In Latani, the seeds are used in
small quantities to conteract flatulency just as the Az­
tecs, according to Hermindez (15), were accustomed to
use them.
   The Chinantecs of the village of San Juan Teotalcingo,
District of Choapam, employ a narcotic seed for divina­
tion. I was unable to procure specimens when I visited
this village, but descriptions of the seeds and the plant
which produces them suggest that it is Rivea corymbosa.
In Teotalcingo, according to my native assistants, this
plant is called hwan-men-ha-sei which is said to mean
"vine bearing brown (red 1) seeds".
   'Vhile questioning native assistants in the western
Chinantec town of San Juan Tepetotutla concerning
medicines and narcotics, I learned that both teonanacatl
and ololiuqui are used in divination by the curanderos.
Twenty-three seeds of Rivea corymbosa were procured
in Tepetotutla although there is apparently no plant of
this species under cultivation in the village. The supply
of seeds is said to come from the neighboring Chinantec
village of San Pedro Y olox. The inhabitants of Tepeto­
tutla call the ololiuqui plant hwan-mei and use the seeds
medicinally for rheumatism.
   In recapitulation, we may say that at the present
time ololiuqui is known to the Zapotecs of Mitla, Ama­
tlan, Tehuantepec, the Sierra J mirez, and the District
of Choapam; to the Mixtecs of the Mixteca Alta; to the
Lazatecs of the District of Teotitlan; and to the Chi­
nantecs of the Districts of Choapam, Ixthin and Cuicat­
Ian.
   In the foregoing paragraphs, we have considered the
use of ololiuqui in Mexico at the present time. As has
                          [ 30 ]
been stated above in the historical introduction, it has
had a long history among Mexican Indians. In the 16th
Century, ololiuqui was utilized by the Mexican Indians
not only as a divinatory narcotic, but also as a panacea
and as an important ingredient in magic potions. Its use
in the past is equally as interesting and significant as its
use to-day.
    An excellent summary of the uses of ololiuqui among
the ancient Aztecs is provided by Simon's definition of
the name in his Dictionnaire de la lengue lVahuatl OU
lJ.'Iexicaine (55): "Ololiuhqui s. Plante medicinale dont
Ie graine est ronde et qui est appelee aussi coaxiutl, herbe
du serpent (Hem.). Elle servait it guerir du mal vene
rien et entrait dans une composition dont les astrologues
frottaient Ie corps au moment de se livrer it certaines
practiques genHhliaques (Bet). "
    If we are to judge from the early writers, ololiuqui
must have been very extensively used in the Valley of
Mexico in pre-hispanic times. It seems to have been
 more important in divination than peyote (Loplwphora
 1Villiamsii (Lem.) Coulter), teonanacatl (Paneolus cam­
panu.lal'us L. var. spltinctrinus (Fr.) Bresadola, or piciete
 (lVicotiana Tabacum L.). Ololiuqui was accorded as
 many ritual honors as piciete.
    Sahagun (44,45,46), describing the use of ololiuqui,
reported that the coatl-xoxouhqui plant:
. . . . bears a seed which is called ololiuqui. This seed intoxicates and
causes one to become talkative. The natives give it in a drink to in­
jure those persons whom they wish to harm. Those who take it see
visions and frightful things. Witch doctors, or those who wish to harm
other people, administer it in foods and in drink. This plant is medic­
inal, and its seeds are good for rheumatism when they are pulverised
and applied to the afflicted parts.

 According to Hernandez (15), the medicinal use was
much more extensive than reported by Sahagun. Ololiu­
                                 [ 81 ]
qui was believed to cure flatulency, to remedy venereal
troubles, to deaden pain, and to remove tumors. When
mixed with a resin (probably from Bursera spp.), it was
used as a boneset. The seeds were pulverised and mixed
with chili (Capsicum annum L. or C. frutescens L.) and
milk to make a poultice which was described as a cure
for "eye-troubles." The narcotic use of ololiuqui was
also described by Hernandez.
   For extended accounts of the use of Rivea corymbosa
as a narcotic in divination among the Aztecs, recourse
must be made to the writings of Serna (54), Acosta (3,
4), Alarcon (5) and other contemporaries who had to con­
tend with ololiuqui as a threat to the extension of Chris­
tianity in Mexico. Since these accounts are rare or are
to be found only in obscure publications, and since they
are written in Old Spanish, a few of the most pertinent
will be translated in detail. Alarcon (5), stated, in part,
that:
   Those things which I have mentioned [i.e., springs, rivers, moun­
tains, ololiuqui, etc.] have their deities. Ololiuqui. ... deprives those
who use it of their reason .... The natives communicate in this way
with the devil, for they usually talk when they become intoxicated
with ololiuqui, and they are deceived by various hallucinations which
they attribute to the deity which they say resides in the seeds . . . .
   It is remarkable how much faith these natives have in the seed,
for, when they drink it, they consult it as an oracle in order to learn
many things . . . . especially those things which are beyond the power
of the human mind to penetrate, as for example, to learn the cause
of an illness. . . . which they attribute to witchcraft . . . . They con­
sult this seed through the medium of one of their deceiving doctors,
some of whom practice the drinking of ololiuqui as a profession. . . .
If a doctor who does not practice ololiuqui-drinking wishes to free a
patient of some trouble, he advises the patient himself to partake of
the seeds. For this patient must pay as though his doctor had taken
the drink and were a payni [an ololiuqui-doctor]. The doctor appoints
the day and hour when the drink must be taken and establishes the
reason for the patient's drinking it. Finally, the one drinking the

                                 [ 32 ]
ololiuqui must seclude himself in his room alone..•. No one must en­
ter during the divination. He who is consulting the seeds believes
that ololiuqui...• is revealing what he wants to know. The delirium
passed, the paynicomes out of seclusion reciting a thousand fabrications.
among which there may be a few truths. Thus, in every way, the
doctor keeps his patient deceived ....
   It happens that he who drinks ololiuqui to excess loses his mind
because of the great potency of the seeds. As a consequence of indul­
gence, the senses are distorted, and he who uses the narcotic speaks
whatever words come into his warped mind .•.. Perhaps he condemns
the innocent, perhaps he exposes the guilty, or perhaps his words are
uttered in such confusion that their meaning cannot be understood
.... and these unfortunate people believe the utterances, attributing
everything to ololiuqui. ... For this reason, they venerate these plants
[ololiuqui and peyote] so much that they do all in their power so that
the use of the plants does not come to the attention of the ecclesias­
tical authorities ....
   It remains to describe the manner of using ololiuqui, the purposes
for which it is taken, and the great inconveniences which follow its
use.... Chronic illness, kinds which the curanderos have pronounced
incurable with ordinary medicines, are attributed to witchcraft and
... , according to their belief, cannot be cured if the one who has
cast the spell does not break it. This is the usual way in which the
doctors make profits and wreak much injury with the satanic super­
stitions surrounding ololiuqui. ... The doctor immediately attributes
the illness to witchery .... In order to aid the doctor, the patient re­
lates his suspicions. The deceiving doctor immediately orders the use
of ololiuqui, and the patient follows the doctor's words as though they
were the words of a prophet or of an oracle....
   In 1634, Alua (2) recorded the answers of an Indian
penitent to questions which were asked during a con­
fession. One of these follows:
   "J have believed in dreams, in magic herbs, in peyote, and in olo­
liuqui, in the owl. ... etc."
This statement emphasizes the fact that ololiuqui, was
considered a powerful force in native religious philosophy.
  In his manuscript on the idolatries of the Mexican
Indians, Serna (54) treated of narcotics in detail under
the caption: De las idolatrias y abusiones y obseruaciones
                                 [ 33 ]
de cosas a que atribuyen diuinidad, especialmente el olo­
liuqui, piciete, y el peyote. Of ololiuqui, he stated in part:
   They also practice much superstition with a lentil-like seed which
they call ololiuqui and a root which they call peyote. They venerate
these plants as though they were divine. When they drink these
herbs, they consult them like oracles about sicknesses and cures, about
lost or stolen articles and their location. They consult these herbs
about all things which cannot be fathomed by the human mind ....
Consulting these plants, ... all their doubts and uncertainties are
dispelled. Those whose profession is the use of these plants are called
pa!Jni, which means "he who drinks a purge" or "he who drinks a
syrup. " These pa!Jni receive an excellent remuneration; if the payni
be not skilled in his office or if he desires to avoid the uncomfortable
after effects of these draughts, he advises the patient himself to drink
the seeds.
   These seeds .•• are held in great veneration.... They place offer­
ings to the seeds ... in secret places so that the offerings cannot be
found if a search be made. They also place these seeds among the
idols of their ancestors..•. The natives do these things with so much
respect that when some transgressor of the law who has the seeds in
his possession is arrested and is asked for the paraphernalia which are
used in taking ololiuqui .•. or for the seeds themselves, he denies
vehemently that he knows anything about the practices. The natives
do this not so much because of fear of the law as because of the ven­
eration in which they hold the seed ololiuqui. They do not wish to
offend ololiuqui with demonstrations before the judges of the use of
the seeds and with public destruction of the seed by burning.
  In considering the use of ololiuqui as a direct medicine,
Serna (54) cited a case in which the administration of
the narcotic had disastrous results. He stated that:
... it was a serious fever and the medicine-man advised the patient
to drink ololiuqui. The patient refused. Finally, however, the med­
icine-man persuaded all the members of the family of the sick man
to drink ololiuqui to help the patient. After drinking, they lighted
candles and gave ololiuqui to the sick man. All became drunk .•• And
when they regained their senses, the sick man began to rage in agony
against the doctor; calling him a knave, a witch. With this, the pa­
tient died. . .. after having drunk such a superstitious potion as
ololiuqui ..• It is not without concern that Christian priests see the

                                [ 34 ]




                                                              to
facility with which the devil works among these people, even after
they have been baptized and accepted into the church.
   Ololiuqui was used extensively by the ancient Aztecs
as an ingredient of magical ointments and potions. Olo­
liuqui was believed to possess a deity of its own which
worked miracles if properly propitiated. One account of
the use of the narcotic seeds in magical potions is that
of Clavigero, translated by Cullen (9). It stated:
   "Besides the usual unction with ink, another extraordinary and
more abominable one was practiced every time they [the Aztec priests]
went to make sacrifices on the tops of the mountains, or in the dark
caverns of the earth. They took a large quantity of poisonous insects
... , burned them over some stove of the temple, and beat their ashes
in a mortar together with the foot of the aeotl, tabacco, the herb Olo­
liuqui, and some live insects. They presented this diabolical mixture in
small vessels to their gods, and afterwards rubbed their bodies with
it. When thus annointed, they became fearless to every danger....
They called it Teopatli, or divine medicament, and imagined it to be
a powerful remedy for several disorders; on which account those who
were sick, and young children, went frequently to the priests to be
annointed with it."

 Acosta (3,4), likewise wrote a detailed report on the
magical use of ololiuqui, stating in part:
   "This unction was made with divers little venomous beasts...• To
make an ointment of these beasts, they put them all together and
burned them upon the hearth ... until they were consumed to ashes.
Then they did put them in mortars with much tobacco or petum (be­
ing an herb that nation useth much to benumb the flesh that they
may not feel their travail) . . . . They did likewise mingle with these
ashes scorpions, spiders, and palmers alive ... then they did put to it
a certain seed being ground which they call ololuchqui, whereof the
Indians make a drink to see visions, for that the virtue of this plant
is to deprive man of sense .... By means of this ointment, they be­
come witches and did see and speak with the devil. The priests being
slobbered with this ointment lost all fear."

  In speaking of the use of ololiuqui as an anaesthetic,
Acosta stated that:
                                 [ 35 ]




                                          ..
" ... they said that they felt thereby a notabJe ease, which might
be, for that the tobacco and ololuchqui have this property of themselves,
to benumb the flesh, being applied in manner of an emplaster which
must be by a stronger reason, being mingled with poisons, and for
that it did appease and benumb the pain, they held it for an effect
of health and a divine virtue."

   Alvarado (6) also described at some length the use of
Rivea corymbosa in magical ointments, stating, in con­
clusion, that:
... they place the mixture before their gods, saying that it is the
food of the gods, for which reason they call it divin.efood; and with
this unction, they become witch-doctors and commune with the devil.

He also mentioned the benumbing properties of ololiu­
qUI.
   Hernandez (15) stated that ololiuqui was used to kill
pam.
   The numerous statements to the effect that ololiuqui
was used to benumb the flesh and to mitigate pain com­
mand attention because of the fact that an analgesic al­
kaloid has been isolated from a related convolvulaceous
plant-Convolvulus pseudocantabricus Schrenk. From
this same plant were also isolated other alkaloids which
mayor may not have pain-killing properties. Inasmuch
as Hernandez, Sahagun, Serna, Acosta, Alarcon. Alvar­
ado and other writers make reference to the benumbing
or analgesic properties of ololiuqui seeds. it seems very
probable that the seeds were used by the Aztecs to kill
pain and that further chemical and pharmacological in­
vestigation of Rivea corymbosa may reveal that this plant,
like Convolvulus pseudocantabricus, possesses analgesic
constituents.
   It is very doubtful that the use of ololiuqui in magical
potions has survived to the present time. However. its
use as an oracular narcotic and as a medicine still persists.
'fhe utilization of the plant as a remedy, while prevalent,
                                 [36 ]
seems to be much less extensive at the present time than
at the time of Hernandez' ethnobotanical investigations.
   Ololiuqui intoxication is best described by the word
which Santesson (47,48) has used to characterize the
narcotic condition which Riveacorymbosa induces in fi'ogs
and mice: Halbnarkose or "semi-narcosis." Reko (32)
has aptly termed it hypnotisch-somnambilistisclt or "hyp­
notic-somnambulistic. "
   In Latani and in Teotalcingo the natives administer
approximately thirteen of the intoxicating seeds for nar­
cotic purposes, and according to Parsons (28), the in­
habitants of Mitla use the same quantity. The doses,
however, seem to be variable in many cases. The seeds
are taken in water or in alcoholic beverages such as pul­
que, mescal, aguardiente, or tepaclte. The fact that the
narcotic is often administered in water would seem to
indicate that the possible action of alcohol in rendering
the gluco-alkaloid active is not an essential factor in the
in toxication.
    The intoxication begins shortly after the ingestion of
ololiuqui. It rapidly proceeds to a stage where visual
hallucinations appear. However, there is often an inter­
veningstageof dizziness or giddiness followed by a feeling
of general ease and well-being, lassitude and increasing
drowsiness. Usually, the drowsiness develops into astu­
por or a kind of somnambulistic narcosis. During this
stupor, the patient is dimly aware of what is going on
about him and is susceptible to suggestions. The visions.
which occur during the somnambulistic stage of the in­
toxication are described by the natives as very similar to
those which are said to be induced   bl  LopllOpltora Wil­
liamsii and by Paneollls campanulatus var. spltinctrinus.
 They are often grotesque visions which portray people
or thoughts or happenings that have occupied the pa­
tient's mind during the preceding hours. It is partly by
means ofthese hallucinations and partly by means of the
indistinct and dilirious talking which accompanies the
narcosis that the medicine-man practices divination.
   According to the natives, ololiuqui intoxication lasts
normally about three hours and is followed by few un­
pleasant after-effects. Ololiuqui is usually taken at night
and, in contrast to peyote which is eaten in company,
is administered to single individuals who seek a quiet
place in which to undergo the intoxication.
   The intoxication which is induced by Rivea corymbosa
resembles in some respects those which are induced by
several other narcotics. Rivea corymbosa has retained a
place of prominence among the materia medica and di­
vinatory plants of the New W orId, chiefly because of its
ready adaptability to the simple needs of the medicine­
man or curandero and of those who receive his ministra­
tions. Indeed, this adaptability of the drug to the needs
of the Chinantec, Mazatec, Mixtec and Zapotec Indians
may well be the main reason for the survival of the use
of ololiuqui in Oaxaca.
 VII. THE VERNACULAR NAMES 01<' RIVEA CORYMBOSA
                              IN MEXICO
  In Mexico. Rivea corymbosa is known and has been
known by a number of different vernacular names. the
more important of which are enumerated below:
  Aztec: oliliukqui; ololiuhqui; ololiuqui; oi{)liuhque; ololiuque; coatlxox­
    ouhqui; coaxihuitt,' cuexpalli,' yololique.
  Chinantec: a-mu-kia; huan-mei; huan-men-ha-sei.
  Maya: xtabentun.
  Mazatec: no-so-le-na.
  Mixtec: yucu-yaha.
  Spanish: ;/lor de la Virgen; fa seilorita; manto,' pascua,' piule; semilla
    de la Virgen; yerba della serpiente; yerba de las serpentes; yerba de
    la Virgen.
  Zapotec: bador,' bitoa; kwan-la-si; kwan-do-a.
  Erroneous spellings: olilinhque; ololinhque; olininque,· ololuchqui; 010­
    linque.
                                  [38 ]
            VIII. PLANTS CONFUSED WITH THE
                      NARCOTIC OLOLIUQUI

   The name ololiuqui seems to have been applied to sev­
eral different plants among the Aztecs, but only one of
these plants was a narcotic. A parallel may be cited in
the case of the term peyotl or peyote which, among the
Aztecs of old and even in modern Mexico, is applied to
a large number of dissimilar plants (38,51).
   According to Sahagun (44,45,46), the Aztecs knew
three plants by the name ololiuqui. Only one of these­
Rivea corymbosa-was used as a narcotic. The other two
have never been identified, but the illustrations of them
in the Paso y Troncoso edition of Sahagun's Historia . ..
indicate definitely that they are not convolvulaceous.
Under the heading De las hierbas medicinale,'?, Sahagun
stated:
   There is an herb called ololiuqui or xixicamatic which has leaves like
rniltomate [Phy.ralis sp.] and thin, yellow flowers. The root is round
and as large as a cabbage.

Doubtless, the plant is not referable to Rivea coryrnbosa,
even though for many years it has been so identified
(46). Figure 566 in the Paso y Troncoso edition depicts
a plant with leaves which could easily be taken for those
of a species of Physalis. The flowers are figured as gamo­
petalous, with long-exerted stamens; and the habit ap­
pears to be herbaceous.
   The third ololiuqui of which Sahagun speaks was also
known as hueyytzontecon. It was medicinal. Its leaves
were figured as ternate; its flowers lavender or whitish;
and its root tuberous. The flowers apparently were gam­
opetalous and the habit herbaceous. Although this olo­
liuqui was reported to be used as a purge and although
other characters might suggest the Convolvulaceae, the
plant is not referable to this family.
                                 [39 ]




                                                                            •
   Sahagun himself emphasized the fact that ololiuqui was
a term which designated different plants when he wrote:
"En otra parte, se puso este nombre ololiuqui, pero son
diferentes hierbas."
   In Oaxaca, ololiuqui ( Rivea corymbosa) is often called
piule. Piule, like the word peyote, apparently refers to
numerous plants other than Rivea corymbosa. In 1919,
Reko (30) reported piule as one of the names designating
Rivea corymbosa. Since this time, however, the same
name has been found to refer to several species of Rhyn­
chosia in Oaxaca. In 1923, Herrera (16) included
Rhynchosia longeracemosa Mart. & Gal. (Dolichos longe­
racemosa (Mart. & Gal.) Rose) under the name piule.
In 1938, Santesson (49) carried out pharmacological and
chemical studies with piule seeds which were referred
to Rhynchosia phaseoloides DC. Positive tests for alka­
loides and for glucosides were obtained, and extracts of
the seeds produced narcosis when injected into animals.
The writer found that the Chinantec and Mazatec
Indians of Oaxaca both regard these two species ofRhyn­
clwsia as poisonous, and Reko, in a personal communi­
cation to the author, states that the seeds of Rhynchosia
phaseoloides have been used as a narcotic among the Za­
potecs of Oaxaca.
                       IX. SUMMARY
   I. Ololiuqui, one of the most important narcotics of
ancient and modern Mexico, has been imperfectly un­
derstood and interpreted by many botanists and anthro­
pologists in spite of the fact that all of the information
essential to a clear understanding has long been available.
   II. All of the ancient writers described ololiuqui as a
vine with coriander-like seeds. Hernandez and Sahagun
figured ololiuqui as a convolvulaceous plant. In 1897,
Urbina correctly identified ololiuqui as Rivea corymbosa
                          [40 ]
(L.) Hall. f., but, in 1915, Safford referred ololiuqui to
Datura meteloides Dunal ex DC. The Safford identifica­
tion, although erroneous, gained wide acceptance, and,
in spite of a reaffirmation ofthe Urbina identification by
Reko in 1934, has persisted.
   III. Rivea is a segregate of the genus Ipomoea and
the genus has its greatest development in Asia. Rivea
corymbosa is the only species of the New VVorId. The
correct combination for this plant of Central America,
the 'Vest Indies, and the northern part of South Amer­
ica, is Rivea corymbosa but several other names are more
frequently used for it.
  IV. Recent investigation has demonstrated the pres­
ence in Rivea corymbosa of a resinous constituent and a
gluco-alkaloid. The gluco-alkaloid is physiologically
active, producing narcotic effects.
   V. The Convolvulaceae are characterized by having
resins of a glucosidal nature. The purgative action of
some of the species of this family is due to the gluco­
resin content of the plants.
   VI. Rivea corymbosa was used by the Aztecs in pre­
hispanic times as a narcotic in divination, as a medicine,
and as an ingredient in magical and analgesic ointments.
The plant is used at the present time in Oaxaca, being
known among the Chinantec, Mazatec, Mixtec and Za­
potec Indians.
  V I I. Rivea corymbosa has been known under a num­
ber of different vernacular names.
   V II I. The name ololiuqui was applied to at least three
different plants by the Aztecs, but only one of these
plants was a narcotic. The name pi1.tle is used at the pres­
ent time in Oaxaca to refer to Rivea corymbosa as well
as to the poisonous species of Rhynclwsia.
                           [ 41 ]
                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

 1. Anonymous. "Estudio relativo al peyote," Inst. Med. Nac.,
    Mexico, 1918.
 2. Alua, Bartolomeo de. "Confessionario mayor y menor en lengua
    mexicana . .• y pliiticas contra las supersticiones de idolatria
    •.. ", Mexico, 1634.
 8. Acosta, Joseph. "Historia natural y moral de las Indias en que
    se traten las cosas notables del cielo, elementos, metales, plantas,
    y animales de elIas; y los ritos, ceremonias, leyes, gobierno, y
    guerras de los Indios," pp. 868-378, Seville, 1590.
 4. Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 67-71, Madrid, 1792.
 5. Alarcon, Hernando Ruiz de. "Tratado de las supersticiones y
    constumbres gentilicas que oy uiuen entre los Indios naturales
    desta Nueva Espana" (written in Mexico, 1629) An. Mus. Nac.
    Mexico, Vol. 6, pp. 184-187, 1892.
 6. Alvarado Tezozomoc, Hernando. "Cronica mexicana" p. 112,
    Mexico, 1878.
 7. Callegri, G.V. "L'antiguo Messico," Vol. 2, pt. 2, p. 82, Rov­
    ereto, 1908.
 8. Carson, "V.E. "Mexico-the wonderland of the south," p. 312,
    New York, 1909.
 9. Clavigero, Francisco Salverio. "The history of Mexico," Vol. 2,
    pp. 44-45, Philadelphia, 1918. (Translated by Charles Cullen).
10. Corlett, William Thomas. "The medicine-man of the American
    Indians." pp. 167, 169. Springfield-Baltimore, 1985.
11. Emmart, Emily Walcott. "The Badianus Manuscript" p. 66,
    Baltimore, 1940.
12. Gracida, ~lanuel Martinez. "Catiilogos de la flora y la fauna del
    Estado de Oaxaca," p. 81, Oaxaca de Juarez, 1891.
18. Gerste, A. "Notes sur la medicine et la botanique des ancienes
    Mexicains," ed. 2, p. 47, Rome, 1909.
14. Hartwich, C. "Die menschlichen Genussmittel," p. 47, Leipzig,
    1911.
15. Hernandez, Francisco. "Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae
    thesaurus, seu plantarum, animalium, mineralium mexicanorum
    historia," p. 145, Rome, 1651.
                                [ 42]
16. Herrera, A.L. "Catalogo alfabHico de nombres vulgares y cien­
    tificos de plautas que existen en Mexico," Mexico, 1923.
17. Hijar y Haro, Luis. "El peyote al traves de los siglos," Rev.
    Mex. Ing. y Arquitec., Vol. 15, No.9, pp. 543-568, No. II,
    pp. 665-692, 1987.
18. Johnson, Jean Bassett. "The elements of Mazatec witchcraft,"
    Etnol. Stud., No.9, pp. 128-150, 1939.
19. --"Some Notes on the Mazatec," Rev. Mex. Est. Antr.,
    1939.
20. LaBarre, Weston. "The peyote cult," p. 134" New Haven, 1939.
21. Leon, Nicolas. "Cuatro libros de la naturaleza y virtudes medic­
    inales de las plantas y animales de Nueva Espana," cap. 14,
    pp, 113-114, Morelia, 1888.
22. Lewin, Louis. "Phantastica-Die batiiubenden und erregenden
    Genussmittel," ed. 2, Berlin, 1927.
23. --"Phantastica-narcotic and stimulating drugs" pp. 96-97,
    186, London, 1931.
24. Martinez, Maximino. "Las plantas mas utiles que existen en la
    Republica Mexicana," pp. 317, 319, Mexico, 1928.
25. --"Las plantas medicinales de Mexico," pp. 508-510, }lex­
    ico, 1988.
26.        'Catlilogo de nombres vulgares y cientificos de plantas mex­
      icanas," pp. 338, 891, Mexico, 1987.
27. Oliva, Leonardo. "Lecciones de farmacologia," Vol. 2, p. 892,
    1854.
28. Parsons, Elsie Clews. "Mitla-town ofthe souls," Chicago, 1926.
29. Ramirez, Jose. "Sinonimia vulgar y cientifica de las plantas me x­
    icanas," p. 50, Mexico, 1902.
80. Reko, B[Jas] P[ablo]. "De los nombres botanicos aztecos," El.
    Mex. Ant., Vol. 1, No.5, pp. 136, 152, 1919.
3 1. -~" Alcaloides y glucosidos en plantas mexicanas, " Mem. Soc.
     Alzate, Vol. 49, p. 412, Mexico, 1929.
82. --"Das Mexikanische Rauschgift Ololiuqui," EI Mex. Ant.,
    Vol. 3, No. 3-4, pp. 1-7, 1934.
33. Reko, Victor A. "Was ist Peyote," Zeitschr. fur Parapsychol.,
    Vol. 4, p. 396, 1929.
84. --"Magische Gifte, Rausch-und
    Neuen Welt," Stuttgart, 1986.
                                               Betaubungsmittel der
                                                                          •
                                [ 48 ]
35. Robelo, Cecilio A. "Diccionario de Aztequismos 0 sea catalogo
    de las palabras del idioma Nahuatl, Azteca, 0 Mexicana, intro­
    ducidas al idioma castellano bajo diversas formas," pp. 622,626,
    Cuernavaca, 1904.
36. Rouhier, Alexandre. "La plante qui fait les yeux emerveille-le
    peyotl," Paris, 1927.
:17. Salford, W[illiam] E[dwin]. "An Aztec narcotic," Journ. Hered.,
      Vol. 6, No.7, pp. 291-311, July, 1915.
38. --"Food plants and textiles of ancient America," Proc. 19th
    Internat. Congr. Americanistes (1915), pp. 12-30, Washington,
    D.C., 1917.
39. --"Food plants and textiles of ancient America," Proc. 2nd
    Pan-Am. Sci. Congr., Sec. I, Anthrop. (1915-1916), pp. 157­
    158, Washington, D.C., 1917.
40. --"Narcotic plants and stimulants of the ancient Americans,"
    Ann. Rept. Smithson. Inst. for 1916. Washington, D.C., 1917.
41. --"Datura -an inviting genus for the study of heredity,"
    Journ. Hered., Vol. I'll, No.4, p. 188, April, 1921.
42. --"Synopsis of the genus Datura," Journ. Wash. Acad. Sci.,
    Vol. II, No.8, pp. 181 If., April, 1921.
43. -~"Daturas of the Old World and New: an account of their
    narcotic properties and their use in oracular and initiatory cere­
    monies," Ann. Rept. Smithson. Inst. for 1920, Washington,
    D.C., 1922.
44. Sahagun, Bernardino de. "Historia general de las cosas de la
    Nueva Espana," Vol. 3, pp. 241, 264-265, Mexico, (Edited by
    Carlos Maria de Bustamente) 1829-1830.
45.        "Histoire generale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne," pp.
      737, 753, Paris, (translated by D. Jourdanet & Remi Sim6n)
      1880.
46. --"Historia general de las cosas de Nueva Espana," Vol. 3,
    pp. 229, 256, 378, Mexico, 1938.
47. Santesson, C.G. "Notiz liber Piule, eine mexikanische Rausch­
    droge," Ethnolog. Stud., Vol. 4, Gothenburg, 1937.
48.        'Piule, eine mexikanische Rauschdroge," Arch. Pharm. &
      Ber. Deutsch. Pharm. Gesel. pp. 532-537, 1937.
49. --"Noch eine mexikanische 'Piule'-Droge-Semina Rhynchos­
    iae phaseoloide.f D. C." Ethnolog. Stud., Vol. 6, pp. 179-183,1938.

                                [ 44 ]
50. Schultes, Richard Evans. "Peyote and plants used in the peyote
    ceremony," Bot. Mus. LeaH., Harv. Univ., Vol. 4, ~o. 8, p.
    185, April, 1987.
51. ~-" Peyote (Lophophora Williamsii) and plants confused with
    it," Bot. Mus. LeaH. Harv. Univ., Vol. 5, No. 5, ~ovember,
    1937.
52. - - " Plantae Mexicanae II. The identification of teonanacatl, a
    narcotic Basidiomycete of the Aztecs," Bot. Mus. Leafl. Harv.
    Univ., Vol. 7, No.8, February, 1989.
58. ---"Teonanacatl-the narcotic mushroom of the Aztecs," Am.
    Anthrop. Vol. 42, No.8, pp. 429-483, 1940.
54. Serna, Jacinto de lao "Manuel de ministros de indios para el
    conocimiento de sus idolatrias y extirpacion de ellas," in. Col.
    Doc. Ined. para la Hist. Espana, Vol. 104, pp. 163-165, Madrid,
    1892.
55. Simeon, Remi. "Dictionnaire de la lengue Nahuatl ou Mexi­
    caine," pp. 316-317, Paris, 1885 .
•'16. Spence, Lewis. "The magic and mysteries of Mexico," pp. 74­
      76, 99, London, no date.
57. Toro, Alfonso. "Las plantas segradas de los Aztecos y su inHu­
    encia sobre el arte precortesiano," Proc. 23rd Internat. Congr.
    Americanistes, pp. 110-112, New York, 1930.
58. Urbina, Manuel. "Catalogo de plantas mexicanas (Fanerogam­
    as)," p. 243, Mexico, 1897.
59. --"EI peyote y el ololiuqui," An. Mus. ~ac. Mexico, Vol. 7,
    pp. 25-38, Mexico, 1903.
60.       "EI peyote y el ololiuhqui," La ~aturaleza, Vol. 1, No.4,
      1912.
61. Ximenez, Francisco. "Quatro libros de la naturaleza, y virtudes
    de las plantas y animales que estan receuidos en el uso de med­
    ica en la Nueva Espana, y la methodo, y correcion, y preparacion,
    que para administrarlas se requiere con 10 que el Doctor Francisco
    Hernandez escriuio en lengua latina," lib. 2, cap. 14, Mexico,
    1615.




                               [ 45 ]
