Wiley 


A - M * E * R * I ■ C • A - ftl 

AN f H ROPOl 0 G I C A L 
ASSOCIATIO N 


Teonanacatl: The Narcotic Mushroom of the Aztecs 
Author(s): Richard Evans Schultes 

Source: American Anthropologist , New Series, Yol. 42, No. 3, Part 1 (Tul. - Sep., 1940), pp. 
429-443 

Published by: Wiley on behalf of the American Anthropological Association 
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/663232 

Accessed: 22/08/2013 17:50 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http ://www.j stor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms .j sp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 


Wiley and American Anthropological Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and 
extend access to American Anthropologist. 


STOR 


http ://www.j stor.org 



This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




TEONANACATL: THE NARCOTIC MUSHROOM 

OF THE AZTECS 1 By RICHARD EVANS SCHULTES 

I 

B ECAUSE of the important roles which they played in ceremonial 
and in daily life, the narcotic plants of ancient Mexico are of especial 
interest to the anthropologist. Mexico possessed and still possesses many 
plant narcotics and intoxicants, of which a few are outstanding in their 
uses and are extremely interesting because of their great antiquity as well 
as because of the important bearing their use, distribution, and history 
may have on questions of a theoretical nature. Of these, the most notable 
are the toleselo or coral-berry (Sophora secundiflora (Ort.) Lag. ex DC.), 
ololiuqui or piule ( Rivea corymbosa (L.) Hall, f.), peyote ( Lophophora 
Williamsii (Lem.) Coult.), and teonanacatl ( Paneolus campqnulatus L. var. 
sphinctrinus (Fr.) Bresadola). 

Long the center of confusion and ambiguity, teonanacatl was not 
known botanically until very recently. Therefore, a thorough discussion of 
the ethnobotanical history of this narcotic mushroom should be made 
available to anthropologists in order that the erroneous interpretations 
now rather widespread in anthropological literature concerning teonanacatl 
may be corrected. 

II 

In his Historia de las cos as de Nueva Espana , Sahagun 2 recorded the 
earliest description of teonanacatl and discussed its narcotic and medicinal 
uses among the Mexican Indians of the period of the Spanish conquest. 
One of these references, in a general consideration of useful plants, states 
that 

. . . they (the Chichimecas) possessed a great knowledge of plants and roots, and 
they were acquainted with properties and virtues of them; these same people were 
the first to discover and use the root which they called peiotl , and those who are 
accustomed to eat and drink them used them in place of wine; and they did the same 
with those which they call nanacatl, which are harmful mushrooms which intoxicate 
in the same way as wine ... 3 

1 It is with pleasure that I express my appreciation of the constant interest which Pro- 
fessor Oakes Ames, Director of the Botanical Museum of Harvard University, has shown in 
the ethnobotanical work which has led, among other things, to the rediscovery of teonanacatl. 
I wish also to thank the several workers whom I mention in this article for making available 
to me unpublished information in their possession. 

2 B. de Sahagun, Histoire generate des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne. 

3 The translations which appear in this paper are free translations made by the writer 
from the original sources. 

429 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


430 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42 , 1940 


A more detailed description of the plant and its uses occurs in a chapter 
which deals specifically with narcotic plants: 

There are some small mushrooms in that region which are called teonanacatl; 
these grow under the grass (hay) of the fields and pastures. They are round, having 
a rather high stipe, slender and terete. When eaten, they have a bad taste, hurting 
the throat, and they cause intoxication. They are medicinal for fevers and for 
rheumatism. Only two or three need to be eaten. Those who eat them see visions 
and feel a faintness of the heart. And they provoke to lust those who eat a number, 
or even a few, of them. 

From SahaguiTs reports (as well as from other early reports which are 
quoted below), it is absolutely clear that the narcotic which the Aztecs 
called teonanacatl was a mushroom. Teonanacatl has been identified with the 
dried tops of the peyote-cactus, Lophophora Williamsii (mescal buttons), 
and this misidentification has been widely accepted in botanical and an- 
thropological literature. For this reason, it is necessary to examine closely 
and evaluate all of the early reports concerning teonanacatl and its uses. 

In the first of the excerpts quoted above, Sahagun clearly distinguished 
between “the root which they call peiotl ” and “ nanacatl , which are harmful 
mushrooms.” Likewise, in the chapter on plant narcotics, from which the 
second excerpt is taken, Sahagun discusses, in one paragraph, the “small 
mushrooms . . . which are called teonanacatl ” and, in another paragraph, 
peiotl , the “earth-cactus.^ 

There is another herb like the earth-tunas which is called peiotl . It is white and 
grows in the north. Those who eat it see terrifying and amusing visions. The intoxi- 
cation persists for two or three days and then stops . . . 

Still further assurance that teonanacatl was a fungus is found in a third 
reference to the narcotic in Sahagun’s Historia : 

The first thing which they ate at the gathering was small, black mushrooms 
which they called nanacatl. These are intoxicating and caus$ visions to be seen and 
even provoke sensuousness. They ate these (mushrooms) before dawn, and they also 
drank chocolate before daylight. They ate these little mushrooms with honey, and 
when they began to be excited by them, they began to dance, some singing, others 
weeping, for they were already intoxicated by the mushrooms. Some did not want 
to sing but sat down in their quarters and remained there as if in a meditative mood. 
Some saw themselves dying in a vision and wept; others saw themselves being eaten 
by a wild beast; others imagined that they were capturing prisoners in battle, that 
they were rich, that they possessed many slaves, that they had committed adultery 
and were to have their heads crushed for the offense, that they were guilty of a 
theft for which they were to be killed, and many other visions which they saw. 
When the intoxication from the little mushrooms had passed, they talked over 
among themselves the visions which they had seen. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN AC ATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


431 


In a chapter on mushrooms ( De las setas) Sahagun used the term 
nanacatl to refer to mushrooms: 

The cone-shaped mushrooms {nanacatl) genus campos agrorum in the mountains 
are good to eat. They are cooked for this purpose . . . 

Sahagun not only described teonanacatl as a mushroom, but the plant 
is figured in (Plate Cl; Fig. 453a) the Paso y Troncoso edition of Sahagun’s 
writings as a small mushroom growing in a grassy field. 

In addition to Sahagun’s direct statements that teonanacatl was a 
mushroom, it is obvious from linguistic evidence that the term nanacatl 
refers to mushroom. Teonanacatl probably was the specific word for the 
intoxicating mushrooms, for it appears that nanacatl referred to mush- 
rooms in general. In Mexico at the present time, mushrooms are called 
nanacaUs. 

In his Dictionnaire de la langue Nahautl ou Mexicaine Simeon analyzed 
several words which include the root nanacatl and clearly indicated the 
meaning of the term: 

Nanacatl , Champignon: quauhtla-nanacatl , champignon des bois; au. fig. nana- 
catl nicte-ittitinemi (Olm.), rendre quelqu’un pervers, lui donner de mauvais 
conseils. En comp: nonanac • ou nonanacauh (Olm.) mon champignon, R. 
nacatl? 

Nacatl, Chair, viande; . . . nonac, ma viande, la chair que je mange. 

Teonanacatl, Espece de petit champignon qui a mauvais gout, enivre, et cause 
des hallucinations; il est medicinal contre les fievres et la goutte (Sah.) RR. 
teotl, nanacatl. 

Teyhuinti , Qui enivre quelqu’un, enivrant; teyhuinti nanacatl, champignon 
enivrant. 

Further evidence can be derived from a definition of teonanacatl offered 
by Jourdanet and Simeon in their translation of Sahagun’s Historia. 

( Teonanacatl ) c’est a dire: champignon dangereux. Later me generique est 
nanacatl, qui se met en composition avec d’autres mots pour designer les 
diverses especes de champignons. 

As further corroboration, the compounds used by Hernandez may be 
cited. By adding adjectival prefixes to a modification of the term nanacatl , 
Hernandez 4 described several types of mushrooms under the heading “De 
nanacatl sen Fungorum genere”: iztacnanacame (white mushroom), tlapal- 
nanacame (reddish mushroom), and chimalnanacame (yellow-orbicular 
mushroom). He described teonanacatl as teyhuinti or “intoxicating.” 


4 Francisco Hernandez (1790), p. 357. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


432 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


In his Catdlogo , Garcida 5 called eleven species of Agaricus , one species 
of Hypophillum , and two species of Boletus , all Oaxacan Fungi , by the com- 
mon name nanacatl. This is certainly convincing evidence that the word 
still refers to mushrooms in modern Mexico. 

In the works of Serna , 6 a very complete description of the use of 
“coloured mushrooms,” quatlannamacatl, as a narcotic for divination is 
found : 

And it so happened that an Indian had come . . . bringing some of the coloured 
mushrooms which are gathered in the hills, and, with these, he had performed a 
great idolatry. But before explaining this (idolatry), I wish to explain the nature 
of the said mushrooms which, in the Mexican language, are called quatlannama- 
catl . . . these mushrooms were small and yellowish, and to collect them, the priests 
and all tnen, appointed as ministers for these impostures, went to the hills and re- 
mained almost the whole night in sermonizing and in superstitious praying. At 
dawn, when a certain little breeze which they know began to blow, they would 
gather them (the mushrooms), attributing to them deity. They have the same effect 
as ololiuqui and peyote, for when they are eaten or drunk, they intoxicate, depriving 
those who partake of them of their senses and making them believe a thousand 
absurdities. 

A further description of the use of narcotic mushrooms, teunamacatlth , 
is given by Benvento in Kingsborough 7 and by Orozco y Berra : 8 

They had another kind of intoxication . . . which was induced by small toad- 
stools or mushrooms . . . which are eaten raw. Because of the bitter taste of these 
mushrooms, they drink after them or eat with them a little honey after which they 
shortly see a thousand visions, especially snakes. They went raving mad, and they 
ran about the streets wildly ... In their language they called these mushrooms 
teunamacatlth , a word which means “bread of the gods” . . . 

The meaning of the word teonanacatl has been questioned recently by 
LaBarre , 9 who states that Benvento’s etymology (“bread of the gods”) 
is wrong. The acceptance of this etymology or a similar one (“flesh of the 
gods”) is wide. Safford 10 accepted “flesh of the gods” as a correct translation 
of teonanacatl. Bancroft , 11 furthermore, writing of Nahuatl intoxicants, said: 

Among the ingredients used to make their drinks more intoxicating, the most 
powerful was the teonanacatl , “flesh of the gods,” a kind of mushroom which excited 
the passions and caused the partaker to see snakes and divers other visions. 

5 Manuel Martinez Gardica (1891), p. 21. 6 Jacinto de la Serna (1892), pp. 61-63. 

7 Lord, Kingsborough (1848), p. 17. 8 Manuel Orozco y Berra (1880), p. 437. 

9 Weston LaBarre, The Peyote Cult (1938), pp. 128-130. 

10 William Safford, An Aztec Narcotic (1915), p. 291. 

11 Hubert Hugh Bancroft (1882), p. 360. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN AC ATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


433 


In an unpublished manuscript , 12 V. A. Reko applies the meaning of 
“divine food of a soft or fleshy nature” to teonanacatl. According to usage 
and to Simeon , 13 nanacatl refers to mushrooms in general, but Simeon 
suggests, with reservations, that the root of nanacatl may be nacatl , the 
word for “meat” or “flesh.” According to Simeon, therefore, teonanacatl 
may mean “flesh of the gods.” 

In early Mexican literature, other references to the uses of mushrooms 
for intoxication are less detailed but nevertheless of interest and of im- 
portance . 14 Usually, they lack common names or descriptions which might 
make it possible to identify the actual plant which was used. 

Kingsborough reports that “wild mushrooms” were given to visitors 
at Montezuma’s coronation, and that the mushrooms intoxicated the vis- 
itors and caused them to dance . 15 

Motolinia 16 described a religious feast held by Montezuma at which 
intoxicating wild mushrooms were eaten; the visions which accompanied 
the intoxication were believed to constitute divine advice concerning the 
future. 

Duran, quoted by Bourke , 17 states that, after the sacrifices of human 
beings at the coronation of Montezuma II, the multitude ate raw mush- 
rooms which induced an intoxication which was much stronger than 
alcoholic-intoxication; many committed suicide at the height of the intoxi- 
cation; some received visions and were, in this way, enabled to prophesy 
the future. Although it is difficult to identify the plant which served as the 
narcotic in these cases, the symptoms of the intoxications induced are the 
same as those induced by the teonanacatl of the ancient Aztecs and are 
the symptoms of the intoxication induced only (among the mushrooms) by 
members of the genus Paneolus , the genus with which teonanacatl has 
been identified. 

Thompson 18 reports Saville as saying that Tizoc, an Aztec ruler, who 
was poisoned after a five year reign, may have been killed by the substitu- 
tion of poisonous mushrooms for the intoxicating kinds which were nor- 
mally eaten at ceremonies. The deadly Amanita phalloides (Fr.) Quel, 
may possibly have been the instrument of death, but this species never 
could have been secretly substituted, in a fresh condition especially, for 
the entirely different Paneolus spp. Paneolus spp., while slightly poisonous, 
are not known to cause sudden death by poisoning. 

12 Victor A. Reko (undated). 13 Remi, Simeon (1885). 

14 Kingsborough (1848), Fr. Motolinia (1858), p. 23; Orozco y Berra (1880). 

15 Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico (Cronica Mexicana), p. 153. 

16 Motolinia (1858), p. 23. 17 John G. Bourke (1891). 

18 J. Eric Thompson (1933), pp. 31, 74. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


434 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


III 

The many references to the general use of narcotic mushrooms among 
Mexican Indians of four hundred years ago suggests to the ethnobotanist 
of the present time that these plants may still be used in parts of Mexico 
in a similar way. 

Curiously enough, the actual utilization of mushrooms as intoxicants in 
modern Mexico was unobserved until very recently. In 1923, Doctor Bias 
Pablo Reko wrote, in a letter to Doctor J. N. Rose of the United States 
National Herbarium, 19 that the teonanacatl is a “fungus . . . which is 
still used under the same old name by the Indians of the Sierra Juarez in 
Oaxaca in their religious feasts.” 

In 1936, Mr Robert J. Weitlaner of Mexico City visited the capital of 
the Mazatec region of Oaxaca, Huautla de Jimenez, and learned of the use 
of certain mushrooms in witchcraft and divination among these primitive 
peoples. He secured a few samples of the narcotic plants and sent them to 
Reko who forwarded several pieces to the Botanical Museum of Harvard 
University for identification. 20 These specimens were insufficiently pre- 
served upon arrival to make possible a definite specific identification; they 
belonged to the genus Paneolus , and were possibly referable to a species 
which is closely allied to P. campanulatus var. sphinctrinus. 

While I was engaged in ethnobotanical investigations among the little 
known Mazatec Indians of the District of Teotitlan, Oaxaca, with Dr. 
B. P. Reko in the summer of 1938, samples of the narcotic mushrooms and 
information concerning their use were collected in Huautla de Jimenez. 21 
These mushrooms are referable to Paneolus campanulatus L. var. sphinc- 
trinus (Fries) Bresadola. 22 Though apparently used rather frequently, the 
plant does not appear to be common in the Mazatec country. It is valued 
highly. Growing in boggy spots in pastures and open fields, it is easily avail- 
able only during the rainy season from June to September. Those who 
search for the plant gather and dry the specimens for use during the rest 
of the year. Because of the belief that the mushroom is semi-sacred, it is 

19 Letter preserved on herbarium sheet number 1745713, United States National Her- 
barium, Washington, D. C. 

20 In an earlier article (32, p. 39), I stated that these mushrooms were collected among the 
Otomis of Puebla. This is an error which was caused by a misunderstanding in correspondence. 
In the article I gave no credit to Mr Weitlaner for his work on teonanacatl in the Mazatec 
country, since this information has only recently been communicated to me by Mr Jean B. 
Johnson. 

21 Schultes and Reko 231, Collections of Economic Botany No. 5548 (Botanical Museum, 
Harvard University, July 27, 1938). 

22 Schultes (February, 1939). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN AC AT L— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


435 


not offered for sale in the markets of the Mazatec towns, although the 
yashun paper (made from the bark of Heliocarpus appendiculatus Turcz.) 
and other articles for brujeria (withcraft) are important articles of sale in 
the markets of Huautla. 

The native Mazatec names by which Paneolus campanulatus var. 
sphinctrinus is known in Huautla de Jimenez and San Antonio Eloxo- 
chitlan are: t-ha-na-sa (meaning unknown), she-to (“pasture mushroom”), 
and to-shka (“intoxicating mushroom”). 

Among the Mazatec Indians there are professional divinators who earn 
a livelihood locating stolen property, discovering secrets, and giving advice 
through Paneolus-mtoxiQ&tion. It is impossible to state whether or not 
these divinators practice their art exclusively with Paneolus ; it is probable 
that they are general curanderos (herb-doctors) as well. Due probably to 
the frequent ingestion of the slightly poisonous Paneolus , they are said to 
age rapidly, signs of approaching senility being apparent at the age of 
thirty-five. 

The narcotic is taken to induce a semi-conscious state which is ac- 
companied by a mild delirium. The incoherent utterances which are made 
during the intoxication are interpreted as prophetic or admonitory. 23 The 
doses which the Mazatec Indians prescribe vary with the size and the age 
of the individual. Usually fifteen mushrooms are considered sufficient to 
induce the desired effect, but larger doses are reported. Overdoses of fifty 
to sixty mushrooms result in severe poisonings, while continued use of 
excessive quantities is said to produce permanent insanity. While this 
might be an expected physiological result of the type of intoxication in- 
duced by species of Paneolus , it was not possible to verify this with actual 
cases in the field. According to a number of descriptions from the Indians, 
the intoxication lasts about three hours. Shortly after ingestion of the 
mushrooms, the subject experiences a general feeling of levity and well- 
being. This exhilaration is followed within an hour by hilarity, incoherent 
talking, uncontrolled emotional outbursts, and, in the later stages of in- 
toxication, by fantastic visions in brilliant colours, similar to the visions 
so often reported for the narcotic peyote ( Lophophora Williamsii). 

Johnson, 24 engaged in ethnological work among the Mazatec Indians 
in 1938, was informed that brujos (witch-doctors) use several kinds of 

23 This, interestingly, parallels the use of ololiuqui or piule ( Rivea corymbosa) which is also 
used as a narcotic for divination in parts of Oaxaca. Investigation revealed that this narcotic 
convolvulaceous plant, the seeds of which are used, is known in the Mazatec region but is no 
longer utilized. It is used, however, by the Chinantec and Zapotec Indians to the south and 
east. (Schultes, ined.). 

24 Jean Bassett Johnson (1939). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


436 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


mushrooms. He reports the names of these as steyi and tsami-ye , tsamikishu, 
and tsamikindi. Unfortunately, it was not possible to procure specimens, 
photographs, or descriptions, and botanical identification is thus pre- 
cluded. It is not improbable, however, that one or more of these is a 
Paneolus. Although in my two visits to the Mazatec country narcotic 
mushrooms other than Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus were not 
found in use in divination, it is possible that poisonous mushrooms of the 
same or of other genera may be utilized. As emphasized below, the intoxi- 
cation which has symptoms making it valuable to the Indians for divination 
is especially, but not exclusively, typical of the entire genus Paneolus. 

Mr Bernard Bevan of Mexico City, who has carried out ethnological 
studies among the Chinantec Indians and who has visited the Mazatec 
tribe, writes, in a letter to me, that he was informed of the use of mush- 
rooms for intoxication among the Mazatecs. 

Extending my ethnobotanical investigations in northeastern Oaxaca in 
the spring and summer of 1939, I learned that Paneolus campanulatus var. 
sphinctrinus is used as a narcotic for divination among the western Chinan- 
tec Indians. The consumption of the narcotic is not uncommon in the 
western Chinantla 25 where the fungus grows in the high mountain pastures 
during the torrential rains of July. In the pueblitos of Santa Cruz Tepeto- 
tutla and San Pedro Sochiapam in the District of Cuicatlan, aged men were 
seen gathering this mushroom in fields, and in San Juan Zautla, District 
of Cuicatlan, information as to the use of the plant was obtained from two 
sources. In Tepetotutla five mushrooms ( Schultes 722) were obtained from 
one of the gatherers in exchange for several quinine pills. In these Chin- 
antec villages, the Paneolus has the name nan-tau-ga. The information 
as to the utilization of the plant and descriptions concerning the intoxica- 
tion were identical with those obtained from the neighbouring Mazatec 
Indians. Furthermore, in Tepetotutla, I was informed that small doses of 
from five to eight of these mushrooms are prescribed for several consecutive 
days for severe attacks of rheumatism. No medical uses were reported in 
the Mazatec region, but, according to Sahagun, teonanacatl in small doses 
of two or three was “medicinal for fevers and for rheumatism” among the 
Aztecs. 

Further evidence of the use of narcotic mushrooms was obtained among 

25 The term Chinantla is extremely ambiguous, having been used in a number of different 
senses by historical, anthropological, and botanical writers. It is a term which, as Bevan 
points out (Instituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia, publ. No. 24, Mexico, 1938) 
should be used only in its widest sense: “a synonym for the region where any dialect of 
Chinantec is spoken.” It is used here in this sense. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN AC ATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


437 


the Chinantec and Zapotec Indians who together inhabit the small town 
of Latani, near Santiago Choapam, District of Choapam, in the south- 
easternmost corner of the Chinantec area. Since my visit to Latani was 
made before the advent of the late June and July rains, it was impossible 
to collect specimens of the fungus which, according to the inhabitants, is 
eaten as a narcotic for divination. Very detailed descriptions of the fungus 
and a full account of the type of intoxication which it induces indicate 
that the intoxicating mushroom of Latani is also a species of Paneolus. The 
possibility that it is Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus is not remote. 
The Chinantec name is a-ni (“medicinal mushroom”) or a-mo-kya (“medi- 
cine for divination”). 

It is interesting to note here that ololiuqui or piule (the seeds of Rivea 
corymbosa (L.) Hall, f., often mistakenly identified as a Datura ), another 
divinatory-narcotic of ancient usage in Mexico, is found growing in door- 
yards in Latani and is used, in the same way as the mushrooms, as an aid 
in divination. 26 

There can be little doubt that Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus 
is used among other Indian groups in Oaxaca and possibly in other states 
as well. Johnson writes in a letter to me that the mushrooms are known to 
the Cuicatec Indians of the District of Cuicatlan, Oaxaca, but that these 
people do not use them. Reko has learned by correspondence that the 
Zapotecs of Santiago Yaveo, District of Choapam, Oaxaca, use this 
narcotic, but when Reko and I visited this pueblo in 1939, no specimens 
could be obtained. Search for its use among the Zapotec Indians of Santa 
Maria Tonaguia, San Ildefonso Villa Alta, Santa Maria Temascalapa, San 
Juan Yatsona, and San Juan Yaee produced no results. Likewise, during a 
very short stay in the Mije country, I could not learn of its use among the 
inhabitants of Santa Maria Chisme, San Juan Metlaltepec, and Santiago 
Zacatepec (at the base of Cerro Zempoaltepetl). I think that it is highly 
probable that the narcotic properties of the Paneolus mushrooms are em- 
ployed in divination among these peoples, however, and that when inten- 
sive investigation is carried out among the Mijes, the use of Paneolus will 
be discovered in this poorly studied tribe. 

The names under which Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus is or 
has been known may be summarized as follows: 

Aztecs: nanacatl (mushroom); teonanacatl (sacred mushroom); quauh- 
tlananacatl (wild mushroom) ; teunamacatlth (probably an erroneous 
rendition of teonanacatl). 

Chichimecas: name unknown. 

26 Richard Evans Schultes, Plantae Mexicanae VI. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


438 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


Chinantecs: nan-tau-ga ; a-ni; a-mo-kya. 

Mazatecs: t-ha-na-sa (meaning unknown); she-to (pasture mushroom); 
to-shka (“ intoxicating mushroom”). Although the names for the nar- 
cotic mushrooms reported by Johnson cannot definitely be applied 
to this species, it is probable that the mushrooms are species of 
Paneolus : steyi ; tsami-ye ; tsamikishu ; tsamikindi. 

IV 

Paneolatus campanulatus L. var. sphinctrinus (Fr.) Bresadola is a small 
mushroom of boggy spots in meadows during the rainy seasons. This spe- 
cies and its closest relatives are found on all the major continents. The 
mushroom is about ten centimeters high, with a slender, terete, dark brown 
stipe from one to two centimeters in diameter. The dark colour of the 
stipe serves to separate this variety from its close relative, R. papilionaceus 
Fries. The pileus, three centimeters in diameter and one half centimeter 
high, is either parabolical, conical, or nearly hemispherical, often slightly 
cuspidate or obtusely acuminate, smooth, light yellowish-brown. The gills 
are spotted and are dark brownish-black. The spores, varying from 12-18 
times 7.5-12 mus, are black, sublimoniform. When dried, the entire 
mushroom assumes a brownish-black colour. 

An excellent coloured illustration of Paneolus campanulatus var sphinc- 
trinus is to be found in Bresadola’s Iconographia MycologicaP Technical 
Latin diagnoses of the characters of the plant may be found in Bresadola’s 
Iconographia Mycologica and in Fries’ Epicrisis ; 28 Bresadola’s Latin diag- 
nosis is republished in Schultes’ Plantae Mexicanae II. 

V 

Species of the genus Paneolus have long been known to be poisonous, 29 
but the use of Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus as an intoxicant in 
Mexico is the only instance in which its properties have been employed 
for narcotization, so far as I have been able to learn from the anthropologi- 
cal and botanical literature. 

Ford 30 divides mushroom-poisoning into five categories, according to 
the physiological action of the poisonous constituents of the plants: 1) the 
choleriform type (caused by the deadly Amanita phalloides (Fr.) Quel.); 
2) the nerve-affecting type which is marked by convulsions, coma, and 
occasional deaths (caused by Amanita muscaria (L.) Pers., which is used 
in Kamchatka as a narcotic); 3) the gastrointestinal type; 4) the blood- 

27 J. Bresadola (1931), p. 894. 23 Elias Fries (1838), pp. 235-236. 

29 Louis C. C. Krieger (1935). 30 W. W. Ford (1923), pp. 225-229. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN ACATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


439 


dissolving type; 5) and the cerebral type. Paneolus- intoxication belongs 
to the fifth category of poisonings. The narcotic action is mainly cerebral 
and is characterized by exhilaration, a feeling of ease and well-being, mus- 
cular incoordination, drowsiness, a staggering gait or difficulty in walking, 
emotional excesses, laughter and hilarity, incoherent and delirious speech, 
mydriasis, and fantastically coloured visions. 

Most of the full descriptions of the use of teonanacatl among the an- 
cient Aztecs indicate, by the peculiar type of intoxication, that the mush- 
room was a species of Paneolus. It is indeed significant that these early 
descriptions and the notes obtained from the Mazatec, Chinantec, and 
Zapotec Indians agree completely with the description of a typical Paneo- 
lus-intoxication by Douglas 31 and Krieger. 32 

Knowing that Paneolus was a poisonous genus, the late Professor 
Santesson 33 carried out a series of pharmacological studies with specimens 
of Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus which were collected in the 
Mazatec country. 34 The results of experiments with frogs indicated that a 
principle was present which induced a kind of narcosis very similar to that 
which is induced by ololiuqui ( Rivea corymbosa (L.) Hall, f.) another 
Mexican oracular narcotic. Santesson called this state “eine Art Halb- 
narkose.” Chemical tests convinced Santesson that a glucoside, but no 
alkaloid, was present. This is rather unexpected, since in Amanita muscaria 
(L.) Pers., the Kamchatkan narcotic mushroom, the active principle is an 
alkaloid — muscarine. 

VI 

The identity of teonanacatl was unknown for three centuries. During 
this time doubt has been expressed concerning the accuracy of all of the 
earlier writers in describing the narcotic as a “mushroom.” As a result, 
considerable confusion and uncertainty arose and a serious error has been 
accepted and widely spread in the botanical and anthropological literature. 

The first attempt to identify teonanacatl botanically was made in 
1915, when Safford 35 published his conclusion that the so-called “mush- 
room” was, in reality, the dried tops of the cactus Lophophora Williamsii 
(Lem.) Coulter and, notwithstanding all of the numerous early reports, was 
not a fungus. “Three centuries of investigation,” wrote Safford, “have 
failed to reveal an endemic fungus used as an intoxicant in Mexico, nor is 
such a fungus mentioned either in works on mycology or pharmacography; 

81 B. Douglas (1917), p. 209-221. 22 Kreiger (1935). 

33 C. G. Santesson (1939), pp. 1-9. 34 Schultes and Reko, op. cit. 

36 Safford, An Aztec Narcotic (1915). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


440 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


yet the belief prevails even now that there is a narcotic Mexican fungus 
. . .” On the basis of this argument, Safford concluded that the dried, brown, 
discoidal head (“mescal button”) of the spineless peyote-cactus {Lopho- 
phora Williamsii) resembled a “dried mushroom so remarkably that, at first 
glance, it will even deceive a mycologist.” When this “remarkable” 
resemblance is analyzed with actual specimens, however, it is found not to 
exist. There is actually very little similarity in appearance between the 
dried pilei of Basidiomycetes and mescal buttons. The shrivelled crowns of 
the cactus have a heavy cushion of closely packed areolate tufts of silky 
hairs on the upper surface and a conspicuous fibrovascular region on the 
lower surface. It seems highly improbable that either the early writers or the 
Indians were likely to confuse dried peyote with dried mushrooms. But Saf- 
ford concluded that those same people who gathered peyote and teonana- 
catl (one of which inhabits dry, calcareous deserts; the other, wet, soggy, 
mountain pastures) failed to recognize the hard wrinkled, brown mescal- 
buttons (which Safford stated were teonanacatl) as a part of the soft, 
succulent, green peyote-plant. The former he assumed the Aztecs called 
teonanacatl , the latter, peiotl. 

Much of Safford’s ethnobotanical investigation of Mexican plants was 
brilliant. It is not surprising, therefore, that his conclusions on this 
mysterious “narcotic mushroom,” which was known only in the literature, 
were accepted and became firmly established in both botanical 36 and 
anthropological literature. 37 This identification was repeated several times 
by Safford and early gained a wide audience. 38 Some of the recent writers 
on the subject of narcotics, however, have not accepted Safford’s conclu- 
sions. 39 Prior to 1915, when Safford made his identification of teonanacatl, 
a number of authors had occasion to mention the narcotic and accepted 
the statements which all of the early writers had made concerning the 
fact that teonanacatl was a mushroom. 40 

The first published objection to Safford’s identification appeared in 1936 
in a popular book by V. A. Reko 41 : “ Dem (the Safford identification) muss 

36 N. L. Britton and J. N. Rose (1922) p. 84; William E. Safford Narcotic Plants and 
Stimulants of the Ancient Americans (1917) pp. 398-405. 

37 Herbert J. Spinden (1917), p. 36; Eric Stone (1932), p. 55; J. Eric Thompson (1932), 
p. 31, 74. See E. W. Emmart: The Badianus Manuscript (Baltimore, 1940), p. 66. 

38 William E. Stafford (1917). 

39 Jean Bassett Johnson (1939); Weston-LaBarre, Native American Beers (1938); Ibid, 
The Peyote Cult (1938); Bias Pablo Reko (1919); Victor A. Reko (undated); Ibid. (1936); 
Sahagun (1938); Schultes (April, 1937); Ibid. (November, 1937); Spinden (1917). 

40 Bancroft (1882), p. 360; Thomas A. Joyce (1914), p. 156; Sim6on (1885); Manuel 
Urbina (1900), p. 25; Ibid. (1912), p. 131. 

41 V. A. Reko (1936). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEON AN AC ATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


441 


widersprochen werden. Die Nanacates sind Giftpilze , die mit Peyote nichts zu 
tun haben . . He suggested, but apparently without any basis, that nan- 
acatl might be a species of Amanita . 

From the first appearance of Safford’s identification, however, Dr B. P. 
Reko has opposed the opinion that teonanacatl was a form of peyote. In 
1923, he wrote to Dr J. N. Rose of the United States National Herbarium: 42 
. . I see in your description of Lophophora that Dr Safford believes this 
plant to be the ‘teonanacatl’ of Sahagun which is surely wrong. It is actually 
as Sahagun states, a fungus which grows on dung-heaps and which is still 
used under the same old name by the Indians of the Sierra Juarez in 
Oaxaca in their religious feasts . . .” In 1919, he had stated 43 that teonan- 
acatl was “div. gentros de hongos , especialmente un hongo negro que crece 
sobre estiercol y produce efectos narcdticos.” 

In 1939, specimens of Paneolus campanulatus L. var. sphinctrinus (Fr.) 
Bresadola which were collected in the Mazatec country of northeastern 
Oaxaca were identified as teonanacatl 44 . Later, the same plant was 
found to be used among the neighbouring Chinantecs and Zapotecs. There 
is, therefore, no longer any reason for the retention of Safford’s misidentifi- 
cation of teonanacatl with Lophophora Williamsii. 

The entire geiius Paneolus is known to be poisonous. Differences between 
species are often very slight and extremely technical. Different species, 
having the same intoxicating properties and being so similar in gross 
appearance, are without doubt utilized along with P. campanulatus var. 
sphinctrinus. Although I have found no other mushroom used as te- 
onanacatl in Oaxaca, numerous reports that there are several kinds of 
teonanacatl must be interpreted to mean that other species are actually 
used. Although the identification of “teonanacatl” was made on the basis of 
specimens of P. campanulatus var. sphinctrinus , it is probable that this 
vernacular name refers to several or numerous species of Paneolus and that 
further ethnobotanical research will result in the discovery of other 
species which serve as divination-narcotics in southern Mexico. 

VII 

In summary, it may be stated that: 

1) Paneolus campanulatus L. var. sphinctrinus (Fr.) Bresadola (and 
possibly other species of Paneolus) is used as a narcotic in witchcraft and 


^Letter preserved on herbarium sheet number 1745713, United States National Her- 
barium, Washington, D. C. 

43 Bias Pablo Reko (1919). 44 Schultes (February, 1939). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


442 


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST 


[n. s., 42, 1940 


divination among the Chinantecs, Mazatecs, and Zapotecs of southern 
Mexico. 

2) The size, colour, form, growth habits, uses, and narcotic effects of 
Paneolus campanulatus var. sphinctrinus correspond so closely to the de- 
scriptions of the same aspects of the teonanacatl of the Chichimecas and 
early Aztecs that there can be no doubt that this species represents the in- 
toxicating mushroom which was described by many of the early writers as 
one of the chief narcotics of Mexico at the time of the Spanish Conquest. 

3) The discovery of the use of Paneolus in three Mexican Indian tribes 
and its identification with teonanacatl should dispel the confusion which has 
resulted in the literature from Safford’s misidentification of teonanacatl 
with peyote. 

4) Although it seems to have been and to be widely used in southern 
Mexico as a narcotic, Paneolus is not known to be utilized as an intoxi- 
cant by any other group of primitive peoples. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bancroft, Hubert Hugh, The native races, vol. 2 (San Francisco, 1882). 

Bourke, John G., Scatological rites of all nations (Washington, D. C., 1891). 

Bresadola, J., Iconographia Mycologia (Milan, 1931). 

Britton, N. L. and J. N. Rose, The Cactaceae, vol. 3 (Washington, D. C-, 1922). 

Douglas, B., Mushroom poisoning (Torreya, vol. 17, pp. 171-175, 209-221. 1917). 

Ford, W. W., A new classification of mycetismus ( mushroom poisoning) (Transactions, Associa- 
tion of American Physicians, Vol. 38, pp. 225-229,1923). 

Fries, Elias, Epicrisis systematis mycologici seu synopsis Hymenomycetum (Upsala 1836- 
1838). 

Garcida, Manuel Martinez, Catdlogos de la flora y la fauna del estado de Oaxaca (Oaxaca, 
1891). 

Hernandez, Francisco, De historia plantarum Novae Hispaniae, vol. 2 (Rome 1790). 
Johnson, Jean Bassett, Elements of Mazatec witchcraft (Ethnological Studies, No. 9. 

Gothenburg, pp. 128-150, 1939). 

Joyce, Thomas A., Mexican archaeology (New York, 1914). 

Kingsborough, Lord, Antiquities of Mexico (Ritos antiguos, vol. 9, London-New York, 
1848). 

Kingsborough, Lord, Antiquities of Mexico (Cronica mexicana, vol. 9, London-New York, 
1848). 

Krieger, Louis C. C., A popular guide to the higher fungi ( mushrooms ) of New York State 
(New York State Museum Handbook, 11, Albany, 1935). 

LaBarre, Weston, Native American beers (American Anthropologist, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 224- 
234, April-June, 1938). 

Ibid., The Peyote cult (Yale University Publications in Anthropology, no. 19, pp. 128-130, 
New Haven, 1938). 

MoTOLiNfA, Fr. Toribio de, Historia de los Indiosde Nueva Espana (in Coleccion de Docu- 
ments para la Historia de Mexico, vol. 1, Mexico, 1858). 

Orozco y Berra, Manuel, Historia antigua y de la conquista de Mexico, vol. 3 (Mexico, 1880). 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


SCHULTES] TEONANACATL— NARCOTIC MUSHROOM OF AZTECS 


443 


Reko, Blas Pablo, De los nombres botdnicos aztecos (El Mexico Antiguo, vol. 1, no. 5, 
pp. 113-157, December, 1919). 

Reko, Victor A., Was bedeutet das Wort Teonanacatl?. Unpublished manuscript, undated. 

Ibid., “Magische Gifte — Rausch- und Betdubungsmittel der Neuen Welt ” (Stuttgart, 1936). 

Safford, W(illiam) E., u Identification of teonanacatl of the Aztecs with the narcotic cactus 
Lophophora Williamsii and an account of its ceremonial use in ancient and modern times” 
(Botanical Society, Washington, D. C., May, 1915). 

Ibid., An Aztec narcotic (Journal of Heredity, vol. 6, pp. 291-311, 1915). 

Ibid., Food Plants and textiles of ancient America (Proceedings, 19th International Congress of 
Americanists, Washington, D. C., 1917). 

Ibid., Narcotic plants and stimulants of the ancient Americans (Annual Report, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, pp. 398-405, 1917). 

Sahagun, Bernardino de, (Editor: Bustamente, Carlos Maria de) Historia general de las 
cosas de Nueva Espana, vol. 3 (Mexico, 1829-1830). 

Ibid., (Translators: Jourdanet, D. and Remi Simeon) Histoire generale des choses de la Nouvelle 
Espagne, vol. 3 (Paris, 1880). 

Ibid., Historia general de las cosas de Nueva Espana, vol. 3 (Mexico, 1938). 

Santesson, C. G. Einige Mexikanische Rauschdrogen (Archiv fur Botanik, vol. 29a, no. 12, 
pp. 1-9, 1939). 

Schultes, Richard Evans, Peyote and plants used in the peyote ceremony (Botanical Museum 
Leaflets, Harvard University, vol. 4, no. 8, April 12, 1937). 

Ibid., Peyote (Lophophora Williamsii) and plants confused with it (Botanical Museum Leaflets, 
Harvard University vol. 5, no. 5, November 19, 1937). 

Ibid., Plantae Mexicanae II. The Identification of teonanacatl , a narcotic Basidiomycete of the 
Aztecs (Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University vol. 7, no. 3, February 21, 
1939). 

Ibid., Plantae Mexicanae VI. Rivea corymbosa, the narcotic ololiuqui of the Aztecs (Botanical 
Museum Leaflets Harvard University, ined.). 

Serna, Jacinto de la, Manual de ministros de Indios para el conocimiento de sus idolatrias y 
extirpation de ellas (in Coleccion de Documentos ineditos para la historia de Espafia, 
vol. 104, Madrid, 1892). 

Simeon, Remi, Dictionnaire de la langue Nahautl or Mexicaine (Paris, 1885). 

Spinden, Herbert J., Ancient civilizations of Mexico and Central America (New York, 1917). 

Stone, Eric, Medicine among the American Indians (New York, 1932). 

Thompson, J. Eric, Mexico before Cortez (New York-London, 1933). 

Toro, Alfonso, Las plantas sagradas de los Aztecos y su influencia sobre el arte precortesiano, 
Proceedings 2 3rd International Congress of Americanistes, pp. 101-121, New York, 
1930). 

Urbina, Manuel El peyote y el ololiuhqui (Anales Museo Nacional Mexico, vol. 7, 1900). 

Ibid., El peyote y el ololiuhqui (La Naturaleza, vol. 1, no. 4, 1912). 

Harvard University 
Cambridge, Mass. 


This content downloaded from 71.172.230.211 on Thu, 22 Aug 2013 17:50:17 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


