[Full text of Max Rinkel, H. Jackson DeShon, Robert W. Hyde, and Harry C. Solomon,
"Experimental Schizophrenia-Like Symptoms," American Journal of Psychiatry 108, no. 8
(February 1952): 572-578, as published. Fetched via curl from the Internet Archive's OCR
of the scanned issue (sim_american-journal-of-psychiatry_1952-02_108_8), and cross-checked
against the archive.org page images for the article's leaves (n25-n31) to correct OCR
errors, since the raw OCR of this two-column layout is heavily garbled in places
(interleaved columns, misread ligatures, running heads mid-paragraph). The cleaned
transcript used in the record's `transcript` field was built by reading those page images
directly; this file preserves the underlying OCR text as fetched.

Source: https://archive.org/download/sim_american-journal-of-psychiatry_1952-02_108_8/sim_american-journal-of-psychiatry_1952-02_108_8_djvu.txt
Fetched: 2026-08-20 via curl -sL
Page images: https://archive.org/download/sim_american-journal-of-psychiatry_1952-02_108_8/page/n25_w800.jpg through n31_w800.jpg]



EXPERIMENTAL SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE SYMPTOMS ' 
MAX RINKEL, M.D., H. JACKSON DeSHON, M.D., ROBERT W. HYDE, M.D., 


AND 


HARRY C. SOLOMON, M.D. 


Boston, 


The nature and cause of the major psy 
choses are still unknown. Repeated attempts 
have been made to reproduce experimentally 
psychotic symptoms in the hope to uncover 
their psycho-physiological relationship. In 
1886, Schmiedeberg succeeded in producing 
cataleptic phenomena in rabbits by the use 
of ethyl-urethan. In 1904, Peters(11) dis 
covered the cataleptic action of bulbocap- 
nine; Baruk and de Jong(1t, 9, 10) investi- 
gated this, as well as many related chemicals, 
more extensively and demonstrated the cata- 
tonic effect upon man and animals. With the 
discovery of new chemicals and chemical 
compounds, new tools are made available to 
the psychiatrist to investigate psychoses ex- 
perimentally, and a new branch, experimen- 
tal psychiatry, is emerging. The experimental 
psychiatrist has the advantage of knowing 
the one factor, in the causation of psychotic 
symptoms, the chemical that was adminis- 
tered to the patient and started the chain of 
reactions. The psychopathological genesis, 
however, of the psychotic phenomena will 
best be investigated by methods of the inter- 


1 Read at the 107th annual meeting of The Ameri- 
can Psychiatric Association, Cincinnati, Ohio, May 
7-11, 1981. 

From the Department of Psychiatry, Harvard 
Medical School, and the Boston Psychopathic Hos 
pital; Dr. Harry C. Solomon, Director. 

Aided by a grant from the McCurdy Company, 
Rochester, New York. 


COOH 


CH, 


sycl latry Of 
xperimentally at present 
alkaloid 
known in its crude form as peyote for hun- 


dreds of years, though only in the past few 


are outstanding: mescaline, an 


years chemically synthetized, and d-lysergic 
tartrate (L.S.D.), a mem- 
ber of the ergot group. Although these chem- 
different in 


acid diethylamide 


their chemical 
structure, in their effect upon normal subjects 
and psychotic patients they show i 


1 
cais are quite 


great simi- 
larities with reg 

chotic symptoms. The schizogenic effect of 
mescaline has been reported in a number of 
recently 


articies, most 


mental and 
Paul H. Hoch(8). Our 


essentially with the description of the 


ot d-lysergic acid diethylamide _ tartrate 
(L.S.D.) upe individuals 


who, subsequent to the administration of this 


effect 
and temale 

cnemical, respont 


led with the production of 
psychotic-schizophrenic-like phenomena. 


Chemistry and Pharmacology, 


, which stands for the German Ly- 
Didthylamid, is the abbreviation 

used for the diethylamid tartrate of lysergic 
according to A. Stoll, A. Hof- 
mann, and F. Troxler(17), is diastereomer 
} 


acid which, 


ut not structurally isomeric with isolysergic 


acid as seen in the accompanying formula. 


Hooc H 


: 
\ 
\ 
| 
paper is ncerned 
H 
\ \ 
C—E ( CH; 
HC N—CH H¢ N—CH 
C——-CH CH 
Cc CH, ( CH, 
HC H¢ ( 
CH CH NH 
S72 


1952 M. RINKEL, H. J. 


DESHON, R. W. HYDE AND H. C. SOLOMON 573 


It is water soluble and administered orally. 
Pharmacologically L.S.D. belongs in the 
group of the ergonovine substances. It has 
a definite effect upon the in situ uterus of the 
rabbit, and causes peculiar states of motor 
rigidity similar to the catatonic phenomena 
in the dog and cat as seen with bulbocapnine 
(19). In our own experiments we noted an 
especially strong physiological reaction in a 
29-year-old very sensitive white girl who was 
menstruating at the time. She complained of 
most violent abdominal constrictions, which 
may have been caused by vehement uterine 
contractions. The peculiar psychological ef- 
fect, seen as excitation in experimental ani- 
mals, was first observed and described by the 
chemist, A. Hofmann. In his laboratory 
notes of April 4, 1943, he remarked that, 
while working with L.S.D., he noticed in 
himself a peculiar restlessness associated 
with slight dizziness. He had to interrupt 
his work and went home to rest. While at 
home, he felt as if intoxicated, a condition 
characterized by an extremely stimulated 
phantasy. After darkening his room, for the 
daylight bothered him very much, he had a 
most wonderful experience. Phantastic im- 
ages of most extraordinary plasticity and in- 
tensive kaleidoscopic coloring passed before 
him. This state of intoxication lasted about 
2 hours. 


Literature 


Following this discovery a number of au- 
thors investigated the effect of L.S.D. in 
self-experiments, on normal subjects, and on 
psychotics. W. A. Stoll(18), who first syste- 
matically investigated the psychological phe- 
nomena of L.S.D., confirmed Hofmann’s ex- 
periences and reported as the most striking 
psychological findings disturbances in per- 
ception that led to hallucinations, acceleration 
of thinking, slight dimming of consciousness, 
but maintenance of judgment. He regarded 
the psychotic condition as an acute exogenous 
reaction type and pathologically as dienceph- 
alosis. Condreau(4) confirmed most of 


Stoll’s findings, but reported that in his ex- 
periments the subjects’ consciousness was not 
disturbed aside from the feeling of intoxica- 
tion. He added that the subjects maintained 
their capacity of self-criticism, but showed 
increased distractibility and were less able 


to concentrate. The basic theme of thought 
remained unchanged, and the changes in feel- 
ing tone he felt to be merely an intensifica- 
tion of the previous underlying mood. He 
added as a new observation forced laughing 
and one instance of athetoid movements as 
suggestive of involvement of the diencepha- 
lon, thus contributing to W. A. Stoll’s origi- 
nal conception. A. M. Becker(2) essentially 
confirmed the observations of Stoll and Hof- 
mann and emphasized the astounding pro- 
duction of psychosis-like syndromes follow- 
ing the administration of mere “traces” of a 
chemical substance. He believes the psycho- 
logical manifestations are the result of two 
different basic disturbances: affectivity and 
impulsivity on the one hand, and intention- 
ality on the other. The most striking con- 
trasts among his observations were manic- 
hyperkinetic and inhibited. depersonalized 
manifestations. In contrast to Stoll, who 
termed L.S.D. a “Phantasticum,” Becker 
suggested the designation of “Psychoticum” 
for L.S.D. Umberto de Giacomo(6, 7), of 
Italy, in his experiments with rather large 
amounts of L.S.D. (300 to 500 gamma) ob- 
served in his patients catatonic-like phenom- 
ena, which were similar to those produced 
by bulbocapnine. M. Rinkel(12) and Victor 
H. Vogel(18) reported their experiences 
with diethylamide of lysergic acid, adding 
as new observations paranoic trends and, in 
contrast to previous publications, slowing of 
thinking and poverty of thought. Bush and 
Johnson(3) used L.S.D. as an aid in psy- 
chotherapy, and reported that their psychotic 
patients responded with an increase in ac- 
tivity and greater verbalization of psychopa- 
thology. They noted occasional short periods 
of confusion and disorientation, and occa- 
sional transitory visual hallucinations. Most 
of their patients showed some degree of eu- 
phoria. 


Method and Procedure 


In our own experiments, L.S.D. was given 
17 times to 15 normal adult volunteers, stu- 
dents, nurses, and doctors, in the 19-48 age 
range, and, as freshly prepared solution, to 
some psychotics: dementia praecox and 
manic-depressive, depressive type. The ob- 
servations on the psychotic patients are still 
in progress and will be published later. The 


: 
— 

ae 
4 

‘ 

} 

Jin 

3 

i 
2 


574 EXPERIMENTAL SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE SYMPTOMS [Feb 


normal subjects, who were kept without 
breakfast, received L.S.D. in doses ranging 
irom 20 to go gamma p. ©0., in most cases 
one gamma per kilogram body weight, while 
the psychotics were given 3 gamma per kilo- 
gram body weight. This increased dosage for 
psychotics was chosen on the basis of the 
unanimous reports in the literature that psy- 
chotic patients were particularly resistant to 
the effect of L.S.D. The subjects were kept 
under continuous observation by at least one 
of the authors for the first 5 hours and, on 
occasions, tape recordings of the subject's 
productions were made. The subjects re- 
mained under observation the same day at 
the hospital, and were seen again the follow- 
ing day. The main emphasis in our observa- 
tions was on the clinical psychiatric picture. 
Routine neurological and circulatory system 
examinations were not done, but signs oc- 
curring in these areas were noted, if ob- 
served, In g of the experiments, electroen- 
cephalograms at or near 2 hours after L.S.D. 
were taken, and Rorschach tests were given 
to 5 normal subjects and concrete-abstract 
thinking tests to 2 subjects during the height 
of the L.S.D. reaction. Controls of EEGs 
and psychological tests were done while the 
subjects were in their normal mental state. 


Results 


1. Disturbances of Thought and Speech. 
The most prominent psychological changes 
observed were those in thinking and speech. 
They were present in all our experiments. 
There was no cloudiness of consciousness, 
no intellectual weakness, but most frequently 
we observed difficulty in the power of ex- 
pression. The subjects became more and 
more slowed down, poverty of thought be- 
came apparent, and the flow of speech be- 
came increasingly diminished and blocked. 
(me subject, a middle-aged depressed pa- 
tient, went into a complete stupor. In another 
instance occurred unwillingness to speak, a 
symptom similar to the negativism of the 
schizophrenic. Hesitancy, indecision, and im- 
pairment of abstract thinking were fre 
quently present; also looseness of thought 
and actual disconnection with increased dis- 
tractibility were common observations. As 
in schizophrenic patients, some of the sub- 


spontaneity, irrelevance, pedantic imitation, 
and subjectively aut tic speech. In one in 
stance, we had the impression of the forma 
tio neologism .cceleration of thought 
with fligl t of idea ciated with rhyming 
and punning; garrulity and loquacity of the 
hypomat type were seen in a cyclothymik 


medical student within 45 minutes after the 


administration of L.S.D. In general, the ef- 


fects appeared within 30-45 minutes after 
the oral administration of L.S.D., and dis- 
appeared gradually after 3-4 hours, 

A tand A 1.—Clear-cut blunting 
ot aftect nd Spi ness, as often seen 
in schizophrenic patients, were outstanding 
These symptoms frequently led to feelings 


of indifference and unreality with disturb- 


ances in body image Che subjects experi 
enced hostilit nd resentment, and on rare 
occasions ambivalence. The phenomena oc- 
curred about 15 minutes after the adminis- 


tration of L.S.D.; feelings of indifference 
and blunting tended to be protracted; sus- 
piciousness, hostility, and resentment were 
always more transient. Changes in mood 
were twofold: euphoria and depression, 
which occurred in about equal number. Eu- 
phoria was either of the shallow elation type 
with silliness, as seen in the hebephrenic, or, 
in a cyclothymic subject, of the jovial and 
infectious type, as found in hypomanic and 
manic states. Depression was combined with 
dependency, indecision, insecurity, passivity, 
and feelings of being “lost.’”’ In no instance 
did we observe the happy and dreamy feeling 
of ecstasy as it has been described by other 
10 experimented with L.S.D., mes- 
caline, and other similar chemicals 
Usually within 40 min- 
utes after the intake of L.S.D. disturb- 
I 


ANCES ¢ f percepti n were observed. hose of 


visual perception were most common and 
] isional type. The subjects 
would see rippling or wavy lines on the wall 
that might evolve into geometrical pattern, 
or be associated with color such as yellow, 
orange, or pink. In some instances, subjects 
aw a thermostat on the wall as a crucifix 


but fully realized that the experience was an 


illusion. None of the subjects, however, had 
the feeling of seeing si inething of extraor- 


jects exhibited such phenomena as lack of : 
| 
Ne 
3 
| 
_ dinary beauty, as it was stated in early re- S 


1952] M. RINKEL, H. J. DESHON, R. 


W. HYDE AND H. C. SOLOMON 


ports on L.S.D., or as it may occur under 
the influence of mescaline. 

fre- 
quently ; the subjects experiencing a metallic 
or “funny” taste or heavy tongue. 


Gustatory disturbances occurred 


Auditory perception was changed only in 
a few instances. The subject would hear a 
sound that was either near or distant, and in 


one instance of a depressed patient, the noise 
of a typewriter in an adjoining room was per- 
ceived as music, seemingly beautiful music. 


The sense of time was disturbed in 11 out 
of 17 experiments. It was characterized by 
the feeling of time accelerated or retarded. 

IV. Hallucinations and Delusions.—Dis- 
turbarices in perception, in a complex way, 
often lead to hallucinations and delusions. 
A vivid phantasy, a pseudohallucination or 
illusion, in the process of mental dissociation, 
may ultimately appear as a real object out- 
side the subject and thus constitute a real 
hallucination. By a similar process, changes 
in auditory perception, combined with exist- 
ing suspiciousness, may lead to ideas of ref- 
erence and delusions of persecution. It may 
be stated that hallucinations, predominant 
under the influence of most phantastica, sub- 
sequent to the injection o1 L.S.D. were 
rather meager and never showed the quality 
of an extraordinarily beautiful or threaten- 
ing experience. The occasional visual hallu- 
cinations consisted mainly of formed images, 
which occasionally were preceded by crude 
flashes of light. Perhaps the above-men- 
tioned disturbances of taste perception should 
be mentioned here as gustatory hallucina- 
tions. In only one instance we noticed an 
auditory hallucination, which consisted in 
hearing bells, although there were none any- 
where around. Haptic hallucinations were 
experienced by two subjects. One male sub- 
ject had the rather vivid feeling of his trou- 
sers being wet from urine, and one female 
schizoid patient was convinced that she lost 
urine and wet her slacks and the bed. She 
actually, later on, did wet the bed, and it may 
be possible that her hallucination was stimu- 
lated by autonomic excitation of the bladder 
mechanism. Morbid ideas were common; 
they included ideas of reference and ideas 
of influence. One female volunteer became 
quite paranoic and was still disturbed the fol- 
lowing day. Major delusions, ideas of gran- 


deur or persecution, as seen in the delusional 
states of the paranoic or paraphrenic, were 
not observed. That may be due, perhaps, to 
the fact that in our experiments on normal 
volunteers we used only relatively small 
amounts of L.S.D. 

V. Depersonalization.—Alteration of per- 
sonality occurred rather frequently. Those 
changes consisted mainly in the subject’s feel- 
ing that his legs were either extraordinarily 
long or heavy; in one psychotic patient the 
feeling was that the leg between ankle and 
hip had disappeared entirely. Most common 
was the feeling of unreality as regard to the 
subject, himself, and the outer world. Though 
these phenomena were of minor magnitude, 
they, too, indicate symptoms particularly ob- 
served in the schizophrenic patient. In no 
instance were we able to elicit experiences 
of synesthesias, as frequently seen in mes- 
caline intoxications. 

VI. Behavior—The most and _ striking 
change consisted in underactivity, associated 
with lack of spontaneity and initiative. One 
schizoid-depressed patient went into a state 
of catatonia; another one became stuporous. 
A female schizophrenic patient, who had re- 
ceived 3 gamma/kg. body weight of L.S.D., 
became agitated ; after an initial state of in- 
ertia, she suddenly stood up and went through 
many and various motions. She knelt down, 
kissing the wall, the floor, the examining 
table, and progressively became more and 
more excited. She tore off her clothes and 
became noisy to such an extent that the ex- 
periment had to be terminated by the intra- 
venous injection of 0.5 g. of sodium amytal. 
In our normal subjects, overactivity or in- 
appropriate behavior was rarely noted, but 
psychomotor manifestations, such as smiling, 
giggling, and laughing, more often appropri- 
ate than inappropriate, were frequently ob- 
served. This was particularly so in a student 
of cyclothymic personality make-up. 

VIL. Jntellect—In our normal subjects, 
intellectual functions were never disturbed. 
The subjects were aware of what they were 
doing at every moment of the experiment. 
Their memory also never became disturbed ; 
each one was able to give, in a written re- 
port, a description of all the experiences he 
went through. Also, the psychotic patients 
did not show any particular memory defect. 


3 
575 
fe 
é 
j 
| 
3 
* 
Hing a 


79 EXPERIMENTAL SCHIZO! 


Patients whose verbal expression becany 
slowed down and finally completely cease 
as in the case of stupor or catatonia, were 
able the following morning, under sodium 
amytal or d-desoxy-ephedrine, to recall their 
thoughts or personal experiences of the day 
before under the influence of L.S.D. 

VILL. Autonomic Nervous System—All 
normal subjects and also the psychotic pa- 
tients had numerous subjective complaints 
and symptoms. Since they mostly belong in 
the group of disturbances of the autonomic 
nervous system, they are best described here. 
The most common symptom was change in 
appetite, which more often was decreased, 
and associated with nausea, than increased. 
Complaints of headiness, giddiness, faint- 
ness, tremulousness, and shaking were fre- 
quently expressed. The subjects complained 
of chilliness and coolness of whole or part of 
the body, lump and “funny” feelings in ab- 
domen, constriction with oppression in chest 
and precordial discomfort, violent cramps 
and constriction in the abdomen in a pa- 
tient who just happened to menstruate. Ob- 
jectively observed were flushing, sweating, 
shivering, and shivering with goosepimples. 
Tachypnoea, salivation, pallor, sighing, and 
urgency of micturation were scattered ob- 
servations. Changes in pulse rate and blood 
pressure were of minor magnitude and ob- 
served only occasionally. Involuntary smil- 
ing, giggling, or laughing were considered in 
the nature of “risus sardonicus’” where the 
subject described these phenomena as occur- 
ring without or against his will. One subject 
stated that in a smile he felt as if his facial 
muscles were like plastic wax being moved 
by some inexorable force. Pupils were often 
maximally dilated. 

Gross disturbances of the cerebrospinal 
nervous system were not observed, except in 
some instances “dysarthria,” which consisted 
of a transient stumbling over words and was 
never marked. 

IX. were 
taken in 9 experiments at about the height 
of L.S.D. reaction, and compared with the 
I.EG of the same subject in his normal state. 
In general, the EEG changes were only 


slight. Principal changes occurred in the 
alpha rhythm, which was characteristically 
increased in rate from 1-3 cycles per second. 


HRENIA-LIKE SYMPTOMS [Feb 


n one case, an individual who was very r 
laxed, a slowing of about 2 cycles per second 
was observed. Hyperventilation showed a 
diminished responsiveness and may be due 
to the subject’s reduced cooperation. 

Psychological Tests. 

A. Rorschach.—Controlled Rorschach tests 
were given to 5 subjects at the height of 
L..5.D. reaction. All tests given during 
L..5.D. reaction showed abnormalities prin- 


cipally of the schizophrenic or paranoic 


type. There was noticed autistic thinking 
with decreased organization, contamination 
responses, and lack of logical thinking, also 


negativism and diminished emotional inhi- 
bition indicating anxiety, depression, and ag- 
gression. One Rorschach test revealed a 
moderately schizophrenic picture with au- 
tistic thinking and withdrawal. 

B. Concrete-Abstract Thinking.—The tests 
consisted in employing proverbs and aphor- 
isms and recording the subject’s reaction. On 
the wh le, the results, especially the wide 
range of responses in abstraction and over- 
generalized and tangential thinking, were 
similar to those obtained in schizophrenic 
patients. 


DISCUSSION 


The common denominator in all our ex- 
periments with L.S.D. on normal subjects is 
a profound transformation and alteration of 
the psychic state of the individual, as it is 
1 common factor in all psychotic states. The 
various mental phenomena that we have re- 
ported were brought about by mere traces 
(1:1,000,000g/kg. weight) of a chemical, 
d-lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate. The 
mental phenomena show similarities to symp- 
toms that occur in actual psychoses. We 
noticed, predominantly, changes similar to 
those seen in schizophrenic patients. The 
subjects exhibited preeminently difficulties 
in thinking, which became retarded, blocked, 
autistic, and disconnected. The affect was 
shallow or there was clear-cut blunting. 
leelings of indifference and unreality with 
suspiciousness, hostility, and resentment also 
approximated schizophrenic phenomena. 
Hallucinations and delusional disturbances 
though present were much less prominent or 
striking, but together with the manifestation 


. 
> 
o 
| 


1952] M. 


RINKEL, H. J. 


DESHON, R. W. HYDE AND H. C. 


SOLOMON 577 


of depersonalization were most reminiscent 
of schizophrenic dissociation. 

To a much lesser degree were there simi- 
larities to the confusional states. Gross cloud- 
ing of consciousness was absent in our ex- 
periments, but illusional misinterpretations 
were not infrequently observed. 

A few cases showed similarities to the 
manic-depressive states, with changes in 
mood of euphoria or depression. However, 
only in one cyclothymic-pyknic subject the 
intensity was of a hypomanic or manic state. 

Delusions of grandiose or persecutory na- 
ture, familiar in the paranoic psychoses, were 
not seen. 

We mention the similarities of the ex- 
perimental phenomena to actual psychotic 
states in order to caution against fallacies 
that may occur in the interpretation of ex- 
perimental psychotic disturbances. The same 
caution that is warranted in the application 
of an animal experiment to a pathological 
condition in man is needed in the application 
of the psychiatric experiment to natural psy- 
chosis. Our experiments have brought to 
light the fact that, in a short space of time, 
under the influence of a mere trace of a 
chemical agent in normal subjects, a variety 
of mental symptoms occur that are similar 
to natural psychoses, and that in psychotic 
patients an accentuation of existing, or elici- 
tation of latent, schizophrenic phenomena 
takes place. It may be possible to assume that 
fundamentally the mechanism of origin of 
natural and experimental psychotic phenom- 
ena is a similar one: a chemical agent that 
pathologically stimulates selectively various 
higher, especially perceptive, brain centers 
with the result of hallucinatory and delu- 
sional experiences. H. J. DeShon, M. Rinkel, 
and H. C. Solomon(5) have already pointed 
out that the clinical effects of L.S.D. imply 
such an involvement of the higher and highest 
centers of the central nervous system, and 
perhaps of lower levels of the nervous system 
as well, 

Many authors assume that chemical endog- 
enous substances are the cause of schizo- 
phrenic psychosis. We must bear in mind 
that, in addition to d-lysergic acid, a great 
variety of seemingly unrelated chemical 
substances are capable of producing transi- 


tory psychotic-like symptoms. Although ob- 
servations are still too few to allow the for- 
mulation of a well-founded scientific theory 
as to the chemical origination of psychotic 
symptoms, we strongly believe that this 
branch of experimental psychiatry is pro- 
gressing in the right direction, and may 
some day provide an answer to the most per- 
plexing problems in psychiatry. 


SUMMARY 


1. The effects of minute amounts of d- 
lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate (L.S.D.) 
on normal subjects, with an age range of 
19-48 years, and some psychotic patients of 
the schizophrenic, depressive, and paranoic 
type are reported. 

2. Psychotic phenomena and _ alterations 
of the autonomic nervous system were ob- 
served. The psychotic phenomena were pre- 
dominantly schizophrenia-like symptoms that 
were manifested in disturbances of thought 
and speech; changes in affect and mood; 
perception ; production of hallucinations and 
delusions ; depersonalization and changes in 
behavior. The basic intelligence was not 
reduced. 

3. Electroencephalographic examinations 
at the height of the L.S.D. reaction revealed 
only slight changes, principally increased 
alpha rhythm, except in one case where there 
occurred a slowing of about 2 cycles per 
second. 

4. Rorschach tests showed abnormalities 
principally of the schizophrenic or paranoic 
type. Concrete-abstract thinking tests also, 
on the whole, showed responses similar to 
those obtained in schizophrenic patients. 

5. No scientific theory for the origination 
of the natural psychotic phenomena or psy- 
choses is being advanced, but the belief is 
expressed that experimental psychiatry pro- 
gresses in the right direction. 


Credits 


Our preparation of L.S.D. was supplied, 
in ampules containing 1 mg. substance, by 
courtesy of Professor E. Rothlin, Director 
of the Pharmacological Laboratories of San- 
doz Chemical Company, Inc., Basel, Switzer- 
land. 


7 
| 
% 
| 
; i 
: 
f 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Baruk, H. Psychiatrie. Medicale, Physiol 
gique et Experimental. Masson et Cie. Paris (VI) 
1938 

2. Becker, A. M. Zar Psyche path logie der 
sergsaure-Diathylamid-wirkung (On the p 
pathology of the effect of lysergic acid diethyla 
mide). Wien. Ztschr. Nervenh. 2: 402, 1 

3. Bush, Anthony K., and Johnson, Warren (¢ 
L.S.D. 25 as an aid in psychotherapy. Dis. Nerv 
Syst. 11: 241, Aug. 1950 

4. Condrau, Gion. Klinishche Erfahrungen ar 
(seisteskranken mit Lysergsaure-Diathylamid (Clin 
ical experiences in mental patients with lysergic 
acid-diethylamide ) Fjnar Munksgaard, Copen 
hagen, 24:9, 

5. DeShon, H. J., et al. Mental changes experi 
mentally produced by L.S.D. Unpublished artick 

6. Giacomo de, U Données biologiques sur lac 
tion psychopharmacologique de la diéthylamide de 
acide lysergique (Biological data on the p 
pathological action of Lysergic acid diethylamide ) 
Paper read at the Symposium on “Chimie cerebrale” 
of the International Congress of Psychiatry, Paris, 
Sept. 18-27, 1950. 

7. Giacomo de, U. La catatonia sperimentale 
Schizofrenie, 4: 195, 1934-1035 

8. Hoch, Paul H. Experimentally produced psy 
choses. Am. J. Psychiat., 107: 607, Feb, 1951. 

9g. Jong de, H. Die experimentelle Katatonie als 
viellach vorkommende Reaktionsform des Zentral 
nervensystems (Experimental catatonia, as a fre 
quent reaction type of the central nervous system). 
Ztschr, ges, Neur. Psychiat., 139: 468, 1932. 

10. Jong de, H., et Baruk, H. La catonie ex- 
perimentale par la Bulbocapnine. Paris: Masson et 
Cie, 1930 

11. Peters, F. Pharmacologische Untersuch- 
ungen uber Corydalisalkaloide (Pharmacological in 


EXPERIMENTAL SCHIZOPHRI 


| 
578 N A - 11 YMPTOMS | Feb. 
vestigation of lalisalkaloids). Arch f eri 
ment. Pat wie, 130, May 1904 
ic of the American Psychiatric Ass 
Id at the Annual Meeting of the A.P.A Bae > 
May 1 n Detroit. J. Clin. Experiment. Psy . 
chop Jan. 1951 (Van Ophuijsen Memorial 
2 it symposium on “Chimie cere : 
f rt W Id Congress f Psy hiatry, Paris, 
: Sept. 18-27, 195 Printed in “Les comptes-rendus i 
du Congrés.” 
deberg, O. Cher die pharmacologischen 
Wirkungen und die therapeutische Anwendung ein re 
ger Carbamin Sdure-Fster On the pharmacolo- 
# ical effect ! therapeut pplication of me of i 
the esters of the Carbamin acid Arch. ft. Experi ; : 
ment. Pathologie und Pharmakologie, 20: 203, 188 
14. Stael | } patho! der 
Zw ind Mitte crankuns Psychopa 
t! ot the a Cast ol the dier epl ak n). : 
we irch. Neurol. und Psychiat. §3: 374, 1944 > 
15. Stoll, A. Les Alcaloides de L’Ergot (The ; 
ilkaloids of ergot). Experientia 1: 250, 1945 
I Stoll, A., and Hofmann, A. Partialsynthese 
i von Alkaloiden vom Typus des Ergobasins (Par- 
tial thesis of alkaloids of the type of the ergo- ; 
ba ). Helv. Chim. Acta, 26: 044, 1043 
H 
3 17. Stoll, A., et al. Ueber die Isomerie von Ly- : 
rgsaure und Isolysergsiure (On the isomery of vs 
lvserei d and isolysergic acid) Helv. Chim 
Acta, 32 (No. 2): 506, 1949 ee 
1&8. Stoll, W \. Lysergsaure-didthylamid, ein 
Phantasticum aus der Mutter-korngruppe. (Lyser 
acid diethylamide, a phantasticon of the ergot : 
: group Schweizer Arch. Neurol. und Psychiat., ae 
60:1, 1947 
19. Vogel, H. Victor. Discussional remark to 
Hoch’s papel (ref. 8). 
j 

