





The 


Journal of Heredity 


(Formerly the American Breeders’ Magazine) 





Vol. VI, No. 7 | =e July, 1915 


CONTENTS 


The Georgia Velvet Bean, by John Belling. ................ Frontispiece 


An Aztec Narcotic, by W. E. Safford................ ere er ree 29] 
Mulattoes in the United States................. le, Tilees a SLi 
Sweet Cherry Breeding, by V. R. Gardner................. cee 312 
Race Betterment Conference. ................ eles pee ee eer 
New Publications: The Great Society, by Graham Wallas Se 
Black and White Ayrshires, by A. H. Kuhlman es ee ee 314 
Annual Meeting of the Association... .............. tN? a 
Kttersburg Strawberries, by Roy E. Clausen................. 21 
The First-Born’s Handicap, Review of a Book by Karl Pearson 332 
Hotel Accommodations at Berkeley...0.0......0....0....... oe he 
The Journal of Heredity is published monthly by the American Genetic 


Association (formerly called the American Breeders’ Association) for the benefit 
of its members. Canadian members who desire to receive it should send 25 cents 
a year, in addition to their regular membership dues of $2, because of additional 
postage on the magazine; foreign members pay 50 cents extra for the same 
reason. Subscription price to non-members, $2.00 a VCar, foreign postage extra; 
price of single copies, 25 cents. 

Entered as second-class matter February 24, 1915, at the postoffice at Washing- 
ton, D. C., under the act of August 24, 1912. Contents copyrighted 1915 by the 
American Genetic Association. Reproduction of articles or parts of articles 
permitted provided proper credit 1s given to author and to the Journal of Heredity 
(Organ of the American Genetic Association), Washington, D. C. 


Date of issue of this number, June 25, 1915. 














THE GEORGIA VELVET BEAN 


a 





ew 
— 
*, 
o%3 
.. 


Sa 


Several cases of “‘mutation”’ which have been thoroughly investigated can be regarded as due 
to the loss of a single genetic factor. Among these cases the best known is the occurrence of the 
‘false wild oat’ in pure strains of oats, which was the subject of a masterly monograph by Nilsson- 
Ehle. It appears not improbable that the loss of a genetic factor may occur occasionally in 
almost any pure line of plants. Sometimes the results are of agricultural value. 

The Florida velvet bean (Stizolobium deeringianum) has long been grown in Georgia as a soil 
improver and cattle food; usually from Florida seed, since it often fails to ripen seed farther 
north. Several farmers in Georgia, however, seem to have found an earlier strain in their fields, 
three years or more ago, and this strain is now extensively grown there. At the left, above, 1s a 
photograph of one plant of the Florida velvet bean, taken at Gainesville, Fla., on Sept. 19, 1914; 
all plants were similar and bore flowers and young pods. At the right is a photograph, taken on 
the same day, of one of three plants of the Georgia velvet bean, from seeds planted on the same 
day and in the same row as the Florida. The Georgia plants had dropped their leaves and ripened 
all their pods, which were dry and ready to pick. In time of appearance of the first flowers, they 
were as early as the Yokohama bean and nearly two months earlier than the Florida. From 
crosses between the Yokohama and the Florida, I conclude that the Florida has a factor for late 
flowering, H, which the Yokohama does not possess. Hence it may be supposed that the Georgia 
velvet arose from the Florida velvet by the ‘‘spontaneous”’ loss of the factor H. Since His dom1- 
nant, the early plants would appear only in the second generation.—John Belling, Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Gainesville, Florida. (Frontispiece.) 











AN AZTEC NARCOTIC 


(Lophophora williamsit). 


So-called ‘‘Sacred Mushroom,” or Teonanacatl, Still in Use by the Indians of 
Mexico and the United States, Producing Hallucinations of a Remark- 
able Nature, Is Identified with the Peyotl Zacatecensis, or 
Devil’s Root of Ancient Mexico, and the ‘‘Mescal 
Button”? of Texas.! 


W. E. SAFFORD 


Bureau of Plant Industry, U. 


CCOUNTS of many early travel- 
lers in America and missionaries 
to the Indians call attention to 
the veneration of the aborigines 

for various plants, showing that they 
attributed to all plants a spirit some- 
what like that of animals or even of 
man himself. To certain plants special 
honors were paid; others were avoided 
with dread; while others, with no pro- 
nounced virtues or evil properties, were 
little noticed. An example is given 
by a Mexican writer of the homage 
paid to a certain tree cut down in order 
to form a bridge over a stream in 
Michoacan. The people of the village 
were called together bv the governor 
and a religious service was held about a 
cross erected for the special ceremony, 
with candles burning before it and 
choristers assisting. A procession was 
formed which climbed the mountain, 
where the tree was growing. When 
it fell there came an aged Indian woman 
who, taking a few of its branches, laid 
them on the trunk where it had been 
cut, and consoling it with loving words 
begged that it might not feel humiliated 
or angry; for they had chosen it on 
account of its magnificent stature and 
ereat strength, and it was destined to 
span a mighty river, so that all the 
people of the land of Michoacan might 


1 Based upon a paper entitled ‘‘Identification of the Teonanacatl, or ‘Sacred 


S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 


cross over uponit. And before dragging 
it away they placed upon the place 
where it had fallen a piece of lighted 
candle, which had been left over from 
Holy Thursday; and they repeated in 
its honora very solemn htany, sprinkling 
it with holy water and much pulque.’ 
Qn the next day, having propitiated 
the spirit of the tree, they bore away the 
hewn beam to the bridge with much 
shouting and jubilation.’ 

The same author speaks of 
veneration paid by the Mexicans to 
certain medicinal plants and to the 
narcotics Qloliuhgui, the sacred Nan- 
acatl, the Peyotl, and the Prcietl (tobac- 
co), ‘to which they ascribe deity and 
with which they practice superstitions.” 


the 


METHODS OF EXORCISM 


The following example is among those 
eiven to show the method of exorcism 
emploved by the Aztec titzitls, or herb 
doctors. In this case the spirit of the 
Ololiuhqui, 1s addressed. ‘*Come now, 
come hither, Green \Voman, behold 
the green heat and the brown heat: 
remove thou the flaming or scarlet heat, 
the yellow heat, or by this token I send 
thee to the seven caves. And, I com- 
mand thee, put it not off till tomorrow 
or another day; for sooner or later thou 
wilt be compelled to do it. Who is the 


Mushroom’ 


of the Aztecs with the narcotic cactus, Lophophora, and an account of its ceremonial use in 
ancient and modern times,” read by the author May 4, 1915, at a meeting of the Botanical Society 


of Washington. 


Published by authority of the Secretary of Agriculture. 


2 Fermented sap of the Century Plant (A gave americana), which also yields the strong distilled 


spirit called mescal. 


’ Jacinto de la Serna, ‘‘ Manual de Ministros par el conocimiento de idolatrias y extirpacion de 


ellas.”’ 


In Documentos inéditos para la Historia de Espana, vol. 104, p. 159-160. 


291 














THE AZTEC NARCOTIC CACTUS, TEONANACATL 
‘“God’s Flesh,’’ or ‘Sacred Mushroom”’ of the Aztecs—dises cut from the crown of the cactus 
Lophophora wilhamsi and dried. Photograph of specimens received by t:e Bureau of 
Chemistry, U.S. Department of Agriculture from the Indian Office in 1914. Now widely 
used as a narcotic by Indians on United States Reservations.—Natural size. (Fig. 1.) 














Safford: An 


god—the so powerful and superior one— 
who can destroy the work of thy hands’ 
I command it, I, the prince of enchant- 
ment.”’ Others using the Hueinacazth 
(‘‘ereat-ear’’), Mecaxochitl  (‘‘cord- 
flower’’), and Coanenepilli (“‘serpent’s 
tongue’’), repeat the following: ‘‘Come 
hither, thou, the yellow and ardent 
red one; come and expel the green 
pain, the brown pain, which now wishes 
to take away the life of the son of the 
gods!’? And with the herb Atlinan 
(‘““water-weed’’), “‘I invoke thee, my 
mother, thou of the precious waters! 
Who is the god or who the so powerful 
one that wishes to destroy and burn 
my enchantment’? Ea! Come _ thou, 
sister of the Green Woman, whom I 
am about to go and leave in the seven 
caves, where the green pain, the brown 
pain, will hide itself. Go and _ rub 
with thy hands the entrails of the 
bewitched one, so that thou mayst 
prove thy power and fall not into 


| Pe 


disgrace ! 


EARLY HISTORY OF TEONANACATL 


Bancroft, in referring to the narcotics 
used by the ancient Mexicans, mentions 
one, which was believed by the early 
Spaniards to be a fungus. In writing 
of their ceremonial feasts he 


Says: 
“Among the ingredients used to make 
their drinks more intoxicating the 
most powerful was the  teonanacatl, 


‘flesh of God,’ a kind of mushroom 
which excited the passions and caused 
the partaker to sce snakes and divers 
other visions.’? This information was 
undoubtedly derived from accounts 
of the Spanish padres, one of whom, 
Bernardino Sahagun, writing before 
the vear 1569, states that 1t was the 
Chichimeca Indians of the north who 
first discovered the properties and made 
use of these “evil mushrooms which 
intoxicate like wine.’” 

They were gathered in the territory 
now northern Mexico and southern 
Texas, preserved by drying, and carried 

‘Bancroft, H. H., Native Races, 2: 360. 

5 Sahagun, Bernardino (1499-1590). 


\ztec Narcotic 





293 


southward. The inhabitants of 
Valley of Mexico knew them only 
in their dry state. It is also very 
probable that the early writers who 
recorded their use had seen them only 
when dry and never knew then: as 
living plants. Francisco Hernandez, 
the physician sent by Philip II in 1570 
to study the resources of Mexico, or 
New Spain, describes them under the 
heading ‘‘De nanacatl seu Fungorum 
genere.’ From the harmless” white- 
mushrooms (1ztacnanacame), red-mush- 
rooms (tlapalnanacame), and yellow 
orbicular-mushrooms (chimalnanacame), 
used for food, he distinguished them as 
teyhuint:, which signifies ‘‘intoxicating.’”® 

In this connection it 1s interesting 
to note that this Nahuatl word, tevhurntz, 
or teyuinti, (from yuinti, to be drunk) 
survives, in the form of te;uino or tehuino 
in the State of Jalisco, Mexico, and 
tesuino or tizwin in the south-western 
United States, as the name of certain 
intoxicating drinks, the principal of 
which is a kind of beer brewed from 
malted maize. 


the 


DETERMINATION OF THE DRUG 

Three centuries of investigation have 
failed to reveal an endemic fungus 
used as an intoxicant in Mexico, nor 
is such a fungus mentioned cither in 
works on mycology or pharmacography ; 
vet the belief prevails even now that 
there 1s a narcotic Mexican fungus, 
and it 1s supported by Siméon in his 
monumental dictionary of the Nahuatl 
language, in which the following defin1- 
tions occur: 

‘ Teonanacatl, espece de petit cham- 
pignon qui a mauvais gout, enivre ct 
cause des hallucinations; il est médicinal 
contre les fievres et la goutte.’” 

“ Teyuinti, qui enivre quelqu’un, eniv- 
rant; teyuinti mnanacatl, champignon 
enivrant.’”* 

In connection with his study of the 
economic plants of the Moexicans and 
the Indians of the south-western United 


1875. 
Hist. Nueva Espana (ed. Bustamente), vol. 3, p. 118. 


6‘*Ouoniam inebrare solent, Teyhuinti nomine nuncupati sunt, et e fulvo in fuscum vergant 
colorem, risum inopportunum concitent, imaginemque citra risum inebriantium possint exhibere.’’ 


Hernandez, Francisco (1514-1578). 


Siméon, Rémi, Dict. de la langue Nahuatl, p 
S Op. cit. p. 412. 


Hist. Pl. Nov. Hisp. (ed. Rom.) 2:357. 
. 436, 1885. 


1790. 








294 








The Journal of Heredity 


THE “DEVIL’S ROOT” 


Peyotl Zacatecensis (Lophophora wil- 


liamsit). ‘““The root is of nearly 
medium size, sending forth no 
branches nor leaves above ground, 
but with a certain wooliness adher- 
ing to it. 
properties! this root scarcely issues 
forth, but conceals itself in the 
ground, as though unwilling to 
harm those who may discover it 
and eat it.’’—Francisco Hernandez, 
1576. Photograph natural size. 
(Fig. 2. 


[On account of its magic 


States the writer has sought diligently 
for a fungus having the _ properties 
attributed to the teonanacatl. As this 
narcotic was used by various tribes of 
Chichimecas, and the Chichimecas in- 
habited the territory situated in what is 
now northern Mexico and the south- 
western United States, it was natural 
to look for the plant in this region. No 
such fungus, however, was discovered, 
but in its place a narcotic plant having 
properties exactly like those attributed 
to the teonanacatl was encountered; 
moreover, one form of this plant, when 
prepared as a drug, resembles a dried 
mushroom so remarkably that at first 
elance it will even deceive a trained 
mycologist. It is discoid in form and 
apparently peltate when seen from 
below; but the upper surface bears 
tufts of silky hairs, and a close inspection 
reveals the fact that it is the crown of a 
small fleshy spineless cactus which has 
been cut off and dried. The cactus 
in question, Lophophora williamsiz, when 
entire, resembles a carrot or radish 
rather than a mushroom, and when cut 
into longitudinal shees or irregular 
pieces, would never be mistaken for a 
fungus. For this reason the drug 
prepared in the latter form was _ not 
recognized in southern AMlexico as the 
same as the discoid form, and it was 
called peyotl by the Aztecs, while the 
name nanacatl was applied to the latter. 
IDENTITY WITH THE NARCOTIC PEYOTL 

Sahagun, who described the drugs of 
the ancient Mexicans from specimens 
brought to him by Indian herb doctors, 
failed to recognize the identity of the 
teonanacatl and pevyotl of the Chichi- 
mecas, although he attributes similar 
narcotic properties to each. The latter 
he describes as follows: 

“There is another herb, hke tunas’® 
of the earth; it is called pezotl; it 1s 
white; it is produced in the north coun- 
try: those who eat or drink it see visions 
either frightful or laughable; — this 
intoxication lasts two or three days and 
then ceases; it is a common food of the 
Chichimeeas. for it sustains them and 
vives them courage to fight and not 
feel fear nor hunger nor thirst; and they 


' Tuna, the Spanish name for the fruit of the Opuntia, or prickly pear. 




















Safford: 


say that it 
danger.’’!° 

The plant itself was described by 
Hernandez as follows, under the heading 
De Peyotl Zacatecensi, seu radice molli 
et lanuginosa. 

The root is of nearly medium size, 
sending forth no branches nor leaves 
above ground, but with a certain woolli- 
ness adhering to it on account of which 
it could not be aptly figured by me. 
Both men and women are said to be 
harmed by it. It appears to be of a 
sweetish taste and moderately hot. 
Ground up and applied to painful 
joints it 1s said to give relicf. Wonder- 
ful properties are attributed to this 
root (if any faith can be given to what 
is commonly said among them on this 
point). It causes those devouring it 
to be able to foresee and to predict 
things; such, for instance, as whether 
on the following day the enemy will 
make an attack upon them; or whether 
the weather will continue favorable; 

* to discern who has stolen from them 
some utensil or anything else; and other 
things of hke nature which the Chichi- 
mecas really believe they have found 
out. On which account this root 
scarcely issues forth. but conceals itself 
in the ground, as if it did not wish to 
harm those who discover it and eat it."!! 

From the above description, which 
applies perfectly to the plant trom 
Zacatecas shown in fig, 2, 1t follows 
that the Peyotl zacatecensis of Hernandez 
is identical with Lophophora williams. 
Specimens of the drug collected at 
Zacatecas by the late Dr. Edward Palmer 
are shown in fig. 3. They bear little 
resemblance to the mushroom-like but- 


protects them from. all 


tons shown in fig. 1, and it 1s not 
surprising that they should have been 
supposed — to be distinct from the 


teonanacatl by the carly Spanish writers. 


RAIZ DIABOLICA, OR DEVIL'S ROOT 


By this name it 
Padre Jose Ortega 
use by the Cora 
Historia del Nayarit, 


was designated by 
who tells of its 
Indians in his 
published anony- 


An Aztec 





Narcotic 295 
mously at Barcelona in 1/754, and 
republished under his own name in 


1887. In describing their 
dances he writes as follows: 

“Close to the musician was seated 
the leader of the singing whose business 
it was to mark the time. Each of these 
had his assistants to take his place when 
he should become fatigued. Nearby 
was pli iced a tray filled with peyote 
which is a diabolical root (razz diabolica) 
that is ground up and drunk by them 
so that they may not become weakened 
by the exh: lusting effects of so long a 
function, which they began by forming 
as large a circle of men and women as 
could occupy the space of ground that 
had been swept off for this purpose. 
One after the other went dancing in a 
ring or marking time with their fect, 
keeping in the middle the musician and 
the choir-master whom they invited, 
and singing in the same unmusical tune 
(el mismo descompasado tono) that he 
set them. They would dance all night, 
from 5 o'clock in the evening to 7 o'clock 
in the morning, without stopping nor 
leaving the cirele. When the dance 
was ended all stood who could hold 
themselves on their feet: for the majority 
from the peyote and the wine which 
they drank were unable to utilize their 
legs to hold themselves upright. "7? 

The early missionarics were Opp sed 
to the drug not so much on account of 
its physiological cffeets upon the Indians 
buat because of its connection with 
certain superstitious rites connected with 
their primitive rehgion. [Eating the 


nocturnal 


teonanacall, peyotl, was declared by 
the padres to be almost as grave a sin 
as eating human flesh. In a_ hittle 
rehgious manual published by Fray 
Bartholomé Garcia in 1760, for the 
use of the missionarics to the Indians 


of San Antonio, 
questions, to be 
are printed: 


Texas, the tollowing 
used in the confessional. 


‘Has comido carne de gente?” (Hast 
thou eaten flesh of man?) 
‘Has comido, el peyote?’ (Hast 


eaten the pevote 7) 


10 Sahagun (1499-1590). Hist. general de las cosas de Nueva Espana (ed. Bustamente) 3:241. 
1830. 
1 Hernandez (1514-1578). De Hist. Plant. Nov. Hisp. 3:70. 1790. 
2 Ortega, Padre José (d. 1700). Hist. del Nay: rit, < 22- = new ed.) 1887. 
’ Garcia, Fr. Bartholomé. Manual para administrar los Santos Sacramentos ete. p. 15. 1760. 








PEYOTE OF ZACATECAS, Lophophora williamsii 
This form of the narcotic drug was called by the early Spanish missionaries ‘ Raiz diabolica,’ 
or Devil's Root. Photograph of material in the Economic Collection, U. S. Department 
of Agriculture, collected at Zacatecas, Mexico, by the late Edward Palmer. (Fig. 3.) 


, 











Saftord: 


The name teonanacatl 1s now obsolete. 
The drug is called by various names 
among the Indians using it: xicort by 
the Huicholes of Jalisco; kori, or 
likuli, by the Tarahumaris of Chi- 
huahua; huatari by the Cora Indians of 


the Tepic mountains; kamaba by the 
Tepehuanes of Durango; ho by the 


Mescalero Apaches of New Mexico, who 
formerly ranged as far south as Coa- 
huila; seni by the Kiowas; and wokowt by 
the Comanches, some of whom formerly 
lived in the state of Chihuahua. The 
name peyote has survived as a gencral 
commercial term; and the mushroom- 
like dises from the Rio Grande region 
are now widely spread among the north- 
Indians’ of 


ern the United States 
under the misleading names of ‘*mescal 


buttons’? or ‘‘mescal beans,” as well 
as under the Nahuatl name peyote. 

This name is of Aztee origin, derived 
from peyotl, the Nahuatl 
“cocoon.” That its application to Lo- 
phophora was not general in early 
times is shown by the fact that Dr. 
Leonardo Oliva, professor of Pharma- 
cology at the University of Guadalajara, 
declared it a singular thing that the 
peyote was regarded by the Mexicans 
as a plant having the virtue of giving 
unusual endurance to those using it, 
and the power of walking great distances 
without tiring. The only plant known 
to him by this name Re a vecllow- 
flowered Composite, with velvety tuber- 
ous roots, which from their form and 
indument might easily be likened to the 
cocoon of a moth.!! As a matter of 
fact this name is still commonly applied 
to several species of Cacalia, the 
principal one of which, Cacalia cordifolia, 
is common in the vicinity of Guadala- 
jara, Jalisco, in the drug markets of 
which the root is offered for sale under 
the name pevote. 


CACALIA ALSO CALLED PEYOTL 


section 
Tussilago, 
this genus 
xochimulcensts 
both of which 
neighborhood 
in the valley of Mexico, having 


belongs to the 
which includes Arnica, 
medicinal piants. To 
should - referred the Pevotl 
and the Nanacace otf Hern: indez, 
are composites endemic in the 
of Nochimuilco, 


The genus Cacalhia 
senecioneae, 
and other 


14 6° 


ISS4. 


Farmacologia 2:392. 


An Aztec Narcotic 


word for 


Es singular que los mexicanos miraban el Pe vote 
como un medicamento propio para dar aptitud a andar sin cansarse 





297 


a single stem growing from the middle”of 
a Cluster of nut-like tubers, with a terminal 
cluster of yellow-flowered rayless heads sub- 
tended by a scarious involucre. They should 
not be confused with the narcotic cactus 
called peyotl or peyote. 

The peyote of Guadalajara, Cacalia cordifolia, 
was first described botanically by Kunth from 
specimens collected by Humboldt and Bonpland 
at Santa Rosa, Mexico. Its tubers, about the 
size of walnuts or hickory nuts, are covered 
with soft woolly hairs. From the center one 
of the cluster rises a single smooth terete 
stem bearing alternate, thickish, conspicuously 
net-veined leaves. The lower leaves are long- 
petioled, the upper ones, near the terminal 
inflorescence, are short-stemmed and = much 
smaller. The blades are roundish or broadly 
ovate, cordate at the base and angled on the 
margin. The flower heads are arranged in the 
form of a corymb, with many tubular 5-toothed 
flowers crowded on a naked flat receptacle, 
subtended by an involucre cupshaped in form, 
composed of many narrow acute teeth. There 


are no marginal ray-flowers. The = disc- 
flowers have both stamens and _ pistils, the 
iatter with an exserted forked stigma. The 


pappus is pilose, somewhat resembling thistle- 
down when mature. 

Fig. 4 shows the woolly tubers, reticulate 
leaves, and mature inflorescense of Cacalia 
cordifolia, photographed from material in the 
United States National Herbarium, collected 
by the writer in February, 1907, in the vicinity 
of Guadal: yjara, state of Jalisco, Mexico. 

Other specimens in the herbarium are from 
the Pedregal, or lavabeds, near Tlalpan, in the 
Federal District of Mexico, corresponding 
very closely with the descriptions of Peyotl 
xochimilcensis of Hernandez: and from Alvarez, 
state of San Luis Potosi, where the tubers, 
locally known as cachan, are offered for sale 
in the drug-markets as an aphrodisiac and a 
remedy for sterility. 


THE GENUS LOPHOPHORA 


The genus Lophophora was based by Coulter 
upon a small plant described in 1845 by 
Lemaire, in the Allgemeine Garten-Zeitung, 
under the name _  FEchinocactus williamsit. 
This plant, though suggesting certain echino- 
cacti ee its form differs essentially from all 
specie s of that genus in its fruit, which is devoid 
of scales, and resembles the smooth club- 
shaped “chilitos” of the Mamillarias. The 
plant is also devoid of spine-bearing areoles. 
In 1886 it was referred to the genus Anhalo- 
nium, which it resembles in its flowers and fruits, 
but from the tvpe of which it differs in several 
important features. 

The genus Anhalonium, defined by Lemaire 
in 1839, proved to be identical with the genus. 
Ariocarpus previously established by Se *heid- 
weiler, the type of which, Ariocarpus retusus, 
described in 1838, is specifically identical with 
the plant described the following year by 


(cl que conozco es de las Compuestas ) 
Oliva, Lecc. de 





inal Herbarium 


q 
| 


I. 


) have medicinal prop- 


IS. Na 


B. 


COCOONS 


es 


. 4 
4 ‘ 
4e 


eS ees 
Sinan ee 4 See : 
. a * * 
ee 
we 


W. 


~ 


Photograph of specimen in the [| 
bras 


The tubers, called pevyotl! | 
/ 


OF JALISCO, Cacalia cordifolia. 


‘Composite, or daisy family, bearing velvety tubers; closely allied to the Pe yotl/ 


PEYOTE 


y but they are not narcotic. 


Xochimilcensis of Hernandez. 
collected near Guadalaiara in 190 


A member of th 
erties 











° 


Safford: 


Lemaire as Anhalonium prismaticum.'» This 
fact was recognized in 1845, by Salm-Dyck, 
who, however, adopted the generic name 
Anhalonium.6 On account of the laws of 
priority the generic name Ariocarpus must be 
retained and_ its synonym <Anhalonium be 
dropped. 

In the genus Artocarpus (Anhalonium) the 
tubercles are very prominent, usually more or 
less triangular or pyramidal in shape, and 
imbricating somewhat lke the scales of an 
artichoke. The lower and upper parts are 
very different, the former comparatively thin 
and flat, while the upper exposed triangular 
part is very thick and hard. ‘The lower surface 
of the tubercles is smooth and keeled, the upper 
surface is plane, as in Ariocarpus retusus; or 
convex and irregularly mamiullate, with the 
acuminate apex bearing a woolly pulvillus, as in 
Ariocarpus furfuraceus; or more or less fissured 
and presenting a warty appearance, as in Ario- 
carpus fissuratus. One of these species 1s figured 
by Lumholtz under the name of hzkort sunami," 
and it is said by him to be more powerful than 
the common hikort sunamt (Artocarpus will- 
lamsit), but he offers no evidence that it has 
narcotic properties. The Indians declare that 
if you wear this plant as an amulet the bears 
cannot harm you nor the deer run away from 
vou. The latter superstition is also held in 
connection with the closely related Arzocarpus 
kotschubeyanus, commonly called** pezuna de 
venado,” (fig. 5) probal Iv on account of the 
close resemblance of its tubercles to the hoof of 
a deer. 

In the genus Lophophora the tubercles are 
quite unlike those of Ariocarpus (Anhalonium), 
being devoid of a differentiated upper part and 
having the lower part broad and rounded. 
Instead of being developed into pyri umidal 
triangular projections the tubercles often 
coalesce into broad continuous vertical or 
somewhat spiral ribs (fig. 7), and in young 
specimens the plant appears almost smooth, 
with the tubercles separated by shallow 1m- 
pressed lines (fig. 9). 


LOPHOPHORA WILLIAMSII 


Lophophora williamsit (Anhalonitum william- 
sit Lemaire) 1s a succulent spineless cactus, 
usually shaped like a turnip or carrot with a 
depressed-globose or hemispherical head bearing 
low inconspicuous tubercles and a tapering tap 
root. The tubercles occur normally tn longi- 
tudinal ribs, but in some forms of the plant 
they are arranged spirally or irregularly. In 
the center of each tubercle there is a flower- 
bearing areole with a dense tuft of erect hairs, 
from the midst of which the flower issues. 
When mature the tuft of hairs persists as a 
pulvillus in the form of a pencil or brush ot 
hairs. Unlike the plants of the genera Echino- 
cactus and Mamiullaria there is no spine-bearing 
areole. The flower (fig. 6) 1s very much like 

lo See Scheidwetler, Bull. Aca 
Cact. &® 1839. 

16 See Anhalontum retusum Salm-Dyck 

7 Scribners “Finite el 16:451. 1894. 


~ 


Is See Hennings, Gartenflora 37:410, figs. 1-4. 


a Cact 


? 





An Aztec Narcotic 299 


that of an Ariocarpus, without a well-de'ined 
calyx, but with the outer floral leaves sepal-like 
and the inner ones petal-like and rose-tinted, 
with a darker median line on the back of each, 
giving to it a feather-like appearance. The 
stamens are numerous, with white filaments 
and bright vellow anthers; and the style bears 
four pale vellow stigmas projecting above the 
mass of stamens. The ovary 1s devoid. of 
scales, in which respect it differs from that of 
the genus Echinocactus, and the smooth 
crimson or rose-colored club-shaped fruit 
resembles that of a Mamuillaria. The plants 
grow either solitary, or, more frequently, in 
clusters of several from a common base. 
Lophephora wilhiamsit is quite variable, 
sometimes its ribs instead of being vertical 
are more or less diagonal or spiral, and instead 
of being separated by straight grooves the 
latter are sinuous; or the tubercles may be 
irregularly arranged. One form was described 
by ‘Hennings as a distinct species under the 
name Anhalonium lewinii:'> but the type plant 
described and figured by him was a boiled up 
‘““mescal-button™ obt ined from Parke, Davis 
& Co., of Detroit, Michigan, in all probability 
gathered 1n the vicinity of Laredo, Texas. In 
this form the ribs are usually thirteen in 
number separated by strongly sinuous grooves 
(fig. 9). Sometimes there are twelve ribs 
or even as few as nine; while in the typical 
L. williamsia there are usually eight ribs 
separated by straight or almost. straight 
lines, or sometimes as many as 10. It has 
been wrongly asserted that the petals of 
L. lewintt are yellow: typical plants of this 
form now blooming in the cactus house of the 
United States Department of Agriculture 
(May, 1915) have rose-tinted flowers 1n no way 
distinguishable 1n form or color from those of 
L. williamsi. Indeed, in specimens collected 
by Lloyd in Zacatecas typical plants of 
L. williamstt and L. lewinit are to be found in 
the same cluster growing from a common hbase. 
Another form (fig. 10) departs from the typical 
L. williamsit even more than the plant figured 
by Hennings. It has the tubercles more or 
less irregularly’ arranged and separated into 
angular areas by intersecting lines. In young 


plants the surfa 1S smooth, but in’ older 
plants (fig. 8) the tubercles are often promi- 
nent. At first the writer was inclined to 


separate this form trom both L. 
L. lewitntt, but atter carefully 
number of specimens th 
connected by intermediate forms, and they 
cannot, therefore, be specifically distinct. 
Indeed as they sometimes grow from the same 
base 1t would be improper even to designate 
them as varieties. 


williams and 
comparing a 
eC three types seem to be 


GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 


The general range of the genus 
Lophophora 1s from southern Texas 


’ 


Rovale des Sciences de Bruxelles 5:492, 1 pl. 1838. Lemaire, 


Hort. Dyck. 15. 1845. 


SSS. 





300 

















DEER-HOOF CACTUS 


Ariocarpus kotschubevanus, a plant with 
supposed magic properties, highly 
prized by 'ndians of northern Mex- 
ico, Who declare that if the hunter 
wears this cactus (here shown 
natural size), the deer can not run 
away from him. It probably owes 
this prestige to the resemblance of 
its tubercics to the hoofs of a deer. 
(Fig. 5.) 





FRUIT AND FLOWER 
Flower of Lophophora williamsii (at the 
right)with rose-tinted petals, issuing 
from a tuft of hairs, while the fruit 
(shown at the left) 1s pink or crim- 
son. Drawing natural size. (Fig. 6.) 


along the valley of the Rio Grande, 
from the mouth of the Pecos River 
south-eastward, to southern Querétaro, 
Mexico. Definite localities in which 
plants have been collected are the 
following: 

Texas.—Mouth of the Pecos River, 
Walliam Lloyd; vicinity of Laredo, 
Mrs. Anna f. Nickels (specimens now 
erowing in the cactus house of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture); near 
Ojuclos, ©. Ochoa (dried specimens in 


19 See Safford, W. E., ‘‘Cactaceae of Northeastern and Central Mexico,”’ 
528 pl. 3, fig. 5. 


for 1908, p. 1909, 





The Journal of Heredity 


the form of ‘‘mescal buttons”’ in the 
economic collection of the U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture); near Aguilares 
(specimens sent by parcel post to the 
Menominee Indians, now in possession 
of the Bureau of Chemistry). 
Tamaulipas.—In the vicinity of Nuevo 
Laredo, Mrs. Anna bh. Nickels; near 


Camargo, south shore of the Rio 
Grande at the mouth of the Rio San 
Juan, fk. A. Goldman, of the U. S. 


Biological Survey. 

Nuevo Leon.—Vicinity of Monterrey, 
Professor Emilio Rodriguez, (specimens 
growing in the cactus garden of the 
Colegio Civil, at Monterrey).! 

Coahuila.—Cerro del Pueblo, near 
Saltillo, Dr. Kkdward Palmer (living 
plants in cactus house, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture; dried plants in economic 
collection). 

Chihuahua.—Near Jimenez, in_ the 
Sierra de Amole (locality in which the 


Tarahumari Indians collect their sup- 
ply for ceremonial purposes); near 
Santa Rosalia de Camargo, in_ the 


Sierra de Amargosa (also visited by the 
collecting expeditions of the Tarahumari 
Indians, as stated by Lumholtz). 

San Luis Potosi.—Vicinity of Real de 
Catorce as cited by Diguet (locality 
whence the Huichol Indians obtain 
their supply). 

Zacatecas.—Vicinity of Cedros, near 
Mazapil, near northern boundary, Pro- 
fessor IF. Ek. Lloyd and Dr. E. Chaffey 
(living plants in the cactus house of 
the U. 5. Department of Agriculture; 
also dried specimens from the market 
of the city of Zacatecas in the economic 
collection). 

Querétaro.— Near Higuerillos, not far 
from the city of Querétaro, Dr. J. N. 
Rose (specimen in cactus house of the 
Department of Agriculture). 


CHEMICAL HISTORY OF THE DRUG 


Attention was called to the use of 
this plant as an intoxicant by the 
Indians by Mrs. Anna B. Nickels of 
Laredo, Texas, who collected material 
for Parke, Davis and Co., of Detroit, 


Michigan, and for other wholesale 
dealers in drugs. Mrs. Nickels sug- 
In Smithsonian Report 














Safford: An Aztec Narcotic 


gested that a chemical and therapeutic 
study of the plant be made, and stated 
that the plant was also used for “ break- 
ing fevers,’’ and that the tops cut off 
and dried were locally known as *‘ mescal 
buttons.”” The accompanying photo- 
graph of this veteran cactus-lover and 
assiduous collector, in her cactus garden 
at Laredo, was taken by David Griffiths 
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 

A serious study of its properties was 
first begun in 1888, by Dr. L. Lewin of 
Berlin, who used for the purpose specti- 
mens obtained from Parke, Davis, and 
Company. It was afterwards studied 
by Dr. Arthur Heffter of the Pharma- 
cological Institute of the University of 
Leipsic; and, in the United States, by 
a group of persons at Washington, 
centering in the Bureau of American 
thnology, and including as associates 
the Division of Chemistry of the 
Department of Agriculture for chemical 
analysis; Drs. D. W. Prentiss and Fran- 
cis P. Morgan of the department of 
Materia Medica and Therapeutics of 
the Columbian University, for the 
study of its physiological properties; 


and the Botanical Division of the 
Department of Agriculture for the 
settlement of botanical questions. The 


material for the studies carried on in 
this country was supplied by James 
Mooney of the Bureau of American 
ethnology. The chemical analysis was 
made by Urvin E. Ewell, who announced 
his results in a paper entitled ‘The 
Chemistry of the Cactaceae,”’ read 
before the Washington Section of the 
American Chemical Society, April 9, 
1896.79 

Dr. Lewin obtained from the drug 
an alkaloidal substance which he called 
anhalonin. This substance was a 
brown, syrup-like liquid, having an 
intense alkaline reaction. From it Heft- 
ter obtained three alkaloids; the first, 
which he called anhalonin, was 1n the 
form of brilliant, colorless, needle-shaped 
crystals; the second was in the torm of 
non-lustrous, white rhombic tables; the 
third was an amorphous and very 
poisonous alkaloid left behind by the 
mother liquor. 


301 


Mr. Ewell found, in addition to the 
alkaloids, at least two resinous bodies, 
and a wax-like substance insoluble 
in cold alcohol but soluble in hot alcohol, 
petroleum ether, and chloroform. The 
resinous bodies, of a dark brown color 
and thick consistency, have the char- 
acteristic taste and odor of the moistened 
drug itself. It was suggested that the 
drug’s activity might be due to these 
resinous bodies rather than to the 
alkaloids. One marked peculiarity of 
the plant is that about one-half its ash 
proved to be potassium chloride—a 
proportion greater than that hitherto 
found in any other plant.?! 


PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION 


Further investigations are about to 
be made in the Bureau of Chemistry by 
Dr. Lyman F. Kebler, chicf of the divi- 
sion of drugs, and Dr. Francis P. Morgan, 
whose work 1n this drug has already been 
referred to. 

The various accounts of the cffects 
of Lophophora differ considerably; but 
nearly all of those who have expert- 
mented with it, including Dr. 5. Weir 
Mitchell, agree in the statement that 
it produces beautiful color visions. The 
pupil becomes dilated and remains 1n 
this condition for some time, often for 
twenty-four hours, and at the same 
time there is a slight loss of the power 
of accommodation and consequent dis- 
turbance of vision. Depression of the 
muscular system has been observed as 
one of its effects, cither well marked or 
indicated only by inactivity and lazy 
contentment; and sometimes this was 
followed by partial anesthesia of the 
skin after the effects of the drug began 
to disappear. Sometimes the patient 
was seized with nausea and vomiting, 
caused perhaps by the bitter and 
unpleasant taste of the drug when first 
put into the mouth. In some cascs 
there was a marked loss of the sense ot 
time. The effects of the drug have been 
compared with those of Indian hemp 
(Cannabis indica), which has found its 
way from the Eastern Hemisphere 
to Mexico and the southwest United 
States, where it 1s known as marihuana; 


20 See Ewell, Erwin E., *‘ The Chemistry of the Cactaceae,”’ in Journ. Amer. Chem. Soc. 18: 624- 


643, 1896. 
21 Prentiss, D. W. and Morgan, Francis P., 


in Therap. Gazette 19, Sept. 


16, 1895, p. 579. 


I 








The Journal of Heredity 





LOPHOPHORA WILLIAMSII 


Typical form with defined ribs. 


Photograph of specimen in the Cactus House of the U.S. 


Department of Agriculture, collected in 1910, on the Hacienda de Cedros, near Mazapuil, 


state of Zacatecas, Mexico, by Dr. Elswood Chaffey. 


but instead of the exciting effect of the 
latter, Lophophora produces rather a 
state of ideal content, with no tendency 
to commit acts of violence. 

A detailed account of the experiments 
of Drs. Prentiss and Morgan was pub- 
lished in the Therapeutic Gazette of 
September 16, 1895, pp. 580-585." 


CEREMONIAL USE BY THE INDIANS 


The first to bring to public notice the 
ceremonial use of this narcotic by 
existing tribes of Indians was James 


22 San 
20: 4. 


also Prentiss and Morgan, 
1896. 


‘Therapeutic uses of Mescal Buttons.”’ 


Photograph natural size. (Fig. 7.) 
Mooney of the Bureau of American 
Kthnology, in a paper read betore the 
Anthropological society of Washington 
on November 3, 1891. His attention 
had been directed to it while making 
investigations among the Kiowas, who 
are descendants of one of the tribes 
known to the Aztecs by the name ot 
“Chichimecas.” Mr. Mooney found that 
these Indians attribute divine 
to the drug and the ceremony attending 
its use is of the nature of a religious rite 


pt WeTS 


Theray ».. Gazette 

















Safford: 





An Aztec 


Narcotic 303 


aie 


ANOTHER TYPE OF LOPHOPHORA 


Form described by Hennings as a distinct species, Anhalonium lewinit, but 
in the same cluster with the typical form, growing from the same root. 


specimen in the Cactus House of the U. 


a 


state of Zacatecas, Mexico, in 1908, by F. 


in which all the tribes of the southern 
plains take part. 

The Kiowas and other Indians of 
Oklahoma receive the greater part of 
their supply of the drug from traders 





who bring it frem the vicinity of 
Laredo, Texas, in the form of “*mescal 
buttons,” which are identical with 
the teonanacatl of the ancient Alexi- 
cans. Like the ancient Mexican feasts 
referred to above, their mectings 
are nocturnal, usually beginning 


Saturday night. A summary of Alr. 
Mooney’s account was published in the 








often occurring 
Photograph of 
S. Department of Agriculture, collected in the 
EK. Lloyd. Photograph natural size. (Fig. 8.) 


Therapeutic Gazette of September 16, 
i895. A more detailed description was 
publish d by Mr. Moone V the following 
January, in the same journal, from which 
the following extracts are taken. 

“The cercmony occupies from twelve 
to fourteen hours, beginning about 9 or 
10 o'clock and lasting until nearly noon 
the next day. Saturday night 1s now 
the time usually selected, in deterence 
to the white man’s idea of Sunday as a 
sacred day and a day of rest. The 
worshipers sit in a circle around the 
inside of the sacred tipi, with a fire 





304 


blazing in the center. The exercises 
open with a prayer by the leader, who 
then hands each man four mescals, 
which he takes and cats in quick 
succession, first plucking out the small 
tuft of down from the center. In 
cating, the dry mescal is first chewed 
in the mouth, then rolled into a large 
pellet between the hands, and swallowed, 
the man rubbing his breast and the 
back of his neck at the same time to 
aid the descent. Arter this first round 
the leader takes the rattle, while his 
assistant takes the drum, and together 
they sing the first song four times, with 
full voices, at the same time beating the 
drum and shaking the rattle with all the 
strength of their arms. The drum and 
rattle are then handed to the next 
couple, and so the song goes on round 
and round the circle—with only a break 
for the baptismal ceremony at midnight, 
and another for the daylight ceremony 

until perhaps 9 o’clock the next 
morning. Then the instruments are 
passed out of the tipi, the sacred foods 
are caten, and the ceremony is at an 
end The dinner, which is given 
an hour or two after the ceremony, 1s 
always as claborate a feast as the host 
can provide. The rest of the day 1s 
spent in gossiping, smoking, and singing 
the new songs, until 1t 1s time to return 
home.’’?8 


AMONG THE TARAHUMARIS 


Lumbholtz, in his account of the plant- 
worship of the Tarahumari Indians of 
the southwestern Chihuahua, mentions 
several kinds of cacti which they regard 
with superstitious veneration; but there 
is no evidence that any of these have 
narcotic properties except the “ hikort 
huanami,’’ which is the typical Lopho- 
phora williamsi. A species of <Ario- 
carpus (probably A. fissuratus) was sold 
to him under the name of ‘“‘hikori 
sunami,”’ and was declared by the 
vendor to have certain magical powers; 
but he did not see it used as an intox1- 
cant. Much that Lumholtz relates in 
connection with the ceremonial use of 
the narcotic hikori appears cxtravagant 
and tanciful; but it is undoubtedly true 


*3 Nlooney, James. 


“The Meseal Plant and Ceremony.” 





The Journal of Heredity 


that the Tarahumari Indians, like their 
more southerly neighbors the Coras and 
Huicholes, have been led by the wonder- 
ful visions induced by the plant to 
attribute to it supernatural powers. 
ven the Christians among them salute 
it and make the sign of the cross when 
approaching it, and it is often carried 
by them as a charm or amulet. They 
declare that Hikori sits next to God 
and is called ‘“‘uncle,’’ because it 1s 
God’s brother. 

It will be shown later that a similar 
superstition is common among some of 
the Indian tribes of the United States 
who pay to the plant divine homage. 
In some of their religious societies 
there is a ceremony of baptism in 
which the candidate is sprinkled with 
an extract of the plant, and also a kind 
of communion in which the plant is 
eaten as an incarnation of the Deity, or 
the flesh of God. 

Lumholtz gives an account of the 
expeditions of the Tarahumaris  1n 
quest of hikori, describing their conse- 
cration with copal incense before start- 
ing out, their ten-days’ journey to the 
land of the Hikori, the erection of a 
cross on their arrival, the superstitious 
observances attending the gathering 
of the plant, which recall the stories of 
the early European herbalists regarding 
the mandrake and other magic plants, 


and the ceremonies attending their 
return. 
The Indians of the village go out 


with music to welcome the travellers, 
bearing their precious burden; and at 
night there is a festival of teswin- 
drinking and dancing in honor of the 
plant. The hikori is piled in a heap at 
the foot of a cross, and is sprinkled with 
teswin, which is grateful to it; and the 
next day a sheep or even an ox or two 
goats are sacrificed in its honor. The 
wild heathen Indians living 1n caves or 
under overhanging cliffs in the barran- 
cas, when they hear of the return of the 
expedition, come to buy supplies of the 
hikori for their own use. “One plant,”’ 
says Lumholtz, ‘“‘costs a sheep, and the 
buyer holds a feast in honor of his 


Therap. Gazette 20:7. 1896. 




















Safford: An Aztec Narcotic 


purchase, and repeats the feast at the 
same time every year.’’*4 
USE BY THE 


HUICHOLES OF JALISCO 


The ceremonies attending the acquisi- 
tion and use of the drug by the Indians 
of the Nayarit mountains of Jalisco and 
Tepic were described by Léon Diguct 
in 1899. These Indians belong to the 
tribes known as Huicholes, Coras, 
Tepehuanes, and ‘Tepecanos. The 
Coras, whose use of the razz dtabolica, as 
described by Padre Ortega, has already 
been noted, now obtain their supply from 
the Huicholes. The latter send expedi- 
tions across the state of Zacatecas to 
Catorce in San Luis Potosi, where the 
plant is endemic. The specimens from 
Zacatecas in the Economic Collection of 
the Bureau of Plant Industry are not at 
all mushroom-like, but resemble dry 
pieces of radishes or carrots sliced longi- 
tudinally, or small, terminal fragments 
covered with silky wool, such as those 
described by early writers as “ peyote de 
Zacatecas.”’ (See fig. 3.) By the Hui- 
choles the drug is known neither as 
peyote nor teonanacatl, but as xicoli, or 
hicuri, which is identical with the name 
hikort apphed to it by the Tarahumarti 
Indians. 

According to Diguet the Huicholes 
collect the plant in October. The 
expedition lasts about one month, and 
its return is an occasion for celebration. 
“Those who take part decorate their 
hats and their hair with feathers and 
paint on their faces the distinctive 
attributes of their caste and of their 
gods. After having made an offering 
of pevote upon their altars they distrib- 
ute pieces of it to all those they mect; 
a supply of peyote is kept for the feasts 
which will take place during the course 
of the vear; the rest 1s sold to those who 
did not take part in the expedition. 

“In eating the pevote the Indians 
chew the pulp of the plant, which has 
been cut up into small pieces, and at 
first spit out the saliva which at the 
beginning dissolves a bitter principle 
having a very disagreeable taste, then 


*4See ‘Tarahumari Dances and Plant-worship.”’ 


October, 1894. Vol. 16, pp. 438-456. 
25 Diguet, Léon. 


tifiques 9:622-24. 1899, 


“La Sierra du Nayarit et ses Indigénes.”’ 





305 








TEXAS TYPE 
Specimens of Lophophora from the 
vicinity of Laredo, Texas; the upper 
one a typical L. williamsii, with 
eight ribs separated by straight 
grooves; the lower one identical with 


“L. lewini,”” with 13 ribs” sep- 
rated by sinuous grooves.  Photo- 


graphes from plants growing in 
Cactus House of U. 5. Department 
of Agriculture; natural size. (Fig.9.) 


they absorb the active principle which 
dissolves little by little in the saliva.’’* 
According to Diguet the Indians regard 
the drug as food for the soul, and 
revere 1t on account of its miraculous 
properties. The manitestation of the 
hallucinations which it~ produces a 
little after the absorption of its active 
principle is held to be a supernatural 
grace by which men are permitted to 
communicate with the gods; and, more- 


over, “in using the drug with modcra- 
tion the partaker is endowed with 
Carl Lumholtz, in Scribner’s Magazine, 


Nouvelles Arch. Missions Scien- 





306 


energy which permits him to overcome 
great fatigue and to endure hunger and 
thirst for five days.’’*® 


PRESENT USE IN THE UNITED STATES 


fforts have been made to prevent 


the spread of the drug among the 
Indians of the United States, and 


action has been taken in the courts to 
prosecute those who have been instru- 
mental in procuring it and furnishing 
it. One of the most recent cases is that 
of the United States versus an Indian 
named Nah-qua-tah-tuck, alias Mitchell 
Neck, of the Menominee Indian Reser- 
vation, Wisconsin, accused of furnishing 
intoxicants to certain Indians, in viola- 
tion of the law. Dr. Francis P. Morgan, 
of the Bureau of Chemistry, was sum- 
moned as a Government expert. The 
trial developed the following facts: 

Qn March 15, 1914, the accused 
brought a supply of the drug in a dress 
suit case to the house of an Indian 
family named Neconish, situated a 
short distance north of the viliage of 
Phlox, Wisconsin, near the western 
boundary of the Menominee Reserva- 
tion, at which place there was a meeting 
of a religious nature. The drug had 
been received by parcel post from 
Aguilares, Texas. The participants first 
made a line about the house to keep out 
the evil spirits, and then invoked God, 
begging him to make all of them good 
and to keep them from evil. The 
pevote was next distributed, and when 
it was eaten caused the partakers to see 
the evil things they had done and 
showed them the good things they 
ought to do. 

The ceremony began about 9 o'clock 
in the evening. One witness testified 
that shortly after having eaten four 
buttons he could see pictures of various 
kinds when his eyes were shut. First he 
saw God, with a bleeding wound in his 
side. This vision vanished when he 
opened his eves, but reappeared when 
he closed them again. Then he saw 
the devil with horns and tail, of the 
color of a negro. Then he saw bad 
things which he had done before, bottles 
of whiskey which he had drunk, a 
watermelon which he had stolen, and 


26 Diguet, Léon. 


loc. cit. p. 621. 


‘the 





The Journal of Heredity 


so many other things that it would 
take all day to tell of them. Then he 
saw a cross with all kinds of colors about 
it, white, red, green and blue. He was 
not made helpless. He stated that he 
could have walked had he wished to do 
so, but that he preferred to sit still 
and look at the pictures. 

Another witness testified that he 
ate the peyote so that his soul might 
go up to God. The witnesses who 
testified at this trial declared that the 
peyote helped them to lead better lives 
and to forsake alcoholic drinks. The 
defendent was acquitted on the ground 
that the meeting was one of a religious 
nature. 

THE 


PEYOTE SOCIETY 


Thomas Prescott of Wittenberg, Wis- 
consin, testified that there is a regularly 
organized association among the Indians 
called the Peyote Society, also known as 
the Union Church Society, of which he 
had been a priest for seven vears. In 
the weekly ceremonies of this society 
the peyote is either eaten or taken 1n 
form of tea. In his opinion the 
effect of the peyote is to make better 
men of the Indians. Many of them 
were formerly common vagabonds, liable 
to commit all sorts of crimes when under 
the influence of alcohol. After becom- 
ing members of the peyote society, 
however, they gave up drink, established 
themselves in regular homes, and lived 
sober and industrious lives. In relating 
his personal experience he made. the 
following statements: 

‘We boys, before we got this peyote, 
was regular drunkards; so when I was 
drunk I was lving on the road somewhere 
sometimes, and I got no home nor 
nothing. Before I got this I did wrong 
and everything else. Now, since I got 
this peyote, it stopped me from drinking, 
and now, since I used this peyote, I have 
been sober, and today I am sober yet 
. I see a good and a bad when I 
eat that peyote. When I eat that 
peyote then it teaches me my heart; | 
know anything that is right and what 
is wrong. That is the way peyote 
works for good and works for God, and 
that is how we worship. When 











Safford: An Aztec Narcotic 


I took this peyote I could see myself 
when I used to be drunk: I could see 
the bottles which used to have my 
whiskey and alcohol in; I could see 
myself lving drunk in the road. That 
is the way it shows us the bad and 
teaches us the good. We could 
have our meetings without this peyote; 
but we see some more coming—a new 
person—he wants to use it—when he 
takes this peyote then he believes God. 
That is why we use it for. Without 
this, why, they would not believe 
anybody.’’*7 

Dr. Morgan gave to the court an 
account of his experiments bearing upon 
the physiological action of the drug 
administered in his presence to several 
yvoung men who had volunteered for 
the purpose. The chief effect noticed 
was the production of visions of various 
kinds: of moving objects, constantly 
changing designs and figures of land- 
scapes, friezes, balls of beautiful colors 
in constant motion. Suggestions of 
definite objects also brought up visions 
of that object. These visions were 
seen only when the eves were closed. 
The pupil of the eye was made larger, 
and this enlargement lasted till the 
following day; the pulse became slower 
at first but increased when a greater 
quantity of the drug was taken; there 
was evidence of muscular depression 
with a disinclination to exertion of any 
kind; and there was a loss of conception 
of space and time and, in some cases, 
symptoms of dual personality, not 
unlike that caused by hashish (Cannabis 
indica). The after effects, however, 
were insomnia, while hashish eating is 
usually followed by sleep. In_ this 
respect it also differs from opium and 
somewhat resembles the active principles 
of coffee and coca (Erythroxylon coca). 
Dr. Morgan further testified that as 
far as he knew no _ therapeutic or 
remedial value of the drug had been 
established. 

At a meeting of the Lake Mohonk 
Conference in October, 1914, several 
papers relating to the effects of this 
drug upon the Indians were read and 
affidavits from two Omaha Indians were 





307 


quoted. Fron one of the latter, I take 
the following extracts: 


AMONG THE OMAHA INDIANS 


At the meetings of the Society ‘* before 
they sing they pass the peyote around. 
They begin taking this medicine along 
about dark, and when they pass it, 
ask you how many you want, and they 
often try to persuade you to take more 
than you want. The medicine does 


Sa 





THE SOUTHERN TYPE 


- 


Young plant of Lophophora = trom 
Higuerillos, state of Queretaro, 
Mexico, the southern limit of the 


genus. Collected in 1905 by Dr. 
J. N. Rose. Photograph natural 
size. (Fig. 10.) 


not work right away, but after it begins 
to take effect along toward midnight 
they begin to ery and sing and pray and 
stand and shake all over, and some of 
them just sit and stare. I used to sit 
in their range right along, and ate some 
of their medicine, but after I ate it the 
first time I was kind of afraid of it. It 
made me feel kind of dizzy and my 
heart was kind of thumping and I felt 
like eryving. Some of them told me that 
this was because of my sins. It makes 
me nervous, and when I shut my eyes 
I kind of see something like an image or 
visions, and when my eves are open | 
can’t see it so plain. One of these 
fellows took twelve beans, or twelve 
peyote, sitting with some girls 


27 From ms. report of the case of the United States versus Nah-qua-tah-tuck, alias Mitchell 


Neck, in the archives of the Bureau of Chemistry. 


1914. 





308 


The Journal 


After | have taken twelve peyote I saw 
a mountain with roads leading to the 
top and people dressed in white going 
up these roads. I got very dizzy and | 
began to see all kinds of colors, and 
arrows began to fly all around me. I 
began to perspire very freely. I asked 
to be taken out of doors. At that time 
it was 20° below zero. I felt better 
when I got out of doors. When I went 
in again I began to hear voices just 
like they came from all over the ceiling 
and | looked around in the other room 
and thought I heard women singing in 
there, but the women were not allowed 
to sing in the meetings usually, and so 
this was kind of strange. After 
eating thirty-six of these peyote I got 
just like drunk, only more so, and I felt 
kind of good, but more good than when 
I drink whiskey, and then after that 
I began to see a big bunch of snakes 
crawling all around in front of me, and 
it was a feeling like as if I was cold 
came over me. The treasurer of the 
Sacred Peyote Society was sit- 
ting near me, and I asked him if he heard 
young kittens. It sounded as if they 
were right close to me; and then I sat 
still for a long time and I saw a big 
black cat coming toward me, and I felt 
him just like a tiger walking up on my 
legs toward me, and when I felt his 
claws | jumped back and kind of made 
a sound as if I was afraid, and he asked 
me to tell him what was the matter, so 
I told him after a while. I did not 
care to tell at first; but I made up my 
mind then, after what I saw, that I 
would not take another one of these 
peyotes if they gave me a ten dollar 
bill. In this Sacred Peyote Soct- 
ety they have a form of baptism and 
they baptize with the tea made from 
stewing the pevote, and they baptize 
‘in the name of the Father, and the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost,’ the Holy 
Ghost being the pevote. Then you 
drink some of the tea and they make 
signs on your forehead with the tea 
and then take an eagle’s wing and fan 
vou with it. I heard an educated 
Indian and he said in a meeting on 





of Heredity 


Sunday morning, ‘My friends, I am glad 
I can be here and worship this medicine 
with you; and we must organize a new 
church and have it run like the Mormon 
Church.’ ’’5 


USE IN ANCIENT MEXICO 


From the preceding description of a 
meeting of the Sacred Peyote Society 
held by the Winnebagos and Omahas in 
1914 I turn back to the first account 
we have of the /eonanacatl feasts of the 


Aztecs, written by Padre Bernardino 
Sahagun in the sixteenth century— 


before Sir Francis Drake set out upon 
his voyage round the world—before 
tobacco which, under the name of picvetl, 
the Mexicans also worshipped, was 
first brought to England. 

“The first thing eaten at the party 
was certain black mushrooms which 
they call nanacatl, which intoxicate 
and cause visions to be seen, and even 
provoke sensuousness. These they ate 
before the break of day, and they also 
drank cacao (chocolate) before dawn. 
The mushrooms they ate with syrup 
(of Maguey sap), and when they began 
to feel the effect they began to dance; 
some sang; others wept because they 
were already intoxicated by the mush- 
rooms; and some did not wish to sing, 
but seated themselves in their rooms 
and remained there as though medita- 
ting. Some had visions that they were 
dying and shed tears; others imagined 
that some wild beast was devouring 
them; others that they were capturing 
prisoners in warfare; others that they 
were rich; others that they had many 
slaves; others that they had committed 
adultery and were to have their heads 
broken as a penalty; others that they 
had been guilty of a theft, for which 
they were to be executed; and many 
other visions were seen by t'em. After 
the intoxication of the mushrooms had 
passed off they conversed with one 
another about the visions which they 
had seen.”’”’ 

The following description of a religious 
meeting in July, 1626, at which sacred 
mushrooms were administered in the 


28 Daiker, F. H., ‘“ Liquor and Peyote a Menace to the Indian,’’ in Report of the Thirty-second 
Annual Lake Mohonk Conference, October, 1914, pp. 66, 6/7. 
Hist. Nueva Espana (ed. Bustamente) 2: 366. 


29 Sahagun, Bernardino. 


1829. 

















Safford: An Aztec Narcotic 


BAGS Secs UR BE NS 
4 one Peed ima 4 % <j G ‘ 
ye TET Tae Bans { 

| ye 1 ge ey ee ON . 
a, ae 3”, Jo me * 


. 


the drug. 


form of communion, 1s related by 
Padre Jacinto de la Serna, at that time 
beneficiary of Tenantzingo. 

To this meeting had come an Indian, 
native of the pueblo of Tenango (about 
25 kilometers from Toluca) and grand 
master of superstitions, named Juan 
Chichiton (or ** John Little-dog’’), who 
had brought some of the mushrooms 
that are gathered in the monte, and with 
these he had performed a great idolatry. 
But before proceeding with my story 
I wish to explain the nature of the said 
mushrooms, which in the Mexican 
language are called QOuauhtlananacatl 
(“wild mushrooms”). When | 





asked 





a ee ee 





309 


VRS. ANNA B. NICKELS IN HER CACTUS GARDEN 


This veteran cactus lover, a resident of Laredo, Texas, called attention to the narcotic proper- 
ties of Lophophora, and supplied to Parke, Davis & Co. material with which to inves 
Photograph by David Griffiths, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 


—s 


igate 
+t 


cl 
(Fig. 11 


the licenciado Don Pedro Ponce de Leon 
what they were hke, he said that these 
mushrooms were small and_ vellow, 
and that they were collected by priests 
and old men, appointed as ministers 
for these impostures, who would proceed 
to the place where they grow and remain 
almost the whole night 1n praver and in 
superstitious conjuring; and at dawn, 
when a certain little breeze known to 
them would begin to blow, then they 
would gather the narcotic, attributing 
to it deity, with the same properties 
as ololiuhqui or pevote, when 
eaten or drunk, they intoxicate thosc 


~ 


who partake of them, depriving them of 


since 


¥ <4 ; 


pees 





310 The Journal 


their senses, and making them believe 
a thousand absurdities.*” 

“This man, Juan Chichiton, brought 
these mushrooms one night to a house 
Where there was a gathering for the 
eelebration of a saint’s feast. The saint 
stood on the altar and below the altar 
were the mushrooms, with some pulque, 
and fire. All might long the teponaztli 
(wooden drum made from a hollowed 
log) kept time to the singing, and after 
the yreater part of the night had passed, 
the said Juan Chichiton, who was the 
priest of that solemnity, administered 
to all those congregated at the feast 
mushrooms and pulque after the manner 
of communion, winding up the celebra- 
tion with an abundant quantity of 
pulque; so that the mushrooms on their 
part and the pulque on its, took away 
their reason, which was a pity. The 
said Juan Chichiton fled soon afterward, 
nor could [| obtain information about the 
others who took part, in order to chas- 
tise them, with the exception of Leonor 
Maria, whom I kept as a prisoner in my 
house for having joined in the idolatry 
which they performed with the mush- 
rooms. 

‘T asked the said licenciado Don 
Pedro Ponce de Leon in what manner 
these creatures perform their acts of 
witcheraft in working harm to others; 
and he told me that in making their 
threats and menaces they strike them- 
selves on the breast as at the Sanctus 
with the tips of their fingers and then, 
opening their hand, they make a gesture 
as if hurling something in the direction 
of the person whom they are menacing 
or wish to bewitch, saying: * You shall 
pay me for that, as you will see!’ But 
coneerning other words and things 
which they say and do by order of the 
devil in these embustes, never or scarcely 
ever could anything be ascertained; 
though it stands to reason that they 


Heredity 


must have them as a pact with the 
devil: and he, who is the author of all, 
closes their mouths, so that there may 
be no means of remedying the evil.’ 


SUMMARY 


After comparing the preceding ac- 
counts of the use of narcotics by the 
ancient Mexicans and by the Indians 
of the present day, separated in time 
by three centuries and ino space” by 
thousands of miles, there can remain 
no doubt that the mushroom-like peyote 
used by our own Indians in the United 
States, which we know to be identical 
with the sacred /rikult, or hircort, of the 
Sierra Madre Indians, is the same drug 
which was called teonanacatl, or “sacred 
mushroom,” by the Aztees. According 
to the carhest writers, 1t was endemic 
in the land of the Chichimecas, the 
early home of our Apaches, Comanches, 
and Kiowas, which is also the source 
of the modern supply. The ancient 
Mexicans, like the Huicholes and Tara- 
humaris of the present day, obtained 
their supply of the drug through the 
medium of messengers, consecrated for 
the purpose, who observed certain 
rehgious rites in collecting it, and who 
were received with ceremomal honors 
on their return. Although the Indians 
on our northern reservations now receive 
it through the medium of the parcel 
post; vet they attribute to it the same 
divine properties as the ancient Mexicans 
and like them combine its) worship 
with the religion they have reecived 
from Christian missionaries. [It is only 
natural that those who are engaged in 
the work of Christianizing and uplifting 
our Indians should try, like the carly 
Spanish missionaries, to stamp out its 
use. On the other hand many of the 
Indians who use the narcotic declare 
that they take it as a kind of sacrament 
or communion, and that it helps them 


“Lumholtz gives a somewhat similar account of the expeditions of the Huichol hikuli-seckers: 
thei ir pravers before starting forth on their journey, ther priestly character, their worship of 
the God of Fire, the importance attached to their dreams while on the road, the ceremonial 
shooting of arrows on their arrival in the hikuli country, their votive offerings, their prayers to 
the five winds, and their petition to the hikul not to make them crazy, the gathering of the 
sacred plants and of the discharged arrows covered with = w, and the return home with its 
attending ceremonies. Lumholtz, c arl—Unknown Mexico 2: 126-136. 1902. 

®t Jacinto de la Serna, ‘‘ Manual! de los Ministros para el c ietelienies de sus idolatrias y extir- 
pacion de ellas,” in Documentos inéditos para la Historia de Espana, vol. 104, p. 61. Madrid, 


1892. 





~—<.. 





Satford: An Aztec Narcotic 311 


to turn from wickedness and lead good these narcotic drugs only in their dry 
lives. state; and the veneral appearance of 
A knowledge of botany has been the peyotl brought from the vicinity of 
b 7 by 
attributed to the Aztecs which they Zacatecas (fiy. 3) was so very different 
| tC | 
were far from possessing. Their plant from = the teonanacatl trom the more 
names show that their classification of — northerly region inhabited by the Chi- 
plants was not based upon real affinities, chimecas (fig. 1) that the two forms 
and it is very probable that they had might easily have been regarded as 
not the slightest notion of the difference coming from distinct plants. 
between a flowering plant and a fungus. As lar as the author knows, this 1s 
Certainly they applied the names nan- the first time that the identity ol the 
acatl and nanacace to both fungr and sacred mushroom” of the Aztecs with 
flowering plants and the name peyoll the narcotic cactus known botanically 
to both the narcotic cactus, Lophophora,  @, Lophophora williamsit has been 
: : pomted out. That it should have been 
and to the tuber-bearmy composite, , ' 
mistaken by the carly Spamiards for a 
mushroom is not surprising when one 
notices the remarkable resemblance of 
the dried buttons to peltate fungi, and 
also bears im mind that the common 
potato (Solanum tuberosum) on its 


Cacalia. Phe botameal knowledge of 
the carly Spanish writers, Sahayun, 
Hernandez, Ortega, and Jacinto de la 
Serna, was perhaps not much more 
extensive: their descriptions were so 


Inadequate that even to the present introduction into Europe was popularly 
day the chief narcotic of the Aztecs, regarded as a kind of truffle, a fact 
Qloliuhgur, which they all mention, which is recorded by 1 


y its German name, 
remains unidentified." Phey knew — Wartoffel, or Tartuffel 

8? Sahagun deseribes two plants bearing the name Ololiuhqut: one, which is not narcotic, with a 
fleshy turnip-lke root, leaves like those of a Physalis, and yellow flowers; the other, also orig 
Coaxonouhgui, or “yreen snake,’ with highly narcotic seeds. (Op. cit. vol. 3, pp. 204, 241. 
Hernandez describes the latter as round like those of Coriander, and says that they 
by a twining plant called Coaxthuitl, or “snake-weed,’? which has fibrous roots 
flowers (Hern. ed. Recchi, p. 145); while Serna does not describe the plant, which he probably 
never saw, but compares the form of the seeds to that of lentils: “semilla a modo de lantejas que 
Haman Olohuhqui.”  (Op., cit. p. 163.) Hernandez thought the plant might be the same as the 
Solanum mantacum of Dioscoroides. Dr. Manuel Urbina, of the National Museum of Mexico, 
declared it to be /pomoea sidaefolta of Choissy; but this ide ntific: ation, While agreeing with Hernan- 
dez's illustration, lacks confirmation through Investigation of the chemical prope riics and physio- 
logical action of the seeds of this species; and it is not known that any of the Cony olvulaceae are 
narcotic, though many of the Solanaceae, which have somewhat similar flowers, are highly so, 
Its very strange that Mexican botanists living in the country of the Ololiuhqui have not solved 
the mystery of its identity. 


are a dena 
and longish white 


Mulattoes in the United States 


Mlaborate statistics regarding the Negroes in the United States are yiven by 
the Bureau of the Census in its recently-issued bulletin 129, compiled by Dr. 
Joseph A. Hill. “Of the 9,827,763 Negroes enumerated in 1910, 7 1 777.077 were 
reported as ‘black’ and 2,050,686 as ‘mulatto.’ In 1850 the pe sodas reported 
as mulatto was 11.2.) It had advanced but little in 1870, hd a only 12%, but 
since 1870 the proportion of mulattoes in the Negro population appears to have 
increased very materially, reaching 15.2% in 1890 and 20.9 in 1910. Conside rable 
uncertainty necessarily attaches to this classification, however, since the accuracy 
of the distinction made depends largely upon the judgment and care of the enu- 
merators. Morcover, the fact that “the definition ‘of the term ‘mulatto’ adopted 
at the different censuses has not been entirely uniform may affect the comparability 
of the figures to some degree. At the census of 1910 the instructions were to 
report as ‘black’ all persons who were ‘evidently full-blood Negroes’ and as ‘mulatto’ 
all other persons ‘that have some proportion or perceptible trace of Negro blood.’ ”’ 








SWEET CHERRY BREEDING 


Scientific Improvement only Beginning—Breeders in Ignorance as to Nature of 
Material with Which They Are Dealing—Needs of Growers 
Self-sterility of Cultivated Varieties. ! 


V. R. GARDNER 


Professor of Pomology, Oregon 


T THE present time the sweet 
cherry varieties grown in this 
country number among. the 
hundreds. <A large percentage 
of these varicties are of old world origin. 
Though seedlings of American origin 
were named and introduced at a com- 
paratively early period in the history 
of American pomology, it 1s only within 
recent years that American varicties of 
commercial importance have appeared. 
Among a number of reasons for this 
is the fact that while the sweet cherry 
has not proved to be particularly well 
adapted to much of the territory cast 
of the Rocky Mountains, at the same 
time it has not practically refused to 
grow there, like certain other fruits of 
European origin. Consequently, there 
has not been the same amount of effort 
devoted to its breeding in’ Eastern 
America, as the many good qualities 
of the fruit would seem to warrant. 
On the other hand, the last fifty or 
seventy-five years have shown that the 
sweet cherry reaches a high degree of 
perfection on the Pacific Coast; and 
with the rapid development of a com- 
mercial cherry industry there, new 
varieties of more or less promise have 
appeared. 

With the hundreds of European 
varieties upon which to build an in- 
dustry it might seem that there would 
be little need of breeding new varicties 
for the section in question, especially 
since such a large percentage of those 
in existence seem to do as well here as 
in the countries of their origin. In 
fact such a need has not been felt 
until comparatively recently—as market 
demands have come to be more exacting. 





Agricultural College, Corvallis, Ore. 


Today certain sections have come to 
cater to particular markets. Only by 
being able to send a particular type of 
cherry to particular markets at certain 
seasons can competition with other 
sections be largely avoided and_ the 
largest profits be realized. For instance, 
certain California sections are mainly 
interested in an extra-carly firm shipping 
varicty that can be placed upon the 
astern markets in late April and early 
May; certain eastern Oregon and Wash- 
ington valleys are desirous of growing 
very late shipping varicties that can be 
placed upon those same markets in 
late July and early August; still other 
sections desire a light colored canning 
varicty that can be grown with the 
Napoleon to lengthen the harvesting 
season for the cannery. Many other 
‘vacant places,” if such they may be 
called, might be mentioned in our 
present catalogue of cherry varicties; 
but enough have been indicated to 
suggest the nature of the practical 
problems presented to the breeder by 
the cherry industry. 


OBSTACLES TO BREEDING 


It would seem that these objects 
not only ought to be possible of attain- 
ment, but that many of them ought to 
prove comparatively simple problems 
for the plant breeder. However, when 
the situation is investigated it is found 
that the breeder has very little in the 
way of detailed information regarding 
the materials with which he must 
work. With but few exceptions nothing 
is known regarding the ancestry of 
present day varieties. Most of them 
originated as chance seedlings. When 


1 Report to the committee on research in plant-breeding, American Genetic Association. Sub- 


mitted by the committee. 


312 























Gardner: Sweet Cherry Breeding 313 


supposed parentage is given for some 
of them in standard pomological works 
it is often found that there is only 
circumstantial evidence to indicate such 
parentage. Perhaps the seedling sprang 
up near a tree of some other known 
variety and hence was assumed to be 
its offspring. 

Of course the cherry breeder can make 
large numbers of crosses between varie- 
ties he thinks might combine to give 
him the particular qualities he desires, 
but in this he would be very largely 
dependent upon chance for his results. 
No body of facts 1s available which will 
enable him to sclect parents that he 
can depend upon for transmitting cer- 
tain qualities. It would seem that one 
of the first things for the cherry breeder 
to do is to make a careful analysis of 
the varictics now in his possession, to 
determine if possible what 1s the nature 
of their gametic constitution, what 
really are the unit characters or factors, 
or the combinations of unit characters 
or factors, that they possess; and to 
determine how these factors or combina- 
tions of factors are transmitted. This 
is not essentially different from the 


work that is necessary when starting 
breeding studies with other plants; 
but the problems associated with an 
analysis of his materials are somewhat 
more difficult than usual for the cherry 
breeder, because at least a large per 
centage, if not all, of the varieties with 
which he would work are self sterile. 
The inter-sterility of a number of the 
apparently more promising varieties 
still further complicates the whole 
question. A certain amount of progrcss 
in this direction is being made, but it 
will probably require many years to 
acquire the data that are really funda- 
mental to scientific cherry breeding 
work. This is not stating that valuable 
varieties will not originate as chance 
seedlings within the near future, just 
as Lambert, Bing and a number of 
others have originated during recent 
years. It is to be expected that 
valuable additions to our cherry list 
will come in that way. Furthermore, 
varieties of merit are almost certain to 
appear incidental to the careful experi- 
mental work necessary in studying 
the inheritance of characters in the 
sweet cherry group. 


Race Betterment Conference 


The second Race Betterment Conference will be held at San Francisco August 5-8 
inclusive. Arrangements are in charge of a committee with David Starr Jordan as 
chairman, Dr. Herbert Stolz of Lane Hospital, San Francisco, as secretary. 


NEW PUBLICATIONS 


THE GREAT SOCIETY—A PSYCHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS, by Graham Wallas, Lon- 


don School of Economics and Political Science. 


Macmillan Company, 66 Fifth avenue, 1914. 


6ér7 


Pp. 382, 8vo., price $2. New York, The 


This book 1s written with the practical purpose of bringing the knowledge which 


has been accumulated by psychologists into touch with the actual problems of 
present civilized life.’ It should be particularly helpful to eugenists, now that 
they are coming generally to realize that the success of their propaganda depends 
largely on the expertness with which they use applied psychology. The author 


himself is in warm sympathy with the biological study of the question, declaring 
that “‘social psychology can never lead men to wise practical conclusions unless it 
keeps in view its relation to that science of human breeding which Sir Francis 
Galton named Eugenics.’ He analyses the important human dispositions in an 
extremely readable way, showing how they can be used for the improvement of 
the organization of society. A perusal of it would tend to broaden and clarify 
the ideas of almost every social worker. 








BLACK AND WHITE AYRSHIRES 


Colors as Old as the Breed—Rare in America but Much More Common Abroad— 
No Indication of Mixed Ancestry—Possible Origin of the Breed. 


A. H. KUHLMAN 
Department of Animal Husbandry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. 


LACK and white cattle are well 

known to all Americans inter- 

ested in dairying, because of 

the popularity of the Holstein- 
Friesian breed, but those colors are not 
commonly associated with Ayrshires in 
this country, and it 1s a surprise to most 
travelers to find black and white cattle 
in the Ayrshire district of Scotland. 
My attention was first attracted to 
them at the Kilmarnock (Scotland) 
Show in April, 1914, where several of 
them were on exhibition, one of which 
(Fig. 12), was among the prize winners. 
The black and white Ayrshire cattle as 
the illustrations (Figs. 12 and 13) show, 
have the typical Holstein markings in 
that the black and white are distinctly 
separated and there seems to be a 
tendency for the spotting to occur in 
large patches rather than in numerous 
small spots as commonly seen in Ayr- 
shires. 

In the scale of points as adopted in 
1906 by the Ayrshire Cattle Herd Book 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 
the following description is given of the 
color of the breed: 

‘Red of any shade, brown or these 
with white, mahogany and white, black 
and white; or white; each color distinctly 
defined.”’ 

The description of the color of the 
breed as given in the Herd Book in 1884, 
however, shows that black and white 
was not always popular with the 
members of that organization as is 
shown by the following reference to it: 

“Color, red of any shade, brown, or 
white, or a mixture of these, each color 
being distinctly defined. Brindle or 
black and white is not in favor.”’ 

William Bartlemore in describing! his 


ideal of the breed in 1889, makes the 
following statements: 

‘As regards the color, it is much a 
matter of fancy. The prevailing one is 
flecked brown and white, but there are 
many splendid animals all brown while 
the leading show yard color during the 
last ten years has been white, with 
brown or dark brown sides of head. 
Few dairies in Scotland of any size at 
the present day are without their 
flecked black and white Ayrshire and 
strange to say, that color is much in 
demand by gentlemen who keep a few 
cows for family use.”’ 


AMERICAN STANDARD 


The American and Canadian Ayr- 
shire breeders have adopted a uniform 
scale of points which closely resembles 
the British, but does not recognize the 
black and white cattle. It refers to 
color as follows: 

“Color. Red of any shade, brown or 
these with white; mahogany and white, 
or white; each color distinctly defined.” 

Very few black and white Ayrshires 
have been imported into this country, 
because American buyers think the 
color shows the presence of Holstein 
blood. 

The red color of the Ayrshire is 
apparently a different kind of red than 
that of the Shorthorn or the Red 
Polled cattle. It seems to be a peculiar 
red which usually shades into a mahog- 
any or wine colored tinge producing a 
color commonly recorded as brown in the 
Ayrshire Herd Book. The term brown 
as used in this way, includes many 
shades of red ranging from a bright red 
to a very dark brown. 

Further observation and inquiry 1n 


1 Speir, J., Early History of the Ayrshire Breed of Cattle, Glasgow, Aug. 13, 1909. 


314 








ee 








Kuhlman: Black and White Ayrshires 315 





BLACK AND WHITE AYRSHIRE PRIZE WINNER 


Heifer exhibited at the Kilmarnock (Scotland) show, 1914. As will be noticed, her markings 


are quite like those of a typical Holstein. 


Black and white are almost unknown colors 


in an American Ayrshire, but this prejudice against them is not founded on reason. (Fig. 


12.) 


Scotland showed that many of the 
leading breeders of pure bred Ayrshires 
have one or more black and white 
animals in their herds. It is claimed 
by many that they are better producers 
than the white, brown, or brown and 
white animals. Some also claim that a 
black and white Ayrshire cow from a 
black and white dam, always produces 
calves of that color even if bred to a 
bull that is white and brown. 

A count of several hundred animals in 
the local markets showed that from 
3 to 4% of the grade Ayrshires were 
black and white. Grades of this color 
are considered good producers and 


often bring a higher price on the market 
than grades of the more usual color. 
Some breeders who do not admit the 
superior milking qualities of the black 
and white cows, keep them for ‘good 
luck’’ as they say or for the contrast 
they add to the color of the herd. 

A study of several volumes of the 
herd book, brought out some interesting 
details. Volume 8 of the Ayrshire 
Herd Book, published in 1885, is the 
first one in which any mention 1s made 
of the color of the individual animals 
recorded in it and in Volume 9 this 
record is not complete, for the color 
of about one hundred cows entered 1n it 





316 The Journal 


is not given. However, it does show 
that even at that time black and white 
cattle were accepted for registration. 
Brown as used in these tabulations 
includes all shades of red and likewise, 
for convenience, red and white animals 
are tabulated with those that are brown 
and white. It may be assumed that 
the terms brown or white as used in the 
herd book do not always refer to a self 
brown or self white, but rather to 
animals that would ordinarily be called 
brown or white by the casual observer. 
For example, some of the so-called 
white cows have brown eye lashes and 
dark colored eyes which would not be 
present in a true self white. The 
designations brown and white, and white 
and brown are freely used in the herd 
books, the former apparently referring 
to animals appearing more brown than 
white and the latter to those showing 


of Heredity 


more white than brown, but it would 
seem as if there would be many cases in 
which it would be hard to determine 
which should be used. 

A comparison of Tables I and II shows 
a decrease from 1886 to 1913 of about 
10% in the number of white and brown 
cows. Table II shows a remarkable 
similarity in the per cent. of cows and 
bulls of the different colors, which is 
not the case in Table I. It is probable 
that this difference may be largely due 
to greater care being exercised in the 
later registration work. Table II also 
shows that there are only about one-half 
as many black and white cows as 
either red or white. 

Table III shows in more detailed 
form the marking of the bulls referred 
to in Table II, as they are entered in 
the herd book. It brings out an inter- 
esting point that 1s well known among 
Ayrshire breeders and exporters, namely, 


TABLE I 


Summary of Registration in Vol. 9, of the Ayrshire Herd Book 
Cows Bulls 


Color Number Per cent. Number Per cent. 


eer ou ae aie laa yen Una gee eg 53 13.35 26 23 64 
FR ee eer Siar ere pera eh ae Nahe d oe rrr 59 14.86 10 9 09 
ee EE PEE TPE eee re OTe Q - Bp Se eee 
rr i be ewes ea asns ena 191 48.12 38 34 35 
ee eee eee ee 85 21.41 36 32.72 

| UN sere ye he ree ee ee 397 100.00 110 100. O00 

TABLE II 
Summary of Registration in Vol. 36, Published 1913 
Cows (pedigreed) Bulls 


Color Number Per cent. Number Per cent. 
ts oon) eee ee ad eee ee eae ed 176 3.91 54 5.42 
SS ee eee ee Te ee eee eee ee eee 145 3.22 32 3.21 
I OE Seo od ee eae eee OER SR OE 67 1.48 AS 1.50 
ee a en ee 4119 91.39 896 89 87 
oa oe) Cn ee 6g, ohne Sd keg ae A ee eS 4507 100. OO Q97 100.00 











3 














FF e—7"#™ 


bar 


Kuhlman: Black and White Ayrshires 


oN 
—+ 
™] 


TABLE II] 


Summary of Bulls Registered in Vol. 36 


Color 


ye ar a and ear a ee eS ee 


Brown 
Black and white 
Prown and white 


White, brown cheeks. . 
White, brown neck 
White, dark cheeks.............. 


a wn ee oe on oe a ee ee ee ee 


the tendency to select sires with much 
white (Figs. 14 and 15) to satisfy popular 
fancy. It shows that of almost 1,000 
bulls registered in that volume, 34% 
were brown and white, 41.93% were 
white and brown and 12.64% _ had 
the brown restricted to the head and 
neck. The latter form of marking is 
one of the most popular at the present 
time. Almost all of the black and white 
bulls now used for service are marked 
in this way and it is doubtful if very 
many bulls marked like the black and 
white cows (Figs. 12 and 13), are kept for 
breeding purposes today, but bulls with 
black or very dark jaws or cheeks are 
very popular. It is interesting to note 
that by careful selection the color 
pattern of a spotted breed can be greatly 
changed. 

The so-called ‘‘White horse with 
black eyes,’ is a striking illustration of 
what may be accomplished along this 
line. By careful selection from brown 
and white spotted animals, a strain of 
horses was produced in Denmark and 
also at Hannover which are entirely 
white in color of hair and skin, but are 
distinguished from albinos in_ that 
the eyes always remain black. 

The Ayrshire Herd Book Society is 
one of the very few breed associations 
that still makes provision for the 
registration of animals not the offspring 
of recorded ancestors. All animals en- 


en SI rue te bs bay en al 


Number Per cent. 

re 54 5.42 
aS 32 3.21 
oe 15 1.50 
a 339 34.00 
~ 418 41.93 
79 7.93 

27 2.71 

He 20 2.00 
a 8 80 
- 3 30 
_ 2 20 
997 100, OO 


tered in the Herd Book are divided into 
three groups: (1) those entered with a 
number or in the Herd Book proper, 
(2) those entered in Appendix A, and 
(3) those entered in Appendix B. 
Subject to the approval of the committee 
in charge of this work, a cow or heifer 
becomes eligible for entry in Appendix 
B, on one of the first three following 
conditions in addition to the fourth: 

1. The sire of such a cow or heifer 
must be entered in the herd book. 

2. She must be an individual of high 
merit, as shown by winning a prize at 
an agricultural show in a class for 
Ayrshires. 

3. She must be able to attain a high 
standard of production by producing 
an authentic milk yield within one year 
and in addition an examining committee 
must declare that she possesses the true 
characteristics of the Ayrshire breed. 

4. In addition to fulfilling one of 
these three requirements, the owner and 
breeder must sign a statement declaring 
that she is a pure bred Ayrshire. 

The female offspring of a dam entered 
in Appendix B, sired by a_ recorded 
bull, is eligible for entry in Appendix A. 
Cows entered in either Appendix A or 
B are entered by name but without a 
number. No bulls can be entered in 
either Appendix A or B. 

An animal is eligible for entry in the 
Herd Book proper, that is with a 


2 Walther, A. R., Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Vererbung der Pferdefarben, 1912. 








318 The Journal of Heredity 





CHARACTERISTIC COLOR DISTRIBUTION 


In the black and white Ayrshires, the colors usually occur in large patches, and are distinctly 
separated, Other colors in the Ayrshire more usually occur as numerous small spots. 
The cow here shown is the dam of the heifer illustrated in Fig. 12. (Fig. 13.) 


number, if both sire and dam are 
entered with numbers, or if the sire is 
recorded and the dam is entered in 
Appendix A of any volume. 


BREED IS KEPT PURE. 


Under these provisions it is possible 
for the progeny of many animals that 
have been bred pure for many years to 
qualify for registration in the herd 
book. That Ayrshire breeders are tak- 
ing advantage of these provisions is 
shown by the numbers recorded in 
Vol. 36, in which 4,507 cows and 895 
bulls are entered with numbers, 1,128 
cows are entered in Appendix A, and 
1,848 cows in Appendix B. This seems 
like introducing a large amount of new 
blood into the breed every year, but it 
must be remembered that these animals, 
for all practical purposes, have exactly 
the same kind of breeding as the pedi- 


ereed animals. Then, too, this breed is 
confined to a rather small area into 
which comparatively few animals of 
other breeds have been introduced for 
breeding purposes for several centuries. 
Confinement to such a small section 
has the further advantage that the 
committees in charge can very easily 
obtain reliable information about the 
breeding of any herd. 

Table IV shows that the per cents. of 
black and white cows in Appendices A 
and B are considerably higher than those 
shown in the preceding tables, but that 
does not prove that the black and 
white color is introduced into the breed 
by this method of registration, for 
Table I shows that Vol. 9 contained 
2.26%, black and white cows, which 
would tend to indicate that black and 
white was present in the breed in the 
early stages of its development. 











a 





a 


Kuhlman: Black and White Ayrshires 319 









altih ae 





. 
eg ALLL OOOO 


Om op 
‘ 5% 
? : Se af 


oe 


: oe bh 


» ae 
* 







ma 





A CHAMPION AYRSHIRE BULL 
bull at Kilmarnock, Scotland, in April, 1914, 


Hobsland Perfect Peace, champion Ayrshire 


and also at the National Dairy show in Chicago in October, 1914. 


His color is nearly 


white, the brown markings being almost exclusively confined to head and neck; and he 
represents very well the prevailing fashionable type of Ayrshire bull in this country. 


(Fig. 14.) 


The study of the early history of the 
Ayrshire breed leads to several theories 
explaining the appearance of this black 
color as shown by the investigations of 
John Speir. Even though the Ayrshire 
is one of the most recent breeds, its 
origin 1s as great a mystery as any of the 
older ones. The original cattle of 
Scotland were black in color, small in 
size and had short horns. The Roman 
invasion brought other types of cattle 
into the country. The resulting fusion 
may have formed the basis for some of 
the later breeds. 

As a much larger number of the 
Ayrshire cattle of “tod: iv are white or 
almost white, when compared with the 
numbers of the early days some people 
think that the white color of the 
Ayrshire is a reversion to the color of 


some white ancestor like the wild white 
cattle of Cadzow Forest. It seems 
unlikely that the Ayrshire is in any 
way related to the Cadzow Forest 
‘rattle. Speir states that between 1865 
and 1880 several bulls, mostly white in 
color, became noted prize winners. 
As a result they became very popular 
and in a few years their progeny was 
widely distributed. This easily accounts 
for the prevalence of many Ayrshires 
at the present time that are mostly 
white. 

Other’suppositions suggest Norwegian 
or Spanish origin, but nothing has ever 
been found to substantiate these claims. 
That Dutch cattle were used in the 
arly formation of the British breeds 
is quite probable. Writers of the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries fre- 








320 The Journal of Heredity 


TABLIn LV 


SHIN) vy of (ows Registered lil A ppendin od and Is al Vol. 46 


Cows Registered in Appendix A > Cows Reyistered in Appendix B 


(Color Numbet 
White 1- 
Brown 55 
Black and white 39 
Brown and white 530 
White and brown 460 
1128 


‘This number mcluded i) black COWS, 


quently mention red and white, and 
black and white, but do not give any 
direct mention of Duteh cattle. No 
writer before 1600 mentions any breed 
that even remotely resembles the Ayr- 
shire breed, but before 1800 the breed 
had spread over the county of Ayr and 
surrounding districts. 

Before and during this period there 
Was close connection and much = trade 
with Holland. It is not unlikely that 
many of the cattle of that country were 
imported before 1600. That) most. of 
the Ayrshires are red and white instead 
of black and white, may be due to the 


tact that more of the former color were 


imported from Holland. For example, 
many red and white cattle are. still 
found in some sections of Holland, and 
red and white scems to have been the 
common color of Dutch cattle before 
1750. It may be that most of the 
British importations were selected from 
such cattle. It is true that there are 
many differences between the Dutch and 
the Ayrshire cattle of today, but these 
differences might be expected from 
differences in selection, food and en- 
vironment during a period of several 
centuries. 

Speir also states that the Dutch 
paintings between 1600 and 1750 usually 
represent cattle as red and white in 
color, but after 1750 black and white 
seems to have become the popular color. 


Per cent, Number Per cent, 
1.90 5] Lan 
4+ &S {)() 4 &6O 

46 99 

40 78 1596 SO 34 

LOO) OO LS48 100) OO 


Brody® im a very interesting discus- 
sion of the Ayrshires, also refers to the 
color and oriwin of the breed. The 
following free quotations are taken 
from his paper: 

“The tendency towards partial albi- 
noism is quite pronounced in Ayrshires. 
This is rather remarkable for the breed 
originally was very dark colored, but 
systematic selection for color, as prac- 
ticed by the breeders, probably account: 
for the change in color. During the 
eivhteenth century only a few white 
markings were usually found, but as 
carly as 1811 Aiton? found that there 
was a decided tendency towards a 
mixture of white and brown markinys. 
That the darker colored animals were 
previously more Common 1s also shown 


by the reproductions of the Ayrshires 


of the latter part of the cighteenth 
century as well as by the method of 
designating the white spotted animals 
that were employed by the breeders. 
Cows with a white face were called 
‘bassened,’ those having white on the 
neck ‘hawked,’ those having white 
along the back or loin ‘rigged’ and if 
the switch of the tail was white they 
were called ‘tagged.’ This would seem 
to indicate that 1f white was present at 
all,it was confined to comparatively small 
areas and found on one part of the 
body only. Since that time a decided 
change has occurred with reference to 


’ Brody, Dr. Ladislaus, Die Ayrshires. Mitteilungen der Landwirthschaftlichen Lehrkanzeln 


der K. K. Hochschule far Bodenkultur in Wien. 


Aug. 18, 1914. 


* Aiton, William., General view of Agriculture of the County of Ayr, 1811, Glasgow. 








Kuhlman: Black and White Ayrshires 321 





CHAMPION AT THRE AYR SHOW 


Howie’s Sir Hugh, champion bull at the Ayr show in Scotland in 1914 and 1915. 9 Most of the 
prominent sires now in use in herds of Ayrshires resemble this bull in} cing mostly white; 
but the preference for a predominantly white bull seems to have no sound genetic bi 
(Ifig, 15, 

° ° ° . ) P ‘ ‘ 4 4 41 7 : 
the distribution of the color pattern in 3. John Speir clain hat the breed 
the Ayrshire. is ol Dutch origin. 

Phe results of Brody’s investigation $. Professor Wellace thinks it de- 
of the color of the breed are given in the cended trom the [vos lonetfron: 
following table: 5. San ()}) ar nat 11 a : # brid 

(olor of Animal Per cent. 
Almost wholly or mostly whit 35. 24 
qually white and brown 33.34 
Almo I wholly QT WO t]\ brown 25 70 
Black or black and whit 5.72 

100 OO 

As nothing is said about registration breed tracing to the celtic cattle and 
In this connection, if may be assumed howing certain resemblances to the 
that this tabulation was made without Kerry. 

iz oy . z ; — - P 44s ‘ 4 — { 4} he 4 Ti’ 7 +] ; 
considering it and it 1s very probable from a study of the history ol the 


that similar results could be obtained in British Isles as well as the skulls and 
many sections of the Ayrshire district. other characteristics of the Ayrshire, 
Among the many theories that are Brody assumes that the breed 1s of 
advanced as to the origin of the breed, celtic origin, had been bred pure tor 
he enumerates the following: a long time and was brought into 
1. A local theory is that the breed Scotland when the Celts were forced to 
was imported. withdraw before the Romans and later 
2. Some claim the breed was de- before the Anglo-Saxons. Of course 


veloped locally. these cattle resembled the present day 








322 The Journal 


breed very httlhe, and many changes 
have occurred since that time. Brody 
aecepts Aiton’s view of the later develop- 
ment of the breed. 

“Aiton reports that the cattle of 
Ayrshire tormerly were mostly black, 
with a white stripe along the back, 
white in the flank or face and had horns 
that turned 


were upwards and in- 
wards.’ 
“The present day breed Was le- 
veloped by imtroducing other blood, 
better care and selection. Lle states 


that about 1740 to 1800 a large number 
of Dutch well as Shorthorn cattle 
were imtroduced and with the 
native cattle. Which of the two were 
used more treely, is not certain, but as 
the Shorthorn was even then famous on 
the [sland and. also to obtain, 
this fact leads to the assumption that 
perhaps more Shorthorns than Dutch 
catile were used. The striking teature 


cls 


CV ¢ ssed 


Casier 


ot Heredity 


about it is that as a result’ of such 
unsystematic mtroduction and crossing, 
such a remarkably unitorm breed was 


obtained which for many decades has 
mantamed its individuality. ‘Two 
things may have aided in this——-(1) the 


Introduction of foreign blood may have 
been confined relatively short 
period and (2) as the work of develop- 
ment was probably begun in the large 
herds the smaller breeders fel] 
Into line and tollowed their example. 
Then, too, information about the merits 
of any animal or system of breeding 
would be quickly disseminated im such 
a small section as that m which the 
breed Wats developed.” 

Whatever may have been the origin 
ot the black in Ayrshires, ios certam 
that this color is as old) as the breed 
itselh and black and white Ayrshires 
are USI as Pure as those that 
other colors. 


Lo oa 


SOOT) 


at r\\ 


ANNUAL MEETING OF THE 
ASSOCIA TION 


Hts American Genetic Assocta- 
tion will hold its annual meeting 
at Berkeley, Caltforma, August 
2 6, inclusive. The 

now scheduled are as follows: 


SCSSTOTIS 


Monday atternoon, August 2, joint 


otf the Amerncan Genetic 
section for Animal Husbandry, American 
Association tor the Advancement of Science. 

Tuesday morning, August 3, opening 
ate. ® 

Tuesday atternoon, August 3, second session 
A. G. A. 

Wednesday, August 4, joint with 
A. A. A. S. at) Stantord University: ‘The 
Role of Variation and Heredity in Evolution.” 

Thursday morning, August 5, meeting of 
plant-breeding section, A. G. A. 


SeSS1ION 


Association with 


SECSSLOT 


SESS TIS 


Friday morning, .\ugust 6, joint meeting 
with section for Horticulture, A. A. A. 5. 


Friday afternoon, August 6, closing session 


of A. G. A. 


This program is subject to change. 
The complete outline of the meetings 
will be published about July 15, and 
a copy will be sent to any member who 
requests it. Address the secretary at 
Washington, or Professor E. B. Bab- 


University of California, Berkeley, 
Cahtfornia. 

All meetings ol the 
he Opch to the public. 
an Opportunity 
Paper. 

following Is an mcomplete list of the 
papers to be presented, embracing 
probably two-thirds of the whole. The 
titles of these papers are subject LO 
change. 

I. 2D. Ball and Byron Adler of the 
Utah [experiment Station, “Is lgy- 
laying in the White Leghorn a Unit 
Character 2". Results of tests extend- 
Ing over number of years and designed 
to show in what way the capacity of 


C*¢ Yo 


will 
Phere will he 
for discussion. of 


aSSOCLALION 


each 


high egglaving is inherited will be 
presented. 
Ie. KE. Barker, Cornell University, 


>] 


“Color Studies in the Morning Glory. 

S. Boshnakian, Cornell University, 
“A Better Method for Representing 
Mendehan Segregation,” and “A Coet- 
ficient of Squarchead Form . Necessary 
for the Statistical Study of Density 1n 


Wheat.” 








Annual Meeting of the Association 


Leon J. Cole, University of Wiscon- 
sn, will describe some otf the experi- 
mental breeding done there to deter- 
mine the facts of inheritance in pigeons. 

GG. N. Collins and J. H. Kempton ot 
the Bureau of Plant) Industry will 
deseribe crosses of Tripsacum and leuch- 
lacna, two grasses, Which may throw heht 
on the ancestry of cultivated maize. 

B. O. Cowan, Santa Monica, Cah- 
forma, “Inbreeding.” 

R. A. Emerson, Cornell University, 
“Genetic Correlation between Plant 
Colors and Aleurone and endosperm 
(‘olors in Corn.” 

Albert FF. fetter, Briceland, Cahs- 
forma, will deseribe his methods of 
strawberry breeding. Professor Roy 
IS. Clausen of the University of Cah- 
fornia Will show lantern shdes of the 

ub ject. 

Irving basher, professor of cconomic: 
cil Vale University, ha promised LO 
peak on the relation between cugeni 
and sOoclology, 

A. ©. Fraser, Cornell University, 
“Teredity mm Phaseolus.” 

I. |, Cacanies, Pullman, Wa h., “The 
Inheritance of OQuahtative factors 1 
Small Grams: results obtamed at the 
Washington State Ixperiment Station 

Alexander (salbraith, Delwalb, I]... 
“Tnbreeding, a deseription of his ex 
permence with Clydesdale horses and 
other stock. 

Ro Rugeles Gate University of 
London, “On Successive Duplicate Mu- 
tations’ and “The Modification — of 
Characters by Crossing.” 

A. W. Gilbert, Cornell University, 
“Color Inheritance in Phlox drime- 
mlondl,” 

frank M. Harding, secretary Ameri- 
can Shorthorn Breeders Association, 
Chicago, I1., “Tnbreeding.”’ 

MH. =6oHayward, Delaware 
ment Station, “Inbreeding.” 

A. CC. Hottes, Cornell Univer ity, 
“Multiple Hybrids, with Special Refer- 
ence to the Genus Gladiolus.’’ 

David Starr Jordan, Chancellor of 
Leland Stanford Junior University, 
“The Long Cost of War.” 

Wilhelmina E. Key, Hartland, Wis.. 
“Creating a Eugenic Conscience.” 

HM. 1. Knowlton, Cornell University, 


lyxperi- 


- 
IN 
wr 


“Studies in Pollen Germination.’’ 

samuel ©, Kohs, House of Correction, 
Chicago, Ill, “Eugenics and the Un- 
consclous.,’’ 

Isabel McCracken, Stantord Univer- 
sity, ‘“‘Notes on Silkworm Heredity, 
with Special Reference LO the Moricaud 
Race.” 

C.L. Redfield, Chicago, Hl...‘ Dynamic 
evolution.” 

G. PP. Rixtord, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, San francisco, Cal., ‘the 
Pistacio Nut in the Southwest and 
Some Morphological Features in- the 
Development ot the lembryo.’ 

A. 5. Rosanoft, Kany Park State 
Hospital, Loney Island, N ¥.,  rre- 
laminar, Report of a Study ()| the 
Offspring of the Insane.” 

A. DD. Shamel, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, Riverside, Cal., ‘Problem 
of the Navel Orange.” 

R. RR. Slocum, Bureau of Animal 
Industry, Washington, ID. C., “Poultry 


Breeding: illustrated with motion 


picture 

\V 13 Swit 0) Lon State Lf pital 
soston, Aa “The Possibilities of 
Voice Inhentance.”’ 

W. ‘TF. Swingle, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, Washington, ID. ©... ‘Plant 


sreediny in Japan.” 

lethel H. Thayer, Mendocino State 
Hospital, Talmage, Cal., ‘“Cacogeni 
Problem nn Calwornia.’”’ 

(. CC. Thomas, Cornell University 
“Preliminary ()}) ervation ()}) Varia 
tions in J/rillium  vgrandijfiorum and 
Podophyllum peltatum 

IK. N. Wentworth, Kansa Stat 
Agricultural College, Manhattan, Kan 
“Sex-limited [nheritanc 


** 


G. L. Fundel, Cornell Univers: 
“Evolution of Celery” and “‘Diseas 
Resistance in Celery.” 

The Surgeon General, U. S. Public 
Health Ss rVvice , ha PTO! ed () Ci 1] 
one of his assistants to speak on immi- 


yration through the port of San Frai 
CISCO, aS 1t bears on cugenics. 

several motion picture films will 
shown, including one illustrating the 
horse breeding work of the U. ». le pari - 
ment of Agriculture. 

A number of the papers will 


4 


illustrated with the stereontic 








ET TERSBURG STRAWBERRIES 


Successful Hybridizing of Many Species and Varieties in Northern California 
Leads to Production of New Sorts Which Are Apparently Adapted 
to Meeting Almost All Requirements. 


Roy Lf. 


lnstructor in Genetics, College 


of Agriculture, 


(*LAUSEN 


(niverstty of California, berkeley, 


( altf. 


N THE early seventies a Captain 

Cousins, in command of a freighter 

plying between North and South 

American Coast points, brought from 
Callao, Peru, to Eureka, California, some 
plants of the sand strawberry, /*ragaria 
chiloensis, mdigenous to that region. 
He turned these plants over to A. J. 
Monroe of Eureka, and from him Albert 
I. etter of Bricecland, Caltornia, ob- 
tained the strain of Peruvian Beach 
strawberry which he has since used so 
successfully in his strawberry breeding 
work. This) strawberry crossed with 
an interior third generation seedling of 
Sharpless x Parry gave, among twelve 
others, his first superior seedling, Rose 
ittersburg. Since then Mr. Etter has 
made numerous other crosses, using not 
only the wild Peruvian beach straw- 
berry, but the beach strawberries native 
to California as well, the wood straw- 
berry of the interior of California, the 
Alpine strawberry, and in later times 
others in addition to these. Some 10,000 
seedlings have been fruited in the course 
of the twenty vears following the pro- 
duction of the Rose Ettersburg straw- 
berry, and the success that has been 
achieved well merits the attention here 
e1ven it. 

Mr. Etter’s success is unquestionably 
due to the skilful way in which he has 
united the advantageous characteristics 
of a number of distinct species and 
forms, and cannot, therefore, be con- 
sidered intelligently without giving due 
attention to these forms. In the course 
of his work he has made a considerable 
collection of strawberry varieties and 
species, including a large number of the 





1 Georgeson, C. C. 
324 


variclics grown commercially im the 
United States and several from french 
sources, besides the strictly wild specics 
of which a number are represented. 

The first and foremost of the specics 
Which Mr. Etter has used is /*. chiloensts, 
the sand or beach strawberry. This 
strawberry is native to) the Pacific 
Coast of the Americas and is distributed 
from South American points well up 
into Alaska, and has also been collected 
at Argentine points on the cast coast of 
south America. In this region it) is 
strictly coastal in its habitat, growing 
at most perhaps not more than 2 miles 
inland. It grows on the bleakest and 
most wind swept situations, enduring 
alike the sterile soil of the beach and 
the salt spray of the ocean. [ven in 


Alaska, Georgeson! writes of it) thus: 


THE BEACH STRAWBERRY 


“The species is known as /ragaria 
chiloensis. It grows along the coast 
from Muir Glacier to Prince William 
Sound and probably also in other places, 
but throughout this region it is quite 
abundant. Its favorite soil is the sand 
and gravel along the old beach line just 
above the reach of high water. It here 
disputes the possession of the surface 
with grasses and weeds of many kinds 
and is quite able to hold its own against 
them.”’ 

In fact wherever found it appears to 
be .a notable characteristic of /. 
chiloensis that it is able by virtue of a 
deep rooting system and hardy fohage 
to endure the most unfavorable condi- 
tions with respect to the fertility of the 
soil and the available supply of moisture. 








An. Rept. Alaska Expt. Sta., 1909, p. 11. 





, > 
‘Ridia 4+ | 


-,. 








Clausen: Ittersburg Strawberries 325 


an poi “teat ion nee ext 
es Pre ee Gere ‘mage a 
“ns Ne a ie al 





STRAWBERRIES FOR LAWN PLANTING 


The beach or sand strawberry (fragarta chiloensts) which occurs almost from one end to the 


4 oe 


other of the Pacific coast. 1s so hardy and resistant to all sorts of unfavorable condition 


’ 


that it is often used in that region to cover 


, 


ing. ‘This photograph shows it so used 
at Berkeley, California. (Fig. 16.) 


But aside from these general char- 
acteristics of the sand strawberries of 
the Pacific Coast, the species shows a 
remarkable diversity of forms, so much 
so as to lend considerable support to 
the tendency of some systematists to 
sub-divide the group still further. Mr. 
letter has growing at Ettersburg half a 
dozen strains of Ff. chiloensis from 
Chilean, Peruvian, and Californian 
sources and all of them possess distinct 
characteristics which would unmistak- 
ably separate them from one another, 
and all appear to present notable 


~ 


differences from the Alaskan form 


| ° | | 
1) Gy Cz Dia Im) 1a ape ~Yaradcn- 


and flowering freely, on the university campu 


which Georgeson has used so successfully 
in his plant breeding work. Thus for 
cxample we have forms with light green 
foliage and petioles covered with a 
dense coarse pubescence. The Cali- 
fornia forms for the most part have 
glossy dark green leaves practically 


free from anv pubescence. Some forms 

have characteristically long fruiting 

trusses, while in others the trusses are 

short. In some forms the berries are 

nearly white in color. while others bear 

distinctly red berries. The differences 
er, and thev 


« 


extend to every charact 


. af | ” 
mentioned here because thev serve as 


























: 
ne 3 ee 


ee Je 


* 


7) 


The Journal of Heredity 


.\ .\ 

ANS 

ay he 
2 


2 an ae 


\\ %, 5) La ' VELA! 


=. 
bath * 





HYBRIDS ARE NOTED FOR VIGOR 

The center row in this photograph is a collection of ordinary commercial varieties of straw- 
berry; while on either side are rows of hybrids produced by Albert F. Etter. It is wel! 
known that, in general, hybridization tends to increase the vigor of plants and animals, 
and this fact is often turned to advantage in modern breeding. It is evident that the Etters- 
burg strawberries are much more vigorous growers than common commercial varieties 
which, although originally hybrids, have been propagated so long that they have lost most 
of the benefit accruing to them from their original hybridization. (Fig. 17.) 


an indication of the extreme variability 
which consequently might be expected 
in the hybrids. 

The two other species which have 
been used extensively in the hybrids 
thus far produced are fF. vesca semper- 
florens, the Alpines, and F. californica, 
the native wood strawberry. Stock of 
the former was obtained by growing 
seedlings from seed supplied by John 
Lewis Childs of Floral Park, New York. 
Some of these seedlings bore red and 
others white berries, and some of the 
plants produced runners and others did 
not, as is characteristic of the Alpine 
strawberries. All of these forms were 
used in the hybridization work. The 
wood strawberry used was derived from 
local sources and displayed the char- 





acteristics usual for that species, namely 
free production of very small inferior 
berries and a tendency towards winter 
growing. These three represent all the 
wild species concerned in the hybrids 
considered in this article. Others are 
now being used, among them F. 
cunetfolia, a distinct and somewhat 
peculhar type from Oregon, and F. 
chinensis varieties originally derived 
from Chinese sources. 


GARDEN VARIETIES USED 


As a foundation for the work a 
number of common garden varicties 
which have met with some favor in 
California have been used. Among 
these are the Sharpless and Parry, 
previously mentioned, and of the others, 








‘ ene 











Clausen: Ettersburg Strawberries 


Michel’s Early, Senator Dunlap, Mar- 
shall, Chesapeake, Crescent, William 
Belt, Bederwood, Dornan, and Aus- 
tralian Crimson have yielded promising 
hybrids. It is unnecessary to go into 
the characteristics of these, because 
they are well known and further because 
these characteristics, except in so far 
as they are common to all the straw- 
berry varieties in general cultivation, 
would lend but little aid to a study of 
the hybrids which have been produced 
from them. Suffice it to sav that the 
garden varictics which are represented 
in the pedigrees of the best of Mr. 
Etter’s productions are not there be- 
cause they have displaved any particular 
value in this respect compared with 
garden varicties which are not repre- 
sented. 

The methods which Mr. Etter uses 
in his strawberry breeding work are 
very simple but admirably adapted to 
the material with which he is working. 
In many cases advantage is taken of the 
fact that pistillate strains exist within 
the species and forms with which he is 
working, and in almost all his crosses 
such pistillate strains and varicties 
have been used as the mother parents. 
Shortly after the blossoms on_ these 
selected mother plants open a flower of 
the desired male parent is bound over 
it with a strip of muslin, and the pollen 
then is scattered over it by the thrips 
which work around in the blossoms and 
also by the mere contact of the two 
flowers. In case the desired female 
parent is perfect flowering the stamens 
are, of course, removed before pollina- 
tion. The strip of muslin with the 
label attached to it remains over the 
fruit untilitisripe. When the fruits are 
ripe they are picked and enclosed in 
little muslin bags. They are then 
mashed together and hung up to fer- 
ment for a few days, after which the 
pulp is washed away from the seeds as 
thoroughly as possible. The seeds are 
sown immediately in specially prepared 
seed boxes in which spaces are marked 
off for each different cross, and there 
the voung seedlings remain until they 
are strong enough to be transplanted to 
the field. No particular attempt is 
made to hasten germination, consc- 


327 


quently under these conditions most of 
the seeds germinate the second year 
after sowing. Obviously these methods 
do not enable us to be absolutely sure 
of the parentage of the seedlings, but 
any doubt as to their hybrid nature 
would be soon dispelled by a study of 
the seedlings and their parent plants. 


THOROUGH TESTS GIVEN 


The second teature of Mr. Etter’s 
methods lies in the thorough test to 
which all seedlings thus secured are 
subjected. They are first transplanted 
to the trial patch where they are 
planted in hills, usually three in each 
hill. Here they remain until they fruit. 
Those which prove inferior from the 
start are soon rooted up while those 
which seem to possess desirable qualities 
are given Ettersburg numbers and 
subjected to a further test in four to 
ten hill units. There they may be 
compared directly with previous selec- 
tions which have made good and, if 
found especially worthy, they are further 
subdivided and propagated. Mr. Etter 
has no faith either in his own or any- 
body else’s ability to pick out the 
varieties which will be successful by any 
other method than that of a thorough 
trial; and in the same way in selecting 
his parents for hybridization, he is 
suided only by the dictates of 
experience. 

The selections which Mr. Etter has 
made have been based almost entirely 
on the commercial value of the char- 
acteristics that the seedlings have dis- 
played under trial. The endeavor has 
been made to improve the strawberry in 
vigor, in quality of fruit with respect to 
texture, flavor, color, etc., in produc- 
tiveness, and in such other character- 
istics as might increase its commercial 
value. <A few freaks have been produced 
in the course of the work but they are 
merely by-products and very few of 
them have been retained. In the work 
several objects have been held in mind, 
such as the production of strawberry 
varieties particularly suitable to the 
home garden, the production of others 
suitable for canning, and the production 
of still other varieties suited to more or 
less special demands. Perhaps these 








328 The Journal 


features may be best brought before 
the reader by a specific conside ration of 
a few of the varieties which have been 
retained. 

Rose Ettersburg, the first successful 
variety, is a hybrid of a third generation 
Sharpless x Parry seedling by Peruvian 
Beach. It is a strong, vigorous grower 
and produces large berries, always true 
to shape, and of a light pink or rose 
color, thus indicating its Peruvian 
Beach parentage. It is remarkable for 
its quality and fragrance, the flavor is 
decidedly different from other straw- 
berries, and on that account desirable 
or undesirable according to individual 
tastes. It possesses the usual extreme 
vigor of the Beach hybrids, and has 
produced at the rate of 8 tons per acre 
on Mr. Etter’s place without irrigation. 
Its light color and rather peculiar flavor 
would probably be against it at the 
present time as a general commercial 
variety. It is a splendid variety, how- 
ever, for the home garden. 

Ettersburg No. 121 is supposedly a 
direct hybrid of the two species Alpine 
x Cape Mendocino Beach. Like Rose 
Bese de it is very vigorous and pro- 
ductive; unlike Rose Ettersburg the 
berries are deep glossy red in color and 
even the flesh is intensely red to the 
center. This is one of the many Etters- 
burg varieties that pick without the 
hulls like blackberries and with about 
as little abrasion, a characteristic which 
is derived from the Alpines. The 
variety is notable for high quality and 
solidity. It has a full, sweet flavor that 
could not fail to be attractive to anyone 
who likes strawberries. The profusion 
of blossoms which it produces makes it a 
beautiful sight when in bloom. This 
is a variety of considerable commercial 
promise. 

A COMPLEX HYBRID 

Ettersburg Trebla, formerly Etters- 
burg No. 222, in contradistinction to 
Ettersburg No. 121 possesses a very 
complex pedigree as shown in the 
following outline: 


(Seedling No. 3 


(Ettersburg No. 84 


-Unnumbered seedling 


Ettersburg Trebla 


‘Unnumbered seedling 


Ettersburg No. 114 - 


| Alpine 


of Heredity 


When the derivation of Rose Etters- 
burg, as given previously, is considered 
it can be seen how complicated this 
pedigree is and how many species and 
varieties are included in it. 

Out of this mixed ancestry has been 
derived the variety which Mr. Etter 
considers his best variety thus far. 
This variety evidently considers its 
mission in life to be the production of 
fruit, and splendid fruit at that. The 
berries are of medium size, deep red, 
and solid to the center. Eaten fresh it 
is a berry that would not appeal to 
most people on account of its high 
acidity, but in canning it develops a 
remarkably rich and pleasant flavor. 
Like Ettersburg No. 121 it picks with- 
out the hull and with scarcely any 
abrasion. At Mr. Etter’s place it has 
produced at the rate of 20 tons per acre. 
The plants present a peculiar appear- 
ance at fruiting time when the heavy 
foliage is mostly weighed down by the 
large quantities of fruit produced and 
only a few stiff leaves remain erect. 
We have here a variety which is ap- 
parently particularly suitable for canning. 
The solidity of the berry is such that it 
has no tendency to break down during 
the canning process, and the deep color, 
high flavor, productiveness, and case 
with which it may be prepared tor 
canning are other features which make 
it an especially desirable variety on 
which to build up a strawberry canning 
industry. 

Ettersburg No. 200 is a cross between 
Senator Dunlap and the Peruvian 
Beach strawberries. It is merely a 
unique novelty. The berries are small 
to medium in size, and with only a very 
faint pink color, very nearly white. 
The achenes (seeds), however, are deep 
red in color and set in deep depressions 
in the surface of the fruit. <A single 


plant has borne as many as 200 berries 


at one time. It is strongly Peruvian 
Beach in its characteristics and is 
certainly a strange strawberry. 


{Rose Ettersburg 
F. californica 

/Cape Mendocino Beach 
Rose Ettersburg 

'F. californica 
Rose Ettersburg 























TWO TYPES OF STRAWBERRY BLOSSOM 


Commercial varieties of strawberries fall in two classes: those with perfect flowers, including 


both stamens and pistils (as shown at the top of the photograph) and those whose flowers 
lack the male element, and are called pistillate. A flower of this type is shown at the 
bottom of the photograph. It is obvious that if plants of the second type are grown 
exclusively, the flowers cannot be fertilized, and will produce no fruit. It is therefore 
necessary for every grower to have at least some plants of the perfect-flowering type, 
in order to pollinate the blossoms and ensure a crop. It is not advisable to limit a planting 
to a single variety, even if this have perfect flowers, because although they will produce 
an abundance of pollen, yet it has been shown by experiment that better results are 
secured when cross-pollination takes place from some other variety. Photograph by 
Fairchild. (Fig. 18.) 








330 


These are typical examples of the 
results which have followed Mr. Etter’s 
strawberry breeding work, and they 
are only a few cases selected as illustra- 
tions of these results. The most 
remarkable general characteristic of 
the hybrids is their extreme vigor lead- 
ing to the production of a deep rooting 
system and of stiff, leathery, heat 
resistant foliage unlike any of the com- 
mon garden varieties. On this account 
it is actually necessary to grow some of 
the varieties under not too favorable 
conditions lest they expend their energy 
in the production of a rampant vegeta- 
tive growth at the expense of the pro- 
duction of fruit. 


DIVERSITY OF TYPE 

This extreme vigor, perhaps an illus- 
tration of the stimulating effects of 
crossing, gives the strong foundation to 
which many other desirable features 
have been added. Some of the hybrids 
produce fruit which is nearly white in 
color and from them we have a con- 
tinuous series of varieties with respect 
to color of fruit up to those which 
produce deep glossy red fruit with 
intensely red flesh. The flavors are 
even more extensive in range. Many of 
them are peculiar and not easy to 
describe, some resemble the flavors of 
other fruits, banana, muskmelon, Tar- 
tarian cherry, raspberry, and so on; 
and we would not greatly exaggerate 
if we were to compare the range of 
flavors found here with that occurring 
in the apple. In acidity the hybrids 
vary from those which are_ insipid, 
watery, and practically tasteless to, 
those which are very acid, lemon sour 
in fact: and some are full, rich, and 
sweet. The texture and quality of the 
flesh is another item to which Mr. 
Etter has given special attention, partic- 
ularly with reference to use in canning, 
and for this he has had a wide range of 
forms from which to make selections. 
Some of the hybrids seem to possess 
practically no substance, they are ex- 
tremely watery like many ot the 
common garden varieties, and on can- 
ning naturally break down into a purée 
mixture with little solid matter in it. 
There are others which are somewhat 


The Journal 


of Heredity 


firmer, but some of these do not possess 
the desired uniformity of texture—in- 
stead they are inclined to be fibrous. 
A few are firm and solid to the center 


with no suggestion of a core. These 
stand up well when canned. They 


remain firm and solid and retain their 
shape remarkably well. There is also 
naturally enough a large range of sizes 
and shapes from small to very large, 
from spherical to sorts which are very 
elongated or even irregular. Some of 
the varieties pick free from the hulls and 
others pick in the usual way, the former 
characteristic apparently representing 
a heritage from the Alpine race. This 
is a characteristic which is of consider- 
able importance from a canning stand- 
point. In productiveness there are all 
degrees up to the 20 tons per acre limit 
of Ettersburg Trebla. <A fairly large 
percentage of the varicties are imperfect 
flowering as might be expected on 
account of the use of such forms so 
extensively in the hybridization work; 
and some of these varieties have a 
tendency to produce irregular berries, 
apparently on account of imperfect 
fertilization. These then represent some 
of the variations found in the Ettersbureg 
hybrid strawberries, and among. the 
200 or more which have been found 
worthy of further trial it is possible to 
please almost any taste or satisfy any 
demand. 


WIDE ADAPTABILITY 


The question naturally arises as to 
the adaptability of these hybrids to 
various environmental conditions, and 
on this question we unfortunately do 
not possess a very extensive knowledge 
as yet. Under the conditions obtaining 
in the northern coast region of Cali- 
fornia they have demonstrated their 
excellence and fitness. These condi- 
tions, however, are almost ideal for 
strawberry growing. The soil on which 
they have been grown is rich, newly 
cleared forest land, perhaps somewhat 
acid; the climate is mild, and there is 
sufficient rainfall to carry them through 
the fruiting season in good shape. The 
hybrids are being tested throughout 
California and at several experiment 
stations, and preliminary reports of 














Clausen: Ettersburg Strawberries 331 


these trials are on the whole very 
encouraging. Thus in New York 
Taylor? has tested seventeen of the 
varictics which have been introduced, 
and even under the totally different 
conditions of that locality with respect 
to soil and climate he has found four of 
them good enough to include in his hist 
of desirable varicties. It appears, there- 
fore, that some will be found excellently 
adapted to other than the ideal condi- 
tions of Humboldt County. Their 
remarkable vigor and their deep rooting 
system and drouth resistant foliage 
would indicate an ability to withstand 
trying summer conditions with respect 
to heat and drouth, and such in fact is 
the case. The enduring qualities of F. 
chiloensis are, if anything, accentuated 
in. the hybrids. The varictics un- 
doubtedly deserve a wide and thorough 
trial, and the indications are that, when 
the story of that trial shall have been 
told, certain of the hybrids will have 
been found adapted to almost any con- 
dition under which strawberrics are 
eTOWN. 

The work which Mr. Etter has done 
has great significance in practical straw- 
berry breeding. Whether or not it has 
succeeded in producing varieties which 
are suitable for all the varied needs and 
conditions of strawberry growing 1s 
not so important as the fact that it has 
demonstrated the wonderful possibilities 
which lie in practical strawberry breed- 
ing, and has developed a method of 
attack of that problem which vields 
remarkable results. Most important of 
all is the demonstration of the fact that 
further hybridization of the common 
garden varieties of the strawberry, 
themselves supposedly largely F. chilo- 
ensis derivatives, with wild forms of 
that species results in a notable increase 
in vigor and in the production of new 
varictics superior in every respect to 
the commonly cultivated ones. George- 


son,’ endeavoring to breed new varieties 
of strawberries suitable for Alaskan 
conditions by hybridizing their native 
I. chiloensis with a common garden 
varicty, has found exactly the same 
thing to be true, and his enthusiastic 
accounts of the work remind one very 
much of the parallel results which Mr. 
Etter 1s securing under California 
conditions. 
SECRETS OF SUCCESS 

We have reported in this article the 
remarkable results which Mr. Etter 
has secured in thirty vears of persistent 
and intelligent strawberry breeding. 
This success is due to the fact that he 
has become thoroughly familiar with 
the material with which he is working 
and has evolved a method of strawberry 
breeding which has proved very effec- 
tive in the production of new, superior 
varieties. Essentially this method is 
the same as that which has_ been 
adopted by a number of successful plant 
breeders, namely that of hybridization 
followed by thorough trial and careful 
selection. The work of selection is of 
course simplified in the strawberry by 
the tact that vegetative propagation 
may be used to perpetuate any par- 
ticularly excellent individual, and that 
perhaps with very little likelihood of 
any subsequent deterioration. The 
selection in effect has been made through 
several generations, as is usually neces- 
sary betore the desired combinations of 
characteristics are secured. While the 
new varieties thus secured have not 
vet been thoroughly tested, present 
indications are that many of them will 
prove highly successful under a variety 
of conditions. At any rate a successful 
method of attack in strawberry breeding 
has been discovered, and these Etters- 
burg hybrid strawberries are a success- 
ful application of that method. 


2 Taylor, O. M., Strawberry Varieties. New York Geneva Sta. Bul. 401, pp. 165-192, 1915. 
’ Georgeson, C. C. An. Repts. Alaska Expt. Sta., 1906-1913. 








THE FIRST-BORN’S HANDICAP 


Accumulation of Statistics Appears to Show That Eldest Members of a Family 


Are ‘‘Weighted”’ 


Possible Explanations of the Fact. 


REVIEW OF A Book BY KARL PEARSON 


Director, Galton Laboratory for National Eugenics, University of London. 


HIEN Karl Pearson, in 1907, 
published statistics which 
appeared to show that the 
first and = second-born in 
any given fraternity or sibship were 
more likely to be attacked by tuber- 
culosis and were, therefore, presumably 
constitutionally inferior, in that respect 
at least, to their later brothers and 
sisters, his conclusions did not lack 
assailants. The succeeding vears have 
seen a good deal of work on the problem, 
the latest contribution being from 
Pearson himself.! Before its contents 
are considered, it may be of interest to 
recall Pearson’s original contribution, 
which Schuster sums up as follows: 
“The Crossley Sanatorium at Frod- 
sham is filled with lower middle-class 
and working-class patients suffering from 
consumption, who come mostly from 
Manchester and, to a lesser degree, 
from Liverpool and its neighborhood. 
From the records kept of the family 
histories of the patients it 1s possible to 
tell how many came in cach particular 
place in their familics. It was then 
found that of 381 patients, 113 were 
first-born and 79 second-born. When 
the patients and all their brothers and 
sisters, living or dead, are taken to- 
ecther, it was found that in the 381 
families there were 381 first-born and 
366 second-born. Dividing these num- 
bers by the average number of children 
per family, one arrives at the number of 
first-born and second-born which, ac- 
cording to the theory of probability, 
one would expect to find in a sample 
made up by picking one child at random 
from each family. The numbers are 67 
and 64. The 381 sanatorium patients 


es? 


1Qn the Handicapping of the First-born, by Karl Pearson, F. 
four diagrams, pp. 68, price two shillings net. 
National Eugenics, Eugenics Lecture Series X. 


W., 1914. 


332 


London, Dulau and Co, Ltd., . 


may be regarded as a sample selected 
by consumption, one from each family 


and among them the corresponding 
numbers are 113 and 79—that is to 


say, about 1%4 times as many first-born 
and 1!'4 times as many second-born, as 
in the random sample of the same size. 
As the differences are too large to be 
due to chance, they appear to show 
that consumption does not pick at 
random, but selects more particularly 
the first-born and second-born. With 
regard to the third and later born 
members the differences were reversed, 
there being fewer of these among the 
patients than would be the expectation 
if the latter were drawn by chance, one 
from each family.’’ 

Pearson contented himself with pre- 
senting the statistics, not attempting to 


explain them. Huis critics attacked 
them from two sides—first on purely 
statistical grounds, and second, by 


attempting to explain them away. 
Pearson’s new paper on the subject is 
devoted largely to refuting those of his 
critics who attacked him on purely 
statistical grounds; and into this aspect 
of the case the reviewer will not go. 
Those who are interested in the mathe- 
matical theories involved may consult 
the original paper. Pearson also sums 
up the evidence in support of his con- 
tention, however, and brings forward 
new data which equally tend to indicate 
that the first-born members of a popula- 
tion are weighted. It may be of 
interest to review this data. 

DIVISION OF 


THE PROBLEM 


There are, it is evident, several ways 
in which a statistically demonstrated 


R.S. With frontispiece and 
University of London, Galton Laboratory for 
Soho Square, 


he 
—— 
Y/ 

















a 








Pearson: The First-Born’s Handicap RR 


handicap of the first-born might be 
made up, and it is important for the 
reader to keep in mind these differences. 
If there were a lot of one-child families 
in the population, and if this single 
child in each case were inferior, it is 
obvious that he or she would be listed 
as first-born in an enumeration, and 
the first-borns as a whole would get a 


~ ~ 


black mark from the bad record of 
these one-child families; whereas it 
is conceivable that the first-borns in 
large familics might at the same time 
be as good as or better than any of 
their brothers or sisters. 

[tis by such an explanation that some 
of Pearson’s critics attacked his statistics 
from the Crossley sanitorium, as. will 
be later explained. 

Qn the other hand, it might be that 
the first-born in a family was inferior 
to his or her own brothers and sisters. 
To demonstrate this would obviously 
require a different line of statistical 
attack; and the meaning of the results, 
from a cugenic point of view, would like- 
wise be distinctly different. Following 
Pearson's original contribution, many 
investigators have adopted this second 
method of attack altogether. The 
problem it involves is the more interest- 
ing and perhaps likewise the more 
important, but Pearson contends, and 
with apparent justice, that both prob- 
lems are worthy of solution, and that 
the cugenist can not be content if the 
case 1s approached from cither side 
alone. 

In his new memoir he has worked out 
methods of analyzing his data from 
both points of view. Unfortunately 
his results are not easily followed in 
detail by a reader who lacks training in 
advanced statistical method. This is 
the more unfortunate, because in some 
instances a handicap is discernible by 
the one method of attack, but from the 
other viewpoint is found to be non- 
existent—thus in epilepsy, it appears 
that the greater number ot. first-born 
in asylums is due to the fact that they 
come from tainted stocks, and not to 
the fact that they are first-born. 

This distinction must be kept in 
mind, whenever the problem of the 
first-born’s handicap is. studied, for 
without it an entirely erroneous result 


will be reached, a result likely to cause 
needless anguish to some of the large 
number of first-born children in the 
world. 


DANGERS AT BIRTH 


Before attacking the problem from 
the conventional side, Pearson notes 
the dangers which meet the first-born 
even at birth. Ansell has given the 
still-births per 1,000 born alive, in order 
of birth for 48,843 births; the rate for 
the first-born is 40, for the second-born 
20, for the third-born 15.5, {or the 
fourth to sixth 17.4 and for the seventh 
and over 20.9. ‘It will be seen that 
still-births for the first-born are double 
those of later births. And this dis- 
advantage follows the first-born tnto 
the first vear of life.”” The intantile 
mortality of the 1 rofessional and upper 
classes for 48,843 births, hkewise com- 
piled by Ansell, shows that in the first 
vear, per 1,000 born alive, the tollowing 
numbers dic: 


I es ee te eM ore 82.2 
et e.g | cr re 10 
I ooo 5 ag ds dik ca een 69 
Powrth tO Stet... . .- oc ccc cece: 718.3 
Seventh and over........... ..... DI.4 


Confirmatory data collected by the 
Galton Laboratory from the manutfac- 
turing towns of northern [England are 
eiven. In Sheffield, “it is not till we 
eet to the eight or ninth birth that the 
mortality is as great as for the first- 
born.” The health of the children 
follows a similar course—it 1s not until 
the thirteenth child, in about 4,400 
cases from Sheffield, that we find as 
much delicacy as in the first-born. 
This inferiority in health, of course, to 
some extent wears off with age, but it 
would still appear to be appreciable 
at twelve and thirteen, according to 
statistics quoted from school inspections. 

Physical evidence of the defect of the 
first-born is also found in statistics as 
to the weights and lengths of 2,000 
babies, made at Lambeth’ Lying-in 
Hospital. The first-born, both 1n boys 
and girls,weighs less and is shorter than 
the subsequent children, who in gencral 
increase regularly in these respects in 
accordance with their order of birth. 
There is some reason to believe that 
this increase is correlated to the increas- 








334 The Journal 


ing ave of the mother. ‘We have, 
however, distinctly guarded ourselves 
from any expression of the source of 
the inferiority of the first-born till the 
data, slowly accumulating, suffices to 
determine how much the first-born pays 
tor the juvenility and how much for 
the inexperience of its parents. 

“It will be seen from the totality of 
the above results that physically, in 
the carly months of life, the first- or 
earher-born babies are inferior to any 
balnes betore at least the seventh or 
ciyhth. We have now to ask whether 
this inferiority persists to later life, and 
whether it shows itself also in congenital 


rar t q*] 
CONGENITAL DEFECTS 


ldiocey or iambecilitv is the first 
defect considered. No matter in what 
way the data are analyzed, it appears 
that there is a distinet bias against the 


Weeks’ American data on epilepsy 
are next analyzed. *‘We must, I think, 


a weighting of the elder-born 
even in epilepsy, this is due to a selec- 
tion of families rather than to a sclec- 


tion of the elder-born in each individual 
amily.’ In other words, the statistical 
observation that there are more first- 
born than later-born cpileptics in an. 
asvlum is of no significance except 
when a large population is considered— 


it does not mean that in any given 
family the first-born is hkely to be 
inferior in this respect to his or her 
SUCCCSSOTS. 

The data for insanity are said not to 
have been available for such full 
analysis as were data of other defects. 
They appear to show that there is a 
weighting of the elder-born in the case 
of insanity, but they do not furnish 
grounds for saving that this may not 
he due merely to the fact that the 
subjects observed come of defective 
stocks. 

Pedigrees of 952 albinos of European 
race are next examined. There is 
marked excess of albinos among the 
first-born: 241 cases instead of the 216 


lude by recognizing that, while. 


of Heredity 


expected by the theory of probability; 
the second-born have no excess and 
the last-born seem to show a slight 
defect. “I think there cannot be the 
least doubt,’ Pearson concludes, “of 
a quite significant weighting of the 
first-born in the matter of albinism.”’ 

Criminality, on the basis of Dr. 
Goring’s figures, seems equally to be a 
prerogative of the elder members of the 
family. When expected and observed 
distribution of criminals in families of 
each size is computed, “the actually 
observed first- and second-born crim- 
inals amount together to 717 as against 
557 which would be anticipated if the 
tendency to crime were divided equally 
among all members. ‘There is a defect 
of both intermediates and of last-born 
criminals. The general bias against 
the elder-born appears amply substan- 
tiated on these data.” 

Statistics for the tuberculous are 
next considered, in a much more refined 
way than was attempted when the 
first study was made. [Even when each 
family is considered indiv-dually, it is 
found that there is a heavy preponder- 
ance of tuberculosis in the case of the 
first-borns, and a detect in the case of 
the late-borns. 

Pedigrees of fiftv families with con- 
genital cataract are finally taken up, and 
here too ‘the less robust members of a 
tainted stock—and such are the first- 
born—appear more likely to be 
affected.” 

CRITICISMS NOT VALID 

In conclusion, Pearson holds “that 
the criticisms raised against the handi- 
capping of the first-born are not valid. 
The first-born is very significantly 
handicapped, and this statistical result 
will coincide with a good deal of personal 
and individual experience.” 

At the risk of tiresome repetition, it 
must onc» more be pointed out that 
when the problem is demonstrated by 
statistics, the handicap of the first-born 
might. be of two kinds: 1t might be that 
the first-born in each family is actually 
inferior to the later-born, or it might be 
that the first-borns, as a whole, in the 


? The type of feeblemindedness known as Mongolian is excluded from consideration, because it 
is already known to be associated with late births in large families. It 1s ordinarily attributed to 


‘uterine exhaustion’’ of the mother. 


wer 
: 





ee IB 











Pou © 














s De 


Pearson: The First-Born’s Handicap 


population are an inferior group, because 
they come from inferior families. This 
point was particularly brought out by 
Dr. Alfred Ploetz of Munich, president 
of the International Society for Race 
Hygiene, in an address which he delivered 
before the First International Eugenics 
Congress (London, 1912). He said: 

‘Among the children of a number of 
marriages taken at random, there are a 
good many children of parents who 
died carly, consequently there 1s a high 
proportion of children who represent 
early members in birth-rank, and prin- 
cipally first, second and_ third-born. 
Because of the death of one or both 
parents there could be no later born. 
first, second and third-born children 
therefore come in a far greater percent- 
ave from early deceased, that is on the 
average weaker parents, than do the 
later born, and they will therefore 
inherit in a higher degree the weaker 
constitution of their weaker parents.” 

“There is) further another factor 
weighting small families,’ Pearson adds, 
“namely, they represent very — fre- 
quently an exhausted virility in the 
parents. Certain types of parental 
degeneracy seem incapable of producing 
more than one or two children at most,’ 
and the children of such parents are 
themselves teeble. But, if any small 
familics are thus. selected, we shall 
Increase the number of early borns in 
the diseased population, for such small 
famihes have no late-borns.”’ 

furthermore, he suggests ‘that the 
growth of the first child is hampered by 
conditions [physiological in the mother] 
Which exist to a far less extent for the 
following births; but these conditions 
will be much harder for the first-born 
child when its mother is forty than when 
she is twenty-five. But the resulting 
family in the former case is likely to be 
lar smaller than in the latter case. In 
other words, the handicapping of the 
first-born in small families may be 
increased by the addition of many 
small families in which the first-born is 
also late-born.”’ 





3 3 5 


Thus gencral statistics on the weight- 
ing of the first-born must carefully 
distinguish whether it is actually the 
individual, or the family, that is 
weighted; and in this fact lies comfort 
for first-born members of healthy 
families. 

Early critics appeared to think that 
the whole problem of the handicapping 
of the first-born might be explained 
away by this fact that in many cases 
it is the family, rather than the 1n- 
dividual, which is handicapped. Pear- 
son’s first statistics of the tuberculous 
were indeed vulnerable on this ground, 
but his re-analysis of the data takes 
both these factors into account and 
appears to show that 1n many Cases at 
least the first-born are handicapped 
altogether apart from the recognized 
weighting of small families. 


EVIL OF SMALL FAMILIES 


If this be the case, it seems evident 
that, from a biological point of view, and 
entirely apart from its cffect on up- 
setting the selective birth rate, the 
small family is detrimental to race 
progress. That, savs Pearson, “1s the 
reason why I have approached this 
subject at all. After this lecture was 
delivered, I was asked by an anxious 
mother: ‘Why, even if the doctrine be 
true, should it be published to the world 
as it would only alarm and so further 
injure a class of the community already 
asserted to be handicapped:’ My 
reply to that question is: ‘Study in 
the first place the incidence rates of 
these abnormalities we are discussing, 
and you will see that it is only in mass- 
statistics that the handicapping be- 
comes sensible.’ Further, | must add 
that in the science of Nationa] Eugenics 
we have to consider what profits the 
nation at large, and I feel strongly con- 
vineed that the present tendency (ex- 
hibited so markedly in France),* to 
make the first-born 50% instead of 
something less than 22% of the whole 
number’ of births, spells degeneracy. 
The individual feelings of the first-born, 


*'This does not necessarily contradict the generally well established principle that degenerate 


stocks are as a rule very fertile. 


‘The German birth-rate is notably high, but in Berlin the percentage of first-born in every 100 


births had increased from eighteen in 1880 to thirty-three in 1906. 


The reader will recall that 


Cattell’s statistics show American men of science almost habitually to have families of two children. 








’ 


even the handicapping were far more 
substantial than ats, cannot be con 
sidered to outweigh the national io 
portance of the problem. Tf this principle 
of the handicapping of the first-born be 
true, as |} have little doubt that it is 
and ab a simular principle holds for the 
last-born (to a lesser deevree ios true) 
tor some conditions like Mongolian 
mnbectity what must be the moral of 
the present lectures Surely, that) the 
better born are the imtermedimates im 
families from five to eight, and that 
When tamales are restricted to twos or 
threes, or extended to twelves ana 
thirteens, there may be a quite appree 
able tondeney to merease the proportion 
of the less efficrent im) the community, 
lL make no pretenee at present to asso 
crate inferiority at beginning or end 
with too voung parents or too old parents. 
Loam oonly aware that we want much 
fuller data, so that we can correct) tor 
parental ages at marriage, and tor 
period after marriage of the birth of 
each child. We want to study not 
only the order and number of children, 
but the imterval between their births. 
“Phe handicapping of the first-born 
Is not, as some of my correspondents 
have supposed, subversive of any faith 
In heredity. Et would not even be an 
areument against an hereditary Upper 
Chamber, except in so far as such a 


30 The Journal ol Heredity 


Chamber as) based on primoveniture, 
Statistics of the failure of the eldest 
born ol PoCers and of the success of ther 
younger brothers mught from this stand 
pont be of real oaterest.’. Phe real 
argument agaist an hereditary chamber 
Is the customary want of hereditary 
Power Hi its members, ¢ e., the negleet 
Of the fact that aman has sixteen eredat 
grandparents, nid, posstbly, only one 
of them omay be of distinetion thie 
man who won the tithe. As Galton 
Wrote: “An old) peerage ts a Valueless 
litle to natural gilts, CXCCplL so Tar as it 
may have been turbished up by a sue 
COSSION Ol WISC TILCTIIArriaige | 
cannot think of any cham to respect, 
put forward im modern days, that is so 
entirely anoimposture, as that made 14 
ca peer On the evrouna ol cde cont, who 
has neither been nobly educated, nor 
has any cmunent ‘kinsman within three 
The dearth of ability i the 
hereditary | Pcers of the Joie ent lay 


Adeerees. 


is largely due to their neglecting mar 
riage ito able stocks, and in some 
cases quite possibly to a succession of 
eldest) son inheritance oan evil which 
the whole community may bring upon 
itsclf, if it scleets its surviving offspring 
m the same restricted manner. Vo 
CTILICIZC priunovemture Is not to discard 
heredity.” 


\In “* Hereditary Genius Galton presented the following statistics concerning the relutive birth- 


order of the eminent men whom he studied: 
Only sons... 
Eldest sons 
Second SOTIS 
Third sons 


Later sons 


11‘, 
WW y/ 
nen 
Blo be 
) 2 


Pay 


Hotel Accommodations at Berkeley 


Acting on the advice of its California committee, the American Genetic .Associa- 
tion has designated Hotel Claremont, Oakland, California, as official headquarters 


during its annual meeting, August 2-7. 


This hotel 1s just across the line from 


Berkeley, and has excellent transportation facilities to the university. It has 
accommodations for about 1,000 guests, prices being as follows: 
Single room with bath, $3 per day ($1.50 1f two persons occupy room). 
Single room without bath, $1 per day; room for two without bath, $1 per person. 
The secretary will be glad to make reservations for members of this association. 


7 


It is highly important that these should be made as soon as possible. 











